1689 Baptist Confession of Faith The 1689 Baptist Confession of Faith was
written by Particular Baptists, who held to a Calvinistic Soteriology in
England to give a formal expression of their Christian faith from a Baptist
perspective. This confession, like The Westminster Confession of Faith (1646)
and the Savoy Declaration (1658), was written by Puritans who were concerned
that their particular church organisation reflect what they perceived to be
Biblical teaching. The General and Particular Baptists in England. The creation
of the 1689 Confession is linked to Early English Baptist history and the
differences between the “General” and “Particular” brands of Baptist
belief. In the early 17th century, English Baptists were mainly a loose
organisation of churches, rather than an established denomination. With the
advent of Arminianism at around the same time, many Baptist churches adopted
the stance that a Christian's salvation was ultimately contingent upon his own
choice. These Baptist churches were considered “General Baptists” due to
their belief in a "general atonement" for all men without exception. On the
other hand, many Baptists rejected the teaching of Arminianism and asserted
that a Christian's salvation was ultimately contingent upon God and his
sovereign choice (Grace or Mercy). These Baptists were called “Particular”
because they believed that the death of Jesus Christ and his atonement was
limited only to those whom God had chosen beforehand. The terms "Particular
Baptist", "Calvinistic Baptist" and "Reformed Baptist" are essentially
synonymous. While these differences in theology were serious, both General and
Particular Baptists suffered overt and covert persecution from the established
Church of England. Virtually all Baptists had left the established church
because they were convinced that the Bible did not support either an episcopal
form of church government, nor the role of the Monarch in determining the
affairs of the church. Other Puritans at the time, the Presbyterians and
Congregationalists, also suffered persecution, but their numerical strength and
influence allowed them to escape much of the persecution that Baptists suffered
at the time. The assertion by Baptist churches that only believers could be
Baptized put them at odds not only with the Church of England, but also the
Presbyterians and Congregationalists – all of whom supported infant baptism.
The 1644 Confession and the English Civil War. As the 17th century continued,
relations between the Puritans and the Monarchy deteriorated. Many Puritan
leaders were members of Parliament and this tension eventually resulted in
civil war, which lasted from 1642 until 1649. King Charles I lost the conflict
and was executed, and England entered into a short period of republicanism.
These events are recorded in more detail elsewhere. With this rise in civil
unrest, Particular Baptists took the opportunity to write their own statement
of faith. Seven congregations sent representatives to write the document. The
purpose of the document was to formally differentiate the beliefs of the
Particular Baptists from the General Baptists. This was completed in 1644, and,
while not very detailed, was clearly Calvinistic in tone. This was known as
“The First Baptist Confession”, and predates the far more well-known
Westminster Confession of Faith which was written in 1646. The 1644 Confession
differed from the Westminster in two other significant ways. First, it rejected
the notion that the law convicted of sin, saying that the terrors of the law
were not needed to do what the gospel alone has the power to do. Second, it
rejected the notion of eternal generation of the Son. With the demise of the
monarchy, the Westminster Confession was officially declared the statement of
faith for both the Church of England (Anglican) and Church of Scotland
(Presbyterian). The smaller Congregationalists created their own version of the
Westminster Confession in 1658 called the Savoy Declaration. The original 1644
Baptist Confession, while similar in theology, was nowhere near as expansive as
these two English Confessions, and it became clear that another Baptist
confession needed to be written. Problems after Restoration. After the
execution of Charles I, Scottish Presbyterians and English Anglicans and
Congregationalists, despite sharing a common theology, were divided over the
place of the Monarchy – the former supported it while the latter were opposed
to it. Oliver Cromwell, a Congregationalist, ruled England as "Lord Protector"
until his death in 1658. The Monarchy, under Charles II, was restored in 1660.
Relations between Scotland and England, as well as their respective Puritans,
continued to be abrasive as laws were passed regulating worship. In 1662, the
"Act of Uniformity" made it illegal to use anything but the new Anglican Prayer
Book in all Anglican, Presbyterian, Congregationalist and Baptist churches in
England. Moreover, the Anglican church had dispensed with the Westminster
Confession and had returned to the Thirty-Nine Articles as their confession of
faith. The 1677 Confession. The result was that, with the restoration of the
Monarchy, English Baptists everywhere were suffering persecution for their
faith. In 1677 a much larger group of Particular Baptists met together for the
purpose of creating a more detailed confession of faith. The process was
modeled on the Westminster Confession, which was being used by many Particular
Baptist churches despite the differences in church government and mode of
baptism. The 1677 document differed from the Westminster and Savoy confessions
in two important ways. Firstly, it had to define the power of the Baptist
association (denomination) in its relation to individual congregations.
Secondly, and most importantly from a Baptist perspective, it made clear their
adherence to Believer's Baptism over and against Infant Baptism. In the latter
case, it was their adherence to their view of scripture that resulted in this
belief, rather than any historical link with the Anabaptist movement that arose
soon after the Protestant Reformation. Persecution and secrecy kept the 1677
document from being officially endorsed by Particular Baptists, though it was
obvious that many Baptist church leaders were able to make its contents known
to church members. The Toleration Act of 1689. In 1689, "The Toleration Act"
was passed, which enabled religious freedom and plurality to co-exist alongside
the established churches in England and Scotland. This official reprieve
resulted in representatives from over 100 Particular Baptist churches to meet
together in London from 3–12 September to discuss and endorse the 1677
document. Despite the fact that the document was written in 1677, the official
preface to the document has ensured that it would be known as the "1689 Baptist
Confession of Faith". Views on Pope. The Confession of Faith taught the typical
Protestant view of the time that the Pope is antichrist. Historical effects of
the 1689 Confession. The 1689 Confession, alongside the Westminster Confession
and Savoy Declaration, are considered to be the most important Reformed
Confessions made in the English-speaking world. There is no doubt that the 1689
confession relied heavily upon the work already done in writing the two other
confessions, but this is not to understate its importance and influence in
Baptist churches specifically, and Reformed and Calvinistic churches generally,
since that point. Particular Baptists were quick to develop churches in
colonial America, and in 1707 the Philadelphia Baptist Association was formed.
This association formally adopted the 1689 confession in 1742 after years of
tacit endorsement by individual churches and congregational members. With the
addition of two chapters (on the singing of psalms and the laying on of hands),
it was retitled "The Philadelphia Confession of Faith" Further Calvinistic
Baptist church associations formed in the mid-late 18th century and adopted the
confession as “The Baptist Confession”. During the Second Great Awakening
in America, Particular Baptists and other Calvinistic expressions of Protestant
Christianity came under sustained attack from evangelists such as Charles
Grandison Finney and theologians such as Nathaniel William Taylor. Many
Particular Baptists retreated into Hyper-Calvinism, despite the fact that the
1689 confession does not espouse or support such extremes in Reformed theology.
The 1689 confession remains, to this day, a very important document for all
Reformed Baptist churches internationally, allowing them to have an historical
confession of faith. The 1693 Keach's Catechism uses the Confession to teach
congregants the basics of the Reformed Baptist faith.
