A Course in Miracles A Course in Miracles (ACIM) is a teaching device that aims
to assist its readers in achieving spiritual transformation. The book describes
a purely non-dualistic philosophy of forgiveness and includes what are meant to
be practical lessons and applications for the practice of forgiveness in daily
life. The introduction to the book contains the following summary, "Nothing
real can be threatened. Nothing unreal exists. Herein lies the peace of God."
Helen Schucman wrote the book with the help of William Thetford, although it
does not identify them as authors, based on what she called an "inner voice"
which she identified as Jesus. The 1992 edition, the most recent copyrighted
one, is published by the Foundation for Inner Peace (FIP), the organization
chosen by Schucman for this purpose. It consists of preface, text, workbook for
students, manual for teachers (including clarification of terms), and two
supplements. Kenneth Wapnick and Foundation for A Course in Miracles (FACIM)
were awarded the copyright to this edition after the original copyright was
overturned. This edited version earned copyright status since it derives from
the original manuscript as edited by Wapnick. FIP reports that two million
volumes of ACIM have been published and disseminated worldwide since it first
became available for sale in 1976. Additionally, the book has been translated
into nineteen different languages with eight new translations underway as of
2008. Background. Overview of origins. "A Course in Miracles" was originally
written in a collaborative venture by Schucman and Thetford. In the beginning,
the voice (which Schucman claimed to have identified itself earlier to her as
Jesus) described them as scribes. At the time, 1965, Thetford was director of
the psychology department of Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in New York
City while at the same time holding a faculty appointment as Professor of
Medical Psychology at the Columbia University College of Physicians and
Surgeons. Schucman began her professional career at the Medical Center as
Thetford's research associate, later also to become a tenured professor of
psychology at Columbia University. They had become consultants to an
interdisciplinary research project at the Cornell University Medical Center,
Thetford's former employer. The weekly meetings had become contentious, and
they had described that they hated going, feeling both uncomfortable and angry.
Tired of the competitiveness and negativity, on an afternoon in June 1965,
Thetford delivered a speech to Schucman indicating that he felt they had been
using the wrong approach. "There must be another way" he concluded. Schucman
felt that this speech had seemed to act as a stimulus that triggered off a long
series of inner experiences that could be categorized as visions, dreams,
heightened imagery, and an "inner voice" that finally on October 21, 1965 urged
her: "This is a Course in Miracles, please take notes". She claims the voice
identified itself as that of Jesus. Schucman said that the writing made her
very uncomfortable, though it never seriously occurred to her to stop. Schucman
explained what was happening to Thetford, who encouraged her to continue this
process and helped her in typing out what she read to him from her notes the
night before. The whole process took about seven years. In 1976, "A Course in
Miracles" was published and distributed as a three-volume set—which had
evolved from the original notes—and comprised three books: Text, Workbook for
Students, and Manual for Teachers. During the first 19 years of its
circulation, "A Course in Miracles" was published, printed and distributed
directly by the students of the work. In 1995, the printing and distribution of
the work was licensed to Penguin Books for five years. Editors. When Schucman
experienced some personal difficulties and hesitance after hearing the voice,
Bill Thetford, her work supervisor and friend, contacted Hugh Lynn Cayce (son
of the celebrity psychic Edgar Cayce) at his Association for Research and
Enlightenment in Virginia Beach, Virginia to seek his advice and counsel.
Shucman later met with Cayce before she began to record the Course. Kenneth
Wapnick was a clinical psychologist who directed a school for disturbed
children and served as chief psychologist at Harlem Valley State Hospital from
1967 through 1972. In 1972, Wapnick left his Jewish faith and converted to
Catholicism so he could become a monk. Fr. Benedict Groeschel was a priest with
a doctorate in psychology and a member of the Order of Friars Minor Capuchin
who studied under Thetford and worked with Schucman. Groeschel arranged an
introduction of Wapnick to Schucman and Thetford in November 1972. Groeschel
was given a copy of the ACIM manuscript in 1973, and testified that he was
instructed by Schucman not to distribute the manuscript; however, with
Schucman's permission, he made it available to Wapnick. Wapnick reviewed the
draft and discussed with Schucman further revisions that were needed to place
the book in final form. Over the next thirteen months, Wapnick and Schucman
edited the manuscript by deleting personal material intended only for Schucman
and Thetford, creating chapter and section headings, and correcting various
inconsistencies in paragraph structure, punctuation, and capitalization. This
editing process was completed by approximately February 1975. Wapnick
subsequently became a teacher of "the Course", co-founder and president of the
Foundation for A Course in Miracles (FACIM), and a director and executive
committee member of the Foundation for Inner Peace (FIP). Distribution. The
Foundation for Inner Peace (or FIP) was originally called the Foundation for
Para-Sensory Investigations, Inc. (FPI)., and was founded on October 21, 1971
by Robert Skutch and Judith Skutch Whitson. Robert Skutch and Judith Skutch
Whitson were married at the time of its inception, and have since become
directors. Robert Skutch was a businessman and writer, who for many years had
been a writer of television plays and advertising copy. Judith Skutch Whitson
was a teacher and lecturer at New York University on the science of the study
of consciousness and parapsychology. On May 29, 1975, Douglas Dean, a physicist
engineer, introduced Schucman, Thetford, and Wapnick to Judith Skutch Whitson.
Soon thereafter, they introduced her to the Course and the four of them met
regularly to study, discuss, and share their common enthusiasm for it. At some
point in 1975, Schucman appears to have authorized Skutch Whitson and Ken
Wapnick to initiate the process of copyrighting ACIM and to assume
responsibility themselves for the resulting copyright. In mid-July 1975, Skutch
Whitson met briefly with her doctoral adviser, Eleanor Criswell, who had a
small printing company called Freeperson's Press. Criswell advised Skutch
Whitson that she would be willing to assist in having the manuscript published
and took responsibility for the manuscript pages, and in August 1975, they were
taken to a Kopy Kat copy center in Berkeley, to be reproduced. In August 1975,
Skutch Whitson organized a reception at 2000 Broadway, San Francisco, where
Schucman and Thetford were introduced to a number of people. During this time
period, a number of copies were distributed—hundreds according to Skutch
Whitson and Skutch. The first edition of 100 copies of the Criswell edition was
bound with a yellow cover and a copyright notice. Robert Skutch filed the
copyright for ACIM for FIP on November 24, 1975, swearing to a date of first
publication as October 6, 1975, in the form of the Freeperson Press edition.
Zelda Suplee, director of the Erickson Educational Foundation, a friend of
Skutch Whitson, was given a copy of the uncopyrighted manuscript by Skutch
Whitson prior to the publication of the Criswell edition. In 1976, Reed
Erickson, a wealthy transsexual philanthropist, received a copy of the
manuscript, which he used as a basis for study by a group in Mexico. Erickson
was the primary financial backer of the first hard-bound edition of the Course,
donating $440,000 for this printing. Later that year the FIP began to publish
"the Course" in a set of three hardcover volumes. Five years later, in 1981,
Schucman died of complications related to pancreatic cancer. In 1983, control
of the copyright was transferred to the FACIM as headed by Wapnick. In 1985,
the FIP began publishing the three volumes in a more manageable, single soft-
cover volume, but without any editorial content changes. In 1992, the FIP
published a second hardcover edition, which contained some editorial content
additions and minor changes. Amongst these changes were the addition of a
verse-numbering system. It was Schucman's desire that a non-profit foundation
publish the work. In 1995, FIP entered a five-year printing and distribution
agreement, which expired in December 2000, with Penguin Books for $2.5 million.
Currently some copies of some of the earlier draft versions of the book (which
may or may not be complete, unadulterated or legal) are available both online
and through private publishers. Copyright litigation. in June, 1996, and ending
in April, 2004, a copyright lawsuit initiated by Penguin Books and FIP was
brought against the Church of the Full Endeavor (also known as the 'Endeavor
Academy') for their unlimited independent publication of substantial portions
of "A Course in Miracles." It was found that the contents of the FIP first
edition, published from 1976 through 1992, are in the public domain. However,
copyright in all of the changes introduced in the Second Edition remains
intact, as does the copyright for the Text Preface, "Clarification of Terms"
found at the end of the Manual for Teachers, and the two supplementary
pamphlets, Psychotherapy and Song of Prayer, as well as Schucman's poetry, "The
Gifts of God". The original unedited (urtext) manuscript of "A Course in
Miracles", which has been widely published on the internet, was obtained under
false pretenses. This material has been copyrighted separately as "The
Unpublished Writings of Helen Schucman". Post-litigation editions. Since the
invalidation of the original copyright, which previously protected substantial
portions of the earlier Schucman-ACIM material, various individuals, groups,
and group members have worked to study and publish various versions and
interpretations of this earlier material. Most notable are the Course in
Miracles Society (CIMS), headed by Tom Whitmore, and various initiatives by
members of Endeavor Academy, which was founded by the late Charles Buell
Anderson. The Course in Miracles Society publishes an online and hard cover
edition of ACIM which derives from the urtext manuscript and includes Matthew's
Gospel. Movie. In 2009, "A Course in Miracles The Movie" was released. The
movie features Ken Wapnick along with several other students and teachers of
ACIM. Reception. Since it first became available for sale in 1976, over 2
million copies of A Course in Miracles have been sold worldwide and the text
has been translated into sixteen different languages. "A Course In Miracles"
(ACIM) is widely distributed globally, forming the basis of a range of
organized groups. The teachings of A Course in Miracles have been supported by
commentators and authors such as Eckhart Tolle. However, due to "ACIM's" claims
to "clarify" or even supersede some of the teachings of orthodox Christianity,
the book has predictably been judged negatively by some Christians. Although a
friend of Schucman, Thetford, and Wapnik, Benedict J. Groeschel has since
criticized "ACIM" and the related organizations. Finding some elements of the
"Course" to be what he called, "severe and potentially dangerous distortions of
Christian theology", he wrote that the "Course" is “a good example of a false
revelation” and that “it has . . . become a spiritual menace to many.”
Other Christian authors, such as evangelical Bob Larson, have similarly
criticized "A Course In Miracles", saying it contradicts basic tenets of
Christianity, twisting its core teachings and "deceiving people who are
sincerely looking for God." Larson also criticizes "ACIM" popularizer Marianne
Williamson personally, saying that her work on behalf of "ACIM" denies
"essential qualities of faith" such as guilt and forgiveness, and necessitates
the Biblically forbidden practice of transpossession mediumship. Evangelical
editor Elliot Miller says that Christian terminology employed in ACIM is
"thoroughly redefined" to resemble New Age teachings. Other Christian critics
say ACIM is "intensely anti-Biblical" and incompatible with Christianity,
blurring the distinction between creator and created and forcefully supporting
the occult and New Age world view. Theologian Anton van Harskamp notes that the
metaphysics of "A Course in Miracles" is inconsistent with that of Christianity
in that its “story of creation is totally different from the Christian
one.” Accordingly to van Harskamp, in looking at "the suffering in the world,
'the Course' says that this world cannot be created by a God.” In the
Christian conception “creation is good” “but at the same time it is
impossible to say this about everything that exists.” Skeptic Robert T.
Carroll criticizes ACIM as "a minor industry" that is overly commercialized and
characterizes it as "Christianity improved", saying its teachings are not
original and suggesting they are culled from "various sources, east and west".
Despite the high level of criticism that ACIM has received from many Christian
theologians and authors, other theologians, both Catholics and Protestants,
including Evangelicals, have given ACIM high marks and "glowing endorsements".
In summary, while ACIM's teachings have been heavily denounced by most
Christian theologians, the reception has not been uniform or monolithic among
Christian clergy and authors. This conflict is anticipated in the "Course's"
Introduction to Clarification of Terms. "They must, however, be willing to
overlook controversy, recognizing that it is a defense against truth in the
form of a delaying maneuver. Theological considerations as such are necessarily
controversial, since they depend on belief and can therefore be accepted or
rejected. A universal theology is impossible, but a universal experience is not
only possible but necessary. It is this experience toward which the course is
directed."
