Abolitionism Abolitionism, used as a single word, was a movement to end
slavery, whether formal or informal. The term has become adopted by those
seeking the abolishment of any perceived injustice to a group of people. There
are abolition movements to end human trafficking, the sex slave trafficking,
abortion, children used in war, and many others. In western Europe and the
Americas, abolitionism was a historical movement to end the African slave trade
and set slaves free. Although European colonists, beginning with the Spanish,
initially enslaved natives, the Dominican priest Bartolomé de las Casas helped
convince the Spanish government to enact the first European law abolishing
colonial slavery in 1542; Spain weakened these laws by 1545. In the 17th
century English Quakers and evangelical religious groups condemned slavery (by
then applied mostly to Africans) as un-Christian; in the 18th century,
abolition was part of the message of the First Great Awakening in the Thirteen
Colonies; and in the same period, rationalist thinkers of the Enlightenment
criticized it for violating the rights of man. The Somersett's case in 1772,
which emancipated a slave in England, helped launch the British movement to
abolish slavery. Though anti-slavery sentiments were widespread by the late
18th century, the colonies and emerging nations that used slave labor continued
to do so: French and English territories in the West Indies, South America, and
the South of the United States. After the American Revolutionary War
established the United States, northern states, beginning with Pennsylvania in
1780, passed legislation during the next two decades abolishing slavery,
sometimes by gradual emancipation. Massachusetts ratified a constitution that
declared all men equal; freedom suits challenging slavery based on this
principle brought an end to slavery in the state. In other states, such as
Virginia, similar declarations of rights were interpreted by the courts to not
apply to Africans. During the following decades, the abolitionist movement grew
in northern states, and Congress limited the expansion of slavery in new states
admitted to the union. Revolutionary France abolished slavery in 1789, but it
was restored by Napoleon in the French colonies more than a decade later after
his subversion of the French Revolution. Haiti achieved independence from
France in 1804 and brought an end to slavery in its territory, establishing the
second republic in the western hemisphere. Britain banned the importation of
African slaves in its colonies in 1807, and the United States followed in 1808.
Britain abolished slavery throughout the British Empire with the Slavery
Abolition Act 1833, the French colonies abolished it 15 years later, and
slavery in the United States was abolished in 1865, after the American Civil
War, with the 13th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. In Eastern Europe,
groups organized to abolish the enslavement of the Roma in Wallachia and
Moldavia; and to emancipate the serfs in Russia (Emancipation reform of 1861).
It was declared illegal in 1948 under the Universal Rights of Man of the United
Nations. The last country to abolish legal slavery was Mauritania, where it was
officially abolished by presidential decree in 1981. Today, child and adult
slavery and forced labour are illegal in most countries, as well as being
against international law, but a high rate of human trafficking for labor and
for sexual bondage continues, believed to affect millions of adults and
children. Great Britain. The last known form of enforced servitude of adults
(villeinage) had disappeared in England by the beginning of the 17th century.
In a 1569 court case involving Cartwright, who had bought a slave from Russia,
the court ruled that English law could not recognise slavery, as it was never
established officially. This ruling was overshadowed by later developments. It
was upheld in 1700 by the Lord Chief Justice John Holt when he ruled that a
slave became free as soon as he arrived in England. In addition to English
colonists importing slaves to the North American colonies, by the 18th century,
traders began to import slaves from Africa, India and East Asia (where they
were trading) to London and Edinburgh to work as personal servants. Men who
migrated to the North American colonies often took their East Indian slaves or
servants with them, as East Indians have been documented in colonial records.
Some of the first freedom suits, court cases in the British Isles to challenge
the legality of slavery, took place in Scotland from 1755 to 1778. The cases
were "Montgomery v. Sheddan" (1755), "Spens v. Dalrymple" (1769), and "Knight
v. Wedderburn" (1778). Each of the slaves had been baptized in Scotland and
challenged the legality of slavery. They set the precedent of legal procedure
in British courts that would later lead to successful outcomes for the
plaintiffs. In the first two cases, deaths of the plaintiff and defendant,
respectively, brought an end before court decisions. The Knight case was
decided in favor of the plaintiff, the former slave. African slaves were not
bought or sold in London but were brought by masters from other areas. Together
with people from other nations, especially non-Christian, Africans were
considered foreigners, not able to be English subjects. At the time, England
had no naturalization procedure. The African slaves' legal status was unclear
until 1772 and Somersett's Case, when the fugitive slave James Somersett forced
a legal decision. Somersett had escaped, and his master, Charles Steuart, had
him captured and imprisoned on board a ship, intending to ship him to Jamaica
to be resold into slavery. While in London, Somersett had been baptised; three
godparents issued a writ of "habeas corpus". As a result, Lord Mansfield, Chief
Justice of the Court of the King's Bench, had to judge whether Somersett's
abduction was legal or not under English Common Law. No legislation had ever
been passed to establish slavery in England. The case received national
attention, and five advocates defended Somersett. In his judgment of 22 June
1772, Mansfield declared: Frederick Charles Moncreiff (2006). "The Wit and
Wisdom of the Bench and Bar", pp.85–86. The Lawbook Exchange, Ltd., Although
the exact legal implications of the judgement are unclear when analysed by
lawyers, it was generally taken at the time to have determined that slavery did
not exist under English common law and was thus prohibited in England. The
decision did not apply to other British territories; by then, for example, the
American colonies had established slavery by positive laws. The Somersett's
case became a significant part of the common law of slavery in the English-
speaking world, and it helped launch the movement to abolish slavery. After
reading about the Somersett's Case, Joseph Knight, an enslaved African who had
been purchased by his master John Wedderburn in Jamaica and brought to
Scotland, left him. Married and with a child, he filed a freedom suit, on the
grounds that he could not be held as a slave in Great Britain. In the case of
"Knight v. Wedderburn" (1778), Wedderburn said that Knight owed him "perpetual
servitude". The Court of Sessions of Scotland ruled against him, saying that
chattel slavery was not recognised under the law of Scotland, and slaves could
seek court protection to leave a master or avoid being forcibly removed from
Scotland to be returned to slavery in the colonies. But at the same time,
legally mandated, hereditary slavery of Scots persons in Scotland had existed
from 1606 until 1799, when colliers and salters were legally emancipated by an
act of the Parliament of Great Britain (39 Geo.III. c56). Skilled workers, they
were restricted to a place and could be sold with the works. A prior law
enacted in 1775 (15 Geo.III. c. 28) was intended to end what the act referred
to as "a state of slavery and bondage," but it was ineffectual, necessitating
the 1799 act. First steps. Despite the ending of slavery in Great Britain, the
United States continued to rely on it as an institution in the South, and the
West Indian colonies of the British Empire also kept slavery. In 1785, the
English poet William Cowper wrote: Rhodes, Nick (2003). "William Cowper:
Selected Poems", p.84. Routledge, 2003 In 1783, an anti-slavery movement began
among the British public. That year a group of Quakers founded the first
British abolitionist organization. The Quakers continued to be influential
throughout the lifetime of the movement, in many ways leading the campaign. On
17 June 1783, Sir Cecil Wray (Member of Parliament for Westminster) presented
the Quaker petition to parliament. Also in 1783, Dr Beilby Porteus issued a
call to the Church of England to cease its involvement in the slave trade and
to formulate a policy to improve the conditions of Afro-Caribbean slaves. The
exploration of the African continent, by such British groups as the African
Association (1788), promoted the abolitionists' cause. Such expeditions
highlighted the legitimate, complex cultures of Africans; before the Europeans
had considered them "other" and uncivilized. The African Association had close
ties with William Wilberforce, who became known as a prominent figure in the
battle for abolition in the British Empire. Africans played an important part
in the abolition movement. In Britain, Olaudah Equiano, whose autobiography was
published in nine editions in his lifetime, campaigned tirelessly against the
slave trade. One aspect of the history of abolitionism during this period was
the effective use of images such as the famous Wedgewood medallion of 1787 and
the engraving showing the horrific layout of the infamous slave ship, "The
Brooks". Growth of the movement. After the formation of the Committee for the
Abolition of the Slave Trade in 1787, William Wilberforce led the cause of
abolition through the parliamentary campaign. It finally abolished the slave
trade in the British Empire with the Slave Trade Act 1807. He continued to
campaign for the abolition of slavery in the British Empire, which he lived to
see in the Slavery Abolition Act 1833. The Atlantic slave trade, also called
Triangle trade, encompassed the trafficking in slaves by British merchants who
exported manufactured goods from ports such as Bristol and Liverpool, sold or
exchanged these for slaves in West Africa (where the African chieftain
hierarchy was tied to slavery), and shipped the slaves to British colonies and
other Caribbean countries or the American colonies. There traders sold or
exchanged the slaves for rum and sugar (in the Caribbean) and tobacco and rice
(in the American South), which they took back to British ports. The merchants
traded in three places with each round-trip. Political influence against the
inhumanity of the slave trade grew strongly in the late 18th century. People of
both European and African ethnicity worked for abolition of the slave trade and
slavery. Well-known abolitionists in Britain included James Ramsay, who had
seen the cruelty of the trade at first hand; the Unitarian William Roscoe who
courageously campaigned for parliament in the port city of Liverpool for which
he was briefly M.P., Granville Sharp, Thomas Clarkson, Josiah Wedgwood, who
produced the ""Am I Not A Man And A Brother?"" medallion for the Committee; and
other members of the Clapham Sect of evangelical reformers, as well as Quakers.
The latter made up most of the Committee for the Abolition of the Slave Trade,
and were the first to present a petition against the slave trade to the British
Parliament. As Dissenters, Quakers were not eligible to become British MPs in
the late 18th and early 19th centuries. The Anglican evangelist William
Wilberforce led the parliamentary campaign. Clarkson became the group's most
prominent researcher, gathering vast amounts of data, and gaining first hand
accounts by interviewing sailors and former slaves at British ports such as
Bristol, Liverpool and London. Mainly because of Clarkson's efforts, a network
of local abolition groups was established across England. They campaigned
through public meetings and the publication of pamphlets and petitions. One of
the earliest books promoted by Clarkson and the Committee for the Abolition of
the Slave Trade was the autobiography of the freed slave Olaudah Equiano. The
movement had support from such freed slaves, from many denominational groups
such as Swedenborgians, Quakers, Baptists, Methodists and others. They reached
out for support from the new industrial workers of the cities in the midlands
and north of England. Even women and children, previously un-politicised
groups, became involved in the campaign. At this time, women often had to hold
separate meetings as there were social rules against their appearing in public
meetings. They could not vote, nor could the majority of the men in Britain at
the time. The abolitionists negotiated with chieftains in West Africa to
purchase land to establish 'Freetown' – a settlement for former slaves of the
British Empire (the Poor Blacks of London) and the United States. Great Britain
had promised freedom to American slaves who left rebel owners to join its cause
during the American Revolutionary War. It evacuated thousands of slaves
together with its troops and transported 3,000 Black Loyalists to Nova Scotia
for resettlement. About a decade later, they were offered a chance to resettle
in Freetown, and several hundred made the move. Freetown was the first
settlement of the colony of Sierra Leone, which was protected under a British
Act of Parliament in 1807–8. British influence in West Africa grew through a
series of negotiations with local chieftains to end trading in slaves. These
included agreements to permit British navy ships to intercept chieftains' ships
to ensure their merchants were not carrying slaves. In 1796, John Gabriel
Stedman published the memoirs of his five-year voyage to the Dutch-controlled
Surinam in South America as part of a military force sent out to subdue
bosnegers, former slaves living in the inlands. The book is critical of the
treatment of slaves and contains many images by William Blake and Francesco
Bartolozzi depicting the cruel treatment of runaway slaves. It was an example
of what became a large body of abolitionist literature. Slave Trade Act 1807.
The Slave Trade Act was passed by the British Parliament on 25 March 1807,
making the slave trade illegal throughout the British Empire. The Act imposed a
fine of £100 for every slave found aboard a British ship. At a time when
Napoleon decided to revive slavery, which had been abolished during the French
Revolution, and to send his troops to re-enslave the people of Haiti,
Guadeloupe and the other French Caribbean possessions, the British took the
moral high ground with their prohibition of the slave trade. The act's
intention was to entirely outlaw the slave trade within the British Empire, but
the lucrative trade continued through smuggling. Sometimes captains at risk of
being caught by the Royal Navy would throw slaves into the sea to reduce their
fines. In 1827, Britain defined participation in the slave trade as piracy and
punishable by death. Between 1808 and 1860, the Royal Navy's West Africa
Squadron seized approximately 1,600 slave ships and freed 150,000 Africans who
were aboard. Britain took action against African leaders who refused to agree
to British treaties to outlaw the trade, for example, in 1851 it deposed "the
usurping King of Lagos". Britain signed anti-slavery treaties with more than 50
African rulers. Slavery Abolition Act 1833. After the 1807 act, slaves were
still held, though not sold, within the British Empire. In the 1820s, the
abolitionist movement revived to campaign against the institution of slavery.
In 1823 the first Anti-Slavery Society was founded in Britain. Many members had
previously campaigned against the slave trade. In 1831 the slave Sam Sharpe led
a Christmas rebellion in Jamaica, an event that catalyzed anti-slavery
sentiment. On 28 August 1833, the Slavery Abolition Act was given Royal Assent,
which paved the way for the abolition of slavery within the British Empire and
its colonies. On 1 August 1834, all slaves in the British Empire were
emancipated, but they were indentured to their former owners in an
apprenticeship system that meant gradual abolition: the first set of
apprenticeships came to an end on 1 August 1838, while the final
apprenticeships were scheduled to cease on 1 August 1840, six years later. On 1
August 1834, as the Governor in Port of Spain, Trinidad addressed an audience
about the new laws, the mostly elderly, unarmed slaves began chanting: "Pas de
six ans. Point de six ans" ("Not six years. No six years"), drowning out his
voice. Peaceful protests continued until the government passed a resolution to
abolish apprenticeship and the slaves gained "de facto" freedom. Full
emancipation for all slaves was legally granted on 1 August 1838, ahead of
schedule, making Trinidad the first British slave society to fully end slavery.
The government set aside £20 million for compensation of slave owners for
their "property" across the Empire, but it did not offer the former slaves
compensation or reparations. Campaigning after the act. In 1839, the British
and Foreign Anti-Slavery Society attempted to outlaw slavery in other countries
and also to pressure the government to help enforce the suppression of the
slave trade by declaring slave traders pirates and pursuing them. The world's
oldest international human rights organization, it continues today as Anti-
Slavery International. France. In 1315, Louis X, king of France, published a
decree proclaiming that "France signifies freedom" and that any slave setting
foot on the French ground should be freed. This prompted subsequent governments
to circumscribe slavery in the overseas colonies. As in other "New World"
colonies, the French relied on the Atlantic slave trade for labor for their
sugar cane plantations in their Caribbean colonies. The French West Indies
included Anguilla (briefly), Antigua and Barbuda (briefly), Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Grenada, Haïti, Montserrat (briefly), Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Sint Eustatius (briefly), St Kitts and Nevis (St Kitts, but not
Nevis), Trinidad and Tobago (Tobago only), Saint Croix (briefly), Saint-
Barthélemy (until 1784 when became Swedish for nearly a century), the northern
half of Saint Martin, and the current French overseas "départements" of
Martinique and Guadeloupe in the Caribbean sea. In addition, French colonists
in "La Louisiane" in North America held slaves, particularly in the South
around New Orleans, where they established sugar cane plantations. Over time in
all these areas, a class of free people of color developed, many of whom became
educated and property owners. Louis XIV's "Code Noir" regulated the slave trade
and institution in the colonies. Any slave brought to Metropolitan France would
be immediately considered free. Although the Code Noir authorized and codified
corporal punishment against slaves under certain conditions, it forbid slave
owners to torture them and encouraged them to instruct them. It was
instrumental in asserting that Africans were human beings, endowed with a soul.
During the Age of Enlightenment, many philosophers wrote pamphlets against
slavery and its moral and economical justifications, including Montesquieu in
"The Spirit of the Laws" (1748) or in the "Encyclopédie" In 1788, Jacques
Pierre Brissot founded the Society of the Friends of the Blacks ("Société des
Amis des Noirs") to work for abolition of slavery. After the Revolution, on 4
April 1792, France granted free people of color full citizenship. The revolt of
slaves in the largest French colony of Saint-Domingue in 1791 was the beginning
of what became the Haïtian Revolution led by Toussaint L'Ouverture. Rebellion
swept through the north of the island, and many whites and free people of color
were killed, as well as slaves. Slavery was first abolished in 1793 in St.
Domingue by Sonthonax, a French Commissioner sent by the Convention in order to
safeguard the allegiance of the population to revolutionary France. First
abolition of slavery (1794). The Convention, the first elected Assembly of the
First Republic (1792–1804), on 4 February 1794, under the leadership of
Maximilien Robespierre, abolished slavery in law in France and its colonies.
Abbé Grégoire and the Society of the Friends of the Blacks were part of the
abolitionist movement, which had laid important groundwork in building anti-
slavery sentiment in the metropole. The first article of the law stated that
"Slavery was abolished" in the French colonies, while the second article stated
that "slave-owners would be indemnified" with financial compensation for the
value of their slaves. The French constitution passed in 1795 included in the
declaration of the Rights of Man that slavery was abolished. Re-establishment
of slavery (1802). Napoleon did not include any declaration of the Rights of
Man in the Constitution promulgated in 1799. Lobbied by planters and concerned
about revenues from the Caribbean islands, after becoming First Consul, he
decided to re-establish slavery. He promulgated the law of 20 May 1802 and sent
military governors and troops to the colonies to impose it. On 10 May 1802,
Colonel Delgrès launched a rebellion in Guadeloupe against Napoleon's
representative, General Richepanse. The rebellion was repressed, and slavery
was re-established. The news of this event sparked another wave of rebellion in
Saint-Domingue. Although from 1802, Napoleon sent more than 20,000 troops to
the island, two-thirds died due to warfare and yellow fever. He withdrew the
remaining 7,000 troops and slaves achieved an independent republic they called
Haïti in 1804. Seeing that he had lost Saint-Domingue, in 1803 Napoleon
decided to sell the Louisiana Territory to the United States and end his
attempt at empire in North America. The French governments initially refused to
recognise Haiti. It forced the nation to pay a substantial amount of
reparations (which it could ill afford) for losses during the revolution and
did not recognise its government until the 1830s. Second abolition (1848). On
27 April 1848, under the Second Republic (1848–52), the decree-law of
Schœlcher abolished slavery in the remaining colonies. The state bought the
slaves from the "colons" (white colonists; "Békés" in Creole), and then freed
them. At about the same time, France started colonising Africa. Its activities
included transferring the Native populations in several countries to mines,
forestry, and rubber plantations under isolated, harsh working conditions often
compared to slavery. Debates about the dimensions of colonialism continue.
Passed on 10 May 2001, the Taubira law officially acknowledges slavery and the
Atlantic Slave Trade as a crime against humanity. 10 May was chosen as the day
dedicated to recognition of the crime of slavery. Anti-colonial activists also
want the French Republic to recognise African Liberation Day. Although France
formally recognised slavery as a crime, four years later, the conservative
Union for a Popular Movement (UMP) voted on 23 February 2005 for a French law
to require teachers and textbooks to "acknowledge and recognise in particular
the positive role of the French presence abroad, especially in North Africa."
This resolution was met with public uproar and accusations of historic
revisionism, both inside France and abroad. Because of this law, Abdelaziz
Bouteflika, the president of Algeria, refused to sign the envisioned "friendly
treaty" with France. The writer and politician Aimé Césaire, leader of the
"Négritude" movement from Martinique, refused to meet UMP leader Nicolas
Sarkozy, who cancelled his planned visit to the island. President Jacques
Chirac (UMP) repealed the controversial law at the beginning of 2006. Moldavia
and Wallachia. In the principalities of Wallachia and Moldavia (both now part
of Romania), the government held slavery of the Roma (often referred to as
Gypsies) as legal at the beginning of the 19th century. The progressive pro-
European and anti-Ottoman movement, which gradually gained power in the two
principalities, also worked to abolish that slavery. Between 1843 and 1855, the
principalities emancipated all of the 250,000 enslaved Roma people. Many
migrated to Western Europe and North America. In the Americas. Bartolomé de
las Casas was a 16th-century Spanish Dominican priest, the first resident
Bishop of Chiapas. As a settler in the New World he witnessed and opposed the
poor treatment of the Native Americans by the Spanish colonists. He advocated
before King Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor on behalf of rights for the natives.
Originally supporting the importation of African slaves as laborers, he
eventually changed and became an advocate for the Africans in the colonies. His
book, "A Short Account of the Destruction of the Indies," contributed to
Spanish passage of colonial legislation known as the New Laws of 1542, which
abolished native slavery for the first time in European colonial history. It
ultimately led to the Valladolid debate. Latin America. During the Independence
Wars (1810–1822), slavery was abolished in most of Latin America. It
continued in the region until 1873 in Puerto Rico, 1886 in Cuba, and 1888 in
Brazil by the Lei Áurea or "Golden Law." Chile declared freedom of wombs in
1811, followed by the United Provinces of the Río de la Plata in 1813, but
without abolishing slavery completely. While Chile abolished slavery in 1823,
Argentina did so with the signing of the Argentine Constitution of 1853.
Slavery was abolished in Uruguay during the "Guerra Grande", by both the
government of Fructuoso Rivera and the government in exile of Manuel Oribe.
Canada. With slaves escaping to New York and New England, legislation for
gradual emancipation was passed in Upper Canada (1793) and Lower Canada (1803).
In Upper Canada the Assembly ruled that no slaves could be imported; slaves
already in the province would remain enslaved until death, no new slaves could
be brought into Upper Canada, and children born to female slaves would be
slaves but must be freed at age 25. In practice, some slavery continued until
abolished in the entire British Empire in the 1830s. United States. The
historian James M. McPherson defines an abolitionist "as one who before the
Civil War had agitated for the immediate, unconditional, and total abolition of
slavery in the United States." He does not include antislavery activists such
as Abraham Lincoln or the Republican Party, which called for the gradual ending
of slavery. The first attempts to end slavery in the British/American colonies
came from Thomas Jefferson and some of his contemporaries. Jefferson included
strong anti-slavery language in the original draft of the Declaration of
Independence, but other delegates took it out. As President, he signed the Act
Prohibiting Importation of Slaves on March 2, 1807, and it took effect in 1808,
which was the earliest allowed under the Constitution. In 1820 he privately
supported the Missouri Compromise, believing it would help to end slavery. He
left the anti-slavery struggle to younger men after that. In the 1850s in
fifteen states constituting the American South, slavery was established
legally. While it was fading away in the cities and border states, it remained
strong in plantation areas that grew cotton for export, or sugar, tobacco or
hemp. By the 1860 United States Census, the slave population in the United
States had grown to four million. American abolitionism was based in the North,
and white Southerners alleged it fostered slave rebellion. The white
abolitionist movement in the North was led by social reformers, especially
William Lloyd Garrison, founder of the American Anti-Slavery Society; writers
such as John Greenleaf Whittier and Harriet Beecher Stowe. Black activists
included former slaves such as Frederick Douglass; and free blacks such as the
brothers Charles Henry Langston and John Mercer Langston, who helped found the
Ohio Anti-Slavery Society. Some abolitionists said that slavery was criminal
and a sin; they also criticized slave owners of using black women as concubines
and taking sexual advantage of them. The Republican Party wanted to achieve the
gradual extinction of slavery by market forces, for its members believed that
free labor was superior to slave labor. Southern leaders said the Republican
policy of blocking the expansion of slavery into the West made them second-
class citizens, and challenged their autonomy. With the 1860 presidential
victory of Abraham Lincoln, seven Deep South states whose economy was based on
cotton and slavery decided to secede and form a new nation. Others joined them.
The American Civil War broke out in April 1861 with the firing on Fort Sumter
in South Carolina. In 1863, Lincoln issued the Emancipation Proclamation, which
freed slaves held in the Confederate States; most border states began their own
emancipation programs. Thousands of slaves escaped to freedom behind Union Army
lines, and in 1863 many men started serving as the United States Colored
Troops. The 13th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution took effect in December
1865 and finally ended slavery throughout the United States. Calls for
abolition. The first American call to abolish slavery came in April 1688 when
Quakers in Germantown, Pennsylvania wrote a two-page condemnation of the
practice and sent it to the governing bodies of their Quaker church, the
Society of Friends. The Quaker establishment never took action. The 1688
Germantown Quaker Petition Against Slavery was an unusually early, clear and
forceful argument against slavery and initiated the spirit that finally led to
the end of slavery in the Society of Friends (1776) and in the state of
Pennsylvania (1780). The Society for the Relief of Free Negroes Unlawfully Held
in Bondage was the first American abolition society, formed 14 April 1775, in
Philadelphia, primarily by Quakers. The society suspended operations in the
Revolutionary war and was reorganized in 1784, with Benjamin Franklin as its
first president. Rhode Island Quakers, associated with Moses Brown, were among
the first in America to free slaves. Benjamin Rush was another leader, as were
many Quakers. John Woolman gave up most of his business in 1756 to devote
himself to campaigning against slavery along with other Quakers. Among the
first articles advocating the emancipation of slaves and the abolition of
slavery was written by Thomas Paine. Titled "African Slavery in America", it
appeared on 8 March 1775 in the "Postscript to the Pennsylvania Journal and
Weekly Advertiser", more popularly known as "The Pennsylvania Magazine", or
"American Museum". Abolition in the North. Through the Northwest Ordinance of
1787, the Congress of the Confederation prohibited slavery in the territories
northwest of the Ohio River. By 1804, abolitionists succeeded in passing
legislation in most states north of the Ohio River and the Mason-Dixon Line
that would eventually (in conjunction with the 13th amendment) emancipate the
slaves. While Massachusetts did not abolish slavery, its new constitution of
1780 declared the equal rights of men and became the standard against which
slavery ceased. But, emancipation in some of the free states was so gradual
that both New York and Pennsylvania, for example, still listed slaves in their
1840 census returns, and a small number of black slaves (18) were held in New
Jersey in 1860 as "perpetual apprentices". The principal organized bodies to
advocate this reform were the Pennsylvania Antislavery Society and the New York
Manumission Society. The latter was headed by powerful politicians: John Jay,
Alexander Hamilton, later Federalists, and Aaron Burr, later the Democratic-
Republican Vice-President of the United States. That bill did not pass, because
of controversy over the rights of freed slaves, although every member of the
Legislature but one voted for some version of it. New York did enact a bill in
1799 that ended slavery over time, but made no provision for the rights of
freedmen. Free blacks were subject to racial segregation and discrimination in
the North. At the United States Constitutional Convention of 1787, delegates
debated over slavery, finally agreeing to protect the international slave trade
for 20 years by not regulating it before 1808. By that time, all the states had
passed individual laws abolishing or severely limiting the international buying
or selling of slaves. The importation of slaves into the United States was
officially banned on 1 January 1808. No action was taken on the nation's
internal domestic slave trade. Manumission by owners. After 1776, Quaker and
Moravian advocates helped persuade numerous slaveholders in the Upper South to
free their slaves. Manumissions increased for nearly two decades. Many
individual acts of manumission freed thousands of slaves. Slaveholders freed
slaves in such number that the percentage of free Negroes in the Upper South
increased sharply from one to ten percent, with most of that increase in
Virginia, Maryland and Delaware. By 1810 three-quarters of blacks in Delaware
were free. The most notable of individuals was Robert Carter III of Virginia,
who freed more than 450 people by "Deed of Gift", filed in 1791. This number
was more slaves than any single American had freed or would ever free. Often
slaveholders came to their decisions by their own struggles in the Revolution;
their wills and deeds frequently cited language about the equality of men
supporting their manumissions. Slaveholders were also encouraged to do so
because the economics of the area was changing. They were shifting from labor-
intensive tobacco culture to mixed crop cultivation and did not need as many
slaves. The free black families began to thrive, together with African
Americans free before the Revolution, mostly descendants of unions between
working class white women and African men. By 1860, in Delaware 91.7 percent of
the blacks were free, and 49.7 percent of those in Maryland. These first free
families often formed the core of artisans, professionals, preachers and
teachers in future generations. Western territories. During the Congressional
debate on 1820 Tallmadge Amendment, which sought to limit slavery in Missouri
as it became a state, Rufus King declared that "laws or compacts imposing any
such condition upon any human being are absolutely void, because contrary to
the law of nature, which is the law of God, by which he makes his ways known to
man, and is paramount to all human control." The amendment failed and Missouri
became a slave state. According to historian David Brion Davis, this may have
been the first time in the world that a political leader openly attacked
slavery's perceived legality in such a radical manner. Beginning in the 1830s,
the U.S. Postmaster General refused to allow the mails to carry abolition
pamphlets to the South. Northern teachers suspected of abolitionism were
expelled from the South, and abolitionist literature was banned. Southerners
rejected the denials of Republicans that they were abolitionists. They pointed
to John Brown's attempt in 1859 to start a slave uprising as proof that
multiple Northern conspiracies were afoot to ignite bloody slave rebellions.
Although some abolitionists did call for slave revolts, no evidence of any
other Brown-like conspiracy has been discovered. The North felt threatened as
well, for as Eric Foner concludes, "Northerners came to view slavery as the
very antithesis of the good society, as well as a threat to their own
fundamental values and interests". However, many conservative Northerners were
uneasy at the prospect of the sudden addition to the labor pool of a huge
number of freed laborers who were used to working for very little, and thus
seen as being willing to undercut prevailing wages.. The famous, "fiery"
Abolitionist, Abby Kelley Foster, from Massachusetts, was considered an "ultra"
abolitionist who believed in full civil rights for all black people. She held
to the views that the freed slaves would colonize Liberia. Parts of the anti-
slavery movement became known as "Abby Kellyism". She recruited Susan B Anthony
to the movement. Colonization and the founding of Liberia. In the early part of
the 19th century, a variety of organizations were established advocating the
movement of black people from the United States to locations where they would
enjoy greater freedom; some endorsed colonization, while others advocated
emigration. During the 1820s and 1830s the American Colonization Society
(A.C.S.) was the primary vehicle for proposals to return black Americans to
freedom in Africa. It had broad support nationwide among white people,
including prominent leaders such as Abraham Lincoln, Henry Clay and James
Monroe, who saw this as preferable to emancipation, with Clay stating:
"unconquerable prejudice resulting from their color, they never could
amalgamate with the free whites of this country. It was desirable, therefore,
as it respected them, and the residue of the population of the country, to
drain them off". Clay argued that as blacks could never be fully integrated
into society due to "unconquerable prejudice" by white Americans, it would be
better for them to emigrate to Africa. There was however, considerable
opposition among African Americans, many of whom did not see colonization as a
viable or acceptable solution to their daunting problems in the United States.
One notable opponent of such plans was the wealthy free black abolitionist
James Forten of Philadelphia. After a series of attempts to plant small
settlements on the coast of West Africa, the A.C.S. established the colony of
Liberia in 1821–22. Over the next four decades, it assisted thousands of
former slaves and free black people to move there from the United States. The
disease environment they encountered was extreme, and most of the migrants died
fairly quickly. Enough survived to declare independence in 1847. American
support for colonization waned gradually through the 1840s and 1850s, largely
because of the efforts of abolitionists to promote emancipation of slaves and
granting of American citizenship. Americo-Liberians ruled Liberia continuously
until the military coup of 1980. Emigration. The emigrationist tradition dated
back to the Revolutionary War era. Initially, the thought was that free African
Americans would want to emigrate to Africa, but over time other ideas became
popular. After Haiti became independent, it tried to recruit African Americans
to migrate there after it re-established trade relations with the United
States. The Haitian Union was the name of a group formed to promote relations
between the countries. Cincinnati's Black community sponsored founding the
Wilberforce Colony, an initially successful settlement of African American
immigrants to Canada. The colony was one of the first such independent
political entities. It lasted for a number of decades and provided a
destination for about 200 black families emigrating from a number of locations
in the United States. Religion and morality. The Second Great Awakening of the
1820s and 1830s in religion inspired groups that undertook many types of social
reform. For some that meant the immediate abolition of slavery because it was a
sin to hold slaves and a sin to tolerate slavery. "Abolitionist" had several
meanings at the time. The followers of William Lloyd Garrison, including
Wendell Phillips and Frederick Douglass, demanded the "immediate abolition of
slavery", hence the name. A more pragmatic group of abolitionists, like
Theodore Weld and Arthur Tappan, wanted immediate action, but that action might
well be a program of gradual emancipation, with a long intermediate stage.
"Antislavery men", like John Quincy Adams, did not call slavery a sin. They
called it an evil feature of society as a whole. They did what they could to
limit slavery and end it where possible, but were not part of any abolitionist
group. For example, in 1841 Adams represented the Amistad African slaves in the
Supreme Court of the United States and argued that they should be set free.
[http://www.npg.si.edu/col/amistad/index.htm] In the last years before the war,
"antislavery" could mean the Northern majority, like Abraham Lincoln, who
opposed "expansion" of slavery or its influence, as by the Kansas-Nebraska Act,
or the Fugitive Slave Act. Many Southerners called all these abolitionists,
without distinguishing them from the Garrisonians. Historian James Stewart
(1976) explains the abolitionists' deep beliefs: "All people were equal in
God's sight; the souls of black folks were as valuable as those of whites; for
one of God's children to enslave another was a violation of the Higher Law,
even if it was sanctioned by the Constitution." Slave owners were angry over
the attacks on what some Southerners (including the politician John C. Calhoun
[http://www.clemson.edu/welcome/history/forthill/calhoun.htm]) referred to as
their peculiar institution of slavery. Starting in the 1830s, there was a
vehement and growing ideological defense of slavery. Slave owners claimed that
slavery was a positive good for masters and slaves alike, and that it was
explicitly sanctioned by God. Biblical arguments were made in defense of
slavery by religious leaders such as the Rev. Fred A. Ross and political
leaders such as Jefferson Davis. There were Southern biblical interpretations
that directly contradicted those of the abolitionists, such as the theory that
a curse on Noah's son Ham and his descendants in Africa was a justification for
enslavement of blacks. Garrison and immediate emancipation. A radical shift
came in the 1830s, led by William Lloyd Garrison, who demanded "immediate
emancipation, gradually achieved". That is, he demanded that slave-owners
repent immediately, and set up a system of emancipation. Theodore Weld, an
evangelical minister, and Robert Purvis, a free African American, joined
Garrison in 1833 to form the American Anti-Slavery Society (Faragher 381). The
following year Weld encouraged a group of students at Lane Theological Seminary
to form an anti-slavery society. After the president, Lyman Beecher, attempted
to suppress it, the students moved to Oberlin College. Due to the students'
anti-slavery position, Oberlin soon became one of the most liberal colleges and
accepted African American students. Along with Garrison, were Northcutt and
Collins as proponents of immediate abolition. These two ardent abolitionists
felt very strongly that it could not wait and that action needed to be taken
right away. Abby Kelley Foster became an "ultra abolitionist" and a follower of
William Lloyd Garrison. She led Susan B. Anthony as well as Elizabeth Cady
Stanton into the anti-slavery cause. After 1840 "abolition" usually referred to
positions like Garrison's; it was largely an ideological movement led by about
3000 people, including free blacks and people of color, many of whom, such as
Frederick Douglass, and Robert Purvis and James Forten in Philadelphia, played
prominent leadership roles. Douglass became legally free during a two year stay
in England, as British supporters raised funds to purchase his freedom from his
American owner Thomas Auld, and also helped fund his abolitionist newspapers in
the US. Abolitionism had a strong religious base including Quakers, and people
converted by the revivalist fervor of the Second Great Awakening, led by
Charles Finney in the North in the 1830s. Belief in abolition contributed to
the breaking away of some small denominations, such as the Free Methodist
Church. Evangelical abolitionists founded some colleges, most notably Bates
College in Maine and Oberlin College in Ohio. The well-established colleges,
such as Harvard, Yale and Princeton, generally opposed abolition, although the
movement did attract such figures as Yale president Noah Porter and Harvard
president Thomas Hill. In the North, most opponents of slavery supported other
modernizing reform movements such as the temperance movement, public schooling,
and prison- and asylum-building. They were split bitterly on the role of
women's activism. "Uncle Tom’s Cabin". The most influential abolitionist
tract was "Uncle Tom’s Cabin" (1852), the best-selling novel and play by
Harriet Beecher Stowe. Outraged by the Fugitive Slave Law of 1850 (which made
the escape narrative part of everyday news), Stowe emphasized the horrors that
abolitionists had long claimed about slavery. Her depiction of the evil slave
owner Simon Legree, a transplanted Yankee who kills the Christ-like Uncle Tom,
outraged the North, helped sway British public opinion against the South, and
inflamed Southern slave owners who tried to refute it by showing some slave
owners were humanitarian. Irish Catholics. Daniel O'Connell, the Catholic
leader of the Irish in Ireland, supported the abolition of slavery in the
British Empire and in America. O'Connell had played a leading role in securing
Catholic Emancipation (the removal of the civil and political disabilities of
Roman Catholics in Great Britain and Ireland) and he was one of William Lloyd
Garrison's models. Garrison recruited him to the cause of American
abolitionism. O'Connell, the black abolitionist Charles Lenox Remond, and the
temperance priest Theobald Mathew organized a petition with 60,000 signatures
urging the Irish of the United States to support abolition. O'Connell also
spoke in the United States for abolition. The Repeal Associations in the United
States mostly took a pro-slavery position. Several reasons have been suggested
for this: that Irish immigrants were competing with free blacks for jobs, and
disliked having the same arguments used for Irish and for black freedom; that
they were loyal to the United States Constitution, which defended "their"
liberties, and disliked the fundamentally extra-constitutional position of the
Abolitionists; and that they perceived abolitionism as Protestant, and were
therefore suspicious of them. In addition, slaveholders had no hesitation in
voicing their support for the freedom of Ireland, a white nation outside the
United States. However, it would be difficult to find evidence in the letters
or oral tradition of immigrant families that would differentiate them from most
Americans of the period. In fact with most immigrants settling in the North,
there was actually very little competition for work between poor immigrants and
the North's relatively small African-American population. Most of the energy of
immigrant families was directed at securing their daily livings and spiritual
lives with what was left over for politics channelled into local issues
concerning public safety and education. Radical Irish nationalists – those
who broke with O'Connell over his refusal to contemplate the violent overthrow
of British rule in Ireland – had a diversity of views about slavery. John
Mitchel, who spent the years 1853 to 1875 in America, was a passionate
propagandist in favor of slavery; three of his sons fought in the Confederate
Army. On the other hand, his former close associate Thomas Francis Meagher
served as a Brigadier General in the United States Army during the American
Civil War. The Catholic Church in America had long ties in slaveholding
Maryland and Louisiana. Despite a firm stand for the spiritual equality of
black people, and the resounding condemnation of slavery by Pope Gregory XVI in
his bull "In Supremo Apostolatus" issued in 1839, the American church continued
in deeds, if not in public discourse, like most of America, to avoid
confrontation with slaveholding interests. In 1842, the Archbishop of New York
while denouncing slavery, objected to O'Connell's petition if authentic as
unwarranted foreign interference. The Bishop of Charleston declared that, while
Catholic tradition opposed slave trading, it had nothing against slavery.
However, in 1861, the Archbishop of New York wrote to Secretary of War Cameron:
"That the Church is opposed to slavery...Her doctrine on that subject is, that
it is a crime to reduce men naturally free to a condition of servitude and
bondage, as slaves." No American bishop supported extra-political abolition or
interference with state's rights before the Civil War. During the Civil War,
however, the Archbishop of New York, John Hughes, who was an ally of Lincoln
and Seward would denounce Southern bishops as follows: "In their periodicals in
New Orleans and Charleston, they have justified the attitude taken by the South
on principles of Catholic theology, which I think was an unnecessary,
inexpedient, and, for that matter, a doubtful if not dangerous position, at the
commencement of so unnatural and lamentable a struggle." One historian observed
that ritualist churches separated themselves from heretics rather than sinners;
he observed that Episcopalians and Lutherans also accommodated themselves to
slavery. (Indeed, one southern Episcopal bishop was a Confederate general.)
There were more reasons than religious tradition, however, as the Anglican
Church had been the established church in the South during the colonial period.
It was linked to the traditions of landed gentry and the wealthier and educated
planter classes, and the Southern traditions longer than any other church. In
addition, while the Protestant missionaries of the Great Awakening initially
opposed slavery in the South, by the early decades of the 19th century, Baptist
and Methodist preachers in the South had come to an accommodation with it in
order to evangelize with farmers and artisans. By the Civil War, the Baptist
and Methodist churches split into regional associations because of slavery.
After O'Connell's failure, the American Repeal Associations broke up; but the
Garrisonians rarely relapsed into the "bitter hostility" of American
Protestants towards the Roman Church. Some antislavery men joined the Know
Nothings in the collapse of the parties; but Edmund Quincy ridiculed it as a
mushroom growth, a distraction from the real issues. Although the Know-Nothing
legislature of Massachusetts honored Garrison, he continued to oppose them as
violators of fundamental rights to freedom of worship. In deeds, however, if
not by proclamations, the Irish would play a leading role in defeating the
South and ending slavery. General William Tecumseh Sherman, General Phil
Sheridan, General George Meade, General John Reynolds, and Dennis Hart Mahan
were all raised by Irish families. Indeed Sherman and Sheridan attended mass at
the same Catholic church in Ohio as children. 137 Irish immigrants were awarded
the Medal of Honor for Civil War valor, far more than any other immigrant
group. After participating in the assault that broke the Confederate center at
Antietam New York City's Irish Brigade would be worse than decimated in
repeated desperate assaults on the stonewall at Fredericksburg on the eve of
Emancipation. In the war's little known last chapter, after Appomottox, General
Phil Sheridan took command to the Union army's African-American 25th Corps and
was sent by Grant with an armada to pacify Texas. Later President Johnson would
relieve Sheridan of command because of Sheridans aggressive enforcement of
Reconstruction in Texas and Louisiana. In the final analysis, none of Lincoln's
most prominent opponents were Irish: George McClellan, August Belmont, Fernando
Wood, James Bennett, and Clement Vallandigham. Of these only Bennett, who
shared a mutual dislike of each other with the "Archbishop of New York" was a
Catholic. Progress of abolition in the United States. To 1804. Although there
were several groups that opposed slavery (such as the Society for the Relief of
Free Negroes Unlawfully Held in Bondage), at the time of the founding of the
Republic, there were few states which prohibited slavery outright. The
Constitution had several provisions which accommodated slavery, although none
used the word. Passed unanimously by the Congress of the Confederation in 1787,
the Northwest Ordinance forbade slavery in the Northwest Territory, a vast area
which had previously belonged to individual states in which slavery was legal.
American abolitionism began very early, well before the United States was
founded as a nation. An early law abolishing slavery (but not temporary
indentured servitude) in Rhode Island in 1652 floundered within 50 years.
Samuel Sewall, a prominent Bostonian and one of the judges at the Salem Witch
Trials, wrote The Selling of Joseph in protest of the widening practice of
outright slavery as opposed to indentured servitude in the colonies. This is
the earliest-recorded anti-slavery tract published in the future United States.
In 1777, Vermont, not yet a state, became the first jurisdiction in North
America to prohibit slavery: slaves were not directly freed, but masters were
required to remove slaves from Vermont. The first state to begin a gradual
abolition of slavery was Pennsylvania, in 1780. All importation of slaves was
prohibited, but none freed at first; only the slaves of masters who failed to
register them with the state, along with the "future children" of enslaved
mothers. Those enslaved in Pennsylvania before the 1780 law went into effect
were not freed until 1847. Massachusetts took an opposite and much more radical
position. Its Supreme Court ruled in 1783, that a black man was, indeed, a man;
and therefore free under the state's constitution. All of the other states
north of Maryland began gradual abolition of slavery between 1781 and 1804,
based on the Pennsylvania model. South. The institution remained solid in the
South, however and that region's customs and social beliefs evolved into a
strident defense of slavery in response to the rise of a stronger anti-slavery
stance in the North. In 1835 alone abolitionists mailed over a million pieces
of anti-slavery literature to the south. In response southern legislators
banned abolitionist literature and encouraged harassment of anyone distributing
it. Immediate abolition.  Anti-slavery advocates were outraged by the murder of
Elijah Parish Lovejoy, a white man and editor of an abolitionist newspaper on 7
November 1837, by a pro-slavery mob in Illinois. Nearly all Northern
politicians rejected the extreme positions of the abolitionists; Abraham
Lincoln, for example. Indeed many northern leaders including Lincoln, Stephen
Douglas (the Democratic nominee in 1860), John C. Fremont (the Republican
nominee in 1856), and Ulysses S. Grant married into slave owning southern
families without any moral qualms. Antislavery as a principle was far more than
just the wish to limit the extent of slavery. Most Northerners recognized that
slavery existed in the South and the Constitution did not allow the federal
government to intervene there. Most Northerners favored a policy of gradual and
compensated emancipation. After 1849 abolitionists rejected this and demanded
it end immediately and everywhere. John Brown was the only abolitionist known
to have actually planned a violent insurrection, though David Walker promoted
the idea. The abolitionist movement was strengthened by the activities of free
African-Americans, especially in the black church, who argued that the old
Biblical justifications for slavery contradicted the New Testament. African-
American activists and their writings were rarely heard outside the black
community; however, they were tremendously influential to some sympathetic
white people, most prominently the first white activist to reach prominence,
William Lloyd Garrison, who was its most effective propagandist. Garrison's
efforts to recruit eloquent spokesmen led to the discovery of ex-slave
Frederick Douglass, who eventually became a prominent activist in his own
right. Eventually, Douglass would publish his own, widely distributed
abolitionist newspaper, the "North Star". In the early 1850s, the American
abolitionist movement split into two camps over the issue of the United States
Constitution. This issue arose in the late 1840s after the publication of "The
Unconstitutionality of Slavery" by Lysander Spooner. The Garrisonians, led by
Garrison and Wendell Phillips, publicly burned copies of the Constitution,
called it a pact with slavery, and demanded its abolition and replacement.
Another camp, led by Lysander Spooner, Gerrit Smith, and eventually Douglass,
considered the Constitution to be an antislavery document. Using an argument
based upon Natural Law and a form of social contract theory, they said that
slavery existed outside of the Constitution's scope of legitimate authority and
therefore should be abolished. Another split in the abolitionist movement was
along class lines. The artisan republicanism of Robert Dale Owen and Frances
Wright stood in stark contrast to the politics of prominent elite abolitionists
such as industrialist Arthur Tappan and his evangelist brother Lewis. While the
former pair opposed slavery on a basis of solidarity of "wage slaves" with
"chattel slaves", the Whiggish Tappans strongly rejected this view, opposing
the characterization of Northern workers as "slaves" in any sense. (Lott,
129–130) Many American abolitionists took an active role in opposing slavery
by supporting the Underground Railroad. This was made illegal by the federal
Fugitive Slave Law of 1850. Nevertheless, participants like Harriet Tubman,
Henry Highland Garnet, Alexander Crummell, Amos Noë Freeman and others
continued with their work. Abolitionists were particularly active in Ohio,
where some worked directly in the Underground Railroad. Since the state shared
a border with slave states, it was a popular place for slaves' escaping across
the Ohio River and up its tributaries, where they sought shelter among
supporters who would help them move north to freedom. Two significant events in
the struggle to destroy slavery were the Oberlin-Wellington Rescue and John
Brown's raid on Harpers Ferry. In the South, members of the abolitionist
movement or other people opposing slavery were often targets of lynch mob
violence before the American Civil War. Numerous known abolitionists lived,
worked, and worshipped in Downtown Brooklyn, from Henry Ward Beecher, who
auctioned slaves into freedom from the pulpit of Plymouth Church, to Nathan
Egelston, a leader of the African and Foreign Antislavery Society, who also
preached at Bridge Street AME and lived on Duffield Street. His fellow Duffield
Street residents, Thomas and Harriet Truesdell were leading members of the
Abolitionist movement. Mr. Truesdell was a founding member of the Providence
Anti-slavery Society before moving to Brooklyn in 1851. Harriet Truesdell was
also very active in the movement, organizing an antislavery convention in
Pennsylvania Hall in Philadelphia. The Tuesdell's lived at 227 Duffield Street.
Another prominent Brooklyn-based abolitionist was Rev. Joshua Leavitt, trained
as a lawyer at Yale who stopped practicing law in order to attend Yale Divinity
School, and subsequently edited the abolitionist newspaper "The Emancipator"
and campaigned against slavery, as well as advocating other social reforms. In
1841 Leavitt published his "The Financial Power of Slavery", which argued that
the South was draining the national economy due to its reliance on slavery.
John Brown. Historian Frederick Blue called John Brown "the most controversial
of all 19th-century Americans." When Brown was hanged after his attempt to
start a slave rebellion in 1859, church bells rang, minute guns were fired,
large memorial meetings took place throughout the North, and famous writers
such as Emerson and Henry David Thoreau joined many Northerners in praising
Brown. Whereas Garrison was a pacifist, Brown resorted to violence. Historians
agree he played a major role in starting the war. Some historians regard Brown
as a crazed lunatic while David S. Reynolds hails him as the man who "killed
slavery, sparked the civil war, and seeded civil rights." For Ken Chowder he is
"the father of American terrorism." His famous raid in October 1859, involved a
band of 22 men who seized the federal Harpers Ferry Armory at Harper's Ferry,
Virginia, knowing it contained tens of thousands of weapons. Brown believed
that the South was on the verge of a gigantic slave uprising and that one spark
would set it off. Brown's supporters George Luther Stearns, Franklin B.
Sanborn, Thomas Wentworth Higginson, Theodore Parker, Samuel Gridley Howe and
Gerrit Smith were all abolitionist members of the Secret Six who provided
financial backing for Brown's raid. Brown's raid, says historian David Potter,
"was meant to be of vast magnitude and to produce a revolutionary slave
uprising throughout the South." The raid was a fiasco. Not a single slave
revolted. Lt. Colonel Robert E. Lee of the U.S. Army was dispatched to put down
the raid, and Brown was quickly captured. Brown was tried for treason against
Virginia and hanged. At his trial, Brown exuded a remarkable zeal and single-
mindedness that played directly to Southerners' worst fears. Few individuals
did more to cause secession than John Brown, because Southerners believed he
was right about an impending slave revolt. Shortly before his execution, Brown
prophesied, "the crimes of this guilty land will never be purged away; but with
Blood." American Civil War. From the beginning of the American Civil War, Union
leaders identified slavery as the social and economic foundation of the
Confederacy, and from 1862 were determined to end that support system.
Meanwhile pro-Union forces gained control of the Border States and began the
process of emancipation in Maryland, Missouri and West Virginia. Lincoln issued
the Emancipation Proclamation on 1 January 1863, and in the next 24 months it
effectively ended slavery throughout the Confederacy. The passage of the
Thirteenth Amendment (ratified in December 1865) officially ended slavery in
the United States, and freed the 50,000 or so remaining slaves in the border
states. Commemoration. The abolitionist movements and the abolition of slavery
have been commemorated in different ways around the world in modern times. The
United Nations General Assembly declared 2004 the International Year to
Commemorate the Struggle against Slavery and its Abolition. This proclamation
marked the bicentenary of the birth of the first black state, Haiti. Numerous
exhibitions, events and research programmes were connected to the initiative.
2007 witnessed major exhibitions in British museums and galleries to mark the
anniversary of the 1807 abolition act – 1807 Commemorated 2008 marks the
201st anniversary of the Abolition of the Slave Trade in the British Empire. It
also marks the 175th anniversary of the Abolition of Slavery in the British
Empire. The Faculty of Law at the University of Ottawa held a major
international conference entitled, "Routes to Freedom: Reflections on the
Bicentenary of the Abolition of the Slave Trade", from 14 to 16 March 2008.
Actor and human rights activist Danny Glover delivered the keynote speech
announcing the creation of two major scholarships intended for University of
Ottawa law students specializing in international law and social justice at the
conference's gala dinner. Brooklyn, New York has begun work on commemorating
the abolitionist movement in New York. Contemporary abolitionism. Although
outlawed in most countries, slavery is nonetheless practiced secretly in many
parts of the world. Enslavement still takes place in the United States, Europe,
and Latin America, as well as parts of Africa, the Middle East, and South Asia.
There are an estimated 27 million victims of slavery worldwide. In Mauritania
alone, estimates are that up to 600,000 men, women and children, or 20% of the
population, are enslaved. Many of them are used as bonded labour. Modern-day
abolitionists have emerged over the last several years, as awareness of slavery
around the world has grown, with groups such as Anti-Slavery International, the
American Anti-Slavery Group, International Justice Mission, and Free the Slaves
working to rid the world of slavery. Zach Hunter, for example, began a movement
called Loose Change to Loosen Chains when he was in seventh grade. Also
featured on CNN and other national news organizations, Hunter has gone on to
help inspire other teens and young adults to take action against injustice with
his books, "Be the Change" and "Generation Change". In the United States, The
Action Group to End Human Trafficking and Modern-Day Slavery is a coalition of
NGOs, foundations and corporations working to develop a policy agenda for
abolishing slavery and human trafficking. Since 1997, the United States
Department of Justice has, through work with the Coalition of Immokalee
Workers, prosecuted six individuals in Florida on charges of slavery in the
agricultural industry. These prosecutions have led to freedom for over 1000
enslaved workers in the tomato and orange fields of South Florida. This is only
one example of the contemporary fight against slavery worldwide. Slavery exists
most widely in agricultural labor, apparel and sex industries, and service jobs
in some regions. In 2000, the United States passed the Victims of Trafficking
and Violence Protection Act (TVPA) "to combat trafficking in persons,
especially into the sex trade, slavery, and involuntary servitude." The TVPA
also "created new law enforcement tools to strengthen the prosecution and
punishment of traffickers, making human trafficking a Federal crime with severe
penalties." The United States Department of State publishes the annual
Trafficking in Persons Report, identifying countries as either Tier 1, Tier 2,
Tier 2 Watch List or Tier 3, depending upon three factors: "(1) The extent to
which the country is a country of origin, transit, or destination for severe
forms of trafficking; (2) The extent to which the government of the country
does not comply with the TVPA's minimum standards including, in particular, the
extent of the government's trafficking-related corruption; and (3) The
resources and capabilities of the government to address and eliminate severe
forms of trafficking in persons."
