Abraham Abraham (Hebrew: , Modern: ', Greek: Αβραάμ (Avraam), Tiberian:
', Ashkenazi: "Avrohom" or "Avruhom", "Ibrahim (name)") is one of the biblical
patriarchs and a major character in the founding myth of the Israelites. His
story is told in chapters 11-25 of the Book of Genesis, and he plays a
prominent role in Judaism, Christianity and Islam. According to the account in
Genesis, at the age of 75, Abram, following what he took to be God's command,
took his wife Sarai, and his household and traveled from Haran to Shechem in
Canaan. Abram enters into a covenant with God, signified by the rite of
circumcision. Abram is now known as Abraham (“father of many nations”), and
Sarai becomes Sarah. As Abraham and Sarah are childless, Sarah suggests Abraham
have a child by her handmaid, Hagar. Hagar bears Abraham his firstborn,
Ishmael. Abraham and Sarah later become the parents of Isaac. In Jewish and
Christian tradition, Abraham is the father of the Israelites through his son
Isaac. In Islamic tradition, Abraham is considered a prophet of Islam, an
ancestor of Muhammad, through Ishmael. Muslims regard him as an example of the
perfect Muslim, and the revered reformer of the Kaaba in Mecca. Bahá'u'lláh,
the prophet of the Baha'i Faith, affirms the highest religious station for
Abraham. In the New Testament Abraham is described as a man of faith. He is
regarded as the patron saint of those in the hospitality industry. Narrative in
Genesis. The life of Abraham is related in of the Hebrew Bible. Abram's origins
and calling. Terah, the tenth in descent from Noah, fathered Abram, Nahor and
Haran, and Haran fathered Lot. Haran died in his native Ur of the Chaldees, and
Abram married Sarai, who was barren. Terah, with Abram, Sarai and Lot, then
departed for Canaan, but settled in a place named Haran, where Terah died at
the age of 205. () God appeared to Abram and told him to depart. After settling
in Haran, where his father Terah died, God then told Abram to leave his country
and his father's house for a land that He would show him, promising to make of
him a great nation, bless him, make his name great, bless those who blessed
him, and curse those who cursed him. () Following God's command, at age 75,
Abram took his wife Sarai, his nephew Lot, and the wealth and persons that they
had acquired, and traveled to Shechem in Canaan. Abram and Sarai. There was a
severe famine in the land of Canaan, so that Abram and Lot and their
households, traveled south to Egypt. En route, Abram told his wife Sarai, to
only say that she was his sister, so that the Egyptians would not kill him. ()
When they entered Egypt, the princes of Pharaoh praised Sarai's beauty to the
Pharaoh, and she was taken into his palace, and Abram was given provisions:
"oxen, and he asses, and menservants, and maidservants, and she asses, and
camels". However, God afflicted the Pharaoh and his household with great
plagues, () and after discovering that Sarai was also Abram's wife, the Pharaoh
wanted nothing to do with them. He demanded that he and his household leave
immediately, along with all their goods. () Abram and Lot separate. When they
came back to the Bethel and Hai area, Abram's and Lot's sizeable numbers of
livestock occupied the same pastures ("and the Canaanite and the Perizzite
dwelled then in the land.") This became a problem for the herdsmen who were
assigned to each family's cattle. The conflicts between herdsmen had become so
troublesome that Abram graciously suggested that Lot choose a separate area,
either on the left hand or on the right hand, that there be no conflict amongst
"brethren". But Lot chose to go east to the plain of Jordan where the land was
well watered everywhere as far as Zoar, and he dwelled in the cities of the
plain toward Sodom. Abram went south to Hebron and settled in the plain of
Mamre, where he built another altar to worship God. () Abram and Chedorlaomer.
During the rebellion of the Jordan River cities against Elam, () Abram's
nephew, Lot, was taken prisoner along with his entire household by the invading
Elamite forces. The Elamite army came to collect booty from the spoils of war,
after having just defeated the King of Sodom's armies. () Lot and his family,
at the time, were settled on the outskirts of the Kingdom of Sodom which made
them a visible target. () One person that escaped capture came and told Abram
what happened. Once Abram received this news, he immediately assembled 318
trained servants. Abram's elite force headed north in pursuit of the Elamite
army, who were already worn down from the Battle of Siddim. When they caught up
with them at Dan, Abram devised a battle strategy plan by splitting his group
into more than one unit, and launched a night raid. Not only were they able to
free the captives, Abram's unit chased and slaughtered the Elamite King
Chedorlaomer at Hobah, just north of Damascus. They freed Lot, as well as his
household and possessions, and recovered all of the goods from Sodom that had
been taken. () Upon Abram's return, Sodom's King (whom we do not know since the
previous king of Sodom, Bera, had perished in ) came out to meet with him in
the Valley of Shaveh, the "king's dale". Also, Melchizedek king of Salem
(Jerusalem), a priest of God Most High, brought out bread and wine and blessed
Abram and God. Abram then gave Melchizedek a tenth of everything. The king of
Sodom then offered to let Abram keep all the possessions if he would merely
return his people. Although he released the captives, Abram refused any reward
from the King of Sodom, other than the share to which his allies were entitled.
() Abrahamic covenant. The word of God came to Abram in a vision and repeated
the promise of the land and descendants as numerous as the stars. Abram and God
made a covenant ceremony, and God told of the future bondage of Israel in
Egypt. God described to Abram the land that his offspring would claim: "the
land of the Kenites, Kenizzites, Kadmonites, Hittites, Perizzites, Rephaites,
Amorites, Canaanites, Girgashites and Jebusites.” (Genesis 15) Abram and
Hagar. Abram and Sarai were trying to make sense of how he would become a
progenitor of nations since it had already been 10 years of living in Canaan,
and still no child had been born from Abram's seed. Sarai then offered her
Egyptian handmaid, Hagar, for Abram to consort with so that she may have a
child by her, as a wife. Abram consented and had sexual intercourse with Hagar.
The result of these actions created a fiery relationship between Hagar and
Sarai. () After a harsh encounter with Sarai, Hagar fled toward Shur. En route,
an angel of the Lord appeared to Hagar at the well of a spring. He instructed
her to return to Sarai for she will bear a son who “shall be a wild ass of a
man, his hand against everyone and everyone's hand against him, and he shall
dwell over against all his kinsmen.” She was told to call her son: Ishmael.
Hagar then referred to God as “El-roi”, meaning that she had gone on seeing
after God saw her. From that day, the well was called Beer-lahai-roi. She then
did as she was instructed by returning to Abram in order to have her child.
Abram was eighty-six years of age when Ishmael was born. () Abraham's three
visitors. Not long afterward, during the heat of the day, Abraham had been
sitting at the entrance of his tent by the terebinths of Mamre. He looked up
and saw three men in the presence of God. Then he ran and bowed to the ground
to welcome them. Abraham then offered to wash their feet and fetch them a
morsel of bread of which they assented. Abraham rushed to Sarah's tent to order
cakes made from choice flour, then he ordered a servant-boy to prepare a choice
calf. When all was prepared, he set curds, milk and the calf before them
waiting on them, under a tree, as they ate. () One of the visitors told Abraham
that upon his return next year, Sarah would have a son. While at the tent
entrance, Sarah overheard what was said and she laughed to herself about the
prospect of having a child at their ages. The visitor inquired to Abraham why
Sarah laughed at bearing a child for her age as nothing is too hard for God.
Frightened, Sarah denied laughing. Abraham's plea. After eating, Abraham and
the three visitors got up. They walked over to the peak that overlooked the
"Cities of the Plain" to discuss the fate of Sodom and Gomorrah for their
detestable sins that were so great, it moved God to action. Because Abraham's
nephew was living in Sodom, God revealed plans to confirm and judge these
cities. At this point, the two other visitors leave for Sodom. Then Abraham
turned to the Lord and pleaded incrementally with Him (from fifty persons to
less) that 'if there were at least ten righteous men found in the city, would
not God spare the city?' For the sake of ten righteous people, God declared
that he would not destroy the city. () When the two visitors got to Sodom to
conduct their report, they planned on staying in the city square. However,
Abraham's nephew, Lot, met with them and strongly insisted that these two
“men” stay at his house for the night. A rally of men stood outside of
Lot's home and demanded that they bring out his guests so that they may
“know” them. However, Lot objected and offered his virgin daughters to the
rally of men instead. They rejected that notion and sought to break Lot's doors
down to get to his male guests, thus confirming the “outcry against Sodom and
Gomorrah” and sealing their doom. () Early the next morning, Abraham awoke
and went to the elevation that looked over the River Jordan plain, at the very
spot where he stood before God, the day prior. From his vantage point, he saw
what became of the cities of the plain as “dense smoke rising from the land,
like smoke from a furnace.” () This meant that there was not even ten
righteous people in any of those cities. () Abraham and Abimelech. Abraham
settled between Kadesh and Shur in the land of the Philistines. While he was
living in Gerar, Abraham openly claimed that Sarah was his sister. Upon
discovering this news, King Abimelech had her brought to him. Later, God came
to Abimelech in a dream and declared that taking her would result in death
because she was a married woman. Abimelech had not laid hands on her, so he
inquired if he would also slay a righteous nation, especially since Abraham had
claimed that he and Sarah were siblings. In response, God told Abimelech that
he did indeed have a blameless heart and that is why he continued to exist.
However, should he not return the wife of Abraham back to him, God would surely
destroy Abimelech and his entire household. Abimelech was informed that Abraham
was a prophet who would pray for him.() Early next morning, Abimelech informed
his servants of his dream and approached Abraham inquiring as to why he had
brought such great guilt upon his kingdom. Abraham stated that he thought there
was no fear of God in that place, and that they might kill him for his wife.
Then Abraham defended what he had said as not being a lie at all: "And yet
indeed "she is" my sister; she "is" the daughter of my father, but not the
daughter of my mother; and she became my wife." () Abimelech returned Sarah to
Abraham, and gave him gifts of sheep, oxen, and servants; and invited him to
settle wherever he pleased in Abimelech's lands. Further, Abimelech gave
Abraham a thousand pieces of silver to serve as Sarah's vindication before all.
Abraham then prayed for Abimelech and his household, since the had stricken the
women with infertility because of the taking of Sarah. () After living for some
time in the land of the Philistines, Abimelech and Phicol, the chief of his
troops, approached Abraham because of a dispute that resulted in a violent
confrontation at a well. Abraham then reproached Abimelech due to his
Philistine servant's aggressive attacks and the seizing of Abraham's well.
Abimelech claimed ignorance of the incident. Then Abraham offered a pact by
providing sheep and oxen to Abimelech. Further, to attest that Abraham was the
one who dug the well, he also gave Abimelech seven ewes for proof. Because of
this sworn oath, they called the place of this well: Beersheba. After Abimelech
and Phicol headed back to Philistia, Abraham planted a grove in Beersheba and
called upon "the name of the , the everlasting God." () Birth of Isaac. As had
been prophesied in Mamre the previous year (Genesis 18:14), Sarah became
pregnant and bore a son to Abraham, at the very time which had been spoken. The
patriarch, now a hundred years old, named the child "Isaac" (Hewbrew yitschaq,
laughter) and circumcised him when he was eight days old. (Genesis 21:4) In
doing so, the second son of Abraham became the first to undergo the covenant-
sign of circumcision at the age God had commanded. (Genesis 17:12) For Sarah,
the thought of giving birth and nursing a child, at such an old age, also
brought her much laughter, as she declared, "God hath made me to laugh. Every
one that heareth will laugh with me." (Genesis 21:6-7) Isaac continued to grow
and on the day he was weaned, Abraham held a great feast to honor the occasion.
During the celebration, however, Sarah found Ishmael mocking; an observation
that would begin to clarify the birthright of Isaac. (Genesis 21:8-9) Abraham
and Ishmael. Abraham was fond of his son Ishmael who had grown up to be
thirteen years old when his son Isaac was born. However, with Sarah, things
were never the same with Ishmael's mother Hagar, back in her life. Now that
Sarah had finally borne her own child, she could no longer stand the sight of
either Hagar or Ishmael. When the teenager was jesting around, Sarah told
Abraham to send the two of them away. She declared that Ishmael would not share
in Isaac's inheritance. Abraham was greatly distressed by his wife's words and
sought the advice of his God. The Lord told Abraham not to be distressed but to
do as his wife commanded. God reassured Abraham that "in Isaac shall seed be
called to thee." () He also said that Ishmael would make a nation, "because he
is thy seed", too. () Early the next morning, Abraham brought Hagar and Ishmael
out together. He gave her bread and water and sent them away. The two wandered
the wilderness of Beersheba until her bottle of water was completely consumed.
In a moment of despair, she burst in tears. The boy then called to God and upon
hearing him, an angel of God confirmed to Hagar that he would become a great
nation. A well of water then appeared so that it saved their lives. As the boy
grew, he became a skilled archer living in the wilderness of Paran. Eventually
his mother found a wife for Ishmael from her native country, the land of Egypt.
() Abraham and Isaac. At some point in Isaac's youth, Abraham was commanded by
God to offer his son up as a sacrifice in the land of Moriah. The patriarch
traveled three days until he came to the mount that God told him of. He
commanded the servants to remain while he and Isaac proceeded alone into the
mount. Isaac carried the wood upon which he would be sacrificed. Along the way,
Isaac asked his father where the animal for the burnt offering was, to which
Abraham replied "God will provide himself a lamb for a burnt offering". Just as
Abraham was about to sacrifice his son, he was interrupted by "the angel of the
", and he saw behind him a ram "caught in a thicket by his horns", which he
sacrificed instead of his son. For his obedience he received another promise of
numerous descendants and abundant prosperity. After this event, Abraham went to
Beersheba. () Later years. Sarah, the only woman in the Hebrew scriptures whose
age is stated, was 127 years old when she died. Abraham buried her in the Cave
of the Patriarchs (also called the Cave of Machpelah), near Hebron which he had
purchased, along with the adjoining field, from Ephron the Hittite and laid her
to rest in the cave. () After the death of Sarah, Abraham took another wife, a
concubine named Keturah, who bore him six sons: Zimran, Jokshan, Medan, Midian,
Ishbak, and Shuah. () Abraham lived 175 years, and "died in a good old age".
The Bible says he was buried by his sons Isaac and Ishmael in the cave of
Machpelah. () Abraham in religious traditions. In Islamic and Jewish
traditions, Abraham is referred to as "our Father" (Hebrew: "Avraham Avinu",
Arabic: "abeena Ibraheem"). In Jewish and Christian tradition, Abraham is the
father of the Israelites through his son Isaac, whose mother was Sarah. His
oldest son is Ishmael, whose mother is Hagar, Sarah's Egyptian handmaiden. In
Islamic tradition, Abraham is considered a prophet of Islam, the ancestor of
Muhammad, through his son Ishmael, whose mother is Hagar (هاجر). Judaism.
Abraham's life can be read in the weekly Torah reading portions, predominantly
in the parashot: Lech-Lecha ( לֶךְ-לְךָ ), Vayeira ( וַיֵּרָא
), Chayei Sarah ( חַיֵּי שָׂרָה ), and Toledot ( תּוֹלְדֹת
) Rabbinic Judaism faced a seeming contradiction with Abraham, in that he lived
before the laws of the Torah had been revealed to Moses. Therefore, Abraham
would not have been knowledgeable of all of the Torah's commandments, besides
the instruction of practicing circumcision. The rabbis (traditional teachers
and interpreters of the Torah), however, interpreted the narratives of the
Torah in Genesis to say that Abraham had in fact known and practiced the Law in
its entirety, although there are different interpretations as to how exactly
Abraham practiced different aspects of the law. 11th and 12th century Rabbis
Rashi and Abraham ibn Ezra agree that Abram's native homeland was Ur Kaśdim,
better known as "Ur of the Chaldees", a Mesopotamian location settled by the
descendants of Ham. Some modern Jewish studies identify this location to be the
same as the Sumerian city-state of Ur. However, this Persian Gulf city in Iraq
is only a candidate among others to be the actual Ur Kaśdim, as well as the
most popularly debated one since 1927. The city of Urfa (classical Urha
 in Turkey, not too far from Haran also claims to the birthplace of the
Patriarch. Urfa is famous for its monuments, pools and shrines associated with
Patriarch Abraham. Rabbi Nahmanides, known as "the Ramban", was a medieval
Jewish scholar of the 13th century who disagreed with Rashi and Ibn Ezra
concerning Abram's birthplace. The Ramban states that because Ur Kaśdim was
settled by Ham's descendants, this could not be Abram's birthplace as he was a
descendant of Shem. However, everyone does agree that Abram's family under the
headship of his father, Terach, had all lived in Ur Kaśdim before being called
to move to Canaan. The three Rabbis also agree that Terach's native homeland
was Charan, the biblical place known as Haran in , where the "House of Terach"
was located. Since this settlement was established by Shem's descendants, only
Ramban assumed that Charan had to be Abram's birthplace. He further concluded
that Terach and his three sons eventually moved from Charan to Ur Kaśdim, and
then later by God's command, they headed to Canaan. Of course, they stopped
back at Terach's hometown of Charan, where the father stayed there rather than
going to Canaan after all. Christianity. In the Christian Bible (New
Testament), Abraham's significance lies in his unwavering faith. In Romans 4,
Abraham's merit is associated less with obedience to the divine will than in
his faith in God's ultimate grace. It is his faith that provides him the merit
for God's having chosen him for the covenant in the first place, and the
covenant becomes one of faith. The New Testament also sees Abraham as an
obedient man of God, and Abraham's interrupted attempt to offer up Isaac is
seen as the supreme act of perfect faith in God. "By faith Abraham, when he was
tested, offered up Isaac, and he who had received the promises offered up his
only begotten son, of whom it was said, 'In Isaac your seed shall be called',
concluding that God was able to raise him up, even from the dead, from which he
also received him in a figurative sense." () The imagery of a father
sacrificing his son is seen as a type of God the Father offering his Son on
Golgotha. The traditional view in Christianity is that the chief promise made
to Abraham in "Genesis" 12 is that through Abraham's seed all the people of
earth would be blessed. Notwithstanding this, John the Baptist specifically
taught that merely being of Abraham's seed was no guarantee of salvation. The
promise in Genesis is considered to have been fulfilled through Abraham's seed,
Jesus. The Roman Catholic Church calls Abraham "our father in Faith", in the
Eucharistic prayer of the Roman Canon, recited during the Mass (see Abraham in
the Catholic liturgy). He is also commemorated in the calendars of saints of
several denominations: on 20 August by the Maronite Church, 28 August in the
Coptic Church and the Assyrian Church of the East (with the full office for the
latter), and on 9 October by the Roman Catholic Church and the Lutheran Church
- Missouri Synod. He is also regarded as the patron saint of those in the
hospitality industry. The Eastern Orthodox Church commemorates him as the
"Righteous Forefather Abraham", with two feast days in its liturgical calendar.
The first time is on 9 October (for those churches which follow the traditional
Julian Calendar, 9 October falls on 22 October of the modern Gregorian
Calendar), where he is commemorated together with his nephew "Righteous Lot".
The other is on the "Sunday of the Forefathers" (two Sundays before Christmas),
when he is commemorated together with other ancestors of Jesus. Abraham is also
mentioned in the Divine Liturgy of Saint Basil the Great, just before the
Anaphora. Abraham and Sarah are invoked in the prayers said by the priest over
a newly married couple at the Sacred Mystery of Crowning (i.e., the Sacrament
of Marriage). Islam. Abraham ("Ibrahim") is an important figure in the Quran,
mentioned in 25 chapters, briefly or in detail. Muslims regard him as a prophet
and patriarch, the archetype of the perfect Muslim, and the revered reformer of
the Kaaba in Mecca. Islamic traditions consider Abraham the father of Islam
(which is also called "millat Ibrahim", the "religion of Abraham"), and that
his purpose and mission throughout his life was to proclaim the Oneness of God.
When Ibrahim (Abraham) was asked for sacrifice and took Ismael to the place
when he was about to use the knife, God placed a sheep under his hand. From
that day onward, every Eid (Eid Al Adha) once a year Muslims around the world
slaughter a sheep to follow the path of Ibrahim that is called Qurbani
sacrifice. Baha'i. Bahá'u'lláh, the prophet of the Baha'i Faith, affirms the
highest religious station for Abraham and generally for prophets mentioned
among the other Abrahamic religions, and has claimed a lineage of descent from
Abraham through Keturah and Sarah. Additionally Bahá'u'lláh actually did lose
a son, Mírzá Mihdí. Bahá'u'lláh, then in prison, eulogized his son and
connected the subsequent easing of restrictions to his dying prayer and also
compared it to the intended sacrifice of Abraham's son. Scholarly criticism.
Origins and composition. Scholarship for more than two centuries have agreed
that the Torah, in which the Patriarchal stories are found, was drawn together
from different literary sources. However, any particular identification or
dating of the textual sources have been strongly debated. It is widely held by
modern biblical scholarship that the Patriarchs, including Abraham, are not
clearly and unambiguously attested in the Hebrew Bible earlier than the
Babylonian exile. This has led modern scholars to propose that the entire
"Torah", which include the stories of Abraham, all originated from literary
circles either during the Babylonian period of the late 6th century BCE, to the
5th century Persian rule, or as late as Hellenistic times. Under these
dominions, the Patriarchal stories are seen as "hope" for the Jewish people
when Jerusalem, the Temple, and the Davidic kingship were all but destroyed.
YHWH's dealings with their ancestors provided hope for a future in which an
ancestral foundation could be built. Thus, Abraham served as a model for those
who would return to Judah. There are however, modern supporters for an earlier
dating. Robert Alter interjects that the Hebrew language evolved over nine
centuries of biblical literary activity, from the "First Commonwealth" (1000
BCE to 586 BCE) to the late Persian/Hellenistic periods. Both Alter and Ronald
Hendel argue that there is very little Hebrew in the Torah that could bear a
late dating to the 6th-4th century BCE eras, due to their linguistic
differences. Setting. Abraham first appears as Abram, until he is renamed by
God in . Both names are West Semitic, and similar and even identical names have
been found in texts dating from the 14th century BCE to the 7th. The text of
Genesis suggests that the new name means "father of multitudes", which
indicates the significance Abraham had for the authors, but in fact the meaning
is unknown. There is basic agreement that Abraham's connection with Haran,
Shechem and Bethel is secondary and originated when he became identified as the
father of Jacob and ancestor of the northern tribes; his association with Mamre
and Hebron, on the other hand (in the south, in the territory of Jerusalem and
Judah), suggest that this region was the original home of his religion. The
standard text of the Hebrew Bible places Abraham's birth 1,948 years after the
Creation, or 1948 AM (Anno Mundi, "Year of the World"). The two other major
textual traditions have different dates, the translated Greek Septuagint
putting it at 3312 AM and the Samaritan version of the Torah at 2247 AM. All
three agree that he died at the age of 175. There have been over two hundred
attempts to match the biblical chronology to dates in history, two of the more
influential being the traditional Jewish dates (Abraham lived 1812 BCE to 1637
BCE), and those of the 17th century Archbishop James Ussher (Abraham lived 1976
BCE to 1801 BCE); but the most that can be said with some degree of certainty
is that the standard Hebrew text of Genesis places Abraham in the earlier part
of the second millennium BCE. Historicity. Since the 1970s, efforts to
reconstruct a patriarchal age for Israel's past have come to an end as most
historians of ancient Israel have abandoned the conclusions of earlier
scholarship, as there is nothing specific in the Genesis stories that can be
definitively linked to known history in or around Canaan in the early second
millennium BCE. There is no solid evidence for any date during that period, as
none of the kings mentioned are known, neither the anonymous Pharaoh who
enlists Joseph into his services. Some scholars argue that historical
inaccuracies exist, such as: the reference to Abimelech "King of the
Philistines", when the Philistines had not settled in Palestine until the later
end of the millennium. Abraham coming from "Ur of the Chaldeans", when the
Babylonians were not known as Chaldeans until a much later time. Laban
identified as an Aramean, when Arameans did not become a known political entity
before the 12th century BCE. Abraham in the arts. Paintings. Paintings on the
life of Abraham tend to focus on only a few incidents: The sacrifice of Isaac;
Meeting Melchizedek; Entertaining the three angels; Hagar in the desert; and a
few others. Many artists have been inspired by the life of Abraham: Albrecht
Dürer (1471–1528), Caravaggio (1573–1610), Rembrandt van Rijn (Dutch,
1606–1669) created at least seven works on Abraham, Petrus-Paulus Rubens
(1577–1640) did several, Donatello, Raphael, Philip van Dyck (Dutch painter,
1680–1753), Marc Chagall did at least five on Abraham, Gustave Doré (French
illustrator, 1832–1883) did six, Claude Lorrain (French painter,
1600–1682), James Jacques Joseph Tissot (French painter and illustrator,
1836–1902) did over twenty works on the subject. Sculpture. The Sarcophagus
of Junius Bassus depicts a set of biblical stories, including Abraham about to
sacrifice Isaac. These sculpted scenes are on the outside of a marble Early
Christian sarcophagus used for the burial of Junius Bassus. He died in 359.
This sarcophagus has been described as "probably the single most famous piece
of early Christian relief sculpture." The sarcophagus was originally placed in
or under Old St. Peter's Basilica, was rediscovered in 1597, and is now below
the modern basilica in the Museo Storico del Tesoro della Basilica di San
Pietro (Museum of Saint Peter's Basilica) in the Vatican. The base is
approximately 4 × 8 × 4 feet. The Old Testament scenes depicted were chosen
as precursors of Christ's sacrifice in the New Testament, in an early form of
typology. Just to the right of the middle is Daniel in the lion's den and on
the left is Abraham about to sacrifice Isaac. "Abraham's Farewell to Ishmael"
by George Segal. The artist created figural sculptures by molding plastered
gauze strips over live models. The human condition was central to his concerns.
On several occasions, Segal turned to the Old Testament as a source for his
imagery. This sculpture depicts the dilemma faced by Abraham when Sarah
demanded that he expel Hagar and Ishmael. In the sculpture, the father's
tenderness, Sarah's rage, and Hagar's resigned acceptance portray a range of
human emotions. The sculpture was donated to the Miami Art Museum after the
artist's death in 2000. Literature. "Fear and Trembling" (original Danish
title: "Frygt og Bæven") is an influential philosophical work by Søren
Kierkegaard, published in 1843 under the pseudonym "Johannes de silentio"
("John the Silent"). Kierkegaard wanted to understand the anxiety that must
have been present in Abraham when God asked him to sacrifice his son. Music. In
1994, Steve Reich released an opera named "The Cave". The title refers to The
Cave of the Patriarchs. The narrative of the opera is based on the story of
Abraham and his immediate family as it is recounted in the various religious
texts, and as it is understood by individual people from different cultures and
religious traditions. Bob Dylan's "Highway 61 Revisited" is the title track for
his 1965 album "Highway 61 Revisited". In 2004, "Rolling Stone" magazine ranked
the song as number 364 in their 500 Greatest Songs of All Time. The song has
five stanzas. In each stanza, someone describes an unusual problem that is
ultimately resolved on Highway 61. In Stanza 1, God tells Abraham to "kill me a
son". God wants the killing done on Highway 61. Abram, the original name of the
biblical Abraham, is also the name of Dylan's own father.
