Accommodation (religion) Accommodation (or condescension) is the theological
principle that God, while being in his nature unknowable and unreachable, has
nevertheless communicated with mankind in a way which humans can understand and
respond to. The concept is that scripture has accommodated, or made allowance
for, the original audience's language and general level of understanding. The
16th century Christian Reformist John Calvin is a key developer of the concept,
in response to that century's discoveries in natural science, foremost
Copernicus' theory of heliocentrism that conflicted with medieval theological
traditions of reading the Bible "through geocentric spectacles". The concept of
accommodation is thus an alternative method of Bible interpretation to the
tradition of Biblical literalism, which, together with an insistence on
traditional Bible interpretation, formed the basis for the Roman Catholic
Church's condemnation of Galileo Galilei in the early 17th century.
Accommodation is not an innovation of the Reformation Period, but "has a long
tradition of use within Judaism and subsequently within Christian theology, and
can easily be shown to have been influential within the patristic period." It
appears almost contradictory that the Christian God, as revealed in the Bible,
is often described in terms of his supreme transcendence and the inability of
limited, finite man to comprehend and know the God who is unlimited and
infinite - the contradiction being that even this knowledge can be known by
mankind and recorded in scripture. Although this may appear on the surface to
be an illogicality, the status of the Christian God's unknowability is only
true insofar as God acts not to reveal himself. In this line of thinking, no
human being can ever hope to even understand or know God via their own powers
of discernment. The principle of accommodation is that God has chosen to reveal
aspects of himself to mankind in a way which mankind is able to understand.
This principle helps to underline other parts of Christian theology, especially
the role of God in supervising the writing of the Bible. While the Bible itself
claims that humans are limited and sinful and can make mistakes, God has
nevertheless supervised the writing of the Bible to ensure that no mistakes
were made. This belief was generally held throughout the historical Christian
church, and is still held by evangelical and fundamentalist Christians today.
The Bible. Throughout the history of the Christian church, it has been
generally held that the Bible - both the Old Testament and the New Testament -
were divinely inspired. The principle of accommodation allows for both the
ability of the Bible to communicate objective spiritual truths about the nature
of God, as well as the ability of the human authors to act as God's means by
which this is to be communicated to mankind. While it is true that the authors
themselves were limited and prone to mistakes, accommodation allows for the
perfect and truthful God to work in and through his human agents in order to
reveal information about himself that is sufficient and complete. It is obvious
that even the means which God uses are imperfect and limited: Ezekiel 1:28
finds the author struggling to put down in words what he was experiencing as he
stood in the presence of God; 1 Corinthians 13:9-12 mentions that what we see
now - what God has chosen to reveal to us - is "but a poor reflection". The
fact that God has chosen to use the limited in order to reveal the unlimited
may seem hard to understand, but is easy to accept once the notion of an
infinite, all-powerful God is presupposed. Linked to this idea is the added
complication of human languages. Church tradition (including more recent
statements of faith like the Chicago Statement on Biblical Inerrancy and the
Cambridge Declaration) holds to the belief that only the original Hebrew Old
Testament text and the original Greek New Testament text can be clearly
identified as God's word. Therefore, any human translation of the original
language will automatically not be considered God's inspired word - which
naturally includes the 5th century Latin Vulgate, as well as today's more
contemporary translations. Yet accommodation allows for the belief that despite
this natural linguistic barrier, God still has the power to use such
translations in order to reveal his nature to people. This means, of course,
that Christians don't have to learn Ancient Hebrew and Greek in order to hear
what God has to say. Yet it could also be argued that, given that this is
correct, we as human beings, by our very nature, are incapable of understanding
why it is true. Traditional Christian theology asserts that it is through the
work of the Holy Spirit within the individual that God the Father is able to
communicate to them via the words of the Bible. Jesus. The belief that God has
been able to sufficiently communicate to mankind, despite the failings and
limitations of the latter, is given its supreme form in the person and work of
Jesus Christ. Traditional Christianity, as expressed in the historic creeds,
proclaims the Trinity as being part of the orthodox Christian faith. The
divinity of Christ, who is believed to be fully man and yet fully God, shows
how the Godhead has accommodated itself to human minds and experience. Many
Christians, especially those from a Reformed background, see in the person and
work of Christ not only the supreme form of accommodation, but the centre and
reason for it as well. By becoming human, Jesus Christ accommodates himself to
the human condition. Through his life, his teaching and ministry, Christ can be
considered as literally God speaking and communicating sufficiently to mankind
- not via the abilities and strength of human beings, but via the ability and
strength of God. In this sense, man is fully passive and God is fully active -
it is not man who "discovers" Christ, but Christ who reveals himself to man.
While many modern-day Christians debate over the meaning of Christ's death and
resurrection, orthodox Christianity proclaims that Jesus died on the cross for
the sins of the world, as an atoning sin-substitute, and that his resurrection
from the dead brings new life to all who have faith in him. This message,
popularly known as "The Gospel" in evangelical churches, is also considered as
a form of accommodation when it is proclaimed publicly. The Holy Spirit. The
work of the Holy Spirit is as a "counsellor" for the Christian person.
Biblically, the Spirit lives and works inside each Christian, as well as works
inside those who are in the process of coming to faith. By dwelling and working
within the life of the individual, the Trinitarian God is again accommodating
himself so that mankind may experience and know him. When an individual comes
to understand the message of the Gospel and the knowledge of God, it comes only
because God is choosing to make that knowledge known. But since mankind is both
limited in understanding and blinded by sin, it is God himself who actively
makes the knowledge known to them. This knowledge is imparted directly through
the work of the Holy Spirit. The sacraments. In most Protestant churches, only
two sacraments are recognised, Baptism and The Lord's Supper. Both have a
special significance in that they were symbolic representations instituted by
Jesus. In the sacraments, therefore, God is somehow able to accommodate himself
and his gospel in the sacramental actions to sinful and limited human beings.
Somehow, through the corporate imbibing of the wine and the bread, God is able
to commune with his people in a special and unique way - not in terms of
transubstantiation, but within the participants of the whole ceremony.
Preaching of the Gospel. Through the communication of God's Word ("logos" and
"rhema") comes the message of the Gospel ("euangelion"). As an individual
listens to Word and Gospel, God as Holy Spirit ("pneuma") moves and works in
people's hearts and minds. It is through the regenerative work of the Spirit
that the listener is able to then respond to this message in repentance and
faith. Such a concept is sometimes called monergism. Gospel preaching,
therefore, is one of the most important facets of the principle of
accommodation, for in it humankind can experience God's redemptive power
through the work of the Spirit. Through this monergistic activity, God is able
to effectively cause people to come to faith. Thus preaching the Gospel is of
prime concern to evangelical Christians, for it is "The power of God for the
salvation of everyone who believes" (Romans 1:16). It explains also why many
evangelical Christians view the Bible so highly - for to remove "sola
scriptura" is to essentially remove everything we can know about God. It
explains why the New Testament was written, and why churches need people to
teach and build up the body of Christ. It also explains why evangelism and
missionary activity was and is necessary - both by the Apostles and by the
church today.
