Acolyte In many Christian denominations, an acolyte is anyone who performs
ceremonial duties such as lighting altar candles. In other Christian Churches,
the term is more specifically used for one who wishes to attain clergyhood.
Etymology. The word "" is derived from the Greek word "acolytos" (companion,
attendant, or helper), via Late Latin "acolythus." Eastern Christianity. In the
Eastern Orthodox Church and Eastern Catholic Churches, the nearest equivalent
of acolyte is the altar server. At one time there was a rank of minor clergy
called the "taper-bearer" responsible for bearing lights during processions and
liturgical entrances. However, this rank has long ago been subsumed by that of
the reader and the service for the tonsure of a reader begins with the setting-
aside of a taper-bearer. The functions of an acolyte or taper-bearer are
therefore carried out by readers, subdeacons, or by non-tonsured men or boys
who are sometimes called "acolytes" informally. Also, the term "altar-boys" is
often used to refer to young altar servers. Subdeacons wear their normal
vestments consisting of the sticharion and crossed orarion; readers and servers
traditionally wear the sticharion alone. In recent times, however, in many of
the North American Greek Orthodox Churches, for the sake of uniformity, readers
have been permitted to wear the orarion (The Bishop presents the reader, who is
to serve on the altar, with the orarion). Readers do not cross the orarion
while wearing it, the uncrossed orarion being intended to slightly distinguish
a reader from a subdeacon. In the Russian tradition, readers wear only the
sticharion, and do not wear the orarion unless they have been specially blessed
to by their bishop. (This might be done if a reader must occasionally serve in
the role of a subdeacon, or for some other reason the bishop believes is
fitting.) If a server has not been tonsured, he must remove the sticharion
before he can receive Holy Communion. In the early church, a taper-bearer was
not permitted to enter the sanctuary, only a subdeacon or above was allowed to
go in. Nowadays, however, servers are permitted to go in, but they are not
permitted either to touch the Holy Table or the Table of Oblation. Western
Christianity. Roman Catholicism. Until 1972, the acolyte was the holder of the
highest of four minor orders. By Pope Paul VI's motu proprio "Ministeria
quaedam" of 15 August 1972, the term "minor orders" has been replaced by that
of "ministries". Two such ministries, those of reader and acolyte are to be
kept throughout the Latin Church. A prescribed interval, as decided by the Holy
See and the national episcopal conference, is to be observed between receiving
them. Candidates for diaconate and for priesthood must receive both ministries
and exercise them for some time before receiving holy orders. The two
ministries are not reserved solely for candidates for holy orders, but can be
conferred only on men. The ministries are conferred by the ordinary: either a
bishop or, in the case of clerical religious institutes, a major superior. The
motu proprio assigned to the acolyte the functions previously reserved for the
subdeacon, and national episcopal conferences are free to use the term
"subdeacon" in place of that of "acolyte". The functions of the acolyte are
specified in the motu proprio, and have been indicated also in the General
Instruction of the Roman Missal, no. 98, which says: "The acolyte is instituted
to serve at the altar and to assist the priest and deacon. In particular, it is
his responsibility to prepare the altar and the sacred vessels and, if it is
necessary, as an extraordinary minister, to distribute the Eucharist to the
faithful. In the ministry of the altar, the acolyte has his own functions (cf.
nos. 187-193), which he must perform personally." The General Instruction of
the Roman Missal adds: "In the absence of an instituted acolyte, lay ministers
may be deputed to serve at the altar and assist the priest and the deacon; they
may carry the cross, the candles, the thurible, the bread, the wine, and the
water, and they may also be deputed to distribute Holy Communion as
extraordinary ministers." The term "instituted acolyte", which does not appear
in the 1972 motu proprio, is used in the General Instruction of the Roman
Missal to distinguish those on whom the ministry has been conferred with the
prescribed rite from others who, while sometimes called acolytes, are less
ambiguously referred to as altar servers. While, in the absence of an
instituted acolyte, an altar server (male or female) may perform most of an
acolyte's functions, some are reserved for an instituted acolyte alone. Thus
only an instituted acolyte is authorized to purify, wipe and arrange the sacred
vessels after Holy Communion. Anglicanism. In Anglican churches - such as the
Episcopal Church of the United States, the Church of Wales the Church of
England the Scottish Episcopal Church - altar servers are often called
"acolytes" and can be of either sex and any age (although usually no younger
than ten). An acolyte can assist in worship by carrying a processional cross,
lighting candles, holding the Gospel book, holding candles or "torches",
assisting a deacon or priest set up and clean up at the altar, swinging a
censer or thurible or carrying the incense boat, handing the offering plates to
ushers, and many other tasks as seen fit by the priest or acolyte warden. In
Anglo-Catholic churches acolytes commonly wear cassock and cotta, and in less
Anglo-Catholic churches commonly cassock-alb with girdle. A girdle is usually a
twisted rope with knots on the ends which is secured round the waist; it may be
white or of the liturgical colour. Wearing crosses or other special pins or
symbols is the prerogative of the individual church. In some more 'traditional'
parishes, the acolytes are ranked as they develop their abilities to serve:
Trainees, Junior Acolytes, Senior Acolytes, and Acolytes of Merit. In others,
the functions of acolytes are performed without vestments, and without
significant formal training by persons available in the parish. In other
parishes, Acolytes are referred to according to the roles they perform. E.g.
Master of Ceremonies, Crucifer and Thurifer, together with the 1st and 2nd
Acolytes. Methodism and Lutheranism. In the Methodist and Lutheran traditions,
acolytes participate in the worship service (or Mass) by carrying a
processional cross or crucifix (these acolytes are called crucifers), lighting
and extinguishing the altar candles, and ringing the church bell to call the
congregation to worship. In these traditions, the lighting of the altar candles
in the worship service is a symbol of Jesus’ coming into the presence of the
worshiping community. Before lighting the candles the acolyte is supposed to
bow at the altar. Before the extinguishing of the last altar candles, the
acolytes relight their "candle lighter" and then process out into the narthex.
This symbolizes that Jesus Christ is for all people everywhere. It also
symbolizes the light of Jesus Christ going out into the world where believers
are called to serve. Similar to those in the Anglican tradition, acolytes in
these traditions wear robes called albs with a cincture. It is also common for
Methodist acolytes to wear the traditional cassock and cotta.
