Acts of Pilate The Acts of Pilate (; ), also called the Gospel of Pilate, is a
purported official document from Pontius Pilate (or composed from reports at
the praetorium at Jerusalem) reporting events in Judea to Emperor Tiberius, and
referring to the crucifixion of Jesus, as well as his miracles. The
authenticity of the document is unlikely and there is no historical basis that
Roman governors wrote reports about non-citizens who were put to death. Most
modern scholars view the Acts of Pilate as not authentic and as a Christian
composition designed to rebuff pagan sources. The dates of its accreted
sections are uncertain, but scholars agree in assigning the resulting work to
the middle of the fourth century. The text is found in the Greek "Acts of Peter
and Paul" and as an appendix to the medieval Latin "Gospel of Nicodemus"
rumored to be written by a member of the Order of Nicodemus, although there is
no intrinsic relation between the independent texts. History and authenticity.
The oldest sections of the book appear first in Greek. The text contains
multiple parts, which are uneven in style and would seem to be by different
hands. The "Acts of Pilate" does not purport to have been written by Pilate
(thus is not pseudepigraphical), but does claim to have been derived from the
official acts preserved in the praetorium at Jerusalem. The authenticity of the
document is unlikely and there is no historical basis that Roman governors
wrote reports about non-citizens who were put to death. Most modern scholars
view the Acts of Pilate as not authentic and as a Christian composition
designed to rebuff pagan sources. Core texts. The main body of "Acta Pilati" is
in two sections, with an appendix, "Descensus ad Infernos"—the Harrowing of
Hell—that does not exist in the Greek texts, and is a later addition to the
Latin versions. The first (chapters i–xi) contains the trial of Jesus based
upon Luke 23. The second part (xii–xvi) regards the Resurrection. In it,
Leucius and Charinus, the two souls raised from the dead after the Crucifixion,
relate to the Sanhedrin the circumstances of the descent of Christ to Limbo. A
literature of miracle-tale romance developed around a conflated "Leucius
Charinus" as an author of further texts. The Harrowing of Hell episode depicts
St Dismas accompanying Christ in Hell, and the deliverance of the righteous Old
Testament patriarchs. An appended text purports to be a written report made by
Pontius Pilate to Claudius, containing an anti-Semitic description of the
crucifixion, as well as an account of the resurrection of Jesus; both are
presented as if in an official report. One series of Latin manuscripts includes
as an appendix or continuation, the episode "Cura Sanitatis Tiberii" ("The Cure
of Tiberius"), the oldest form of the Veronica legend, according to the
"Catholic Encyclopedia", in which Emperor Tiberius is cured of his malady.
(Compare the legend of the Image of Edessa.) Dating and readership. The Church
historian Eusebius of Caesarea (writing "c." 325), shows no acquaintance with
this work, although he was aware of "Letters of Pilate" referred to by Justin
and Tertullian. He was also aware of an anti-Christian text called "Acts of
Pilate", which was prescribed for reading in schools under the emperor
Maximinus during the Diocletianic Persecution. "We are forced to admit that
Christian "Acts of Pilate" is of later origin, and scholars agree in assigning
it to the middle of the fourth century." Epiphanius refers to an "Acta Pilati"
("c." 376), but the extant Greek texts show evidence of later editing. Though
the "Acta Pilati" purports to be a report by Pontius Pilate containing evidence
of Jesus Christ's messiahship and godhead, there is no record in early
Christian lore of Pilate's conversion to Christianity. It seems unlikely that
the work was ever meant to have been taken seriously by Christians; instead,
its purpose was to offer further conjectural details about the life of Christ
as a pious entertainment, part of a larger body of Pilate literature. Justin
the Martyr wrote, "And that these things did happen, you can ascertain from the
Acts of Pontius Pilate." The Apology letters were written and addressed by name
to the Roman Emperor Pius and the Roman Governor Urbicus. All three of these
men lived between 138–161 AD. The "Acta Pilati" have had a long history
inspiring devotional works. A "Meditatione sopra la Passione del nostro signore
iesu christo", drawing in part on "Acta Pilati" for its expanded anecdotal
elements in the Passion, was printed twenty-eight times in Italy between about
1476 and 1500, and inspired the depiction of Christ before Pilate by Pontormo.
