Adam and Eve Adam and Eve, according to the creation myth of the Abrahamic
religions, were the first man and woman. In Genesis, God fashions Adam from
dust and places him in the Garden of Eden, where he is to have dominion over
the plants and animals. Eve is later created to be his companion. God places a
tree in the garden which he prohibits Adam and Eve from eating from. However, a
serpent tricks them into eating from it, and they are subsequently expelled
from the garden for disobeying God, who visits upon them and their progeny
numerous hardships as punishment. Interpretations and beliefs regarding Adam
and Eve and the story revolving around them vary across religions and sects.
Narrative. Genesis 2. Yahweh fashions a man (Heb. "adam", "man" or "mankind")
from the dust (Heb. "adamah") and blows the breath of life into his nostrils,
then plants a garden (the Garden of Eden) and causes to grow in the middle of
the garden the Tree of the knowledge of good and evil and the Tree of life. God
sets the man in the garden "to work it and watch over it," permitting him to
eat from all the trees in the garden except the Tree of Knowledge, "for on the
day you eat of it you shall surely die." God brings the animals to the man for
him to name. None of them are found to be a suitable companion for the man, so
God causes the man to sleep and creates a woman from a part of his body
(English-language tradition describes the part as a rib, but the Hebrew word
"tsela", from which this interpretation is derived, has multiple meanings; see
the Textual Note, below). Describing her as "bone of my bones, flesh of my
flesh," the man calls his new help-mate "woman" (Heb. "ishshah"), "for this one
was taken from a man" (Heb. "ish"). This sundering, a making of two from one,
predicates reunification in marriage, in which two will be made one: "On
account of this a man leaves his father and his mother and clings to his
woman." The chapter ends by establishing the state of primeval innocence,
noting that the man and woman were naked and not ashamed, and so provides the
departure point for the subsequent narrative in which wisdom is gained through
disobedience at severe cost. Genesis 3. The serpent, "more wise than any beast
of the field," tempts the woman to eat "of the fruit of the tree in the midst
of the garden", telling her that "Ye shall not surely die" and it will make her
to be as god, knowing good and evil. After some thought about "the tree to be
desired to make wise", the woman took of the fruit and did eat. She then gives
the fruit to the man, who eats also, "and the eyes of the two of them were
opened." Aware now of their nakedness, they make coverings of fig leaves and
hide from the sight of God. God asked them what they have done, and man and
woman defer responsibility. The man blames the woman for giving him the fruit,
but implies a sentiment that God is also at fault for making the woman in the
first place ("The woman Thou gavest to be with me, she gave me the fruit of the
tree, and I ate"), while the woman blames the serpent for seducing her to
disobedience ("The serpent beguiled me and I ate"). God curses the serpent
"above all animals," causing it to lose its legs and to become an eternal enemy
of the human race. God then passes judgment for the disobedience of the man and
woman, condemning the man to sustain life through hard labor and the woman to
create new life through painful childbirth. Adam named his wife Eve (Heb.
"hawwah") "because she was the mother of all living" and Adam receives his name
"the man", changing from "eth-ha'adham", before the fall to "ha'Adham"(with
article/command), to Adam after the fall(disobedience). Eve/woman is also
established as subordinate to Adam/man. Then Yahweh banished "the man" from the
Garden and posted two cherubs, with flaming swords, at the entrance to the
Garden of Eden in order to block the way to the Tree of life, "lest he put out
his hand ... and eat, and live forever." Genesis 4 and 5. Genesis four tells of
the birth of Cain and Abel, Adam and Eve's first children, while Genesis 5
gives Adam's genealogy past that. Adam and Eve are listed as having three
children, Cain, Abel and Seth, then "other sons and daughters". Abrahamic
traditions. Jewish traditions. Even in ancient times, the presence of two
distinct accounts of the creation of the first man (or couple) was noted. The
first account says "male and female created them", implying simultaneous
creation, whereas the second account states that God created Eve subsequent to
the creation of Adam. The Midrash Rabbah - Genesis VIII:1 reconciled the two by
stating that Genesis 1, "male and female He created them", indicates that God
originally created Adam as a hermaphrodite, bodily and spiritually both male
and female, before creating the separate beings of Adam and Eve. Other rabbis
suggested that Eve and the woman of the first account were two separate
individuals, the first being identified as Lilith, a figure elsewhere described
as a night demon. Genesis does not tell how long Adam and Eve were in the
Garden of Eden, but the 2nd century BC Book of Jubilees provides more specific
information. It states (ch3 v17) that the serpent convinced Eve to eat the
fruit on the 17th day of the 2nd month in the 8th year after Adam's creation.
It also states that they were removed from the Garden on the new moon of the
fourth month of that year (ch3 v33). According to traditional Jewish belief
Adam and Eve are buried in the Cave of Machpelah, in Hebron. Christianity. The
story of Adam and Eve forms the basis for the Christian doctrine of original
sin: "Sin came into the world through one man and death through sin, and so
death spread to all men because all men sinned," said Paul of Tarsus in his
Epistle to the Romans, although Chapter 3 of Genesis does not use the word
"sin" and Genesis 3:24 makes clear that the couple are expelled "lest he put
forth his hand and take also of the tree of life, and eat, and live for ever".
St Augustine of Hippo (354–430), working with a Latin translation of the
epistle, understood Paul to have said that Adam's sin was hereditary: "Death
passed upon (i.e. spread to) all men because of Adam, whom all sinned".
Original sin, the concept that man is born in a condition of sinfulness and
must await redemption, thus became a cornerstone of Western Christian
theological tradition; the belief is not shared by Judaism or the Orthodox
churches, and has been dropped by some post-Reformation churches such as the
Congregationalists and The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Because
Eve tempted Adam to eat of the fatal fruit, some early Fathers of the Church
held her and all subsequent women to be the first sinners, and especially
responsible for the Fall. "You are the devil's gateway," Tertullian told his
female listeners in the early 2nd century, and went on to explain that they
were responsible for the death of Christ: "On account of your desert (i.e.
punishment for sin), that is, death, even the Son of God had to die." In 1486
the Dominicans Kramer and Sprengler used similar tracts in "Malleus
Maleficarum" ("Hammer of Witches") to justify the persecution of "witches".
Over the centuries, a system of uniquely Christian beliefs has developed from
the Adam and Eve story. Baptism has become understood as a washing away of the
stain of hereditary sin in many churches, although its original symbolism was
apparently rebirth. Additionally, the serpent that tempted Eve was interpreted
to have been Satan, or that Satan was using a serpent as a mouthpiece, although
there is no mention of this identification in the Torah and it is not held in
Judaism. Gnostic and Manichaean traditions. Gnostic Christianity discussed Adam
and Eve in two known surviving texts, namely the "Apocalypse of Adam" found in
the Nag Hammadi documents and the "Testament of Adam". The creation of Adam as
Protanthropos, the original man, is the focal concept of these writings. The
Manichean conception of Adam and Eve is pessimistic. According to them, the
copulative action of two demons, Adam and Eve were born to further imprison the
soul in the material universe. Another Gnostic tradition held that Adam and Eve
were created to help defeat Satan. The serpent, instead of being identified
with Satan, is seen as a hero by the Ophites. Still other Gnostics believed
that Satan's fall, however, came after the creation of humanity. As in Islamic
tradition, this story says that Satan refused to bow to Adam due to pride.
Satan said that Adam was inferior to him as he was made of fire, whereas Adam
was made of clay. This refusal led to the fall of Satan recorded in works such
as the Book of Enoch. Islamic tradition. In Islam, Adam#Islamic view ("Adem";
Arabic: آدم ), whose role is being the father of mankind, is looked upon by
Muslims with reverence. ('; Arabic: حواء '") is the "mother of mankind".
Eve is referred to in the as Adam's spouse (Qur'an surah 4: Surah An-Nisa' 1).
In Al-Qummi's tafsir of Eden, such place was not entirely earthly. According to
the , both and ate the forbidden fruit in a "Heavenly" Eden ("See also"
Jannah). As a result, they were both sent down to Earth as God's
representatives. Each person was sent to a mountain peak; Adam on Al-Safa, and
Eve on Al-Marwa. In this Islamic tradition, Adam wept 40 days until he
repented, after which God sent down the Black Stone, teaching him the hajj.
According to a prophetic hadith, Adam and Eve reunited in the plain of 'Arafat,
near Mecca. They had two sons together, Qabil and Habil. The concept of
"original sin" does not exist in Islam because Adam and Eve were forgiven by
God. When God orders the angels to bow to Adam, "" questioned, "why should I
bow to man, I am made of pure fire and he is made of soil". The Liberal
movements within Islam have viewed God's commanding the angels to bow before
Adam as an exaltation of humanity, and as a means of supporting human rights,
others view it as an act of showing Adam that the biggest enemy of humans on
earth will be their ego. Art and literature. Adam and Eve were used by early
Renaissance artists as a theme to represent female and male nudes. Later, the
nudity was objected to by more modest elements, and fig leaves were added to
the older pictures and sculptures, covering their genitals. The choice of the
fig was a result of Mediterranean traditions identifying the unnamed Tree of
knowledge as a fig tree, and since fig leaves were actually mentioned in
Genesis as being used to cover Adam and Eve's nudity. Treating the concept of
Adam and Eve as the historical truth introduces some logical dilemmas. One such
dilemma is whether they should be depicted with navels (the Omphalos theory).
Since they were created fully grown, and did not develop in a uterus, they
would not have been connected to an umbilical cord as were all born humans.
Paintings without navels looked unnatural and some artists obscure that area of
their bodies, sometimes by depicting them covering up that area of their body
with their hand or some other intervening object. John Milton's "Paradise Lost"
is a famous 17th-century epic poem written in blank verse which explores the
story of Adam and Eve in great detail. American painter Thomas Cole painted
"The Garden of Eden" (1828), with lavish detail of the first couple living amid
waterfalls, vivid plants, and attractive deer. Mark Twain wrote humorous and
satirical diaries of Adam and Eve. Science vs. literalism. Some Christians
believe all humans did not descend from a historical Adam and Eve, saying that
the field of human genetics indicates this concept is impossible. Genetic
evidence indicates humans descended from a group of at least 10,000 people due
to the amount of human genetic variation. If all humans descended from two
individuals several thousand years ago, it would require an impossibly high
mutation rate to account for the observed variation. This has caused some
literalists to move away from a literal interpretation and belief in creation
myth, while others continue to believe in what they see as a fundamental
doctrine of the Christian faith.
