Aeon The word aeon (), also spelt eon or æon, originally means "life", and/or
"being", though it then tended to mean "age", "forever" or "for eternity". It
is a Latin transliteration from the koine Greek word ("ho aion"), from the
archaic ("aiwon"). In Homer it typically refers to life or lifespan. Its latest
meaning is more or less similar to the Sanskrit word "kalpa" and Hebrew word
"olam". A cognate Latin word "aevum" or "aeuum" (cf. ) for "age" is present in
words such as "longevity" and "mediæval". Although the term aeon may be used
in reference to a period of a billion years (especially in geology, cosmology
or astronomy), its more common usage is for any long, indefinite, period. Aeon
can also refer to the four aeons on the Geologic Time Scale that make up the
Earth's history, the Hadean, Archean, Proterozoic, and the current aeon
Phanerozoic. Cosmology. Roger Penrose uses the word "aeon" to describe the
period between successive and cyclic big bangs within the context of conformal
cyclic cosmology. In this theory, the remote future of the previous aeons
becomes the Big Bang of subsequent aeons. Eternity or age. And these shall go
away to punishment age-during, but the righteous to life age-during. (YLT) Then
they will go away to eternal punishment, but the righteous to eternal life.
(NIV) These will go away into eternal punishment, but the righteous into
eternal life. (NASB) And these shall go away into everlasting punishment, but
the righteous into eternal life. (KJV) And these will depart into everlasting
cutting-off, but the righteous ones into everlasting life. (NWT) Philosophy and
mysticism. Plato used the word "aeon" to denote the eternal world of ideas,
which he conceived was "behind" the perceived world, as demonstrated in his
famous allegory of the cave. Christianity's idea of "eternal life" comes from
the word for life, "zoe", and a form of "aeon", which could mean life in the
next aeon, the Kingdom of God, or Heaven, just as much as immortality, as in .
According to the Christian doctrine of Universal Reconciliation, the Greek New
Testament scriptures use the word "eon" to mean a long period (perhaps 1000
years) and the word "eonian" to mean "during a long period"; Thus there was a
time before the eons, and the eonian period is finite. After each man's mortal
life ends, he is judged worthy of eonian life or eonian punishment. That is,
after the period of the eons, all punishment will cease and death is overcome
and then God becomes the all in each one (). This contrasts with the
conventional Christian belief in eternal life and eternal punishment.
Occultists of the Thelema and O.T.O. traditions sometimes speak of a "magical
Aeon" that may last for far less time, perhaps as little as 2,000 years. Aeon
may also be an archaeic name for omnipotent beings, such as gods. Gnosticism.
In many Gnostic systems, the various emanations of God, who is also known by
such names as the One, the Monad, "Aion teleos" ( "The Broadest Aeon"), Bythos
("depth or profundity", Greek ), "Proarkhe" ("before the beginning", Greek ),
the "Arkhe" ("the beginning", Greek ), are called "Aeons". In the different
systems these emanations are differently named, classified, and described, but
the emanation theory itself is common to all forms of Gnosticism. In the
Basilidian Gnosis they are called sonships (υἱότητες "huiotetes";
sing.: "huiotes"); according to Marcus, they are numbers and sounds; in
Valentinianism they form male/female pairs called "syzygies" (Greek , from
σύζυγοι "syzygoi"). Similarly, in the Greek Magical Papyri, the term
"Aion" is often used to denote the All, or the supreme aspect of God
