Historicity of Jesus The historicity of Jesus refers to the analysis of
historical data to determine if Jesus existed as a historical figure,
approximately where and when he lived, and if any of the major milestones in
his life, such as his method of death, can be confirmed as historical events.
In contrast, the study of the historical Jesus goes beyond the question of his
historicity and attempts to reconstruct portraits of his life and teachings,
based on methods such as biblical criticism of gospel texts and the history of
first century Judea. Virtually all modern scholars of antiquity agree that
Jesus existed, and biblical scholars and classical historians regard theories
of his non-existence as effectively refuted. While there is little agreement on
the historicity of gospel narratives and their theological assertions of his
divinity most scholars agree that Jesus was a Galilean Jew who was born between
7 and 2 BC and died 30‚Äì36 AD. Most scholars hold that Jesus lived in Galilee
and Judea, did not preach or study elsewhere and that he spoke Aramaic and may
have also spoken Hebrew and Greek. Although scholars differ on the
reconstruction of the specific episodes of the life of Jesus, the two events
whose historicity is subject to "almost universal assent" are that he was
baptized by John the Baptist and was crucified by the order of the Roman
Prefect Pontius Pilate. Beyond baptism and crucifixion, scholars attribute
varying levels of certainty to the historicity of other events and a list of
eight facts that may be historically certain about Jesus and his followers has
been widely discussed. But scholarly agreement on this extended list is not
universal, e.g. while some scholars accept that Jesus called disciples, others
maintain that Jesus imposed no hierarchy and preached to all in equal terms.
Since the 18th century a number of quests for the historical Jesus have taken
place, and historical critical methods for studying the historicity of Jesus
have been developed. Various Christian and non-Christian sources are used to
study and establish the historicity of Jesus, e.g. Jewish sources such as
Josephus, and Roman sources such as Tacitus. These sources are compared and
contrasted to Christian sources such as the Pauline Letters and the Synoptic
Gospels to determine the historicity of Jesus. These sources are usually
independent of each other (e.g. Jewish sources do not draw upon Roman sources),
and similarities and differences between them are used in the authentication
process. Existence and chronology. Existence and location. The question of the
existence of Jesus as a historical figure is distinct from the study of the
historical Jesus which goes beyond the analysis of his historicity and attempts
to reconstruct portraits of his life and teachings, based on methods such as
biblical criticism of gospel texts and the history of first century Judea.
Virtually all modern scholars of the antiquity agree that Jesus existed, and
biblical scholars and classical historians see the theories of his non-
existence as effectively refuted. In antiquity, the existence of Jesus was
never denied by those who opposed Christianity. Robert E. Van Voorst states
that the idea of the non-historicity of the existence of Jesus has always been
controversial, and has consistently failed to convince scholars of many
disciplines. Although a very small number of modern scholars argue that Jesus
never existed, that view is a distinct minority and most scholars consider
theories that Jesus' existence was a Christian invention as implausible.
Christopher Tuckett states that the existence of Jesus and his crucifixion by
Pontius Pilate seem to be part of the bedrock of historical tradition, based on
the availability of non-Christian evidence. Graham Stanton states that "Today
nearly all historians, whether Christians or not, accept that Jesus existed". A
number of ancient non-Christian documents, such as Jewish and Greco-Roman
sources, have been used in historical analyses of the existence of Jesus. These
include the works of 1st century Roman historians Josephus and Tacitus.
Josephus scholar Louis H. Feldman has stated that "few have doubted the
genuineness" of Josephus' reference to Jesus in and it is only disputed by a
small number of scholars. Bart D. Ehrman states that the existence of Jesus and
his crucifixion by the Romans is attested to by a wide range of sources,
including Josephus and Tacitus. The Mishnah (c. 200) may refer to Jesus and
reflect the early Jewish traditions of portraying Jesus as a sorcerer or
magician. Other possible references to Jesus and his execution may exist in the
Talmud, but they also aim to discredit his actions, not deny his existence.
Scholars generally agree that Jesus was a Galilean Jew who was born between 7
and 2 BC and died 30‚Äì36 AD. However, in a review of the state of modern
scholarship, Amy-Jill Levine stated: "Beyond recognizing that 'Jesus was
Jewish' rarely does scholarship address what being 'Jewish' means." Most
scholars hold that Jesus lived in Galilee and Judea. The Talmud refers to
"Jesus the Nazarene" several times and scholars such as Andreas Kostenberger
and Robert Van Voorst hold that some of these references are to Jesus. Nazareth
is not mentioned in the Hebrew Bible and the Christian gospels portray it as an
insignificant village, asking "Can any good thing come out of Nazareth?" Craig
S. Keener states that it is rarely disputed that Jesus was from Nazareth, an
obscure small village not worthy of invention. Gerd Theissen concurs with that
conclusion. The languages spoken in Galilee and Judea during the first century
include the Semitic Aramaic and Hebrew languages as well as Greek, with Aramaic
being the predominant language. Most scholars agree that during the early part
of the first century, Aramaic was the mother tongue of virtually all women in
Galilee and Judae. Most scholars support the theory that Jesus spoke Aramaic
and that he may have also spoken Hebrew and Greek. Most scholars reject that
there is any evidence that an adult Jesus traveled or studied outside Galilee
and Judea. Robert Van Voorst states that modern scholarship has "almost
unanimously agreed" that claims of the travels of Jesus to Tibet, Kashmir or
India contain "nothing of value". Basic historical facts. The reconstruction of
portraits of the historical Jesus along with his life story has been the
subject of wide ranging debate among scholars, with no scholarly consensus. In
a review of the state of research Amy-Jill Levine stated that "no single
picture of Jesus has convinced all, or even most scholars" and that all
portraits of Jesus are subject to criticism by some group of scholars. However,
regardless of the scholarly disagreements on the reconstruction of portraits of
the historical Jesus, almost all modern scholars consider the baptism of Jesus
and his crucifixion to be two historically certain facts about him. James Dunn
states that these "two facts in the life of Jesus command almost universal
assent" and "rank so high on the 'almost impossible to doubt or deny' scale of
historical facts" that they are often the starting points for the study of the
historical Jesus. But scholarly agreement on this extended list is not
universal, and beyond the two basic facts of baptism and crucifixion, scholarly
consensus begins to dilute. For instance, N. T. Wright accepts that there were
twelve disciples, but holds that the list of their names can not be determined
with certainty, while John Dominic Crossan disagrees with Wright, and believes
that Jesus did not call disciples and had an "open to all" egalitarian
approach, imposed no hierarchy and preached to all in equal terms. On the other
hand John P. Meier sees the calling of disciples a natural consequence of the
information available about Jesus. Although there is disagreement about issues
such as the calling of disciples, the agreement on crucifixion is very
widespread, and most scholars in the third quest for the historical Jesus
consider the crucifixion indisputable. Eddy and Boyd state that it is now
"firmly established" that there is non-Christian confirmation of the
crucifixion of Jesus. Bart Ehrman states that the crucifixion of Jesus on the
orders of Pontius Pilate is the most certain element about him. John Dominic
Crossan states that the crucifixion of Jesus is as certain as any historical
fact can be. John P. Meier views the crucifixion of Jesus as historical fact
and states that based on the "criterion of embarrassment" Christians would not
have invented the painful death of their leader. Meier states that a number of
other criteria, e.g. the criterion of "multiple attestation" (i.e. confirmation
by more than one source), the "criterion of coherence" (i.e. that it fits with
other historical elements) and the "criterion of rejection" (i.e. that it is
not disputed by ancient sources) help establish the crucifixion of Jesus as a
historical event. Although scholars agree on the historicity of the
crucifixion, they differ on the reason and context for it, e.g. both E. P.
Sanders and Paula Fredriksen support the historicity of the crucifixion, but
contend that Jesus did not foretell his own crucifixion, and that his
prediction of the crucifixion is a Christian story. Geza Vermes also views the
crucifixion as a historical event but provides his own explanation and
background for it. The existence of John the Baptist within the same time frame
as Jesus, and his eventual execution by Herod Antipas is attested to by first
century historian Josephus and the overwhelming majority of modern scholars
view Josephus' accounts of the activities of John the Baptist as authentic. One
of the arguments in favor of the historicity of the Baptism of Jesus by John is
that it is a story which the early Christian Church would have never wanted to
invent, typically referred to as the criterion of embarrassment in historical
analysis. The four gospels are not the only references to the baptisms
performed by John and in , the apostle Peter refers to how the ministry of
Jesus followed "the baptism which John preached". Another argument used in
favour of the historicity of the baptism is that multiple accounts refer to it,
usually called the criterion of multiple attestation. Technically, multiple
attestation does not guarantee authenticity, but only determines antiquity.
However, for most scholars, together with the criterion of embarrassment it
lends credibility to the baptism of Jesus by John being a historical event.
Chronology. Diverse approaches have been used to estimate the chronology of
Jesus, ranging from the comparison of the accounts in the Christian gospels
with Roman and Jewish sources regarding facts such as the marriage of Herodias
and separately the Jerusalem Temple, to correlation with the well established
chronology of Paul of Tarsus, to astronomical analysis based on an approach
first suggested by Isaac Newton. Two independent approaches can be used to
estimate the year of birth of Jesus, one based on the nativity accounts in the
gospels, the other by working backwards from the date of the start of his
ministry. Most scholars assume a date of birth between 6 and 4 BC. Three
independent approaches to estimate the dates of the ministry of Jesus (when he
started calling disciples, generally considered to be after his baptism) and
are: first, the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar, second: the
date of the building of the Jerusalem Temple and third, the date of the death
of John the Baptist. Scholars generally estimate that the ministry of Jesus
began around AD 27-29 and lasted at least one year, and perhaps three years, or
more. At least four distinct approaches have been used to estimate the date of
the crucifixion of Jesus. One approach uses the attestations of non-Christian
sources such as Josephus and Tacitus. Both Josephus, writing in "Antiquities of
the Jews" ("c." AD 93), and the early 2nd century Roman historian Tacitus,
writing in "The Annals" ("c." AD 116), state that Pilate ordered the execution
of Jesus. A separate approach uses the reign of Herod Antipas. Another method
works backwards from the historically well established trial of Apostle Paul in
Achaea to estimate the date of his conversion. Two independent astronomical
methods have also been used, suggesting the same date, i.e. Friday, April 3, AD
33. Scholars generally agree that Jesus died AD 30-36. Josephus provides a
useful link between the chronology of the ministry of Jesus and his death. Most
modern scholars also view Josephus' account (in ) of the execution of John the
Baptist by Herod Antipas, and the marriage of Herod and Herodias to be
authentic. Given that John the Baptist was executed before the defeat of Herod
by Aretas IV of Nabatea in the AD 36, and based on the scholarly estimates for
the approximate date of the marriage of Herod Antipas and Herodias AD 28-35,
Josephus establishes a key connection between the time frame of the ministry of
Jesus and his execution. The Pauline letters, which were written before the
Christian gospels, also shed light on the chronology of Jesus. The estimation
of the date of the conversion of Paul places the death of Jesus before this
conversion, which is estimated at around AD 33-36. The estimation of the year
of Paul's conversion relies on a series of calculations working backwards from
the well established date of his trial before Gallio (who was mentioned in the
Delphi Inscription) in Achaea Greece () AD 51-52, the meeting of Priscilla and
Aquila which were expelled from Rome about AD 49 and the 14-year period before
returning to Jerusalem in . Scholars generally agree that this expulsion from
Rome is likely the same as that reported by Suetonius in in his "Lives of the
Twelve Caesars" further confirming the consistency of the Pauline-based
chronology. Denial of existence. The term "Christ myth theory" is an umbrella
term that applies to a range of arguments that in one way or another question
the authenticity of the existence of Jesus or the essential elements of his
life as described in the Christian gospels. Among the variants of the Jesus
myth theory, the notion that Jesus never existed has little scholarly support,
and although some modern scholars adhere to it, they remain a distinct
minority; virtually all scholars involved with historical Jesus research
believe that his existence can be established. The beginnings of the formal
denial of the existence of Jesus can be traced to late 18th-century France, and
the works of Constantin-Volney and Charles Dupuis. Although in Dialogue with
Trypho, the second century Christian writer Justin Martyr wrote of a discussion
about "Christ" with Trypho, most scholars agree that Trypho is a fictional
character invented by Justin for his literary apologetic goals. In 1835, the
methodical writings of David Friedrich Strauss caused an uproar in Europe, and
Strauss became known as the founder of Christ myth theory, his approach having
been influenced by the epistemological views of Leibniz and Spinoza. Strauss
did not deny the existence of Jesus, but believed that very few facts could be
known about him and characterized the miraculous accounts in the gospels as
"mythical". By the beginning of the 20th century, Arthur Drews, William B.
Smith and John M. Robertson became the most recognized proponents of the Christ
myth theory. In the 20th century, scholars such as professor of German language
G. A. Wells, Swedish professor of English language Alvar Elleg√•rd, and
philosopher and theologian Robert M. Price produced a number of arguments to
support the Christ myth theory. Virtually all scholars accept the existence of
Jesus, but differ on the accuracy of the details of his life within the
biblical narratives. The Christ myth theory is still being debated in the 21st
century, with Graham Stanton stating in 2002 that the most thorough analysis of
the theory had been by G. A. Wells. But Wells' book "Did Jesus Exist?" was
criticized by James D.G. Dunn in his book "The Evidence for Jesus". And the
debates continue, e.g. Wells changed his views over time and while he used to
argue that there was no historical evidence supporting the existence of Jesus,
he later modified his position, and in his later book "The Jesus Myth" accepted
the possible existence of Jesus based on historical sources, although still
disputing the gospel portrayals of his life. Robert Van Voorst states that
among "New Testament scholars and historians the theory of the non-existence of
Jesus remains effectively dead as a scholarly question". Methods of research.
While textual criticism (or lower criticism) had been practiced for centuries,
a number of approaches to historical analysis and a number of criteria for
evaluating the historicity of events emerged as of 18th century, as a series of
"Quests for the historical Jesus" took place. At each stage of development,
scholars suggested specific forms and methodologies of analysis and specific
criteria to be used to determine historical validity. The first Quest which
started in 1778 was almost entirely based on biblical criticism. This was
supplemented with form criticism in 1919 and redaction criticism in 1948. Form
criticism began as an attempt to trace the history of the biblical material
before it was written down, and may thus be seen as starting when textual
criticism ends. Form criticism looks for patterns within units of biblical text
and attempts to trace their origin based on the patterns. Redaction criticism
may be viewed as the child of text criticism and form criticism. This approach
views an author as a "redactor" i.e. someone preparing a report, and tries to
understand how the redactor(s) has molded the narrative to express their own
perspectives. At the end of the first Quest (c. 1906) the criterion for
multiple attestation was used and was the major additional element up to 1950s.
The concept behind multiple attestation is simple: as the number of independent
sources that vouch for an event increases, confidence in the historical
authenticity of the event rises. Other criteria were being developed at the
same time, e.g. "double dissimilarity" in 1913, "least distinctiveness" in 1919
and "coherence and consistency" in 1921. The criterion of double dissimilarity
views a reported saying or action of Jesus as possibly authentic, if it is
dissimilar from both the Judaism of his time and also from the traditions of
the early Christianity that immediately followed him. The least distinctiveness
criterion relies on the assumption that when stories are passed from person to
person, the peripheral, least distinct elements may be distorted, but the
central element remains unchanged. The criterion of "coherence and consistency"
states that material can be used only when other material has been identified
as authentic to corroborate it. The second Quest was launched in 1953, and
along with it the criterion of embarrassment was introduced. This criterion
states that a group is unlikely to invent a story that would be embarrassing to
themselves. The criterion of "historical plausibility" was introduced in 1997,
after the start of the third Quest in 1988. This principle analyzes the
plausibility of an event in terms of two separate components: contextual
plausibility and consequential plausibility, i.e. the historical context needs
to be suitable, as well as the consequences. Non-Christian sources. Key
sources. Josephus. The writings of the 1st century Romano-Jewish historian
Flavius Josephus include references to Jesus and the origins of Christianity.
Josephus' "Antiquities of the Jews", written around 93‚Äì94¬ AD, includes two
references to Jesus in Books and . Of the two passages the James passage in
Book 20 is used by scholars to support the existence of Jesus, the Testimonium
Flavianum in Book 18 his crucifixion. Josephus' James passage not only attests
to the existence of Jesus as a historical person but that some of his
contemporaries considered him the Messiah. The passage deals with the death of
"James the brother of Jesus" in Jerusalem, and given that works of Josephus
refer to at least twenty different people with the name Jesus, Josephus
clarifies that this Jesus was the one "who was called Christ". Louis Feldman
states that this passage, above others, indicates that Josephus did say
something about Jesus. The overwhelming majority of modern scholars consider
the reference in of the "Antiquities" to "the brother of Jesus, who was called
Christ, whose name was James" to be authentic and to have the highest level of
authenticity among the references of Josephus to Christianity. Louis Feldman
states that the authenticity of the Josephus passage on James has been "almost
universally acknowledged" The "Testimonium Flavianum" (meaning the testimony of
Flavius ) is the name given to the passage found in of the Antiquities in which
Josephus describes the condemnation and crucifixion of Jesus at the hands of
the Roman authorities. Scholars have differing opinions on the total or partial
authenticity of the reference in of the "Antiquities" to the execution of Jesus
by Pontius Pilate, a passage usually called the "Testimonium Flavianum". The
general scholarly view is that while the "Testimonium Flavianum" is most likely
not authentic in its entirety, it is broadly agreed upon that it originally
consisted of an authentic nucleus with a reference to the execution of Jesus by
Pilate which was then subject to Christian interpolation. Although the exact
nature and extent of the Christian redaction remains unclear there is broad
consensus as to what the original text of the "Testimonium" by Josephus would
have looked like. The references found in "Antiquities" have no parallel texts
in the other work by Josephus such as the "Jewish War", written 20 years
earlier, but some scholars have provided explanations for their absence, e.g.
that the "Antiquities" covers a longer time period and that during the 20 year
gap between the writing of the "Jewish Wars" (c. 70 AD) and "Antiquities"
(after 90 AD) Christians had become more important in Rome and were hence given
attention in the "Antiquities". A number of variations exist between the
statements by Josephus regarding the deaths of James and the New Testament
accounts. Scholars generally view these variations as indications that the
Josephus passages are not interpolations, for a Christian interpolator would
have made them correspond to the New Testament accounts, not differ from them.
For an extensive discussion of the scholarly arguments regarding these Josephus
passages, see the article Josephus on Jesus. Tacitus. The Roman historian and
senator Tacitus referred to the crucifixion of Jesus by Pontius Pilate and the
existence of early Christians in Rome in his final work, "Annals" (written
"ca." 116 AD), , in the context of the persecution of Christians and the Great
Fire of Rome. Scholars generally consider Tacitus's reference to the execution
of Jesus by Pontius Pilate to be both authentic, and of historical value as an
independent Roman source about early Christianity that is in unison with other
historical records. Eddy and Boyd state that it is now "firmly established"
that Tacitus provides a non-Christian confirmation of the crucifixion of Jesus.
Although a few scholars question the passage given that Tacitus was born 25
years after Jesus's death, the majority of scholars consider it genuine.
William L. Portier has stated that the consistency in the references by
Tacitus, Josephus and the letters to Emperor Trajan by Pliny the Younger
reaffirm the validity of all three accounts. Tacitus was a patriotic Roman
senator and his writings shows no sympathy towards Christians. Andreas
K√∂stenberger and separately Robert E. Van Voorst state that the tone of the
passage towards Christians is far too negative to have been authored by a
Christian scribe - a conclusion shared by John P. Meier Robert E. Van Voorst
states that "of all Roman writers, Tacitus gives us the most precise
information about Christ". John Dominic Crossan considers the passage important
in establishing that Jesus existed and was crucified, and states: "That he was
crucified is as sure as anything historical can ever be, since both Josephus
and Tacitus... agree with the Christian accounts on at least that basic fact."
Bart D. Ehrman states: "Tacitus's report confirms what we know from other
sources, that Jesus was executed by order of the Roman governor of Judea,
Pontius Pilate, sometime during Tiberius's reign." Some scholars have debated
the historical value of the passage, given that Tacitus does not reveal the
source of his information. Gerd Theissen and Annette Merz argue that Tacitus at
times had drawn on earlier historical works now lost to us, and he may have
used official sources from a Roman archive in this case; however, if Tacitus
had been copying from an official source, some scholars would expect him to
have labeled Pilate correctly as a "prefect" rather than a "procurator".
Theissen and Merz state that Tacitus gives us a description of widespread
prejudices about Christianity and a few precise details about "Christus" and
Christianity, the source of which remains unclear. However, Paul R. Eddy has
stated that given his position as a senator Tacitus was also likely to have had
access to official Roman documents of the time and did not need other sources.
By the end of the 19th century, there was a hypothesis that the "Annals" had
been fabricated by 15th century Italian author Poggio Bracciolini (1380-1459).
However, when Giovanni Boccaccio (1313 - 1375) was commissioned by the city of
Florence to write "Commento di Dante" which he completed c. 1374 (before the
birth of Poggio Bracciolini), he made clear use of the Annals when he gave an
account of Seneca's death directly based on the Tacitus account in . According
to Van Voorst the forging of the Annals by Poggio Bracciolini was an extreme
hypothesis which never gained a following among modern scholars. The Talmud.
The Babylonian Talmud in a few cases includes possible references to Jesus
using the terms "Yeshu," "Yeshu ha-Notzri," "ben Satda," and "ben Pandera".
Some of these references probably date back to the Tannaitic period (70‚Äì200
AD). In some cases, it is not clear if the references are to Jesus, or other
people, and scholars continue to debate their historical value, and exactly
which references, if any, may be to Jesus. Robert Van Voorst states that the
scarcity of Jewish references to Jesus is not surprising, given that Jesus was
not a prominent issue for the Jews during the first century, and after the
devastation caused by the Siege of Jerusalem in the year 70, Jewish scholars
were focusing on preserving Judaism itself, rather than paying much attention
to Christianity. Van Voorst states that although the question of who was
referred to in various points in the Talmud remains subject to debate among
scholars, in the case of "Sanhedrin 43a" (generally considered the most
important reference to Jesus in rabbinic literature), Jesus can be confirmed as
the subject of the passage, not only from the reference itself, but from the
context that surrounds it, and there is little doubt that it refers to the
death of Jesus of Nazareth. Christopher M. Tuckett states that if it is
accepted that death narrative of Sanhedrin 43a refers to Jesus of Nazareth then
it provides evidence of Jesus' existence and execution. "Sanhedrin" 43a. Peter
Sch√§fer states that there can be no doubt that the narrative of the execution
of Jesus in the Talmud refers to Jesus of Nazareth, but states that the
rabbinic literature in question are not Tannaitic but from a later Amoraic
period and may have drawn on the Christian gospels, and may have been written
as responses to them. Bart Ehrman and separately Mark Allan Powell state that
given that the Talmud references are quite late, they can give no historically
reliable information about the teachings or actions of Jesus during his life.
Another reference in early second century Rabbinic literature (Tosefta Hullin
II 22) refers to Rabbi Eleazar ben Dama who was bitten by a snake, but was
denied healing in the name of Jesus by another Rabbi for it was against the
law, and thus died. This passage reflects the attitude of Jesus' early Jewish
opponents, i.e. that his miracles were based on evil powers. Eddy and Boyd, who
question the value of several of the Talmudic references state that the
significance of the Talmud to historical Jesus research is that it never denies
the existence of Jesus, but accuses him of sorcery, thus indirectly confirming
his existence. R. T. France and separately Edgar V. McKnight state that the
divergence of the Talmud statements from the Christian accounts and their
negative nature indicate that they are about a person who existed. Craig
Blomberg states that the denial of the existence of Jesus was never part of the
Jewish tradition, which instead accused him of being a sorcerer and magician,
as also reflected in other sources such as Celsus. Andreas Kostenberger states
that the overall conclusion that can be drawn from the references in the Talmud
is that Jesus was a historical person whose existence was never denied by the
Jewish tradition, which instead focused on discrediting him. Relevant sources.
Mara bar Sarapion. Mara (son of Sarapion) was a Stoic philosopher from the
Roman province of Syria. Sometime between 73 AD and the 3rd century, Mara wrote
a letter to his son (also called Sarapion) which may contain an early non-
Christian reference to the crucifixion of Jesus. The letter refers to the
unjust treatment of "three wise men": the murder of Socrates, the burning of
Pythagoras, and the execution of "the wise king" of the Jews. The author
explains that in all three cases the wrongdoing resulted in the future
punishment of those responsible by God and that when the wise are oppressed,
not only does their wisdom triumph in the end, but God punishes their
oppressors. The letter includes no Christian themes and the author is presumed
to be a pagan. Some scholars see the reference to the execution of the "wise
king" of the Jews as an early non-Christian reference to Jesus. Criteria that
support the non-Christian origin of the letter include the observation that
"king of the Jews" was not a Christian title, and that the letter's premise
that Jesus lives on based on the wisdom of his teachings is in contrast to the
Christian concept that Jesus continues to live through his resurrection.
Scholars such as Robert Van Voorst see little doubt that the reference to the
execution of the "king of the Jews" is about the death of Jesus. Others such as
Craig A. Evans see less value in the letter, given its uncertain date, and the
possible ambiguity in the reference. Suetonius. The Roman historian Suetonius
made references to early Christians and their leader in his work "Lives of the
Twelve Caesars". The references appear in and which describe the lives of Roman
Emperors Claudius and Nero. The Nero 16 passage refers to the abuses by Nero
and mentions how he inflicted punishment on Christians - which is generally
dated to around AD 64. This passage shows the clear contempt of Suetonius for
Christians - the same contempt expressed by Tacitus and Pliny the younger in
their writings, but does not refer to Jesus himself. The reference in Claudius
25 involves the agitations in the Jewish community which led to the expulsion
of some Jews from Rome by Claudius, and is likely the same event mentioned in
the Acts of the Apostles (). Most historians date this expulsion to around AD
49-50. Suetonius refers to the leader of the leader of the Christians as
"Chrestus" (a term which may have also been used by Tacitus) and was also
common at the time, particularly for slaves, meaning good or useful. Van Voorst
states that there is "near-unanimous" agreement among scholars that the use of
Chrestus here refers to Christ. However, Suetonius is confused in the passage
and assumes that Chrestus was alive at the time of the disturbance and was
agitating the Jews in Rome. The confusion of Suetonius weakens the historical
value of his reference as a whole, and there is no overall scholarly agreement
about its value as a reference to Jesus. However, the confusion of Suetonius
also points to the lack of Christian interpolation, for a Christian scribe
would not have confused the Jews with Christians. Scholars are divided on the
value of the Suetonius' reference. Some scholars such as Craig A. Evans, John
Meier and Craig S. Keener see it as a likely reference to Jesus Others such as
Stephen Benko and H. Dixon Slingerland see it as having little or no historical
value. Peripheral sources. Pliny the Younger (c. 61 - c. 112), the provincial
governor of Pontus and Bithynia, wrote to Emperor Trajan "c". 112 concerning
how to deal with Christians, who refused to worship the emperor, and instead
worshiped "Christus". Charles Guignebert, who does not doubt that Jesus of the
Gospels lived in Gallilee in the 1st century, nevertheless dismisses this
letter as acceptable historical evidence." Lucian of Samosata (Born 115 AD) a
well-known Greek satirist and traveling lecturer wrote mockingly of the
followers of Jesus for their ignorance and credulity. Given that Lucian's
understanding of Christian traditions has significant gaps and errors, his
writing is unlikely to have been influenced by Christians themselves, and he
may provide an independent statement about the crucifixion of Jesus. However,
given the nature of the text as satire, Lucian may have embellished the stories
he heard and his account can not have a high degree of historical reliability.
The Dead Sea scrolls are first century or older writings that show the language
and customs of some Jews of Jesus' time. Scholars such as Henry Chadwick see
the similar uses of languages and viewpoints recorded in the New Testament and
the Dead Sea scrolls as valuable in showing that the New Testament portrays the
first century period that it reports and is not a product of a later period.
However, the relationship between the Dead Sea scrolls and the historicity of
Jesus has been the subject of highly controversial theories, and although new
theories continue to appear, there is no overall scholarly agreement about
their impact on the historicity of Jesus, despite the usefulness of the scrolls
in shedding light on first century Jewish traditions. Others. Thallus, of whom
very little is known, and none of whose writings survive wrote a history around
AD 52, to which Eusebius referred. Julius Africanus, writing "c" 221, while
discussing the crucifixion of Jesus mentioned Thallus and stated that in his
third book of "History", Thallus talked about the earth shaking and a great
darkness which he called an eclipse of the sun. The Thallus reference is the
earliest noncanonical reference to a gospel episode, but its usefulness in
determining the historicity of Jesus is uncertain. Celsus writing late in the
second century produced the first full scale attack on Christianity. Celsus'
document has not survived but in the third century Origen replied to it, and
what is known of Celsus' writing is through the responses of Origen. According
to Origen, Celsus accused Jesus of being a magician and a sorcerer. While the
statements of Celsus may be seen as a confirmation of the miracles of Jesus,
they have little historical value, given that the wording of the original
writings can not be examined. The Acts of Pilate is a purported official
document from Pontius Pilate (or composed from reports at the praetorium at
Jerusalem) reporting events in Judea to Emperor Tiberius, and referring to the
crucifixion of Jesus, as well as his miracles. The authenticity of the document
is unlikely and there is no historical basis that Roman governors wrote reports
about non-citizens who were put to death. Most modern scholars view the Acts of
Pilate as not authentic and as a Christian composition designed to rebuff pagan
sources. Christian sources. Pauline Epistles. Overview. In the context of
Christian sources, even if all other texts are ignored, the Pauline epistles
can provide some information regarding Jesus, just on their own. This
information does not include a narrative of the life of Jesus, but refers to
his existence as a person, and a few specific items such as his death by
crucifixion. This information comes from those letters of Paul whose
authenticity is not disputed. Traditionally, thirteen letters are attributed to
Paul but only seven letters are considered authentic by almost all scholars,
and the others are generally considered pseudepigraphic. The 7 undisputed
letters (and their approximate dates) are: 1 Thessalonians (c. 51 AD),
Philippians (c. 52-54 AD), Philemon (c. 52-54 AD), 1 Corinthians (c. 53-54 AD),
Galatians (c. 55 AD), 2 Corinthians (c. 55-56 AD) and Romans (c. 55-58 AD). The
authenticity of these letters is accepted by almost all scholars, and they have
been referenced and interpreted by early authors such as Origen and Eusebius.
Given that the Pauline epistles are generally dated to AD 50 to AD 60, they are
the earliest surviving Christian texts that include information about Jesus.
These letters were written approximately twenty to thirty years after the
generally accepted time period for the death of Jesus, around AD 30-36. The
letters were written during a time when Paul recorded encounters with the
disciples of Jesus, e.g. Galatians 1:18 states that several years after his
conversion Paul went to Jerusalem and stayed with Apostle Peter for fifteen
days. The Pauline letters were not intended to provide a narrative of the life
of Jesus, but were written as expositions of Christian teachings. In Paul's
view, the earthly life of Jesus was of a lower importance than the theology of
his death and resurrection,a theme that permeates Pauline writings. However,
the Pauline letters clearly indicate that for Paul Jesus was a real person
(born of a woman as in Gal 4.4) who had disciples (1 Corinthians 15.5) and who
was crucified (as in 1 Corinthians 2.2 and Galatians 3.1). And the letters
reflect the general concept within the early Christian Church that Jesus
existed and was crucified. The references by Paul to Jesus do not in themselves
prove the existence of Jesus, but they do establish that the existence of Jesus
was the accepted norm within the early Christians (including the Christian
community in Jerusalem, given the references to collections there) twenty to
thirty years after the death of Jesus, at a time when those who could have been
acquainted with him could still be alive. Specific references. The existence of
only these references to Jesus in the Pauline epistles has given rise to
criticism of them by G. A. Wells, who is generally accepted as a leader of the
movement to deny the historicity of Jesus. When Wells was still denying the
existence of Jesus, he criticized the Pauline epistles for not mentioning items
such as John the Baptist or Judas or the trial of Jesus and used that argument
to conclude that Jesus was not a historical figure. James D. G. Dunn addressed
Wells' statement and stated that he knew of no other scholar that shared that
view, and most other scholars had other and more plausible explanations for the
fact that Paul did not include a narrative of the life of Jesus in his letters,
which were primarily written as religious documents rather than historical
chronicles at a time when the life story of Jesus could have been well known
within the early Church. Dunn states that despite Wells' arguments, the
theories of the non-existence of Jesus are a "thoroughly dead thesis". While
Wells no longer denies the existence of Jesus, he has responded to Dunn,
stating that his arguments from silence not only apply to Paul but all early
Christian authors, and that he still has a low opinion of early Christian
texts, maintaining that for Paul Jesus may have existed a good number of
decades before. Pre-Pauline creeds. The Pauline letters sometimes refer to
creeds, or confessions of faith, that predate their writings. For instance
reads: "For what I received I passed on to you as of first importance: that
Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures, that he was buried, that
he was raised on the third day according to the Scriptures." refers to Romans
1:2 just before it which mentions an existing gospel, and in effect may be
treating it as an earlier creed. One of the keys to identifying a pre-Pauline
tradition is given in Here Paul refers to others before him who preached the
creed. The Pauline letters thus contain Christian creed elements of pre-Pauline
origin. The antiquity of the creed has been located by many Biblical scholars
to less than a decade after Jesus' death, originating from the Jerusalem
apostolic community. Concerning this creed, Campenhausen wrote, "This account
meets all the demands of historical reliability that could possibly be made of
such a text," whilst A. M. Hunter said, "The passage therefore preserves
uniquely early and verifiable testimony. It meets every reasonable demand of
historical reliability." These creeds date to within a few years of Jesus'
death, and developed within the Christian community in Jerusalem. Although
embedded within the texts of the New Testament, these creeds are a distinct
source for Early Christianity. This indicates that existence and death of Jesus
was part of Christian belief a few years after his death and over a decade
before the writing of the Pauline epistles. Gospels. The four canonical
gospels, Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, are the main sources for the biography
of Jesus‚Äô life, the teachings and actions attributed to him. Three of these
namely Matthew, Mark, and Luke, are known as the synoptic Gospels, from the
Greek œÉœçŒΩ (syn "together") and ·ΩÑœàŒπœÇ (opsis "view"), given that they
display a high degree of similarity in content, narrative arrangement, language
and paragraph structure. The presentation in the fourth canonical gospel, i.e.
John, differs from these three in that it has more of a thematic nature rather
than a narrative format. Scholars generally agree that it is impossible to find
any direct literary relationship between the synoptic gospels and the Gospel of
John. The authors of the New Testament generally showed little interest in an
absolute chronology of Jesus or in synchronizing the episodes of his life with
the secular history of the age. The gospels were primarily written as
theological documents in the context of early Christianity with the
chronological timelines as a secondary consideration. One manifestation of the
gospels being theological documents rather than historical chronicles is that
they devote about one third of their text to just seven days, namely the last
week of the life of Jesus in Jerusalem. Although the gospels do not provide
enough details to satisfy the demands of modern historians regarding exact
dates, scholars have used them to reconstruct a number of portraits of Jesus.
However, as stated in the gospels do not claim to provide an exhaustive list of
the events in the life of Jesus. Scholars have varying degrees of certainty
about the historical reliability of the accounts in the gospels, and the only
two events whose historicity is the subject of almost universal agreement among
scholars are the baptism and crucifixion of Jesus. Scholars such as E.P.
Sanders and separately Craig A. Evans go further and assume that two other
events in the gospels are historically certain, namely that Jesus called
disciples, and caused a controversy at the Temple. Ever since the Augustinian
hypothesis, scholars continue to debate the order in which the gospels were
written, and how they may have influenced each other, and several hypothesis
exist in that regard, e.g. the Markan priority hypothesis holds that the Gospel
of Mark was written first "c." 70 AD/CE. In this approach, Matthew is placed at
being sometime after this date and Luke is thought to have been written between
70 and 100 AD/CE. However, according to the competing, and more popular, Q
source hypothesis, the gospels were not independently written, but were derived
from a common source called Q. The two-source hypothesis then proposes that the
authors of Matthew and Luke drew on the Gospel of Mark as well as on Q. The
gospels can be seen as having three separate lines: A literary line which looks
at it from a textual perspective, secondly a historical line which observes how
Christianity started as a renewal movement within Judaism and eventually
separated from it, and finally a theological line which analyzes Christian
teachings. Within the historical perspective, the gospels are not simply used
to establish the existence of Jesus as sources in their own right alone, but
their content is compared and contrasted to non-Christian sources, and the
historical context, to draw conclusions about the historicity of Jesus. Early
Church fathers. Two possible patristic sources that may refer to eye witness
encounters with Jesus are the early references of Papias and Quadratus,
reported by Eusebius of Caesarea in the 4th century. Richard Bauckham states
that while Papias was collecting his information ("c". 90), Aristion and the
elder John (who were Jesus‚Äô disciples) were still alive and teaching in Asia
minor, and Papias gathered information from people who had known them. However,
the exact identity of the "elder John" is wound up in the debate on the
authorship of the Gospel of John, and scholars have differing opinions on that,
e.g. Jack Finegan states that Eusebius may have misunderstood what Papias
wrote, and the elder John may be a different person from the author of the
fourth gospel, yet still a disciple of Jesus. Gary Burge, on the other hand
sees confusion on the part of Eusebius and holds the elder John to be different
person from the apostle John. By ‚Äúour Savior‚Äù Quadratus means Jesus and the
letter is most likely written before AD 124. Bauckham states that by ‚Äúour
times‚Äù he may refer to his early life, rather than when he wrote (117‚Äì124),
which would be a reference contemporary with Papias. Bauckham states that the
importance of the statement attributed to Quadratus is that he emphasizes the
"eye witness" nature of the testimonies to interaction with Jesus. Gnostic and
apocryphal texts. A number of later Christian texts, usually dating to the
second century or later, exist as New Testament apocrypha, among which the
gnostic gospels have been of major recent interest among scholars. The 1945
discovery of the Nag Hammadi library created a significant amount of scholarly
interest and many modern scholars have since studied the gnostic gospels and
written about them. However, the trend among the 21st century scholars has been
to accept that while the gnostic gospels may shed light on the progression of
early Christian beliefs, they offer very little to contribute to the study of
the historicity of Jesus, in that they are rather late writings, usually
consisting of sayings (rather than narrative), their authenticity and
authorship remain questionable, and various parts of them rely on components of
the New Testament. The focus of modern research into the historical Jesus has
been away from gnostic writings and towards the comparison of Jewish, Greco-
Roman and canonical Christian sources. As an example, Bart Ehrman states that
gnostic writings of the Gospel of Thomas (part of the Nag Hammadi library) have
very little value in historical Jesus research, because the author of that
gospel placed no importance on the physical experiences of Jesus (e.g. his
crucifixion) or the physical existence of believers, and was only interested in
the secret teachings of Jesus rather than any physical events. Similarly, the
Apocryphon of John (also part of the Nag Hammadi library) has been useful in
studying the prevailing attitudes in the second century, and questions of
authorship regarding the Book of revelation, given that it refers to , but is
mostly about the post ascension teachings of Jesus in a vision, not a narrative
of his life. Some scholars such as Edward Arnal contend that the Gospel of
Thomas continues to remain useful for understanding how the teachings of Jesus
were transmitted among early Christians, and sheds light on the development of
early Christianity. There is overlap between the sayings of Jesus in the
apocryphal texts and canonical Christian writings, and those not present in the
canonical texts are called agrapha. There are at least 225 agrapha but most
scholars who have studied them have drawn negative conclusions about the
authenticity of most of them and see little value in using them for historical
Jesus research. Robert Van Voorst states that the vast majority of the agrapha
are certainly inauthentic. Scholars differ on the number of authentic agrapha,
some estimating as low as 7 as authentic, others as high as 18 among the more
than 200, rendering them of little value altogether. While research on
apocryphal texts continues, the general scholarly opinion holds that they have
little to offer to the study of the historicity of Jesus given that they are
often of uncertain origin, and almost always later documents of lower value.
