Altar rails Altar rails are a set of railings, sometimes ornate and frequently
of marble or wood, delimiting the chancel in a church, the part of the
sanctuary that contains the altar. A gate at the centre divides the line into
two parts. The sanctuary is a figure of heaven, into which entry is not
guaranteed. Rails are a feature of Roman Catholic, Anglican, Lutheran, and
Methodist churches. Barriers of various kinds often mark off as especially
sacred the area of a church close to the altar, which is largely reserved for
ordained clergy. In the Armenian rite curtains are drawn to cut off that area
during the holiest moments of the liturgy. In other eastern rites, this evolved
into a solid icon-clad screen, called the iconostasis, with three doorways, in
each of which there are usually curtains that can be closed or drawn aside at
various times. Western Europe had its more transparent Gothic rood screens and
the smaller more economical altar rails. Roman Catholic churches. Many Roman
Catholic churches have had altar rails, those of the late nineteenth century
being particularly decorative. Communicants receiving the Eucharist kneel at
the railings to be given communion by a priest. After the Second Vatican
Council, many parishes removed their altar rails, and a myth has arisen that
the Council ordered the change (although the Council said nothing about it).
Previously, only altar servers were allowed to join the clergy within the
sanctuary during the celebration of the liturgy. Now, Lay Readers of Scripture
and Extraordinary Ministers of Holy Communion enter the sanctuary during Mass.
Some Catholics and many architects and planners criticised some removals, often
on liturgical, historical and æsthetic grounds. While in some states, the
Roman Catholic Church has adopted a minimalist approach towards the removal of
altar rails, in other countries, for example in Ireland, almost every re-
ordering eliminated altar rails. Many Catholics resisted the changes: some have
taken legal action to try to prevent the removal of altar rails and of other
traditional features in pre-Vatican II sanctuaries. However, not all liberal
Catholics supported the changes to sanctuaries; some have disputed the belief
that the altar rails were a barrier, claiming that many churches were able to
allow full participation by the laity in the new Order of the Mass without
removing altar rails. In the most recent liturgical legislation enacted by the
Holy See, the "Institutio Generalis Romani Missalis 2000", the traditional
distinction between the chancel and the nave of the church is retained and may
be delimited by a number of options, including an altar rail. The same
legislation makes it clear that there is no requirement in liturgical law
necessitating the removal of altar rails from historic churches and nothing
prohibiting their erection in new ones. While a diocesan bishop is competent to
decide on concrete questions concerning the removal of altar rails from a
church in the diocese committed to his pastoral care, he is required prudently
to make that decision in accordance with the norms of law, taking into account
the wishes of the faithful. Any decision taken by the bishop, however, may be
appealed by hierarchical recourse to the competent instance of the Holy See
which, in this case, is the Congregation for Divine Worship and the Discipline
of the Sacraments. Other denominations. In other denominations, such as many of
the churches of the Anglican Communion, the Lutheran Church, and the Methodist
Church, the use of altar rails has remained more common. There is typically no
specific regulation concerning their presence or use, although they remain a
common feature even in newly constructed churches. Their continued popularity
results from a preference on the part of many to assume a posture of kneeling
to receive the Eucharist. For those sanctuaries without an altar rail, in some
cases a portable rail with attached kneeler is used for those who wish to kneel
to receive the Eucharist. In the Lutheran Church, an altar rail is the common
place for a pastor to hear a confession, which generally is required to receive
the Eucharist for the first time. A common Lutheran practice from the
Scandinavian traditions is to have an altar rail in the shape of a half-circle,
the other half of the circle being on the other side of the altar wall-
outside, in the cemetery. The two halves symbolize the connection between the
current congregation with those gone before.
