Anabaptist Anabaptists (Greek ἀνά "again, twice" + βαπτίζω
"baptize," thus "re-baptizers") are Protestant Christians of the Radical
Reformation of 16th-century Europe, although some consider Anabaptism to be a
distinct movement from Protestantism. The Amish, Hutterites, and Mennonites are
direct descendants of the movement. As a result of their views on the nature of
baptism and other issues, Anabaptists were heavily persecuted during the 16th
century and into the 17th by both Magisterial Protestants and Roman Catholics.
Origins. Medieval Forerunners. Although Anabaptists began with the Radical
Reformers in the 16th century, certain people and groups may still legitimately
be considered their forerunners due to a similar approach to the interpretation
and application of the Bible. Petr Chelčický, a 15th century Bohemian
reformer, taught most of the beliefs considered integral to Anabaptist
theology. Medieval antecedents may include the Brethren of the Common Life, the
Hussites, Dutch Sacramentists, and some forms of monasticism. The Waldensians
also represent a faith similar to the Anabaptists. Zwickau prophets and the
German Peasants' War. On December 27, 1521, three "prophets", influenced by and
in turn influencing Thomas Müntzer, appeared in Wittenberg from Zwickau:
Thomas Dreschel, Nicholas Storch and Mark Thomas Stübner preaching an
apocalyptic, radical alternative to Lutheranism. Preaching such as that done by
the "prophets" helped to stir the feelings concerning the social crisis, which
erupted in the German Peasants' War in southern Germany in 1525 as a revolt
against feudal oppression. Under the leadership of Müntzer, it became a war
against all constituted authorities and an attempt to establish by revolution
an ideal Christian commonwealth, with absolute equality and the community of
goods. Although the Zwickau prophets were not Anabaptists (that is, they did
not practice "re-baptism"), the prevalent social inequities and the preaching
of men like this have been seen as laying the foundation for the Anabaptist
movement. Although the social ideals of the Anabaptist movement coincided
closely with those off the German Peasants' War, studies have found a very low
percentage of later Anabaptists to have been active participants in the peasant
uprising. Views on origins. Research on the origins of the Anabaptists has been
tainted both by the attempts of their enemies to slander them and the attempts
of their supporters to vindicate them. It was long popular to simply lump all
Anabaptists as Munsterites and radicals associated with the Zwickau Prophets,
Jan Matthys, John of Leiden, and Thomas Müntzer. Those desiring to correct
this error tended to over-correct and deny all connections between the larger
Anabaptist movement and the most radical elements. The modern era of Anabaptist
historiography arose with the work of Roman Catholic scholar Carl Adolf
Cornelius' publication of "Die Geschichte des Münsterischen Aufruhrs" (The
History of the Münster Riot) in 1855. Baptist historian Albert Henry Newman
(1852–1933), who Harold S. Bender said occupied "first position in the field
of American Anabaptist historiography," made a major contribution with his "A
History of Anti-Pedobaptism." Monogenesis. A number of scholars ("e.g.", Harold
S. Bender, William Estep, Robert Friedmann ) have seen the Anabaptist movement
as radiating from the Swiss Brethren movement of Conrad Grebel, Felix Manz,
George Blaurock, et al. They generally held that Anabaptism had its origins in
Zürich, and that the Anabaptism of the Swiss Brethren was transmitted to
southern Germany, Austria, the Netherlands, and northern Germany, where it
developed into its various branches. The monogenesis theory usually rejects the
Münsterites and other radicals from the category of true Anabaptists. In the
monogenesis view the time of origin is January 21, 1525, when Conrad Grebel
baptized George Blaurock, and Blaurock in turn baptized several others
immediately. These baptisms were the first "re-baptisms" known in the movement
and therefore remains the most popular date posited for the establishment of
Anabaptism. Polygenesis. James M. Stayer, Werner O. Packull, and Klaus
Deppermann disputed the idea of a single origin of Anabaptists in a 1975 essay
entitled "From Monogenesis to Polygenesis," suggesting that February 24, 1527
at Schleitheim is the proper date of the origin of Anabaptism. On this date the
Swiss Brethren wrote a declaration of belief called the Schleitheim Confession.
The authors of the essay noted the agreement among previous Anabaptist
historians on polygenesis, even when disputing the date for a single starting
point: "Hillerbrand and Bender (like Holl and Troeltsch) were in agreement that
there was a single dispersion of Anabaptism..., which certainly ran through
Zurich. The only question was whether or not it went back further to Saxony."
After criticizing the standard polygenetic history, the authors found six
groups in early Anabaptism which could be collapsed into three originating
"points of departure": "South German Anabaptism, the Swiss Brethren, and the
Melchiorites." According to their polygenesis theory, South German–Austrian
Anabaptism "was a diluted form of Rhineland mysticism," Swiss Anabaptism "arose
out of Reformed congregationalism", and Dutch Anabaptism was formed by "Social
unrest and the apocalyptic visions of Melchior Hoffman". As examples of how the
Anabaptist movement was influenced from sources other than the Swiss Brethren
movement, mention has been made of how Pilgram Marpeck's "Vermanung" of 1542
was deeply influenced by the "Bekenntnisse" of 1533 by Münster theologian
Bernhard Rothmann. Melchior Hoffman influenced the Hutterites when they used
his commentary on the Apocalypse shortly after he wrote it. Others who have
written in support of polygensis include Grete Mecenseffy and Walter Klaassen,
who established links between Thomas Müntzer and Hans Hut. In another work,
Gottfried Seebaß and Werner Packull showed the influence of Thomas Müntzer on
the formation of South German Anabaptism. Similarly, author Steven Ozment
linked Hans Denck and Hans Hut with Thomas Müntzer, Sebastian Franck, and
others. Author Calvin Pater showed how that Andreas Karlstadt influenced Swiss
Anabaptism in various areas, including his view of Scripture, doctrine of the
church, and views on baptism. Apostolic succession. Baptist successionists
have, at times, pointed to 16th century Anabaptists as part of an apostolic
succession of churches ("church perpetuity") from the time of Christ. This view
is held by some Baptists, some Mennonites, and a number of "true church"
movements. The opponents of the Baptist successionism theory emphasize that
these non-Catholic groups clearly differed from each other, that they held some
heretical views, or that the groups had no connection with one another and had
origins that were separate both in time and place. A different strain of
successionism is the theory that the Anabaptists are of Waldensian origin. Some
hold the idea that the Waldensians are part of the apostolic succession, while
others simply believe they were an independent group out of whom the
Anabaptists arose. Ludwig Keller, Thomas M. Lindsay, H. C. Vedder, Delbert
Grätz, John T. Christian and Thieleman J. van Braght (author of Martyrs
Mirror) all held, in varying degrees, the position that the Anabaptists were of
Waldensian origin. History. Switzerland. Anabaptism in Switzerland began as an
offshoot of the church reforms instigated by Ulrich Zwingli. As early as 1522
it became evident that Zwingli was on a path of reform preaching when he began
to question or criticize such Catholic practices as tithes, the mass, and even
infant baptism. Zwingli had gathered a group of reform-minded men around him,
with whom he studied Classic literature and the Scriptures. However, some of
these young men began to feel that Zwingli was not moving fast enough in his
reform. The division between Zwingli and his more radical disciples became
apparent in an October, 1523 disputation held in Zurich. When the discussion of
the mass was about to be ended without making any actual change in practice,
Conrad Grebel stood up and asked "what should be done about the mass?" Zwingli
responded by saying the Council would make that decision. At this point, Simon
Stumpf, a radical priest from Hongg, answered saying, "The decision has already
been made by the Spirit of God." This incident illustrated clearly that Zwingli
and his more radical disciples had different expectations. To Zwingli, the
reforms would only go as fast as the city Council allowed them. To the
radicals, the council had no right to make that decision, but rather the Bible
was the final authority of church reform. Feeling frustrated, some of them
began to meet on their own for Bible study. As early as 1523, William Reublin
began to preach against infant baptism in villages surrounding Zurich,
encouraging parents to not baptize their children. Seeking fellowship with
other reform-minded people, the radical group wrote letters to Martin Luther,
Andreas Karlstadt, and Thomas Müntzer. Felix Manz began to publish some of
Karlstadt's writings in Zurich in late 1524. By this time the question of
infant baptism had become agitated and the Zurich council had instructed
Zwingli to meet weekly with those who rejected infant baptism "until the matter
could be resolved." Zwingli broke off the meetings after two meetings, and
Felix Mantz petitioned the Council to find a solution, since he felt Zwingli
was too hard to work with. Council then called a meeting for January 17, 1525.
After Blaurock was baptized, he in turn baptized others at the meeting. Even
though some had rejected infant baptism before this date, these baptisms marked
the first re-baptisms of those who had been baptized as infants and thus,
technically, Swiss Anabaptism was born on that day. Tyrol. Anabaptism appears
to have come to Tyrol through the labors of George Blaurock. Similar to the
German Peasants' War, the Gasmair uprising set the stage by producing a hope
for social justice. Michael Gasmair had tried to bring religious, political,
and economical reform through a violent peasant uprising, but the movement was
squashed. Although little hard evidence exists of a direct connection between
Gaspair's uprising and Tyrolian Anabaptism, at least a few of the peasants
involved in the uprising later became Anabaptists. While a connection between a
violent social revolution and non-resistant Anabaptism may be hard to imagine,
the common link was the desire for a radical change in the prevailing social
injustices. Disappointed with the failure of armed revolt, Anabaptist ideals of
an alternative peaceful, just society probably resonated on the ears of the
disappointed peasants.. Before Anabaptism proper was introduced to South Tyrol,
Protestant ideas had been propagated in the region by men such as Hans Vischer,
a former Dominican. Some of those who participated in conventicles where
Protestant ideas were presented later became Anabaptists. As well, the
population in general seemed to have a favorable attitude towards reform, be it
Protestant or Anabaptist. George Blaurock appears to have preached itinerantly
in the Puster Valley region in 1527, which most likely was the first
introduction of Anabaptist ideas in the area. Another visit through the area in
1529 reinforced these ideas, but he was captured and burned at the stake in
Klausen on September 6, 1529. Jacob Hutter was one of the early converts in
South Tyrol, and later became a leader among the Hutterites, who received their
name from him. Hutter made several trips between Moravia and Tyrol, and most of
the Anabaptists in South Tyrol ended up emigrating to Moravia due to the fierce
persecution unleashed by Ferdinand I. In November of 1535, Hutter was captured
near Klausen and taken to Innsbruck where he was burned at the stake on
February 25, 1536. By 1540 Anabaptism in South Tyrol was beginning to die out,
due largely to the emigration to Moravia of the converts because of incessant
persecution. The Low Countries. Melchior Hoffman is credited with the
introduction of Anabaptist ideas into the Low Countries. Hoffman had picked up
Lutheran and Reformed ideas, but on 23 April 1530 he was "re-baptized" at
Strasbourg and within two months had gone to Emden and baptized about 300
persons. For several years Hoffman preached in the Low Countries until he was
arrested and imprisoned at Strasbourg, where he died about 10 years later.
Hoffman's apocalyptic ideas were indirectly related to the Münster Rebellion,
even though he was "of a different spirit." Obbe and Dirk Philips had been
baptized by disciples of Jan Matthijs, but were opposed to the violence that
occurred at Münster. Obbe later became disillusioned with Anabaptism and
withdrew from the movement in about 1540, but not before ordaining David Joris,
his brother Dirk, and Menno Simons, the latter from whom the Mennonites
received their name. David Joris and Menno Simons parted ways, with Joris
placing more emphasis on "spirit and prophecy," while Menno emphasized the
authority of the Bible. For the Mennonite side, the emphasis on the "inner" and
"spiritual" permitted compromise to "escape persecution," while to the Joris
side, the Mennonites were under the "dead letter of the Scripture." Due to
persecution and expansion, many of the Low Country Mennonites emigrated to
Prussia, and from there to the Ukraine (which at the time was part of Russia).
In the late 1800s, many of the Russian Mennonites emigrated to the Prairie
States and Provinces of the U.S. and Canada, and also to Mexico, Belize, and
South America (Paraguay, Bolivia, Argentina, and Brazil) where thousands of
them still live in colonies. Moravia. Although Moravian Anabaptism was a
transplant from other areas of Europe, Moravia soon became a center for the
growing movement, due largely to the greater religious tolerance found there.
Hans Hut was an early evangelist in the area, with one historian crediting him
with baptizing more converts in two years than all the other Anabaptist
evangelists put together. The coming of Balthasar Hübmaier to Nikolsburg was a
definite boost for Anabaptist ideas to the area. With the great influx of
religious refugees from all over Europe, many variations of Anabaptism appeared
in Moravia, with Jarold Zeman documenting at least 10 slightly different
versions. Soon, one-eyed Jacob Wiedemann appeared at Nikolsburg, and began to
teach the pacifistic convictions of the Swiss Brethren, a position that
Hübmaier was not a strong on. This eventually led to a division between the
"Schwertler" (sword-bearing) and the "Stäbler" (staff-bearing). Wiedemann and
those with him also promoted the practice of community of goods. With orders
from the lords of Leichenstein to leave Nikolsburg, about 200 "Stäbler"
withdrew to Moravia to form a community at Austerlitz. Persecution in South
Tyrol brought many refugees to Moravia, many of which formed into communities
that practiced community of goods. Jacob Hutter was instrumental in organizing
these into what became known as the Hutterites. But others came from Silesia,
Switzerland, German lands, and the Low Countries. With the passing of time and
persecution, all the other versions of Anabaptism eventually died out in
Moravia, leaving only the Hutterites. Even the Hutterites were eventually
dissipated by persecution, with a remnant fleeing to Transylvania, then to the
Ukraine, and eventually to North America in 1874. South Germany. South German
Anabaptism had its roots in German Mysticism. Andreas Karlstadt, who first
worked alongside Martin Luther, is seen as a forerunner of South German
Anabaptism due to his reforming theology that rejected many Catholic practices,
including the rejection of infant baptism. However, Karlstadt is not known to
have been "rebaptized", nor to have taught it. Hans Denck and Hans Hut, both
with German Mystical background (in connection with Thomas Muntzer) both
accepted "rebaptism", but Denck eventually backed off from the idea under
pressure. Hans Hut is said to have brought more people into early Anabaptism
than all the other Anabaptist evangelists of his time put together. However,
there may have been confusion about what his baptism (at least some of the
times it was done by making the sign of the Tau on the forehead) may have meant
to the recipient. Some seem to have taken it as a sign by which they would
escape the apocalyptical revenge of the Turks that Hut predicted. Hut even went
so far as to predict a 1528 coming of the kingdom of God. When the prediction
failed, some of his converts became discouraged and left the Anabaptist
movement. The large congregation of Anabaptists at Augsburg fell apart (due in
part to persecution) and those who stayed with Anabaptist ideas were absorbed
into Swiss and Moravia Anabaptist congregations. Pilgram Marpeck was another
notable leader in early South German Anabaptism. Persecutions and migrations.
Roman Catholics and Protestants alike persecuted the Anabaptists, resorting to
torture and execution in attempts to curb the growth of the movement. The
Protestants under Zwingli were the first to persecute the Anabaptists, with
Felix Manz becoming the first martyr in 1527. On May 20, 1527, Roman Catholic
authorities executed Michael Sattler. King Ferdinand declared drowning (called
the "third baptism") "the best antidote to Anabaptism". The Tudor regime, even
the Protestant monarchs (Edward VI of England and Elizabeth I of England),
persecuted Anabaptists as they were deemed too radical and therefore a danger
to religious stability. The persecution of Anabaptists was condoned by ancient
laws of Theodosius I and Justinian I that were passed against the Donatists,
which decreed the death penalty for any who practiced rebaptism. Martyrs
Mirror, by Thieleman J. van Braght, describes the persecution and execution of
thousands of Anabaptists in various parts of Europe between 1525 and 1660.
Continuing persecution in Europe was largely responsible for the mass
emigrations to North America by Amish, Hutterites, and Mennonites. Types.
Different types exist among the Anabaptists, although the categorizations tend
to vary with the scholar's viewpoint on origins. Estep claims that in order to
understand Anabaptism, one must "distinguish between the Anabaptists,
inspirationists, and rationalists." He classes the likes of Blaurock, Grebel,
Balthasar Hubmaier, Manz, Marpeck, and Simons as Anabaptists. He groups
Müntzer, Storch, et al. as inspirationists, and anti-trinitarians such as
Michael Servetus, Juan de Valdés, Sebastian Castellio, and Faustus Socinus as
rationalists. Mark S. Ritchie follows this line of thought, saying, "The
Anabaptists were one of several branches of 'Radical' reformers (i.e. reformers
that went further than the mainstream Reformers) to arise out of the
Renaissance and Reformation. Two other branches were Spirituals or
Inspirationists, who believed that they had received direct revelation from the
Spirit, and rationalists or anti-Trinitarians, who rebelled against traditional
Christian doctrine, like Michael Servetus." Those of the polygenesis viewpoint
use "Anabaptist" to define the larger movement, and include the inspirationists
and rationalists as true Anabaptists. James M. Stayer used the term
"Anabaptist" for those who "rebaptized" persons already "baptized" in infancy.
Walter Klaassen was perhaps the first Mennonite scholar to define "Anabaptists"
that way in his 1960 Oxford dissertation. This represents a rejection of the
previous standard held by Mennonite scholars such as Bender and Friedmann.
Another method of categorization acknowledges regional variations, such as
Swiss Brethren (Grebel, Manz), Dutch and Frisian Anabaptism (Menno Simons, Dirk
Philips), and South German Anabaptism (Hübmaier, Marpeck). Historians and
sociologists have made further distinctions between radical Anabaptists, who
were prepared to use violence in their attempts to build a New Jerusalem, and
their pacifist brethren, later broadly known as Mennonites. Radical Anabaptist
groups included the Münsterites, who occupied and held the German city of
Münster in 1534–5, and the Batenburgers, who persisted in various guises as
late as the 1570s. Spirituality. Charismatic manifestations. Within the
inspirationist wing of the Anabaptist movement, it was not unusual for
charismatic manifestations to appear, such as dancing, falling under the power
of the Holy Spirit, "prophetic processions" (at Zurich in 1525, at Munster in
1534 and at Amsterdam in 1535), and speaking in tongues. In Germany some
Anabaptists, "excited by mass hysteria, experienced healings, glossolalia,
contortions and other manifestations of a camp-meeting revival". The Anabaptist
congregations that later developed into the Mennonite and Hutterite churches
tended not to promote these manifestations, but did not totally reject the
miraculous. Pilgram Marpeck, for example, wrote against the exclusion of
miracles: "Nor does Scripture assert this exclusion... God has a free hand even
in these last days." Referring to some who had been raised from the dead, he
wrote: "Many of them have remained constant, enduring tortures inflicted by
sword, rope, fire and water and suffering terrible, tyrannical, unheard-of
deaths and martyrdoms, all of which they could easily have avoided by
recantation. Moreover one also marvels when he sees how the faithful God (who,
after all, overflows with goodness) raises from the dead several such brothers
and sisters of Christ after they were hanged, drowned, or killed in other ways.
Even today, they are found alive and we can hear their own testimony... Cannot
everyone who sees, even the blind, say with a good conscience that such things
are a powerful, unusual, and miraculous act of God? Those who would deny it
must be hardened men".. The Hutterite Chronicle and The Martyrs Mirror record
several accounts of miraculous events, such as when a man named Martin
prophesied while being led across a bridge to his execution in 1531: "...this
once yet the pious are led over this bridge, but no more hereafter." Just "a
short time afterwards such a violent storm and flood came that the bridge was
demolished". Holy Spirit leadership. The Anabaptists insisted upon the "free
course" of the Holy Spirit in worship, yet still maintained it all must be
judged according to the Scriptures. The Swiss Anabaptist document titled
"Answer of Some Who Are Called (Ana-)Baptists – Why They Do Not Attend the
Churches". One reason given for not attending the state churches was that these
institutions forbade the congregation to exercise spiritual gifts according to
"the Christian order as taught in the gospel or the Word of God in 1
Corinthians 14." "When such believers come together, 'Everyone of you (note
every one) hath a psalm, hath a doctrine, hath a revelation, hath an
interpretation', and so on. When someone comes to church and constantly hears
only one person speaking, and all the listeners are silent, neither speaking
nor prophesying, who can or will regard or confess the same to be a spiritual
congregation, or confess according to 1 Corinthians 14 that God is dwelling and
operating in them through His Holy Spirit with His gifts, impelling them one
after another in the above-mentioned order of speaking and prophesying." Today.
Anabaptists. Several existing denominational bodies may be regarded as the
successors of the continental Anabaptists: Amish, Brethren, Hutterites,
Mennonites and to some extent the Bruderhof Communities. Some historical
connections have been demonstrated for all of these spiritual descendants,
though perhaps not as clearly as the noted institutionally lineal descendants.
Although many see the more well-known Anabaptist groups (Amish, Hutterites and
Mennonites) as ethnic groups, the Anabaptist bodies of today are no longer
composed mostly of descendants of the continental Anabaptists. Total worldwide
membership of the Mennonite, Brethren in Christ and related churches totals
1,616,126 (as of 2009) with about 60 percent in Africa, Asia and Latin America.
Similar Groups. The Bruderhof Communities were founded in Germany by Eberhard
Arnold in 1920, establishing and organisationally joining the Hutterites in
1930. The group moved to England after Gestapo confiscated their property in
1933, and subsequently to Paraguay to avoid military conscription, and by
settlements moved to USA after the World War II. They are not recognized by
more conservative Hutterites. Groups deriving from the Schwarzenau Brethren,
often called German Baptists, while not directly descended from the 16th-
century Anabaptists, are usually considered Anabaptist because of an almost
identical doctrine and practice. The modern-day Brethren movement is a
combination of Anabaptism and Radical Pietism. Puritans of England and their
Baptist branch arose independently, but were influenced by the Anabaptist
movement. Anabaptist characters exist in popular culture, most notably Chaplain
Tappman in Joseph Heller's novel "Catch-22", James in Voltaire's novella
"Candide", Giacomo Meyerbeer’s opera "Le prophète" (1849), and the central
character in the novel "Q", by the collective known as "Luther Blissett".
Legacy. Common Anabaptist beliefs and practices of the 16th century continue to
influence modern Christianity and Western society. The Anabaptists were early
promoters of a free church and freedom of religion (sometimes associated with
separation of church and state).
