Anatta In Buddhism, the term anattā (Pāli) or anātman () refers to the
notion of "not-self" or the illusion of "self". In the early texts, the Buddha
commonly uses the word in the context of teaching that all things perceived by
the senses (including the mental sense) are not really "I" or "mine", and for
this reason one should not cling to them. In the same vein, the Pali suttas
(and parallel āgamas, both referred to collectively below as the nikāyas),
categorize the phenomena experienced by a being into five groups ("khandhas")
that serve as the objects of clinging and as the basis for a sense of self. In
the "Nikāyas", the Buddha repeatedly emphasizes not only that the five
"khandhas" of living beings are "not-self", i.e. not "I" or "mine", but also
that clinging to them as if they were "I" or "mine" gives rise to unhappiness.
According to the early texts, while on the path, one should develop oneself in
healthy and liberating ways, only letting go of the attempt to improve the self
as it becomes unnecessary. Overview. The "anattā" doctrine is not a type of
materialism. Buddhism does not necessarily deny the existence of mental
phenomena (such as feelings, thoughts, and sensations) that are distinct from
material phenomena. Thus, the conventional translation of "anattā" as "no-
soul" can be misleading. If the word "soul" refers to a non-bodily component in
a person that can continue in some way after death, then Buddhism does not deny
the existence of a soul. In fact, persons (Pāli: "puggala"; Sanskrit,
"pudgala") are said to be characterized by an ever-evolving consciousness
(Pali: "samvattanika viññana"), Sanskrit: "vijñana srotām"), or mind-
continuity (Sanskrit: "citta-saṃtāna") which, upon the death or dissolution
of the aggregates (skandhas), becomes one of the contributing causes for the
arising of a new group of skandhas. However, Buddhism denies the existence of a
permanent or static entity that remains constant behind the changing bodily and
non-bodily components of a living being. Reportedly, the Buddha reprimanded a
disciple who thought that in the process of rebirth the same consciousness is
reborn without change. Just as the body changes from moment to moment, so
thoughts come and go; and according to the "anattā" doctrine, there is no
permanent conscious substance that experiences these thoughts, as in
Cartesianism: rather, conscious thoughts simply arise and perish with no
"thinker" behind them. When the body dies, the incorporeal mental processes
continue and are reborn in a new body. Because the mental processes are
constantly changing, the new being is neither exactly the same as, nor
completely different from, the being that died. On one interpretation, although
Buddhism rejects the notion of a permanent self, it does not reject the notion
of an empirical self (composed of constantly changing physical and mental
phenomena) that can be conveniently referred to with words such as "I", "you",
"being", "individual", etc. Early Buddhist scriptures describe an enlightened
individual as someone whose changing, empirical self is highly developed.
According to Buddhist teachings, this phenomenon should not, either in whole or
in part, be reified, either in affirmation or denial. The Buddha rejected the
latter metaphysical assertions as ontological theorizing that binds one to
suffering. On another interpretation, Buddhism rejects any idea of the self. On
this view it is incorrect even to speak about an "empirical self". This is
because constantly changing physical and mental phenomena all have
impermanence, and anything with such impermanence does not amount to the idea
of a self. One is permitted to use terms such as "I", "you", and so on, not
because they refer to an empirical self, but simply because they are
"convenient designations". They are used in much the same way that the word
"it" is used in the sentence "It is cold". Here there is nothing that the word
"it" refers to. It is merely a grammatical device which allows one to assert
"there is cold", while using a substantive term. Some Mahayana Buddhist sutras
and tantras present Buddhist teachings on emptiness using positive language by
positing the ultimate reality of the "true self" (atman). In these teachings
the word is used to refer to each being's inborn potential to realize
Buddhahood through Buddhist practices, and future status as a Buddha. This
teaching, which is soteriological rather than theoretical, portrays this
potential or aspect as undying. Anattā, "dukkha" (suffering/unease), and
"anicca" (impermanence), are the three dharma seals, which, according to
Buddhism, characterise all conditioned phenomena. Anatta in the Nikayas. The
Buddhist term "anatta" (Pāli) or "anātman" (Sanskrit) is used in the sutras
both as a noun and as a predicative adjective to denote that phenomena are not,
or are without, a Self, to describe any and all composite, consubstantial,
phenomenal and temporal things, from the macrocosmic to microcosmic, be it
matter pertaining to the physical body or the cosmos at large, as well as any
and all mental machinations, which are impermanent. Anatta in sutra is often
used in conjunction with the terms dukkha (imperfection) and anicca
(impermanence), and all three terms are often used in triplet in making a
blanket statement as regards any and all compounded phenomena. “All these
aggregates are anicca, dukkha and anatta.” MN 3.196 (PTS) The nikayas state
that certain things such as material shape, feeling, perception, habitual
tendencies and consciousness (the five aggregates), with which the unlearned
man identifies himself, do not constitute his self and that is why one on the
path to liberation should grow uninterested in the aggregates, become detached
from them and be liberated. MN 3.20 (PTS) In Samyutta Nikaya (SN) 4.400, both
when asked if there was a soul, and when asked if there was no soul
("natthatta"), Gautama Buddha refused to answer Within the Mahayana tradition,
the position that there is no soul is conventionally considered to be
equivalent to Nihilism (ucchedavada). The Buddha himself said: “Both formerly
and now, I’ve never been a nihilist (vinayika), never been one who teaches
the annihilation of a being, rather taught only the source of suffering, and
its ending.” The early Suttas see annihilationism, which the Buddha equated
with denial of a Self, as tied up with belief in a Self. It is seen as arising
due to conceiving a Self in some sort of relationship to the personality-
factors. It is thus rooted in the 'I am' attitude; even the attitude 'I do not
exist' arises from a preoccupation with 'I'. Anatta is not meant as a
philosophical position. According to Peter Harvey, Peter Harvey, "The Selfless
Mind." Curzon Press, 1995, page 45 The Buddha criticized conceiving theories
even of a unitary soul or identity immanent in all things as unskillful. In
fact, according to the Buddha's statement in Khandha Samyutta 47, all thoughts
about self are necessarily, whether the thinker is aware of it or not, thoughts
about the five aggregates or one of them. As the "Khemaka Sutta" points out,
those who have already attained one of the lower levels of enlightenment may
not identify with anything in particular, but may still have the illusion of
subjectivity; that is, there may not be anything for which they think "I am
this", but they may still retain the tendency to feel "I am". At the time of
the Buddha some philosophers and meditators posited a "root": an abstract
principle out of which all things emanated and which was immanent in all
things. When asked about this, instead of following this pattern of thinking,
the Buddha attacks it at its very root: the notion of a principle in the
abstract, superimposed on experience. In contrast, a person in training should
look for a different kind of "root" — the root of dukkha experienced in the
present. According to one Buddhist scholar, theories of this sort have most
often originated among meditators who label a particular meditative experience
as the ultimate goal, and identify with it in a subtle way. While the doctrine
of anatta denies the self can be the five aggregates or skandhas since
everywhere within them resides impermanence and suffering, this does not mean
the Buddha categorically denied the self. He only denied the phenomenality of
the self: the self believed to be an aggregate or skandha. Anatta in
Mahāyāna. There are many different views of Anatta within various Mahayana
schools. Madhyamaka. Napper summarises and distinguishes a host of modern
academic commentators and their views on anatta and the middle way philosophy;
rather than enter into the many different modern hermeneutics the basic view on
annata can be seen from the following commentators. While commenting on
Āryadeva, Candrakīrti defines anatta as follows: Buddhapālita adds, while
commenting on Nagārjuna's Mūlamadhyamakakārikā, The 'essence' which is
mentioned here is not merely refuting a self which is permanent, partless and
independent, or a self that belongs to the views of other philosophies: While
commenting on Candrakīrti, Tsongkhapa says: Regarding this, Candrakīrti says
Anatta and moral responsibility. While the Buddha attacked the assumptions of
existence of an eternal Self, he would refer to the existence of a conventional
self-subject to conditional phenomena and responsible, in the causal-moral
sense, for karma. Peter Harvey writes that according to the suttas, Peter
Harvey, "The Selfless Mind." Curzon Press 1995, page 33. There are many
statements in the suttas to the effect that a person acts, and then reaps the
consequences. These statements are made to rebut the various theories
circulating among philosophers of the Buddha's time that denied the efficacy of
moral action, attributing all change to fate; these were forms of determinism.
The Buddha's statements are not metaphysical in nature, and do not imply an
unchanging subject of experience. Instead, continuity is maintained not by
positing an extraempirical entity such as a Self, but by a theory of causality.
The Buddha criticized two main theories of moral responsibility; the doctrine
that posited an unchanging Self as a subject, which came to be known as
"atthikavāda", and the doctrine that did not do so, and instead denied moral
responsibility, which came to be known as "natthikavāda". He rejected them
both on empirical grounds. The following interaction of the Buddha pertains to
the latter theory: The Buddha was silent to the questions of the paribbajako
(wandering ascetic) Vacchagotta of “Is there a self?” or “Is there not a
self?” [SN.5:44,10]. When Ananda later asked about his silence, the Buddha
said that to affirm or deny the existence of an eternal self would have sided
with sectarian theories and have disturbed Vacchagotta even more. The early
Suttas see even Annihilationism, which the Buddha equated with denial of a
Self, as tied up with belief in a Self. It is seen as arising due to conceiving
a Self in some sort of relationship to the personality-factors. It is thus
rooted in the 'I am' attitude; even the attitude 'I do not exist' arises from a
preoccupation with 'I'. The Buddha appealed to experience in his refutation of
natthikavāda, saying: "To one who sees, with proper understanding, the arising
of the things in the world, the belief in nonexistence would not occur." The
Buddha was also careful not to allow an atthikavādin interpretation of his
doctrine of causality. In response to the question from a man named Acela
Kassapa as to whether or not suffering is self-caused, the Buddha gave a
negative reply; "A person acts and the same person experiences result — this,
Kassapa, which you emphatically call 'suffering self-wrought', amounts to the
eternalist theory." In responding in this way, the Buddha indicated the
connection between the problem of personal identity and moral responsibility.
This process-view of a person does not see personality as a chaotic flux, but
as a law-governed moving pattern which only changes insofar as supporting
conditions change. In spite of the changes taking place in a person, some
character-patterns are repeated, even over many lives, before they are worn out
or replaced by others in accordance with the law of dependent origination. The
complex of conditions arises out of an interaction of those processes internal
to a person's own stream of psychological processes, that is, past or present
karma, with those from the external world. Some of the external conditions will
in turn be influenced or generated by internal processes. Thus the person-
process both changes and is changed by its environment. The principles of
causality are key to the Buddha's teachings; they provide a vital perspective
on his doctrine as a whole and show how to see it integrated positively in the
causal relationships of the mental-physical factors of the experience of life.
Causal relationships were detailed in the Buddha’s analysis of dependent
origination and "idappaccayata" (lit. “This is founded on that”). This
analysis is applied to knowing the interplay of senses within the mental-
physical factors just as they are. It is a careful analysis of these realities
in terms of their changefulness, instability or un-satisfactoriness and that
these lack inherent personal identification. And this leads to wisdom (prajña,
pañña), cessation of craving (nirodha), and to liberation (nirvana) of the
will/mind (citta). The goal of the Buddhist contemplative is to develop freedom
of the will/mind (citta) from entanglement with things as they seem; through
the delusions of desire and consequential self-identity with events, resultant
fear, aversion and projected hopes—to awaken to things as they are; coming
home to a natural understanding of reality with one's given abilities at work
in an ever changing evolution of experience. “The mind (citta) is cleansed of
the five skandhas (pañcakkhandha)” 44 Developing the self. While the suttas
criticize notions of an eternal, unchanging Self, they see an enlightened being
as one whose changing, empirical self is highly developed. One with great self
has a mind which is not at the mercy of outside stimuli or its own moods, but
is imbued with self-control, and self-contained. The mind of such a one is
without boundaries, not limited by attachment or I-identification. One can
transform one's self from an "insignificant self" into a "great self" through
practices such as loving-kindness and mindfulness. The suttas portray one
disciple who has developed his mind through loving-kindness saying: "Formerly
this mind of mine was limited, but now my mind is immeasurable." Buddhism and
the Self of the Upanishads. The pre-Buddhist Upanishads link the Self to the
feeling "I am." The Chandogya Upanishad for example does, and it sees Self as
underlying the whole world, being "below," "above," and in the four directions.
In contrast, the Buddhist Arahant says: "Above, below, everywhere set free, not
considering 'this I am.'" While the pre-Buddhist Upanishads link the Self to
the attitude "I am," others like the post-Buddhist Maitri Upanishad hold that
only the defiled individual self, rather than the universal self, thinks "this
is I" or "this is mine". According to Peter Harvey, This is very reminiscent of
Buddhism, and may well have been influenced by it to divorce the universal Self
from such egocentric associations. The Upanishadic "Self" shares certain
characteristics with nibbana; both are permanent, beyond suffering, and
unconditioned. However, the Buddha shunned any attempt to see the spiritual
goal in terms of "Self" because in his framework, the craving for a permanent
self is the very thing which keeps a person in the round of uncontrollable
rebirth, preventing him or her from attaining nibbana. Harvey continues: Both
in the Upanishads and in common usage, self/Self is linked to the sense of "I
am" ... If the later Upanishads came to see ultimate reality as beyond the
sense of "I am", Buddhism would then say: why call it 'Self', then? Buddhist
mysticism is also of a different sort from that found in systems revolving
around the concept of a "God" or "Self": Peter Harvey, "Consciousness Mysticism
in the Discourses of the Buddha." In Karel Werner, ed., "The Yogi and the
Mystic." Curzon Press 1989, page 100. Possibly the main philosophical
difference between Hinduism and Buddhism is that the concept of atman was
rejected by the Buddha. Terms like anatman (not-self) and shunyata (voidness)
are at the core of all Buddhist traditions. The permanent cessation of the
reification of the perceived self is integral to the enlightenment of an Arhat.
The Buddha criticized conceiving theories even of a unitary soul or identity
immanent in all things as unskillful. In fact, according to the Buddha's
statement in Khandha Samyutta 47, all thoughts about self are necessarily,
whether the thinker is aware of it or not, thoughts about the five aggregates
or one of them. One of the Buddha's uses of his fivefold classification of
human experience was to refute the conception of a Self held by Upanishadic
thinkers. At the time of the Buddha some philosophers and meditators posited a
"root": an abstract principle out of which all things emanated and which was
immanent in all things. When asked about this, instead of following this
pattern of thinking, the Buddha attacks it at its very root: the notion of a
principle in the abstract, superimposed on experience. In contrast, a person in
training should look for a different kind of "root" — the root of dukkha
experienced in the present. According to one Buddhist scholar, theories of this
sort have most often originated among meditators who label a particular
meditative experience as the ultimate goal, and identify with it in a subtle
way. Nibbana and anatta. Two characteristics of nibbana are permanence and an
absence of suffering. The relationship between nibbana and the anatta is a
different matter. Walpola Rahula shows that the early attempts of Western
scholars to find the atman doctrine in the Pali canon are a result of
mistranslations of the original Pali. Rahula further says, though, that in
declaring "all dhammas are anatta," the Buddha included even nirvana in his
blanket statement that all things are not one's self; this standard Theravada
interpretation also hinges on interpreting the word "sankhara" in the widest
sense. Peter Harvey agrees with this interpretation; see below. Thanissaro
Bhikkhu and Nanavira Thera disagree, finding that the word "dhamma" is used
here only to refer to objects of mental consciousness or mental analysis. They
instead assert that the self/not-self analysis does not extend to nibbana at
all. While there are passages that describe nibbana as an object of
consciousness (such as AN 9.36), this applies only up to the level of non-
returning. For the arahant, however, it is directly known without mediation of
the mental consciousness factor in dependent co-arising, and is the
transcending of all dhammas. In SN V.6, for one example, the Buddha calls the
attainment of the goal the transcending of all dhammas; thus nibbana cannot
always be included in the scope of the word "dhamma." In fact, according to
Thanissaro Bhikkhu, the teaching "all dhammas are not-self" applies directly to
those who experience nibbana without finality; its use in verses 277-279 of the
Dhammapada make clear that the statement is directed at the path, not the goal.
The statement reminds the meditator that he or she should not regard the
deathless with any form of self-identification, and thus clinging, at all.
Nanavira Thera holds that "all dhammas are not-self" can be read as "all
objects of mental analysis are not-self." Since "self" arises in the first
place merely as a delusive figment of the mind, and is then attributed by the
mind to "the five aggregates of clinging or one of them," a statement that
mental analysis finds no "self" in any of its objects is, given the fact that
the mind is the only means there is of investigating anything at all,
equivalent to a complete denial of the "self" concept. According to this
analysis, the Buddha did not make the metaphysical assertion that nibbana is
not self, but neither did he hold the metaphysical view that it is self. In
this analysis, the self/not-self dichotomy simply is not applicable there. As
AN 4.174 states, to even ask if there is anything remaining or not remaining
(or both, or neither) after the complete realization of unconditioned
consciousness is to differentiate what is by nature undifferentiated (or to
complicate the uncomplicated). Perceptions of self or not-self, which would
count as differentiation, would not apply beyond the "All." Thus someone who is
not liberated should not cling to any object of the six sense spheres,
including nirvana if it has been tasted but not fully realized, as a permanent
self, and for a liberated individual who has gone beyond experiencing nirvana
as an object, ideas of self and non-self do not apply. Peter Harvey agrees with
the Theravada view that "all dhammas are not-Self" includes nibbana in its
scope. He states, "where Self and nibbana differ is with respect to the very
aspect of "Self"-hood, I-ness." He continues, "Nibbana itself is not-Self as it
is the stopping of the breeding-ground for the 'I am' attitude, beyond all
possibility of I-ness. Thus, where there was formerly impermanence and a
supposed 'I', there is now permanence and no grounds at all for 'I'. All the
personality-factors are dropped because they fall short of the Self-ideal ...
is that which is 'not dependent on another' attained by not depending on
"anything" as 'Self. It is the 'ultimate empty thing' [this is a reference to
the Patisambhidamagga, which is true permanence and happiness." As one scholar
has written, If one would characterize the forms of mysticism found in the Pali
discourses, it is none of the nature-, God-, or soul-mysticism of F.C. Happold.
Though nearest to the latter, it goes beyond any ideas of 'soul' in the sense
of immortal 'self' and is better styled 'consciousness-mysticism.' Anatta in
the Tathagatagarbha Sutras. Some Mahayana scriptures declare the existence of
"atman," which in these scriptures is equated with buddha-nature.
Tathagatagarbha genre as orthodox. Luminous, monks, is the mind. And it is
defiled by incoming defilements. Luminous, monks, is the mind. And it is freed
from incoming defilements. Prior to the period of these scriptures, Mahayana
metaphysics had been dominated by teachings on emptiness in the form of
Madhyamaka philosophy. The language used by this approach is primarily
negative, and the Tathagatagarbha genre of sutras can be seen as an attempt to
state orthodox Buddhist teachings of dependent origination using positive
language instead, to prevent people from being turned away from Buddhism by a
false impression of nihilism. In these sutras the perfection of the wisdom of
not-self is stated to be the true self; the ultimate goal of the path is then
characterized using a range of positive language that had been used in Indian
philosophy previously by essentialist philosophers, but which was now
transmuted into a new Buddhist vocabulary to describe a being who has
successfully completed the Buddhist path. In the Tathagatagarbha Sutra, the
Buddha is portrayed telling of how, with his buddha-eye, he can actually see
this hidden "jewel" within each and every being: "hidden within the "kleśas"
contaminants of greed, desire, anger, and stupidity, there is seated augustly
and unmovingly the Tathagata's wisdom, the Tathagata's vision, and the
Tathagata's body [... all beings, though they find themselves with all sorts of
kleśas, have a tathagatagarbha that is eternally unsullied, and replete with
virtues no different from my own". This represents a being's potential to
become a Buddha; it is the "true self" in the sense of being the ideal
personality, not a metaphysical essence. As the Buddha is portrayed as
proclaiming in the Mahaparinirvana Sutra; Good son, there are three ways of
having: first, to have in the future, Secondly, to have at present, and
thirdly, to have in the past. All sentient beings will have in future ages the
most perfect enlightenment, i.e., the Buddha nature. All sentient beings have
at present bonds of defilements, and do not now possess the thirty-two marks
and eighty noble characteristics of the Buddha. All sentient beings had in past
ages deeds leading to the elimination of defilements and so can now perceive
the Buddha nature as their future goal. For such reasons, I always proclaim
that all sentient beings have the Buddha nature. The "Mahaparinirvana Sutra", a
long and highly composite Mahayana scripture, refers to the Buddha using the
term "Self" in order to win over non-Buddhist ascetics. From this, it
continues: "The Buddha-nature is in fact not the self. For the sake of sentient
beings, I describe it as the self." The Ratnagotravibhaga, a related text,
points out that the teaching of the tathagatagarbha is intended to win sentient
beings over to abandoning "affection for one's self" - one of the five defects
caused by non-Buddhist teaching. Youru Wang notes similar language in the
Lankavatara Sutra, then writes: "Noticing this context is important. It will
help us to avoid jumping to the conclusion that tathagatagarbha thought is
simply another case of metaphysical imagination." Tathagatagarbha genre as
monist. 'Matsumoto attention to the similarity between the extremely positive
language and causal structure of enlightenment found in the tathagatagarbha
literature and that of the substantial monism found in the atman/Brahman
tradition. Matsumoto, of course, is not the only one to have noted this
resemblance. Takasaki Jikido, for example, the preeminent scholar of the
tathagatagarbha tradition, sees monism in the doctrine of the tathagatagarbha
and the Mahayana in general ... Obermiller wedded this notion of a monistic
Absolute to the tathagatagarbha literature in his translation and comments to
the "Ratnagotra", which he aptly subtitled “A Manual of Buddhist Monism”
... Lamotte and Frauwallner have seen the tathagatagarbha doctrine as
diametrically opposed to the Madhyamika and representing something akin to the
monism of the atman/Brahman strain ... Yet another camp, represented by
Yamaguchi Susumu and his student Ogawa Ichijo, is able to understand
tathagatagarbha thought without recourse to Vedic notions by putting it
squarely within the Buddhist tradition of conditioned causality and emptiness,
which, of course, explicitly rejects monism of any sort. Obviously, the
question of the monist or absolutist nature of the tathagatagarbha and Buddha-
nature traditions is complex.’ Professor Michael Zimmermann, a specialist on
the Tathagatagarbha Sutra, sees the notion of an unperishing and eternal self
in that early buddha-nature scripture and insists that the compilers of the
"Tathagatagarbha Sutra" 'do not hesitate to attribute an obviously
substantialist notion to the buddha-nature of living beings'. Professor
Zimmermann also avers that 'the existence of an eternal, imperishable self,
that is, buddhahood, is definitely the basic point of the Tathagatagarbha
Sutra'. He further indicates that there is no evident interest found in this
sutra in the idea of Emptiness ("sunyata"), saying: 'Throughout the whole
"Tathagatagarbha Sutra" the term "sunyata" does not even appear once, nor does
the general drift of the "TGS" somehow imply the notion of "sunyata" as its
hidden foundation. On the contrary, the sutra uses very positive and
substantialist terms to describe the nature of living beings.'. The problem of
evil. With this monistic interpretation arises the problem of evil akin to the
theistic problem of evil. The Ratnagotra-vibhaga sees the tathagatagarbha as
the basis for all mental activity, including "unsystematic attention", which is
in turn the basis for moral and spiritual defilements. The Lankavatara Sutra
specifically says that the tathagatagarbha "holds within it the cause for both
good and evil." Tathagatagarbha thought, seeking to avoid the conclusion that
genuine evil can arise from the pure tathagatagarbha, portrays mental
defilements as insubstantial illusions produced by delusion. It portrays mental
defilements as unreal, and nirvana not as the actual extinction of anything,
but as being already existent in a concealed state. Why the illusory mental
defilements should be imagined by the deluded mind is stated to be a mystery
that only a Buddha can understand. The absolutist language of tathagatagarbha
thought thus tends to introduce a gulf of non-relation between the realms of
enlightenment and deluded existence. This dualism brings with it the conundrum
of relating enlightened and unenlightened existence. Opposed to early Buddhism
and Yogācāra. In early Buddhism, in contrast, nibbāna, which is Pāli for
"blowing out", is the extinguishing of the three fires of greed, hatred, and
delusion. Furthermore, it is not the recognition of a pre-existing or eternal
perfection, but is the attainment of something that is hitherto unattained.
This is also the orthodox Yogācāra position. The early scriptures also reject
monism (ekatta) and pluralism (nānatta) as speculative views. See middle way.
Modern Thai movements. The Thai Dhammakaya Movement’s Teachings on Non-Self.
‘ meditations involve the realization, when the mind reaches its purest
state, of an unconditioned “Dhamma Body” ("dhammakaya") in the form of a
luminous, radiant and clear Buddha figure free of all defilements and situated
within the body of the meditator. Nirvana is the true Self, and this is also
the "dhammakaya".’ ‘ incline towards a not-Self perspective. But only
scholars hold that view. By way of contrast, Phra Rajyanvisith mentions in
particular the realizations of several distinguished forest hermit monks.
Moreover, he argues, impermanence, suffering and not-Self go together. Anything
which is not-Self is also impermanent and suffering. But, it is argued, nirvana
is not suffering, nor is it impermanent. It is not possible to have something
which is permanent, not suffering (i.e. is happiness) and yet for it still to
be not-Self. Hence it is not not-Self either. It is thus (true, or
transcendental) Self ... These ways of reading Buddhism in terms of a true Self
certainly seem to have been congenial in the East Asian environment, and hence
flourished in that context where for complex reasons Mahayana too found a ready
home.’ In view of the affirmative teachings on a real Self in both the
Dhammakaya Movement and in the "tathagatagarbha" sutras, Professor Williams
inclines to the view that '...we should abandon any simplistic identification
of Buddhism with a straightforward not-Self definition ...' Thai Forest
Tradition. "Questions and Answers with Ajahn Chah." Originally printed at Wat
Pah Pong, Ubon Rajathana Province, N.E. Thailand COPYRIGHT 1982 by The Sangha,
Bung Wai Forest Monastery, available online at [http://www.buddhanet.net/
bodhiny2.htm]. However both he and Ajahn Maha Boowa state that for an
enlightened being, there is neither self nor not-self. Ajahn Chah states:
"Really, in the end there is neither "atta" nor "anatta"." Maha Boowa, "Maha
Boowa in London" Translated by Ajahn Pannavaddho. Forest Dhamma Books, page 46.
Available online from [http://www.forestdhammabooks.com/]. Thanissaro Bhikkhu,
a scholar-monk trained in the Thai Forest Tradition, clarifies that in the
early texts, the "anatta" teaching is a teaching device to assist the
practitioner in reaching the final goal, which lies altogether outside the
realm of "self" or "not-self". Teaching of Self in the 'Chanting the Names of
Mañjusri'. The Buddhist tantric scripture entitled "Chanting the Names of
Mañjusri" (Mañjuśrī-nāma-saṅgīti), as quoted by the great Tibetan
Buddhist master, Dolpopa, repeatedly exalts not the non-Self but the Self.
Thus, the "non-Self" doctrine is presented in the Mañjuśrī-nāma-saṅgīti
(and in certain tantric texts) as a merely partial, incomplete truth rather
than as an absolute verity. Anatman in Advaita Vedanta. The term "anatman" is
found not only in Buddhist sutras, but also in the writings of Adi Shankara,
the founder of Advaita Vedanta. In Advaita Vedanta, this word is used to
indicate "Samsara" - the cycle of birth, life, death and rebirth. Samsara is
described as the unreal ("Mithya") projected by ignorance on the real Brahman,
who is the Absolute. Cosmologically, Brahman is the subtle essence that
underlies phenomena, biologically, it is the supreme life-principle that gives
life to the universe and psychologically, it annihilates all individualities.
As Ishwara, Brahman controls both the sentient and the insentient. The
conscious existence and non-conscious existence in Brahman are both eternal.
Adi Shankara calls the conscious factor "Atman" and the non-conscious factor as
the "Anatman". He does not use the term "Anatman" to mean non-soul or anti-
soul. Atman is formless and partless. Its true nature cannot be perceived but
can only be experienced. However, Anatman causes the living being to experience
the pangs of (repeated) birth, suffering, old age and death. The eternal
Anatman, a creation of Brahman and inseparable from it, is "Mithya". The
ability to discriminate Atman and Anatman leads to Moksha, liberation from the
cycle of Samsara. Relationship to secular philosophy. David Hume's "bundle
theory of the self" is in some ways similar to the Buddha's skandha analysis,
though the skandhas are not an ontological exercise, but rather an explanation
of clinging. Derek Parfit's reductionist account is also reminiscent of
Buddhism. Parfit devotes a small appendix in his book "Reasons and Persons" to
showing that "Buddha would have agreed" with his account. Anatta in
Contemporary Philosophy. The western approach to the self has various
proponents, none more famous than perhaps René Descartes in his famous
“Meditations on first philosophy” where the cogito; I think therefore I am
was drawn as a necessary conclusion. Descartes aim was to find epistemological
certainty (certainty in knowledge) and part of his project was to prove the
existence of an immaterial soul. However, virtually all modern philosophers
have noted that not only is Cartesian Dualism untenable since the
interactionism problem breaks the causal closure of the physical, but the
cogito itself is logically fallacious. As Nietzsche points out, it presupposes
an “I” to think without offering empirical evidence to back this
assumption. As It has also been pointed out that the only thing the cogito can
tell us is that thinking entails existence and no more. John Cottingham stated
the only thing the cogito tells us is that there is something thinking. David
Hume in his 1739 “Treatise of Human Nature” concluded that he could not
perceive a self. 'After what manner, therefore, do they belong to self; and how
are they connected with it? For my part, when I enter most intimately into what
I call myself, I always stumble on some particular perception or other, of heat
or cold, light or shade, love or hatred, pain or pleasure. I never can catch
myself at any time without a perception, and never can observe any thing but
the perception. When my perceptions are removed for any time, as by sound
sleep; so long am I insensible of myself, and may truly be said not to exist'
(Hume, 1739) 'The identity ascribed to man is nothing more than a fiction'
(Hume, 1739) Other notable philosophers in the problem of selfhood or as it is
technically known - personal identity – include Derek Parfit, Thomas
Metzinger, Julian Baginni, Bernard Williams and Sam Harris. Neuroscientists and
philosophers of conscious have started incorporating the notion that there is
no self in to current theory with Daniel Dennett being a well known advocate of
this position in his theory of consciousness. Wu-Wo tea ceremony. The Chinese
term "wu-wo 無我" means anatta or anatman, there is a Chinese tea ceremony
that takes this name Wu-Wo tea ceremony (see main article) and encourages
participants to forget about knowledge, wealth, and appearance to establish a
group equality without prejudice.
