Anathema In the Christian Bible, it appears in conjunction with the word
"maranatha". Interpretation. "Anathema" is a word used mainly in the English
language to describe vehement disagreement to something. It is not a commonly
used word, particularly in spoken language, perhaps because its meaning is
often confused. Examples: "Some people will consider this definition anathema;"
or "Doing homework after school is a complete anathema to her;" or "That
political party would paint as anathema any idea not their own, no matter how
good it is." There is some difficulty in etymologically translating this word,
especially since it has now become commonly used with the term "accursed" or
"accustomed". The original meaning of the Greek word, as used in non-Biblical
Greek literature, was an offering to a god. The Hebrew word ""herem"" (חרם)
referred to something forbidden or off-limits. It was used in verses such as to
refer to things offered to God, and hence off limits to common (non-religious)
use. Because the Greek word "anathema" meant things offered to God, it was used
to translate the Hebrew word "herem" in such contexts. Thus, the meaning of the
Greek word, under the influence of the Hebrew word, was eventually taken as
meaning "set apart", (like "herem") rather than "offering to god", and
eventually the word came to be seen as meaning "banished" and to be considered
beyond the judgment and help of the community. In Greek usage, an "anathema"
was anything laid up or suspended; hence anything laid up in a temple or set
apart as sacred. In this sense the form of the word was once (in plural) used
in the Greek New Testament, in , where it is rendered 'gifts.' It is used
similarly in the Book of Judith, where it is translated as 'gift to the Lord.'
In the Septuagint the form "anathema" is generally used as the rendering of the
Hebrew word "herem," derived from a verb which means (1) to consecrate or
devote; and (2) to exterminate. Any object so sacrificed or devoted to the Lord
could not be redeemed (; ); and hence the idea of exterminating was connected
with the word. The Hebrew verb (haram) is frequently used of the extermination
of idolatrous nations. It had a wide range of application. The "anathema" or
"herem" was a person or thing irrevocably devoted to God (, ); and "none
devoted shall be ransomed. He shall surely be put to death" (). The Hebrew word
therefore carried the idea of devoted to destruction (; ); and hence a majority
of scholars have treated the word anathema similarly, generally as meaning a
thing accursed. For example, in an idol is called a "herem" = "anathema",
understood to mean a thing accursed. There is however, an alternative view that
the Greek word 'anathema,' in these passages, was used by the Greek Septuagint
translators to mean "offered up to God." New Testament. In the New Testament
the word anathema often implies denouncement and banishment. In some instances
an individual pronounces an anathema on himself if certain conditions are not
fulfilled (, , ). "To call Jesus denounced" ["anathema"] () is to pronounce him
execrated or accursed. "But though we, or an angel from heaven, preach any
other gospel unto you than that which we have preached unto you, let him be
accursed" (); that is, let his conduct in so doing be accounted banished.
Sometimes, however, the word "anathema" in the New Testament invokes an
alternative meaning, that of being "offered up to God". In , the expression
"anathema from Christ", that is, excluded from fellowship or alliance with
Christ, has occasioned much difficulty. The traditional view is that the
apostle here does not speak of his wish as a possible thing. It is simply a
vehement expression of feeling, showing how strong was his desire for the
salvation of his people. The word "anathema" in might suggest that they who
love not the Lord are objects of loathing and execration to all holy beings;
they are unrepentant of a crime that merits the severest condemnation; they are
exposed to the sentence of "everlasting destruction from the presence of the
Lord" for they do not embrace saving beliefs, as was the sentence of all
mankind before the atonement, justification and sanctification of the blood of
Christ that allowed for the redemption of sins. Alternatively, the Apostle Paul
could be suggesting that those who do not love the Lord should be offered up to
God. Early Catholic Dogma. Since the time of the apostles, the term 'anathema'
has come to mean a form of extreme religious sanction, known as
excommunication. The earliest recorded instance of the form is in the Council
of Elvira (c. 306), and thereafter it became the common method of cutting off
heretics; for example, the Synod of Gangra (c. 340) pronounced that
Manicheanism was anathema. Cyril of Alexandria issued twelve anathemas against
Nestorius in 431. In the fifth century, a formal distinction between anathema
and "minor" excommunication evolved, where "minor" excommunication entailed
cutting off a person or group from the rite of Eucharist and attendance at
worship, while anathema meant a complete separation of the subject from the
Church. Eastern Orthodox churches. The Eastern Orthodox churches distinguishes
between "separation from the communion of the Church" (excommunication) and
other "epitemia" (penances) laid on a person, and anathema. While undergoing
epitemia, the person remains a Eastern Orthodox Christian, even though his or
her participation in the mystical life of the church is limited; but those
given over to anathema are considered to be completely torn away from the
Church until repentance. Epitemia or excommunication is normally limited to a
specified period of time — though it is always dependent upon the repentance
of the one penanced, but the lifting of anathema is dependent solely upon the
repentance of the one condemned. The two causes for which a person may be
anathematized are heresy and schism. Anathematization is only a last resort,
and must always be preceded by pastoral attempts to reason with the offender
and bring about his restoration. For the Orthodox, anathema is not final
damnation; God alone is the judge of the living and the dead, and up until the
moment of death repentance is always possible. The purpose of public anathema
is twofold: to warn the one condemned and bring about his repentance, and to
warn others away from his error. Everything is done for the purpose of the
salvation of souls. "… if thy brother shall trespass against thee, go and
tell him his fault between thee and him alone: if he shall hear thee, thou hast
gained thy brother. But if he will not hear thee, then take with thee one or
two more, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be
established. And if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto the church: but
if he shall neglect to hear the church, let him be unto thee as a heathen man
and a publican. Verily I say unto you, whatever ye shall bind on earth shall be
bound in heaven; and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed in
heaven." After an ektenia (litany), during which petitions are offered that God
will have mercy on those who err and bring them back to the truth, and that he
will "make hatred, enmity, strife, vengeance, falsehood and all other
abominations to cease, and cause true love to reign in our hearts…", the
bishop (or abbot) says a prayer during which he beseeches God to: "look down
now upon Thy Church, and behold how that, though we have joyously received the
Gospel of salvation, we are but stony ground. For the thorns of vanity and the
tares of the passions make it to bear but little fruit in certain places and
none in others, and with the increase in iniquity, some, opposing the truth of
Thy Gospel by heresy, and others by schism, do fall away from Thy dignity, and
rejecting Thy grace, the subject themselves to the judgment of Thy most holy
word. O most merciful and almighty Lord … be merciful unto us; strengthen us
in the right Faith by Thy power, and with Thy divine light illumine the eyes of
those in error, that they may come to know Thy truth. Soften the hardness of
their hearts and open their ears, that they may hear Thy voice and turn to
Thee, our Saviour. O Lord, set aside their division and correct their life,
which doth not accord with Christian piety. … Endue the pastors of Thy Church
with holy zeal, and so direct their care for the salvation and conversion of
those in error with the spirit of the Gospel that, guided by Thee, we may all
attain to that place where is the perfect faith, fulfillment of hope, and true
love …." The Protodeacon then proclaims the Synodicon, anathematizing various
heresies and lauding those who have remained constant in the dogma and Sacred
Tradition of the church. Catholic Church. The priests respond: "Fiat, fiat,
fiat" (Let it be done, let it be done, let it be done), and all, including the
pontiff, cast their lighted candles on the ground. Notice is sent in writing to
the priests and neighbouring bishops of the name of the one who has been thus
excommunicated and the cause of his excommunication, in order that they may
have no communication with him. Although he is delivered to Satan and his
angels, he can still, and is even bound to repent. The Pontifical gives the
form for absolving him and reconciling him with the Church. The 1917 Code of
Canon Law, which abolished all ecclesiastical penalties not mentioned in the
Code itself (canon 6), made "anathema" synonymous with "excommunication" (canon
2257). The ritual described above is not included in the post-Vatican II
revision of the Pontifical.
