Veneration of the dead Veneration of the dead is based on the belief that the
deceased, often family members, have a continued existence and/or possess the
ability to influence the fortune of the living. Some groups venerate their
ancestors; some faith communities, in particular the Catholic Church, venerate
saints as intercessors with God. In some Eastern cultures, and in Native
American traditions, the goal of ancestor veneration is to ensure the
ancestors' continued well-being and positive disposition towards the living and
sometimes to ask for special favours or assistance. The social or non-religious
function of ancestor veneration is to cultivate kinship values, such as filial
piety, family loyalty, and continuity of the family lineage. While far from
universal, ancestor veneration occurs in societies with every degree of social,
political, and technological complexity, and it remains an important component
of various religious practices in modern times. This article will examine
similarities and differences in the relationships between the living and the
dead. The minimum requirement for veneration offered to the dead is probably
some kind of belief in an afterlife, a survival, at least for a time, of
personal identity beyond death. These beliefs are far from uniform.
Description. For most of the cultures, ancestor practices are not the same as
the worship of the gods. When a person worships a god at a local temple it is
to ask for some favor that can be granted by the powerful spirit. In some
cultures, the purpose of ancestor veneration is not to ask for favors but to do
one's filial duty. Some people believe that their ancestors actually need to be
provided for by their descendants. Others do not believe that the ancestors are
even aware of what their descendants do for them, but that the expression of
filial piety is what is important. Whether or not the ancestor receives what is
offered is not the issue. Therefore, for people unfamiliar with how "ancestor
worship" is actually practiced and thought of, the use of the translation
"worship" can be a cause of misunderstanding and is a misnomer in many ways. In
English, the word "worship" usually refers to the reverent love and devotion
accorded a deity or divine being. However, in other cultures, this act of
worship does not confer any belief that the departed ancestors have become some
kind of deity. Rather, the act is a way to respect, honor and look after
ancestors in their afterlives as well as seek their guidance for their living
descendants. In this regard, many cultures and religions have similar
practices. Some may visit the graves of their parents or other ancestors, leave
flowers and pray to them in order to honor and remember them, while also asking
their deceased ancestors to continue to look after them. However, this would
not be considered as worshipping them. It is in that sense that the translation
"ancestor veneration" may convey a more accurate sense of what practitioners,
such as the Chinese and other Buddhist-influenced and Confucian-influenced
societies, see themselves as doing. Africa. Ancestor veneration is very
prevalent throughout Africa and serves as the basis of many religions. It is
often augmented by a belief in a supreme being, but prayers and/or sacrifices
are usually offered to the ancestors who may ascend to becoming minor deities
themselves. Ancestor veneration remains among many Africans, sometimes
practiced alongside the later adopted religions of Christianity (as in Nigeria
among the Igbo people) and Islam (among the different Mand√© peoples and the
Bamum) in much of the continent. Madagascar. Veneration of ancestors is
prevalent throughout the African island of Madagascar. Approximately half of
the country's population of 20 million currently practice traditional religion,
which tends to emphasize links between the living and the "razana" (ancestors).
The veneration of ancestors has led to the widespread tradition of tomb
building, as well as the highlands practice of the "famadihana", whereby a
deceased family member's remains may be exhumed to be periodically re-wrapped
in fresh silk shrouds before being replaced in the tomb. The famadihana is an
occasion to celebrate the beloved ancestor's memory, reunite with family and
community, and enjoy a festive atmosphere. Residents of surrounding villages
are often invited to attend the party, where food and rum are typically served
and a hiragasy troupe or other musical entertainment is commonly present.
Veneration of ancestors is also demonstrated through adherence to "fady",
taboos that are respected during and after the lifetime of the person who
establishes them. It is widely believed that by showing respect for ancestors
in these ways, they may intervene on behalf of the living. Conversely,
misfortunes are often attributed to ancestors whose memory or wishes have been
neglected. The sacrifice of zebu is a traditional method used to appease or
honor the ancestors. Small, everyday gestures of respect include throwing the
first capful of a newly opened bottle of rum into the northeast corner of the
room to give the ancestors their due share. Ancient Egypt. The ancient Egyptian
pyramids are the most famous historical monuments devoted to the dead (see
Great pyramid of Giza). Egyptian religion posited the survival of the soul in
connection with the survival of a physical receptacle for the soul - hence
mummification and portraiture flourished as a vital part of Egyptian religion.
Although some historians claim that ancient Egyptian society was a ‚Äúdeath
cult‚Äù because of its elaborate tombs and mummification rituals, it was really
quite the opposite. The philosophy that ‚Äúthis world is but a vale of tears‚Äù
and that to die and be with God is a better existence than an earthly one was
relatively unknown among the ancient Egyptians. This was not to say that they
were unacquainted with the harshness of life; rather, their ethos included a
sense of national pride. The Egyptian people loved the culture, customs and
religion of their daily lives so much that they wanted to continue them in the
next‚Äîalthough some might hope for a better station in the Beautiful West
(Egyptian afterlife). This same strong sense of national and historical pride
still exists in modern-day Egypt, although the religion and culture have
changed. Tombs were housing in the Hereafter and so they were carefully
constructed and decorated, just as homes for the living were. Mummification was
a way to preserve the corpse so the "ka" (soul) of the deceased could return to
receive offerings of the things s/he enjoyed while alive. If mummification was
not affordable, a ‚Äúka-statue‚Äù in the likeness of the deceased was carved
for this purpose. The Blessed Dead were collectively called the "akhu", or
‚Äúshining ones‚Äù (singular: "akh"). They were described as ‚Äúshining as gold
in the belly of Nut" (Gr. Nuit) and were indeed depicted as golden stars on the
roofs of many tombs and temples. The process by which a "ka" became an "akh"
was not automatic upon death; it involved a 70-day journey through the "duat",
or Otherworld, which led to judgment before Wesir (Gr. Osiris), Lord of the
Dead where the "ka‚Äô"s heart would be weighed on a scale against the Feather
of Ma‚Äôat (representing Truth). However, if the "ka" was not properly
prepared, this journey could be fraught with dangerous pitfalls and strange
demons; hence some of the earliest religious texts discovered, such as the
Papyrus of Ani (commonly known as The Book of the Dead) and the Pyramid Texts
were actually written as guides to help the deceased successfully navigate the
"duat". If the heart was in balance with the Feather of Ma'at, the "ka" passed
judgment and was granted access to the Beautiful West as an "akh" who was
"ma‚Äôa heru" (‚Äútrue of voice‚Äù) to dwell among the gods and other "akhu".
At this point only was the "ka" deemed worthy to be venerated by the living
through rites and offerings. Those who became lost in the "duat" or
deliberately tried to avoid judgment became the unfortunate (and sometimes
dangerous) "mutu", the Restless Dead. For the few whose truly evil hearts
outweighed the Feather, the goddess Ammit waited patiently behind Wesir‚Äôs
judgment seat to consume them. She was a composite creature resembling three of
the deadliest animals in Egypt: the crocodile, the hippopotamus and the lion.
(The hippopotamus is still the leading cause of human deaths by animal
encounter in Africa today.) Being fed to Ammit was to be consigned to the
Eternal Void, to be ‚Äúunmade‚Äù as a "ka". Besides being eaten by Ammit, the
worst fate a "ka" could suffer after physical death was to be forgotten. For
this reason, ancestor veneration in ancient Egypt was an important rite of
remembrance in order to keep the "ka" ‚Äúalive‚Äù in this life as well as in
the next. Royals, nobles and the wealthy made contracts with their local
priests to perform prayers and give offerings at their tombs. In return, the
priests were allowed to keep a portion of the offerings as payment for services
rendered. Some tomb inscriptions even invited passers-by to speak aloud the
names of the deceased within (which also helped to perpetuate their memory),
and to offer water, prayers or other things if they so desired. In the private
homes of the less wealthy, niches were carved into the walls for the purpose of
housing images of familial "akhu" and to serve as altars of veneration. Many of
these same religious beliefs and ancestor veneration practices are still
carried on today in the religion of Kemetic Orthodoxy. Ancient Rome. The
Romans, like many Mediterranean societies, regarded the bodies of the dead as
polluting. During Rome's Classical period, the body was most often cremated,
and the ashes placed in a tomb outside the city walls. Much of the month of
February was devoted to purifications, propitiation, and veneration of the
dead, especially at the nine-day festival of the Parentalia during which a
family honored its ancestors. The family visited the cemetery and shared cake
and wine, both in the form of offerings to the dead and as a meal among
themselves. The Parentalia drew to a close on February 21 with the more somber
Feralia, a public festival of sacrifices and offerings to the Manes, the
potentially malevolent spirits of the dead who required propitiation. One of
the most common inscriptional phrases on Latin epitaphs is "Dis Manibus",
abbreviated "D.M," "for the Manes gods," which appears even on some Christian
tombstones. The Caristia on February 22 was a celebration of the family line as
it continued into the present. A noble Roman family displayed ancestral images
"(imagines)" in the atrium of their home "(domus)". Some sources indicate these
portraits were busts, while others suggest that funeral masks were also
displayed. The masks, probably modeled of wax from the face of the deceased,
were part of the funeral procession when an elite Roman died. Professional
mourners wore the masks and regalia of the dead person's ancestors as the body
was carried from the home, through the streets, and to its final resting place.
Christianity. Early Christianity's attitudes. Some early Christians may have
been persecuted for their faith, leading some to hide in the catacombs in Rome.
As a result, they may have found themselves praying and worshiping God
surrounded by the tombs and bodies of the dead. When possible, they may have
sought to pray among the bodies of dead Christians, maybe using a coffin or
tomb for an altar on which to celebrate the Eucharist. From the early apostolic
times, it appears the Church held a respectful veneration for the dead. They
reported witnessing miracles in connection with the bodies of dead Christians,
such as healing, or observing sweet-smelling myrrh exuding from their bones.
This, combined with their belief in the Resurrection of Jesus and future
resurrection of all Christians (the Resurrection of the Dead), eventually led
to the veneration of saints and of their relics. Early accounts of martyrs
include Christian witnesses making great efforts to obtain the remains of the
martyrs and the Romans sometimes trying to prevent this. Also, it became common
to continue to ask Christian leaders to pray for them, even after the leaders
had died, as they believed that these Christians were still able to pray and
that their prayers would still be effective. Later, most of the various
Protestant sects that broke away from the Catholic Church in the 16th century
repudiated the practice of asking intercession from the dead, based on possible
Pagan origin of communicating with the dead. Catholicism and Anglicanism's
attitudes. The Roman Catholic Church, as well as the Anglican Communion,
Eastern Orthodox Churches and Oriental Orthodox Churches venerate saints who
are in Heaven. Although not necessarily ancestors, the saints are considered
departed from Earthly life. They are honored through prayers and feast days.
Such holidays to honor the dead in Christianity include All Saints' Day, All
Souls' Day, and Day of the Dead. East Asian cultures. China. Ancestral
veneration in some cultures (such as Chinese) (Êï¨Á•ñ, pinyin: "j√¨ngz«î"), as
well as ancestor worship (ÊãúÁ•ñ, pinyin: "b√ iz«î"), seeks to honor and
reminiscence the actions of the deceased; the ultimate homage to the dead. The
importance of paying respect to parents (and elders) lies with the fact that
all physical bodily aspects of one's being were created by one's parents, who
continued to tend to one's well-being until one is on firm footings. The
respect and the homage to parents, is to return this gracious deed to them in
life and after, the ultimate homage. The "shi" (Â∞∏; "corpse, personator") was
a Zhou Dynasty (1045¬ BCE-256¬ BCE) sacrificial representative of a dead
relative. During a "shi" ceremony, the ancestral spirit supposedly would enter
the personator, who would eat and drink sacrificial offerings and convey
spiritual messages. Sacrifices are sometimes made to altars as food for the
deceased. This falls under the modes of communication with the Chinese
spiritual world concepts. Some of the veneration includes visiting the deceased
at their graves and making offerings to the deceased in the Spring, Autumn, and
Ghost Festivals. Due to the hardships of the late 19th- and 20th-century China,
when meat and poultry were difficult to come by, sumptuous feasts are still
offered in some Asian countries as a practice to the spirits or ancestors.
However, in the orthodox Taoist and Buddhist rituals, only vegetarian food
would suffice. For those with deceased in the afterlife or hell, elaborate or
even creative offerings, such as servants, refrigerators, houses, car, paper
money and shoes are provided so that the deceased will be able to have these
items after they have died. Often, paper versions of these objects are burned
for the same purpose. Originally, real-life objects were buried with the dead.
In time these goods were replaced by full size clay models which in turn were
replaced by scale models, and in time today's paper offerings (including paper
servants). Korea. In Korea, ancestor veneration is referred to by the generic
term "jerye" (hangul: Ï úÎ°Ä; hanja: ) or "jesa" (hangul: Ï úÏÇ¨; hanja: ).
Notable examples of "jerye" include "Munmyo jerye" and "Jongmyo jerye", which
are performed periodically each year for venerated Confucian scholars and kings
of ancient times, respectively. The ceremony held on the anniversary of a
family member's death is called "charye" (Ï∞®Î°Ä). It is still practiced today.
The majority of Catholics, Buddhists and nonbelievers practice ancestral rites,
although Protestants do not. The Catholic ban on ancestral rituals was lifted
in 1939, when the Catholic Church formally recognized ancestral rites as a
civil practice. Vietnam. Ancestor veneration is one of the most unifying
aspects of Vietnamese culture, as practically all Vietnamese, regardless of
religious affiliation (Buddhist or Christian) have an ancestor altar in their
home or business. In Vietnam, traditionally people did not celebrate birthdays
(before Western influence), but the death anniversary of a loved one was always
an important occasion. Besides an essential gathering of family members for a
banquet in memory of the deceased, incense sticks are burned along with hell
notes, and great platters of food are made as offerings on the ancestor altar,
which usually has pictures or plaques with the names of the deceased. These
offerings and practices are done frequently during important traditional or
religious celebrations, the starting of a new business, or even when a family
member needs guidance or counsel and is a hallmark of the emphasis Vietnamese
culture places on filial duty. A significant distinguishing feature of
Vietnamese ancestor veneration is that women have traditionally been allowed to
participate and co-officiate ancestral rites, unlike in Chinese Confucian
doctrine, which allows only male descendants to perform such rites. South and
Southeast Asian cultures. Burma (Myanmar). Ancestor worship is no longer
present in modern-day Burma (except within some ethnic minority communities),
but remnants of it still exist, such as worship of Bo Bo Gyi (literally "great
grandfather"), as well as of other guardian spirits such as nats, all of which
may be vestiges of historic ancestor worship practices. Ancestor worship was
present in the royal court in pre-colonial Burma. During the Konbaung dynasty,
solid gold images of deceased kings and their consorts were worshiped three
times a year by the royal family, during the Burmese New Year (Thingyan), at
the beginning and at the end of the Buddhist lent. The images were stored in
the treasury and worshiped at the Zetawunzaung (, 'Hall of Ancestors'), along
with a book of odes. Some scholars attribute the disappearance of ancestor
worship to the influence of Buddhist doctrines of anicca and anatta,
impermanence and rejection of a 'self'. India. Ancestor worship is predominant
in India among Hindus. In India, when a person dies, the family observes a ten-
day mourning period, generally called shraddha. A year and six months thence,
they observe the ritual of Tarpan, in which the family offers tributes to the
deceased. During these rituals, the family prepares the food items that the
deceased liked and offers food to the deceased. They offer this food to cows
and crows as well. They are also obliged to offer sraddha (a small feast of
specific preparations) to eligible Bramhins. Only after these rituals are the
family members allowed to eat. Each year, on the particular date (as per the
Hindu calendar) when the person had died, the family members repeat this
ritual. Apart from this, there is also a fortnight-long duration each year
called "Pitru Paksha" ("fortnight of ancestors"), when the family remembers all
its ancestors and offers Tarpan to them. This period falls just before the
Navratri or Durga Puja falling in the month of Ashwin. Mahalaya marks the end
of the fortnight-long Tarpan to the ancestors. The Philippines. In the
animistic tribes of the northern Philippines, worshipping the ancestors was
very prevalent until the arrival of the Americans in 1900. However, unlike in
the other places where the images of the folk gods were burnt by Spanish
colonisers, the American missionaries allowed these images to be preserved as a
memorial of the rich cultural heritage of the different northern tribes. Many
of these carved wooden ancestors, known as the "bulul", are preserved in
museums and serve as a reminder of the sophisticated history of the mountain
tribes. Thailand. In rural northern Thailand a religious ceremony honoring
ancestral spirits, known as "faun phii" (spirit dance or ghost dance), takes
place. It includes offerings for ancestors with spirit mediums sword fighting,
spirit-possessed dancing, and spirit mediums cock fighting in a spiritual
cockfight. Western cultures. Europe. Traditionally, in Celtic and Germanic
Europe, the feast of Samhain (called Allelieweziel in Deitsch) was specially
associated with the deceased, and, in these countries, it was still customary
to set a place for them at table on this day until relatively recent times.
After Christianisation, in most Catholic countries in Europe (and Anglican
England), November 1 (All Saints' Day, also known as Day of the Dead) became
the day when families go to the cemeteries and light candles for their dead
relatives. This is a very ancient practice, already present long before the
time of the Roman Empire. In the early Catholic Church, honouring Christian
relatives who had died was commonplace, and, during the post-Apostolic period
when the Church was forced underground by the Roman Empire, the Mass was
celebrated among the catacombs. The official day, according to the Church, to
commemorate the dead who have not attained beatific vision is November 2 (All
Souls' Day). Britain. In a British context, the autumn ancestor festival
corresponds to Halloween, which derives from the Celtic Samhain. Ireland.
During Samhain in Ireland, the dead are thought to return, and food and light
are left for them. The ancient people would extinguish their fires in their
homes and relight the home fire with a piece of fire obtained from the bond
fire.Lights are left burning all night, as on Christmas Eve, and food is left
outdoors for them. It is believed that food fallen on the floor should also be
left, as someone needed it. Canada and the United States. In the United States
and Canada, flowers, wreaths, grave decorations and sometimes candles or even
small pebbles are put on graves year-round as a way to honor the dead. In the
Southern United States, many people honor deceased loved ones on Decoration
Day. Times like Easter, Christmas, Candlemas, and All Souls' Day are also
special days in which the relatives and friends of the deceased gather to honor
them with flowers and candles. In the Catholic Church, one's local parish
church often offers prayers for the dead on their death anniversary or on
special days like All Souls' Day. Some Latinos of Mexican origin celebrate Dia
de los Muertos (Day of the Dead) on or around All Saints Day (November 1), this
being a mix of a native Mesoamerican celebration and an imported European
holiday. Ofrendas (altars) are set up, with calaveras (sugar skulls),
photographs of departed loved ones, marigold flowers, candles, and more. In
Judaism, when a grave site is visited, a small pebble is placed on the
headstone. While there is no clear answer as to why, this custom of leaving
pebbles may date back to biblical days when individuals were buried under piles
of stones. Today, they are left as tokens that people have been there to visit
and to remember. Some Americans may build a shrine in their home dedicated to
loved ones who have died, with pictures of them. Also, increasingly, many
roadside shrines may be seen for deceased relatives who died in car accidents
or were killed on that spot, sometimes financed by the state or province as
these markers serve as potent reminders to drive cautiously in hazardous areas.
The Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington D.C. is particularly known for the
leaving of offerings to the deceased; items left are collected by the National
Park Service and archived. Members of The Church of Jesus Christ of latter-day
Saints perform posthumous baptisms and other rituals for their dead ancestors
in the numerous temples, to allow the deceased entrance into the highest degree
of glory in the afterlife.
