Ancient of Days Ancient of Days is a name for God in Aramaic: "Atik Yomin"; in
the Greek Septuagint: "Palaios Hemeron"; and in the Vulgate: "Antiquus Dierum".
The title "Ancient of Days" has been used as a source of inspiration in art and
music, denoting the Creator's aspects of eternity combined with perfection.
William Blake's watercolour and relief etching entitled "The Ancient of Days"
is one such example. In Religion. Judaism. Daniel 7:9Idra Rabba, Zohar 3:136b
This term appears three times in the book of Daniel (7:9, 13, 22), and is used
in the sense of God being eternal. The most powerful effect of this particular
Name of God stems from the the Zohar, the seminal document of Kabbalah that
emerged in 13th century Spain. In the Kabbalah there is mention of the Ancient
of Ancients, and the Holy Ancient One - Atika Kadisha, variably interpreted as
synonymous with the En Sof, the unmanifested Godhead. The Ancient of Days is
the manifestation of the Ancient of Ancients within Creation. It refers to the
most primary ("ancient") source of Creation in the Divine Will Keter. In 16th
century Lurianic Kabbalah, Atik Yomin becomes the inner Partzuf of Keter,
synonymous with Divine Delight, that enclothes within and motivates Arich
Anpin, the outer Partzuf of Keter, synonymous with Divine Will. Arich Anpin is
said to extend down all levels of Creation in ever more concealed mode as the
Divine substratum of everything. The Zohar goes into great detail describing
the White Head of God and ultimately the emanation of its personality or
attributes. Christianity. In Eastern Orthodox Christian hymns and icons, the
Ancient of Days is sometimes identified with God the Father; but most properly,
in accordance with Orthodox theology he is identified with God the Son, or
Jesus Christ. As such, Eastern Christian art will sometimes portray Jesus
Christ as an old man, the Ancient of Days, to show symbolically that he existed
from all eternity, and sometimes as a young man to portray him as he was
incarnate. This iconography emerged in the 6th century, mostly in the Eastern
Empire. It was declared by the Russian Orthodox Church at the Great Synod of
Moscow in 1667 that the Ancient of Days was the Son and not the Father. In the
Western Church similar figures usually represent only God the Father. Building
his argument upon the Daniel passage, Thomas Aquinas identifies the Ancient of
Days as the Person of the Father. In the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
Saints, the title "Ancient of Days" belongs to Adam, the oldest and earliest
man, who is also identified with the archangel Michael. Hinduism. The Sanskrit
name, Karttikeya or Skanda, means "always a youth" and is revered as one of the
four (or seven) sons of Brahma. Buddhism. In Buddhism, in the Kevattha Sutta
(Digha Nikaya 11), the term "ancient of days" is referred to the creator God
Brahma, ""“I am the Great Brahma, the Supreme, the Mighty, the All-seeing,
the Ruler, the Lord of all, the Controller, the Creator, the Chief of all,
appointing to each his place, the Ancient of days, the Father of all that are
and are to be.” ."" In Buddhism, although Brahma or God is respected, he is
not regarded as omnipotent or all knowing, but someone in samsara who is
subject to ignorance, birth and death (over billions of years) and a disciple
of the Buddha. Bahá’í. In the Bahá’í Faith, 'the Ancient of Days' is
one of the titles with which Bahá’u’lláh refers to Himself.
