Continuing Anglican movement The Continuing Anglican movement encompasses a
number of Christian churches in various countries that profess Anglicanism
while remaining outside the Anglican Communion. These churches generally
believe that "traditional" forms of Anglican faith and worship have been
unacceptably revised or abandoned within some Anglican Communion churches in
recent decades. They claim, therefore, that they are "continuing" or preserving
Anglicanism's line of Apostolic Succession as well as historic Anglican belief
and practice. The modern "Continuing" movement principally dates to the 1977
Congress of St. Louis in the United States, at which meeting participants
rejected the ordination of women and the changes that had been made in the
Episcopal Church's Book of Common Prayer. Relations with the Anglican
Communion. Continuing churches have generally been formed by clergy and lay
people who left churches belonging to the Anglican Communion. These particular
Anglican Communion churches are charged by the Continuing movement with being
greatly compromised by adopting what they consider to be secular cultural
standards and liberal approaches to theology. Many Continuing Anglicans believe
that the faith of some churches in communion with the Archbishop of Canterbury
has become either unorthodox or un-Christian and therefore have not sought to
also be in communion with them. Although the term "Anglican" usually refers to
those churches in communion with the Church of England and the Archbishop of
Canterbury, many Continuing churches, particularly those in the United States,
use the term "Anglican" to differentiate themselves from the Episcopal Church.
Many continuing Anglicans feel that they are remaining true to historic
Anglican tradition and Biblical Christianity and that it is the Episcopal
Church in the United States, as well as other parts of the Anglican Communion,
which have become unorthodox. Theological diversity. Anglicanism in general has
always sought a balance between the emphases of Catholicism and Protestantism,
while tolerating a range of expressions of evangelicalism and ceremony. Clergy
and laity from all Anglican churchmanship traditions have been active in the
formation of the Continuing movement. While there are high church, broad
church, and low church Continuing Anglicans, many Continuing churches are
Anglo-Catholic with highly ceremonial liturgical practices. Others belong to a
more Evangelical or low church tradition, support the Thirty-nine Articles, and
observe Morning Prayer more frequently than Holy Communion. The Continuing
churches in the United States reject the 1979 revision of the Book of Common
Prayer made by the Episcopal Church and use the 1928 version or prior official
versions of the Book of Common Prayer for their services instead. In addition,
some Anglo-Catholic bodies also use the Anglican Missal or English Missal in
celebrating the Eucharist. Liturgical use of the 1611 "Authorized Version" of
Holy Scripture (more widely known as the King James Version) is also a common
feature. This is done for many reasons, including aesthetics, and in protest
against what some claim to be liberal or progressive theology that updated
English translations such as the New Revised Standard Version are believed to
embody. History. Origins. The Continuing movement originated in the Episcopal
Church in the United States of America and the Anglican Church of Canada.
Related churches in other countries, such as the Anglican Catholic Church in
Australia and the Church of England (Continuing), were founded later. In 1976,
the General Convention of the Episcopal Church in the United States of America
voted to approve the ordination of women to the priesthood and to the
episcopate and also provisionally adopted a new and doctrinally controversial
Book of Common Prayer, later called the 1979 version. During the following
year, 1977, several thousand dissenting clergy and laypersons responded to
those actions by meeting in St. Louis, Missouri under the auspices of the
Fellowship of Concerned Churchmen and adopted a theological statement, the
Affirmation of St. Louis. The Affirmation expressed a determination "to
continue in the Catholic Faith, Apostolic Order, Orthodox Worship and
Evangelical Witness of the traditional Anglican Church, doing all things
necessary for the continuance of the same." Out of this meeting came a new
church with the provisional name of the "Anglican Church in North America
(Episcopal)". The first bishop of the new church, the Right Reverend Charles
Doren, was consecrated by a retired bishop of the Episcopal Church, the Right
Reverend Albert Arthur Chambers of the Diocese of Springfield, Illinois, along
with Bishop Francisco Pagtakhan of the Philippine Independent Church as co-
consecrator. Although expected to be the third bishop participating in Doren's
consecration, the Right Reverend Mark Pae of the Anglican Church of Korea sent
a letter of consent instead. This development left the new group open to
charges of violating the customs of apostolic succession, in which three
bishops customarily are present, although only one is necessary for a valid
consecration. The newly-consecrated Bishop Doren then joined with Bishops
Chambers and Pagtakhan in consecrating as bishops the Reverend James Mote, the
Reverend Robert Morse, and the Reverend Francis Watterson. Bishop Watterson
left the movement shortly afterward and became a Roman Catholic priest. Early
fractures. During the process of ratifying the new church's constitution,
disputes developed which split its dioceses into two American churches and a
separate Canadian church. These were the Anglican Catholic Church led by Bishop
Mote, the Diocese of Christ the King (now the Anglican Province of Christ the
King) led by Bishop Morse, and the Anglican Catholic Church of Canada. In 1981,
Bishop Doren and others left the Anglican Catholic Church to found the United
Episcopal Church of North America in opposition to the alleged inhospitality of
the other jurisdictions towards Low Churchmen. Recent developments and
statistics. The original generation of Continuing parishes in the U.S. were
found mainly in metropolitan areas. Since the late 1990s, a number have
appeared in smaller communities, often as a result of a division in the town's
existing Episcopal parish(es) or mission(s). The 2007/08 "Directory of
Traditional Anglican and Episcopal Parishes", published by The Fellowship of
Concerned Churchmen, contained information on over 900 parishes affiliated with
either the Continuing Anglican churches or the Anglican realignment movement.
The principles of the Affirmation of St. Louis and, to a lesser extent, the
Thirty-nine Articles of Religion, provide some basis for unity in the movement,
but the jurisdictions are numerous, usually quite small in membership and often
splinter and recombine. Reports put the number of jurisdictions at somewhere
between 20 and 40, mostly in North America, but fewer than a dozen of the
churches popularly called "Continuing churches" can be traced back to the
meeting in St. Louis. Reunification efforts. In 2007, various jurisdictions
made attempts at overcoming the movement's divisions. The Anglican Catholic
Church, the Anglican Province of Christ the King, and the United Episcopal
Church of North America entered into discussions about possible organic unity.
A Communion Agreement was entered into on May 17, 2007. In January 2009 one
bishop from each jurisdiction consecrated three suffragan bishops in St. Louis,
intending that they serve all three jurisdictions. The Anglican Episcopal
Church and the Diocese of the Great Lakes formed the North American Anglican
Conference for mutual assistance between Evangelical Anglican churches. A
suffragan bishop was consecrated for the Anglican Episcopal Church in late 2008
by its presiding bishop and three bishops of the Diocese of the Great Lakes.
Another regional association facilitating increased dialogue and fellowship
opportunities is Common Cause Appalachia, to which some continuing Anglican
churches in Georgia, Kentucky, North Carolina and Tennessee belong. In 2007,
one Continuing Anglican church body, the Traditional Anglican Communion (TAC),
made a formal proposal to the Roman Catholic Church for admission into "full
corporate and sacramental union" with that church in a manner that would permit
the retention of some of its Anglican heritage. The Vatican announced, on July
5, 2008, that it was giving serious consideration to appeals received from
various Anglican groups seeking union with itself, observing that "the
situation within the Anglican Communion in general has become markedly more
complex". On October 29, 2009, the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith
announced Pope Benedict XVI's intention to create a new type of ecclesiastical
structure, called a "personal ordinariate", for groups of Anglicans entering
into full communion with the see of Rome. On November 4, 2009, Pope Benedict
signed an apostolic constitution, "Anglicanorum Coetibus". The House of Bishops
of the Anglican Church in America — the American Province of the TAC —
responded on March 3, 2010, voting unanimously to request acceptance under the
personal ordinariate provision. Other Anglican churches. The oldest independent
Anglican churches are the Free Church of England (the first congregations of
which were founded in 1844) and the Reformed Episcopal Church (founded in
1873). Other Anglican bodies not in communion with the Archbishop of Canterbury
include the Church of England in South Africa; the Anglican Orthodox Church
(another Low Church body that was founded in 1963), and the Orthodox Anglican
Communion founded by the AOC in 1967. These churches are not universally
considered to be Continuing Anglican churches because they were founded prior
to the beginning of the Continuing Anglican movement of the 1970s; however,
they relate to the Continuing churches on a number of levels and have
similarities in beliefs and practices. Churches. The following is a list of
North American church bodies commonly called "Continuing Anglican," with the
approximate number of their parishes in North America shown in parentheses.
Some also have affiliated churches in other countries.
