Homosexuality and Anglicanism Since the 1990s, the Anglican Communion has
struggled with controversy regarding homosexuality in the church. In 1998, the
13th Lambeth Conference of Anglican bishops passed a resolution stating that
homosexual acts are "incompatible with Scripture". In 2002, the Diocese of New
Westminster, in the Anglican Church of Canada, permitted the blessing of same-
sex unions. In 2003, two openly gay men in England and the United States became
candidates for bishop. In the Church of England, Jeffrey John eventually
succumbed to pressure to withdraw his name from consideration to be the Bishop
of Reading. In the Episcopal Church USA, Gene Robinson was elected and
consecrated Bishop of New Hampshire, becoming the first openly gay bishop in
the Anglican Communion. This was highly controversial and led several hundred
bishops to boycott the 2008 Lambeth Conference. As an alternative to Lambeth,
many of these bishops attended the Global Anglican Futures Conference in
Jerusalem. Many provinces, primarily from the Global South and representing
about half of the 80 million practising Anglicans worldwide, have responded to
these theological disputes by declaring a state of impaired communion with
their Western counterparts. Minority groups in Western provinces have stated
their opposition to what they consider unscriptural actions by the churches in
England, Canada, Australia, and the United States. Since 2000, some
conservative Global South provinces have appointed missionary bishops to the
United States and Canada to provide pastoral oversight to disaffected
Anglicans. This process, known as Anglican realignment, is considered by the
Episcopal Church USA and the Anglican Church of Canada to be an illegitimate
incursion into their territories; however, conservative Anglicans argued that
the incursions were necessary because of the failure of these churches to
uphold orthodox teaching with regard to human sexuality. however, it also
contained a statement which "calls on all our people to minister pastorally and
sensitively to all irrespective of sexual orientation and to condemn irrational
fear of homosexuals, violence within marriage and any trivialisation and
commercialisation of sex," and noted importantly: "We commit ourselves to
listen to the experience of homosexual persons and we wish to assure them that
they are loved by God and that all baptised, believing and faithful persons,
regardless of sexual orientation, are full members of the Body of Christ." The
Lambeth Conference is "not an executive which imposes doctrine or discipline
but it is a forum where the mind of the Communion can be expressed on matters
of controversy." Over 100 bishops, including some who voted in favour of the
resolution, immediately repudiated it and signed a letter of apology to gay and
lesbian Anglicans. Gay bishop controversy. In August 2003 the Episcopal Diocese
of New Hampshire elected an openly gay priest, Gene Robinson, as a bishop. This
came shortly after a similar controversy in England when a gay priest, Canon
Jeffrey John, was appointed to become the Suffragan Bishop of Reading.
Eventually, however, John agreed to withdraw in order to avoid division. In
2004, in the aftermath of Robinson's election as bishop, John was installed as
Dean of St Albans, the cathedral there being the site of England's first
Christian martyr. 2003 Lambeth Palace meeting. We must make clear that recent
actions in New Westminster and in the Episcopal Church (USA) do not express the
mind of our Communion as a whole, and these decisions jeopardise our
sacramental fellowship with each other. ... If his "Robinson's" consecration
proceeds, we recognise that we have reached a crucial and critical point in the
life of the Anglican Communion and we have had to conclude that the future of
the Communion itself will be put in jeopardy. ... In this case, the ministry of
this one bishop will not be recognised by most of the Anglican world, and many
provinces are likely to consider themselves to be out of Communion with the
Episcopal Church (USA). This will tear the fabric of our Communion at its
deepest level, and may lead to further division on this and further issues as
provinces have to decide in consequence whether they can remain in communion
with provinces that choose not to break communion with the Episcopal Church
(USA). ... Similar considerations apply to the situation pertaining in the
Diocese of New Westminster. We commend the report of that Conference in its
entirety to all members of the Anglican Communion, valuing especially its
emphasis on the need to listen to the experience of homosexual persons, and
[...] to assure them that they are loved by God and that all baptised,
believing and faithful persons, regardless of sexual orientation, are full
members of the Body of Christ"; and its acknowledgement of the need for ongoing
study on questions of human sexuality. ... As Primates, it is not for us to
pass judgement on the constitutional processes of another province. We
recognise the sensitive balance between provincial autonomy and the expression
of critical opinion by others on the internal actions of a province. Statements
from Rowan Williams. In 2004 the Archbishop of Canterbury, Rowan Williams wrote
a letter to Anglican churches worldwide in which he condemned comments by
bishops outside the Western world for inciting violence against gay men and
women. Any words that could make it easier for someone to attack or abuse a
homosexual person are words of which we must repent. Do not think repentance is
always something others are called to, but acknowledge the failings we all
share, sinful and struggling disciples as we are. In a 2007 speech to theology
students in Toronto, Williams argued that conservatives have failed to consider
the wider context of Romans 1:27, which states, "and the men likewise gave up
natural relations with women and were consumed with passion for one another,
men committing shameless acts with men and receiving in their own persons the
due penalty for error." Williams pointed out that although St. Paul (the author
of this epistle) and his contemporaries viewed homosexual behaviour "as
obviously immoral as idol worship or disobedience to parents", the main thrust
of this passage is that humans must not judge one another for being sinful:
Romans 2:1 says "Therefore you have no excuse, O man, whoever you are, when you
judge another: for in passing judgment upon him you condemn yourself, because
you, the judge, are doing the very same things." Williams admitted that his
analysis "does nothing to settle the exegetical questions fiercely debated at
the moment", but called upon conservatives to avoid self-righteousness rather
than "happily identifying with Paul's castigation of someone else". Subsequent
division. Bishops from two Anglican provinces, Province of Rwanda and the
Province of South East Asia, consecrated missionary bishops for the United
States in January 2000 and formally established the Anglican Mission in America
(now called the Anglican Mission in the Americas) later that year. In 2010, a
similar jurisdiction created by the Reformed Episcopal Church and former
members and congregations of the Episcopal Church in the USA was officially
launched. Four dioceses which withdrew from the Episcopal Church account for
the majority of the nearly 700 congregations affiliated with this church, the
Anglican Church in North America. These two bodies—AMiA and ACNA—reject the
creation of rites for same-sex unions as well as the ordination of openly
homosexual persons. Neither is a member of the Anglican Communion at present
(see Anglican realignment). Bishops in Uganda cut relations with the Diocese of
New Hampshire following Robinson's consecration on 2 November 2003. The Church
of Nigeria declared itself in "impaired communion" with the Episcopal Church on
2 November 2003, and nine days later announced it was planning to establish a
United States branch of its province to support Nigerian Anglicans living in
the U.S., the Convocation of Anglicans in North America. The Province of South
East Asia broke communion with the Episcopal Church on 20 November 2003, citing
Robinson's consecration as the reason for its action. Windsor Report and 2005
Primates Meeting. In 2004, the Lambeth Commission on Communion issued a report
on the issue of homosexuality in the Anglican Communion, which became known as
the Windsor Report. This report took a strong stand against homosexual
practice, recommended a moratorium on further consecrations of actively
homosexual bishops and blessings of same-sex unions, and called for all
involved in Robinson's consecration "to consider in all conscience whether they
should withdraw themselves from representative functions in the Anglican
Communion". However, it stopped short of recommending discipline against the
Episcopal Church or Anglican Church of Canada. In February 2005, the Primates
of the Anglican Communion held a regular meeting at Dromantine in Northern
Ireland at which the issue of homosexuality was heavily discussed. Of the 38
Primates, 35 attended. The Primates issued a communiqué that reiterated most
of the Windsor Report's statements, but added a new twist. The Episcopal Church
and Anglican Church of Canada were asked to voluntarily withdraw from the
Anglican Consultative Council, the main formal international entity within the
Anglican Communion until the next Lambeth Conference in 2008. Consecration of
Mary Douglas Glasspool. In December 2009 an open lesbian, Mary Douglas
Glasspool, was elected as a suffragan bishop in the Diocese of Los Angeles. Her
consecration took place on 15 May 2010. Leaders from 20 Anglican provinces,
meeting in Singapore in April 2010 declared the election and intended
consecration of Canon Mary Glasspool, a partnered lesbian in the Episcopal
Church in the United States (TEC), “demonstrated, yet again, a total
disregard for the mind of the Communion”. Differing stances. Within the
Anglican Communion there is diverse opinion over homosexuality. Church of
England. The issue erupted when Jeffrey John, a gay priest, was elected Bishop
of Reading in May 2003. Before he could take up his post there was strong
opposition from a minority of bishops and he was persuaded to not proceed with
the appointment. However, many senior bishops have voiced disappointment at his
decision to resign. Later in 2004 he was then installed as Dean of St Albans.
Further controversy erupted when churches in the Diocese of St Albans decided
that they would withhold contributions until further notice to protest this
appointment. St Peter and Paul's Church in Cranfield, near Bedford, and Holy
Trinity Church, in New Barnet, north London pledged to withhold money from
diocesan funds in protest. St Andrews Church in the Hertfordshire town of
Chorleywood has also announced that it would withhold funds until further
notice. Church of Ireland. Within the Church of Ireland there is a wide
spectrum of opinion. Conservatives expressed great concern about an alleged
blessing of the relationship of a lesbian couple in St Nicolas' Collegiate
Church, Galway in September 2002. The rector of the parish, the Reverend
Patrick Towers, told the press, "I refuse to do weddings of same gender couples
as they simply don't exist. But I am always very happy to look favourably on
anyone seeking a blessing, be it for divorced couples, animals or friendships.
It was a standard blessing, one I wrote myself, based on the Claddagh ring
theme." There was also widespread concern within the Church of Ireland at the
Bishop of Limerick's attendance at Gene Robinson's consecration. Views at
parish level reflect this with many evangelical parishes as well as those in
the more populous (in terms of Church of Ireland membership) north being
generally opposed to homosexual practice, while middle and high church
parishes, especially in the south, have openly gay parishioners as a matter of
routine. For example, at General Synod 2005, Dean Michael Burrows (now a
bishop) stated that he regularly gives Holy Communion to parishioners in long-
standing homosexual relationships. The bishops have announced a process of
listening and reflection within the church. A preliminary response to the
Windsor Report was produced by the church's standing committee in January 2005.
Most of the northern dioceses have passed motions favouring Lambeth Resolution
I.10, although a similar motion failed to receive overall endorsement in the
Diocese of Connor, covering most of County Antrim and the diocese with the most
members in the Church of Ireland. Scottish Episcopal Church. (We) had never
regarded the fact that someone was in a close relationship with a member of the
same sex as in itself constituting a bar to the exercise of an ordained
ministry...We do not have a synodical decision like the Church of England has,
which it made a number of years ago, and therefore if someone who was of a
homosexual orientation felt a sense of call to the ordained ministry then we
would begin the process of testing that vocation. We wouldn't bar him or her
simply because they were homosexual. Thinking Anglicans: Book review archives,
24 March 2005.More on Scotland. Retrieved 18 July 2007. Church of the Province
of South East Asia. Diocese of Singapore, 13 August 2003. Statement of Bishops
of the Province of the Anglican Church in South East Asia. Retrieved 22 March
2007. The Synod of the Province of the Anglican Church of South East Asia ("the
Province") unanimously rejects the purported consecration of Dr Gene Robinson
("Robinson") on 2 November 2003 by the Episcopal Church in the United States of
America ("ECUSA"), in New Hampshire, as a bishop in the Anglican Church. The
Province views the purported consecration as a flagrant disregard of the
fundamental teachings of the Bible and the long-established doctrines of the
Church. As the Rev. Gene Robinson is a practising homosexual who had divorced
his wife and has, for the last 13 years, been living with a male partner, the
Province cannot and does not recognize his consecration and ministry in the
Anglican church. In view of the ECUSA's action in proceeding with the
consecration despite the warnings and pleas of a large majority of Anglican
churches worldwide, the Province regrets that communion with the ECUSA as well
as those who voted for the consecration and those who participated in the
consecration service is now broken. This means that the Province no longer
treats those in ECUSA who carried out and supported the act of consecration as
brothers and sisters in Christ unless and until they repent of their action and
return to embrace Biblical truths. At the same time, the Province remains in
fellowship with the faithful believers within ECUSA who rightly oppose and
reject the erroneous actions of their house. This decision was made unanimously
at an extraordinary meeting of the Synod held in Kudat, Sabah, Malaysia, on 20
November 2003. Hong Kong Sheng Kung Hui (Hong Kong Anglican Church). The fourth
General Synod of the Hong Kong Sheng Kung Hui, at its meeting on 15 October
2007, resolved that the Anglican Church in Hong Kong and Macau supports the
recommendations contained in the Windsor Report so as to safeguard the unity of
the Anglican Communion. Anglican Church in Aotearoa, New Zealand and Polynesia.
There is no officially stated policy, although there is majority agreement with
the Windsor Report and Lambeth Conference. The Māori and Pasifika tikanga are
committed to this, and see homosexuality as a sin. There is no official support
for the ordination of actively gay or lesbian clergy, although there can be
local support. Some Pākehā parishes are more open to gay and lesbian issues,
including ordination and blessing of unions. The Dunedin and Auckland dioceses
are notable for other such examples, including the ordination of a non-celibate
gay priest and the blessings of same-sex relationships performed by priests in
an official capacity. New Zealand writer Liz Lightfoot has documented the
experiences of individuals coming out in the Anglican Church as a contribution
to the 'listening process' in the Anglican Church. Anglican Church of
Australia. At its 2004 General Synod held in Perth, the Anglican Church of
Australia passed four resolutions on human sexuality. The key resolutions
stated that, "Recognising that this is a matter of ongoing debate and
conversation in this church and that we all have an obligation to listen to
each other with respect, this General Synod does not condone the liturgical
blessing of same sex relationships" and "this General Synod does not condone
the ordination of people in open committed same sex relationships." Patrick
Goodenough, CNSNews.com, 30 June 2003, Anglican leaders in Australia at odds
over homosexuality issue. Retrieved 22 March 2007. St Andrew's Church in
Subiaco, Perth, Western Australia was the first Anglican church in Australia to
publicly welcome gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgender people. Its Sunday
evening services are specifically for GLBT people but heterosexual people are
also welcome. Anglican Province of the Southern Cone of America. Archbishop
Gregory Venables has also been strongly critical of homosexuality. Bishops in
his province criticized the Windsor Report for failing to call liberal churches
to repentance. The province has declared itself in "impaired communion" with
ECUSA, but continues to maintain full communion with opponents of the Robinson
consecration. Venables has authorized dioceses within his province to provide
episcopal oversight to United States churches that have left ECUSA. In December
2007, the convention of the Episcopal Diocese of San Joaquin, an ECUSA diocese
in central California voted to leave ECUSA and joined the Province of the
Southern Cone as the Anglican Diocese of San Joaquin. A minority of the
Episcopal Diocese remained in ECUSA. In October 2008, a majority of the
convention of the Episcopal Diocese of Pittsburgh voted to leave ECUSA and
affiliate with the Southern Cone, resulting in one body affiliated with the
Southern Cone and a second body remaining within ECUSA. The following month,
the conventions of two more US dioceses—the Diocese of Quincy in Illinois and
the Diocese of Fort Worth in Texas—voted to leave ECUSA and affiliate with
the Southern Cone. All were subsequently absorbed into the new Anglican Church
in North America. Episcopal Anglican Church of Brazil. The Episcopal Anglican
Church of Brazil is characterized by its progressive theological views on
homosexuality. After the 1998 Lambeth Conference, the Anglican Church in Brazil
has decided to promote two national forums on Human Sexuality, both held in Rio
de Janeiro. Its decisions guide the actual policy on this subject. According to
the final document, the consensus of the Brazilian Church is that human
sexuality is a gift from God, and it should be experienced in peace, freedom,
love and respect. It is understood that the Church should respect the privacy
of its members and clergy. So, any kind of public exposure of someone's sexual
orientation (as a pre-requisite to be a member or take part of any ministry)
violates this privacy. Because of that progressive position, the Bishop of the
Diocese of Recife (the only one that is still strongly Evangelical), Robinson
Cavalcanti, declared Recife to be independent of the Church of Brazil, an
action that resulted in his being deposed as a bishop by the Ecclesiastical
Tribunal. Among his main reasons, he pointed that the Brazilian Church was
sympathetic to the ordination of Gene Robinson's and dangerously coping with
the allowing of homosexuals being part of its clergy. This split separated the
Diocese of Recife in two parts: one of them, loyal to Bishop Orlando Santos de
Oliveira, primate of the Episcopal Anglican Church of Brazil, and currently
coordinated by Bishop Sebastião Gameleira, and the other, under Cavalcanti's
leadership, tied to the Anglican Church of the Southern Cone. Anglican Church
of Canada. Homosexuality and the Anglican Church of Canada exist within a
Canadian context. In the secular context, Canadian law has undergone a profound
change in regards to homosexuality. The last homosexual to be 'sent to prison
indefinitely as a "dangerous sex offender" was in 1967. In 1969, the Canadian
parliament passed amendments into the Criminal Code decriminalizing
homosexuality in Canada. On 20 July 1971, the last homosexual criminally
convicted on his sexual orientation was released from prison. A series of
judicial rulings beginning in 2003 legalized same-sex marriage in the majority
of Canada's provinces, and on 20 July 2005, the Canadian government extended
the new definition nationwide by statute. Currently ten Anglican dioceses
(Edmonton, Nova Scotia and Prince Edward Island, Rupert’s Land, Ottawa,
Vancouver-based New Westminster, Toronto, London-based Huron, Hamilton-based
Niagara, Montreal and Victoria-based British Columbia) allow blessings on same-
sex couples. The Anglican Parishes of the Central Interior (formerly the
Diocese of Cariboo) also permit such rites. On September 30, 2012, the Anglican
bishop of Saskatoon ordained as deacon an individual who is civilly married to
a person of the same sex. Episcopal Church in the United States of America. In
2003, ECUSA became the first Anglican province to ordain an openly gay priest
in a same-sex relationship as a bishop; however, the church's stance on gay
issues has been debated for decades. In 1976, ECUSA's General Convention passed
a resolution stating: "It is the sense of this General Convention that
homosexual persons are children of God who have a full and equal claim with all
other persons upon the love acceptance, and pastoral concern and care of the
Church." Jill Lawless, Associated Press, 21 June 2005. U.S. Episcopals Defend
Openly Gay Bishop. Accessed 17 July 2007. In July 2009, the General Convention
voted to allow bishops to bless same-sex unions, and also called for bishops to
"collect and develop theological and liturgical resources" for possibly
creating an official rite for such ceremonies at the 2012 General Convention.
In January 2010, the Reverend Mally Lloyd and the Reverend Katherine Ragsdale,
two high-level Episcopal priests, married in a ceremony at the Cathedral Church
of St. Paul in Boston, Massachusetts. Church in the Province of the West
Indies. Archbishop Gomez has said Robinson's confirmation is incompatible with
scripture. Church of the Province of Central Africa. Archbishop Malango was
quoted as stating Gene Robinson's election "brought darkness, disappointment,
sadness and grief" to his Church. Anglican Church of Kenya. Archbishop Nzimbi
has strongly spoken against admitting non-celibate homosexuals into the Church.
Church of Nigeria. The church remains sharply opposed to homosexuality, calling
it "a perversion of human dignity." In March 2009, the church declared itself
in full communion with the Anglican Church in North America, a denomination
formed by American and Canadian Anglicans who opposed their national churches'
actions with regard to homosexuality. Anglican Church of Southern Africa. The
previous Archbishop, Desmond Tutu, stated: "The Jesus I worship is not likely
to collaborate with those who vilify and persecute an already oppressed
minority [...]. I could not myself keep quiet whilst people were being
penalized for something about which they could do nothing, their sexuality. For
it is so improbable that any sane, normal person would deliberately choose a
lifestyle exposing him or her to so much vilification, opprobrium and physical
abuse, even death. To discriminate against our sisters and brothers who are
lesbian or gay on grounds of their sexual orientation for me is as totally
unacceptable and unjust as Apartheid ever was." Current Archbishop Njongonkulu
Ndungane has criticised other African Churches against homosexuality and said
that the church's attention should be focussed on other concerns such as AIDS
and poverty. Nevertheless, Archbishop Njongonkulu Ndungane expressed publicly
his disapproval of same-sex marriage, when it was legalized in South Africa:
"As far as we are concerned as a church, our understanding of marriage is
between a man and a woman. And as a church, and the Anglican Church in
particular, we have said no to same-sex unions." Episcopal Church of the Sudan.
The Primate of the Episcopal Church of the Sudan, Archbishop Daniel Deng Bul,
on 22 July at a public press conference during the 2008 Lambeth Conference
called for Robinson to resign, and for all those who had participated in his
consecration to confess their sin to the conference. Anglican Church of
Tanzania. In November 2003, responding to the consecration of Bishop Gene
Robinson, Archbishop Donald Mtetemela said homosexuality is against biblical
teaching: "The Anglican Church of Tanzania believes that homosexuality is
contrary to the teaching of the Word of God. It is a sin." Mtetemela declared
that the church of Tanzania was no longer in communion with ECUSA bishops who
participated in the consecration of Gene Robinson, and those who permit the
blessing of same-sex unions. Church of the Province of Uganda. The Ugandan
church has cut ties with its North American counterparts over homosexuality. It
has declared itself in full communion with the Anglican Church in North
America. External links. Ontario Consultants on Religious Tolerance
