Animism Animism (from Latin "anima" "soul, life") is the religious belief that
natural phenomena, including animals, plants, and sometimes even inanimate
natural objects, possess a spiritual essence. Specifically, animism is used in
the anthropology of religion as a term for the religion of indigenous tribal
peoples, especially prior to the development of civilization and organized
religions. Although each tribe is unique in its specific mythologies and
rituals, the term animism is often used to describe the most common thread of
native tribespeoples' spiritual or supernatural perspectives. Some non-tribal
people also consider themselves animists (such as author Daniel Quinn) and, of
course, not all peoples who describe themselves as a tribe would describe
themselves as animist. Even most animist native tribal people do not have a
word in their languages that corresponds to "animism"; it is a purely
anthropological term rather than one self-designated by tribespeople
themselves. Animism encompasses the beliefs that there is no separation between
the spiritual and physical (or material) world, and souls or spirits exist, not
only in humans, but also in all other animals, plants, rocks, geographic
features such as mountains or rivers, or other entities of the natural
environment. Animism may further attribute souls to abstract concepts such as
words, true names, or metaphors in mythology. Examples of Animism can be found
in forms of Shinto, Serer, Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism, Pantheism, Paganism,
and Neopaganism. Throughout European history, philosophers such as Aristotle
and Thomas Aquinas, among others, contemplated the possibility that souls exist
in animals, plants, and people; however, the currently accepted definition of
animism was only developed in the 19th century by Sir Edward Tylor, who created
it as "one of anthropology's earliest concepts, if not the first". According to
the anthropologist Tim Ingold, animism shares similarities to totemism but
differs in its focus on individual spirit beings which help to perpetuate life,
whereas totemism more typically holds that there is a primary source, such as
the land itself or the ancestors, who provide the basis to life. Certain
indigenous religious groups such as the Australian Aborigines are more
typically totemic, whereas others like the Inuit are more typically animistic
in their worldview. Etymology. The term "Animism" appears to have been first
developed as "animismus" by German scientist Georg Ernst Stahl, circa 1720, to
refer to the "doctrine that animal life is produced by an immaterial soul." The
actual English language form of "animism", however, can only be attested to
1819. The term was taken and redefined by the anthropologist Sir Edward Tylor
in his 1871 book "Primitive Culture", in which he defined it as "the general
doctrine of souls and other spiritual beings in general." According to Tylor,
animism often includes "an idea of pervading life and will in nature"; i.e., a
belief that natural objects other than humans have souls. As a self-described
"confirmed scientific rationalist", Tylor believed that this view was
"childish" and typical of "cognitive underdevelopment", and that it was
therefore common in "primitive" peoples such as those living in hunter gatherer
societies. Tylor's definition of animism has since largely been followed by
anthropologists, such as Émile Durkheim, Claude Lévi-Strauss and Tim Ingold.
However, some anthropologists, such as Nurit Bird-David, have criticised the
Tylorian concept of animism, believing it to be outdated. Motivation. Animism
in the widest sense, i.e., thinking of objects as animate, and treating them as
if they were animate, is near-universal. Jean Piaget applied the term in child
psychology in reference to an implicit understanding of the world in a child's
mind which assumes that all events are the product of intention or
consciousness. Piaget explains this with a cognitive inability to distinguish
the external world from one's internal world. Developmental psychology has
since established that the distinction of animate vs. inanimate things is an
abstraction acquired by learning. The justification for attributing life to
objects was stated by David Hume in his "Natural History of Religion" (Section
III): "There is a universal tendency among mankind to conceive all beings like
themselves, and to transfer to every object those qualities with which they are
familiarly acquainted, and of which they are intimately conscious." Lists of
phenomena, from the contemplation of which "the savage" was led to believe in
animism, have been given by Sir E. B. Tylor, Herbert Spencer, Andrew Lang, and
others; a controversy arose between the former as to the priority of their
respective lists. Among these phenomena are trance states, dreams, and
hallucinations. Animism and religion. Animism is a belief held in many
religions around the world, and is not, as some have purported, a type of
religion in itself. It is a belief, such as shamanism, polytheism or
monotheism, that is found in several religions. In modern usage, the term is
sometimes used improperly as a catch-all classification of "other world
religions" alongside major organized religions. Tylor's theory. Some theories
have been put forward that the anthropocentric belief in animism among early
humans was the basis for the later evolution of religions. In one such theory,
put forward by Sir E. B. Tylor, early humans initially, through mere
observation, recognized what might be called a soul, life-force, spirit, breath
or animus within themselves; that which was present in the body in life and
absent in death. These early humans equated this soul with figures which would
appear in dreams and visions. These early human cultures later interpreted
these spirits to be present in animals, the living plant world, and even in
natural objects in a form of animism. Eventually, these early humans grew to
believe that the spirits were invested and interested in human life, and
performed rituals to propitiate them. These rituals and beliefs eventually
evolved over time into the vast array of “developed” religions. According
to Tylor, the more scientifically advanced the society, the less that society
believed in Animism; however, any remnant ideologies of souls or spirits, to
Tylor, represented “survivals” of the original animism of early humanity.
World view. In many animistic world views found in hunter-gatherer cultures,
the human being is often regarded as on a roughly equal footing with other
animals, plants, and natural forces. Therefore, it is morally imperative to
treat these agents with respect. In this world view, humans are considered a
part of nature, rather than superior to, or separate from it. Death. It is not
surprising to find that many peoples respect and even worship animals (see
"totem" or "animal worship"), often regarding them as relatives. It is clear
that widespread respect was paid to animals as the abode of dead ancestors, and
much of the cults to dangerous animals is traceable to this principle; though
there is no need to attribute an animistic origin to it. Mythology. A large
part of mythology is based upon a belief in souls and spirits — that is, upon
animism in its more general sense. Urarina myths that portray plants, inanimate
objects, and non-human animals as personal beings are examples of animism in
its more restrictive sense. Distinction from Pantheism. Animism is not the same
as Pantheism, although the two are sometimes confused. Some faiths and
religions are even both pantheistic and animistic. One of the main differences
is that while animists believe everything to be spiritual in nature, they do
not necessarily see the spiritual nature of everything in existence as being
united (monism), the way pantheists do. As a result, animism puts more emphasis
on the uniqueness of each individual soul. In Pantheism, everything shares the
same spiritual essence, rather than having distinct spirits and/or souls.
Science and animism. Some early scientists such as Georg Ernst Stahl (1659-
1734) and Francisque Bouillier (1813–1899) had supported a form of animism
which life and mind, the directive principle in evolution and growth, holding
that all cannot be traced back to chemical and mechanical processes, but that
there is a directive force which guides energy without altering its amount. An
entirely different class of ideas, also termed animistic, is the belief in the
world soul anima mundi, held by philosophers such as Schelling and others. In
the early 20th century William McDougall defended a form of animism in his book
"Body and Mind: A History and Defence of Animism" (1911). The terms animism and
panpsychism have become related in recent years. The biologist Rupert Sheldrake
has supported a form of animism which David Skrbina calls "a unique form of
panpsychism". Sheldrake in his book "The Rebirth of Nature: New Science and the
Revival of Animism" (1991) has claimed that Morphic fields "animate organisms
at all levels of complexity, from galaxies to giraffes, and from ants to
atoms". In his book "The Science Delusion" (2012) he wrote that the philosophy
of the organism (organicism) has updated the ideas of animism as it treats all
of nature as alive.
