Anointing To anoint is to pour or smear with perfumed oil, milk, water, melted
butter or other substances, a process employed ritually by many religions.
People and things are anointed to symbolize the introduction of a sacramental
or divine influence, a holy emanation, spirit, power or God. It can also be
seen as a spiritual mode of ridding persons and things of dangerous influences,
as of demons (Persian "drug", Greek κηρες "Keres", Armenian "dev")
believed to be or to cause disease. Unction is another term for anointing. The
oil may be called "chrism". The word is known in English since c. 1303,
deriving from Old French "enoint" "smeared on", pp. of "enoindre" "smear on",
itself from Latin "inunguere", from "in-" "on" + "unguere" "to smear."
Originally it only referred to grease or oil smeared on for medicinal purposes;
its use in the Coverdale Bible in reference to Christ (cf. The Lord's Anointed,
see Chrism) has spiritualized the sense of it, a sense expanded and expounded
upon by St Paul's writings in his "Epistles". The title Christ is derived from
the Greek term Χριστός (Khristós) meaning "the anointed one"; covered
in oil, anointed, itself from the above mentioned word Keres. Eastern
tradition. A complex of late Vedic and Buddhist rituals involved the anointing
of government officials, worshipers, or statues and images of deities, in a
rite called Abhisheka. Abhishekionians had believed that the virtues of one
killed could be transferred to survivors if the latter rubbed themselves with
his caul-fat. Other rites are associated with eating a victim whose virtues are
coveted. So the Arabs of East Africa anoint themselves with lion's fat in order
to gain courage and inspire fear in other animals. Human fat is likewise a
powerful charm. W. Robertson Smith points out, after the blood, fat was
peculiarly the vehicle and seat of life. This is why fat of a victim was
smeared on a sacred stone, not only in homage but in consecration. The
influence of the deity, communicated to the victim, passed with the unguent
into the stone. Thus such divinity could, by anointing, be transferred into men
as well. In several temple reliefs in Ancient Egypt the Pharaoh is depicted
being anointed by Horus (sun god and "father" of Pharaoh) and Thoth (god of
wisdom), the oil of which is symbolically depicted as a stream of ankhs
(symbols of life). Also, especially from the New Kingdom onward, anointing is
often depicted in intimate scenes between husband and wife, where the wife is
shown anointing her spouse, as a sign of affection. The most famous example of
this is on the throne of Tutankhamun. Most famously in Pharaonic Egypt—along
with many other ancient cultures—preparation for burial included anointing
human remains with sweet-smelling oils in devotion as well with the practical
intent of obscuring the stench of death. In sealing a coffin a ritual, final
anointing of the mummy was observed. In the Hindu belief systems anointment is
freely practiced. To mark particular devotions, as a "consecration" to
particular beliefs or as a ritualized blessing used especially to invoke
auspicious beginnings, every stage of life features some gesture of anointment,
from rituals accompanying birthing, to religious or educational initiations,
royal enthronements to final rites. Even every new building and household is
anointed, as well as some ritual instruments. Likewise, the installation and
care of any deity's form (frequently appearing as a statue) can involve daily
ritual anointing. In every case the direction of the smearing is significant.
Persons are anointed from head to foot, downwards, as in India the ground is
considered less clean than the uplifted head. Anointing is also used to aid
persons within negative cycles—illnesses, demonic possession or streaks of
"bad luck". Though our western root word indicates a greasing of the head or
skin with what is generally used as food, we understand "anointing" today to
involve broader beliefs and practices, from ritual to talismanic. Yogurt, milk
or butter produced by the Hindu's revered cow forms the base of much ritual
anointing. Hindu ointments also include ashes, clay, wood (particularly sandal-
wood) powders, herbal pastes, as well as endless waters, from sacred rivers or
scented with saffron, tumeric, or flower-waters such as jasmine, gardenia,
rose-water or infusions. More exotic are rinse-water used in bathing a deity
and ink-water which has passed over the fresh calligraphy of appropriate
scriptural verses—thus tinged with ink. Ayurvedic medicine practices include
extensive herbal, mineral and talismanic preparations compounded and applied
according to astrologic and Vedic prescription which tend to further expand
monotheistic Western definitions of "anointment". Buddhist practices of
anointing are largely derived from Indian practices but tend to be much less
free and noticeably less elaborate. The range of buddhist "anointments"
typically include sprinkling assembled practitioners with water and the
devotions shown to deities, images or ritual articles by marking statues of
Buddhas, Bodhisatvvas and divinities with butter (including yak butter) and
various waters including flower-waters, "saffron-waters" stained yellow using
saffron or turmeric. Ointments including astrological and talismanic elements
such as ink-water are also employed in Buddhist herbal medicine practice.
Hebrew Bible. Among the Hebrews, the act of anointing with the Holy anointing
oil was significant in consecration to a holy or sacred use: hence the
anointing of the high priest (; ) and of the sacred vessels (). Later, Kings
and Prophets were given the right to partake in this sacrament as well.
Medicinal. Olive oil was used also for medicinal purposes. It was applied to
the sick, and also to wounds to soften them (). The expression, "anoint the
shield" (), refers to the custom of rubbing oil on the leather of the shield so
as to make it supple and fit for use in war. Hospitality. It was the custom of
the Jews in like manner to anoint themselves with oil, as a means of refreshing
or invigorating their bodies (; , etc.). The Hellenes had similar customs. This
custom is continued among the Arabs to the present day. Since about 3,000 years
ago, Persian Zoroastrians honor their guests with rose extract out of a
beautifully designed glass goose-necked bottle, while holding mirror in front
of their guest's face. The guest holds his/her palm, collects the rose-water
and then spreads the perfumed liquid onto face and sometimes on his/her head.
The words of "Rooj kori aka" (have a nice day) might be said as well. Priests
and kings. The High Priest and the king are each sometimes called "the
anointed" (, ; ; ). Prophets were also anointed with the Holy anointing oil (;
; ). Christian Gospels. The Messiah, The Christ. Distinct from the Jewish view,
Christians believe the "anointed" one referred to in various biblical verses
such as , and is the promised "Christian Messiah". According to the Jewish
Bible, whenever someone was anointed with the specific Holy anointing oil
formula and ceremony described in , the Spirit of God came upon this person, to
qualify him or her for a God-given task. According to the New Testament, Jesus
of Nazareth is this Anointed One, the "Messiah" (; ; ; , ). The kings of the
Old Testament were anointed with oil and only afterwards did they receive Power
through the Holy Spirit that came upon them. Jesus on the other hand, was
anointed because the Holy Spirit had come upon Him (Acts 10:38). Jesus was
anointed with Power itself. God was pleased that Jesus should be His Son
(Matthew 3:16) and Jesus was the anointed of God. So we can differentiate
between the kind of power that the kings of Israel and the kind of Power that
Jesus (The King of Israel) had – the difference is that the kings were
anointed of a human high priest but The King was anointed of God Himself. The
Gospels also state that he was physically "anointed" by an anonymous woman who
is interpreted by some as Mary Magdalene; however, this anointing was not in
the fashion described in Exodus, but rather an anointing done out of affection,
which Jesus stated was to prepare him for his burial. The word Christ which is
now used as though it were a surname was more accurately a title which was
equivalent to the Hebrew HaMashiach meaning "the anointed one.” Hospitality.
Anointing was also an act of hospitality, as Jesus was anointed in the house of
the Pharisee (). Medicinal. The New Testament records that oil was applied to
the sick, and also to wounds ; ). The bodies of the dead were sometimes
anointed (; ). Christian monarchy. In Christian Europe, the Carolingian
monarchy was the first to anoint the king in 7th century AD at a coronation
ceremony that was designed to epitomize the Catholic Church's conferring a
religious sanction of the monarch's divine right to rule. Nevertheless, a
number of Merovingian, Carolingian and Ottonian kings and emperors have avoided
coronation and anointing. English and Scottish monarchs in common with the
French included anointing in the coronation rituals ("sacre" in French). The
Sovereign of the United Kingdom is the last anointed monarch. For the
coronation of King Charles I in 1626 the holy oil was made of a concoction of
orange, jasmine, distilled roses, distilled cinnamon, oil of ben, extract of
bensoint, ambergris, musk and civet. Not all the water in the rough rude sea
Can wash the balm off an anointed king. However this does not symbolize any
subordination to the religious authority, hence it is not usually performed in
Catholic monarchies by the pope but usually reserved for the (arch)bishop of a
major see (sometimes the site of the whole coronation) in the nation, as is
sometime the very act of crowning. Hence its utensils can be part of the
regalia, such as in the French kingdom an ampulla for the oil and a spoon to
apply it with; in the Swedish and Norwegian kingdoms, an anointing horn (a form
fitting the Biblical as well as the Viking tradition) is the traditional
vessel. The French Kings adopted the fleur-de-lis as a baptismal symbol of
purity on the conversion of the Frankish King Clovis I to the Christian
religion in 493. To further enhance its mystique, a legend eventually sprang up
that a vial of oil—the Holy Ampulla--descended from Heaven to anoint and
sanctify Clovis as King. The thus "anointed" Kings of France later maintained
that their authority was directly from God, without the mediation of either the
Emperor or the Pope. Legends claim that even the lily itself appeared at the
baptismal ceremony as a gift of blessing in an apparition of the blessed Virgin
Mary. In the Eastern Orthodox Church, the Anointing of an Orthodox Sovereign is
considered a Sacred Mystery (Sacrament). The act was believed to bestow upon
the ruler the empowerment, through the grace of the Holy Spirit, to discharge
his God-appointed duties, and his ministry in defending the Orthodox Christian
faith. The same "Myron" which is used in Chrismation is used for the Anointing
of the Monarch. In the Russian Orthodox Church, during the Coronation of the
Tsar, the Anointing took place just before the receipt of Holy Communion,
toward the end of the service. The Sovereign and his Consort were escorted to
the Holy Doors (Iconostasis) of the Cathedral, and were there anointed by the
Metropolitan. After the Anointing, the Tsar alone was taken through the Holy
Doors (an action normally reserved only for bishops or priests) and received
Holy Communion at a small table set next to the Holy Table, or altar. Christian
sacramental usage. Early Gnostic usage. Many early apocryphal and Gnostic texts
indicate that anointing was part of the baptismal process, and in fact that the
baptism with water (Johns baptism) is incomplete. The Gospel of Philip states;
"The Chrism is superior to baptism, for it is from the word "Chrism" that we
have been called "Christians", certainly not because of the word "baptism." And
it from the "Chrism" that the "Christ" has his name. For the Father anointed
the Son, and the Son anointed the apostles, and the apostles anointed us. He
who has been anointed possesses everything. He possesses the Resurrection, the
Light, the Cross, the Holy Spirit. The Father gave him this in the bridal
chamber, he merely accepted the gift. The Father was in the Son and the Son in
the Father. This is the Kingdom of Heaven." In the Acts of Thomas the anointing
is in fact the beginning of the baptismal process and essential to becoming a
"Christian." It claims that God knows his own children by his seal, and that we
shall receive the seal by the oil. Many such baptisms/Chrismations are
described in detail throughout the text. Roman Catholic usage. The Roman
Catholic Church blesses three types of holy oils for anointing: "Oil of the
Catechumens" (traditionally abbreviated "OS" for oleum sanctum), "Oil of the
Infirm" ("OI"), and "Sacred Chrism" ("SC"). The first two are said to be
"blessed", while chrism is "consecrated". The Oil of Catechumens is used to
anoint the catechumens (adults preparing for reception into the church) just
before receiving the Sacrament of Baptism. Anointing is part of the Sacrament
of Anointing of the Sick, and the Oil of the Infirm is used for this. The
Sacred Chrism is used in the Sacraments of Baptism, Confirmation, and Holy
Orders. Any bishop may consecrate the holy oils, and normally do so every Holy
Thursday at a special "Chrism Mass". Orthodox usage. In the Eastern Orthodox
and Eastern Catholic churches, Confirmation is known as "Chrismation—"from
the Greek word "chrisma" (χρίσμα), meaning the medium and act of
anointing. The Eastern Churches perform the Mystery of Chrismation immediately
after the Mystery of Baptism during the same ceremony, even in the case of
infant baptism, using the sacred "myron" (chrism) which they believe contains a
remnant of oil blessed by the Twelve Apostles. This myron may be added to as
needed, usually at a ceremony held on Holy Thursday at one of the Patriarchal
Cathedrals. The new myron contains olive oil, myrrh, and numerous spices and
perfumes. This myron is normally kept on the Holy Table (altar) or on the Table
of Oblation. During Chrismation, the newly illuminate (i.e., newly baptized)
person is anointed by making the sign of the cross with the myron on the
forehead, eyes, nostrils, lips, both ears, breast, hands and feet. The priest
uses a special brush for this purpose. The oil that is used to anoint the
catechumens before baptism is simple olive oil which is blessed by the priest
immediately before he pours it into the baptismal font. Then, using his
fingers, he takes some of the blessed oil floating on the surface of the
baptismal water and anoints the catechumen on the forehead, breast, shoulders,
ears, hands and feet. He then immediately baptizes the catechumen with
threefold immersion in the name of the Trinity. Anointing of the sick is called
the "Sacred Mystery of Unction". Although practices will vary, most of the
Orthodox use Unction not only for physical ailments, but for spiritual ailments
as well, and the faithful may request Unction any number of times at will. In
some churches, it is normal for all of the faithful to receive Unction during a
service on Holy Wednesday of Holy Week. The holy oil used at Unction is not
stored in the church like the "myron", but consecrated anew for each individual
service. When an Orthodox Christian dies, if he has received the Mystery of
Unction, and some of the consecrated oil remains, it is poured over his body
just before burial. It is also common to bless using oils which have been
blessed either with a simple blessing by a priest (or even a venerated
monastic), or by contact with some sacred object, such as relics of a saint, or
which has been taken from an oil lamp burning in front of a wonderworking icon
or some other shrine. Consecration of Oil in the Orthodox Church. Among Eastern
Orthodox Churches, the "Myron" (Μύρον, Holy Oil) for Chrismation (and,
prior to the 20th century, for the Anointing of monarchs) is prepared
periodically by the Orthodox Patriarchates (such as the Church of
Constantinople -- see an announcement and process for preparation, with some
sample dates of preparation) and by the various heads of autocephalous churches
(such as the Orthodox Church in America -- see photos of the process). The
Consecration of the Oil, when performed, occurs during Holy Week, and
thereafter the Oil is distributed to the Orthodox parishes and monasteries
under the authority of that ecclesiastical jurisdiction. At the Patriarchate of
Constantinople, the process is under the care of the "Archontes Myrepsoi", lay
officials of the Patriarchate. Various members of the clergy may also
participate in the preparation, but the Consecration itself is always performed
by the Patriarch or a bishop deputed by him for that purpose. Pentecostal
churches. As in the early Christian church, anointing with oil is used in
Pentecostal churches for healing the sick and also for consecration or
ordination of pastors and elders. The NIV translates this passage as, "the yoke
will be broken because you have grown so fat." The context of this passage
refers to the yoke of Sennacherib, and how his oppressive nature is overturned
by that of Hezekiah who was said to be as mild as oil. The Church of Jesus
Christ of Latter-day Saints. In The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
Saints, Melchizedek Priesthood holders may anoint the head of an individual who
is ill and has requested a blessing. Pure olive oil must be used, and it must
have been consecrated earlier in a short ordinance that any Melchizedek
Priesthood holder may perform. In addition to the reference, the Doctrine and
Covenants contains numerous references to the anointing and healing of the sick
by those with authority to do so. Church founder Joseph Smith instituted
anointing for other purposes on 21 January 1836 as a sign of sanctification and
consecration preparatory to the endowment rites practiced in the Kirtland
Temple. Biblical metaphor. Anointing is not only used by Pentecostal churches
but by many other denominations to describe the work of the Holy Spirit among
believers. In so doing they only recognize the spiritual anointing that the
Bible speaks of. "But you have an anointing from the Holy One" . "But the
anointing, which you have received from Him abides in you"
