Anointing of the Sick Anointing of the Sick, known also by other names, is
distinguished from other forms of religious anointing or "unction" (an older
term with the same meaning) in that it is intended, as its name indicates, for
the benefit of a sick person. Other religious anointings occur in relation to
other sacraments, in particular baptism, confirmation and ordination, and also
in the coronation of a monarch. Names. Since 1972, the Roman Catholic Church
uses the name "Anointing of the Sick" both in the English translations issued
by the Holy See of its official documents in Latin and in the English official
documents of Episcopal conferences. It does not, of course, forbid the use of
other names, for example the more archaic term "Unction of the Sick" or the
term "Extreme Unction". Cardinal Walter Kasper used the latter term in his
intervention at the 2005 Assembly of the Synod of Bishops. However, the Church
declared that "'Extreme unction' ... may also "and more fittingly" be called
'anointing of the sick'" (emphasis added), and has itself adopted the latter
term, while not outlawing the former. This is to emphasize that the sacrament
is available, and recommended, to all those suffering from any serious illness,
and to dispel the common misconception that it is exclusively for those at or
very near the point of death. Extreme Unction was the usual name for the
sacrament in the West from the late twelfth century until 1972, and was thus
used at the Council of Trent and in the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia. Peter
Lombard (died 1160) is the first writer known to have used the term, which did
not become the usual name in the West till towards the end of the twelfth
century, and never became current in the East. The word "extreme" (final)
indicated either that it was the last of the sacramental unctions (after the
anointings at Baptism, Confirmation and, if received, Holy Orders) or because
at that time it was normally administered only when a patient was "in
extremis". Other names used in the West include the unction or blessing of
consecrated oil, the unction of God, and the office of the unction. Among some
Protestant bodies, who do not consider it a sacrament, but instead as a
practice suggested rather than commanded by Scripture, it is called anointing
with oil. In the Greek Church the sacrament is called Euchelaion (Greek
Εὐχέλαιον, from εὐχή, "prayer", and ἔλαιον, "oil"). Other
names are also used, such as ἅγιον ἔλαιον (holy oil),
ἡγιασμένον ἔλαιον (consecrated oil), and χρῖσις or
χρῖσμα (anointing). The Community of Christ uses the term administration
to the sick. The term "last rites" refers to administration to a dying person
not only of this sacrament but also of Penance and Holy Communion, the last of
which, when administered in such circumstances, is known as "Viaticum", a word
whose original meaning in Latin was "provision for the journey". The normal
order of administration is: first Penance (if the dying person is physically
unable to confess, absolution, conditional on the existence of contrition, is
given); next, Anointing; finally, Viaticum (if the person can receive it).
Biblical texts. The chief Biblical text concerning the rite is : "Is any among
you sick? Let him call for the elders of the church, and let them pray over
him, anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord; and the prayer of faith
will save the sick man, and the Lord will raise him up; and if he has committed
sins, he will be forgiven." (RSV) , and are also quoted in this regard.
Sacramental beliefs. The Roman Catholic, Eastern Orthodox and Coptic and Old
Catholic Churches consider this anointing to be a sacrament. Other Christians
too, in particular Anglicans, Lutherans and some Protestant and other Christian
communities use a rite of anointing the sick, without necessarily classifying
it as a sacrament. In the Churches mentioned here by name, the oil used (called
"oil of the sick" in both West and East) is blessed specifically for this
purpose. Roman Catholic Church. An extensive account of the teaching of the
Catholic Church on Anointing of the Sick is given in "Catechism of the Catholic
Church", 1499–1532. Anointing of the Sick is one of the seven Sacraments
recognized by the Catholic Church, and is associated with not only bodily
healing but also forgiveness of sins. Only ordained priests can administer it,
and "any priest may carry the holy oil with him, so that in a case of necessity
he can administer the sacrament of anointing of the sick." Sacramental graces.
The Catholic Church sees the effects of the sacrament as follows. As the
sacrament of Marriage gives grace for the married state, the sacrament of
Anointing of the Sick gives grace for the state into which people enter through
sickness. Through the sacrament a gift of the Holy Spirit is given, that renews
confidence and faith in God and strengthens against temptations to
discouragement, despair and anguish at the thought of death and the struggle of
death; it prevents from losing Christian hope in God's justice, truth and
salvation. Sacramental oil. The duly blessed oil used in the sacrament is, as
laid down in the Apostolic Constitution Sacram unctionem infirmorum, pressed
from olives or from other plants. It is blessed by the bishop of the diocese at
the Chrism Mass he celebrates on Holy Thursday or on a day close to it. If oil
blessed by the bishop is not available, the priest administering the sacrament
may bless the oil, but only within the framework of the celebration. Current
liturgical form (1972). The Roman Rite Anointing of the Sick, as revised in
1972, puts greater stress than in the immediately preceding centuries on the
sacrament's aspect of healing, and points to the place sickness holds in the
normal life of Christians and its part in the redemptive work of the Church.
Canon law permits its administration to any Catholic who has reached the age of
reason and is beginning to be put in danger by illness or old age, unless the
person in question obstinately persists in a manifestly grave sin. "If there is
any doubt as to whether the sick person has reached the use of reason, or is
dangerously ill, or is dead, this sacrament is to be administered". There is an
obligation to administer it to the sick who, when they were in possession of
their faculties, at least implicitly asked for it. A new illness or a renewal
or worsening of the first illness enables a person to receive the sacrament a
further time. The sacrament can be administered within Mass, which is the
preferred manner. If the celebration takes place outside of Mass, it can be
held in the home, in a hospital or institution, or in church. The rite begins
with a greeting by the priest, followed by sprinkling of all present with holy
water, if deemed desirable, and a short instruction. There follows a
penitential act, as at the beginning of Mass. If the sick person wishes to
receive the sacrament of penance, it is preferable that the priest make himself
available for this during a previous visit; but if the sick person must confess
during the celebration of the sacrament of anointing, this confession replaces
the penitential rite A passage of Scripture is read, and the priest may give a
brief explanation of the reading, a short litany is said, and the priest lays
his hands on the head of the sick person and then says a prayer of thanksgiving
over the already blessed oil or, if necessary, blesses the oil himself. The
actual anointing of the sick person is done on the forehead, with the prayer
"Through this holy anointing may the Lord in his love and mercy help you with
the grace of the Holy Spirit", and on the hands, with the prayer "May the Lord
who frees you from sin save you and raise you up". To each prayer the sick
person, if able, responds: "Amen." It is permitted, in accordance with local
culture and traditions and the condition of the sick person, to anoint other
parts of the body in addition, such as the area of pain or injury, but without
repeating the sacramental form. In case of emergency, a single anointing, not
necessarily on the forehead, is sufficient. Historical liturgical form. From
the early Middle Ages until after the Second Vatican Council the sacrament was
administered, within the Latin Church, only when death was approaching and, in
practice, bodily recovery was not ordinarily looked for, giving rise, as
mentioned above to the name "Extreme Unction" (i.e. final anointing). The form
used in the Roman Rite included anointing of seven parts of the body while
saying (in Latin): "Through this holy unction and His own most tender mercy may
the Lord pardon thee whatever sins or faults thou hast committed deliquisti by
sight hearing, smell, taste, touch, walking, carnal delectation", the last
phrase corresponding to the part of the body that was touched; however, in the
words of the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia, "the unction of the loins is
generally, if not universally, omitted in English-speaking countries, and it is
of course everywhere forbidden in case of women". Use of this form is still
permitted under the conditions mentioned in article 9 of the 2007 motu proprio
"Summorum Pontificum". Liturgical rites of the Catholic Church, both Western
and Eastern, other than the Roman, have a variety of other forms for
celebrating the sacrament. Eastern Orthodox Church. The teaching of the Eastern
Orthodox Church on the Holy Mystery (sacrament) of Unction is similar to that
of the Roman Catholic Church. However, the reception of the Mystery is not
limited to those who are enduring physical illness. The Mystery is given for
healing (both physical and spiritual) and for the forgiveness of sin. For this
reason, it is normally required that one go to confession before receiving
Unction. Because it is a Sacred Mystery of the Church, only Orthodox Christians
may receive it. The solemn form of Eastern Christian anointing requires the
ministry of seven priests. A table is prepared, upon which is set a vessel
containing wheat. Into the wheat has been placed an empty shrine-lamp, seven
candles, and seven anointing brushes. Candles are distributed for all to hold
during the service. The rite begins with reading Psalm 50 (the great
penitential psalm), followed by the chanting of a special canon. After this,
the senior priest (or bishop) pours pure olive oil and a small amount of wine
into the shrine lamp, and says the "Prayer of the Oil", which calls upon God to
"...sanctify this Oil, that it may be effectual for those who shall be anointed
therewith, unto healing, and unto relief from every passion, every malady of
the flesh and of the spirit, and every ill..." Then follow seven series of
epistles, gospels, long prayers, Ektenias (litanies) and anointings. Each
series is served by one of the seven priests in turn. The afflicted one is
anointed with the sign of the cross on seven places: the forehead, the
nostrils, the cheeks, the lips, the breast, the palms of both hands, and the
back of the hands. After the last anointing, the Gospel Book is opened and
placed with the writing down upon the head of the one who was anointed, and the
senior priest reads the "Prayer of the Gospel". At the end, the anointed kisses
the Gospel, the Cross and the right hands of the priests, receiving their
blessing. Anointing is considered to be a public rather than a private
sacrament, and so as many of the faithful who are able are encouraged to
attend. It should be celebrated in the church when possible, but if this is
impossible, it may be served in the home or hospital room of the afflicted.
Unction in the Greek Orthodox Church and Churches of Hellenic custom (Melkite,
Antiochian Orthodox, etc.) is usually given with a minimum of ceremony.
Anointing may also be given during Forgiveness Vespers and Great Week, on Great
and Holy Wednesday, to all who are prepared. Those who receive Unction on Holy
Wednesday should go to Holy Communion on Maundy Thursday. The significance of
receiving Unction on Holy Wednesday is shored up by the hymns in the Triodion
for that day, which speak of the sinful woman who anointed the feet of Christ
(). Just as her sins were forgiven because of her penitence, so the faithful
are exhorted to repent of their sins. In the same narrative, Jesus says, "in
that she hath poured this ointment on my body, she did it for my burial" (Id.,
v. 12), linking the unction with Christ's death and resurrection. In some
dioceses of the Russian Orthodox Church it is customary for the bishop to visit
each parish or region of the diocese some time during Great Lent and give
Anointing for the faithful, together with the local clergy. Anglican churches.
The 1552 and later editions of the Book of Common Prayer omitted the form of
anointing given in the original (1549) version in its Order for the Visitation
of the Sick, but most twentieth-century Anglican prayer books do have anointing
of the sick. Some Anglicans accept that anointing of the sick has a sacramental
character and is therefore a channel of God's grace, seeing it as an "outward
and visible sign of an inward and spiritual grace" which is the definition of a
sacrament. The Catechism of the Episcopal Church of the United States of
America includes Unction of the Sick as among the "other sacramental rites" and
it states that unction can be done with oil or simply with laying on of hands.
The rite of anointing is included in the Episcopal Church's "Ministration to
the Sick" Article 25 of the Thirty-Nine Articles, speaking of the sacraments,
says: "Those five commonly called Sacraments, that is to say, Confirmation,
Penance, Orders, Matrimony, and extreme Unction, are not to be counted for
Sacraments of the Gospel, being such as have grown partly of the corrupt
following of the Apostles, partly are states of life allowed in the Scriptures;
but yet have not like nature of Sacraments with Baptism, and the Lord's Supper,
for that they have not any visible sign or ceremony ordained of God." Other
Christian communities. Among Protestants, anointing is provided in a wide
variety of formats but, for the most part, however, it has fallen into disuse.
Protestant communities generally vary widely on the sacramental character of
anointing. Most Mainline Protestants recognize only two sacraments, the
Eucharist and baptism (though some Lutherans add confession), deeming Anointing
only a humanly-instituted rite. Non-traditional Protestant communities
generally use the term "ordinance" rather than "Sacrament". Mainline beliefs.
Liturgical or Mainline Protestant communities (e.g. Presbyterian,
Congregationalist/United Church of Christ, Methodist, Lutheran, etc.) all have
official yet often optional liturgical rites for the anointing of the sick
partly on the model of Western pre-Reformation rites. Anointing need not be
associated with grave illness or imminent danger of death. Lutheran communities
in particular have the practice of anointing the sick, or have always offered
the rite since the Protestant Reformation with varying degrees of frequency.
Charismatic and Pentecostal beliefs. In Charismatic and Pentecostal
communities, anointing of the sick is a frequent practice and has been an
important ritual in these communities since the respective movements were
founded in the 19th and 20th centuries. These communities use extemporaneous
forms of administration at the discretion of the minister, who need not be a
pastor. There is minimal ceremony attached to its administration. Usually,
several people physically touch (laying on of hands) the recipient during the
anointing. It may be part of a worship service with the full assembly of the
congregation present, but may also be done in more private settings, such as
homes or hospital rooms. Pentecostals believe that physical healing is within
the anointing and so there is often great expectation or at least great hope
that a miraculous cure or improvement will occur when someone is being prayed
over for healing. Evangelical and fundamentalist beliefs. In Evangelical and
Fundamentalist communities, anointing of the sick is performed with varying
degrees of frequency, although laying on of hands may be more common than
anointing. The rite would be similar to that of Pentecostals in its simplicity,
but would usually not have the same emotionalism attached to it. Unlike
Pentecostals, Evangelicals and Fundamentalists generally do not believe that
physical healing is within the anointing. Therefore, God may or may not grant
physical healing to the sick. The healing conferred by anointing is thus a
spiritual event that may not result in physical recovery. The Church of the
Brethren practices Anointing with Oil as an ordinance along with Baptism,
Communion, Laying on of Hands, and the Love Feast. Evangelical Protestants who
use anointing differ about whether the person doing the anointing must be an
ordained member of the clergy, whether the oil must necessarily be olive oil
and have been previously specially consecrated, and about other details.
Several Evangelical groups reject the practice so as not to be identified with
charismatic and Pentecostal groups, which practice it widely. Use of Catholic
rite among Protestants. Some Protestant US military chaplains carry the Roman
Rite version of the Anointing of the Sick with them for use if called upon to
assist wounded or dying soldiers who are Catholics. The Catholic and Orthodox
Churches consider invalid "as a sacrament" the administration of Anointing of
the Sick by such chaplains, who in the eyes of those Churches are not validly
ordained priests. The rite performed by them is thus seen as having the same by
no means negligible value of any other form of prayer offered for the sick or
dying. Latter Day Saints and Restorationists. Latter Day Saints—who consider
themselves restorationists rather than Protestants—also practice ritual
anointing of the sick, as well as other forms of anointing. Members of the
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints often, but not exclusively consider
anointing to be an ordinance. Members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-
day Saints (Mormon or LDS Church) who hold the Melchizedek priesthood may use
consecrated oil in performing the ordinance of blessing of the "sick or
afflicted", though oil is not required if it is unavailable. The priesthood
holder anoints the recipient's head with a drop of oil, then lays hands upon
that head and declare their act of anointing. Then another priesthood holder
joins in, if available, and pronounces a "sealing" of the anointing and other
words of blessing, as he feels inspired. Melchizedek priesthood holders are
also authorized to consecrate any pure olive oil and often carry a personal
supply in case they have need to perform a blessing. Oil is not used in other
blessings, such as for people seeking comfort or counsel. In addition to the
reference, the Doctrine and Covenants contains numerous references to the
anointing and healing of the sick by those with authority to do so.
Administration to the sick is one of the eight sacraments of the Community of
Christ, in which it has also been used for people seeking spiritual, emotional
or mental healing. External links. Western Eastern
