Antediluvian The antediluvian (or pre-diluvian) period – meaning "before the
deluge" – is the period referred to in the Bible between the Creation of the
Earth and the Deluge (flood) in the biblical cosmology. The narrative takes up
chapters 1-6 (excluding the flood narrative) of Genesis. The term found its way
into early geology and lingered in science until late Victorian era.
Colloquially, the term is used to refer to any ancient and murky period. Timing
the antediluvian period. The biblical flood. In the Christian Bible and Hebrew
Torah, the antediluvian period begins with the Creation according to Genesis
and ends with the destruction of all life on the earth except those saved with
Noah in the Ark. According to Bishop Ussher's 17th century chronology, the
antediluvian period lasted for 1648 years, from creation at 4004 BC and the
flood at 2348 BC. The elements of the narrative include some of the best-known
stories in the Bible—the Creation itself, Adam and Eve, and Cain and
Abel—followed by the genealogies tracing the descendants of Cain and Seth,
the third son of Adam and Eve. (These genealogies provide the framework for the
biblical chronology, in the form A begat B in his Xth year). The Bible speaks
of this era as being a time of great wickedness. There were Gibborim (giants)
in the earth in those days as well as Nephilim; some translations identify the
two as one and the same. The Gibborim were unusually powerful; Genesis calls
them "heroes of old, men of renown;" (Enoshi Ha Shem). The antediluvian period
ended when God sent the Flood to wipe out all life except Noah, his family, and
the animals they took with them. Nevertheless, the Nephilim (literally meaning
'fallen ones', from the Hebrew root n-f-l 'to fall') reappear much later in the
biblical narrative, in Numbers 13:31-33 (where the spies sent forth by Moses
report that there were Nephilim or "giants" in the Promised Land). In early
geology. Prior to the 19th century, rock was classified into three main types:
primary or primitive (igneous and metamorphic rock), secondary (sedimentary
rock) and tertiary (sediments). The primary rocks (like granite and gneiss) are
void of fossils and were thought to be associated with the very creation of the
world in the primary Pre-Adamitic period. The secondary rocks, often containing
copious fossils, though human remains had not been found, were thought to have
been laid down in the secondary Pre-Adamitic period. The tertiary rocks
(sediments) were thought to have been put down after Creation and possibly in
connection to a flood event, and were thus associated with the Adamitic period.
The post-flood period was termed the Quaternary, a name still in use in
geology. As mapping of the geological strata progressed in the early decades of
the 19th century, the estimated lengths of the various sub-periods were greatly
increased. The fossil rich Secondary Pre-Adamitic period was divided up into
the Coal period, the Lias and the Chalk period, later expanded into the now-
familiar geologic time scale of the Phanerozoic. The term "antediluvian" was
used in natural science well into the 19th century and lingered in popular
imagination despite increasingly detailed stratigraphy mapping the Earth's
past, and was often used for the Pleistocene period, where humans existed
alongside now extinct megafauna. The antediluvian world. In 19th-century
science. A modern view of the ancient world, along with abandoning the term
"Antediluvian", came about with the works of Darwin and Agassiz in the 1860s.
The antediluvian monsters. From antiquity, fossils of large animals were often
quoted as having lived together with the giants from the Book of Genesis: e.g.
the Tannin or "great sea monsters" of Gen. 1,21. They are often described in
later books of the Bible, especially by God Himself in the Book of Job: e.g.
Re'em in verse 39,9, Behemoth in chapter 40 and Leviathan in chapter 41. With
the advent of geological mapping in the early 19th century, it became
increasingly obvious that much of the fossils associated with the "secondary"
(sedimentary) rock, notably large animals like Ichthyosaurs, Mosasaurs,
Pliosaurs and the various giant mammals found when excavating the Catacombs of
Paris, were neither those of giant humans nor of any extant animals. The
geologists of the day increasingly came to use the term "Antediluvian" only for
the younger strata containing fossils of animals resembling those alive today.
