Anthropology of religion The anthropology of religion involves the study of
religious institutions in relation to other social institutions, and the
comparison of religious beliefs and practices across cultures. Modern
anthropology assumes that there is complete continuity between magical thinking
and religion, and that every religion is a cultural product, created by the
human community that worships it. History. In the early 11th century, Abū
Rayhān Bīrūnī (973-1048), wrote detailed comparative studies on the
anthropology of religions and cultures across the Middle East, Mediterranean
and the Indian subcontinent. He discussed the peoples, customs, and religions
of the Indian subcontinent. Modern anthropology assumes that religion is in
complete continuity with magical thinking, that it is a cultural product, and
that is a phenomenon of psychological projection. The complete continuity
between magic and religion has been a postulate of modern anthropology at least
since early 1930s. The perspective of modern anthropology towards religion is
the "projection idea", a methodological approach which assumes that every
religion is created by the human community that worships it, that "creative
activity ascribed to God is projected from man." In 1841, Ludwig Feuerbach, was
the first to employ this concept as the basis for a systematic critique of
religion. A prominent precursor in the formulation of this projection principle
was Giambattista Vico, and an early formulation of it is found in ancient Greek
writer Xenophanes, which observed that "the gods of Ethiopians were inevitably
black with flat noses while those of the Thracians were blond with blue eyes."
In 1912 Émile Durkheim, building on Feuerbach, considered religion "a
projection of the social values of society," "a means of making symbolic
statements about society," "a symbolic language that makes statements about the
social order"; in short, "religion is society worshiping itself". In the 19th
century, cultural anthropology was dominated by an interest in cultural
evolution; most anthropologists assumed that there was a simple distinction
between “primitive” and “modern” religion and tried to provide accounts
of how the former evolved into the latter. In the 20th century most
anthropologists rejected this approach. Today the anthropology of religion
reflects the influence of, or an engagement with, such theorists as Karl Marx,
Sigmund Freud, Émile Durkheim, and Max Weber. They are especially concerned
with how religious beliefs and practices may reflect political or economic
forces; or the social functions of religious beliefs and practices. Definition
of religion. One major problem in the anthropology of religion is the
definition of religion itself. At one time anthropologists believed that
certain religious practices and beliefs were more or less universal to all
cultures at some point in their development, such as a belief in spirits or
ghosts, the use of magic as a means of controlling the supernatural, the use of
divination as a means of discovering occult knowledge, and the performance of
rituals such as prayer and sacrifice as a means of influencing the outcome of
various events through a supernatural agency, sometimes taking the form of
shamanism or ancestor worship. According to Geertz, religion is "(1) a system
of symbols which acts to (2) establish powerful, pervasive, and long-lasting
moods and motivations in men by (3) formulating conceptions of a general order
of existence and (4) clothing these conceptions with such an aura of factuality
that (5) the moods and motivations seem uniquely realistic" (Geertz 1966).
Today, anthropologists debate, and many reject, the cross-cultural validity of
these categories (often viewing them as examples of European primitivism).
Anthropologists have considered various criteria for defining religion – such
as a belief in the supernatural or the reliance on ritual – but few claim
that these criteria are universally valid. In Western culture, religion has
become more or less synonymous with monotheism and the various moral codes that
monotheism prescribes. Moral codes have also evolved in conjunction with Hindu
and Buddhist beliefs, independent of monotheism. However, prescriptive moral
codes or even normative ethical codes are not a necessary component of
religious beliefs or practices any more than they are a necessary component of
science and the scientific method. Anthony F.C. Wallace proposes four
categories of religion, each subsequent category subsuming the previous. These
are, however, synthetic categories and do not necessarily encompass all
religions.
