Anthropomorphism Anthropomorphism or personification is any attribution of
human characteristics (or characteristics assumed to belong only to humans) to
other animals, non-living things, phenomena, material states, objects or
abstract concepts, such as organizations, governments, spirits or deities. The
term was coined in the mid 1700s. Examples include animals and plants and
forces of nature such as winds, rain or the sun depicted as creatures with
human motivations, and/or the abilities to reason and converse. The term
derives from the combination of the Greek ('), "human" and ('), "shape" or
"form". As a literary device, anthropomorphism is strongly associated with art
and storytelling where it has ancient roots. Most cultures possess a long-
standing fable tradition with anthropomorphised animals as characters that can
stand as commonly recognised types of human behavior. In contrast to this,
conventional Western science, as well as such religious doctrines as the
Christian Great Chain of Being propound the opposite, anthropocentric belief
that animals, plants and non-living things, unlike humans, lack spiritual and
mental attributes, immortal souls, and anything other than relatively limited
awareness. Pre-history. From the beginnings of human behavioural modernity in
the Upper Paleolithic, about 40,000 years ago, examples of zoomorphic (animal-
shaped) works of art occur that may represent the earliest evidence we have of
anthropomorphism. One of the oldest known is an ivory sculpture, the Lion man
of the Hohlenstein Stadel, Germany, a human-shaped figurine with a lion's head,
determined to be about 32,000 years old. It is not possible to say what exactly
these prehistoric artworks represent. A more recent example is The Sorcerer, an
enigmatic cave painting from the Trois-Frères Cave, Ariège, France: the
figure's significance is unknown, but it is usually interpreted as some kind of
great spirit or master of the animals. In either case there is an element of
anthropomorphism. This anthropomorphic art has been linked by archaeologist
Steven Mithen with the emergence of more systematic hunting practices in the
Upper Palaeolithic (Mithen 1998). He proposes that these are the product of a
change in the architecture of the human mind, an increasing fluidity between
the natural history and social intelligences, where anthropomorphism allowed
hunters to empathetically identify with hunted animals and better predict their
movements. In religion and mythology. In religion and mythology,
anthropomorphism refers to the perception of a divine being or beings in human
form, or the recognition of human qualities in these beings. Ancient
mythologies frequently represented the divine as a god or gods with human forms
and qualities. These gods resemble human beings not only in appearance and
personality; they exhibited many human behaviors which were used to explain
natural phenomena, creation, and historical events. The gods fell in love,
married, had children, fought battles, wielded weapons, and rode horses and
chariots. They feasted on special foods, and sometimes required sacrifices of
food, beverage, and sacred objects to be made by human beings. Some
anthropomorphic gods represented specific human concepts, such as love, war,
fertility, beauty, or the seasons. Anthropomorphic gods exhibited human
qualities such as beauty, wisdom, and power, and sometimes human weaknesses
such as greed, hatred, jealousy, and uncontrollable anger. Greek gods such as
Zeus and Apollo were often depicted in human form exhibiting both commendable
and despicable human traits. Anthropomorphism in this case is referred to as
anthropotheism. From the perspective of adherents to religions in which humans
were created in the form of the divine, the phenomenon may be considered
theomorphism, or the giving of divine qualities to humans. The Church of Jesus
Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) teaches that both God the Father and
Jesus Christ have physical, resurrected bodies, the image of which humans were
created in. Anthropomorphism has cropped up as a Christian heresy, particularly
prominently with the Audians in third century Syria, but also in fourth century
Egypt and tenth Century Italy. This often was based on a literal interpretation
of Genesis 1:27: "So God created man in His own image, in the image of God
created He him; male and female created He them". Criticism. Some religions,
scholars, and philosophers found objections to anthropomorphic deities. The
Greek philosopher Xenophanes (570–480 BCE) said that "the greatest god"
resembles man "neither in form nor in mind". Anthropomorphism of God is
rejected by Judaism and Islam, which both believe that God is beyond human
limits of comprehension. Judaism's rejection grew during the Hasmonean period
(circa 300 BCE) due to Greek philosophy becoming incorporated in Jewish belief.
Judaism's rejection grew further following the Muslim Renaissance (10 century
AD) later codified in 13 principles of Jewish faith authored by Maimonides in
the 12th century. Hindus do not reject the concept of God in the abstract
unmanifested but note problems; Lord Krishna said in the Bhagavad Gita, Chapter
12, Verse 5, that it is much more difficult to focus on God as the unmanifested
than God with form, i.e., using anthropomorphic icons (murtis), due to human
beings' need to perceive via the senses. In his book "Faces in the Clouds: A
New Theory of Religion", Stewart Guthrie theorizes that all religions are
anthropomorphisms that originate due to the brain's tendency to detect the
presence or vestiges of other humans in natural phenomena. In literature.
Fables. Apollonius noted that the fable was created to teach wisdom through
fictions that are meant to be taken as fictions, contrasting them favourably
with the poets' stories of the gods that are sometimes taken literally. Aesop,
"by announcing a story which everyone knows not to be true, told the truth by
the very fact that he did not claim to be relating real events". The same
consciousness of the fable as fiction is to be found in other examples across
the world, one example being a traditional Ashanti way of beginning tales of
the anthropomorphic trickster-spider Anansi: "We do not really mean, we do not
really mean that what we are about to say is true. A story, a story; let it
come, let it go." Fairy tales. Anthropomorphic motifs have been common in fairy
tales from the earliest ancient examples set in a mythological context to the
great collections of the Brothers Grimm and Perrault. The "Tale of Two
Brothers" (Egypt, 13th century BC) features several talking cows and in "Cupid
and Psyche" (Rome, 2nd century AD) Zephyrus, the west wind, carries Psyche
away. Later an ant feels sorry for her and helps her in her quest. Modern
literature. Building on the popularity of fables and fairy tales, specifically
"children's" literature began to emerge in the 19th century with works such as
"Alice's Adventures in Wonderland" (1865) by Lewis Carroll, "The Adventures of
Pinocchio" (1883) by Carlo Collodi and "The Jungle Book" (1894) by Rudyard
Kipling, all employing anthropomorphic elements. This continued in the 20th
century with many of the most popular titles having anthropomorphic characters,
examples being "The Tales of Beatrix Potter" (1901 onwards), "The Wind in the
Willows" (1908) by Kenneth Grahame, "The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe" by
C. S. Lewis and "Winnie-the-Pooh" (1926) by A. A. Milne. In many of these
stories the animals can be seen as representing facets of human personality and
character. As John Rowe Townsend remarks, discussing "The Jungle Book" in which
the boy Mowgli must rely on his new friends the bear Baloo and the black
panther Bagheera, "The world of the jungle is in fact both itself and our world
as well". Another notable work is George Orwell's "Animal Farm". The fantasy
genre developed from mythological, fairy tale and Romance motifs and
characters, sometimes with anthropomorphic animals. The best-selling examples
of the genre are "The Hobbit"" (1937) and The Lord of the Rings" (1954–1955),
both by J. R. R. Tolkien, books peopled with talking creatures such as ravens,
spiders and the dragon Smaug and a multitude of anthropomorphic goblins and
elves. John D. Rateliff calls this the "Doctor Dolittle Theme" in his book "The
History of the Hobbit" and Tolkien saw this anthropomorphism as closely linked
to the emergence of human language and myth: "...The first men to talk of
'trees and stars' saw things very differently. To them, the world was alive
with mythological beings... To them the whole of creation was "myth-woven and
elf-patterned".' In the 20th century, the children's picture book market
expanded massively. Perhaps a majority of picture books have some kind of
anthropomorphism, with popular examples being "The Very Hungry Caterpillar"
(1969) by Eric Carle and "The Gruffalo" (1999) by Julia Donaldson.
Anthropomorphism in literature and other media led to a sub-culture known as
Furry fandom, which promotes and creates stories and artwork involving
anthropomorphic animals, and the examination and interpretation of humanity
through anthropomorphism. Various Japanese manga have used anthropomorphism as
the basis of their story. Examples include "Squid Girl" (anthropomorphised
squid), "" (humanised countries) and "Upotte!!" (humanised guns). Film and
television. Some of the most notable examples are the Walt Disney characters,
Mickey Mouse, Donald Duck, Goofy, Oswald the Lucky Rabbit; the Looney Tunes
characters, Bugs Bunny, Daffy Duck, Porky Pig; and an array of others from the
1920s to present day. Since the 1960s, anthropomorphism has also been
represented in various animated TV shows such as "Biker Mice From Mars"
(1993–1996) and "" (1993–1995). "Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles", first aired
in 1987, features four pizza-loving anthropomorphic turtles with a great
knowledge of ninjutsu, led by their anthropomorphic rat sensei, Master
Splinter. "TUGS" (1988) is a British children's series, set in the 1920s,
featuring anthropomorphic tugboats. They moved like real boats but would
sometimes perform certain actions without the aid of humans although not seen.
Like real boats they obeyed maritime laws but would sometimes perform actions
of their own will. "Sonic the Hedgehog", a game released in 1991, features a
speedy blue hedgehog as the protagonist. This series' characters are almost all
anthropomorphic animals such as foxes, cats, and other hedgehogs who are able
to speak and walk on their hind legs like normal humans. As with most
anthropomorphisms of animals, clothing is of little or no importance, where
some characters may be fully clothed while some only wear shoes and gloves.
Another example in video games is "Super Mario Bros.", which was released in
1985. Some of the characters include Yoshi, a dinosaur who is able to talk, run
and jump, and Bowser, a "Koopa" that is able to perform most human
characteristics, with some exceptions, as he can breathe fire. In the American
animated TV series "Family Guy", one of the show's main characters, Brian, is a
dog. Brian shows many human characteristics – he walks upright, talks, smokes
and drinks Martinis – but also acts like a normal dog in other ways; for
example he cannot resist chasing a ball. A Canadian-New Zealand-American
animated TV show called "Turbo Dogs" (2008) starred anthro dog characters. In
2010, a French-American animated TV show "The Mysteries of Alfred Hedgehog" was
mostly consisted of woodland anthropomorphic characters. In the films "Cars"
(2006) and "Cars 2" (2011), all the characters are anthropomorphized vehicles.
A British TV series, "Thomas and Friends", features anthropomorphised trains,
airplanes, helicopters and cars. In the motion picture "Fantastic Mr. Fox"
(2009), most of the characters are anthropomorphic animals very similar to the
style seen in the Furry Fandom. They are given especially human characteristics
such as body shape, hands and clothing, among other things. Art history. Claes
Oldenburg. Claes Oldenburg's soft sculptures are commonly described as
anthropomorphic. Depicting common household objects, Oldenburg's sculptures
were considered Pop Art. Reproducing these objects, often at a greater size
than the original, Oldenburg created his sculptures out of soft materials. The
anthropomorphic qualities of the sculptures were mainly in their sagging and
malleable exterior which mirrored the not so idealistic forms of the human
body. In "Soft Light Switches" Oldenburg creates a household light switch out
of Vinyl. The two identical switches, in a dulled orange, insinuate nipples.
The soft vinyl references the aging process as the sculpture wrinkles and sinks
with time. Minimalism. In the essay "Art and Objecthood", Michael Fried makes
the case that "Literalist art" (Minimalism) becomes theatrical by means of
anthropomorphism. The viewer engages the minimalist work, not as an autonomous
art object, but as a theatrical interaction. Fried references a conversation in
which Tony Smith answers questions about his "six-foot cube, Die." Q: Why
didn't you make it larger so that it would loom over the observer? A: I was not
making a monument. Q: then why didn't you make it smaller so that the observer
could see over the top? A: I was not making an object. Fried implies an
anthropomorphic connection by means of "a surrogate person-that is, a kind of
statue." The minimalist decision of "hollowness" in much of their work, was
also considered by Fried, to be "blatantly anthropomorphic." This "hollowness"
contributes to the idea of a separate inside; an idea mirrored in the human
form. Fried considers the Literalist art's "hollowness" to be "biomorphic" as
it references a living organism. Post Minimalism. Curator Lucy Lippard's
Eccentric Abstraction show, in 1966, sets up Briony Fer's writing of a post
minimalist anthropomorphism. Reacting to Fried's interpretation of minimalist
art's "looming presence of objects which appear as actors might on a stage",
Fer interprets the artists in Eccentric Abstraction to a new form of
anthropomorphism. She puts forth the thoughts of Surrealist writer Roger
Caillous, who speaks of the "spacial lure of the subject, the way in which the
subject could inhabit their surroundings." Caillous uses the example of an
insect who "through camouflage does so in order to become invisible... and
loses its distinctness." For Fer, the anthropomorphic qualities of imitation
found in the erotic, organic sculptures of artists Eva Hesse and Louise
Bourgeois, are not necessarily for strictly "mimetic" purposes. Instead, like
the insect, the work must come into being in the "scopic field... which we
cannot view from outside." In science. In the scientific community, the use of
anthropomorphic language that suggests animals have intentions and emotions has
traditionally been deprecated as indicating a lack of objectivity. Biologists
have been warned to avoid assumptions that animals share any of the same
mental, social, and emotional capacities of humans, and to rely instead on
strictly observable evidence. In 1927 Ivan Pavlov wrote that animals should be
considered "without any need to resort to fantastic speculations as to the
existence of any possible subjective states". More recently, "The Oxford
companion to animal behaviour" (1987) advised that "one is well advised to
study the behaviour rather than attempting to get at any underlying emotion".
Some scientists, like William M Wheeler (writing apologetically of his use of
anthropormorphism in 1911), have used anthropomorphic language in metaphor to
make subjects more humanly comprehensible or memorable. The study of great apes
in their own environment has changed attitudes to anthropomorphism. In the
1960s the three so-called "Leakey's Angels", Jane Goodall studying chimpanzees,
Dian Fossey studying gorillas and Biruté Galdikas studying orangutans, were
all accused of "that worst of ethological sins – anthropomorphism". The
charge was brought about by their descriptions of the great apes in the field;
it is now more widely accepted that empathy has an important part to play in
research. Frans de Waal wrote: "To endow animals with human emotions has long
been a scientific taboo. But if we do not, we risk missing something
fundamental, about both animals and us." Alongside this has come increasing
awareness of the linguistic abilities of the great apes and the recognition
that they are tool-makers and have individuality Writing of cats in 1992,
veterinarian Bruce Fogle points to the fact that "both humans and cats have
identical neurochemicals and regions in the brain responsible for emotion" as
proof that "it is not anthropomorphic to credit cats with emotions such as
jealousy". Antonym. In the context of the sciences, the term "anthropomorphism"
has been deprecated to the point that, when applied to a scientist, the term
functions as a pejorative (see above). However, there is also a risk of
straying off the path of objectivity when scientists choose to assume that only
humans possess any degree of certain traits. This assumption is called
anthropocentrism, practitioners of which either believe in or unintentionally
form an outlook of human exceptionalism. Darwin - to the chagrin of many
religious philosophers - dismissed these ideas of human exceptionalism in his
book The Descent of Man by saying that our differences are "only in degree, and
not in kind". In sports. Anthropomorphic animals are often used as mascots for
sports teams or sporting events.
