Anti-Zionism Anti-Zionism is opposition to Zionistic views or opposition to the
state of Israel. The term is used to describe various religious, moral and
political points of view in opposition to these, but their diversity of
motivation and expression is sufficiently different that "anti-Zionism" cannot
be seen as having a single ideology or source. Definition. Zionism may be
defined as, "An international movement originally for the establishment of a
Jewish national or religious community in Palestine and later for the support
of modern Israel." Zionism is also "a political movement among Jews which holds
that the Jews are a nation, and as such need to establish a national homeland",
and as a religious movement within Orthodox Judaism which encourages Jews to
establish a sovereign commonwealth in the Land of Israel that is governed by
Halakha (Jewish law), and as "a movement to support the development and defense
of the State of Israel, and to encourage Jews to settle there." Therefore, a
possible definition for anti-Zionism is opposition to these objectives; and
people, organizations or governments that oppose these objectives can in some
sense be described as anti-Zionist. "Progressive Jewish Thought and the New
Anti-Semitism," an essay published by the American Jewish Committee, concludes
that, with the maturing of Israel since its founding in 1948, the term anti-
Zionism in scholarly work is often used to mean advocating the elimination of
the State of Israel. Opposition to Israel as a Jewish state is anti-Zionism or
what can be called Post-Zionism. Diversity of anti-Zionism. Opposition to
Zionism has changed over time and has taken on a spectrum of religious,
ethical, political or military forms. Some include, opposition to the creation
of a Jewish state prior to the appearance of the messiah, objection to the idea
of a state based on maintenance of a Jewish majority, differing democratic
values and differing levels of geographical extension. Brian Klug of "The
Guardian" has argued that anti-Zionism represents fair opposition to Israel.
The legitimacy of anti-Zionist views has been disputed to the present day,
including the more recent and disputed relationship between anti-Zionism and
antisemitism. A range of other views regarding the various forms of anti-
Zionism is discussed and debated. Anti-Zionism and antisemitism. In recent
years, commentators have argued that contemporary manifestations of anti-
Zionism have become a cover for antisemitism, and that a "new antisemitism"
rooted in anti-Zionism has emerged Advocates of this concept argue that much of
what purports to be criticism of Israel and Zionism is demonization, and has
led to an international resurgence of attacks on Jews and Jewish symbols and an
increased acceptance of antisemitic beliefs in public discourse. Critics of the
concept argue that the equation of anti-Zionism with antisemitism is used to
stifle legitimate criticisms of Israel, and trivializes antisemitism. Others go
the other way and claim "anti-Zionism" has become a requisite proof of
progressive conviction today, and is similar to Jews converting to Christianity
a century ago. Marcus also states: "Unsurprisingly, recent research has shown a
close correlation between anti-Israeli views and anti-Semitic views based on a
survey of citizens in ten European countries." Anti-Zionism has become the most
dangerous and effective form of anti-Semitism in our time, through its
systematic delegitimization, defamation, and demonization of Israel. Although
not "" anti-Semitic, the calls to dismantle the Jewish state, whether they come
from Muslims, the Left, or the radical Right, increasingly rely on an anti-
Semitic stereotypization of classic themes, such as the manipulative "Jewish
lobby," the Jewish/Zionist "world conspiracy," and Jewish/Israeli "warmongers."
Dina Porat, "Defining Anti-Semitism", http://www.tau.ac.il/Anti-Semitism/
asw2003-4/porat.htm#_edn23 Retrieved 15 November 2008 See also Emanuele
Ottolenghi http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2003/nov/29/comment Israeli
journalist Ben-Dror Yemini maintains that anti-Zionism is "politically correct
antisemitism" and argues that the same way Jews were demonized, Israel is
demonized, the same way the right of Jews to exist was denied, the right for
Self-determination is denied from Israel, the same way Jews were presented as a
menace to the world, Israel is presented as a menace to the world. In July
2001, the Simon Wiesenthal Center reported that during a visit there, German
Foreign Minister Joschka Fischer stated that "anti-Zionism inevitably leads to
antisemitism." Brian Klug has argued that anti-Zionism and antisemitism are
distinct but not mutually exclusive concepts:There is a long and ignoble
history of "Zionist" being used as a code word for "Jew," as when Communist
Poland carried out "anti-Zionist" purges in 1968, expelling thousands of Jews
from the country, or when the extreme right today uses the acronym ZOG (Zionist
Occupied Government) to refer to the US government. Moreover, the Zionist
movement arose as a reaction to the persecution of Jews. Since anti-Zionism is
the opposite of Zionism, and since Zionism is a form of opposition to anti-
Semitism, it seems to follow that an anti-Zionist must be an anti-Semite.
Nonetheless, the inference is invalid. To argue that hostility to Israel and
hostility to Jews are one and the same thing is to conflate the Jewish state
with the Jewish people. In fact, Israel is one thing, Jewry another.
Accordingly, anti-Zionism is one thing, anti-Semitism another. They are
separate. To say they are separate is not to say that they are never connected.
But they are independent variables that can be connected in different ways.
Some critics of Israeli policy argue that Israeli propagandists and supporters
often try to equate anti-Zionism and sometimes even criticism of Israeli
policy, with antisemitism, to silence opposition to Israeli policies. Noam
Chomsky for example argues:Chomsky, 1989 "Necessary Illusions", Anti-Zionism
outside the Jewish community. Secular Arab. According to philosopher Michael
Neumann, Zionism as an "expansionist threat" has caused Arab hostility toward
Israel and even antisemitism. Anti-Zionist sentiment has increased with ongoing
Arab Israeli conflicts: after the June 1967 Six-Day War where Israel gained
control of the Sinai Peninsula, the Gaza Strip, the West Bank, East Jerusalem,
and the Golan Heights; during the 1982 Lebanon War where Israel Defense Forces
invaded southern Lebanon, attacking the PLO, as well as Syria, leftist and
Muslim Lebanese forces, leading to Israeli occupation of southern Lebanon; the
2002 Operation Defensive Shield in the West Bank, including the attack on the
Jenin refugee camp; the 2006 Lebanon War; and the 2008–2009 Israel–Gaza
conflict. Pan-Arabist narratives in the 1960s Nasser era emphasized the idea of
Palestine as a part of the Arab world taken by others. In this narrative, the
natural means of combating Zionism is Arab nations uniting and attacking Israel
militarily. Pan-Syrian narratives, promoted mainly by Syria, are essentially
parallel. In contrast, a poll of 507 Arab-Israelis conducted by the Israeli
Democracy Institute in 2007 found that 75 percent profess support for Israel's
status as a Jewish and democratic state which guarantees equal rights for
minorities. Israeli Arab support for a constitution in general was 88 percent.
Muslim. Muslim anti-Zionism considers the State of Israel an intrusion into
what many Muslims consider to be Dar al-Islam, a domain rightfully, and
permanently, ruled only by Muslims due the fact it was historically conquered
in the name of Islam. Palestinian and other Muslim groups, as well as the
government of Iran (since the 1979 Islamic Revolution), insist that the State
of Israel is illegitimate and refuse to refer to it as "Israel," instead using
the locution "the Zionist entity" (see Iran–Israel relations). Islamic maps
of the Middle East frequently do not show the State of Israel. In an interview
with "Time Magazine" in December 2006, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad said "Everyone knows
that the Zionist regime is a tool in the hands of the United States and British
governments." The Grand Mufti of Jerusalem Mohammed Amin al Husseini opposed
the Jewish immigration to Palestine before the creation of the State of Israel,
and in several documented cases expressed his hostility toward Jews in general
and Zionists in particular. Christian. Positions of the World Council of
Churches. The World Council of Churches has been described by some as taking
anti-Zionist positions in connection with its criticisms of Israeli policy.
They believe the council has focused disproportionately on activities and
publications criticizing Israel in comparison with other human rights issues.
The council members have been characterized by Israel's former Justice minister
Amnon Rubinstein as anti-Zionist, saying "they just hate Israel." Soviet Union.
From 1928–1934, during the so-called "Third Period" in the Soviet Union,
Zionism was outlawed. But by the late 1930s, the official position of Zionism
began to change to a more favourable one. In the Soviet encyclopedia of this
time, it was stated that Jewish migration to Palestine had become a
"progressive factor" because many of the workers stood on the left. At the
beginning of 1947, the Soviet Union supported the partition of Palestine.
Joseph Stalin wanted to use the Jews in Palestine against British imperialism,
and to establish a point of support for the USSR in the Middle East. During the
last years of Stalin's rule, official support for the creation of Israel in
1948 was replaced by strong anti-zionism. The level of confrontation with those
deemed as anti-Soviet "Jewish nationalists" was toned down after Stalin's death
in 1953, but the official position of opposition to Zionism remained in force:
the Anti-Zionist Committee of the Soviet Public, as well as numerous other
initiatives, were state-sponsored. As outlined in the third edition of the
Great Soviet Encyclopedia (1969–1978), the Communist Party of the Soviet
Union's position during the Cold War became: "the main posits of modern Zionism
are militant chauvinism, racism, anti-Communism and anti-Sovietism... overt and
covert fight against freedom movements and the USSR." At the same time, the
spectre of Jewish allegiance to Israel amid the tensions of the Arab-Israeli
conflict raised fears of internal dissent and opposition. The Soviet government
liquidated almost all remaining Jewish organizations. It placed synagogues
under police surveillance, both openly and through the use of informers. At the
same time, the general restriction on the right of refuseniks, or Soviet Jews
seeking to emigrate for Israel, emerged as a major human rights issue in the
West. (See Jackson-Vanik amendment.) International. Anti-Zionist sentiments
were also manifested in organisations such as the Organization for African
Unity and the Non-Aligned Movement, which passed resolutions condemning Zionism
and equating it with racism and apartheid during the early 1970s. This
culminated in the passing by the United Nations General Assembly of Resolution
3379 in November 1975, which declared that "Zionism is a form of racism." The
decision was revoked on 16 December 1991, when the General Assembly passed
Resolution 4686, repealing resolution 3379, by a vote of 111 to 25, with 13
abstentions and 17 delegations absent. Thirteen out of the 19 Arab countries,
including those engaged in negotiations with Israel, voted against the repeal,
another six were absent. No Arab country voted for repeal. The Palestine
Liberation Organisation denounced the vote. All of the ex-communist countries
and most of the African countries who had supported Resolution 3379 voted to
repeal it. Only three non-Muslim countries voted against the resolution: Cuba,
North Korea and Vietnam. The rest abstained (including Turkey) or absented
themselves. African-American. After Israel occupied Palestinian territory
following the 1967 Six-Day War, some African-Americans supported the
Palestinians and criticized Israel's actions, for example by publicly
supporting Palestinian leader Yassir Arafat and calling for the destruction of
the Jewish state. Immediately after the war, the black power organization
Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee published a newsletter criticizing
Israel, and asserting that the war was an effort to regain Palestinian land and
that during the 1948 war, "Zionists conquered the Arab homes and land through
terror, force, and massacres". In 1993, philosopher Cornel West wrote: "Jews
will not comprehend what the symbolic predicament and literal plight of
Palestinans in Israel means to blacks... Blacks often perceive the Jewish
defense of the state of Israel as a second instance of naked group interest,
and, again, an abandonment of substantive moral deliberation." African-American
support of Palestinians is frequently due to the consideration of Palestinians
as people of color – political scientist Andrew Hacker writes: "The presence
of Israel in the Middle East is perceived as thwarting the rightful status of
people of color. Some blacks view Israel as essentially a white and European
power, supported from the outside, and occupying space that rightfully belongs
to the original inhabitants of Palestine." Jewish anti-Zionism. Interpretations
of "Aliyah". Hope for return to the land of Israel is embodied in the content
of the Jewish religion (see Kibbutz Galuyot.) "Aliyah", the Hebrew word meaning
"ascending" or "going up" is the word used to describe religious Jewish return
to Israel, and has been used since ancient times. From the Middle Ages and
onwards, many famous rabbis and often their followers, returned to the land of
Israel. These have included Nahmanides, Yechiel of Paris, Isaac Luria, Yosef
Karo, Menachem Mendel of Vitebsk among others. For Jews in the Diaspora "Eretz
Israel" was revered in a religious sense. They prayed, and thought of the
return, as being fulfilled in a messianic age. Return remained a recurring
theme for generations, particularly in Passover and Yom Kippur prayers which
traditionally concluded with, "Next year in Jerusalem", as well as the thrice-
daily "Amidah" (Standing prayer). Following Jewish Enlightenment however,
Reform Judaism dropped many traditional beliefs, including "aliyah", as
incompatible with modern life within the Diaspora. Later, Zionism re-kindled
the concept of "aliyah" in an ideological and political sense, parallel with
traditional religious belief; it was used to increase Jewish population in the
Holy Land by immigration and it remains a basic tenet of Zionist ideology.
Support for aliyah does not always equal immigration however, as a majority of
the world Jewish population remains within the Diaspora. Support for the modern
Zionist movement is not universal and as a result, some religious Jews as well
as some secular Jews, do not support Zionism. non-Zionist Jews are not
necessarily anti-Zionists, although some are. Generally however, Zionism does
have the support of the majority of the Jewish religious organizations, with
support from segments of the Orthodox movement, and all of the Conservative,
and more recently, the Reform movement. Many Hasidic rabbis oppose the creation
of a Jewish state. The leader of the Satmar Hasidic group, Rabbi Joel
Teitelbaum's book, "VaYoel Moshe", published in 1958, expounds one Orthodox
position on Zionism, based on a literal form of "midrash" (biblical
interpretation). Citing to Tractate Kesubos 111a of the Talmud Teitelbaum
states that God and the Jewish people exchanged three oaths at the time of the
Jews' exile from ancient Israel, forbidding the Jewish people from massively
immigrating to the Land of Israel, and from rebelling against the nations of
the world. Jewish Orthodox religious groups. In the early history of Zionism
many traditional religious Jews opposed ideas of nationalism (Jewish or
otherwise) which they regarded as a secular ideology, which some viewed as a
violation of the Three Oaths. Key traditionalist opponents of Zionism included
Isaac Breuer, Hillel Zeitlin, Aaron Shmuel Tamares, Elazar Shapiro (Muncatz),
and Joel Teitelbaum, all waged ideological religious, as well as political,
battles with Zionism each in their own way. Most Orthodox religious groups have
accepted and actively support the State of Israel, even if they have not
adopted "Zionist" ideology. The World Agudath Israel party (founded in Poland)
has at times participated in Israeli government coalitions. Most religious
Zionists hold pro-Israel views from a right-wing viewpoint. The main exceptions
are Hasidic groups such as Satmar Hasidim, which have about 100,000 adherents
world wide, as well as numerous different, smaller Hasidic groups, unified in
America in the Central Rabbinical Congress of the United States and Canada and
in Israel in the Edah HaChareidis. Secular. The Jewish community is not a
single united group and responses vary both between and within Jewish groups.
One of the principal divisions is that between secular Jews and religious Jews.
The reasons for secular opposition to the Zionist movement are very different
from those of religious Jews. Prior to the Second World War many Jews regarded
Zionism as a fanciful and unrealistic movement. Many liberals during the
European Enlightenment had argued that Jews should enjoy full equality only on
the condition that they pledge their singular loyalty to their nation-state and
entirely assimilate to the local national culture; they called for the
"regeneration" of the Jewish people in exchange for rights. Those liberal Jews
who accepted integration and/or assimilation principles saw Zionism as a threat
to efforts to facilitate Jewish citizenship and equality within the European
nation-state context. The Jewish Anti-Zionist League, in Egypt, was a
Communist-influenced anti-Zionist league in the years 1946–1947. In Israel,
there are several Jewish anti-Zionist organisations and politicians, many of
these are related to Matzpen. Noam Chomsky has reported a change in the
boundaries of what are considered Zionist and anti-Zionist views. In 1947, in
his youth, Chomsky's support for a socialist binational state, in conjunction
with his opposition to any semblance of a theocratic system of governance in
Israel, was at the time considered well within the mainstream of secular
Zionism; today, it lands him solidly in the anti-Zionist camp. Modern American
groups such as J Street are taken as evidence of an "anomalous pattern of
internal defection" created as a result of anti-Zionism. Some Jewish
organizations oppose Zionism as an integral part of their anti-imperialism.
Some secular Jews today, particularly socialists and Marxists, continue to
oppose the State of Israel on anti-imperialist and human rights grounds. Many
oppose it as a form of nationalism, which they argue to be a product of
capitalist societies. One secular anti-Zionist group today is the International
Jewish Anti-Zionist Network, a socialist, anti-war, and anti-imperialist
organization which calls for "the dismantling of Israeli apartheid, the return
of Palestinian refugees, and the ending of the Israeli colonization of historic
Palestine". World War II and the creation of Israel. Attitudes changed during
and following the war. In May, 1942, before the full revelation of the
Holocaust, the Biltmore Program proclaimed a fundamental departure from
traditional Zionist policy of a “homeland” with its demand ""that Palestine
be established as a Jewish Commonwealth."" Opposition to official Zionism’s
firm, unequivocal stand caused some prominent Zionists to establish their own
party, Ichud (Unification), which advocated an Arab – Jewish Federation in
Palestine. Opposition to the Biltmore Program also led to the founding of the
anti-Zionist American Council for Judaism. The full knowledge of the Holocaust
altered the views of many who critiqued Zionism before 1948, including the
British journalist Isaac Deutscher, a socialist and lifelong atheist who
nevertheless emphasised the importance of his Jewish heritage. Before World War
II, Deutscher opposed Zionism as economically retrograde and harmful to the
cause of international socialism, but in the aftermath of the Holocaust he
regretted his pre-war views, arguing for Israel's establishment as a "historic
necessity" to provide a refuge for the surviving Jews of Europe. In the 1960s,
Deutscher renewed his criticism of Zionism, scrutinizing Israel for its failure
to recognise the dispossession of the Palestinians. Anti-Zionist conspiracy
theories. Claims that the Zionist movement controls world history or seeks to
achieve world domination are roughly as old as the Zionist movement. The most
influential of these claims is the Tsarist forgery, The Protocols of the Elders
of Zion, which remains popular. In 1939, the Nazi German paper Volkischer
Beobachter, justified the German occupation of Czechoslovakia with the
headline: "In Prague Jewry is in power". In 1968, the East German communist
paper Neues Deutschland justified the Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia
with the headline "In Prague Zionism is in power". Simon Wiesenthal
subsequently found 39 formerly influential Nazi party members working in the
East German press and now directing their campaigns at Zionists. A different
version of this conspiracy theory claims that Nazis and Zionists had a shared
interest or even cooperated in the extermination of Europe's Jewry, as
persecution would force them to flee to Palestine, then under British
administration. Similar claims are occasionally made by Hezbollah or Hamas
sources. In 1995, William Korey released a work entitled "Russian antisemitism,
Pamyat, and the demonology of Zionism". Korey's central argument is that the
Soviet Union promoted an "official Judeophobic propaganda campaign" under the
guise of anti-Zionism from 1967 to 1986; after this program was shut down by
Mikhail Gorbachev, a populist and chauvinist group called Pamyat emerged in the
more open climate of Glasnost to promote an openly anti-Semitic message. Korey
also argues that much official late-period Soviet anti-Semitism may be traced
back to the influence of "Protocols of the Elders of Zion". He notes, for
instance, that a 1977 Soviet work entitled "International Zionism: History and
Politics" contains the allegation that most major Wall Street financial
institutions are "large financial-industrial Jewish monopolies" exercising
control over many countries in the world. "Russian antisemitism" was reviewed
by Robert O. Freedman in the "Slavic Review"; while he concurs with the book's
central thesis, Freedman nevertheless writes that the actual extent of Soviet
anti-Semitism may have been less than Korey suggests. Before the Second World
War many prominent Britons maintained that the tension between Germany and
Britain was the result of Jewish warmongering. In 1935 the British Union of
Fascists mounted a "peace campaign" against war, claiming an alliance of
international financiers and Jews were leading Britain to war with Germany.
However by 1938 the public mood had changed and Admiral Domville wrote "it is
interesting to see how permeated these people are with the war germ. Israel has
done its work well." Similar accusations have been made regarding Zionism and
the 2003 invasion of Iraq. The Sudanese government has alleged that the Darfur
uprising (in which some 500,000 have been killed) is part of a wider Zionist
conspiracy. Egyptian media have alleged that the Zionist movement deliberately
spreads HIV in Egypt. According to the Anti-Defamation League, Neo-Nazi and
radical Muslim groups allege the US government is controlled by Jews,
describing it as the "Zionist Occupation Government". Article 22 of the 1988
Hamas charter claims that the French Revolution, the Russian Revolution,
colonialism and both world wars were created by the Zionists or forces
supportive of Zionism. Article 32 alleges that the Zionist movement seeks to
create an Empire stretching from the Nile in Egypt to the Euphrates river in
Iraq. In April 2010, Abd Al-Azim Al-Maghrabi, the Deputy Head of Egyptian Arab
Lawyers Union, stated in an interview with Al-Manar TV (as translated by MEMRI)
that the Hepatitis C virus was produced by "the Zionists" and that "this virus
is now spreading in Egypt like wildfire." He also called for it to be
"classified as one of the war crimes perpetrated by the Zionist enemy." [http:/
/www.memritv.org/clip_transcript/en/2503.htm Against the Backdrop of Soccer
World Cup in South Africa, Egyptian Cleric Mus'id Anwar Blasts Soccer, Other
"Harmful Sports", as a Means Prescribed by the Protocols of the Elders of Zion
in Order to Rule the World, MEMRITV, Clip No. 2503, 6 June 2010.
