Anti-Defamation League The Anti-Defamation League (ADL) is an international
non-governmental organization based in the United States. Describing itself as
"the nation's premier civil rights/human relations agency", the ADL states that
it "fights anti-Semitism and all forms of bigotry, defends democratic ideals
and protects civil rights for all," doing so through "information, education,
legislation, and advocacy." Founded in October 1913 by The Independent Order of
B'nai B'rith, a Jewish service organization in the United States, its original
mission statement was "to stop, by appeals to reason and conscience and, if
necessary, by appeals to law, the defamation of the Jewish people. Its ultimate
purpose is to secure justice and fair treatment to all citizens alike and to
put an end forever to unjust and unfair discrimination against and ridicule of
any sect or body of citizens." The ADL has 29 offices in the United States and
three offices in other countries, with its headquarters located in New York
City. Since 1987, Abraham Foxman has been the national director in the United
States. The national chairman in the United States is Robert Sugarman. Origin.
Founded in October 1913 by Sigmund Livingston, the ADL's charter states, "The
immediate object of the League is to stop, by appeals to reason and conscience
and, if necessary, by appeals to law, the defamation of the Jewish people. Its
ultimate purpose is to secure justice and fair treatment to all citizens alike
and to put an end forever to unjust and unfair discrimination against and
ridicule of any sect or body of citizens." Livingston established the ADL in
direct response to the 1913 trial of Leo Frank, a Jewish factory manager and
B'nai B'rith chapter president in Georgia, convicted of —and, posthumously,
pardoned for— murdering a 13 year old female employee. Goals. Fighting anti-
Semitism, bigotry, and racism. The stated purpose of the ADL is to fight "Anti-
Semitism and all forms of bigotry (in the United States) and abroad, combat
international terrorism, probe the roots of hatred, advocate before the United
States Congress, come to the aid of victims of bigotry, develop educational
programs, and serve as a public resource for government, media, law
enforcement, and the public, all towards the goal of countering and reducing
hatred." Historically, the ADL has opposed groups and individuals it considered
to be anti-Semitic and/or racist, including: Nazis, the Ku Klux Klan, Henry
Ford, Father Charles Coughlin (leader of the Christian Front), the Christian
Identity movement, the German-American Bund, neo-Nazis, the American militia
movement and white power skinheads (although the ADL acknowledges that there
are also non-racist skinheads). The ADL publishes reports on a variety of
countries, regarding alleged incidents of anti-Jewish attacks and propaganda.
The ADL gives out its Courage to Care Award to honor rescuers of Jews during
the Holocaust era. The ADL publishes a list of the "ten leading organizations
responsible for maligning Israel in the US", which have included a group
calling for the United States to "stop funding Israeli apartheid". In October
2010, the ADL condemned remarks by Haham Ovadia Yosef that the sole purpose of
non-Jews was to serve the people of Israel. Separation of church and state. One
of the ADL's major focuses is religious freedom for people of all faiths. In
the context of public schools, the ADL has taken the position that because
creationism and intelligent design are religious beliefs, and the government is
prohibited from endorsing the beliefs of any particular religion, they should
not be taught in science classrooms: "The U.S. Constitution guarantees the
rights of Americans to believe the religious theories of creation (as well as
other theories) but it does not permit them to be taught in public school
science classes." Similarly, the ADL supports the legal precedent that it is
unconstitutional for the government to post the Ten Commandments in
courthouses, schools, and other public places: "True religious liberty means
freedom from having the government impose the religion of the majority on all
citizens." The ADL has also condemned the public school Bible curriculum
published by the National Council on Bible Curriculum in Public Schools, saying
that it raises "serious constitutional problems" and "advocates the acceptance
of one faith tradition's interpretation of the Bible over another." The ADL
opposed Proposition 8 and supported the Matthew Shepard Act. Defending other
religions. Letter to Dr. Richard Lindsay, Director of Public Communications,
The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, May 25, 1984 Tracking
"extremists". The ADL keeps track of the activities of various "extremist"
groups and movements. According to ADL Director Abe Foxman, "Our mission is to
monitor and expose those who are anti-Jewish, racist, anti-democratic, and
violence-prone, and we monitor them primarily by reading publications and
attending public meetings …. Because extremist organizations are highly
secretive, sometimes ADL can learn of their activities only by using undercover
sources … function in a manner directly analogous to investigative
journalists. Some have performed great service to the American people—for
example, by uncovering the existence of right-wing extremist paramilitary
training camps—with no recognition and at considerable personal risk." A
person apprehended in connection to the 2002 white supremacist terror plot had
drawn a cartoon of himself blowing up the Boston offices of the ADL. The ADL
regularly releases reports on anti-Semitism and extremist activities on the far
left and the far right. For instance, as part of its Law Enforcement Agency
Resource Network (L.E.A.R.N.), the ADL has published information about the
Militia Movement in America and a guide for law enforcement officials titled
"Officer Safety and Extremists". An archive of "The Militia Watchdog" research
on U.S. right-wing extremism (including groups not specifically cited as anti-
Semitic) from 1995 to 2000 is also available on the ADL website. In the 1990s,
some details of the ADL's monitoring activities became public and
controversial, including the fact that the ADL had gathered information about
some non-extremist groups. Role in arrest of potential assassins of Barack
Obama. In October 2008 the ADL reportedly assisted the US Bureau of Alcohol,
Tobacco and Firearms (ATF) by providing, on request, information on Daniel
Cowart and Paul Schlesselman and their associates and contacts, and on their
ties to the Supreme White Alliance. Shortly thereafter the two men were
arrested on charges of plotting to murder dozens of African Americans and
plotting to assassinate US President-elect Barack Obama. Holocaust awareness.
The ADL holds that it is important to remember the Holocaust, in order to
prevent such an event from ever coming to pass again. Along with sponsoring
events and fighting Holocaust deniers and revisionists, the ADL has been active
in urging action to stop modern-day "ethnic cleansing" and genocide in places
such as Bosnia and Darfur, Sudan. The ADL spoke out against an advertising
campaign by People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) beginning in
2003 that equated meat-eating with the Holocaust. A press release from the ADL
stated that "PETA's effort to seek 'approval' for their 'Holocaust on Your
Plate' campaign is outrageous, offensive and takes chutzpah to new heights.
Rather than deepen our revulsion against what the Nazis did to the Jews, the
project will undermine the struggle to understand the Holocaust and to find
ways to make sure such catastrophes never happen again." On May 5, 2005, PETA
issued an apology for comparing the treatment of farm animals to the victims of
the Nazi concentration camps. PETA President Ingrid Newkirk said she realized
that the campaign had caused pain: "This was never our intention, and we are
deeply sorry." The ADL has for many years refused to acknowledge that the
Armenian genocide constituted a genocide. The ADL has actively engaged in
efforts to oppose Congressional affirmation of the Armenian Genocide. Under
pressure to do so, the national ADL issued a "Statement on the Armenian
Genocide" on August 21, 2007. The statement declared, "The consequences of
those actions were indeed tantamount to genocide." Activists felt that the
statement was not a full, unequivocal acknowledgment of the Armenian genocide,
because the use of the qualifier "tantamount" was seen as inappropriate, and
the use of the word "consequences" was seen as an attempt to circumvent the
international legal definition of genocide by avoiding any language that would
imply intent, a crucial aspect of the 1948 UN Genocide Convention definition.
The ADL convened its national meeting in New York City in early November at
which time the issue of the Armenian Genocide was discussed. Upon conclusion, a
one sentence press statement was issued that "The National Commission of the
Anti-Defamation League (ADL) today, at its annual meeting, decided to take no
further action on the issue of the Armenian genocide." Political positions. The
ADL supports the Jewish state and has vociferously opposed resolutions such as
the 1975 United Nations resolution (revoked in 1991) that had equated Zionism
and racism, and attempts to revive that formulation at the 2001 U.N. World
Conference Against Racism in Durban, South Africa. The ADL honors individuals
throughout the year for various reasons. On September 23, 2003, at its Tribute
to Italy Dinner, the ADL awarded Italian prime minister Silvio Berlusconi the
ADL's distinguished statesman award, an honor "conferred on world leaders who
exhibit a commitment to furthering the achievement of regional and world peace,
and who possess a special commitment to promoting human and civil rights."
Berlusconi is also known for his staunch pro-Israel stance. The ADL has spoken
out against red-baiting and McCarthyism. In 2006 the ADL condemned Senate
Republicans in the United States for attempting to ban same-sex marriage with
the Federal Marriage Amendment and praised its demise, calling it
"discrimination". That same year the ADL warned that the debate over illegal
immigration was drawing neo-nazis and anti-Semites into the ranks of the
Minutemen Project. In 1974 ADL national leaders Arnold Forster and Benjamin R.
Epstein published a book called "The New Anti-Semitism" (New York, 1974),
arguing that a new kind of anti-Semitism is on the rise. In 1982, ADL national
leader Nathan Perlmutter and his wife, Ruth Ann Perlmutter, released a book
entitled "The Real Anti-Semitism in America" (New York, 1982). In 2003, ADL's
national director Abraham Foxman published "Never Again? The Threat of the New
Anti-Semitism" (San Francisco, 2003), where on page 4 he states: "We currently
face as great a threat to the safety and security of the Jewish people as the
one we faced in the 1930s—if not a greater one." In 2010, during a hearing
for Florida House Bill 11 (Crimes Against Homeless Persons) which was to revise
the list of offenses judged to be hate crimes in Florida by adding a person's
homeless status, the League lobbied against the bill, which subsequently passed
in the House by a vote of 80 to 28 and was sent to the Senate, taking the
position that adding more categories to the list would dilute the effectiveness
of the law, which already includes race, religion, sexual orientation,
disability, and age. Relations with ethnic groups. Relations with Arabs and
Muslims. ADL publications on condemning bigotry towards Arabs, Muslims, Blacks
and members of other minorities have often been used in synagogue adult
education programs, and as part of Jewish-Christian and Jewish-Muslim inter-
faith dialogue. The ADL is sometimes at odds with Arab and Muslim groups,
particularly over issues involving Israel and antisemitism. For instance, the
ADL regularly publishes updates to its web site reviewing and cataloguing
negative portrayals of Jews in Arab nations' media. On June 18, 2004 the ADL
issued a news release about the University of California Irvine (UCI) Muslim
Students Union in which the ADL alleged that the student group had invited
speakers to campus who "made public declarations of support for Hamas,
advocated suicide bombings and called for the destruction of Israel." For
graduation Group members chose to wear green (the traditional colour of Islam)
graduation stoles bearing the "Shahada", the Islamic declaration of faith. The
ADL's press release described the Shahada as "a declaration of faith that has
been closely identified with Palestinian terrorists," and claimed that suicide
bombers connected to the Palestinian group Hamas wear green armbands and
headbands inscribed with the "Shahada" as a symbol of their movement, and
further stated, "We are troubled that members of the (UCI) Muslim Students
Union have chosen to display symbolism that is closely identified with
Palestinian terrorist groups and that can be especially offensive to Jewish
students." A news release from the Council on American-Islamic Relations denied
that the stoles were expressions of support for terrorism, called the ADL's
comments "bigoted statements", and demanded an apology; the organization's
communications director Sabiha Khan said: "The ADL's hate-filled Islamophobic
rhetoric labels all Muslims as terrorists, because every Muslim believes in the
declaration of faith as the essence of Islam." The ADL released a clarifying
statement saying the ADL has nothing against the Muslim statement of faith and
that, "It was never our intent to offend anyone and we apologize to those who
took offense." Relations with African-Americans. The ADL has worked to combat
racism against all racial groups, including racism against blacks. In 1997, the
"National Center for Black-Jewish Relations" of Dillard University, a
historically black university in New Orleans awarded the director of the ADL,
Abraham H. Foxman, with the first Annual Martin Luther King, Jr. – Donald R.
Mintz Freedom and Justice Award. In 2004, the ADL became the lead partner in
the "Peace and Diversity Academy", a new New York City public high school with
predominantly black and Hispanic students. In celebration of Black History
Month, the ADL created and distributed lesson plans to middle and high school
teachers about Shirley Chisholm, the first black woman elected to the US
Congress, and an important civil rights leader. The ADL files controversy.
Since the 1930s the ADL has been gathering information and publishing reports
on anti-Semitism, racism and prejudice, and on anti-Jewish, anti-Israel,
racist, anti-democratic, violent, and extremist individuals and groups. As a
result, the organization has amassed what it once called a "famous storehouse
of accurate, detailed, unassailable information on extremist individuals and
organizations." Over the decades the ADL has assembled thousands of files. One
of its sources was Roy Bullock, a person who collected information and provided
it to the ADL as a secretly paid independent contractor over 32 years. Bullock
often wrote letters to various groups and forwarded copies of their replies to
the ADL, clipped articles from newspapers and magazines, and maintained files
on his computer. He also used less orthodox, and possibly illegal, methods such
as combing through trash and tapping into the White Aryan Resistance's phone
message system to find evidence of hate crimes. Some of the information he
obtained and then passed on to the ADL came from confidential documents
(including intelligence files on various Nazi groups and driver's license
records and other personal information on nearly 1,400 people) that were given
to him by San Francisco police officer Tom Gerard. On April 8, 1993, police
seized Bullock's computer and raided the ADL offices in San Francisco and Los
Angeles, California. A search of Bullock's computer revealed he had compiled
files on 9,876 individuals and more than 950 groups across the political
spectrum. Many of Bullock's files concerned groups that did not fit the mold of
extremist groups, hate groups, and organizations hostile to Jews or Israel that
the ADL would usually be interested in. Along with files on the Ku Klux Klan,
White Aryan Resistance, Islamic Jihad and Jewish Defense League were data on
the NAACP, the African National Congress (ANC), the American Civil Liberties
Union (ACLU), the United Auto Workers, the AIDS activist group ACT UP, Mother
Jones magazine, the TASS Soviet/Russian news agency, Greenpeace, Jews for Jesus
and the National Lawyers Guild; there were also files on politicians including
Democratic U.S. Representative Nancy Pelosi, former Republican U.S.
Representative Pete McCloskey, and activist Lyndon LaRouche. Bullock told
investigators that many of those were his own private files, not information he
was passing on to the ADL. An attorney for the ADL stated that "We knew nothing
about the vast extent of the files. Those are not ADL's files. … That is all
doing." As for its own records, the ADL indicated that just because it had a
file on a group did not indicate opposition to the group. The San Francisco
district attorney at the time accused the ADL of conducting a national "spy
network", but dropped all accusations a few months later. In the weeks
following the raids, twelve civil rights groups led by the American-Arab Anti-
Discrimination Committee and the National Lawyers Guild, filed a lawsuit
demanding ADL release its surveillance information and end its investigations,
as well as be ordered to pay punitive damages. The plaintiffs' attorney, former
Representative McCloskey, claimed that information the ADL gathered constituted
an invasion of privacy. The ADL, while distancing itself from Bullock,
countered that it is entitled like any researcher or journalist to research
organizations and individuals. Richard Cohen, legal director of the Southern
Poverty Law Center in Montgomery, Alabama, stated that like journalists, the
ADL's researchers "gather information however they can" and welcome disclosures
from confidential sources, saying "they probably rely on their sources to draw
the line" on how much can legally be divulged. Bullock admitted that he was
overzealous, and that some of the ways he gathered information may have been
illegal. The lawsuit was settled out of court in 1999. The ADL agreed to pay
$175,000 for the court costs of the groups that sued it, promised that it would
not seek information from sources it knew could not legally disclose such
information, consented to remove sensitive information like criminal records or
Social Security numbers from its files, and spent $25,000 to further relations
between the Jewish, Arab and black communities. When the case was settled,
Hussein Ibish, director of communications for the American-Arab Anti-
Discrimination Committee (ADC), claimed that the ADL had gathered data
"systematically in a program whose clear intent was to undermine civil rights
and Arab-American organizations". ADL national director Abraham Foxman called
the ADC's claims "absolutely untrue," saying that "if it were true, they would
have won their case" and noting that no court found the ADL guilty of any
wrongdoing. The ADL released a statement saying that the settlement "explicitly
recognizes ADL's right to gather information in any lawful and constitutionally
protected manner, which we have always done and will continue to do." James
Rosenberg. A case which has been compared to the Bullock case was that of James
Mitchell Rosenberg, AKA Jim Anderson. Rosenberg/Anderson was an undercover
operative of the ADL who acted as an agent provocateur, posing as a racist
right-wing paramilitary extremist. He appeared in this role as part of a TV
documentary entitled "Armies of the Right" which premiered in 1981. Rosenberg
was arrested that same year in New York for carrying an unregistered firearm in
public view. In 1984, ADL fact-finding director Irwin Suall identified
Rosenberg as an ADL operative in a court deposition. Armenian Genocide
controversy. In 2007, Abraham Foxman came under criticism for his stance on the
Armenian Genocide. The ADL had previously described it as a "massacre" and
"atrocity", but not a "genocide". Foxman had earlier opposed calls for the U.S.
Government to recognise it as a "genocide". "I don't think congressional action
will help reconcile the issue. The resolution takes a position; it comes to a
judgment," said Foxman in a statement issued to the Jewish Telegraphic Agency.
“The Turks and Armenians need to revisit their past. The Jewish community
shouldn't be the arbiter of that history, nor should the U.S. Congress, and "a
Congressional resolution on such matters is a counterproductive diversion and
will not foster reconciliation between Turks and Armenians and may put at risk
the Turkish Jewish community and the important multilateral relationship
between Turkey, Israel and the United States." In early August 2007, complaints
about the Anti-Defamation League's refusal to acknowledge the Armenian Genocide
led to the Watertown, Massachusetts unanimous town council decision to end
their participation in the ADL "No Place for Hate" campaign. (Watertown is
known for its Armenian population.) Also in August 2007, an editorial in "The
Boston Globe" criticized the ADL saying that "as an organization concerned
about human rights, it ought to acknowledge the genocide against the Armenian
people during World War I, and criticize Turkish attempts to repress the memory
of this historical reality." Then on 17 August 2007, the ADL fired its regional
New England director, Andrew H. Tarsy, for breaking ranks with the main
organization and saying the ADL should recognize the genocide. In a 21 August
2007 press release, the ADL changed its position to one of acknowledging the
genocide but maintained its opposition to congressional resolutions aimed at
recognizing it. Foxman wrote, "the consequences of those actions," by the
Ottoman Empire against Armenians, "were indeed tantamount to genocide." The
Turkish government condemned the league's statement. Andrew H. Tarsy was
rehired by the league on 27 August, though he has since chosen to step down
from his position. After Foxman's capitulation, the New England ADL pressed the
organization's national leadership to support a congressional resolution
acknowledging the genocide. After hours of closed-door debate at the annual
national meeting in New York, the proposal was ultimately withdrawn. The
organization issued a statement saying it would "take no further action on the
issue of the Armenian genocide." The ADL had earlier received direct pressure
from the Turkish Foreign ministry. Tarsy submitted his resignation on December
4. Since August, some human rights commissions in other Massachusetts
communities decided to follow Watertown's lead and withdraw from the ADL's No
Place for Hate anti-discrimination program. Criticism. Linguist and activist
Noam Chomsky has characterized ADL as having lost entirely its focus on civil
rights issues to become solely an advocate for Israeli policy; he holds that
ADL casts all left-wing opposition to Israeli interests as antisemitism. Role
in cancellation of speech by Tony Judt at Polish Consulate. The ADL, in
addition to the American Jewish Committee, was criticized by academic Tony Judt
for allegedly pressuring the Polish Consul General in New York to cancel a
scheduled appearance by Judt at a non-profit organization that rents space from
the consulate. In an interview with the "New York Sun", Foxman claimed that the
group "had nothing to do with the cancellation", insisting that the ADL only
called to ask if the event was being sponsored by the Polish government. Polish
Consul General Krzysztof Kasprzyk suggested in an interview with "The
Washington Post" that calls by the ADL and the American Jewish Committee were
"exercising a delicate pressure". In reference to the role of the ADL and
American Jewish Committee in organizing the cancellations, Judt told "The
Washington Post": "This is serious and frightening, and only in America—not
in Israel—is this a problem. These are Jewish organizations that believe they
should keep people who disagree with them on the Middle East away from anyone
who might listen." The ADL denied the charges. According to Foxman, "I think
they made the right decision... He's taken the position that Israel shouldn't
exist. That puts him on our radar." Denver defamation suit. According to an
April 13, 2001 article in "The Forward", a federal judge "lambasted the
organization for labeling a nasty neighborhood feud as an anti-Semitic event"
and upheld most of William and Dorothy Quigley's $10 million lawsuit for
defamation. In 1994, Candace and Mitchell Aronson, Jewish next door neighbors
of the Quigleys, contacted the Denver ADL office, reporting overheard cordless
phone conversations of the Quigleys discussing putting pictures of oven doors
on the Aronsons' home (a reference to the Holocaust), burning the Aronson
children and wishing the Aronsons had been killed in a suicide bombing. (The
Quigleys later indicated that these remarks had been intended to be humorous.)
The Quigleys and the Aronsons had been engaged in an escalating series of petty
disputes prior to this incident. The ADL also labelled the Quigleys as anti-
Semites in a press conference which led to felony federal charges being filed
against them. Unknown to many at the time that the Aronsons were
taping—including Mr. Thomas—was that Congress had amended federal wiretap
law to make it illegal to record conversations on a cordless telephone, to
transcribe the material and to use the transcriptions for any purpose. Without
knowing about the change, the Aronsons used the tapes as the basis for a
federal civil lawsuit against the Quigleys in December 1994. A day later, Mr.
Rosenthal appeared at a news conference with the Aronsons in which he described
their encounter with the Quigleys as "a vicious anti-Semitic campaign," based
solely on conversations he and associates had with the Aronsons. Later that
day, Mr. Rosenthal expanded on his remarks in an interview on a Denver radio
talk show. Two days later, Mr. Thomas used the tapes as the basis for filing
criminal charges against the Quigleys. But after Mr. Thomas learned of the
change in the wiretap law and heard on the tapes the context of Mrs. Quigley's
remarks, he dropped all charges but one, a misdemeanor traffic violation
against Mr. Quigley for the incident in the street. In an open letter released
to reporters, Mr. Thomas apologized to the Quigleys, saying he found no
evidence that either had engaged in "anti-Semitic conduct or harassment." New
antisemitism controversy. In 1974, ADL national leaders Arnold Forster and
Benjamin R. Epstein published a book called "The New Anti-Semitism" (New York,
1974), arguing that a new kind of anti-Semitism is on the rise. In 1982, ADL
national leader Nathan Perlmutter and his wife, Ruth Ann Perlmutter, released a
book entitled "The Real Anti-Semitism in America" (New York, 1982). In 2003,
ADL's national director Abraham Foxman published "Never Again? The Threat of
the New Anti-Semitism" (San Francisco, 2003), where on page 4 he states: "We
currently face as great a threat to the safety and security of the Jewish
people as the one we faced in the 1930s—if not a greater one." In 2005,
Norman G. Finkelstein published "" which devotes Part 1 to "The Not-So-New 'New
Anti-Semitism'." In a 2006 appearance on Amy Goodman's Democracy Now!,
Finkelstein denied there was any evidence for a rise of a new anti-Semitism in
either Europe or North America. He continued, "Every time Israel comes under
international pressure, as it did recently because of the war crimes committed
in Lebanon, it steps up the claim of anti-Semitism, and all of Israel's critics
are anti-Semitic." According to Finkelstein, the ADL and Foxman, its president,
have advanced this "preposterous" deception. Conflict with Jews for the
Preservation of Firearms Ownership. ADL is an advocate for gun control
legislation. The ADL supported the District of Columbia before the US Supreme
Court in "District of Columbia v. Heller" which argued that the city's ban on
the possession of handguns and any functional firearms, even for self-defense
in the home is not prohibited by the Second Amendment. The League urged the
Court to ensure that states retain the ability to keep guns out of the hands of
"violent bigots." Gun rights group Jews for the Preservation of Firearms
Ownership (JPFO) has been highly critical of the Anti-Defamation League. In
pamphlets such as "Why Does the ADL Support Nazi-Based Laws?" and "JPFO Facts
vs. ADL Lies," the JPFO has accused the ADL of undermining the welfare of the
Jewish people by promoting gun control. In a 2007 handbill the JPFO accused
Director Abraham Foxman of knowingly supporting the "use of Nazi gun control
laws in America." Foxman has written about the JPFO: "Anti-Semitism has a long
and painful history, and the linkage to gun control is a tactic by Jews for the
Preservation of Firearms Ownership to manipulate the fear of anti-Semitism
toward their own end." Park 51 Community Center controversy. On July 28, 2010
the ADL issued a statement in which it expressed opposition to the Park51
Community Center, which sponsors planned to build near Ground Zero in New York.
The ADL stated, "The controversy which has emerged regarding the building of a
Community Center at this location is counterproductive to the healing process.
Therefore, under these unique circumstances, we believe the City of New York
would be better served if an alternative location could be found." The ADL
denounced what it saw as bigoted attacks on the project. Foxman opined that
some of those who oppose the mosque are "bigots", and that the plan's
proponents may have every right to build the mosque at that location.
Nevertheless, he appealed to the builders to consider the sensitivities of the
victims' families, saying that building the mosque at that site would
unnecessarily cause more pain for families of some victims of 9/11. This
opposition to the Community Center led to criticism of the statement from
various parties, including one ADL board member, the American Jewish Committee,
the Jewish Community Relations Council of New York, Rabbi Irwin Kula,
columnists Jeffrey Goldberg and Peter Beinart, the Interfaith Alliance, and the
Shalom Center. In an interview with the "New York Times" Abe Foxman published a
statement in reaction to criticism. In protest of ADL’s stance, CNN host
Fareed Zakaria returned the Hubert H. Humphrey First Amendment Freedoms Prize
the ADL awarded him in 2005. ADL chair Robert G. Sugarman responded to a
critical "New York Times" editorial writing, "we have publicly taken on those
who criticized the mosque in ways that reflected anti-Muslim bigotry or used
the controversy for that purpose" and stating that the ADL has combated
Islamophobia.
