Antichrist The antichrist is a Christian concept based on the exegesis of
Second Temple (500 BCE–50 CE) Jewish texts that refer to anti-messiahs. In
Christian belief, Jesus the messiah appears in his Second coming to earth, to
face the emergence of the Antichrist figure. Just as Christ is the savior and
the ideal model for humanity, his opponent in the End of days will be a single
figure of concentrated evil. In the New Testament, the term "antichrist" occurs
five times in 1 John and 2 John, once in plural form and four times in the
singular. Origins. Etymology. The word "antichrist" is made up of two roots: +
(anti + Christos). "Αντί" can mean not only "against" and "opposite of",
but also "in place of", "Χριστός", translated "Christ", is Greek for the
Hebrew "Messiah" meaning "anointed," and refers to Jesus of Nazareth within
Christian, Islamic and Messianic Jewish theology. Jewish antecedents. Anti-
messiahs are referred to in some Jewish writings in the period 500 BC–50 AD,
and this is thought to be the precursor of the concept of the Antichrist in
Christian writing. Bernard McGinn conjectures that the concept may have been
generated by the frustration of Jews subject to often-capricious Seleucid or
Roman rule, who found the nebulous Jewish idea of a Satan who is more of an
opposing angel of God in the heavenly court insufficiently humanised and
personalised to be a satisfactory incarnation of evil and threat. Armilus is an
anti-messiah figure from late period Jewish eschatology. He is described as
bald, partially maimed, and partially deaf. History of the doctrine. Early
Church. Polycarp (ca. 69 – ca. 155) warned the Philippians that everyone who
preached false doctrine was an antichrist. Irenaeus (2nd century AD – c. 202)
wrote "Against Heresies" to refute the teachings of the Gnostics. In Book V of
"Against Heresies" he addresses the figure of the Antichrist referring to him
as the "recapitulation of apostasy and rebellion." He uses the Number of the
Beast from Revelation 13:18 to numerologically decode several possible names.
Some names that he loosely proposed were "Evanthos", "Lateinos" ("Latin" or
pertaining to the Roman Empire). In his exegesis of Daniel 7:21, he stated that
the ten horns of the beast will be the Roman empire divided into ten kingdoms
before the Antichrist's arrival. However, his readings of the Antichrist were
more in broader theological terms rather than within a historical context.
Tertullian (ca.160 – ca.220 AD) held that the Roman Empire was the
restraining force written about by Paul in 2 Thessalonians 2:7-8. The fall of
Rome and the disintegration of the ten provinces of the Roman Empire into ten
kingdoms were to make way for the Antichrist.  Hippolytus of Rome (c. 170-c.
236) held that the Antichrist would come from the tribe of Dan and would
rebuild the Jewish temple in order to reign from it. He identified the
Antichrist with the Beast out of the Earth from the book of Revelation.
Hippolytus's   Post-Nicene Christianity. Cyril of Jerusalem, in the mid-4th
century, delivered his 15th Catechetical Lecture about the Second Coming of
Jesus Christ, in which he also lectures about the Antichrist, who will reign as
the ruler of the world for three and a half years, before he is killed by Jesus
Christ right at the end of his three-and-a-half-year reign, shortly after which
the Second Coming of Jesus Christ will happen. Athanasius (c. 293 – 373),
writes that Arius of Alexandria is to be associated with the Antichrist,
saying, "And ever since Council of Nicaea has Arius's error been reckoned for a
heresy more than ordinary, being known as Christ's foe, and harbinger of
Antichrist." John Chrysostom (c. 347–407) warned against speculations and old
wives' tales about the Antichrist, saying, "Let us not therefore enquire into
these things". He preached that by knowing Paul's description of the Antichrist
in 2 Thessalonians Christians would avoid deception. Jerome (c. 347-420) warned
that those substituting false interpretations for the actual meaning of
Scripture belonged to the "synagogue of the Antichrist". "He that is not of
Christ is of Antichrist," he wrote to Pope Damasus I. He believed that "the
mystery of iniquity" written about by Paul in 2 Thessalonians 2:7 was already
in action when "every one chatters about his views." To Jerome, the power
restraining this mystery of iniquity was the Roman Empire, but as it fell this
restraining force was removed. He warned a noble woman of Gaul:  We should
therefore concur with the traditional interpretation of all the commentators of
the Christian Church, that at the end of the world, when the Roman Empire is to
be destroyed, there shall be ten kings who will partition the Roman world
amongst themselves. Then an insignificant eleventh king will arise, who will
overcome three of the ten kings... after they have been slain, the seven other
kings also will bow their necks to the victor.  Augustine of Hippo (354 –
430) wrote "it is uncertain in what temple Antichrist shall sit, whether in
that ruin of the temple which was built by Solomon, or in the Church." Pope
Gregory I wrote to Emperor Maurice A.D. 597, concerning the titles of bishops,
"I say with confidence that whoever calls or desires to call himself
‘universal priest’ in self-exaltation of himself is a precursor of the
Antichrist." Western Church–Pre-Reformation. Archbishop Arnulf of Rheims
disagreed with the policies and morals of Pope John XV. He expressed his views
while presiding over the Council of Reims in A.D. 991. Arnulf accused John XV
of being the Antichrist while also using the 2 Thessalonians passage about the
Man of Sin, saying, "Surely, if he is empty of charity and filled with vain
knowledge and lifted up, he is Antichrist sitting in God's temple and showing
himself as God." This incident is history's earliest record of anyone
identifying a pope with the Antichrist (See Antichrist (historicism)). Pope
Gregory VII (c. 1015 or 29 – 1085), struggled against, in his own words, "a
robber of temples, a perjurer against the Holy Roman Church, notorious
throughout the whole Roman world for the basest of crimes, namely, Wilbert,
plunderer of the holy church of Ravenna, Antichrist, and archeritic." Cardinal
Benno, on the opposite side of the Investiture Controversy, wrote long
descriptions of abuses committed by Gregory VII, including necromancy, torture
of a former friend upon a bed of nails, commissioning an attempted
assassination, executions without trials, unjust excommunication, doubting the
Real Presence in the Eucharist, and even burning it. Benno held that Gregory
VII was "either a member of Antichrist, or Antichrist himself." A little horn
has grown up with eyes and mouth speaking great things, which is reducing three
of these kingdoms--i.e. Sicily, Italy, and Germany--to subserviency, is
persecuting the people of Christ and the saints of God with intolerable
opposition, is confounding things human and divine, and is attempting things
unutterable, execrable. Protestant reformers. Many Protestant reformers,
including Martin Luther, John Calvin, Thomas Cranmer, John Thomas, John Knox,
and Cotton Mather, identified the Roman Papacy as the Antichrist. The
Centuriators of Magdeburg, a group of Lutheran scholars in Magdeburg headed by
Matthias Flacius, wrote the 12-volume "Magdeburg Centuries" to discredit the
papacy and identify the pope as the Antichrist. The fifth round of talks in the
Lutheran-Roman Catholic dialogue notes, See Building Unity, edited by Burgess
and Gross William Tyndale, an English Protestant reformer, held that while the
Roman Catholic realms of that age were the empire of Antichrist, any religious
organization that distorted the doctrine of the Old and New Testaments also
showed the work of Antichrist. In his treatise "The Parable of the Wicked
Mammon", he expressly rejected the established Church teaching that looked to
the future for an Antichrist to rise up, and he taught that Antichrist is a
present spiritual force that will be with us until the end of the age under
different religious disguises from time to time. Tyndale's translation of 2
Thessalonians, chapter 2, concerning the "man of sin" reflected his
understanding, but was significantly amended by later revisers, including the
King James Bible committee, which followed the Vulgate more closely. Counter-
Reformation. The view of Futurism, a product of the Counter-Reformation, was
advanced beginning in the 16th century in response to the identification of the
Papacy as Antichrist. Francisco Ribera, a Jesuit priest, developed this theory
in "In Sacrum Beati Ioannis Apostoli, & Evangelistiae Apocalypsin Commentarij",
his 1585 treatise on the Apocalypse of John. St. Bellarmine codified this view,
giving in full the Catholic theory set forth by the Greek and Latin Fathers, of
a personal Antichrist to come just before the end of the world and to be
accepted by the Jews and enthroned in the temple at Jerusalem — thus
endeavoring to dispose of the exposition which saw Antichrist in the pope. Most
premillennial dispensationalists now accept Bellarmine's interpretation in
modified form. Widespread Protestant identification of the Papacy as the
Antichrist persisted in the USA until the early 1900s when the Scofield
Reference Bible was published by Cyrus Scofield. This commentary promoted
Futurism, causing a decline in the Protestant identification of the Papacy as
Antichrist. Some US Futurists hold that sometime prior to the expected return
of Jesus, there will be a period of "great tribulation" during which the
Antichrist, indwelt and controlled by Satan, will attempt to win supporters
with false peace, supernatural signs. He will silence all that defy him by
refusing to "receive his mark" on their right hands or forehead. This "mark"
will be required to legally partake in the end-time economic system. Some
Futurists believe that the Antichrist will be assassinated half way through the
Tribulation, being revived and indwelt by Satan. The Antichrist will continue
on for three and a half years following this "deadly wound". Old Believers.
After the reforms of Patriarch Nikon to the Russian Orthodox Church of 1652, a
large number of Old Believers held that czar Peter the Great was the Antichrist
because of his treatment of the Orthodox Church, namely subordinating the
church to the state, requiring clergymen to conform to the standards of all
Russian civilians (shaved beards, being fluent in French), and requiring them
to pay state taxes. Age of Enlightenment. Bernard McGinn noted that complete
denial of the Antichrist was rare until the Age of Enlightenment. Following
frequent use of "Antichrist" laden rhetoric during religious controversies in
the 17th century, the use of the concept declined in the 18th century.
Subsequent eighteenth-century efforts to cleanse Christianity of "legendary" or
"folk" accretions effectively removed the Antichrist from discussion in
mainstream Western churches. Other identities. As "Man of sin". The Antichrist
has been equated with the "Man of sin" of 2 Thessalonians 2, even though
commentaries of the "Man of sin's" identity greatly varies. The "man of sin"
has been identified with Caligula, Nero, and the end times Antichrist. Some
scholars believe that the passage contains no genuine prediction, but
represents a speculation of the apostle's own, based on ; , and on contemporary
ideas of the Antichrist. As "being in league with other figures". Several
American evangelical and fundamentalist theologians, including Cyrus Scofield,
have identified the Antichrist as being in league with (or the same as) several
figures in the Book of Revelation including the Dragon (or Serpent), the Beast,
the False Prophet, and the Whore of Babylon. Others, for example, Rob Bell,
reject the identification of the Antichrist with any one person or group. They
believe a loving Christ would not view anyone as an enemy. As Satan. Bernard
McGinn described multiple traditions detailing the relationship between the
Antichrist and Satan. In the dualist approach, Satan will become incarnate in
the Antichrist, just as God became incarnate in Jesus. However, in orthodox
Christian thought, this view was problematic because it was too similar to
Christ's incarnation. Instead, the "indwelling" view became more accepted. It
stipulates that the Antichrist is a human figure inhabited by Satan, since the
latter’s power is not to be seen as equivalent to God’s. As Lucifer. In
Mormonism, the "Antichrist" "is anyone or anything that counterfeits the true
gospel or plan of salvation and that openly or secretly is set up in opposition
to Christ and the changes he wants made to his Church when he wants them done.
The great antichrist is Lucifer, but he has many assistants both as spirit
beings and as mortals." Latter-day Saints use the New Testament scriptures, 1
John 2:18, 22; 1 John 4:3-6; 2 John 1:7 and the Book of Mormon, Jacob 7:1-23,
Alma 1:2-16, Alma 30:6-60, in their exegesis of the Antichrist. As "Masih ad-
Dajjal". Masih ad-Dajjal (, literally "The Deceiving Messiah"), is an evil
figure in Islamic eschatology. He is to appear pretending to be God at a time
in the future, before Yawm al-Qiyamah (The Day of Resurrection, Judgment Day).
He will travel around the globe entering every city except Mecca and Medina
obliging people to believe in him as a God. Then Isa (Jesus) will descend from
the sky to the White lighthouse in eastern Bethlehem, Palestine, placing his
hands on the backs of two angels at the time of Fajr. This will happen at the
time of the Dajjal and Isa will be the one to eventually defeat the Dajjal,
killing him with his spear. The Ahmadiyya teachings interpret the prophecies
regarding the appearance of the "Dajjal" (Anti-Christ) and Gog and Magog in
Islamic eschatology as foretelling the emergence of two branches or aspects of
the same turmoil and trial that was to be faced by Islam in the latter days and
that both emerged from Christianity or Christian nations. Its Dajjal aspect
relates to deception and perversion of religious belief while its aspect to do
with disturbance in the realm of politics and the shattering of world peace has
been called Gog and Magog. Thus Ahmadis consider the widespread Christian
missionary activity that was aggressively active in the 18th and 19th centuries
as being part of the prophesied Dajjal (Antichrist) and Gog and Magog emerging
in modern times. The emergence of the Soviet Union and the USA as superpowers
and the conflict between the two nations (i.e., the rivalry between communism
and capitalism) are seen as having occurred in accordance with certain
prophecies regarding Gog and Magog. Ahmadis believe that prophecies and sayings
about the Antichrist are not to be interpreted literally and hold deeper
meanings. Masih ad-Dajjal is then a name to given to latter day Christianity
and the west. As "Adolf Hitler". In the Alice A. Bailey material, Theosophist
Alice A. Bailey asserts that World War II was a cosmic conflict between good
and evil. The Masters of the Wisdom, representing the "Forces of Light", were
on the side of the Allies; the "Dark Forces" were on the side of the Axis.
According to Bailey, Adolf Hitler was possessed by the Dark Forces. With the
defeat of the axis by the allies in 1945, the stage was set for the appearance
of Maitreya to inaugurate the New Age. Alice A. Bailey's follower Benjamin
Creme claims to be the one called to prepare the way for this to happen, and
that it is possible that it could happen because Adolf Hitler was the Anti-
Christ and he was defeated in World War II. Use in popular culture. The term
"Antichrist" is widely used through popular culture, and most prominently in
punk subculture. This trend was spurred by the Sex Pistols' song "Anarchy in
the UK", in which lead singer Johnny Rotten proclaimed that he was an
Antichrist. After the release of the song, adherents of the punk culture began
to use the word as a term to describe someone who is very vulgar, crude, or
rebellious. However, after Johnny Rotten's denouncement of useless violence in
his years with Public Image Ltd, this trend began to subside with those who had
used it for the sheer sake of being "punk". It is now used in the fringe groups
of anarcho-punks and is most commonly used to describe those who practice
violent and sensational forms of anarchy.
