Apocatastasis Apocatastasis (; from , also anglicized as apokatastasis) is
reconstitution, restitution, or restoration to the original or primordial
condition. Etymology and definition. The word is reasonably common in papyri.
Concepts. Stoicism. According to Edward Moore of St. Elias School of Orthodox
Theology, Nebraska, "Apokatastasis" was first properly conceptualized in early
Stoic thought, particularly by Chrysippus whose thinking was influenced by the
theory of recurrence and cosmic cycles in Babylonian astronomical thought. The
return ("apokatastasis") of the planets and stars to their proper "celestial
signs", namely their original positions, would spark a conflagration of the
universe ("ekpyrosis"). The original position was believed to consist of an
alignment of celestial bodies with Cancer. Thereafter, from fire, rebirth would
commence, and this cycle of alternate destruction and recreation was correlated
with a divine Logos. "Antapocatastasis" is a counter-recurrence when the stars
and planets align with Capricorn, which would mark destruction by a universal
flood. Origen of Alexandria correlated the Stoic's concept of the rebirth and
reconstruction of the cosmos with the active guidance and sustenance of the
Logos, which is taken to be an emanation of Zeus, when Zeus turns his thoughts
outwards once more. In Origen's understanding, in Stoic philosophy, the cosmos
is a physical expression of Zeus' perfect thoughts and "apocatastasis" is the
contraction when Zeus returns to self-contemplation. Leibniz explored both
Stoic and his understanding of Origen's philosophy in two essays written
shortly before his death, "Apokatastasis" and "Apokatastasis panton" (1715).
Judaism. The concept of "restore" or "return" in the Hebrew Bible is the common
Hebrew verb "שׁוּב" ("shuwb/shuv"), as used in Malachi 4:2, the only use
of the verb form of apocatastasis in the Septuagint. This is used in the
"restoring" of the fortunes of Job, and is also used in the sense of rescue or
return of captives, and in the restoration of Jerusalem. This is similar to the
concept of tikkun olam in hassidic Judaism. New Testament. Grammatically, the
relative pronoun "ὧν" ("of which", genitive plural), could refer to
"χρόνων" ("of times"), in which case the central phrase would mean "till
a restitution of all times of which God spake", or to "πάντων" ("of all"
or "of all things"), meaning "till times of a restitution of all things of
which God spake". The examples given show that the phrase is usually
understood, seeing "all (things) of which God spoke" as the nearest referent,
to speak of a restitution of all things of which God spoke, not of all times of
which God spoke. The usual view taken of Peter's use of the ""apokatastasis" of
all the things about which God spoke" is that it refers to the restoration of
the Kingdom of Israel and/or the Garden of Eden and not "all things that ever
existed". The verbal form of "apokatastasis" is found in the Septuagint Malachi
3:23LXX (i.e. ), a prophecy of Elijah "turning back" the hearts of the children
to their fathers; in ("he will "restore" all things"), echoing Malachi, and in
("that I may be "restored" to you the sooner"). Shortly before the phrase in
Acts 3:21 comes, in or , the similar phrase, "times of refreshing", Nineteenth-
century "Eckermann interprets the 'apocatastasis of all things' to mean the
universal emendation of religion by the doctrine of Christ, and the 'times of
refreshing' to be the day of renewal, the times of the Messiah." Patristic
Christianity. The significance of "apocatastasis" in early Christianity is
today being re-evaluated. In particular it is now questioned whether Origen,
often listed as the most notable advocate of universal salvation did in fact
teach or believe in such a doctrine. Frederick W. Norris, in his article
"Apokatastasis" in "The Westminster Handbook to Origen" (2004), states that the
positions that Origen takes on the issue of universal salvation have often
seemed to be contradictory. "In scattered places Origen says quite clearly that
he thinks all created intelligence will be restored to God at the end of time.
In other places he says, equally clearly, that only souls who make the choice
for God and practice the virtues God demands will come to rest in heaven. Those
who do not live for God shall suffer eternally in hell or perhaps be
annihilated there. If in coming years Origen's treatise on the resurrection is
rediscovered, this apparent contradiction may be settled." He concludes: "One
could not know in advance which audience would be most likely to accept the
gospel, because of the hope engendered by God's overpowering love or because of
the fear stimulated by God's threat of hell coupled with God's demand for
ethical living. Most audiences of hearers or readers include both groups;
knowing this, Origen the pastoral preacher probably kept his view of salvation
economically 'open' for a greater effectiveness." Konstantinovsky (2009) states
that the uses of "apocatastasis" in Christian writings prior to the Synod of
Constantinople (543) and the anathema (553) pronounced against "Origenists" and
Evagrius Ponticus were neutral and referred primarily to concepts similar to
the general "restoration of all things spoken" ("restitutio omnium quae locutus
est Deus") of Peter in Acts 3:21 and not for example the universal
reconciliation of all souls which had ever been. The term "apocatastasis" is
not mentioned in the 553 anathema. A form of "apocatastasis" was also
attributed to Gregory of Nyssa and possibly the Ambrosiaster, attributed to
Ambrose of Milan. Gregory of Nazianzus discussed it without reaching a
decision. A local Synod of Constantinople (543) condemned a form of
apocatastasis as being Anathema, and the Anathema was formally submitted to the
Fifth Ecumenical Council of Constantinople (553). Since "apocatastasis" had
been used earlier in writers commenting on Peter's use in the New Testament,
the form of "apocatastasis" condemned in 543 and 553 was a later development.
Origen of Alexandria's other teachings about the possibility of glorified man
falling again also played a role in that condemnation. In fact, most historians
today would recognize a distinction between Origen's own teachings (or at least
those that have survived) and the theological positions of later "Origenists".
Even beliefs long attributed to Origen himself, such as a Platonic version of
souls existing before bodies, the possibility of a second fall, are found to be
much more nuanced and difficult to pin down in Origen's own writings. The
Anathema against apocatastasis, or more accurately, against the belief that
hell is not eternal, was not ratified despite support from the Emperor, and it
is absent from the Anathemas spoken against Origen at Constantinople II. The
Alexandrian school adapted Platonic terminology and ideas to Christianity while
explaining and differentiating the new faith from all the others. Proponents
cited Biblical passage in "1 Corinthians 15:28" ("When he has done this, then
the Son himself will be made subject to him who put everything under him, so
that God may be all in all.") in support. Meaning of apocatastasis in Christian
theology. Early Christianity. Clement of Alexandria (c.150 - c. 215) generally
uses the term "apokatastasis" to refer to the "restoration" of the "gnostic"
Christians, rather than that of the universe or of all Christians, but with
universal implications. As indicated above, the position of Origen (186-284) is
disputed, with works as recent as the New Westminster Dictionary of Church
History presenting him as speculating that the apocatastasis would involve
universal salvation. In early Christian theological usage "apocatastasis" meant
the ultimate restoration of all things to their original state, which early
exponents believed would still entail a purgatorial state, Both Origen and
Gregory of Nyssa hoped that all creatures would be saved. The word was still
very flexible at that time, but in the mid-6th century it became virtually a
technical term referring, as usually today, to a specifically Origenistic
doctrine of universal salvation. Maximus the Confessor outlined God's plan for
"universal" salvation alongside warnings of everlasting punishment for the
wicked. Luther. The Vulgate translation of "apokatastasis", "in tempora
restitutionis omnium quae locutus est Deus" (the restitution of all things of
which God has spoken) was taken up by Luther to mean the day of the restitution
of the creation, but in Luther's theology the day of restitution was also the
day of resurrection and judgment, not the restitution of the wicked. In
Luther's Bible he rendered Greek "apokatastasis" with German "herwiedergebracht
werde", "will be brought back." This sense continued to be used in Lutheran
sermons. Luther explicitly disowned belief that the devils would ultimately
reach blessedness. 19th-century Universalism. During the 19th and early 20th
centuries several histories published by Universalists, including Hosea Ballou
(1829), Thomas Whittemore (1830), John Wesley Hanson (1899) and George T.
Knight (1911), argued that belief in universal reconciliation was found in
early Christianity and in the Reformation, and ascribed Universalist beliefs to
Origen, Clement of Alexandria, and others. Recent works. In recent writing,
apocatastasis is generally understood as involving some form of universal
reconciliation, without necessarily attributing this understanding to Origen
and other Fathers of the Church. Stravinskas identifies apocatastasis with
universalism or universal reconciliation, and some of the older sources do so
also. But most writers do not simply identify apocatastasis with universal
reconciliation. González points out that a distinction exists, in that "it is
possible to hold universalist views without believing that all of creation will
return to its original state". And both Ludlow and McGarry state that the word
"apokatastasis" is today usually understood as referring to one specific
doctrine of universal salvation, not to all versions of universalism.
