Apostolic succession Apostolic succession is the method whereby the ministry of
the Christian Church is held to be derived from the apostles by a continuous
succession, which has usually been associated with a claim that the succession
is through a series of bishops. This series was seen originally as that of the
bishops of a particular see founded by one or more of the apostles, but it is
generally understood today as meaning a series of bishops, regardless of see,
each consecrated by other bishops themselves consecrated similarly in a
succession going back to the apostles. Apostolic succession "may also be
understood as a continuity in doctrinal teaching from the time of the apostles
to the present" Meanings. He adds that this last has been controversial in that
it has been claimed that this aspect of the doctrine is not found before the
time of Augustine of Hippo, while others allege that it is implicit in the
Church of the second and third centuries. In its 1982 statement on Baptism,
Eucharist and Ministry, the Faith and Order Commission of the World Council of
Churches stated that "the primary manifestation of apostolic succession is to
be found in the apostolic tradition of the Church as a whole‚Ä¶. Under the
particular historical circumstances of the growing Church in the early
centuries, the succession of bishops became one of the ways, together with the
transmission of the Gospel and the life of the community, in which the
apostolic tradition of the Church was expressed." It spoke of episcopal
succession as something that churches that do not have bishops can see "as a
sign, though not a guarantee, of the continuity and unity of the Church" and
that all churches can see "as a sign of the apostolicity of the life of the
whole church". The Porvoo Common Statement (1996), agreed to by the Anglican
churches of the British Isles and most of the Lutheran churches of Scandinavia
and the Baltic, also stated that "the continuity signified in the consecration
of a bishop to episcopal ministry cannot be divorced from the continuity of
life and witness of the diocese to which he is called." In the early Fathers.
The doctrine was formulated in the second century in the first of the three
senses given by Ramsey, originally as a response to Gnostic claims of having
received secret teaching from Christ or the apostles; it emphasised the public
manner in which the apostles had passed on authentic teaching to those whom
they entrusted with the care of the churches they founded and that these in
turn had passed it on to their successors. Only later was it given a different
meaning, a process in which Augustine (Bp of Hippo Regis, 395-430) played a
part by emphasising the idea of "the link from consecrator to consecrated
whereby the grace of order was handed on." Writing about AD 94, Clement of Rome
states that the apostles appointed successors to continue their work where they
had planted churches and for these in their turn to do the same because they
foresaw the risk of discord. He uses both 'bishop' and 'presbyter' to refer to
these men. The interpretation of his writing is disputed, but it is clear that
he supports some sort of approved continuation of the apostolic ministry which
in its turn was derived from Christ. Hegesippus (180?) and Irenaeus (180)
introduce explicitly the idea of the bishop's succession in office as a
guarantee of the truth of what he preached in that it could be traced back to
the apostles. and they produced succession lists to back this up. That this
succession depended on the fact of ordination to a vacant see and the status of
those who administered the ordination is seldom commented on. Woollcombe also
states that no one questioned the apostolicity of the See of Alexandria despite
the fact that its Popes were consecrated by the college of presbyters up till
the time of the Council of Nicaea in 325. Irenaeus also refers to a succession
of presbyters who preserve the tradition "which originates from the apostles".
and later goes on to speak of their having "an infallible gift of truth"
["charisma veritatis certum"]. Jay comments that this is sometimes seen as an
early reference to the idea of the transmission of grace through the apostolic
succession which in later centuries was understood as being specifically
transmitted through the laying on of hands by a bishop within the apostolic
succession (the "pipeline theory"). He warns that this is open to the grave
objection that it makes grace a (quasi)material commodity and represents an
almost mechanical method of imparting what is by definition a free gift. He
adds that the idea cannot be squeezed out of Irenaeus' words. Writing a little
later, Tertullian makes the same main point but adds expressly that recently
founded churches (such as his own in Carthage) could be considered apostolic if
they had "derived the tradition of faith and the seeds of doctrine" from an
apostolic church. His disciple, Cyprian (Bishop of Carthage 248-58) appeals to
the same fundamental principle of election to a vacant see in the aftermath of
the Decian Persecution when denying the legitimacy of his rigorist rival in
Carthage and that of the anti-pope Novatian in Rome; however, the emphasis is
now on legitimating his episcopal ministry as a whole and specifically his
exclusive right to administer discipline to the lapsed rather than on the
content of what is taught. Cyprian also laid great emphasis on the fact that
any minister who broke with the Church lost "ipso facto" the gift of the Spirit
which had validated his orders. This meant that he had no power or authority to
celebrate an efficacious sacrament. As transmission of grace. For the adherents
of this understanding of apostolic succession grace is transmitted during
episcopal consecrations (the ordination of bishops) by the laying on of hands
of bishops previously consecrated within the apostolic succession. This lineage
of ordination is traceable, according to "apostolic" churches, to the original
Twelve Apostles, thus making the Church the continuation of the early Apostolic
Christian community. It is "one of four elements which define the true Church
of Jesus Christ" and legitimizes the ministry of its clergy, as only a bishop
within the succession can perform legitimate or "valid" ordinations.
Furthermore, only bishops and presbyters (priests) ordained by bishops in the
apostolic succession can validly celebrate or "confect" several of the other
sacraments, including the Eucharist, reconciliation of penitents, confirmation
and anointing of the sick. "Tracts for the Times - Number 1", emphases in
original, cited Dean Church. "The Oxford movement" MacMillan & C¬∞: 1892 Basis.
Those who hold for the importance of episcopal apostolic succession appeal to
the New Testament, which, they say, implies a personal apostolic succession
(from Paul to Timothy and Titus, for example). They appeal as well to other
documents of the early Church, especially the Epistle of St. Clement (see
above). In this context, Clement explicitly states that the apostles appointed
bishops as successors and directed that these bishops should in turn appoint
their own successors; given this, such leaders of the Church were not to be
removed without cause and not in this way. Further, proponents of the necessity
of the personal apostolic succession of bishops within the Church point to the
universal practice of the undivided early Church (up to AD 431), before being
divided into the Church of the East, Oriental Orthodoxy, the Eastern Orthodox
Church and the Roman Catholic Church. Most Protestants deny the need for this
type of continuity and the historical claims involved have been severely
questioned; Eric Jay comments that the account given of the emergence of the
episcopate in chapter III of "Lumen Gentium" "is very sketchy, and many
ambiguities in the early history of the Christian ministry are passed over"
Their reasons are given in detail below. Apostolicity as doctrinal and related
continuity. Most Protestant denominations deny the need of maintaining
episcopal continuity with the early Church, holding that the role of the
apostles was that, having been chosen directly by Jesus as witnesses of his
resurrection, they were to be the "special instruments of the Holy Spirit in
founding and building up the Church". The Church is "built upon 'the foundation
of the Prophets and Apostles' (Ephes. ii. 20); but a foundation does not repeat
itself". When the apostles died, they were replaced by their writings. To share
with the apostles the same faith, to believe their word as found in the
Scriptures, to receive the same Holy Spirit, is to them the only meaningful
"continuity". The most meaningful "apostolic succession" for most Protestants,
then, is a "faithful succession" of apostolic teaching. The 1937 British
Methodist Conference located the "true continuity" with the Church of past ages
in "the continuity of Christian experience, the fellowship in the gift of the
one Spirit; in the continuity in the allegiance to one Lord, the continued
proclamation of the message; the continued acceptance of the mission;..." a
long chain which goes back to the "the first disciples in the company of the
Lord Himself ... This is our doctrine of apostolic succession" neither depends
on, nor is secured by, "an official succession of ministers, whether bishops or
presbyters, from apostolic times, but rather by fidelity to apostolic truth".
These realities form a "composite faithfulness" and are (i) "perseverance in
the apostolic doctrine"; (ii) "the will to proclaim God's word"; (iii)
"communion in the fundamental continuity of the Church, the Body of Christ, the
faithful celebration of Baptism and the Eucharist"; (iv) "succession in the
laying on of hands, the sign of ministerial continuity". Objections to the
transmission of grace theory. Protestants have objected that this theory is not
explicitly found in Scripture and the New Testament uses 'bishop' and
'presbyter' as alternative names for the same office. Furthermore, it is not
clearly found in the writings of the Fathers before Augustine in the fourth
century and attempts to read it back as implicit in earlier writers are flawed
because it is possible to show that significant changes occurred. For example,
Barrett points out that the Pastoral Epistles are concerned that ministers of
the generation of Timothy and Titus should pass on the doctrine they had
received to the third generation. Teaching and preaching are "the main, almost
the only, activities of ministry." However, in Clement of Rome ministerial
activity is liturgical: the undifferentiated 'presbyter-bishops' are to "make
offerings to the Lord at the right time and in the right places" something
which is simply not defined by the evangelists. More significant still is the
change in the use of sacrificial language: for Paul the Eucharist is a
receiving of gifts from God, the Christian sacrifice is the offering of our
bodies (Romans 12). Moving on to Ignatius of Antioch, Barrett states that here
we find a sharp distinction between 'presbyter' and 'bishop': the latter now
stands out as "an isolated figure" who is to be obeyed and without whom it is
not lawful to baptise or hold a love-feast. He also points out that when
Ignatius writes to the Romans, there is no mention of a bishop of the Roman
Church, "which we may suppose had not not yet adopted the monarchical
episcopate." Jalland comes to a similar conclusion and locates the change from
the "polyepiscopacy" of the house churches in Rome to monepiscopacy as
occurring before the middle of the second century. Similar objections are
voiced by Harvey who comments that there is a "strong and ancient tradition"
that the presence of an ordained man is necessary for the celebration of the
Eucharist. But, there is "certainly no evidence for this view in the New
Testament" and in the case of Clement of Rome and Ignatius of Antioch the
implication is not that it "cannot" be celebrated by anyone else, but that it
"ought" not. In the third century, this "concern for propriety" begins to be
displaced by the concept of 'power' to do so which means that in the absence of
such a man it is "literally impossible" for a Eucharist to be celebrated.
Churches claiming apostolic succession. Churches that claim some form of
episcopal apostolic succession, dating back to the apostles or to leaders from
the apostolic era, include the Roman Catholic Church, the Eastern Orthodox and
Oriental Orthodox Churches, the Church of the East, the Anglican Communion, and
some Lutheran Churches (see below). The Anglican Communion (see below) and
those Lutheran Churches which claim apostolic succession do not specifically
teach this but exclusively practice episcopal ordination. While some Anglicans
claim it for their communion, their views are often nuanced and there is
widespread reluctance to 'unchurch' Christian bodies which lack it. Roman
Catholics recognize the validity of the apostolic successions of the bishops,
and therefore the rest of the clergy, of the Eastern Orthodox, Oriental
Orthodox, Church of the East, and the Old Catholic Church (Union of Utrecht
only). The Eastern Orthodox generally recognize Roman Catholic orders, but have
a different concept of the apostolic succession as it exists outside of Eastern
Orthodoxy. The lack of apostolic succession through bishops is the primary
basis on which Protestant communities are not considered "churches" by the
Orthodox churches and the Roman Catholic Church. Apostolic founders. The See of
Rome claims to have been founded by Saint Peter, traditionally called the
"Prince of the Apostles" and the "Chief of the Apostles". The Patriarchate of
Constantinople claims Saint Andrew as its founder. The Patriarchate of
Alexandria (Greek Orthodox Church of Alexandria and Coptic Orthodox Church of
Alexandria) claims to have been founded by Saint Mark. The Patriarchate of
Antioch (Greek Orthodox Church of Antioch, Syriac Orthodox Church, Syriac
Catholic Church, Maronite Patriarch of Antioch and the Whole Levant) claims
unbroken succession to the Throne of Saint Peter. The Patriarchate of Jerusalem
claims to have been founded by Saint James the Just. The Armenian Apostolic
Church, based at Etchmiadzin, claims to have been founded by Saints Bartholomew
and Jude. The following bodies claim to have been founded by Saint Thomas the
Apostle: the Assyrian Church of the East, the Ancient Church of the East and
the Chaldean Catholic Church, originating in or around Mesopotamia, and
churches based in Kerala, India having Syriac roots and generically known as
the Saint Thomas Christians: the Syro-Malabar Catholic Church, the Syro-
Malankara Catholic Church, the Jacobite Syrian Christian Church, the Malankara
Orthodox Syrian Church, and the Mar Thoma Syrian Church. The Ethiopian Orthodox
Tewahedo Church claims founding by Saint Philip the Evangelist. The Orthodox
Church of Cyprus, based at New Justiana (Erdek), claims to have been founded by
the apostles Saints Paul and Barnabas The Russian Orthodox Church claims a
connection with Saint Andrew, who is said to have visited the area where the
city of Kiev later arose. Teachings. Catholic Church. In Roman Catholic
theology, the doctrine of apostolic succession states that Christ gave the full
sacramental authority of the Church to the Twelve Apostles in the sacrament of
Holy Orders, making them the first bishops. By conferring the fullness of the
sacrament of Holy Orders on the apostles, they were given the authority to
confer the sacrament of Holy Orders on others, thus consecrating more bishops
in a direct lineage that can trace its origin back to the Twelve Apostles and
Christ. This direct succession of bishops from the apostles to the present day
bishops is referred to as apostolic succession. Papal primacy is different
though related to apostolic succession as described here. The Catholic Church
has traditionally claimed a unique leadership role for the Apostle Peter,
believed to have been named by Jesus as head of the Apostles and as a focus of
their unity, who became the first Bishop of Rome, and whose successors
inherited the role and accordingly became the leaders of the worldwide Church
as well. Even so, Catholicism acknowledges the papacy is built on apostolic
succession, not the other way around. As such, apostolic succession is a
foundational doctrine of authority in the Catholic Church. Catholicism holds
that Christ entrusted the Apostles with the leadership of the community of
believers, and the obligation to transmit and preserve the "deposit of faith"
(the experience of Christ and his teachings contained in the doctrinal
"tradition" handed down from the time of the apostles and the written portion,
which is Scripture). The apostles then passed on this office and authority by
ordaining bishops to follow after them. Roman Catholic theology holds that the
apostolic succession effects the power and authority to administer the
sacraments except for baptism and matrimony. (Baptism may be administered by
anyone and matrimony by the couple to each other). Authority to so administer
such sacraments is passed on only through the sacrament of Holy Orders, a rite
by which a priest is ordained (ordination can be conferred only by a bishop).
The bishop, of course, must be from an unbroken line of bishops stemming from
the original apostles selected by Jesus Christ. Thus, apostolic succession is
necessary for the valid celebration of the sacraments today. In the early 18th
century, Pope Benedict XIII, whose orders were descended from Scipione Rebiba,
personally consecrated at least 139 bishops for various important European
sees, including German, French, English and New World bishops. These bishops in
turn consecrated bishops almost exclusively for their respective countries
causing other episcopal lineages to die off. Roman Catholics recognize the
validity of the apostolic successions of the bishops, and therefore the rest of
the clergy, of the Eastern Orthodox, Oriental Orthodox, Assyrian, Old Catholic,
and some Independent Catholic Churches. Rome does not recognize any Anglican
orders as valid. This conflict stems over the Anglican Church's revision of its
rite of ordination for its bishops during the 16th century. Most of today's
Anglican bishops would trace their succession back through a bishop who was
ordained with the revised form and thus would be viewed as invalid. However,
all Anglican bishops in Europe today can claim a line of succession through
bishops who had only been ordained through the old rite. This was achieved
through several different means: ordinations by the schismatic Catholic bishops
of the Old Catholic and Independent Catholic Churches who converted to
Anglicanism. This has not affected the official Roman opinion in any way since
their objection was based fundamentally on the intention of the rite and the
question has been further complicated by the ordination of women which as seen
as implying that, in ordination, the Anglican Communion does not intend to do
what the Roman Catholic Church does. On 29 June 2007, the Congregation for the
Doctrine of the Faith explained why apostolic succession is integral to, and
indeed, "a constitutive element" of the Church. In response to the question why
the Second Vatican Council and other official statements of the Catholic Church
do not call Protestant Christian Communities "Churches", it stated that
"according to Catholic doctrine, these Communities do not enjoy "apostolic
succession" in the sacrament of Orders, and are, therefore, deprived of a
constitutive element of the Church. These ecclesial Communities which,
specifically because of the absence of the sacramental priesthood, have not
preserved the genuine and integral substance of the Eucharistic Mystery cannot,
according to Catholic doctrine, be called 'Churches' in the proper sense".
Debate among some Catholic theologians. Differing interpretations are offered
by the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith and by some Catholic
theologians. According to liberal Catholic theologian Richard P. McBrien,
professor of theology at the University of Notre Dame, and Boston College
theologian Francis Sullivan, debate over the role of the "bishop" in apostolic
succession is a church-dividing issue. Of course, from a Catholic point of
view, the bishops in communion with the Pope (the Church's Magisterium) have
the final say in the matter, as they, not theologians, are the successors of
the Apostles and have doctrinal authority. McBrien has no complaint with the
succession doctrine, but with the way it is so often explained. He says that
Catholic theologians today would point to Vatican¬ II‚Äôs declaration that
apostolic succession is ‚Äúby divine institution‚Äù (Dogmatic Constitution on
the Church). McBrien maintains this interpretation should "not" be understood
to mean that Christ explicitly determined the episcopal structures of either
the local churches or dioceses. Orthodox Churches. Orthodox Christians view
apostolic succession as an important, God-ordained mechanism by which the
structure and teaching of the Church are perpetuated. While Eastern Orthodox
sources often refer to the bishops as "successors of the apostles" under the
influence of Scholastic theology, strict Orthodox ecclesiology and theology
hold that all legitimate bishops are properly successors of Peter. This also
means that presbyters (or "priests") are successors of the apostles. As a
result, Orthodox theology makes a distinction between a geographical or
historical succession and proper ontological or ecclesiological succession.
Hence, the bishops of Rome and Antioch can be considered successors of Peter in
a historical sense on account of Peter's presence in the early community. This
does not imply that these bishops are more successors of Peter than all others
in an ontological sense. According to ancient canons still observed with the
Orthodox communion, a bishop must be consecrated by at least three other
bishops; so-called "single handed ordinations" do not exist. Moreover, bishops
are never ordained "at large" but only for a specific Eucharist community, in
due historical and sacramental succession. Views concerning other churches. The
Eastern Orthodox have often permitted non-Orthodox clergy to be rapidly
ordained within Orthodoxy as a matter of pastoral necessity and economia.
Priests entering Eastern Orthodoxy from Oriental Orthodoxy and Roman
Catholicism have usually been received by "vesting" and have been allowed to
function immediately within Eastern Orthodoxy as priests. Recognition of Roman
Catholic orders by the Russian Orthodox Church was stipulated in 1667 by the
Synod of Moscow, but this position is not universal within the Eastern Orthodox
communion. The validity of a priest's ordination is decided by each
autocephalic Orthodox church. In addition to a line of historic transmission,
Eastern Orthodox and Oriental Orthodox churches additionally require that a
person who holds a high position in a hierarchy maintain Orthodox Church
doctrine, which they hold to be that of the apostles and communion with other
Orthodox bishops. The Armenian Apostolic Church, which is one of the Oriental
Orthodox churches, recognizes Roman Catholic episcopal consecrations without
qualification. Anglican Churches. The Anglican Communion "has never officially
endorsed any one particular theory of the origin of the historic episcopate,
its exact relation to the apostolate, and the sense in which it should be
thought of as God given, and in fact tolerates a wide variety of views on these
points". According to "The Westminster Dictionary of Christian Theology", The
Anglican Communion "retained episcopacy, believing it to be not merely an
administrative expedient of contingent historical origin but an essential part
of the church as founded by Christ." Its claim to apostolic succession is
rooted in the Church of England's evolution as part of the Western Church.
Apostolic succession is viewed not so much as conveyed mechanically through an
unbroken chain of the laying-on of hands, but as expressing continuity with the
unbroken chain of commitment, beliefs and mission starting with the first
apostles; and as hence emphasising the enduring yet evolving nature of the
Church. The Anglican‚ÄîRoman Catholic International Commission report expressed
broad agreement in the nature of apostolic succession as the ‚Äòeffective
sign‚Äô of the apostolicity of the whole people of God, living in fidelity to
the teaching and mission of the apostles. When Henry VIII broke away from the
jurisdiction of Rome in 1533/4, the English Church retained the episcopal
polity and apostolic succession inherent in its Catholic past. Until Henry's
death in 1547, it continued to adhere to the traditional doctrinal and
liturgical norms; however, Protestant theology gained a certain foothold and
under his successor, Edward VI what had been an administrative schism became a
Protestant reformation under the guiding hand of Thomas Cranmer. Although care
was taken to maintain the unbroken sequence of episcopal consecrations,
particularly in the case of Matthew Parker, apostolic succession was not seen
as a major concern: English Reformers such as Richard Hooker rejected the
Catholic position that Apostolic Succession is divinely commanded or necessary
for true Christian ministry. The "foreign" reformed (presbyterian) churches
were genuine ones despite the lack of apostolic succession because they had
been abandoned by their bishops at the Reformation. In very different ways both
James II and William III of England made it plain that the Church of England
could no longer count on the 'godly prince' to maintain its identity and
traditions and the 'High Church' clergy of the time began to look began to look
to the idea of apostolic succession as a basis for the church's life. For
William Beveridge (Bp of St Asaph 1704-8) the importance of this lay in the
fact that Christ himself is "continually present at such imposition of hands;
thereby transferring the same Spirit, which He had first breathed into His
Apostles, upon others successively after them"., but the doctrine did not
really come to the fore until the time of the Tractarians. Newman writing of
the apostolic succession stated: "We must necessarily consider none to be
"really" ordained who has not been "thus" ordained". After quoting this,
Michael Ramsey continues: "With romantic enthusiasm, the Tractarians propagated
this doctrine. In doing so they involved themselves in some misunderstandings
of history and in some confusion of theology". He goes on to explain that they
ascribed to early Anglican authors a far more exclusive version of the doctrine
than was the case, they blurred the distinction between succession in office
(Irenaeus) and succession in consecration (Augustine); they spoke of apostolic
succession as the channel of grace in a way that failed to do justice to His
gracious activity within all the dispensations of the New Covenant.(p.¬ 111)
Newman, and after him, Charles Gore held that the episcopate was passed down
from the apostles through men like Timothy and Titus to single bishops in
particular localities (monarchial episcopacy). However Bp. Lightfoot argued
that monarchial episcopacy evolved upwards from a college of presbyters by the
elevation of one of their number to be the episcopal president(p.¬ 116) and A.C
Headlam laid great stress on Irenaeus' understanding of succession (see above)
which had been lost from sight behind the Augustinian 'pipe-line theory'.
(pp.¬ 117,18) Eastern Orthodox views on Anglican orders. In the 20th century
there have been a variety of positions taken by the various Eastern Orthodox
Churches on the validity of Anglican orders. In 1922 the Patriarch of
Constantinople recognized them as valid. He wrote: "That the orthodox
theologians who have scientifically examined the question have almost
unanimously come to the same conclusions and have declared themselves as
accepting the validity of Anglican Orders." Succeeding judgements, however,
have been more conflicting. The Eastern Orthodox churches require a totality of
common teaching to recognize orders and in this broader view find ambiguities
in Anglican teaching and practice problematic. Accordingly, in practice
Anglican clergy who convert to Orthodoxy are treated as if they had not been
ordained and must be ordained in the Eastern Orthodox communion as would a lay
person. Roman Catholic judgment on Anglican orders. In the Catholic Church,
Pope Leo XIII stated in his 1896 bull "Apostolicae Curae" that the Catholic
Church believes specifically that the Anglican Church's consecrations are
"absolutely null and utterly void" because of changes made to the rite of
consecration under Edward VI, thus denying that Anglicans participate in the
apostolic succession. Anglican clergy, then, are ordained as Catholic priests
upon entry into the Catholic Church. A reply from the Archbishops of Canterbury
and York (1896) was issued to counter Pope Leo's arguments: "Saepius Officio:
Answer of the Archbishops of Canterbury and York to the Bull Apostolicae Curae
of H. H. Leo XIII". They argued that if the Anglican orders were invalid, then
the Roman orders were as well since the Pope based his case on the fact that
the Anglican ordinals used did not contain certain essential elements but these
were not found in the early Roman rites either. However, Catholics argue, this
argument does not consider the sacramental intention involved in validating
Holy Orders. In other words, Catholics believe that the ordinands were reworded
so as to invalidate the ordinations because the intention behind the
alterations in the rite was a fundamental change in Anglican understanding of
the priesthood. It is Roman Catholic doctrine that the teaching of "Apostolicae
Curae" is a truth to be "held definitively", as evidenced by commentary by
then-Cardinal Ratzinger, currently Pope Benedict XVI. Cardinal Basil Hume
explained the conditional character of his ordination of Graham Leonard, former
Anglican bishop of the Diocese of London, to the priesthood in the following
way: "While firmly restating the judgment of "Apostolicae Curae" that Anglican
ordination is invalid, the Catholic Church takes account of the involvement, in
some Anglican episcopal ordinations, of bishops of the Old Catholic Church of
the Union of Utrecht who are validly ordained. In particular and probably rare
cases the authorities in Rome may judge that there is a 'prudent doubt'
concerning the invalidity of priestly ordination received by an individual
Anglican minister ordained in this line of succession." but this opinion is not
widely endorsed. Since "Apostolicae Curae" was issued many Anglican
jurisdictions have revised their ordinals, bringing them more in line with
ordinals of the early Church. Timothy Dufort, writing in The Tablet in 1982,
argued that by 1969 all Anglican bishops had acquired apostolic succession
fully recognized by Rome, since from the 1930s Old Catholic bishops (whose
orders Rome recognizes as valid) have acted as co-consecrators in the
ordination of Anglican bishops. This view is not accepted by the Roman Catholic
Church itself, which continues to require that Anglican clergy be ordained
absolutely (not conditionally) if they are to exercise a ministry in that
church. Porvoo Communion of Churches. Of note is the fact that at least one of
the Scandinavian Lutheran Churches in the Porvoo Communion of Churches, the
Church of Denmark has bishops, but strictly speaking they were not in the
historic apostolic succession prior to their entry into the Porvoo Communion,
since their Episcopate and Holy Orders derived from Dr. Johannes Bugenhagen,
who was a pastor, not a bishop. In 2010, the Church of Denmark joined the
Porvoo Communion of Churches. Lutheran churches. Wide variations exist within
Lutheranism on this issue. Most Lutheran churches in Scandinavian countries are
favorable to the traditional doctrine of apostolic succession. Others de-
emphasize it, e.g., many German Lutheran churches in former Prussian lands,
resulting from their state-ordered with Reformed (Calvinist) churches in 1817.
Lutheran claims to apostolic succession. In Scandinavia, most Lutheran churches
participating in the Porvoo Communion, those of Iceland, Norway, Sweden,
Finland, Estonia, and Lithuania, believe that they ordain their bishops in the
apostolic succession in lines stemming from the original apostles. "The New
Westminster Dictionary of Church History" states that "In Sweden the apostolic
succession was preserved because the Catholic bishops were allowed to stay in
office, but they had to approve changes in the ceremonies." Similarly, in the
High Church Lutheranism of Germany, some religious brotherhoods like
Hochkirchliche St. Johannes-Bruderschaft and Hochkirchlicher Apostolat St.
Ansgar have managed to arrange for their own bishop to be re-ordained in
apostolic succession. The members of these brotherhoods do not form into
separate ecclesia. The Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, North America's
largest Lutheran body, became united in the historic episcopate of the
Episcopal Church in 2000, upon the signing of "Called to Common Mission". By
this document the full communion between the Evangelical Lutheran Church in
America and the Episcopal Church was established. The Evangelical Lutheran
Church in America is headed by a presiding bishop who is elected by the
churchwide assembly for a six year term. In recent years a number of Lutheran
churches at the most Catholic edge of the Evangelical Catholic High Church
Lutheran spectrum in the United States of America have accepted the doctrine of
apostolic succession and have successfully recovered it, generally from
Independent Catholic Churches. At present, most of these church bodies have
memberships numbering in the hundreds. The Catholic Church "has never
officially expressed its judgement on the validity of orders as they have been
handed down by episcopal succession in these two national Lutheran churches."
Indifference to the issue. Many German Lutherans appear to demur on this issue,
which may be sourced in the church governance views of Martin Luther. Luther's
reform movement, however, usually did not as a rule abrogate the ecclesiastic
office of Bishop. An important historical context to explicate the wide
differences among German Lutheran Churches is the Prussian Union of 1817,
whereby the secular government directed the Lutheran Churches in Prussia to
merge with non-Lutheran Reformed Churches in Prussia. The Reformed Churches
generally oppose on principle the traditional doctrine of ecclesiastic
Apostolic Succession, e.g., not usually even recognizing the church office of
Bishop. Later in the 19th century, other Lutheran and Reformed congregations
merged to form united church bodies in some of the other 39 states of the
German Confederation, e.g., in Anhalt, Baden, Bremen, Hesse and Nassau, Hesse-
Kassel and Waldeck, and the Palatinate. Yet the partial nature of this list
also serves to show that in Germany there remained many Lutherans who never did
unite with the Reformed. Other Lutheran Churches seem indifferent as a matter
of understood doctrine regarding this particular issue of ecclesiastical
governance. In America, the conservative Missouri Synod places its church
authority in the congregation rather than in the bishop, though its founder,
C.F.W. Walther, while establishing congregational polity for the Missouri
Synod, did consider Polity (a Church's form of government) to be a matter of
adiaphora (something indifferent.) The Missouri Synod is, however, not in what
it calls "Pulpit and Altar Fellowship" (full communion) with Churches which are
not governed by Congregationalist polity. It has its own international
communion structure, the International Lutheran Council, the member Churches of
which are all of Congregationalist polity. Beyond indifference, some
conservative Lutherans are in principle outright against the traditional
doctrine of Apostolic Succession, e.g., Confessional Lutheranism (see also
subsection "Confessional Lutheranism" herein below). Other conservative
Lutherans, however, may favor High Church Lutheranism which remains generally
favorable to the traditional doctrine of Apostolic Succession (see above).
Methodist Church. In the beginnings of the Methodist movement, adherents were
instructed to receive the sacraments within the Anglican Church; however, the
Methodists soon petitioned to receive the sacraments from the local preachers
who conducted worship services and revivals. However, the Bishop of London
refused to ordain ministers in the British American colonies. Rev. John Wesley,
the founder the movement, was not prepared to allow unordained preachers to
administer the sacraments: In 1763, Greek Orthodox bishop Erasmus of the
Diocese of Arcadia, who was visiting London at the time, consecrated Rev. John
Wesley a bishop, and ordained several Methodist lay preachers as priests,
including John Jones. However, Wesley could not openly announce his episcopal
consecration without incurring the penalty of the Pr√¶munire Act. In light of
Wesley's episcopal consecration, the Methodist Church can lay a claim on
apostolic succession, as understood in the traditional sense. Since the Rt.
Rev. John Wesley ordained and sent forth every Methodist preacher in his day,
who preached and baptized and ordained, and since every Methodist preacher who
has ever been ordained as a Methodist was ordained in this direct "succession"
from Wesley, then the Methodist Church teaches that it has all the direct
merits coming from apostolic succession, if any such there be. This apostolic
succession is recognized by Unity Catholic Church, an independent Catholic
Church. Despite this fact, most Methodists view apostolic succession outside
its high church sense. This is because Rev. John Wesley believed that bishops
and presbyters constituted one order, citing an ancient opinion from the Church
of Alexandria. Since the Bishop of London refused to ordain ministers in the
British American colonies, this constituted an emergency, and as a result, on 2
September, 1784, Rev. John Wesley, along with a priest from the Anglican Church
and two other elders, operating under the ancient Alexandrian habitude,
ordained Rev. Thomas Coke a superintendent, although Rt. Rev. Coke embraced the
title bishop. Today, the Methodist Church follows this ancient Alexandrian
practice as bishops are elected from and by the order of the presbyterate: the
"Discipline of the Methodist Church", in ¬∂303, affirms that "ordination to
this ministry is a gift from God to the Church. In ordination, the Church
affirms and continues the apostolic ministry through persons empowered by the
Holy Spirit." It also uses sacred scripture in support of this practice,
namely, 1 Timothy 4:12, which states: The Methodist Church also buttresses this
argument with the leg of Sacred Tradition of the Wesleyan Quadrilateral by
citing the Church Fathers, many of whom concur with this view. Moravian Church.
The Moravian Church teaches that it has preserved apostolic succession. In
order to preserve apostolic succession, three Moravian Brethren were
consecrated bishops by Bishop Stephen of Austria, a Waldensian bishop who had
been ordained by a Roman Catholic bishop in 1434. These three consecrated
bishops returned to Lititz and then ordained other Moravians, thereby
preserving the historic episcopate. Latter-day Saints (Mormons). Members of The
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (sometimes referred to as Mormons)
claim apostolic succession through the process of restoration. According to
their teaching, a period of universal apostasy followed the death of the Twelve
Apostles. Without apostles or prophets left on the earth with the legitimate
Priesthood Authority, the true teachings and practices of Christianity were
lost. Eventually these were restored to the prophet Joseph Smith and various
others in a series of divine conferrals and ordinations by angelic men who had
held this authority during their lifetimes (see this partial list of
restoration events). As it relates to apostolic succession, the apostles Peter,
James, and John allegedly appeared to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdry sometime
in 1829 and conferred upon them the Melchizedek Priesthood and with it "the
keys of the kingdom, and of the dispensation of the fulness of times". Ecclesia
Gnostica Catholica. Although no longer Christian, Ecclesia Gnostica Catholica,
also known as E.G.C., recognizes apostolic succession as a major spiritual
tenet. Because E.G.C. has since accepted the Law of Thelema, a religion which
claims to supersede Christianity, it is no longer concerned with apostolic
succession deriving from Jesus. Instead, apostolic succession in E.G.C. is
derived from The Master Therion, known by his civil name as Aleister Crowley
and considered by Thelemites to be the Prophet of the Aeon. Unlike apostolic
succession in Christianity, E.G.C. does not claim that Thelemic Succession
grants the power to remit and retain sins. Instead, the point of a valid line
of succession in E.G.C. is to grant the authority to claim communion and
benediction of the Gnostic Saints. Protestant denominations that reject
apostolic succession. Most Protestants deny the doctrine of apostolic
succession, believing that it is neither taught in Scripture nor necessary for
Christian teaching, life, and practice. Accordingly, these Protestants strip
the notion of apostolic succession from the definition of "apostolic" or
"apostolicity." For them, to be apostolic is simply to be in submission to the
teachings of the original twelve apostles as recorded in Scripture. This
doctrinal stance reflects the Protestant view of authority, embodied in the
doctrine known as Sola Scriptura. Among the original champions of Protestantism
who rejected the doctrine of apostolic succession were John Calvin, and Martin
Luther. They both said that the episcopacy was inadequate to address
corruption, doctrinal or otherwise, and that this inadequacy justified the
intervention of the church of common people. In part this position was also
necessary, as otherwise there would have been no means to elicit or initiate
reform of the church. In the 20th century, there has been more contact between
Protestants and Christians from Eastern traditions which claim apostolic
succession for their ministry. Like the Roman Catholic Church, these ancient
Eastern churches may use the doctrine of apostolic succession in ministry in
their apologetics against Protestantism. Some Protestants feel that such claims
of apostolic succession are proven false by the differences in traditions and
doctrines between these churches: Roman Catholics and Eastern Orthodox consider
both the Church of the East and the Oriental Orthodox churches to be heretical,
having been anathematized in the early ecumenical councils of Ephesus (431) and
Chalcedon (451) respectively. However, churches that claim apostolic succession
in ministry distinguish this from doctrinal orthodoxy, holding that "it is
possible to have valid orders coming down from the apostles, and yet not to
have a continuous spiritual history coming down from the apostles". All
Christians who have a genuine relationship with God through and in Christ are
part of the "true Church", according to exemplary statements of evangelical
Protestant theology, notwithstanding condemnation of the Catholic Church by
some Protestants. According to these statements, claims that one or more
denominations might be the "true Church" are nothing more than propaganda which
has evolved over centuries to support authoritarian claims---based on tradition
or based on scripture---of merely human institutions. Such claims can be found
among the worldwide community of Christians. Yet all appear to treasure the
truth that liberates, and Jesus taught his followers to love one another.
Charismatic and British New Church Movement. Some Protestant charismatic and
British New Church Movement churches include "apostles" among the offices that
should be evident into modern times in a true church, though they never trace
an historical line of succession. The founders or senior leaders of a British
New Church Movement group will frequently be referred to as the apostles.
Church planting is a key role of these present-day apostles. Confessional
Lutheranism. Confessional Lutheranism rejects Apostolic succession, stating
that that there's no evidence the Popes have historic succession from Peter
other than their own claim that it is so. Furthermore, they claim that in the
Bible there's no evidence showing that the office must be conveyed by laying on
of hands and no Biblical command that it must be by a special class of bishops
(the laying on of hands is repeatedly used to give a commission to some person
in scripture. However, it was done to St. Paul before his missions work, and
St. Paul also instructed St. Timothy to not be hasty in laying on hands.
Confessional Lutherans claim that the churches claiming apostolic succession
have not preserved apostolic doctrine, therefore their leaders have no
meaningful apostolic succession.
