Apostles' Creed The Apostles' Creed (Latin: "Symbolum Apostolorum" or "Symbolum
Apostolicum"), sometimes titled Symbol of the Apostles, is an early statement
of Christian belief, a creed or "symbol". It is widely used by a number of
Christian denominations for both liturgical and catechetical purposes, most
visibly by liturgical Churches of Western tradition, including the Latin Rite
of the Catholic Church, Lutheranism, Anglicanism, and Western Orthodoxy. It is
also used by Presbyterians, Methodists, and Congregationalists. The Apostles'
Creed was based on Christian theological understanding of the Canonical
gospels, the letters of the New Testament and to a lesser extent the Old
Testament. Its basis appears to be the old Roman Creed. Because of the early
origin of its original form, it does not address some Christological issues
defined in the later Nicene and other Christian Creeds. It thus says nothing
explicitly about the divinity of either Jesus or of the Holy Spirit. This makes
it acceptable to many Arians and Unitarians. Nor does it address many other
theological questions that became objects of dispute centuries later. The name
of the Creed may come from the probably 5th-century tradition that, under the
inspiration of the Holy Spirit after Pentecost, each of the Twelve Apostles
dictated part of it. It is traditionally divided into twelve articles. However,
Ambrose refers to the "Creed of the Apostles" in 390. Origins. The title,
"Symbolum Apostolicum" (Symbol or Creed of the Apostles), appears for the first
time in a letter from a Council in Milan (probably written by Ambrose himself)
to Pope Siricius in about 390: "Let them give credit to the Creed of the
Apostles, which the Roman Church has always kept and preserved undefiled". But
what existed at that time was not what is now known as the Apostles' Creed but
a shorter statement of belief that, for instance, did not include the phrase
"maker of heaven and earth", a phrase that may have been inserted only in the
7th century. The account of the origin of this creed, the forerunner and
principal source of the Apostles' Creed, as having been jointly created by the
Apostles under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit, with each of the twelve
contributing one of the articles, was already current at that time. The earlier
text evolved from simpler texts based on , part of the Great Commission, and it
has been argued that it was already in written form by the late 2nd century (c.
180). While the individual statements of belief that are included in the
Apostles' Creed – even those not found in the Old Roman Symbol – are found
in various writings by Irenaeus, Tertullian, Novatian, Marcellus, Rufinus,
Ambrose, Augustine, Nicetus, and Eusebius Gallus, the earliest appearance of
what we know as the Apostles' Creed was in the "De singulis libris canonicis
scarapsus" (""Excerpt from Individual Canonical Books"") of St. Pirminius
(Migne, "Patrologia Latina" 89, 1029 ff.), written between 710 and 714.
Bettenson and Maunder state that is first from "Dicta Abbatis Pirminii de
singulis libris canonicis scarapsus" ("idem quod excarpsus", excerpt), c.750.
This longer Creed seems to have arisen in what is now France and Spain.
Charlemagne imposed it throughout his dominions, and it was finally accepted in
Rome, where the old Roman Creed or similar formulas had survived for centuries.
It has been argued nonetheless that it dates from the second half of the 5th
century, though no earlier. Some have suggested that the Apostles' Creed was
spliced together with phrases from the New Testament. For instance, the phrase
"descendit ad inferos" ("he descended into hell") echoes , "κατέβη
εἰς τὰ κατώτερα μέρη τῆς γῆς" ("he descended into
the lower, earthly regions"). This phrase and that on the communion of saints
are articles found in the Apostles' Creed, but not in the old Roman Creed nor
in the Nicene Creed. Musical settings. Musical settings of the Symbolum
Apostolorum as a motet are rare. The French composer Le Brung published one
Latin setting in 1540, the Spanish composer Fernando de las Infantas published
two in 1578. More recently, in 1979 John Michael Talbot, a Third Order
Franciscan, composed and recorded "Creed" on his album, "The Lord's Supper".
Rich Mullins and Beaker also composed a musical setting titled "Creed",
released on Mullins' 1993 album "A Liturgy, a Legacy, & a Ragamuffin Band". The
song "Creed" on Petra's 1990 album "Beyond Belief" is loosely based on the
Apostles' Creed. English translations. Catholic Church. The "Catechism of the
Catholic Church" gives the following English translation of the Apostles'
Creed. In its discussion of the Creed, the Catechism maintains the traditional
division into twelve articles, the numbering of which is here added to the
text. Church of England. In the Church of England there are currently two
authorized forms of the creed: that of the "Book of Common Prayer" (1662) and
that of "Common Worship" (2000). Book of Common Prayer Common Worship Lutheran
Church. Lutheran Service Book, Lutheran Worship Evangelical Lutheran Worship
The Church of Denmark still uses the phrase "We renounce the devil and all his
works and all his ways" as the beginning of this creed, before the line "We
believe in God etc.". This is mostly due to the influence of Grundtvig. See Den
apostolske trosbekendelse. Unity of the Brethren. In the version recited by
Unity churches, the only variation from the Lutheran Creed is "I believe in the
holy Christian Church," instead of the "catholic Church." United Methodist
Church. The United Methodists commonly incorporate the Apostles' Creed into
their worship services. The version which is most often used is located at #881
in the "United Methodist Hymnal", one of their most popular hymnals and one
with a heritage to John Wesley, founder of Methodism. It is notable for
omitting the line "he descended into hell", but is otherwise very similar to
the Book of Common Prayer version. The 1989 Hymnal has both the traditional
version and the 1988 ecumenical version (see below), which includes "he
descended to the dead." The "United Methodist Hymnal" also contains (at #882)
what it terms the "Ecumenical Version" of this creed—a version which is
identical to that found in the Episcopal Church's current "Book of Common
Prayer". This form of the Apostles' Creed can be found incorporated into the
Eucharistic and Baptismal Liturgies in the Hymnal and in "The United Methodist
Book of Worship", and hence it is growing in popularity and use. Liturgical use
in Western Christianity. The liturgical communities in western Christianity
that derive their rituals from the Roman Missal, including those particular
communities which use the Roman Missal itself (Roman Catholics), the "Book of
Common Prayer" (Anglicans / Episcopalians), the "Lutheran Book of Worship"
(ELCA Lutherans), "Lutheran Service Book" (Missouri-Synod Lutherans), use the
Apostles' Creed and interrogative forms of it in their rites of Baptism, which
they consider to be the first sacrament of initiation into the Church. Roman
Catholic Church. Rite of Baptism. And all respond: Amen. Profession of faith at
Mass. Since the 2002 edition, the Apostles' Creed is included in the Roman
Missal with the indication, "Instead of the Niceno-Constantinopolitan Creed,
especially during Lent and Easter time, the baptismal Symbol of the Roman
Church, known as the Apostles’ Creed, may be used." Previously the Nicene
Creed was the only profession of faith that the Missal gave for use at Mass,
except in Masses for children; but in some countries use of the Apostles' Creed
was already permitted. Church of England. The Apostles' Creed is used in the
non-Eucharistic services of Matins and Evening Prayer (Evensong). It is invoked
after the recitation or singing of the Canticles, and it is the only part of
the services in which the congregation traditionally turns to face the altar,
if they are seated transversely in the quire. Episcopal Church (United States).
The Episcopal Church uses the Apostles' Creed as a Baptismal Covenant for those
who are to receive the Rite of Baptism. Regardless of age, candidates are to be
sponsored by parents and/or godparents. Youths able to understand the
significance of the Rite may go through the ritual speaking for themselves.
Younger children and infants rely on their sponsors to act upon their behalf.
1. The celebrant calls for the candidates for Baptism to be presented. 2. The
catechumen or sponsors state their request for Baptism. 3a. If the catechumen
is of age, the celebrant will ask him or her if he or she desires Baptism, to
which the catechumen will respond: "I do." 3b. If the candidate relies on
sponsors, the celebrant asks them if they will raise the child in "the
Christian faith and life" (ECUSA BCP), and will raise the child through
"prayers and witness to grow into the full stature of Christ" to which the
parents will state to each, "I will, with God's help." 6. The Apostles' Creed
is then recited by candidates, sponsors and congregation, each section of the
Creed being an answer to the celebrant's question, 'Do you believe in God the
Father (God the Son, God the Holy Spirit)?' Lutheran Church. Following each
question, the candidate answers by saying "Yes, I believe". If the candidate is
a child, the godparents are to answer the questions.
