Apostolic see In Christianity, an apostolic see is any episcopal see whose
foundation is attributed to one or more of the apostles of Jesus. Out of the
many such sees, five acquired special importance in Chalcedonian Christianity
(beginning with the council held in 451) and became classified as the Pentarchy
in Eastern Orthodox Christianity. But before then, the First Council of Nicaea
of 325 recognized in its sixth canon the special position of Rome and
Alexandria, and perhaps of Antioch and the chief sees in other provinces: "The
ancient customs of Egypt, Libya and Pentapolis shall be maintained, according
to which the bishop of Alexandria has authority over all these places since a
similar custom exists with reference to the bishop of Rome. Similarly in
Antioch and the other provinces the prerogatives of the churches are to be
preserved." And Jerusalem received special recognition in the seventh canon.
The Council, which was held in 325, of course made no mention of
Constantinople, a city which was founded and became the capital of the empire
only in 330. Officially, Constantinople was founded on 11 May 330. Constantine
the Great (who died on 22 May 337) divided the expanded city (previously known
as Byzantium), like Rome, into 14 regions, and ornamented it with public works
worthy of an imperial metropolis. The First Council of Constantinople (381)
decreed in a canon of disputed validity: "The Bishop of Constantinople,
however, shall have the prerogative of honour after the Bishop of Rome; because
Constantinople is New Rome." A century after the Council of Chalcedon (451) and
the ensuing schism between those who accepted it and those who rejected it, the
theory of the Pentarchy was given expression: "formulated in the legislation of
the emperor Justinian I (527–565), especially in his Novella 131, the theory
received formal ecclesiastical sanction at the Council in Trullo (692), which
ranked the five sees as Rome, Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch, and
Jerusalem." Specific reference to Rome. In Roman Catholic usage, ""the"
Apostolic See" is used in the singular and capitalized to refer specifically to
the See of Rome, with reference to the Pope's status as successor of the
Apostle Peter. This usage existed already at the time of the third ecumenical
council, held at Ephesus in 431, at which the phrase "our most holy and blessed
pope Cœlestine, bishop of the Apostolic See" was used. In Catholic canon law,
the term is applied also to the various departments of the Roman Curia. Both
the Code of Canon Law and the Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches state: "In
this Code the terms Apostolic See or Holy See mean not only the Roman Pontiff,
but also, unless the contrary is clear from the nature of things or from the
context, the Secretariat of State, the Council for the public affairs of the
Church, and the other Institutes of the Roman Curia." The bodies in question
are seen as speaking on behalf of the See of Rome.
