Antisemitism in the Arab world Antisemitism in the Arab world refers to
discrimination against Jews in Arab countries. While Arabs are also a Semitic
people, the meaning of the English term "antisemitism" refers to discrimination
against Jews (see Antisemitism: Etymology and usage). Arab antisemitism is
believed to have expanded since the 19th century. Jews, like other minority
groups within the Muslim world, were subject to various restrictions long
before that (see Dhimmi). However, despite its restrictive nature, dhimmi
status also afforded the "People of the Book", provided they did not contest
the inferior social and legal status imposed on them, relative security against
persecution and welfare most of the time—a protection that was missing for
non-Christians in most of Europe until the institutionalization of equality
under a secular idea of citizenship after the French Revolution—and allowed
them to enjoy their respective religious laws and ways of life. Antisemitism in
the Arab world has increased greatly in modern times, for many reasons: the
breakdown of the Ottoman Empire and traditional Islamic society; European
influence, brought about by Western imperialism and Christian Arabs; Nazi
propaganda; resentment over Jewish nationalism (see Zionism); and the rise of
Arab nationalism. The rise of political Islam during the 1980s and afterwards
provided a new mutation of Islamic anti-Semitism, which gave the hatred of Jews
a religious component. For most of the past fourteen hundred years, according
to Bernard Lewis, Arabs have not been antisemitic as the word is used in the
West. In his view this is because, for the most part, Arabs are not Christians
brought up on stories of Jewish deicide. In Islam, such stories are rejected by
the Qur'an as a blasphemous absurdity. Since Muslims do not consider themselves
as the "true Israel", they do not feel threatened by the survival of Jews.
Because Islam did not retain the Old Testament, no clash of interpretations
between the two faiths can therefore arise. There is, says Lewis, no Muslim
theological dispute between their religious institutions and the Jews. While
there were antisemitic incidents in the early twentieth century, antisemitism
has certainly been heightened by the Arab-Israeli conflict. After the 1948
Arab-Israeli War, the Palestinian exodus, the creation of the state of Israel,
and Israeli victories during the wars of 1956 and 1967 were a severe
humiliation to the Arabs. The situation of the Jews in the Middle East worsened
and almost all fled or were expelled from most Arab and Muslim countries. By
the 1980s, according to Bernard Lewis, the volume of antisemitic literature
published in the Arab world, and the authority of its sponsors, seemed to
suggest that classical antisemitism had become an essential part of Arab
intellectual life, considerably more than in late nineteenth- and early
twentieth-century France, and to a degree that has been compared to Nazi
Germany. In their 2008 report on contemporary Arab-Muslim antisemitism, the
Israeli Intelligence and Terrorism Information Center dates the beginning of
this phenomenon to the spread of classic European Christian antisemitism into
the Arab world starting in the late 19th century. Medieval times. Jews, along
with Christians and Zoroastrians, typically had the legal status of dhimmi
(protected minority) in the lands conquered by Muslim Arabs, generally applied
to non-Muslim minorities. Jews were generally seen as a religious group (not a
separate race), thus being a part of the "Arab family". Dhimmi were subjected
to a number of restrictions, the application and severity of which varied with
time and place. Restrictions included residency in segregated quarters,
obligation to wear distinctive clothing, public subservience to Muslims,
prohibitions against proselytizing and against marrying Muslim women, and
limited access to the legal system (the testimony of a Jew did not count if
contradicted by that of a Muslim). Dhimmis had to pay a special poll tax (the
"jizya"), which exempted them from military service, and also from payment of
the Zakat alms tax required of Muslims. In return, dhimmis were granted limited
rights including a degree of tolerance, community autonomy in personal matters,
and protection from being killed outright. Jewish communities, like Christian
ones, were typically constituted as semi-autonomous entities managed by their
own laws and leadership, who carried the responsibility for the community
towards the Muslim rulers. By medieval standards, conditions for Jews under
Islam was generally more formalized and better than those of Jews in Christian
lands, in part due to the sharing of minority status with Christians in these
lands. There is evidence for this claim in that the status of Jews in lands
with no Christian minority was usually worse than their status in lands with
one. For example, there were numerous incidents of massacres and ethnic
cleansing of Jews in North Africa, especially in Morocco, Libya and Algeria
where eventually Jews were forced to live in ghettos. Decrees ordering the
destruction of synagogues were enacted in the Middle Ages in Egypt, Syria, Iraq
and Yemen. At certain times in Yemen, Morocco and Baghdad, Jews were forced to
convert to Islam or face death. G.E. Von Grunebaum, "Eastern Jewry Under
Islam", 1971, p.369. Views in Modernity. Nineteenth century. "... and for the
love we bear to our subjects, we cannot permit the Jewish nation, whose
innocence for the crime alleged against them is evident, to be worried and
tormented as a consequence of accusations which have not the least foundation
in truth...". Nevertheless, pogroms spread through the Middle East and North
Africa: Aleppo (1850, 1875), Damascus (1840, 1848, 1890), Beirut (1862, 1874),
Dayr al-Qamar (1847), Jaffa (1876), Jerusalem (1847, 1870 and 1895), Cairo
(1844, 1890, 1901–02), Mansura (1877), Alexandria (1870, 1882, 1901–07),
Port Said (1903, 1908), and Damanhur (1871, 1873, 1877, 1891). The Dreyfus
affair of the late nineteenth century had consequences in the Arab world.
Passionate outbursts of antisemitism in France were echoed in areas of French
influence, especially Maronite Lebanon. The Muslim Arab press, however, was
sympathetic to the falsely accused Captain Dreyfus, and criticized the
persecution of Jews in France. Twentieth century. Pre-state anti-Semitism.
While antisemitism has increased in the wake of the Arab-Israeli conflict,
there were pogroms against Jews prior to the foundation of Israel, including
Nazi-inspired pogroms in Algeria in the 1930s, and attacks on the Jews of Iraq
and Libya in the 1940s. In 1941, 180 Jews were murdered and 700 were injured in
the anti-Jewish riots known as the Farhud. Four hundred Jews were injured in
violent demonstrations in Egypt in 1945 and Jewish property was vandalized and
looted. In Libya, 130 Jews were killed and 266 injured. In December 1947, 13
Jews were killed in Damascus, including 8 children, and 26 were injured. In
Aleppo, rioting resulted in dozens of Jewish casualties, damage to 150 Jewish
homes, and the torching of 5 schools and 10 synagogues. In Yemen, 97 Jews were
murdered and 120 injured. Speculated causes. Antisemitism in the Arab world
increased in the twentieth century, as antisemitic propaganda and blood libels
were imported from Europe and as resentment against Zionist efforts in British
Mandate of Palestine spread. British troops stationed in Palestine arrived
fresh from deployment in the Russian civil war, fighting alongside the
genocidal antisemitic White Movement. The British forces are credited with
introducing the Protocols of the Elders of Zion to Palestine. In March 1921,
Musa Khazem El Husseini, Mayor of Jerusalem, told Winston Churchill "The Jews
have been amongst the most active advocates of destruction in many lands... It
is well known that the disintegration of Russia was wholly or in great part
brought about by the Jews, and a large proportion of the defeat of Germany and
Austria must also be put at their door." Matthias Küntzel has suggested that
the decisive transfer of Jewish conspiracy theory took place between 1937 and
1945 under the impact of Nazi propaganda targeted at the Arab world. According
to Kuntzel, the Nazi Arabic radio service had a staff of 80 and broadcast every
day in Arabic, stressing the similarities between Islam and Nazism and
supported by the activities of the Mufti of Jerusalem, Haj Amin al-Husayni (who
broadcast pro-Nazi propaganda from Berlin). The Nazi regime also provided
funding to the Egyptian Moslem Brotherhood, which began calling for boycotts of
Jewish businesses in 1936. Bernard Lewis also describes Nazi influence in the
Arab world, including its impact on Michel Aflaq (a Christian), the principal
founder of ba'athist thought (which later dominated Syria and Iraq).Lewis,
Bernard. "Semites and Anti-Semites: An Inquiry into Conflict and Prejudice".
New York: W.W. Norton, 1999. ISBN 978-0-393-31839-5, p. 148 George Gruen
attributes the increased animosity towards Jews in the Arab world to the
breakdown of the Ottoman Empire and traditional Islamic society; domination by
Western colonial powers under which Jews gained a disproportionately large role
in the commercial, professional, and administrative life of the region; the
rise of Arab nationalism, whose proponents sought the wealth and positions of
local Jews through government channels; resentment over Jewish nationalism and
the Zionist movement; and the readiness of unpopular regimes to scapegoat local
Jews for political purposes. After the 1948 Arab-Israeli War, the Palestinian
exodus, the creation of the state of Israel, and the independence of Arab
countries from European control, conditions for Jews in the Arab world
deteriorated. Over the next few decades, almost all would flee the Arab world,
some willingly, and some under threat (see Jewish exodus from Arab lands). In
1945 there were between 758,000 and 866,000 Jews (see table below) living in
communities throughout the Arab world. Today, there are fewer than 8,000. In
some Arab states, such as Libya (which was once around 3% Jewish), the Jewish
community no longer exists; in other Arab countries, only a few hundred Jews
remain. Robert Bernstein, founder of Human Rights Watch, says that antisemitism
is "deeply ingrained and institutionalized" in "Arab nations in modern times."
Modern examples. Arab League. On December 2, 1945, the newly formed Arab League
Council declared a formal boycott against Jewish products. "Jewish products and
manufactured goods shall be considered undesirable to the Arab countries." All
Arab "institutions, organizations, merchants, commission agents and
individuals" were called upon "to refuse to deal in, distribute, or consume
Zionist products or manufactured goods." The boycott began to wane only in the
1970s. Israeli Arabs. During a speech in 2007, Israeli-Arab Raed Salah, the
leader of the northern branch of the Islamic Movement in Israel, accused Jews
of using children's blood to bake bread. "We have never allowed ourselves to
knead dough for the bread that breaks the fast in the holy month of Ramadan
with children's blood," he said. "Whoever wants a more thorough explanation,
let him ask what used to happen to some children in Europe, whose blood was
mixed in with the dough of the holy bread." In 1997, Arab parliamentarian Ahmad
Tibi declared, "Whoever sells his house to Jews, has sold his soul to Satan and
has done a despicable act." Egypt. Egyptian Muslim Brotherhood leader Mohammed
Mahdi Akef has denounced what he called "the myth of the Holocaust" in
defending Iranian president Mahmoud Ahmadinejad's denial of it. With regard to
the fraud of the Holocaust… Many French studies have proven that this is no
more than a fabrication, a lie, and a fraud!! That is, it is a 'scenario' the
plot of which was carefully tailored, using several faked photos completely
unconnected to the truth. Yes, it is a film, no more and no less. Hitler
himself, whom they accuse of Nazism, is in my eyes no more than a modest
'pupil' in the world of murder and bloodshed. He is completely innocent of the
charge of frying them in the hell of his false Holocaust!! The entire matter,
as many French and British scientists and researchers have proven, is nothing
more than a huge Israeli plot aimed at extorting the German government in
particular and the European countries in general. But I, personally and in
light of this imaginary tale, complain to Hitler, even saying to him from the
bottom of my heart, 'If only you had done it, brother, if only it had really
happened, so that the world could sigh in relief their evil and sin.' Cartoons
appearing in the daily "Al-Wafd" in 2003 depict Jews as Satanic figures with
hooked noses and equates them with Nazis. In an article in October 2000
columnist Adel Hammoda alleged in the state-owned Egyptian newspaper "al-Ahram"
that Jews made Matza from the blood of (non-Jewish) children. Mohammed Salmawy,
editor of "Al-Ahram Hebdo", "defended the use of old European myths like the
blood libel" in his newspapers. In August 2010, Saudi columnist Iman Al-
Quwaifli sharply criticized the "phenomenon of sympathy for Adolf Hitler and
for Nazism in the Arab world", specifically citing the words of Hussam Fawzi
Jabar, an Islamic cleric who justified Hitler's actions against the Jews in an
Egyptian talk show one month earlier. Jordan. Jordan does not allow entry to
Jews with visible signs of Judaism or even with personal religious items in
their possession. The Jordanian ambassador to Israel replied to a complaint by
a religious Jew denied entry that security concerns required that travelers
entering the Hashemite Kingdom not do so with prayer shawls (Tallit) and
phylacteries (Tefillin). Jordanian authorities state that the policy is in
order to ensure the Jewish tourists safety. In July 2009, six Breslov Hasidim
were deported after attempting entry into Jordan in order to visit the tomb of
Aaron / Sheikh Harun on Mount Hor, near Petra, because of an alert from the
Ministry of Tourism. The group had taken a ferry from Sinai, Egypt because they
understood that Jordanian authorities were making it hard for visible Jews to
enter from Israel. The Israeli Ministry of Foreign Affairs is aware of the
issue. Saudi Arabia. A Saudi government website initially stated that Jews
would not be granted tourist visas to enter the country. It has since removed
this statement, and apologized for posting "erroneous information". Members of
religions other than Islam, including Jews, are not permitted to practice their
religion publicly in Saudi Arabia; according to the U.S. State Department,
religious freedom "does not exist" in Saudi Arabia. Islam is the official
religion of Saudi Arabia, and the tenets of that religion are enforced by law.
Saudi Arabian media often attacks Jews in books, news articles, at their
Mosques and with what some describe as antisemitic satire. Saudi Arabian
government officials and state religious leaders often promote the idea that
Jews are conspiring to take over the entire world; as proof of their claims
they publish and frequently cite "The Protocols of the Elders of Zion" as
factual. One Saudi Arabian government newspaper suggested that hatred of all
Jews is justifiable. "Why are they (the Jews) hated by all the people which
hosted them, such as Iraq and Egypt thousands years ago, and Germany, Spain,
France and the UK, up to the days they gained of power over the capital and the
press, in order to rewrite the history?" Saudi textbooks vilify Jews (and
Christians and non-Wahabi Muslims): according to "The Washington Post", Saudi
textbooks claimed by them to have been sanitized of antisemitism still call
Jews apes (and Christians swine); demand that students avoid and not befriend
Jews; claim that Jews worship the devil; and encourage Muslims to engage in
Jihad to vanquish Jews. Syria. On March 2, 1974, the bodies of four Syrian
Jewish girls were discovered by border police in a cave in the Zabdani
Mountains northwest of Damascus. Fara Zeibak 24, her sisters Lulu Zeibak 23,
Mazal Zeibak 22 and their cousin Eva Saad 18, had contracted with a band of
smugglers to flee Syrian to Lebanon and eventually to Israel. The girl’s
bodies were found raped, murdered and mutilated. The police also found the
remains of two Jewish boys, Natan Shaya 18 and Kassem Abadi 20, victims of an
earlier massacre. Syrian authorities deposited the bodies of all six in sacks
before the homes of their parents in the Jewish ghetto in Damascus. In 1984
Syrian Defense Minister Mustafa Tlass published a book called "The Matzah of
Zion", which claimed that Jews had killed Christian children in Damascus to
make Matzas (see Damascus affair). His book inspired the Egyptian TV series
"Horseman Without a Horse" (see below) and a spinoff, "The Diaspora", which led
to Hezbollah's al-Manar being banned in Europe for broadcasting it. Former Ku
Klux Klan leader David Duke visited Syria in November 2005 and made a speech
which was broadcast live on Syrian television. Tunisia. At each crisis, with
every incident of the slightest importance, the mob would go wild, setting fire
to Jewish shops. This even happened during the Yom Kippur War. Tunisia's
President, Habib Bourguiba, has in all probability never been hostile to the
Jews, but there was always that notorious "delay", which meant that the police
arrived on the scene only after the shops had been pillaged and burnt. Is it
any wonder that the exodus to France and Israel continued and even increased?
Palestinian territories. The Hamas, an offshoot of the Egyptian Muslim
Brotherhood, has a foundational statement of principles, or "covenant" which
claims that the French revolution, the Russian revolution, colonialism and both
world wars were created by the Zionists. It also claims the Freemasons and
Rotary clubs are Zionist fronts and refers to the Protocols of the Elders of
Zion. Claims that Jews and Freemasons were behind the French Revolution
originated in Germany in the mid-19th century. Mudar Zahran, a Palestinian,
writing for the Hudson Institute says that "the Palestinians have been used as
fuel for the new form of anti-Semitism; this has hurt the Palestinians and
exposed them to unprecedented and purposely media-ignored abuse by Arab
governments, including some of those who claim love for the Palestinians, yet
in fact only bear hatred to Jews. This has resulted in Palestinian cries for
justice, equality, freedom and even basic human rights being ignored while the
world getting consumed with delegitimizing Israel from either ignorance or
malice." Mahmoud Abbas, leader of the PLO, published a Ph.D. thesis (at Moscow
University) in 1982, called "The Secret Connection between the Nazis and the
Leaders of the Zionist Movement". Medoff, Dr. Rafael. "A Holocaust-Denier as
Prime Minister of 'Palestine'?" (The David S. Wyman Institute for Holocaust
Studies). Arab newspapers. Many Arab newspapers, such as "Al-Hayat Al-Jadidah",
the Palestinian Authority's official newspaper, often write that "the Jews"
control all the world's governments, and that "the Jews" plan genocide on all
the Arabs in the West Bank. Others write less sensational stories, and state
that Jews have too much of an influence in the United States government. Often
the leaders of other nations are said to be controlled by Jews. Articles in
many official Arab government newspapers claim that "The Protocols of the
Elders of Zion", reflects facts, and thus points to an international Jewish
conspiracy to take over the world. Lebanon. Hizbullah's Al-Manar TV channel has
often been accused of airing antisemitic broadcasts, blaming the Jews for a
Zionist conspiracy against the Arab world, and often airing excerpts from the
"Protocols of the Elders of Zion", which the "Encyclopædia Britannica"
describes as a "fraudulent document that served as a pretext and rationale for
anti-Semitism in the early 20th century." Al-Manar recently aired a drama
series, called "The Diaspora", which is based on historical antisemitic
allegations. BBC reporters who watched the series said that: "France offers
'hate TV' reprieve", "BBC News Online", August 20, 2004. In another incident,
an Al-Manar commentator recently referred to "Zionist attempts to transmit AIDS
to Arab countries". Al-Manar officials deny broadcasting antisemitic incitement
and state that their position is anti-Israeli, not antisemitic. However,
Hezbollah has directed strong rhetoric both against Israel and Jews, and it has
cooperated in publishing and distributing outright antisemitic literature. The
government of Lebanon has not criticized continued broadcast of antisemitic
material on television. Due to protests by the CRIF umbrella group of French
Jews regarding allegations of antisemitic content, French Prime Minister Jean-
Pierre Raffarin called for a ban on Al-Manar broadcasting in France on December
2, 2004; just two weeks after al-Manar was authorised to continue broadcasting
in Europe by France's media watchdog agency. On December 13, 2004, France's
highest administrative court banned Hizbullah's Al-Manar TV station on the
grounds that it consistently incites racial hatred and antisemitism. Yemen. The
1940s and the establishment of Israel saw rapid emigration of Jews out of
Yemen, in the wake of anti-Jewish riots and massacres. By the late 90's, only
several hundred remained, mainly in a northwestern mountainous region named
Sa'ada and town of Raida. Houthi members put up notes on the Jews' doors,
accusing them of corrupting Muslim morals. Eventually, the Houthi leaders sent
threatening messages to the Jewish community: "We warn you to leave the area
immediately... We give you a period of 10 days, or you will regret it".
"Horseman Without a Horse". In 2001–2002, Arab Radio and Television produced
a 30-part television miniseries entitled "Horseman Without a Horse", which
contains dramatizations of "The Protocols of the Elders of Zion". The United
States and Israel criticized Egypt for airing the program, which includes
racist falsehoods that have a history of being used "as a pretext for
persecuting Jews." Opinion Polling. In 2008 A Pew Research Center survey found
that negative views concerning Jews were most common in the three predominantly
Arab nations polled, with 97% of Lebanese having unfavorable opinion of Jews,
95% in Egypt and 96% in Jordan.
