Archbishop An archbishop (from Greek ἀρχι-, chief, and
ἐπίσκοπος, bishop) is a bishop of higher rank, but not of higher
sacramental order above that of the three orders of deacon, priest (presbyter),
and bishop. Accordingly, a person does not become an archbishop by ordination.
Western Christianity. Metropolitan archbishops. Episcopal sees are generally
arranged in groups in which the bishop who is the ordinary of one of them has
certain powers and duties of oversight over the other sees. He is known as the
metropolitan archbishop of that see. In the Roman Catholic Church, canon 436 of
the Code of Canon Law indicates what these powers and duties are for a Latin
Rite metropolitan archbishop, while those of the head of an autonomous (sui
iuris) Eastern Catholic Church are indicated in canon 157 of the Code of Canons
of the Eastern Churches. Non-metropolitan archiepiscopal sees. As well as the
much more numerous metropolitan sees, there are 77 Roman Catholic sees that
have archiepiscopal rank. In some cases, such a see is the only one in a
country, such as Luxembourg or Monaco, too small to be divided into several
dioceses so as to form an ecclesiastical province. In others, the title of
archdiocese is for historical reasons attributed to a see that was once of
greater importance. Some of these archdioceses are suffragans of a metropolitan
archdiocese. An example is the Archdiocese of Avignon, which is a suffragan of
the Archdiocese of Marseille, Others are immediately subject to the Holy See
and not to any metropolitan archdiocese. These are usually "aggregated" to an
ecclesiastical province. An example is the Archdiocese of Hobart in Australia,
associated with the Metropolitan ecclesiastical province of Melbourne, but not
part of it. The ordinary of such an archdiocese is an archbishop, however,
especially in the Anglican Communion, not all archbishops' dioceses are called
archdioceses. Coadjutor archbishops. Until 1970, a coadjutor archbishop, one
who has special faculties and the right to succeed to the leadership of a see
on the death or resignation of the incumbent, was assigned also to a titular
see, which he held until the moment of succession. Since then, the title of
Coadjutor Archbishop of the see is considered sufficient and more appropriate.
Archbishops "ad personam". The rank of archbishop is conferred on some bishops
who are not ordinaries of an archdiocese. They hold the rank not because of the
see that they head but because it has been granted to them personally (""ad
personam""). Such a grant can be given when someone who already holds the rank
of archbishop is transferred to a see that, though its present-day importance
may be greater than the person's former see, is not archiepiscopal. The bishop
transferred is then known as the Archbishop-Bishop of his new see. An example
is Gianfranco Gardin, appointed Archbishop-Bishop of Treviso on 21 December
2009. The title borne by the successor of such an archbishop-bishop is merely
that of Bishop of the see, unless he also is granted the personal title of
Archbishop. Titular archiepiscopal sees. The distinction between metropolitan
sees and non-metropolitan archiepiscopal sees exists for titular sees as well
as for residential ones. The Annuario Pontificio marks titular sees of the
former class with the abbreviation "Metr." and the others with "Arciv." Many of
the titular sees to which nuncios and heads of departments of the Roman Curia
who are not cardinals are assigned are not of archiepiscopal rank. In that case
the person who is appointed to such a position is given the personal title of
archbishop ("ad personam"). They are usually referred to as Archbishop of the
see, not as its Archbishop-Bishop. Archbishops emeriti. If an archbishop
resigns his see without being transferred to another, as in the case of
retirement or assignment to head a department of the Roman Curia, the word
"emeritus" is added to his former title, and he is called Archbishop Emeritus
of his former see. Until 1970, such archbishops were transferred to a titular
see. There can be several Archbishops Emeriti of the same see: the 2008
Annuario Pontificio listed three living Archbishops Emeriti of Taipei. There is
no Archbishop Emeritus of a titular see: an archbishop who holds a titular see
keeps it until death or until transferred to another see. In the Anglican
Communion retired archbishops vary their use of the title archbishop. Some,
such as Michael Ramsey of Canterbury and Desmond Tutu of Cape Town, South
Africa, continue to use the title in retirement, while others do not keep the
title of archbishop and simply revert to bishop. Privileges of archbishops.
While there is no difference between the official dress of archbishops, as
such, and that of other bishops, Roman Catholic metropolitan archbishops are
distinguished by the use in liturgical ceremonies of the pallium, but only
within the province over which they have oversight. In Roman Catholic heraldry,
an archbishop has an ecclesiastical hat with ten tassels on each side of his
coat of arms, while a bishop has only six. The archiepiscopal cross behind the
shield has two bars instead of one. Such a cross may be borne before him in
liturgical processions. In processions and other occasions for strict protocol,
archbishops precede simple bishops. In the Anglican Communion, archbishops are
styled "The Most Reverend" and addressed as "Your Grace", while bishops are
styled "The Right Reverend" and addressed as "My Lord" or "Your Lordship". In
some countries, this usage is followed also by the Roman Catholic Church, but
in others no distinction is made and "The Most Reverend" and "Your Excellency"
are used for archbishops and bishops alike. Eastern Christianity. In the
Eastern Orthodox Church of Greek tradition, the title of Archbishop usually
indicates some form of leadership of the other bishops of the local church (who
may be metropolitans), as in the Church of Greece and the Greek Orthodox
Archdiocese of America. In the Russian Orthodox tradition, metropolitans
outrank archbishops. The Oriental Orthodox generally follow the pattern of the
Slavic tradition with respect to the archbishop/metropolitan distinction.
Instead of the term "archbishop", Eastern Catholic Churches sometimes use the
word "archeparch" by analogy with "eparch", the term used for a diocesan (or
eparchial) bishop. However, the word "archeparch" is not found in the Code of
Canons of the Eastern Churches.
