Arul Nool The Arul Nool is a supplement to the "Akilattirattu Ammanai", and is
likewise considered a holy scripture of Ayyavazhi, an offshoot sect of
Hinduism. This book contains the collection of messages given by Ayya Vaikundar
to his Disciples ("Citars" or "Arulalarkal"), whose names are unknown. Since
they are believed to be composed by "Arylalarkar", it acquired the name
"Arulnool". There is no direct indication within the book regarding the time of
its composition. Within this literature, "Ukappadippu", "Ucchippadippu",
"Vazhappadippu" and "Pothippu" are prayer formulae used for worship. "Chattu
Nittolai" is a book that is said to contain the Lamentations of Ayya Vaikundar.
It laments on the sufferings of Ayya Vaikundar and the Canror people. There are
also views that Ayya Vaikundar himself sang the content of this book when he
came from Thiruchendur. "Ayya Cicarukku chonna pathiram, Ayya Cicarukku chonna
Sivakanta atikara pathiram" and "Tinkalpatam" are instructions given to people
on various aspects of life, including the conduct of worship. The instructions
found in these are generally rephrasings of those that are given in
"Akilathirattu. Natuthirvai Ula" is a set of predictions for the day of
judgement, and "Kalyana Vazhthu" is a song of felicitation to be sung during
marriages in honour of the couples. "Saptha kannimar patal" is another
formulation of the story of Seven Virgins given in "Akilathirattu", and
"Panchatevar Urpatthi" is about five folk deities named "Sivaimargal", believed
to be the soldiers of Ayya Vaikundar. The word "Ukappadippu" in Tamil denotes
that 'the song of the Aeon. It is present in "Arul Nool". This "Ukappatippu" is
not to be confused with "Uccippadippu", the noon Prayer. The "Ukappadippu"
consists of six verses, and each was chanted eleven times by the devotees in
"Pathis" and "Nizhal Thangals" twice a day; at dawn and at dusk after the
"Panividai". The word "Ucchippadippu" in Tamil means "Things to be chanted at
noontide." This "Ucchippatippu" is not to be confused with "Ukappatippu" (see
above). This "Ucchippadippu" is the noon prayer chanted in Ayyavazhi "Pathis"
and "Nizhal Thangals", exactly at 12:00 noon. This is also found in "Arul
Nool". The "Panchathevar Urppatthi" part tells about the situation and the way
by which the "Sivaimar" were created. The "Natuttheervai Ula" part tells about
the happenings of the day of final judgement. This "Kalyana Vazhthu" is the
ballad which was sung during the marriages of the followers of Ayyavazhi. Most
of the lines of this part seems as an extract from "Akilam".
