Asceticism Asceticism (from the , "áskēsis", "exercise" or "training")
describes a lifestyle characterized by abstinence from various worldly
pleasures, often with the aim of pursuing religious and spiritual goals. Many
religious traditions (e.g. Buddhism, Jainism, the Christian desert fathers)
include practices that involve restraint with respect to actions of body,
speech, and mind. The founders and earliest practitioners of these religions
lived extremely austere lifestyles, refraining from sensual pleasures and the
accumulation of material wealth. They practiced asceticism not as a rejection
of the enjoyment of life, or because the practices themselves are virtuous, but
as an aid in the pursuit of salvation or liberation. Etymology. The adjective
"ascetic" derives from the ancient Greek term "askēsis", which means training
or exercise. The original usage did not refer to self-denial, but to the
physical training required for athletic events. Its usage later extended to
practices that are used in all major religious traditions, in varying degrees.
Sociological and psychological views. Early 20th century German sociologist Max
Weber made a distinction between "innerweltliche" and "ausserweltliche"
asceticism, which means (roughly) "inside the world" and "outside the world",
respectively. Talcott Parsons translated these as "worldly" and "otherworldly"
-- however, some translators use "inner-worldly", and this is more in line with
inner world explorations of mysticism, a common purpose of asceticism.. "Inner
or Other- worldly" asceticism is practiced by people who withdraw from the
world to live an ascetic life (this includes monks who live communally in
monasteries, as well as hermits who live alone). "Worldly" asceticism refers to
people who live ascetic lives but do not withdraw from the world. "Wealth is
thus bad ethically only in so far as it is a temptation to idleness and sinful
enjoyment of life, and its acquisition is bad only when it is with the purpose
of later living merrily and without care"Max Weber, The Protestant Ethic and
the Spirit of Capitalism, Chapter V Asceticism and the Spirit of Capitalism,
1905 Weber claimed this distinction originated in the Protestant Reformation,
but later became secularized, so the concept can be applied to both religious
and secular ascetics. (See Talcott Parsons' translation of The Protestant Ethic
and the Spirit of Capitalism, translator's note on Weber's footnote 9 in
chapter 2.) Twentieth century American psychological theorist David McClelland
suggested worldly asceticism is specifically targeted against worldly pleasures
that "distract" people from their calling and may accept worldly pleasures that
are not distracting. As an example, he pointed out Quakers have historically
objected to bright-colored clothing, but wealthy Quakers often made their drab
clothing out of expensive materials. The color was considered distracting, but
the materials were not. Amish groups use similar criteria to make decisions
about which modern technologies to use and which to avoid. Religious
motivation. Self-discipline and abstinence in some form and degree are parts of
religious practice within many religious and spiritual traditions. A more
dedicated ascetical lifestyle is associated particularly with monks, yogis or
priests, but any individual may choose to lead an ascetic life. Shakyamuni
Gautama (who left a more severe ascetism to seek a reasoned "middle way" of
balanced life), Mahavir Swami, Anthony the Great (St. Anthony of the Desert),
Francis of Assisi, Jesus, and Mahatma Gandhi can all be considered ascetics.
Many of these men left their families, possessions, and homes to live a
mendicant life, and in the eyes of their followers demonstrated great spiritual
attainment or enlightenment. Hinduism. Sadhus are known for the extreme forms
of self-denial they occasionally practice. These include extreme acts of
devotion to a deity or principle, such as vowing never to use one leg or the
other or to hold an arm in the air for a period of months or years. The
particular types of asceticism involved vary from sect to sect and from holy
man to holy man. The Rig Veda describes Kesins ("long-haired" ascetics) and
Munis ("silent ones"). The Kesins are described as friends of Vayu, Rudra, the
Gandharvas and the Apsaras. There is also another story in the Rig Veda that
Dhruva the son of Uttanapada (the son of Manu) performs penance, making him
"one with Brahma". In the Rig Veda, the Maruts (offspring of Rudra) are
mentioned as "young seers who have knowledge of the truth" (V.58.8) and they
are said to be "like the wild silent sages" (V.II.56.8). Yatin means
"renunciate" and is a name given to mendicants in the Rig Veda. "Sanyasa" is
one of the four stages of life in Hinduism. The term "tapas" is used in the Rig
Veda to connote the burning of desires. Keeping silence, even in times of
verbal abuse, was practiced by Hindu ascetics. Yajnavalkya also describes
Brahmans as "Bhiksacaryas". Different types of ascetics are Sanyasis
(renunciants who wander forest usually with other renunciants), "vairagis",
"jangamas" (who have matted hair and put chains on their feet), "sarevras" (who
shave their heads), and yogis (who practice yoga). Jainism. Asceticism in one
of its most intense forms can be found in one of the oldest religions, known as
Jainism. Jainism encourages fasting, yoga practices, meditation in difficult
postures, and other austerities. According to Jains, one's highest goal should
be moksha (i.e., liberation from samsara, the cycle of birth and rebirth). For
this, a soul has to be without attachment or self-indulgence. This can be
achieved only by the monks and nuns who take five great vows: "Ahimsa" (Non-
violence), "Satya" (Truth), "Asteya" (Non-stealing), "Brahmacharya" (Chastity)
and "Aparigraha" (Non-attachment). Most of the austerities and ascetic
practices can be traced back to Vardhaman Mahavira, the twenty-fourth
"fordmaker" or Tirthankara. The Acaranga Sutra, or Book of Good Conduct, is a
sacred book in Jainism that discusses the ascetic code of conduct. Other texts
that provide insight into conduct of ascetics include Yogashastra by Acharya
Hemachandra and Niyamasara by Acharya Kundakunda. Other illustrious Jain works
on ascetic conduct are "Oghanijjutti, Pindanijjutti, Cheda Sutta, and Nisiha
Suttafee." Ascetic vows. As per the Jain vows, the monks and nuns renounce all
relations and possessions. Jain ascetics practice complete nonviolence.
"Ahimsa" is the first and foremost vow of a Jain ascetic. They do not hurt any
living being, be it an insect or a human. They carry a special broom to sweep
any insects that may cross their path. Some Jain monks wear a cloth over the
mouth to prevent accidental harm to airborne germs and insects. They also do
not use electricity as it involves violence. Furthermore, they do not use any
devices or machines. As they are possession-less and without any attachment,
they travel from city to city, often crossing forests and deserts and always
barefoot. Jain ascetics do not stay in a single place for more than two months
to prevent attachment to any place. However, during four months of monsoon
(rainy season) known as "chaturmaas", they continue to stay at a single place
to avoid killing life forms that thrive during the rains. Jain monks and nuns
practice complete celibacy. They do not touch or share a sitting platform with
a person of the opposite sex. Dietary practices. Jain ascetics follow a strict
vegetarian diet without root vegetables. Shvetambara monks do not cook food but
solicit alms from householders. Digambara monks have only a single meal a day.
Neither group will beg for food, but a Jain ascetic may accept a meal from a
householder, provided that the latter is pure of mind and body and offers the
food of his own volition and in the prescribed manner. During such an
encounter, the monk remains standing and eats only a measured amount. Fasting
(i.e., abstinence from food and sometimes water) is a routine feature of Jain
asceticism. Fasts last for a day or longer, up to a month. Some monks avoid (or
limit) medicine and/or hospitalization out of disregard for the physical body.
Austerities and other daily practices. Other austerities include meditation in
seated or standing posture near river banks in the cold wind or meditation atop
hills and mountains, especially at noon when the sun is at its fiercest. Such
austerities are undertaken according to the physical and mental limits of the
individual ascetic. Jain ascetics are (almost) completely without possessions.
Some Jains (Shvetambara monks and nuns) own only unstitched white robes (an
upper and lower garment) and a bowl used for eating and collecting alms. Male
Digambara monks do not wear any clothes and carry nothing with them except a
soft broom made of shed peacock feathers ("pinchi") and eat from their hands.
They sleep on the floor without blankets and sit on special wooden platforms.
Every day is spent either in study of scriptures or meditation or teaching to
lay people. They stand aloof from worldly matters. When death is imminent or
when a monk feels that he is unable to adhere to his vows due to advanced age
or terminal disease, many Jain ascetics take a final vow of "Santhara" or
"Sallekhana", a peaceful and detached death where medicines, food and water are
abandoned. A monk or a nun wandering from village to village should look
forward for four cubits and seeing animals they should move on by walking on
his toes or heels or the sides of his feet. If there be some bypath, they
should choose it and not go straight on; then they may circumspectly wander
from village to village. ~Third Lecture(6) 'I shall become a Sramana who owns
no house, no property, no sons, no cattle, who eats what others give him; I
shall commit no sinful action; Master, I renounce to accept anything that has
not been given.' Having taken such vows, (a mendicant) should not, on entering
a village or scot-free town, etc., take himself or induce others to take or
allow others to take, what has not been given. ~Seventh Lecture (1) Buddhism.
Theravada. The historical Siddhartha Gautama adopted an extreme ascetic life
after leaving his father's palace, where he once lived in extreme luxury. But
later the Shakyamuni rejected extreme asceticism because it is an impediment to
ultimate freedom (nirvana) from suffering (samsara), choosing instead a path
that met the needs of the body without crossing over into luxury and
indulgence. After abandoning extreme asceticism he was able to achieve
enlightenment. This position became known as the Madhyamaka or Middle Way and
became one of the central organizing principles of Theravadin philosophy. "The
middle way which enlightens the eyes, enlightens the mind, which leads to rest,
to knowledge, to enlightenment, to Nirvana" The degree of moderation suggested
by this middle path varies depending on the interpretation of Theravadism at
hand. Some traditions emphasize ascetic life more than others. The basic
lifestyle of an ordained Theravadin practitioner (bhikkhu, monk; or bhikkhuni,
nun) as described in the Vinaya Pitaka was intended to be neither excessively
austere nor hedonistic. Monks and nuns were intended to have enough of life's
basic requisites (particularly food, water, clothing and shelter) to live
safely and healthily, without being troubled by illness or weakness. While the
life described in the Vinaya may appear difficult, it would be perhaps better
described as Spartan rather than truly ascetic. Deprivation for its own sake is
not valued. Indeed, it may be seen as a sign of attachment to one's own
renunciation. The aim of the monastic lifestyle was to prevent concern for the
material circumstances of life from intruding on the monk or nun's ability to
engage in religious practice. To this end, having inadequate possessions was
regarded as being no more desirable than having too many. Initially, the
Tathagata rejected a number of more specific ascetic practices that some monks
requested to follow. These practices — such as sleeping in the open, dwelling
in a cemetery or cremation ground, wearing only cast-off rags, etc. — were
initially seen as too extreme, being liable to either upset the social values
of the surrounding community or as likely to create schisms among the Sangha by
encouraging monks to compete in austerity. Despite their early prohibition,
recorded in the Pali Canon, these practices (known as the Dhutanga practices or
in Thai as "thudong") eventually became acceptable to the monastic community.
They were recorded by Buddhaghosa in his Visuddhimagga and later became
significant in the practices of the Thai Forest Tradition. Mahayana. The
Mahayana traditions of Buddhism received a slightly different code of
discipline than that used by the various Theravada sects. This fact, combined
with significant regional and cultural variations, has resulted in differing
attitudes towards asceticism in different areas of the Mahayana world.
Particularly notable is the role that vegetarianism plays in East Asian
Buddhism, particularly in China and Japan. While Theravada monks are compelled
to eat whatever is provided for them by their lay supporters, including meat,
Mahayana monks in East of Asia are most often vegetarian. This is attributable
to a number of factors, including Mahayana-specific teachings regarding
vegetarianism, East Asian cultural tendencies that predate the introduction of
Buddhism (some of which may have their roots in Confucianism) and the different
manner in which monks support themselves in East Asia. While Southeast Asian
and Sri Lankan monks generally continue to make daily begging rounds to receive
their daily meal, monks in East Asia more commonly receive bulk foodstuffs from
lay supporters (or the funds to purchase them) and are fed from a kitchen
located on the site of the temple or monastery and staffed either by working
monks or by lay supporters. Similarly, divergent scriptural and cultural trends
have brought a stronger emphasis on asceticism to some Mahayana practices. The
Lotus Sutra, for instance, contains a story of a bodhisattva who burns himself
as an offering to the assembly of all Buddhas in the world. This has become a
patterning story for self-sacrifice in the Mahayana world, probably providing
the inspiration for the self-immolation of the Vietnamese monk Thich Quang Duc
during the 1960s, as well as several other incidents. Judaism. The history of
Jewish asceticism goes back thousands of years to the references of the
Nazirite (Numbers 6) and the Wilderness Tradition that evolved out of the forty
years in the desert. The prophets and their disciples were ascetic to the
extreme including many examples of fasting and hermitic living conditions.
After the Jews returned from the Babylonian exile and the Mosaic institution
was done away with a different form of asceticism arose when Antiochus IV
Epiphanes threatened the Jewish religion in 167 BC. With the rise of the
Hasmoneans and finally Jonathan's claim to the High Priesthood in 152 BC, the
Essene sect separated under the Teacher of Righteousness and they took the
banner of asceticism for the next two hundred years culminating in the Dead Sea
Sect. Asceticism is rejected by modern day Judaism; it is considered contrary
to God's wishes for the world. God intended the world to be enjoyed, and people
be in good spirits when praying. However, Judaism does not encourage people to
seek pleasure for its own sake but rather to do so in a spiritual way. An
example would be thanking God for creating something enjoyable, like a
wonderful view or tasty food. As another example, while remembering that a
person may be fulfilling the commandments of marriage and pru-urvu
(procreation), sex should also be enjoyed. It's a commandment of Halakha for a
man to have sex with his wife even if she cannot conceive (possibly after
menopause or due to infertility) to bring her pleasure and promulgate their
intimacy. Also, food can be enjoyed by remembering that it is necessary to eat,
but by thanking God for making it an enjoyable process and by not overeating or
eating wastefully. Modern normative Judaism is in opposition to the lifestyle
of asceticism and sometimes cast the Nazirite vow in a critical light. There
did exist some ascetic Jewish sects in ancient times, most notably the Essenes
and Ebionites. Further, some early Kabbalists may have led a lifestyle that
could be regarded as ascetic. And the more extreme forms of self-mortification
practiced by early mystical sects of Judaism were shunned by the Hassidic
movement. Because these practices of self-mortification would lead to
downheartedness, the Ba'al Shem Tov said this is not the right state for
someone to be worshipping Hashem (God). Christianity. Christian authors of late
antiquity such as Origen, Jerome, St. Ignatius, John Chrysostom, and Augustine
interpreted meanings of Biblical texts within a highly asceticized religious
environment. Scriptural examples of asceticism could be found in the lives of
John the Baptist, Jesus, the twelve apostles and Saint Paul. The Dead Sea
Scrolls revealed ascetic practices of the ancient Jewish sect of Essenes who
took vows of abstinence to prepare for a holy war. An emphasis on an ascetic
religious life was evident in both early Christian writings (see the
Philokalia) and practices (see hesychasm). Other Christian practitioners of
asceticism include individuals such as Simeon Stylites, Saint David of Wales
and Francis of Assisi. The deserts of the middle-east were at one time
inhabited by thousands of hermits including St. Anthony the Great (aka St.
Anthony of the Desert), St. Mary of Egypt, and St. Simeon Stylites. Sexual
abstinence was only one aspect of ascetic renunciation. The ancient monks and
nuns had other, equally weighty concerns: pride, humility, compassion,
discernment, patience, judging others, prayer, hospitality and almsgiving. For
some early Christians, gluttony represented a more primordial problem than lust
and as such the reduced intake of food is also a facet of asceticism. As an
illustration, the systematic collection of the "Apophthegmata Patrum", or
Sayings of the desert fathers and mothers has more than twenty chapters divided
by theme; only one chapter is devoted to "porneia" ("sexual lust"). Nowadays,
the monastic state of Mount Athos, having a history of over a millennium, is a
center of Christian spirituality and asceticism in Eastern Orthodox tradition.
Islam. The Islamic word for asceticism is zuhd. Mohammed is quoted to have
said, "What have I to do with worldly things? My connection with the world is
like that of a traveler resting for a while underneath the shade of a tree and
then moving on." He advised the general people to live simple lives and himself
practiced great austerities. Even when he had become the virtual king of
Arabia, he lived an austere life bordering on privation. His wife Ayesha said
that there was hardly a day in his life when he had two square meals. The
prophet advised against wearing rich silken cloths. He himself is said to have
only worn some izaars together with a sheet that covered his upper body. A
narration reports that he would sleep on the ground, on a mat made of coarse
straw, and the markings of the straw would be impressed on his skin when he got
up. When he was gifted a new izaar, he preferred to wear the old ones he had.
While out right Monasticism is forbidden in Islam, Muslims are encouraged to
view this life as a transitory period bordering on a mirage. As such, a Muslim
is advised to establish a balance between living this life to its fullest (i.e.
seeking family, wealth, position and other such worldly pursuits) and
remembering that whatever this life offers will be over when his/her life is
over, hence the metaphor of a traveler resting in an oasis before moving on to
their ultimate destination. The trick to achieving this balance then is to
partake but not indulge in what this world/life has to offer. A Muslim is
warned that this world is very insidious and charming and can easily overwhelm
and beguile those of weaker character and force them to forget the real reason
we (as human beings) are here; that is, to work hard and do the good acts and
deeds of worship and charity that would eventually save us on Judgement Day. It
is from this point of view of life that the concept of "zuhd" came to being.
Reducing (but not shunning) one's interaction and needs of this world reduces
the chances that a Muslim will fall prey to its charms and frees him/her to
pursue a more pure state of life. Later generations of Muslims would build on
this basic concept and spawn many philosophical and intellectual schools of
thought regarding the true nature of man in this world, giving rise to many of
the sufi movements of later centuries. Zoroastrianism. In Zoroastrianism,
active participation in life through good thoughts, good words and good deeds
is necessary to ensure happiness and to keep the chaos at bay. This "active"
participation is a central element in Zoroaster's concept of free will and
Zoroastrianism rejects all forms of asceticism and monasticism. Religious
versus secular motivation. The observation of an ascetic lifestyle can be found
in both religious and secular settings. For example, practices based on a
religious motivation might include fasting, abstention from sex, and other
forms of self-denial intended to increase religious awareness or attain a
closer relationship with a purported "divine". Non-religious (or not
specifically religious) practices might be seen in such an example as Spartans
undertaking regimens of severe physical discipline to prepare for battle.
Philosophical view. In the third essay ("") from his book "On the Genealogy of
Morals", Friedrich Nietzsche discusses what he terms the "ascetic ideal" and
its role in the formulation of morality along with the history of the will. In
the essay, Nietzsche describes how such a paradoxical action as asceticism
might serve the interests of life: through asceticism one can overcome their
desire to perish from pain and despair and attain mastery over oneself. In this
way one can express both ressentiment and the will to power. Nietzsche
describes the morality of the ascetic priest as characterized by Christianity
as one where, finding oneself in pain or despair and desiring to perish from
it, the will to live causes one to place oneself in a state of hibernation and
denial of the material world in order to minimize that pain and thus preserve
life, a technique which Nietzsche locates at the very origin of secular science
as well as of religion. He associated the "ascetic ideal" with Christian
decadence.
