Ascension of Jesus The Ascension of Jesus (anglicized from the Vulgate Latin
section title: "Ascensio Iesu") is the Christian teaching found in the New
Testament that the resurrected Jesus was taken up to heaven in his resurrected
body, in the presence of eleven of his apostles, occurring 40 days after the
resurrection. In the biblical narrative, an angel tells the watching disciples
that Jesus' second coming will take place in the same manner as his ascension.
The canonical gospels include two brief descriptions of the Ascension of Jesus
in and . A more detailed account of Jesus' bodily Ascension into the clouds is
then given in the Acts of the Apostles (). The Ascension of Jesus is professed
in the Nicene Creed and in the Apostles' Creed. The Ascension implies Jesus'
humanity being taken into Heaven. The Feast of the Ascension, celebrated on the
40th day of Easter (always a Thursday), is one of the chief feasts of the
Christian year. The feast dates back at least to the later 4th century, as is
widely attested. The Ascension is one of the five major milestones in the
gospel narrative of the life of Jesus, the others being Baptism,
Transfiguration, Crucifixion, and Resurrection. By the 6th century the
iconography of the Ascension in Christian art had been established and by the
9th century Ascension scenes were being depicted on domes of churches. Many
ascension scenes have two parts, an upper (Heavenly) part and a lower (earthly)
part. The ascending Jesus is often shown blessing with his right hand -
directed towards the earthly group below him and signifying that he is blessing
the entire Church. Biblical accounts. Gospels of Mark and Luke. The canonical
gospels include two somewhat brief descriptions of the Ascension of Jesus in
and . The blessing is often interpreted as a priestly act in which Jesus leaves
his disciples in the care of God the Father. The return to Jerusalem after the
Ascension ends the Gospel of Luke where it began: Jerusalem. Acts of the
Apostles. The narrative of the Acts of the Apostles begins with the account of
Jesus' appearances after his resurrection and his Ascension forty days
thereafter in . Acts 1:9-12 specifies the location of the Ascension as the
"mount called Olivet" near Jerusalem. After giving a number of instructions to
the apostles Following this two men clothed in white appear and tell the
apostles that Jesus will return in the same manner as he was taken, and the
apostles return to Jerusalem. Other possible references. A number of statements
in the New Testament may be interpreted as references to the Ascension.
Location. states that the Ascension took place on Mount Olivet (the "Mount of
Olives", on which the village of Bethany sits). After the Ascension the
apostles are described as returning to Jerusalem from the mount that is called
Olivet, which is near Jerusalem, within a Sabbath day's journey. Tradition has
consecrated this site as the Mount of Ascension. The Gospel of Luke states that
the event took place 'in the vicinity of Bethany' and the Gospel of Mark
specifies no location. Before the conversion of Constantine in 312 AD, early
Christians honored the Ascension of Christ in a "cave" on the Mount of Olives.
By 384, the place of the Ascension was venerated on the present open site,
uphill from the cave. The Chapel of the Ascension in Jerusalem today is a
Christian and Muslim holy site now believed to mark the place where Jesus
ascended into heaven. In the small round church/mosque is a stone imprinted
with what some claim to be the very footprints of Jesus. Around the year 390 a
wealthy Roman woman named Poimenia financed construction of the original church
called "Eleona Basilica" ("elaion" in Greek means "olive garden", from "elaia"
"olive tree," and has an oft-mentioned similarity to "eleos" meaning "mercy").
This church was destroyed by Sassanid Persians in 614. It was subsequently
rebuilt, destroyed, and rebuilt again by the Crusaders. This final church was
later also destroyed by Muslims, leaving only a 12x12 meter octagonal structure
(called a "martyrium"—"memorial"—or "Edicule") that remains to this day.
The site was ultimately acquired by two emissaries of Saladin in the year 1198
and has remained in the possession of the Islamic Waqf of Jerusalem ever since.
The Russian Orthodox Church also maintains a Convent of the Ascension on the
top of the Mount of Olives. Christian theology. The Ascension of Jesus is
professed in the Nicene Creed and in the Apostles' Creed. The Ascension implies
Jesus' humanity being taken into Heaven. Catholicism. Referring to ("So then
the Lord Jesus, after he had spoken unto them, was received up into heaven, and
sat down at the right hand of God.") Pope John Paul II stated that Scripture
positions the significance of the Ascension in two statements: "Jesus gave
instructions, and then Jesus took his place. John Paul II also separately
emphasized that Jesus had foretold of his Ascension several times in the
Gospels, e.g. at the Last Supper: "I go to the Father, and you will see me no
more" and after his resurrection he tells Mary Magdalene: "I have not yet
ascended to the Father; go to my brethren and say to them, I am ascending to my
Father and your Father, to my God and your God". Eastern and Oriental
Christianity. In Eastern Orthodox and Oriental Orthodox theology, the Ascension
is interpreted as the culmination of the Mystery of the Incarnation, in that it
not only marked the completion of Jesus' physical presence among his apostles,
but consummated the union of God and man when Jesus ascended in his glorified
human body to sit at the right hand of God the Father. The Ascension and the
Transfiguration both figure prominently in the Orthodox doctrine of theosis.
The bodily Ascension into heaven is also understood as the final token of
Christ's two natures: divine and human. Protestantism. The Westminster
Confession of Faith (part of the Reformed tradition in Calvinism and
influential in the Presbyterian church), in Article four of Chapter eight,
states: "On the third day He arose from the dead, with the same body in which
He suffered, with which also he ascended into heaven, and there sits at the
right hand of His Father, making intercession, and shall return, to judge men
and angels, at the end of the world." Critical analysis. The Jesus Seminar
considers the New Testament accounts of Jesus' ascension as inventions of the
Christian community in the Apostolic Age. They describe the Ascension as a
convenient device to discredit ongoing appearance claims within the Christian
community. New Testament scholar Rudolph Bultmann writes, " The cosmology of
the N.T. is essentially mythical in character, The world is viewed as a three-
storied structure, with the Earth in the center, the heaven above, and the
underworld beneath. Heaven is the abode of God and of celestial beings-
angels...No one who is old enough to think for himself supposes that God lives
in a local heaven. " It is possible that the writer of Acts 1v9 reasoned that
if Christ returned to Heaven then he must have ascended up into the sky to get
there, so that is what he wrote Christ as doing. Feast. The Feast of the
Ascension is one of the great feasts in the Christian liturgical calendar, and
commemorates the bodily Ascension of Jesus into Heaven. Ascension Day is
traditionally celebrated on a Thursday, the fortieth day from Easter day.
However, some Roman Catholic provinces have moved the observance to the
following Sunday. The feast is one of the ecumenical feasts (i.e., universally
celebrated), ranking with the feasts of the Passion, of Easter, and Pentecost.
Artistic depictions. The Ascension has been a frequent subject in Christian
art, as well as a theme in theological writings. By the 6th century the
iconography of the Ascension had been established and by the 9th century
Ascension scenes were being depicted on domes of churches. The Rabbula Gospels
(c. 586) include some of the earliest images of the Ascension. Many ascension
scenes have two parts, an upper (Heavenly) part and a lower (earthly) part. The
ascending Christ may be carrying a resurrection banner or make a sign of
benediction with his right hand. The blessing gesture by Christ with his right
hand is directed towards the earthly group below him and signifies that he is
blessing the entire Church. In the left hand, he may be holding a Gospel or a
scroll, signifying teaching and preaching. The Eastern Orthodox portrayal of
the Ascension is a major metaphor for the mystical nature of the Church. In
many Eastern icons the Virgin Mary is placed at the center of the scene in the
earthly part of the depiction, with her hands raised towards Heaven, often
accompanied by various Apostles. The upwards looking depiction of the earthly
group matches the Eastern liturgy on the Feast of the Ascension: "Come, let us
rise and turn our eyes and thoughts high..."
