Asmodeus Asmodeus or Asmodai ( "Ashmedai") (see below for other variations) is
a king of demons mostly known from the deuterocanonical "Book of Tobit", in
which he is the primary antagonist. The demon is also mentioned in some
Talmudic legends, for instance, in the story of the construction of the Temple
of Solomon. He was supposed by some Renaissance Christians to be the King of
the Nine Hells. Asmodeus also is referred to as one of the seven princes of
Hell. In Binsfeld's classification of demons, each one of these princes
represents one of the seven deadly sins (Pride, Lust, Envy, Sloth, Greed,
Gluttony, and Wrath). Asmodeus is the demon of lust and is therefore
responsible for twisting people's sexual desires. It is said in "Asmodeus; Or,
The Devil on Two Sticks" that people who fall to Asmodeus' ways will be
sentenced to an eternity in the second level of hell. Etymology. The name
"Asmodai" is believed to derive from Avestan language "*aēšma-daēva", where
"aēšma" means "wrath", and "daēva" signifies "demon". While the "daēva"
Aēšma is thus Zoroastrianism's demon of wrath and is also well attested as
such, the compound "aēšma-daēva" is not attested in scripture. It is
nonetheless likely that such a form did exist, and that the Book of Tobit's
"Asmodaios" () and the Talmud's "Ashmedai" () reflect it. Other spelling
variations include Asmodaeus (Latin), Asmodaios-Ασμοδαίος (Greek),
Ashmadia, Asmoday, Asmodée (French), Asmodee, Asmodei, Ashmodei, Ashmodai,
Asmodeios, Asmodeo (Spanish and Italian), Asmodeu (Portuguese), Asmodeius,
Asmodi, Chammaday, Chashmodai, Sidonay, Sydonai, Asimodai (Romanian), Asmodeusz
(Polish), Asmodevs (Armenian). The playwright William Shakespeare abbreviated
his name to Modo. Although there are also functional parallels between
Zoroastrianism's Aēšma and Judaism's Asmodai/Asmodeus, the linguistic
relationship does not denote conceptual continuity. The two are mythologically
and culturally distinct. In the texts. In the Kabbalah. According to the
Kabbalah and the school of Rashba, Agrat Bat Mahlat, a succubus, mated with
King David and bore a cambion son Asmodeus, king of demons. In the Book of
Tobit. The Asmodeus of the Book of Tobit is attracted to Sarah, Raguel's
daughter, and is not willing to let any husband possess her (); hence he slays
seven successive husbands on their wedding nights, impeding the sexual
consummation of the marriages. He is described as 'the worst of demons'. When
the young Tobias is about to marry her, Asmodeus proposes the same fate for
him, but Tobias is enabled, through the counsels of his attendant angel
Raphael, to render him innocuous. By placing a fish's heart and liver on red-
hot cinders, Tobias produces a smoky vapor that causes the demon to flee to
Egypt, where Raphael binds him (). According to some translations Asmodeus is
strangled. Asmodeus would thus seem to be a demon characterized by carnal
desire; but he is also described as an evil spirit in general:
'Ασμοδαίος τὸ πονηρὸν δαιμόνιον or τõ
δαιμόνιον πονηρόν, and πνεῦμα ἀκάθαρτον (; ; ;
). It is possible, moreover, that the statement (), "Asmodeus loved Sarah,"
implies that he was attracted not by women in general, but by Sarah only. In
the Talmud. The figure of Ashmedai in the Talmud is less malign in character
than the Asmodeus of Tobit. In the former, he appears repeatedly in the light
of a good-natured and humorous fellow. But besides that, there is one feature
in which he parallels Asmodeus, inasmuch as his desires turn upon Solomon's
wives and Bath-sheba. But even here, Ashmedai seems more like a Greek satyr
than an evil demon. Another Talmudic legend has King Solomon tricking Asmodai
into collaborating in the construction of the Temple of Jerusalem. Another
legend depicts Asmodai throwing king Solomon over 400 leagues away from the
capital by putting one wing on the ground and the other stretched skyward. He
then changed places for some years with King Solomon. When King Solomon
returned, Asmodai fled from his wrath. An aggadic narrative describes him as
the king of all the shades ("Pesachim" 109b–112a). "Shadim" (plural of
"shade") can fly because they have wings. It is also stated that they have
chicken claws as opposed to toes. Another passage describes him as marrying
Lilith, who became his queen. He has also been recorded as the off-spring of
the union between Adam and the angel of prostitution, Naamah, conceived while
Adam was married to Lilith. In the "Testament of Solomon". In the "Testament of
Solomon", a 1st–3rd century text, the king invokes Asmodeus to aid in the
construction of the Temple. The demon appears and predicts Solomon's kingdom
will one day be divided (Testament of Solomon, verse 21–25). When Solomon
interrogates Asmodeus further, the king learns that Asmodeus is thwarted by the
angel Raphael, as well as by sheatfish found in the rivers of Assyria. He also
admits to hating water and birds because both remind him of God. In the
"Malleus Maleficarum". In the "Malleus Maleficarum" (1486), Asmodeus was
considered the demon of lust. Sebastien Michaelis said that his adversary is
St. John. Some demonologists of the 16th century assigned a month to a demon
and considered November to be the month in which Asmodai's power was strongest.
Other demonologists asserted that his zodiacal sign was Aquarius but only
between the dates of January 30 and February 8. He has 72 legions of demons
under his command. He is one of the Kings of Hell under Lucifer the emperor. He
incites gambling, and is the overseer of all the gambling houses in the court
of Hell. Some Catholic theologians compared him with Abaddon. Yet other authors
considered Asmodeus a prince of revenge. In the "Dictionnaire Infernal". In the
"Dictionnaire Infernal" by Collin de Plancy, Asmodeus is depicted with the
breast of a man, a cock leg, serpent tail, three heads (one of a man spitting
fire, one of a sheep, and one of a bull), riding a lion with dragon wings and
neck, all of these animals being associated with either lascivity, lust or
revenge. The Archbishop of Paris approved his portrait. In the Lesser Key of
Solomon. Asmodai appears as the king 'Asmoday' in the Ars Goetia, where he is
said to have a seal in gold and is listed as number thirty-two according to
respective rank. He "is strong, powerful and appears with three heads; the
first is like a bull, the second like a man, and the third like a ram; the tail
of a serpent, and from his mouth issue flames of fire." Also, he sits upon an
infernal dragon, holds a lance with a banner and, amongst the Legions of
"Amaymon", Asmoday governs seventy two legions of inferior spirits. In The
Magus. Asmodeus is referred to in Book Two, Chapter Eight of The Magus (1801)
by Francis Barrett. Later depictions. Asmodeus was named as an angel of the
Order of Thrones by Gregory the Great. Asmodeus was cited by the nuns of Loudun
in the Loudun possessions of 1634. Asmodeus' reputation as the personification
of lust continued into later writings, as he was known as the "Prince of
Lechery" in the 16th century romance "Friar Rush". The French Benedictine
Augustin Calmet equated his name with fine dress. The French novelist Alain-
René Lesage likened him to Cupid in his 1707 novel "le Diable boiteux". In the
book, he is rescued from an enchanted glass bottle by a Spanish student Don
Cleophas Leandro Zambullo. Grateful, he joins with the young man on a series of
adventures before being recaptured. Asmodeus is portrayed in a sympathetic
light as good-natured, and a canny satirist and critic of human society. In
another episode Asmodeus takes Don Cleophas for a night flight, and removes the
roofs from the houses of a village to show him the secrets of what passes in
private lives. The origin of the word detection is believed to refer to this,
its meaning coming from the Latin 'de-tegere' or 'unroof'. Following Lesage's
work, he was depicted in a number of novels and periodicals, mainly in France
but also London and New York. The 16th century Dutch demonologist Johann Weyer
described him as the banker at the baccarat table in hell, and overseer of
earthly gambling houses. Asmodeus was widely depicted as having a handsome
visage, good manners and an engaging nature; however, he was portrayed as
walking with a limp and one leg was either clawed or that of a rooster. He
walks aided by two walking sticks in Lesage's work, and this gave rise to the
English title "The Devil on Two Sticks" (also later translated "The Limping
Devil" and "The Lame Devil"). Lesage attributes his lameness to falling from
the sky after fighting with another devil.
