Assumption of Mary The Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary into Heaven,
informally known as The Assumption, according to the Christian beliefs of the
Roman Catholic Church, Eastern Orthodoxy, Oriental Orthodoxy, and parts of
Anglicanism, was the bodily taking up of the Virgin Mary into Heaven at the end
of her earthly life. The Roman Catholic Church teaches as dogma that the Virgin
Mary "having completed the course of her earthly life, was assumed body and
soul into heavenly glory." This doctrine was dogmatically defined by Pope Pius
XII on November 1, 1950, in his Apostolic Constitution "Munificentissimus Deus"
by exercising papal infallibility. While the Catholic Church and Eastern
Orthodox Church believe in the Dormition of the Theotokos, which is the same as
the Assumption, the death of Mary has not been dogmatically defined. In the
churches which observe it, the Assumption is a major feast day, commonly
celebrated on August 15. In many Catholic countries, the feast is also marked
as a Holy Day of Obligation. In his August 15, 2004, homily given at Lourdes,
Pope John Paul II quoted John 14:3 as one of the scriptural bases for
understanding the dogma of the Assumption of Mary. In this verse, Jesus tells
his disciples at the Last Supper, "If I go and prepare a place for you, I will
come again, and will receive you to myself; that where I am, you may be there
also." According to Catholic theology, Mary is the pledge of the fulfillment of
Christ's promise. The feast of the Assumption on August 15 is a public holiday
in many countries, including Austria, Belgium, Chile, Colombia, Croatia,
Ecuador, France, Germany (Bavaria and Saarland only), Greece, Lebanon,
Lithuania, Italy, Malta, Mauritius, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Senegal,
Slovenia, Spain, Switzerland (8 cantons only) and Vanuatu. In Eastern Orthodox
churches following the Julian Calendar, the feast day of Assumption of Mary
falls on August 28. History of the belief. Although the Assumption (Latin:
"assūmptiō", "taken up") was only relatively recently defined as infallible
dogma by the Catholic Church, and in spite of a statement by Saint Epiphanius
of Salamis in AD 377 that no one knew whether Mary had died or not, apocryphal
accounts of the assumption of Mary into heaven have circulated since at least
the 4th century. The Catholic Church itself interprets chapter 12 of the Book
of Revelation as referring to it. The earliest known narrative is the so-called
"Liber Requiei Mariae" ("The Book of Mary's Repose"), which survives intact
only in an Ethiopic translation. Probably composed by the 4th century, this
Christian apocryphal narrative may be as early as the 3rd century. Also quite
early are the very different traditions of the ""Six Books" Dormition
narratives". The earliest versions of this apocryphon are preserved by several
Syriac manuscripts of the 5th and 6th centuries, although the text itself
probably belongs to the 4th century. Later apocrypha based on these earlier
texts include the "De Obitu S. Dominae", attributed to St. John, a work
probably from around the turn of the 6th century that is a summary of the "Six
Books" narrative. The story also appears in "De Transitu Virginis", a late 5th
century work ascribed to St. Melito of Sardis that presents a theologically
redacted summary of the traditions in the "Liber Requiei Mariae". The
"Transitus Mariae" tells the story of the apostles being transported by white
clouds to the deathbed of Mary, each from the town where he was preaching at
the hour. The "Decretum Gelasianum" in the 490s declared some "transitus
Mariae" literature apocryphal. An Armenian letter attributed to Dionysus the
Areopagite also mentions the event, although this is a much later work, written
sometime after the 6th century. John of Damascus, from this period, is the
first church authority to advocate the doctrine under his own name. His
contemporaries, Gregory of Tours and Modestus of Jerusalem, helped promote the
concept to the wider church. In some versions of the story the event is said to
have taken place in Ephesus, in the House of the Virgin Mary, although this is
a much more recent and localized tradition. The earliest traditions all locate
the end of Mary's life in Jerusalem (see "Mary's Tomb"). By the 7th century a
variation emerged, according to which one of the apostles, often identified as
St Thomas, was not present at the death of Mary, but his late arrival
precipitates a reopening of Mary's tomb, which is found to be empty except for
her grave clothes. In a later tradition, Mary drops her girdle down to the
apostle from heaven as testament to the event. This incident is depicted in
many later paintings of the Assumption. Teaching of the Assumption of Mary
became widespread across the Christian world, having been celebrated as early
as the 5th century and having been established in the East by Emperor Maurice
around AD 600. It was celebrated in the West under Pope Sergius I in the 8th
century and Pope Leo IV then confirmed the feast as official. Theological
debate about the Assumption continued, following the Reformation, climaxing in
1950 when Pope Pius XII defined it as dogma for the Catholic Church. Catholic
theologian Ludwig Ott stated, "The idea of the bodily assumption of Mary is
first expressed in certain transitus-narratives of the fifth and sixth
centuries... The first Church author to speak of the bodily assumption of Mary,
in association with an apocryphal transitus B.M.V., is St. Gregory of Tours."
The Catholic writer Eamon Duffy states that "there is, clearly, no historical
evidence whatever for it." However, the Catholic Church has never asserted nor
denied that its teaching is based on the apocryphal accounts. The Church
documents are silent on this matter and instead rely upon other sources and
arguments as the basis for the doctrine. Catholic teaching. In this dogmatic
statement, the phrase "having completed the course of her earthly life," leaves
open the question of whether the Virgin Mary died before her assumption or
whether she was assumed before death; both possibilities are allowed. Mary's
assumption is said to have been a divine gift to her as the 'Mother of God'.
Ludwig Ott's view is that, as Mary completed her life as a shining example to
the human race, the perspective of the gift of assumption is offered to the
whole human race. In Ludwig Ott's "Fundamentals of Catholic Dogma" he states
that "the fact of her death is almost generally accepted by the Fathers and
Theologians, and is expressly affirmed in the Liturgy of the Church", to which
he adduces a number of helpful citations, and concludes that "for Mary, death,
in consequence of her freedom from original sin and from personal sin, was not
a consequence of punishment of sin. However, it seems fitting that Mary's body,
which was by nature mortal, should be, in conformity with that of her Divine
Son, subject to the general law of death". The point of her bodily death has
not been infallibly defined, and many believe that she did not die at all, but
was assumed directly into Heaven. The dogmatic definition within the Apostolic
Constitution Munificentissimus Deus which, according to Roman Catholic dogma,
infallibly proclaims the doctrine of the Assumption leaves open the question
whether, in connection with her departure, Mary underwent bodily death; that
is, it does not dogmatically define the point one way or the other, as shown by
the words "having completed the course of her earthly life". Roman Catholic
theologians consider this declaration by Pius XII to be an ex cathedra use of
Papal Infallibility. Although Pope Pius XII deliberately left open the question
of whether Mary died before her Assumption, the more common teaching of the
early Fathers is that she did die. Assumption and Dormition (Eastern
Christianity) compared. The Catholic Feast of the Assumption is celebrated on
August 15, and the Eastern Orthodox and Eastern Catholics celebrate the
Dormition of the Theotokos (the falling asleep of the Mother of God) on the
same date, preceded by a 14-day fast period. Eastern Orthodox Christians
believe that Mary died a natural death, that her soul was received by Christ
upon death, and that her body was resurrected on the third day after her death
and that she was taken up into heaven bodily in anticipation of the general
resurrection. Her tomb was found empty on the third day. "...Orthodox tradition
is clear and unwavering in regard to the central point the Dormition: the Holy
Virgin underwent, as did her Son, a physical death, but her body – like His
– was afterwards raised from the dead and she was taken up into heaven, in
her body as well as in her soul. She has passed beyond death and judgement, and
lives wholly in the Age to Come. The Resurrection of the Body ... has in her
case been anticipated and is already an accomplished fact. That does not mean,
however, that she is dissociated from the rest of humanity and placed in a
wholly different category: for we all hope to share one day in that same glory
of the Resurrection of the Body which she enjoys even now." Many Catholics also
believe that Mary first died before being assumed, but they add that she was
miraculously resurrected before being assumed, while others believe she was
assumed bodily into Heaven without first passing through death. As mentioned
earlier, this aspect of the Assumption is not authoritatively defined in
Catholic theology, and either understanding may be legitimately held by
Catholics. Eastern Catholics observe the Feast as the Dormition. Many
theologians note by way of comparison that in the Catholic Church, the
Assumption is dogmatically defined, while in the Eastern Orthodox tradition,
the Dormition is less dogmatically than liturgically and mystically defined.
Such differences spring from a larger pattern in the two traditions, wherein
Catholic teachings are often dogmatically and authoritatively defined – in
part because of the more centralized structure of the Catholic Church– while
in Eastern Orthodoxy, many doctrines are less authoritative. Mary's heavenly
birthday. The Assumption is important to many Catholic and Orthodox Christians
as the Virgin Mary's heavenly birthday (the day that Mary was received into
Heaven). Her acceptance into the glory of Heaven is seen by them as the symbol
of the promise made by Jesus to all enduring Christians that they too will be
received into paradise. The Assumption of Mary is symbolised in the Fleur-de-
lys Madonna. The present Italian name of the holiday, ""Ferragosto"", may
derive from the Latin name, "Feriae Augusti" ("Holidays of the Emperor
Augustus"), since the month of August took its name from the emperor. The
Solemnity of the Assumption on August 15 was celebrated in the eastern Church
from the 6th Century. The Catholic Church adopted this date as a Holy Day of
Obligation to commemorate the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary, the real
physical elevation of her sinless soul and incorrupt body into Heaven. The
Solemnity of the Assumption on August 15 is a public holiday in many countries,
including Andorra, Austria, Belgium, Burundi, Cameroon, Central African
Republic, Chile, Republic of Congo, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Colombia, Cyprus,
East Timor, France, Gabon, Greece, Republic of Guinea, Haiti, Italy, Lebanon,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Republic of Macedonia, Madagascar, Malta, Mauritius,
Republic of Moldova, Monaco, Paraguay, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Rwanda,
Senegal, Seychelles, Slovenia, Spain, Switzerland, Tahiti, Togo, and Vanuatu.
It is also a holiday in some predominantly Catholic states of Germany,
including Bavaria and Saarland. In Guatemala it is observed in Guatemala City
and in the town of Santa Maria Nebaj, both of which claim her as their patron
saint. Also, this day is combined with Mother's Day in Costa Rica. In many
places, religious parades and popular festivals are held to celebrate this day.
Prominent Catholic and Orthodox countries in which Assumption day is an
important festival but is not recognized by the state as a public holiday
include Argentina, Brazil, Czech Republic, Ireland, Mexico, the Philippines and
Russia. In Canada, Assumption Day is the Fête Nationale of the Acadians, of
whom she is the patron saint. Businesses close on that day in heavily
francophone parts of New Brunswick, Canada. The Virgin Assumed in Heaven is
also patroness of the Maltese Islands and her feast, celebrated on 15 August,
apart from being a public holiday in Malta is also celebrated with great
solemnity in all the local churches especially in the seven localities known as
the Seba' Santa Marijiet. In Anglicanism and Lutheranism, the feast is kept,
but without official use of the word "Assumption". Anglican views. Although the
Assumption of Mary is not an Anglican doctrine, 15 August is observed by some
within Anglicanism as a feast day in honour of Mary. The "Book of Common
Prayer" in the versions of the Scottish Episcopal Church and the Anglican
Church of Canada mark the date as the Falling Asleep of the Blessed Virgin
Mary. In the Episcopal Church in the United States of America, the day is
observed as the Holy Day of Saint Mary the Virgin. In the Church of England the
day is a Festival of the Blessed Virgin Mary. In some churches of the Anglican
Communion and the Continuing Anglican churches, many Anglo-Catholics often
observe the feast day as the Assumption. The Anglican-Roman Catholic
International Commission agreed statement on the Virgin Mary assigns a place
for both the Dormition and the Assumption in Anglican devotion. Protestant
views. Most modern Protestants neither teach nor believe in the Assumption of
Mary, as they see no Biblical basis for it. Although most churches within
Lutheranism do not teach the Assumption of Mary, August 15 is a Lesser Feast in
celebration of "Mary, Mother of Our Lord", according to the Calendar of Saints.
Scriptural sources. 29. ...the holy writers...employed statements and various
images and analogies of Sacred Scripture to Illustrate and to confirm the
doctrine of the Assumption, which was piously believed... On the feast day of
the Assumption, while explaining the prophet's words: "I will glorify the place
of my feet," 60:13 he St. Anthony of Padua stated it as certain that the divine
Redeemer had bedecked with supreme glory his most beloved Mother from whom he
had received human flesh. He asserts that "you have here a clear statement that
the Blessed Virgin has been assumed in her body, where was the place of the
Lord's feet..." 30. ...St. Albert the Great... in a sermon which he delivered
on the sacred day of the Blessed Virgin Mary's annunciation, explained the
words "Hail, full of grace" 1:28-words used by the angel who addressed her-the
Universal Doctor, comparing the Blessed Virgin with Eve, stated clearly and
incisively that she was exempted from the fourfold curse that had been laid
upon Eve Genesis 3:16... 32. Along with many others, the Seraphic Doctor held
the same views. He considered it as entirely certain that...God...would never
have permitted her body to have been resolved into dust and ashes. Explaining
these words of Sacred Scripture: "Who is this that comes up from the desert,
flowing with delights, leaning upon her beloved?" of Songs 8:5 and applying
them in a kind of accommodated sense to the Blessed Virgin, he reasons thus:
"From this we can see that she is there bodily...her blessedness would not have
been complete unless she were there as a person. The soul is not a person, but
the soul, joined to the body, is a person. It is manifest that she is there in
soul and in body. Otherwise she would not possess her complete beatitude. ...
For by a man came death, and by a man the resurrection of the dead. And as in
Adam all die, so also in Christ all shall be made alive. But every one in his
own order: the firstfruits Christ, then they that are of Christ, who have
believed in his coming. Afterwards the end, when he shall have delivered up the
kingdom to God and the Father, when he shall have brought to nought all
principality, and power, and virtue. For he must reign, until he hath put all
his enemies under his feet. And the enemy death shall be destroyed last: For he
hath put all things under his feet. ...although subject to who is the new Adam,
the new Eve is most intimately associated with him in that struggle against the
infernal foe which, as foretold in the protoevangelium Genesis 3:15, would
finally result in that most complete victory over the sin and death which are
always mentioned together in the writings of the Apostle of the Gentiles.
Consequently, just as the glorious resurrection of Jesus was an essential part
and the final sign of this victory, so that struggle which was common to the
Blessed Virgin and her divine Son should be brought to a close by the
glorification of her virginal body, for the same Apostle says: "When this
mortal thing hath put on immortality, then shall come to pass the saying that
is written: Death is swallowed up in victory." The pope also mentions (in
paragraph 26) Psalms 132, a liturgical psalm commemorating the return of the
Ark of God to Jerusalem and lamenting its subsequent loss. The second half of
the psalm says that the loss will be recompensed in the New Covenant, and so it
is hopefully prayed, "Arise, O Lord, into thy resting place: thou and the ark,
which thou hast sanctified" (v. 8). Since the Church sees this New Covenant ark
in Mary, it understands that she was taken into Heaven in the same manner as
the Lord – that is, body and soul. In the same paragraph, the pope mentions
also Psalms 45:9–17 for support of a heavenly Queen present bodily with the
heavenly King Jesus, and Song of Songs 3:6, 4:8, and 6:9, which speaks of
David's lover "that goeth up by the desert, as a pillar of smoke of aromatical
spices, of myrrh, and frankincense, and of all the powders of the perfumer".
Regarding the Marian interpretations of those passages from Psalms 132 to Song
of Songs 6:9 and those in between, the pope did, however, consider them "rather
free in their use of events and expressions taken from Sacred Scripture"
(paragraph 26). Finally, he mentions in the next paragraph "that woman clothed
with the sun 12:1–2 whom John the Apostle contemplated on the Island of
Patmos" as support for the doctrine. The text seems to parallel this woman with
the woman of the Genesis 3 prophecy (and hence Mary): for in verse 9 the
passage recalls "that old serpent" of Genesis 3, and reflects the prophecy that
God would place "enmities between thee Satan and the woman, and thy seed and
her seed" when it says that Satan "was angry against the woman: and went to
make war with the rest of her seed" (Rev. 12:17). All these passages – viz.,
John 14:3, Isaiah 60:13, Luke 1:28, Song of Songs 8:5, 1st Corinthians 15:
21–26, Psalms 132:8, Psalms 45:9–17, Song of Songs 3:6, 4:8, 6:9, Genesis
3:15, and Revelation 12:1–2 – are drawn upon as Scriptural support of the
Assumption both in that original document, and today by Catholic apologists.
Armenian tradition. In the Armenian tradition, a cultural custom of blessing of
the grapes is annually observed each August 12, the in religious commemoration
of the Feast of the Dormition of the Theotokos. While the blessing of the
grapes are not exactly associated with the Assumption of the Virgin Mary into
heaven, the blessing is nonetheless viewed as a liturgy of thanksgiving by
farmers for a plentiful season of harvest and is generally considered a family
day by the Armenian peoples. Women often bring baskets of grapes into the
church, where a deacon or priest blesses the fruit after the Divine Liturgy and
is then followed by a public meal or celebration.
