Astrology Astrology consists of a number of belief systems which hold that
there is a relationship between astronomical phenomena and events in the human
world. In the West, astrology most often consists of a system of horoscopes
that claim to explain aspects of a person's personality and predict future
events in their life based on the positions of the sun, moon, and other
planetary objects at the time of their birth. Many cultures have attached
importance to astronomical events, and the Indians, Chinese, and Mayans
developed elaborate systems for predicting terrestrial events from celestial
observations. Among Indo-European peoples, astrology has been dated to the
third millennium BCE, with roots in calendrical systems that are used to
predict shifts and to interpret celestial cycles as signs of divine
communications. Through most of its history, astrology was considered a
scholarly tradition. It was accepted in political and academic contexts, and
was connected with other studies, such as astronomy, alchemy, meteorology, and
medicine. At the end of the 17th century, new scientific concepts in astronomy
(such as heliocentrism) called astrology into question, and subsequent
controlled studies failed to confirm its predictive value. Astrology thus lost
its academic and theoretical standing. Astrology is a pseudoscience, and as
such has been rejected by the scientific communities as having no explanatory
power for describing the universe. Where astrology has been falsifiable, it has
been falsified. Since the enlightenment, particularly from the introduction of
classical mechanics, common belief in astrology has largely reduced. Scientific
testing of astrology has been conducted, and no evidence has been found to
support any of the premises or purported effects outlined in astrological
traditions. Furthermore, there is no proposed mechanism of action by which the
positions and motions of stars and planets could affect people and events on
Earth that does not contradict well understood, basic aspects of biology and
physics. Etymology. The word comes from the early Latin word ', deriving from
the Greek noun , 'account of the stars'. "Astrologia" later passed into meaning
'star-divination' with ' used for the scientific term. Principles and practice.
Advocates have defined astrology as a symbolic language, an art form, a
science, and a method of divination. Although most cultural systems of
astrology share common roots in ancient philosophies that influenced each
other, many have unique methodologies which differ from those developed in the
West. These include Hindu astrology (also known as "Indian astrology" and in
modern times referred to as "Vedic astrology") and Chinese astrology, both of
which have influenced the world's cultural history. Western. Western astrology
is a form of divination based on the construction of a horoscope for an exact
moment, such as a person's birth. It uses the tropical zodiac, which is aligned
to the equinoctial points. Western astrology is founded on the movements and
relative positions of celestial bodies such as the Sun, Moon, planets, which
are analyzed by their movement through signs of the zodiac (spatial divisions
of the ecliptic) and by their aspects (angles) relative to one another. They
are also considered by their placement in houses (spatial divisions of the
sky). Astrology's modern representation in western popular media is usually
reduced to sun sign astrology, which considers only the zodiac sign of the Sun
at an individual's date of birth, and represents only 1/12 of the total chart.
The names of the zodiac correspond to the names of the constellations
originally within the respective segment and are in Latin. Along with tarot
divination, astrology is one of the core studies of Western esotericism, and as
such has influenced systems of magical belief not only among Western
esotericists and Hermeticists, but also belief systems such as Wicca that have
borrowed from or been influenced by the Western esoteric tradition. Tanya
Luhrmann has said that "all magicians know something about astrology," and
refers to a table of correspondences in Starhawk's "The Spiral Dance",
organized by planet, as an example of the astrological lore studied by
magicians. Indian and South Asian. Hindu astrology originated with western
astrology. In the earliest Indian astronomy texts, the year was believed to be
360 days long, similar to that of Babylonian astrology, but the rest of the
early astrological system bears little resemblance. Later, the Indian
techniques were augmented with some of the Babylonian techniques. Hindu
astrology is oriented toward predicting one's fate or destiny. Hindu astrology
relies on the sidereal zodiac in which the signs of the zodiac are aligned to
the position of the corresponding constellations in the sky. In order to
maintain this alignment, Hindu astrology uses an adjustment, called "ayanamsa",
to take into account the gradual precession of the vernal equinox (the gradual
shift in the orientation of the Earth's axis of rotation). In Hindu astrology
the equinox occurs when the Sun is 6 degrees in Pisces. Western astrology
places the equinox at the beginning of Aries, about 23 degrees after the
equinox in the Hindu system. Hindu astrology also includes several sub-systems
of zodiac division, and employs the notion of bandhu: connections that,
according to the Vedas link the outer and the inner worlds. Sri Lankan
astrology is largely based on Hindu astrology with some modifications to bring
it in line with Buddhist teachings. Tibetan astrology also shares many of these
components but has also been strongly influenced by Chinese culture and
acknowledges a circle of animal signs similar to that of the Chinese zodiac
(see below). Chinese and East-Asian. Chinese astrology has a close relation
with Chinese philosophy (theory of the three harmonies: heaven, earth and man)
and uses concepts such as yin and yang, the Five phases, the 10 Celestial
stems, the 12 Earthly Branches, and shichen (時辰 a form of timekeeping used
for religious purposes). The early use of Chinese astrology was mainly confined
to political astrology, the observation of unusual phenomena, identification of
portents and the selection of auspicious days for events and decisions. The
constellations of the Zodiac of western Asia and Europe were not used; instead
the sky is divided into Three Enclosures (三垣 sān yuán), and Twenty-eight
Mansions (二十八宿 èrshíbā xiù) in twelve Ci (十二次). The Chinese
zodiac of twelve animal signs is said to represent twelve different types of
personality. It is based on cycles of years, lunar months, and two-hour periods
of the day (the shichen). The zodiac traditionally begins with the sign of the
Rat, and the cycle proceeds through 11 other animals signs: the Ox, Tiger,
Rabbit, Dragon, Snake, Horse, Goat, Monkey, Rooster, Dog and Pig. Complex
systems of predicting fate and destiny based on one's birthday, birth season,
and birth hours, such as "ziping" and Zi Wei Dou Shu () are still used
regularly in modern day Chinese astrology. They do not rely on direct
observations of the stars. The Korean zodiac is identical to the Chinese one.
The Vietnamese zodiac is almost identical to Chinese zodiac except that the
second animal is the Water Buffalo instead of the Ox, and the fourth animal is
the Cat instead of the Rabbit. The Japanese zodiac includes the Wild Boar
instead of the Pig. The Thai zodiac includes a Naga in place of the Dragon and
begins, not at Chinese New Year, but at either on the first day of fifth month
in Thai lunar calendar, or during the Songkran festival (now celebrated every
13–15 April), depending on the purpose of the use. History. Ancient world.
Astrology, in its broadest sense, is the search for meaning in the sky. It has
therefore been argued that astrology began as a study as soon as human beings
made conscious attempts to measure, record, and predict seasonal changes by
reference to astronomical cycles. Early evidence of such practices appears as
markings on bones and cave walls, which show that lunar cycles were being noted
as early as 25,000 years ago; the first step towards recording the Moon’s
influence upon tides and rivers, and towards organizing a communal calendar.
Agricultural needs were also met by increasing knowledge of constellations,
whose appearances change with the seasons, allowing the rising of particular
star-groups to herald annual floods or seasonal activities. By the third
millennium BCE, widespread civilizations had developed sophisticated awareness
of celestial cycles, and are believed to have consciously oriented their
temples to create alignment with the heliacal risings of the stars. There is
scattered evidence to suggest that the oldest known astrological references are
copies of texts made during this period. Two, from the Venus tablet of
Ammisaduqa (compiled in Babylon around 1700 BCE) are reported to have been made
during the reign of king Sargon of Akkad (2334–2279 BCE). Another, showing an
early use of electional astrology, is ascribed to the reign of the Sumerian
ruler Gudea of Lagash (ca. 2144–2124 BCE). This describes how the gods
revealed to him in a dream the constellations that would be most favorable for
the planned construction of a temple. However, there is controversy about
whether they were genuinely recorded at the time or merely ascribed to ancient
rulers by posterity. The oldest undisputed evidence of the use of astrology as
an integrated system of knowledge is therefore attributed to the records of the
first dynasty of Mesopotamia (1950–1651 BCE). The system of Chinese astrology
was elaborated during the Zhou dynasty (1046–256 BC) and flourished during
the Han Dynasty (2nd century BC to 2nd century AD), during which all the
familiar elements of traditional Chinese culture – the Yin-Yang philosophy,
theory of the 5 elements, Heaven and Earth, Confucian morality – were brought
together to formalise the philosophical principles of Chinese medicine and
divination, astrology and alchemy. Medieval Islamic world. Astrology was taken
up by Islamic scholars following the collapse of Alexandria to the Arabs in the
7th century, and the founding of the Abbasid empire in the 8th. The second
Abbasid caliph, Al Mansur (754–775) founded the city of Baghdad to act as a
centre of learning, and included in its design a library-translation centre
known as "Bayt al-Hikma" ‘Storehouse of Wisdom’, which continued to receive
development from his heirs and was to provide a major impetus for Arabic-
Persian translations of Hellenistic astrological texts. The early translators
included Mashallah, who helped to elect the time for the foundation of Baghdad,
and Sahl ibn Bishr, ("a.k.a." "Zael"), whose texts were directly influential
upon later European astrologers such as Guido Bonatti in the 13th century, and
William Lilly in the 17th century. Knowledge of Arabic texts started to become
imported into Europe during the Latin translations of the 12th century, the
effect of which was to help initiate the European Renaissance. Other important
Arabic astrologers include Albumasur and Al Khwarizmi, the Persian
mathematician, astronomer and astrologer, who is considered the father of
algebra and the algorithm. The Arabs greatly increased the knowledge of
astronomical cycles, and many of the star names that remain in common use
today, such as Aldebaran, Altair, Betelgeuse, Rigel and Vega retain the legacy
of their language. Since 1900. Astrology saw a popular revival from the
nineteenth century as part of a general revival of spiritualism and later New
Age philosophy, and through the influence of mass media such as newspaper
horoscopes and astrology software. Early in the twentieth century psychologist
Carl Jung developed some concepts concerning astrology, which led to the
development of psychological astrology. Cultural influence. In the West there
have been occasional reports of political leaders consulting astrologers. Louis
de Wohl worked as an astrologer for the British intelligence agency MI5, after
it was claimed that Hitler used astrology to time his actions. The War Office
was "interested to know what Hitler's own astrologers would be telling him from
week to week". In fact de Wohl's predictions were so inaccurate that he was
soon labelled a "complete charlatan" and it was later shown that Hitler
considered astrology to be "complete nonsense". After John Hinckley's attempted
assassination of U.S. President Ronald Reagan, first lady Nancy Reagan
commissioned astrologer Joan Quigley to act as the secret White House
astrologer. However, Quigley's role ended in 1988 when it became public through
the memoirs of former chief of staff, Donald Regan. In India, there is a long-
established and widespread belief in astrology. It is commonly used for daily
life, particularly in matters concerning marriage and career, and makes
extensive use of electional, horary and karmic astrology. Indian politics has
also been influenced by astrology. It remains considered a branch of the
Vedanga. resulting in permission for Indian universities to offer courses in
Vedic astrology. In February 2011, the Bombay High Court reaffirmed astrology's
standing in India when it dismissed a case which had challenged its status as a
science. In Japan, a strong belief in astrology has led to dramatic changes in
the fertility rate and the number of abortions in the years of "Fire Horse".
Women born in these years are called "hinoeuma", and believed to be
unmarriageable and to bring bad luck to their father or husband. In 1966, the
number of babies born in Japan dropped by over 25% as parents tried to avoid
the stigma of having a daughter born in the hinoeuma year. Scientific
appraisal. Astrology is a pseudoscience that has not demonstrated its
effectiveness in controlled studies and has no scientific validity. The
majority of professional astrologers rely on performing astrology-based
personality tests and making relevant predictions about the remunerators
future. Those who continue to have faith in astrology have been characterized
as doing so "in spite of the fact that there is no verified scientific basis
for their beliefs, and indeed that there is strong evidence to the contrary."
Astrophysicist Neil deGrasse Tyson commented on astrological belief, saying
that "part of knowing how to think is knowing how the laws of nature shape the
world around us. Without that knowledge, without that capacity to think, you
can easily become a victim of people who seek to take advantage of you". The
former astrologer, and scientist, Geoffrey Deans and psychologist Ivan Kelly
conducted a large scale scientific test, involving more than one hundred
cognitive, behavioral, physical and other variables, but found no support for
astrology. Furthermore, a meta-analysis was conducted pooling 40 studies
consisting of 700 astrologers and over 1000 birth charts. Ten of the tests,
which had a total of 300 participants, involved subjects picking the correct
chart interpretation out of a number of others which were not the
astrologically correct chart interpretation (usually 3 to 5 others). When the
date and other obvious clues were removed no significant results were found to
suggest there was any preferred chart. A further test involved 45 confident
astrologers, with an average of 10 years experience and 160 participants (out
of an original sample size of 1198 participants) who strongly favoured certain
characteristics in the Eysenck Personality Questionnaire to extremes. The
astrologers performed much worse than merely basing decisions off the
individuals age, and much worse than 45 control subjects who did not use birth
charts at all. Science and non-science are often distinguished by the criterion
of falsifiability. The criterion was first proposed by philosopher of science
Karl Popper. To Popper, science does not rely on induction, instead scientific
investigations are inherently attempts to falsify existing theories through
novel tests. If a single test fails, then the theory is falsified. Therefore,
any test of a scientific theory must prohibit certain results which will
falsify the theory, and expect other specific results which will be consistent
with the theory. Using this criterion of falsifiability, astrology is a
pseudoscience. Popper regarded astrology as "pseudo-empirical" in that "it
appeals to observation and experiment", but "nevertheless does not come up to
scientific standards". In 1953, sociologist Theodor W. Adorno conducted a study
of the astrology column of a Los Angeles newspaper as part of a project
examining mass culture in capitalist society. Adorno concluded that astrology
was a large-scale manifestation of systematic irrationalism, where individuals
were subtly being led to believe that the author of the column was addressing
them directly through the use of flattery and vague generalizations. Cognitive
bias. It has also been suggested that much of the continued faith in astrology
could be psychologically explained as a matter of cognitive bias. In 1949
Bertram Forer conducted a personality test on students. While seemingly giving
the students individualized results, he instead gave each student exactly the
same sheet that discussed their personality. The personality descriptions were
taken from a book on Astrology. When the students were asked to comment on the
accuracy of the test with a rating more than 40% gave it the top mark of 5 out
of 5, and the average rating was 4.2. The results of this study have been
replicated in numerous other studies. Thus, study of this Barnum/Forer effect
has been mostly focused on the level of acceptance of fake horoscopes and fake
astrological personality profiles. Recipients of these personality assessments
consistently fail to distinguish common and uncommon personality descriptors.
By a process known as self-attribution, it has been shown in numerous studies
that individuals with knowledge of astrology tend to describe their personality
in terms of traits compatible with their star sign. The effect is heightened
when the individuals were aware the personality description was being used to
discuss astrology. Individuals who were not familiar with astrology had no such
tendency. Lack of consistency. Testing the validity of astrology can be hard
because there is no consensus amongst astrologers as to what astrology is or
what it can predict. Most professional astrologers are paid to predict the
future or describe a person's personality and life, but most horoscopes only
make vague untestable statements that can almost apply to any individual.
Astrologers avoid making verifiable predictions and instead rely on making
vague statements which allows them to try to avoid falsification. Georges
Charpak and Henri Broch dealt with claims from astrology in the book "Debunked!
ESP, Telekinesis, and other Pseudoscience". They pointed out that astrologers
have only a small knowledge of astronomy and that they often do not take into
account basic features such as the precession of the equinoxes which would
change the position of the sun with time; they commented on the example of
Elizabeth Teissier who claimed that "the sun ends up in the same place in the
sky on the same date each year" as the basis for claims that two people with
the same birthday but a number of years apart should be under the same
planetary influence. Charpak and Broch noted that "there is a difference of
about twenty-two thousand miles between Earth's location on any specific date
in two successive years" and that thus they should not be under the same
influence according to astrology. Over a 40 years period there would be a
difference greater than 780,000 miles. The tropical zodiac has no connection to
the stars and avoids the issue with precession moving the constellations as
long as they make no reference to the constellations themselves being in the
associated zodiacal sign. Charpak and Broch, noting this, referred to astrology
based on the tropical zodiac as being "empty boxes that have nothing to do with
anything and are devoid of any consistency or correspondence with the stars".
Sole usage of the tropical zodiac is inconsistent with references made, by the
same astrologers, to the Age of Aquarius which is dependent on when the vernal
point enters the constellation of Aquarius. Some astrologers make claims that
the position of all the planets must be taken into account, but astrologers
were unable to predict the existence of Neptune based on mistakes in
horoscopes. Instead Neptune was predicted using Newton's law of universal
gravitation. The grafting on of Uranus, Neptune and Pluto into the astrology
discourse was done on an ad-hoc basis. Lack of mechanism. Astronomer Carl Sagan
declined to sign the statement. Sagan said he took this stance not because he
thought astrology had any validity, but because he thought that the tone of the
statement was authoritarian, and that dismissing astrology because there was no
mechanism (while "certainly a relevant point") was not in itself convincing. In
a letter published in a follow-up edition of "The Humanist", Sagan confirmed
that he would have been willing to sign such a statement had it described and
refuted the principal tenets of astrological belief. This, he argued, would
have been more persuasive and would have produced less controversy. Many
astrologers claim that astrology is scientific. Some of these astrologers have
proposed conventional causal agents such as electromagnetism and gravity.
Scientists dismiss these mechanisms as implausible since, for example, the
magnetic field, when measured from earth, of a large but distant planet such as
Jupiter is far smaller than that produced by ordinary household appliances.
Other astrologers prefer not to attempt to explain astrology, and instead give
it supernatural explanations such as divination. Carl Jung sought to invoke
synchronicity to explain results on astrology from a single study he conducted,
where no statistically significant results were observed. Sychronicity itself
is considered to be neither testable nor falsifiable. The study was
subsequently heavily criticised for its non-random sample and its use of
statistics and also its lack of consistency with astrology. Carlson's
experiment. Across several centuries of testing, the predictions of astrology
have never been more accurate than that expected by chance alone. One approach
used in testing astrology quantitatively is through blind experiment. When
specific predictions from astrologers were tested in rigorous experimental
procedures in the Carlson test, the predictions were falsified. The Shawn
Carlson's double-blind chart matching tests, in which 28 astrologers agreed to
match over 100 natal charts to psychological profiles generated by the
California Psychological Inventory (CPI) test, is one of the most renowned
tests of astrology. The best-known of Gauquelin's findings is based on the
positions of Mars in the natal charts of successful athletes and became known
as the "Mars effect". A study conducted by seven French scientists attempted to
replicate the claim, but found no statistical evidence, and attributed the
effect to selective bias on Gauquelin's part, accusing him of attempting to
persuade them to add or delete names from their study. Geoffrey Dean has
suggested that the effect may be caused by self-reporting of birth dates by
parents rather than any issue with the study by Gauquelin. The suggestion is
that a small subset of the parents may have had changed birth times to be
consistent with better astrological charts for a related profession. The sample
group was taken from a time where belief in astrology was more common.
Gauquelin had failed to find the Mars effect in more recent populations. where
a nurse or doctor recorded the birth information. The number of births under
astrologically undesirable conditions was also lower, indicating more evidence
that parents choose dates and times to suit their beliefs. Theological
viewpoints. Some of the practices of astrology were contested on theological
grounds by medieval Muslim astronomers such as Al-Farabi (Alpharabius), Ibn al-
Haytham (Alhazen) and Avicenna. They said that the methods of astrologers
conflicted with orthodox religious views of Islamic scholars through the
suggestion that the Will of God can be known and predicted in advance. For
example, Avicenna’s 'Refutation against astrology' "Risāla fī ibṭāl
aḥkām al-nojūm", argues against the practice of astrology while supporting
the principle of planets acting as the agents of divine causation which express
God's absolute power over creation. Avicenna considered that the movement of
the planets influenced life on earth in a deterministic way, but argued against
the capability of determining the exact influence of the stars. In essence,
Avicenna did not refute the essential dogma of astrology, but denied our
ability to understand it to the extent that precise and fatalistic predictions
could be made from it. Belief in astrology is incompatible with Catholic
beliefs such as free will. According to the Catechism of the Catholic Church:
St. Augustine believed that astrology conflicted with church doctrine, but he
grounded his opposition with non-theological reasons such as the failure of
astrology to explain twins who behave differently although are conceived at the
same moment and born at approximately the same time.
