Aten Aten (also Aton, Egyptian "") is the disk of the sun in ancient Egyptian
mythology, and originally an aspect of Ra. The deified Aten is the focus of the
monolatristic, henotheistic, or monotheistic religion of Atenism established by
Amenhotep IV, who later took the name Akhenaten in worship and recognition of
Aten. In his poem "Great Hymn to the Aten", Akhenaten praises Aten as the
creator, and giver of life. The worship of Aten was eradicated by Horemheb.
Overview. The Aten, the sun-disk, is first referred to as a deity in The Story
of Sinuhe from the 12th dynasty, in which the deceased king is described as
rising as god to the heavens and uniting "with the sun-disk, the divine body
merging with its maker." By analogy, the term "silver aten" was sometimes used
to refer to the moon. The solar Aten was extensively worshipped as a god in the
reign of Amenhotep III, when it was depicted as a falcon-headed man much like
Ra. In the reign of Amenhotep III's successor, Amenhotep IV, the Aten became
the central god of Egyptian state religion, and Amenhotep IV changed his name
to Akhenaten to reflect his close link with the new supreme deity. The full
title of Akhenaten's god was "The Ra-Horus who rejoices in the horizon, in his/
her Name of the Light which is seen in the sun disc." (This is the title of the
god as it appears on the numerous stelae which were placed to mark the
boundaries of Akhenaten's new capital at Akhetaten, modern Amarna.) This
lengthy name was often shortened to "Ra-Horus-Aten" or just "Aten" in many
texts, but the god of Akhenaten raised to supremacy is considered a synthesis
of very ancient gods viewed in a new and different way. The god is also
considered to be both masculine and feminine simultaneously. All creation was
thought to emanate from the god and to exist within the god. In particular, the
god was not depicted in anthropomorphic (human) form, but as rays of light
extending from the sun's disk. Furthermore, the god's name came to be written
within a cartouche, along with the titles normally given to a Pharaoh, another
break with ancient tradition. Ra-Horus, more usually referred to as "Ra-
Horakhty" ("Ra, who is Horus of the two horizons"), is a synthesis of two other
gods, both of which are attested from very early on. During the Amarna period,
this synthesis was seen as the invisible source of energy of the sun god, of
which the visible manifestation was the Aten, the solar disk. Thus Ra-Horus-
Aten was a development of old ideas which came gradually. The real change, as
some see it, was the apparent abandonment of all other gods, especially Amun,
and the debatable introduction of monotheism by Akhenaten. The syncretism is
readily apparent in the Great Hymn to the Aten in which Re-Herakhty, Shu and
Aten are merged into the creator god. Others see Akhenaten as a practitioner of
an Aten monolatry, as he did not actively deny the existence of other gods; he
simply refrained from worshipping any but the Aten. Royal Titulary. During the
Amarna Period, the Aten was given a Royal Titulary (as he was considered to be
king of all), with his names drawn in a cartouche. There were two forms of this
title, the first had the names of other gods, and the second later one which
was more 'singular' and referred only to the Aten himself. The early form has
Re-Horakhti who rejoices in the Horizon, in his name Shu which is the Aten. The
later form has Re, ruler of the two horizons who rejoices in the Horizon, in
his name of light which is the Aten. Variant vocalizations. Egyptologists have
vocalized the word variously as Aten, Aton, Atonu, and Itn.
