Augustinians (1) Several mendicant Orders of friars, who lived a mixed
religious life of contemplation and apostolic ministry and follow the Rule of
St. Augustine, a brief document providing guidelines for living in a religious
community. The largest and most familiar, originally known as the Hermits of
Saint Augustine (O.E.S.A. - "Ordo Eremitarum sancti Augustini") and also as the
Austin friars, is now simply referred to as the Order of Saint Augustine
(O.S.A.). Two other Orders, the Augustinian Recollects and the Discalced
Augustinians, were once part of the Augustinian Order under a single Prior
General. The Recollect friars, founded in 1588 as a reform movement of the
Augustinian friars in Spain, became autonomous in 1612 with their first Prior
General, Enrique de la Sagrada. The Discalced friars became an independent
religious congregation with their own Prior General in 1592, and were raised to
the status of a separate mendicant Order in 1610. (2) Various congregations of
clerics, known as canons regular, who also follow the Rule of St. Augustine,
and embrace the evangelical counsels and lead a semi-monastic life, while
remaining committed to pastoral care, appropriate to their primary vocation as
priests. They generally form one large community, which might serve parishes in
the vicinity, and are organized into autonomous religious congregations, which
normally are distinct by region. There are also Augustinian orders within the
Anglican Communion. The Augustinian Friars. From the 2008 Constitutions of the
Order of Saint Augustine, we read:- a) Religious institutes, both male and
female, formally aggregated to the Order by a decree of the Prior General (this
would include the Augustinians of the Assumption, the Sisters of St Rita, etc.)
b) Other groups of lay Augustinians c) Lay faithful affiliated to the Order The
Augustinian, or Austin, friars (O.S.A.), are a mendicant order. As consecrated
religious, they pray the Liturgy of the Hours throughout the day. This Latin
Rite Order, while a contemplative Order, differs from traditional monastic
Orders in three ways: 1) They do not take vows of stability, meaning that they
can live in one house (called a friary or sometimes a monastery) typically for
several years before being moved into a different community of the Order. 2)
They are engaged in apostolic activity, such as mission work, education, prison
ministries, etc. The Order is under the supervision of a Prior General in Rome,
and as an international Order they are divided into various Provinces
throughout the world, with each Province being led by a Prior Provincial; (3)
As an Order, they have a special commitment to corporate poverty as opposed to
simply the poverty professed by the individual friar. While this is not
currently legislated as it was in the origins of the Order, this is to be a
distinguishing mark of their lives as a community. As is typical of most
Catholic religious orders, the Augustinians wear a religious habit, consisting
of three pieces: a tunic, a cincture, and a shoulder cape with hood. The tunic
and shoulder cape may be black or white (white typically being reserved among
the professed friars for tropical locations, and where Dominican friars are not
present, so as to avoid confusion), and a black cincture. Novices of the Order
wear a white tunic and hooded cape with a black cincture. When white is used by
professed friars, however, a scapular is added to the habit, which is the same
as the Dominican habit, thus the possible confusion. This is due to St.
Dominic's origins as a canon regular. As consecrated religious, Augustinians
profess the evangelical counsels of chastity, poverty, and obedience. They
follow the Rule of St. Augustine, written sometime between 397-403, for a
monastic community Augustine founded in Hippo (modern day Algeria), and which
takes as its inspiration the early Christian community described in the Acts of
the Apostles, particularly Acts 4:32: "Now the company of those who believed
were of one heart and soul, and no one said that any of the things which he
possessed was his own, but they had everything in common" (RSV). By decree of
the Holy See, the Augustinian Order is granted exempt status, which places it
under the direct dependence of the Pope, meaning that bishops have no
jurisdiction with regards to the internal affairs of the Order. History of the
Friars. The Augustinian friars came into being as part of the mendicant
movement of the 13th century, a new form of religious life which sought to
bring the religious ideals of the monastic life into an urban setting which
allowed the religious to serve the needs of the People of God in an apostolic
capacity. At this time there were a number of eremitical groups living in such
diverse places as Tuscany, Latium, Umbria, Liguria, England, Switzerland,
Germany, and perhaps France. In 1243 the Tuscan hermits petitioned Pope
Innocent IV to unite them all as one group. Innocent IV issued the Bull
"Incumbit Nobis" on 16 December 1243, an essentially pastoral letter which,
despite its brevity, basically served as the "magna carta" initiating the
foundation of the Order as it is known today. This papal bull exhorted these
hermits to adopt "the "Rule" and way of life of the Blessed Augustine," to
profess this Augustinian manner of life in a way that they themselves would
decide with regards to specific charism and apostolate, and to elect a Prior
General. The bull also appointed Cardinal Riccardo Annibaldi as their
supervisor and legal guide. The importance of this man in the foundation of the
Order cannot be overstated. These Tuscan hermits came together for a general
chapter in March 1244, as decreed by the Bull "Praesentium Vobis", a chapter
presided over by Cardinal Annibaldi. At this chapter the Order formally adopted
the Rule of St. Augustine, to follow the Roman office with the Cistercian
psalter, and to hold triennial elections of the Prior General. The first Prior
General was Friar Matthew, followed by Adjutus and Philip. In the Papal Bull
"Pia desideria", issued 31 March 1244, Pope Innocent IV formally approved the
foundation of the Order. In 1256 Innocent's successor Alexander IV called
together various other hermit groups from around the world and ultimately
joined them to this existing Augustinian Order. From June to July 1255 he
issued 22 bulls of instruction, encouragement, and protection of the young
Order. His bull "Cum Quaedam Salubria" summoned all the hermits of St.
Augustine and St. William to send two representatives to Rome for a General
Chapter, again to be held under the supervision of the kindly Cardinal
Annibaldi, and during this Chapter the following groups of hermits, inter alia,
were amalgamated to the Order, which up to then had only consisted of the
groups of the Tuscan hermits: the two Orders of St. William the Hermit (the
Malevale and MonteFavale communities), the Brittin, and the Bonites (named
after St. John the Good). This historical union has subsequently been referred
to as the Grand Union of 1256. At this Chapter Lanfranc Settala, the leader of
the Bonites, was elected Prior General. This 12-year-old religious Order of
friars now consisted of 100 or more houses. On 22 August 1256 the Italian
Williamites, unhappy with the arrangement of the Grand Union, left the Order
and adopted the Rule of St. Benedict. Organization of the Order. The
Augustinian Hermits, while following the rule known as that of St. Augustine,
are also subject to the Constitutions, first drawn up by Augustinus Novellus
(d. 1309), Prior General of the Order from 1298 to 1300, and by Clement of
Osimo. The Rule and Constitutions were approved at the General Chapter held at
Florence in 1287 and at Ratisbon in 1290. A revision was made at Rome in 1895.
The Constitutions have frequently been printed: at Rome, in 1581, and, with the
commentary of Girolamo Seripando, at Venice, in 1549, and at Rome, in 1553. The
Constitutions were revised again and published at Rome in 1895, with additions
in 1901 and 1907. Today, the Order follows the Constitutions approved in the
Ordinary General Chapter of 2007. The government of the order is as follows: At
the head is the Prior General, elected every six years by the General Chapter.
The Prior General is aided by six assistants and a secretary, also elected by
the General Chapter. These form the "Curia Generalitia". Each province is
governed by a Prior Provincial, each commissariat by a Commissary General, each
of the two congregations by a Vicar General, and every monastery by a Prior
(only the Czech monastery of Alt-Brunn in Moravia is under an abbot) and every
college by a Rector. The members of the Order number both priests and lay
brothers. The Augustinians, like most religious orders, have a Cardinal
Protector. The choir and outdoor dress of the friars is a tunic of black woolen
material, with long, wide sleeves, a black leather girdle and a large shoulder
cape to which is attached a long, pointed hood reaching to the girdle . The
indoor dress consists of a black tunic and scapular, over which the shoulder
cape is worn. In many monasteries. white was formerly the color worn in areas
where there were no Dominicans. Discalced and Recollect friars. The Discalced
Augustinians were formed in 1588 in Italy as a reform movement of the Order,
and have their own constitutions, differing from those of the other
Augustinians. Their fasts are more rigorous, and their other ascetic practices
stricter. They wear sandals, not shoes, a practice which accounts for their
name ("scalzo" or "barefoot"). In an effort to preserve their roots in the
hermit life, the Discalced Augustinians practice strict silence and have in
every province a house dedicated to recollection situated in some retired
place, to which friars striving after greater perfection can retire in order to
practice severe penance, living only on water, bread, fruits, olive oil and
wine. The Augustinian Recollects developed in Spain in 1592 with the same goal.
Currently, though, they are primarily found serving in pastoral care. The
Augustinians in North America. The North American foundation of the Order took
place in 1796, when Irish friars arrived in Philadelphia. Michael Hurley was
the first American to join the Order the following year. The friars established
schools throughout the Americas, including the two Augustinian institutions of
higher learning in the United States: Villanova University in Pennsylvania and
Merrimack College in Massachusetts. The following high schools were also
established: Malvern Preparatory School in Pennsylvania (1842); St. Rita of
Cascia High School in Chicago (1909); St. Augustine High School in San Diego,
California (1922); Villanova Preparatory School in Ojai, California (1925);
Cascia Hall Preparatory School in Tulsa, Oklahoma (1926); Monsignor Bonner High
School in Drexel Hill, Pennsylvania (1953); St. Augustine College Preparatory
School in South Jersey (1959); Austin Preparatory School in Reading,
Massachusetts (1961) and in 1962, Providence Catholic High School, which serves
the Diocese of Joliet in Illinois. The educational and spiritual traditions of
the Order enrich each of these academic communities. Canons Regular. The Canons
Regular follow the more ancient form of Augustinian religious life, which
developed toward the end of the first millennium, and thus predates the
founding of the friars. They represent a clerical adaptation of monastic life,
as it grew out of an attempt to organize communities of clerics to a more
dedicated way of life, as St. Augustine himself had done. Historically it
paralleled the lay movement of monasticism or the eremetical life from which
the friars were later to develop. In their tradition, the canons added the
commitment of religious vows to their primary vocation of pastoral care. As the
canons became independent of the diocesan structures, they came to form their
own monastic communities. The official name of the Order is the Canons Regular
of St. Augustine (C.R.S.A.). Like the Benedictines, they do not form one legal
body, but are a union of various independent religious congregations. Though
they also follow the Rule of St. Augustine, they differ from the friars in not
committing themselves to corporate poverty, which is a defining element of the
mendicant orders. Unlike the friars and like monks, the canon are generally
organized as one large community to which they are attached for life with a vow
of stability. Their houses are given the title of an abbey, from which the
canons then serve various surrounding towns and villages for spiritual
services. The religious superior of their major houses is titled an abbot.
Smaller communities are headed by a prior or provost. The distinctive habit of
the canon regular is the rochet, worn over a cassock or tunic, which is
indicative of their clerical origins. This has evolved in various way among
different congregations, from wearing the full rochet to the wearing of a white
tunic and scapular. The Austrian congregation, as an example, wears a narrow
band of white cloth—a vestige of the scapular—which hangs down both front
and back over a cassock for their weekday wear. For more solemn occasions, they
wear the rochet under a purple mozzetta. Communities of canons served the poor
and the sick throughout Europe, through both nursing and education. They
include the canons of the Hospice at the Great St. Bernard Pass in the Alps on
the border of Switzerland, where they have served travelers since the mid-11th
century. This community is the one which developed the familiar canine breed of
St. Bernard to assist the canons in their ability to find travelers buried by
avalanches. The Canons Regular of the New Jerusalem are a newly founded
Tridentine rite congregation. Charism. The teaching and writing of Augustine,
the Augustinian Rule, and the lives and experiences of Augustinians over
sixteen centuries help define the ethos of the order, sometimes "honoured in
the breach". As well as telling his disciples to be "of one mind and heart on
the way towards God" Augustine of Hippo taught that "Nothing conquers except
truth and the victory of truth is love" ("Victoria veritatis est caritas"), and
the pursuit of truth through learning is key to the Augustinian ethos, balanced
by the injunction to behave with love towards one another. It does not unduly
single out the exceptional, especially favour the gifted, nor exclude the poor
or marginalised. Love is not earned through human merit, but received and given
freely by God's free gift of grace, totally undeserved yet generously given.
These same imperatives of affection and fairness have driven the order in its
international missionary outreach. This balanced pursuit of love and learning
has energised the various branches of the order into building communities
founded on mutual affection and intellectual advancement. The Augustinian ideal
is inclusive. Augustine spoke passionately of God's "beauty so ancient and so
new", and his fascination with beauty extended to music. He taught that "to
sing once is to pray twice" ("Qui cantat, bis orat") and music is also a key
part of the Augustinian ethos. Contemporary Augustinian musical foundations
include the famous Augustinerkirche in Vienna where Orchestral Masses by Mozart
and Schubert are performed every week, as well as the boys' choir at Sankt
Florian in Austria, a school conducted by Augustinian canons, a choir now over
1,000 years old. Augustinian lay societies. The lay societies are voluntary
groups, generally made up of people who are either married or single and have
sympathy with, and interest in, the Augustinian approach to life. These lay
people do not take monastic vows, but offer support to the work of the
Augustinian Order voluntary work, gifts of money and goods, and of study and
promotion of St. Augustine and Augustinian teaching. The primary among these
are the Third Orders associated with the various branches of the mendicant
Orders. These are the Augustinian Lay Community and the Secular Augustinian
Recollects. They make a formal and public commitment as laity to follow as best
as possible the life and charism of the Order. Other associations which support
the spirit and work of the friars and Sisters include: Brotherhood of the
Virgin Mary of the Belt in Italy, the Friends of Augustine in the Philippines,
the Augustinian Friends in Australia are some examples of Augustinian lay
societies.
