Auspice An auspice (Latin: auspicium from auspex) is literally "one who looks
at birds", a diviner who reads omens from the observed flight of birds. This
type of omen reading was already a millennium old in the time of Classical
Greece: in the fourteenth-century BCE diplomatic correspondence preserved in
Egypt called the "Amarna correspondence", the practice was familiar to the king
of Alasia in Cyprus who has need of an 'eagle diviner' to be sent from Egypt.
This earlier, indigenous practice of divining by bird signs, familiar in the
figure of Calchas, the bird-diviner to Agamemnon, who has led the army ("Iliad"
I.69), was largely replaced by sacrifice-divination through inspection of the
sacrificial victim's liver— "haruspices"— during the Orientalizing period
of archaic Greek culture. Plato notes that hepatoscopy held greater prestige
than augury by means of birds. In ancient Roman religion, the auspices provided
divine signs to be interpreted by an augur (Latin plural: augures, English
plural: augurs). An augur would perform a ceremony (known as "taking the
auspices") and would read flight patterns of birds in the sky. Depending upon
the birds, the auspices from the gods could be favorable or unfavorable
("auspicious" or "inauspicious"). Sometimes bribed or politically motivated
augures would fabricate unfavorable auspices in order to delay certain state
functions, such as elections. Pliny the Younger attributes the invention of
auspicy to Tiresias the seer of Thebes, the generic model of a seer in the
Greco-Roman literary culture. One of the most famous auspices is the one which
is connected with the founding of Rome. Once the founders of Rome, Romulus and
Remus, arrived at the Palatine Hill, the two argued over where the exact
position of the city should be. Romulus was set on building the city upon the
Palatine, but Remus wanted to build the city on the strategic and easily
fortified Aventine Hill. The two agreed to settle their argument by testing
their abilities as augures and by the will of the gods. Each took a seat on the
ground apart from one another, and, according to Plutarch, Remus saw six
vultures, while Romulus saw twelve. Auspices in Ancient Rome. In ancient Rome,
the appointment and inauguration of any magistrate, decisions made within the
people’s assembly and the advancement of any campaign always required a
positive "auspicium". Unlike in Greece where oracles played the role of
messenger of the Gods, in Rome it was through birds that Jupiter’s will was
interpreted. Auspices showed Romans what they were to do, or not to do; giving
no explanation for the decision made except that it was the will of the Gods.
It would be difficult to execute any public act without consulting the
auspices. It was believed that if an augur committed an error in the
interpretation of the signs or, vitia, it was considered offensive to the gods
and often was said to have disastrous effects unless corrected. Elections, the
passing of laws and wars were all put on hold until the people were assured the
Gods agreed with their actions. The men who interpreted these signs, revealing
the will of the gods were called augures. Similar to records of court
precedents, augures kept books containing records of past signs, the necessary
rituals and prayers and other tricks of their trade to help other augures and
even member of the aristocracy understand the fundamentals of augury. The
augures themselves were not the ones with the final say. Though they had the
power to interpret the signs, it was ultimately the responsibility of the
magistrate to execute decisions as to future actions. The magistrates were also
expected to understand the basic interpretations as they were often expected to
take the auspices whenever they undertook any public business. Until 300 BC
only patricians could become augures. Plebeian assemblies were forbidden to
take augury and hence had no input as to whether a certain law, war or festival
should occur. Cicero, an augur himself, accounts how the monopoly of the
patricians created a useful barrier to the encroachment of the "populares".
However in 300 BC a new law Lex Ogulnia, increased the number of augures from
four to nine and required that five of the nine be plebeians, granting, for the
first time, the ability to interpret the will of the Gods to lower classes.
With this new power, it was not only possible for plebeians to determine the
gods will in their favor but it was also now possible for plebeians to critique
unfair interpretations by patricians. History of auspices. According to
unanimous testimony from ancient sources the use of auspices as a means to
decipher the will of the Gods was more ancient than Rome itself. The use of the
word is usually associated with Latins as well as the earliest Roman citizens.
Though some modern historians link the act of observing Auspices to the
Etruscans, Cicero accounts in his text De Divinatione several differences
between the auspicial of the Romans and the Etruscan system of interpreting the
will of the Gods. Cicero also mentions several other nations which, like the
Romans, paid attention to the patterns of flying birds as signs of God’s will
but never once mentions this practice while discussing the Etruscans. Though
auspices were prevalent before the Romans, Romans are often linked with
auspices because of both their connection to Rome’s foundation and because
Romans were the first to take the system and lay out such fixed and fundamental
rules for the reading of auspices that it remained an essential part of Roman
culture. Stoics, for instance, maintained that if there are gods, they care for
men, and that if they care for men they must send them signs of their will.
Types of auspices. There were five different types of auspices. Of these, the
last three formed no part of the ancient auspices. Offered and requested signs.
There were two classifications of auspice signs, impetrative ("impetrativa",
sought or requested) and oblative ("oblativa", unsought or offered). Signs that
fall under the category of "impetrativa" were signs that resulted due to the
actions performed by the augur during the reading of the auspice. The other
category of signs, "oblativa", were momentous events which occurred
unexpectedly, while the magistrate was either taking auspices or participating
in public debate. "Ex Caelo" ("from the sky") signs of thunder and lightning or
other natural phenomena, would be considered an “offered” sign. Unless the
magistrate was accompanied by an augur it was up to them to decide whether or
not the “offered” sign was significant.
