Ayyavazhi mythology Ayyavazhi mythology is the mythology of the growing South
Indian religious faith and a sect of Hinduism known as Ayyavazhi. The main
source of Ayyavazhi mythology is the Ayyavazhi scripture, Akilattirattu
Ammanai, and its supplement, Arul Nool. The Akilattirattu Ammanai is a
recitation by "Mayon" (the Tamil name for Vishnu, or Lord Narayana) to his
consort Lakshmi. It is divided into three sections: pre-incarnational events,
incarnational events and post-incarnational events. Pre-incarnational events.
The pre-incarnational events are all those that occurred prior to the earthly
incarnation of Mayon. The first six Yugas. The first "Yuga" ("aeon" or "era")
was called Neetiya Yuga. During this time, divine, human and all other virtues
flourished without hindrance. The human race lived united as a family, without
distinctions of caste, and were not subjected to "uliyams" (pronounced
"oozhiyam", and meaning slavery or severe labour). They did not fear demons,
and there was perfect harmony among the creatures of the Earth, as well as
among those who lived in the Fourteen Worlds. In this yuga, the king was
righteous and did not oppress his people through taxes or other means. During
this peaceful time, Kroni was born. Kroni, who is analogous to Satan in the
Christian tradition, is a primordial personification of evil. Though Kroni is
said to have been born with multitudinous limbs, each the size of a mountain,
he nevertheless assumes different forms in different yugas: as Ravana or
Duryodhana, for example. Likewise, Mayon also incarnates in different yugas as
different "Avatars": for example Rama or Krishna. In order to quell the
ravenous hunger in his stomach, Kroni drank all of the waters of the sea. With
these waters being insufficient, he swallowed "Kailayam", the abode of "Sivan"
(the Tamil name for Shiva), and then proceeded to devour the entire universe.
Akilam one: 440-446. () Mayon, residing with Sivan in "Kailayam", escaped to
undertake "tavam" ("tapas", meaning "austerity") and to receive permission from
Sivan to destroy Kroni. Isvaran granted this permission, but made Mayon aware
of the necessity to appear in different forms in the successive six yukams in
order to destroy the Six Fragments of Kroni. Following this advice, Mayon
sliced Kroni into six fragments and saved the universe. The first yuga thus
came to an end. In the second yuga, called "Chathura Yuga", one of the six
pieces of Kroni was formed into a creature named Kuntomasali. It had the shape
and size of a mammoth leech, and when it disturbed the tavam of those in Tava
lokam (the land of austerity), Mayon destroyed the leech by catching it with a
hook. In the third yuga, called Netu Yuga, another fragment of Kroni created
two wicked individuals called Thillaimallalan and Mallosivahanan. They ruled
over the people by extracting "Uliyam" and "Iraikal" (taxes) from them. When
this exploitation became unbearable, the Devas (celestial beings) complained to
Sivan, who, in turn, commissioned Mayon to carry out the destruction of the
wicked rulers, which he did. The fourth yuga was called Kretha Yuga. The third
fragment of Kroni was, once again, made into two siblings, called Suraparppan
and Sinhamuka Asuran, and they were given responsibility to rule the Earth. The
wicked rulers began to crush the Devas, who reported it to Mayon. Mayon took
the form of Arumugan, the Tamil name for Kartikeya, and advised the rulers to
desist from their wickedness. However, when they arrogantly spurned his advice,
Arumugan eliminated them. During the same Yuga, Suraparppan was created once
again, this time as Iraniyan. Mayon, incarnated as the son of Iraniyan
(Prahlada), challenged his authority and finally took on the therianthropic
form of man and lion (Narasimha) by piercing his stomach. On his deathbed,
Mayon asked him to repent, but he replied arrogantly: "You cannot kill me. Only
by placing ten mountains as ten nails might you kill me. Otherwise you can't."
In the ensuing yuga, called Thretha Yuga, Sivan, as per the request of Mayon,
created the fourth piece of the primordial Kroni as a ten-headed mighty
warrior, with the ten mountains as ten heads, naming him as Ravanan. He
oppressed all those living on Earth by extracting Uliyam from them. He subdued
all the earthly kings and made them pay tributes to him. Suffering under his
oppression, the Devas sought the help of Mayon who, for the purpose of
destroying him, took birth as Raman. On his death-bed, he repented, saying:
"Only with the help of my brother were you able to destroy me." With this
episode of killing Ravanan, Thretha Yuga came to an end. In the sixth yuga,
called Dwapara Yuga, the fifth fragment of Kroni was portioned into a hundred
pieces, and made into Duriyodhanan and ninety-nine brothers to support him. The
three brothers of Raman, along with Vibushanan and Sampoovan of the preceding
epoch, were created as Pancha Pandavas in this aeon. The wicked Duriyodhanan
was killed by the Pancha Pandavas, with the support of Mayon, who came in the
form of Krishna. Even at the brink of death, Duriyodhanan refused to repent,
saying that "only with your cunning mind were you able to defeat me, and
otherwise not." Mayon then told him: "You will be created with knowledge,
intelligence, and artistic skill in the next Yukam, and if you do not repent in
that age, that will be your eternal annihilation." Having said this, Mayon went
to Srirangam and dwelt there. The Santror. Towards the end of Dwapara Yuga,
Thirumal (Mayon), with the aid of Seven Virgins (Saptha Kanniyar), had begotten
seven sons, known as the Santror Makkal (see Santror Pirappu), in order to
accomplish the task of destroying the Kalineesan and Kali mayai (Kali Yuga
Maya) that were to be countered in the following Kali Yuga. After the birth of
Santror, they were all named by conducting a naming ceremony (see The Naming
ceremony of Santror) and fed with celestial nectar (see Feeding the children
with Celestial Nectar). The Santror were raised by Bhadrakali and married to
the daughters of Nirupathirajan (see Fostered by the acclaimed Deity
Patrakali). Kalineesan, Kali Yuga, and Kalimayai. The sixth fragment of the
primordial Kroni was Neesan, the epitome of wickedness ((Tamil "neesa" meaning
"wickedness"). Neesan was created in the form of a male human being who was
wise, beautiful and intelligent. Neesan pushed himself out of the earth in an
inverted form. Upon seeing his appearance, the celestial diviners predicted
that he, being without normal human parentage, would have an undefined and rude
physique, and that his intelligence and five senses would be rooted in
falsehood. They further predicted that he would have a life as fragile as that
of a bird, but he would unleash wickedness on people with arrogance. Having
obtained innumerable boons (see Boons), including the Chakra of Mayon and
invincibility, Neesan proceeded to earth to rule over the people. On his way,
he was accosted by Thirumal, who appeared as a Pantaram (an itinerant
mendicant), with long flowing unkempt hair and torn clothes. Thirumal
challenged him to a duel which Neesan refused, considering it beneath his
dignity to fight with a Pantaram coming in such an attire without any weapon.
Taking the opportune moment, Thirumal shrewdly made Neesan promise to forfeit
all his boons if any of his lies caused trouble to any Pantaram on earth in the
future. Then, he bought the Chakra from Kaliyan and cursed it as money. The
money asked Thirumal when this curse would leave it, to which Thirumal replied:
"It will leave you when Kali is defeated". The Neesan was thenceforth called
Kalineesan because the Kali Yuga had dawned along with his birth. Along with
him was born an evil force called Kali Mayai (Kali Yuga Maya). The "Kali" here
refers to the evil spirit behind "Kali Yuga" and not "Kali", the Hindu deity).
test Kali Maya engulfed the whole world and consequently, deceit and illusion
began to contaminate the minds of the people. Age-old traditions and
conventions, based on Dharmam, were unduly overthrown. Kalineesan introduced
the discrimination of caste among the people. The powerless people were crushed
with brute might. People, caught in the Kalimayai, began to be inimical towards
one another - men against women, children against parents, and so forth. People
used demonic force to harm one another. Kalimayai captured the king of
Thiruvitankur and began to rule over the people as their king. Thirumal in
Thiruvananthapuram. Thirumal, dwelling at Sri Rangam hitherto, found it
unworthy of his abode because of the misdeeds of the priests there. He shifted
his tent to Thiruvananthapuram. When he reached there, a Pulayar woman saw him
and spread the news to one and all. Hearing of this, Kalineesan constructed a
temple of fine granite at the site where the Pulayar woman spotted Tirumal, and
decorated the temple with gold and pearls. The king instituted scores of
rituals and ceremonies at the temple to be performed by Namboothiri Brahmins.
The lights of the temple were, however, lit daily from a torch brought from the
home of the Pulayar woman. Venneesan. Kalineesan had no children, so he went on
a pilgrimage to Kasi, a holy place, and stood in "tavam" (spiritual suffering)
for a son. While performing the "tavam", he was distracted by the scene of a
cleric embracing a woman. Because of this, Kalineesan's semen came out and fell
into the water. A white crane came and swallowed the semen, became pregnant,
and delivered a baby boy in the water. A sage, Punal Rhishi, took the baby,
which was white in appearance, and looked after it. Kalineesan, his "tavam"
being defective, returned to his country in despair, resigned to a prediction
that even if he were to have a son, it would be only the sons of his sister who
would rule the country. The baby, delivered by the white crane, grew up and
came of age, and was married in the land of Chenkomatti. He prospered there
with his progeny, who later emerged as a powerful people by learning the skills
of ship-travel, trading in gold and silver, and diplomacy. This people, called
Venneesa kulam, propagated a religion of their own, and through the lure of
money gained many new members. Venneesan (the name comes from two words,
"venmai" meaning "white," and "neesan," meaning "wicked person") introduced a
new calendar. Santror in Kali Yuga. Kalineesan, coming to know about the valour
and loyalty of the Santror people, appointed them as his bodyguards. It so
happened that one day, while guarding the entrance of the king’s room, the
body-guards happened to fall asleep, during which time, the enemies of the
king, hailing from the king’s own race, entered the room and assassinated the
king. The Kalineesan, while succumbing to the murderous attack, mistaking it to
be a betrayal by the body-guards, cursed them that they and their progeny would
be oppressed with oozhiyam (coolie service) and regressive taxation as long as
the king’s dynasty ruled the country. The curse of the king began to take
effect on the Santror. The Kalineesan, the successor of the previous king,
imposed innumerable taxes on every article used by the Santror for their day to
day living. Their occupational implements, the palmyra trees that supported
them, and every item of the produce of these trees were punitively taxed. The
produce of the palmyra trees was to be given to the high castes, failing which
the Santror were tortured with corporal punishments. There were many arbitrary
taxes imposed on them. The Santror found no favour with the rules, in spite of
paying these cruel taxes. Thirumal deserting Kalineesan. Having witnessed the
woes of the Santror, Mayon admonished the king to desist from oppressing them.
He reminded the king that it was his seventh birth, coming in the lineage of
the primordial Kroni, and if he failed to repent during this opportunity, then
it would be his eternal damnation. He exhorted him to revoke the cruel taxes
and the exploitative system of uliyam, imposed on the Santror, the people born
of Mayon's seeds. Peeved at the response of Mayon, the king mockingly said: "If
you have not tasted any of my offerings, what then have you to do with me? Go
wherever you want to..." Listening to the impenitent and brute words of the
king, divine rage overcame Mayon and he said: "You have mocked at me and ill-
treated me as you do to the Chanar. Lo, I am going away from your place to
Thiruchendur. I will take on you in another form. Then, I will perform a
Dharmam that you and the world will acknowledge as the greatest. I will destroy
the pervasive demonic cult and crown the Chanar". Having said these things,
Mayon deserted Thiruvananthapuram. He told the people: “Henceforth, let all
castes united as one people, come to the place where I am going to dwell”.
Having said this, he proceeded to Thiruchendur. It happened then that the
fortress of the Kalineesan crashed into pieces. The earth was covered with
darkness of slumber, the sea engulfed the land, and all the palatial buildings
of the king were effaced. Seeing these calamities, the Brahmins lamented and
the priests wailed. Mayon took his abode at the seashore of Thiruchendur.
During this time, the venneesan had spread his wicked rule over the country,
trampling upon the traditions of the land. He flouted the principles of
"Dharma", observed by the Santror and failed to give the dignity due to them.
Incarnational events. Incarnational events include preparations for
incarnation, the event of incarnation, and the proclamations and instructions
given to the newly incarnated god. Since Mayon's incarnation, as Ayya
Vaikundar, is the foremost power, this is considered to be the most important
part in Akilattirattu Ammanai. Below is an elaboration of these events.
Preparing for incarnation. Seeing the degraded status of the Santror, the
celestial gods made a plea to Mayon as follows: “Our young brothers, the
Santror, are suffering endlessly under the yoke of the centuries old oozhiyam
and have lost dignity and respect on account of that. Have you not seen their
iniquities?” After listening to the plea, Mayon prepared for the incarnation.
He made all the celestial gods take birth in the world in order to assist in
destroying the kali. He set out to create new cattle, reptiles, birds, plants,
trees, and all other elements of nature that would befit the new age of Dharma
Yukam because the Dharma Yukam was to be characterised by a new life, new
people, and new thinking. In that new age Shastras, Vedas and all the religions
would be the same; the Tamil language would permeate the world; people would
live united as a single humanity; the people of Mayon would live with pristine
glory and they would flourish with all prosperity; the earth would yield
abundantly; diseases, calamities and the impact of the evil magical practices
would not affect the people; the old Shastras would be turned untrue, and
instead, a new code would be enshrined. Mayon — on the identity of his
people. Mayon then enunciated the attributes of his children who would be his
collaborators in the world. He said: Final admonition through Thiruvasakam.
Before the incarnation of Mayon could take place, the three godheads decided to
send a final admonition with the name of Thiruvasakam to Kalineesan that he
might amend". (see : Thiruvasakam (Ayyavazhi))" Deciding to incarnate as
Vaikundar. Kalineesan did not pay heed to the Thiruvasakam. Mayon then decided
to incarnate as Vaikundar and, to that effect, walked towards the seashore of
Thiruchendur. Meanwhile, in Thamaraiyur, (The alternative name given for the
village Tamaraikulam in Akilattirattu Ammanai the source of Ayyavazhi
mythology) famed to be the right place for undertaking effective tavam, laid
the body of Mayon in Parvatha Ucchi Malai, that he had left behind after his
last incarnation in Dwapara Yukam. It was carrying the soul of
Sampooranathevan, who had been growing into a human person named Muthukutty as
per the divine plan. This person excelled in dharmam, wisdom, piety and
courage. In his seventeenth year, he married a woman and lived a blissful
conjugal life. It so happened that he had been struck by a severe disease in
his twenty-second year and had suffered for a year. In the year 1008 (AD 1833),
his mother had a dream in which Mayon appeared and instructed her to bring his
ailing son to Thiruchendur, where the festival had begun on the 19th day of the
Tamil month of Maci (February/March). Obeying the divine command, the ailing
person was carried to Thiruchendur. On their way, while they were having their
meals at a place near Kudankulam, Mayon, staying at the seashore in
Tiruchendur, commanded two of his celestial sages, Kalai Muni and Gnana Muni,
to fetch "the life that he had designated". They immediately came over, carried
the person (the body of Mayon along with the soul of Sampooranathevan) along
the four streets of Tiruchendur, gave it a bath and purified it from all dirt.
The Soul of Sampooranathevan gets unified into the Ultimate soul (granted
moksha). The incarnation. Mayon then instantly went into the sea, amidst the
chanting of the celestial gods. Inside the sea, enveloping himself in a
scorching flame, he approached Lakshmi who was awaiting his arrival in the form
of a Lotus pedestal. Afraid of the ball of flame approaching her, Lakshmi
worshipped it with reverence. Mayon revealed himself and took Lakshmi and told
her of his intention to create a son. By that time, the body of Mayon too had
come into the sea. Mayon then took the body inside the Lotus pedestal,
transformed it into his son,(the Ultimate Soul was installed into the body) by
and adorned him with sparkling jewels and crown. He then imparted certain
arcane knowledge in the form of proclamations and instructions, known as
Vinchai, to his newly niall son, Vaikundar. "(see: Vinchai to Vaikundar)"
Having given these exhortations, Mayon called his son intimately as Narayana
Vaikundar and told him that if these teachings were observed strictly, the
illusory force of kali would be contained and when people learned to live with
self-respect, Kali would destroy itself. Then the whole array of celestial gods
sang lullabies (See:Thalattu, Palli Unarthal, Abayam.), praising the special
attributes of the newly born child, Vaikundar. They praised him for having been
born as the child of Mayon, in the race of Chanar, in order to teach the virtue
of Dharmam to the world and to incinerate Kali. Vaikundar, having received all
the instructions from his father, walked out of the sea to go into the world.
Mayon sent two celestial sages (Kalai Muni and Gnana Muni) with him as
witnesses to his activities. Post-incarnational events. The various episodes,
that are portrayed to be occurring after the event of incarnation, are called
here as post-incarnational events. Given below is an elaboration of them.
Vaikundar's emergence out of the sea. Vaikundar crossed over to the land from
the sea and showing a bodily appearance to the mother of Muthukutty, told her:
"Woman, you had been my mother before the year 1008 (AD 1833). Now, I have been
born as Vaikundar, the child of Mayon. I have received powers for redeeming the
Santror. I am going to destroy the evilmongers and rule the world under a
single command." Having said this, Vaikundar set out towards Detchanam
(Dakshin, the south). Vaikundar's journey to Detchanam. Vaikundar walked
towards Detchanam, along the sea route. All along his path, the creatures of
the sea and the animals of the forest greeted him, expressing their happiness,
for they were to be freed from the clutches of Kali. Vaikundar, announcing the
glad tidings to everyone, traversed the path towards Manavaippathi
(Puvantantoppu) in Detchanam. The itinerant Vaikundar, reaching the temple of
Pakavathi at Kanyakumari, told her that he, the Narayana Vaikundar, had come to
uplift the lowly by ruling the world under the banner of Dharmam and therefore,
she was to rescind from accepting any sacrifices or offerings. Tavam. Making
himself known to the people as Vaikundar, the great Narayana took his abode
under a tree at the entrance of Manavaippathi. Burning of the demons. Vaikundar
then assembled all the demons in one place. He made some persons in the
gathering, who were accustomed to ‘possession’, to get ‘possessed’ of
the demons in the presence of the people. The demons that had ‘come on to
these persons’ began to tremble with fear and, by making loud cries, bemoaned
their end. Resigned to their fate, they requested Vaikundar to tell them the
modalities to surrender. When the demons asked it themselves, Vaikundar ordered
them to make an oath in front of the people that they had surrendered all their
powers. Accordingly, the demons made a public oath that they had surrendered
all their powers. Then they fled to the mountain and killed themselves by
falling into fire. As this happened, those that were dancing due to the
‘possession’ of the demons got exhausted and fell flat on the grounds. As
the crowd was witnessing all these happenings, a few shepherds, tending their
flock in the mountain, came rushing and reported that they heard the loud cries
of the demons as they were falling in the fire. When the crowd heard these,
they appreciated the way the demons were destroyed and acknowledged that
Vaikundar was really the Narayanar needed for the country. Seizing the power of
magic, witchcraft, sorcery, trickery, etc.. Having destroyed the demons,
Vaikundar thought of incarcerating the powers of Malaiyarasar, the people of
the mountain who performed black magic, witchcraft, sorcery, etc., with the aid
of evil spirits. No sooner had he thought of it than the wild animals, being
released from the clutches of the Malaiyaracar, went berserk and attacked the
people ferociously. Horrified at the behaviour of the animals, the Malaiyaracar
resorted to their usual black magic to contain the animals. But, alas, this
time, their magic did not work. Disappointed and worried, they became panicky
and sought the help of a Kuratti, the village astrologer, to make them known
the cause of these events. Kuratti, hearing their woes, told them that
Vaikundar had incarnated to eradicate the sufferings of all and therefore, they
would do well to meet him to get rid of their woes. Coming to know of
Vaikundar, the Malaiyaracar came to him immediately and pleaded with him to
solve their problems. Vaikundar told them it was time for the destruction of
all the evil forces and therefore, they would do well to surrender the
knowledge of black magic, witchcraft, sorcery, and trickery, the spells used to
bind others, and all types of esoteric charms in their possession. If refused
to comply, they were warned of severe consequences. Hearing the admonition from
Vaikundar, and fearing the consequences of the refusal to surrender, they
agreed to hand over all their powers to him. Since they had not brought with
them the manuscript documents that contained the spells, they vowed in front of
Vaikundar and the people that they would never again resort to these practices.
When they did so, Vaikundar advised and blessed them to take to cultivation as
an alternative profession. When this was done, the celestial Gods wrote it in
the heavenly records that Vaikundar had done away with the evil forces and had
made Dharmam to prosper in the world. Exhortations. Having incinerated the
demons and seized the powers of the Malaiyaracar, Vaikundar exhorted the people
as follows: Listening to these exhortations, people of all castes realised that
kalimayai was being destroyed and Dharmam was established. Vaikundar brought
Dharmam also to the flora and fauna, exhorting them not to hurt or kill each
other, and not to crush the weak, but to live in harmony as one family. People
came as one family and listened to the exhortations of Dharmam given by
Vaikundar. They accepted him in their hearts as the undisputed God and lived
happily. Vaikundar's trial. Listening to this, the king grew weary. He summoned
a seer to know whether the news was true. The seer confirmed it, saying it was
time the great Vishnu incarnated as Vaikundar. The king retorted to the seer
saying: """Even if the great Vishnu wanted to incarnate, would he, leaving
aside the honourable Namboothiri and other Brahmin caste, come into this
untouchable Chanar people? It looks to be a cheating"." Listening to the king,
an elderly person from a shepherd caste, who was in the assembly, advised the
king saying: """If Vishnu wants, he will take birth in any race and in any
form. He may come as a Panan or a Pariyan. So better not to disturb this
person"." The king was infuriated and was not ready to listen to anyone's
counsel. He ordered one of the chiefs of the army to bring Vaikuntar to him.
Accordingly, a squad of soldiers came and surrounded Vaikundar who was sitting
on a cot, performing his tavam. As the troops prepared to seize him, the
Santror, standing near Vaikundar, got enraged and readied to attack the troops.
Sensing trouble, Vaikundar prevented the Santror saying: The army personnel,
then, took hold of Vaikundar, tied him with a rope, and tortured him
ruthlessly. They questioned him with spite: He was then led along the streets
to the king. The wicked people threw stones at him, pulled his long hair and
teased him, calling him demoniac. Some people from the low castes accused him
of bringing disgrace to their race. Vaikundar did not utter a word in response.
He reached Suchindram and was brought in front of the king. The king wanted to
test Vaikundar's powers. He hid a ring in the palm of his hand and asked him to
name it. Vaikundar, being aware of the fact that showing his powers would not
aid his mission in any way but that it would only precipitate matters unduly,
remained reticent. The king, being hurt by his silence, ordered him to be
tortured more. Five kinds of poison were mixed in an arrack and given to him to
drink. Vaikundar drank it as if he were drinking milk and remained unaffected.
Seeing that the poison had not worked, Vaikundar was confined in a stinking
prison, infested with worms and leeches. Vaikundar took upon himself all these
sufferings for the sake of his poor Chanar. Then Vaikundar was led through
Kottar, Chunkankadai, Padmanabhapuram, Balaramapuram, and brought to
Thiruvananthapuram where he was detained in an open prison. While in the
prison, many people came and worshipped him. The Kalineesan did not relent from
torturing Vaikundar. He ordered him to be thrown to a starving tiger. In that,
Ayya Vaikundar proves to the world, his Power (see Katuvai Sothanai). After
that event, a person known as Poovandar went up to the king, and testifying to
the genuineness of Vaikundar, pleaded for his release. The king, considering
the request, wanted Vaikundar to sign a document as a condition for the
release. The condition was that he would not any more gather the different
castes, except his own, into one place. Vaikundar tore the piece of material
that contained the condition into pieces and threw it on to the ground.
However, the king did not wish to retain him in the prison anymore. Vaikundar
chose the nineteenth of the Tamil month Masi (February/March) to be the day of
his release. His devotees, the Santror, carried him on a cradle through
Balaramapuram, Parvathipuram, Kottar, Suchindram and reached back to
Thamaraippathi. Thuvayal Thavasu. Back in Tamaraipathi, Vaikundar continued
according to the instructions of his Father. He instructed the people to
undertake a tavam called thuvayal thavam ("thuvay" means "to wash") which was
also called Thuvayal Thavasu, an act of ritual washing of one's physique and
clothes along with practice of and self-restraint. Marriage with the Seven
Virgins. Even as Vaikundar was continuing to instruct and serve the people, he
intended to marry the seven virgins. He made some people of Chanar, young and
old, male and female, get into a trance and dance. He made some of them narrate
the accounts of the world, and of the story of the seven virgins carrying the
seeds of Mayon and delivering the seven sons of the Chanar. Vaikundar then,
putting on the appearance of Narayana, made the Santror, who stood around him,
to walk in the four directions and call out to their mothers, the Seven
Virgins. The seven divine mothers, listening to the call of their sons, came
out and paid respect to Vaikundar who had come to marry them and give them back
their children as it was promised to them in their previous birth. Once the
divine mothers came, after confirming their desire to get married and to get
back their children, Vaikundar announced to the world the news of the marriage
of the Seven Virgins with Vaikundar. Vaikundar then asked the Santror what they
would give as gift to the bridegroom. (see: Thirukkalyana Ekanai). The Santror,
the kith and kin of the brides, answered that all their wealth, even their very
lives could be given as gift to him. Vaikundar then requested the Santror to
take and give the hands of the seven virgins to him in marriage. When they did
it ceremoniously, Vaikundar placed a glittering golden chain around the necks
of the seven divine women. The celestial saints then praised the special
attributes of the marriage partners, and the race in which they hailed from.
Then, singing the praises of Narayana and praying that he might fulfil his
mission of ushering in the Dharma Yukam, the brides and the bridegroom
circumambulated the ‘Pathi’ in their ceremonial attire. The supplications
of the brides were that Vaikundar should destroy the evil age, usher in the age
of Dharma, and make his people rule the Dharma Yukam . When the marriage had
taken place as per the earlier promise, the Santror realised that all the
curses incurred by them had been erased and there was no curse anymore on their
race. People came from all directions to pay homage to Vaikundar and presented
him with various gifts. Festivals and celebrations. Vaikundar thought of
organising festivals and celebrations with the people who garnered around him.
He fixed Sunday, the day of his birth in the sea, to be the day in every week
for celebrations. People gathered there on every Sunday, bringing him gifts.
They decorated the vicinity with flowers and festoons. Amidst crackers of
fireworks and music of joy, the seven virgins, dressing themselves in saffron
and sporting the Namam (sacred symbol on the forehead), came in grand
procession on the streets alone with Vaikundar. Ayya Vaikundar, as a Pantaram,
had donned himself in squalid rags, smeared the white mark on the body, tied a
turf on his hair, and carried a cane. Besides his disciples, a large number of
Santror came in procession along with him. Those who had participated in the
thuvayal thavam also accompanied him by chanting the prayer, “Siva Siva”
Those men and women, that were ‘taken hold of by divine power’, sang the
praises of Narayaya and accompanied the procession. During the procession,
Vaikundar was carried in a golden cradle. A conch shell was blown, womenfolk
made kuravai, and the celestial gods were showering flowers from above. People
held these festivals in high esteem. Vaikundar as the Reigning King. Vaikundar,
being instructed through a dream that occurred to one of his followers, came to
Moolakuntappati (Ambalappathi) with his kith and kin. Here he enthroned himself
like a reigning king on a grand seat in a mansion built with pearls, designed
with a pedestal for conducting the Ukattheerppu (the judgment). He vested
himself in white silk, wore a golden cap on the head, and arbitrated for the
people. People celebrated his presence there. Marriage with the Deities.
Vaikundar then decided to marry deities such as Pakavathi (Bhagavati), Valli,
Theivanai, Mantaikattal, Lakshmi, Parvathi and Poomadanthai. He took on
different forms and told the deities that they were to be united with him in
order to destroy Kali Yukam and establish the Dharma Yukam. Then, compelling
each deity to seduce a woman in the gathering, he married them in a grand
manner. Vaikundar, having married these deities, continued his activities among
his people. People flocked to him in large numbers. They were pleased to invite
him to their houses. They took him in chariots, arranged grand feasts in his
honour, and presented him with very valuable gifts. Vaikundar laid the
foundation for Nizhal Thangals in some villages that he visited. Ascending to
Vaikundam, the abode of Thirumal. Having accomplished whatever he intended
doing, Vaikundar thought of attaining Vaikundam, i.e., leaving this world and
going to the world of Vaikundam. He prayed to Thirumal to take him back as he
had accomplished his mission. Thirumal, too, had thought of calling his son
back, and so he commanded his sages to decorate the house for his son in
Vaikundam. Vaikundar then began contemplating on Vaikundam alone. As he was
preparing, he instructed his Santror not to be afraid, and to live united in
love. He gave them a white mark on their forehead. Then he began his journey to
Vaikundam on 1126, Itabam 21, at noon. As he reached Vaikundam, Thirumal and
Isvaran received him warmly. The Devas praised him for his singular,
unsurpassable achievement of the tavam that he had undertaken for the sake of
destroying the Kali. When he was received in the celestial abode, his women and
children on earth interned his golden body, erected a temple and conducted
celebrations regularly. Dharma Yukam final victory. In Vaikundam, Thirumal
asked his son whether he had fulfilled, without any flaw, all that had been
told to him earlier. Vaikundar, in response, told him about the six-year tavam
and other activities. The sages who had been sent to accompany him vouched for
the flawlessness of the tavam he undertook. Being satisfied at the performance
of Vaikundar, Thirumal and Isvaran crowned him gloriously, gave him a sceptre
and other divine paraphernalia, and seated him on the throne. While on the
throne in Vaikundam, he was worshipped by his people on earth. All those who
stood by him and served him when he undertook the tavam were granted happiness
on earth, besides the assurance of a life with him in Vaikundam. Those
Neesakulam that opposed and tortured him were condemned to hell. Once Vaikundar
was crowned as the king, everything belonging to Dharma Yukam appeared as per
the wish of Vaikundar. People worthy of Dharma Yukam, including his children
and women, appeared instantly. A whole lot of new creatures, animals, plants
and trees appeared. A new earth, new moon, new sky, new wind, etc. emerged. The
wicked people disappeared and the people, worthy of Dharma Yukam, appeared. All
those living beings, that had been ordered to come up at the coronation of
Vaikundar, awoke to the new age. All those unworthy of Dharma Yukam were
engulfed by the sea. Then, Thirumal brought up the life of Kroni for judgment.
Kalineesan, then, without having anything to say, surrendered all his powers
and boons. The force of illusion took hold of him and put him into the flames
of the abyss where the devils resided. All the evil forces of the kalimayai
were also destroyed likewise. And then, Vaikundar blew a conch shell to
announce his victory. Hearing the sound of the conch-shell, all that befitted
Dharma Yukam - the virtues, the Sastirankal, the plants and trees, the reptiles
and the birds, the divine women and their children - all gathered around
Vaikundar. He gave them blessings, and instructed them to live fearlessly. He
enjoined upon them to assemble in one place, to drink from the same well, and
live happily as per the values of Dharma Yukam.
