Ayyavazhi Ayyavazhi (Tamil:‡ÆÖ‡ÆØ‡Øç‡ÆØ‡Ææ‡Æµ‡Æ¥‡Æø Malayalam:
‡¥Ö‡¥Ø‡µç‡¥Ø‡¥æ‡¥µ‡¥¥‡¥ø "Ayyavali," -""Path of the father"") is a dharmic
belief system that originated in South India . It is cited as an independent
monistic religion by several newspapers, government reports and academic
researchers. In Indian censuses, however, the majority of its followers declare
themselves as Hindus. Therefore, Ayyavazhi is also considered a Hindu sect.
Ayyavazhi is centered on the life and preachings of Ayya Vaikundar; its ideas
and philosophy are based on the holy texts "Akilattirattu Ammanai" and "Arul
Nool". Accordingly, Vaikundar was the Purna avatar of Narayana. Ayyavazhi
shares many ideas with Hinduism in its mythology and practice, but differs
considerably in its concepts of good and evil and dharma. Ayyavazhi is
classified as a dharmic belief because of its central focus on dharma.
Ayyavazhi first came to public attention in the 19th century as a Hindu sect.
Vaikundar's activities and the growing number of followers caused a reformation
and revolution in 19th century Travancorean and Tamil society, surprising the
feudal social system of South India. It also triggers a number of reform
movements including those of Narayana Guru, Vallalar etc. Though Ayyavazhi
followers are spread across India, they are primarily present in South India,
especially concentrated in Tamil Nadu and Kerala. The number of practitioners
is estimated to be between 700,000 and 8,000,000, although the exact number is
unknown, since Ayyavazhis are reported as Hindus during censuses.The university
paper cited says Ayyavazhi as a Hindu sect; So on this account Ayyavazhi is
considered as a Hindu sect and since data on sub-sects are not pinned-up with
census reports, exact estimation for the number of Ayyavazhis are not there.
Etymology and history. "Ayya" in Tamil means 'Father' and "vazhi", 'the
pathway' ; The simple derivative in the sense is " 'The Pathway of (or) towards
Father' ". Apart, due to the diverse synonymous versions for the phrase in
Tamil, it also leads to various other theories. Ayyavazhi began to be noticed
initially by the large number of people gathering to worship Vaikundar (known
historically as "Mudisoodum Perumal") (1809 CE¬ ‚Äì 1851 CE) at
Poovandanthoppe. The Thuvayal thavasu (washing penance) of 1840 is the origin
of Ayyavazhi as an alternative religio-cultural phenomena. The majority of its
participants were from marginalised and poor sections of society. They began to
function as a distinct and autonomous society, and gradually, they identified
their path with the phrase 'Ayya vazhi'. Although the majority of these
followers were from the Chanar cast, a large number of people from other castes
also followed it. Ayyavazhi's rapid growth throughout its first century of
existence was noted by Christian missionary reports from the mid-19th century.
By the middle of 19th century, Ayyavazhi had come to be recognised as a
separate religion with deep roots in the regions of South Travancore and South
Tirunelveli. The numbers of faithful increased significantly from the 1840s. By
the close of the 19th century, Swamithope was considered the religio-cultural
epi-center of Ayyavazhi. After the time of Vaikundar, Ayyavazhi was spread
through his teachings. The five Seedars, disciples of Vaikundar and their
descendants, traveled to several parts of the country bearing the mission of
Ayyavazhi. Meanwhile, the Payyan dynasty started administrating the Swamithoppe
pathi, while other Pathis came under the administration of the followers of
Ayya. Following the instructions of Akilattirattu Ammanai (Akilam), the Nizhal
Thangals (small pagodas) have been established across the country for worship
and the study of scripture. Arul Nool, the first Ayyavazhi work in print was
released in 1927, followed by the Akilam in 1933, almost a century after it had
been written down. As a result, Ayyavazhi abandoned active oral traditions in
favor of literary scriptures. Ayyavazhi headquarter reports that Ayyavazhi
spread more rapidly after Indian Independence (1940s) and still more rapidly
through the 1990s. Many Ayyavazhi-based social welfare organisations were
established in the late 20th century. Several alternative versions of Akilam,
including some controversial versions, were released during the same period.
The Anbukkodimakkal Thirucchabai, a democratic bureau, was established by the
religious headquarters in the early 1990s to organize and govern the religion.
Organisational conferences are held in various cities in South India including
Mumbai, Chennai and Thiruvananthapuram. Considering the growth of Ayyavazhi,
Ayya Vaikunda Avataram, the day of Vaikundar's incarnation, was declared a
holiday by the state administration for the district of Kanyakumari in 1994,
followed by the districts of Tirunelveli and Tuticorin in 2006. From this year
(2012 C.E) Vaikunda Avataram was declared a restricted holiday for the entire
Tamil Nadu state. Currently, Bala Prajapathi Adikalar, heir to the Payyan
dynasty, is considered the leader of Ayyavazhi. Scriptures and holy places. The
holy books of Ayyavazhi are the Akilattirattu Ammanai (commonly referred to as
"Akilam") and the Arul Nool, and they are the source of the religion's
mythology. The "Akilattirattu Ammanai" was written by Hari Gopalan Seedar in
1841, as if hearing the contents of Akilam told by Narayana to his consort
Lakshmi. In addition to the mythological events Akilam also provides an
extensive quantity of historical facts, especially that of mid and late 2nd
millennium CE. While the original text is damaged, the daughter versions such
as the "Swamithope" version, the "Kottangadu" version as well as the
"Panchalankurichi" versions, are the earliest existing palm-leaf versions of
Akilam. Other released versions includes the Sentrathisai Ventraperumal, the
Kalai Ilakkiya Peravai, the Vivekanandan, the highly criticised VTV and the
earliest and commonly accepted Palaramachandran version. Akilam contains more
than 15,000 verses in seventeen sections. It is written in poetic Tamil in a
ballad form, and is composed with a unique literal-style with two sub-genres,
"Viruttam" and "Natai" throughout. The secondary scripture, Arul Nool, includes
various books that are believed to be written by Arulalarkal (one possessed by
divine power). It contains prayers, hymns and instructions for the way of
worship in Ayyavazhi, as well as rituals prophesy and many acts. It also
contains many events found in the Akilam pertaining to the life of Vaikundar.
Unlike Akilam, there is no definitive history for Arul Nool. All these texts
are compiled in Tamil language. To the Ayyavazhi devotees, there are seven holy
places, called Pathis, with the Pancha pathis being the most important. The
temple of the Swamithope pathi is the headquarters of the Ayyavazhi. 1. the
Swamithope Pathi, the venue of the great Tavam and the religion's headquarters.
2. Ambala Pathi, where Vaikundar joined six of the Seven Deities unto himself.
3. Mutta Pathi, the venue of the Second and Third Vinchais. 4. Thamaraikulam
Pathi, where the Akilattirattu Ammanai was written down. 5. Poo Pathi, where
Ayya unified the Earth goddess Poomadanthai to himself by symbolic marriage.
Vakaippathi, though not included in the Pancha pathis by the headquarters, is
still considered as a Pathi but with lesser importance. There is disagreement
among followers of Ayyavazhi regarding the holiness of some other Pathis, such
as Vaikunda Pathi and Avathara Pathi. The list of Pathis announced by the
headquarters of Ayyavazhi does not include these Pathis. Symbolism. The symbol
of Ayyavazhi is a lotus carrying a flame-shaped white "Namam". The lotus
represents the 1,008-petalled "Sahasrara" (in Tamil, "Ladam"), while the Namam
represents the "Aanma Jyothi" or "atman". Both of the Ayyavazhi scriptures
refer to Thirunamam (the "flame shaped symbol" present in the top of the Lotus
in the Ayyavazhi symbol), but not to the lotus directly. The symbol is the
ideological summary of Akilam-based philosophy. This symbol has been in use
since the mid-20th century. The mythical narration in akilam about the eight
yugas is often viewed philosophically as a reference to eight chakras. The
first Neetiya Yukam, is Bindu and the final state, Dharma Yukam, is Sahasrara,
or absolute bliss. In this series, the energy of consciousness (Namam) of
oneself is invoked, rising from Bindu (Neetiya Yukam) to the final Sahasrara
(Dharma Yukam). This lotus, the highest spiritual center of enlightenment is
for experiencing the absolute "bliss". The reigning power in the final Dharma
Yukam (Sahasrara) is Ekam, which is a part of Vaikundar a Trinity conception,
or a manifestation of the supreme absolute. Thus Ayyavazhi's symbol is derived
from Akilam. The symbol, "Lotus with Thirunamam", shows "Vaikundar's
experienced in Sahasrara." In certain Hindu texts the Sahasrara chakra has 1000
petals. But in Ayyavazhi symbolism, Saharara has 1008 petals. In Ayyavazhi,
there is no scriptural authority indicating the importance of 1000, but the
number 1008 is commonly mentioned. Also, the incarnation year of Vaikundar is
1008 M.E. (Malayalam Era). Backing these scriptural identities, the 1008-petal
lotus is followed in Ayyavazhi symbolism. "Sahasrara" is symbolised as a lotus
without a stem. Ayyavazhi architecture was developed in constructing Nizhal
Thangals, where the inverted lotus flower of "Sahasrara" is used to cover the
roof. The lotus may also represent the heart and the flame shape (Thirunamam),
the divinity. Ayyavazhi has used other symbols including Vaishnavite ' "Triple
Namam" '(not used currently), and Conch. Teachings and impact. The majority of
Ayyavazhi's key teachings can be found in the book Akilattirattu Ammanai and
other teachings are collated from various books written by unknown authors,
whose works feature in the Arul Nool. Like Dharma, the other teachings of
Ayyavazhi are twofold, sociological and mystical. The mystical teachings are
devoted to revealing divine knowledge, while social teachings are primarily
concerned with eliminating inequality and discrimination in society. The
teachings encourage a positive relationship with God, as opposed to one based
on fear. Followers are encouraged to refer to God as "Ayya", "dear father", to
strengthen their intimacy and affection towards God. Ayyavazhi mystics focus on
supreme oneness. Among its variations, the theology always maintains this focus
on oneness. The evil of Kali blocks the ultimate or supreme oneness prevailing
between individual souls and the universe, creating among them a false sense of
individuality and of extreme pride. This erroneous view causes the apparent
sense of separation from the oneness and motivates against it. Ekam‚Äîthe
"over-soul" or the supreme soul‚Äîis identified as the whole of existence,
changeless in nature and ubiquity. This is "one which undergoes different
changes with respect to space and time" because of the evil force maya. All of
creation evolved from this Ekam, the supreme consciousness. All the qualities
of Ekam are within each soul, and evolve from it. Each and every individual
soul is a reflection or mirror of the absolute Supreme, Ekam, which provides
the textual basis and metaphor for the mirror's role in Ayyavazhi worship.
Human and all other souls are restricted and limited by the evil of Kali. This
is why individual souls are not able to attain supreme bliss, and so are
secondary to Ekam. Once a soul overcomes the influence of maya, it becomes one
with Ekam. Its individuality is gone, and thereby it is Ekam. On the other
hand, this supreme consciousness is personified as Paramatma (over-soul) by
which, God is the "Husband", while all other souls are his "consorts",
symbolised by Thirukkalyana Ekanai, where Vaikundar marries the individual
souls. Also, the Ayyavazhi philosophy applies a common formula for the creation
of human beings and the rest of the universe. Thus whatever exists externally
to human beings exists also internally. Ayyavazhi clearly and explicitly
condemns the caste based inequalities in its social teachings. It heavily
criticises the caste discrimination rather than the 'Caste system' itself. From
its inception, Ayyavazhi has also served as an engine of social reform,
particularly in the area of Travancore, which was previously noted for its
unusually strong caste system. In this contest, the mingling of castes in
Ayyavazhi centers was a vital element in the transformation of society. Ayya
Vaikundar was the first to succeed as a social reformer in launching political
struggle, social renaissance as well as religious reformation in the country.
Vaikundar was the pioneer of the social revolutionaries of Tamil Nadu and
Kerala. He was also said to be the forerunner of all social reformers of India.
Akilam displayed sympathy for the laboring classes, and opposed to the often
excessive taxes they were forced to pay. From the beginning the followers,
fortified by the teachings, have also taken a strong stand against political
oppression. This is most clearly seen in Akilam, where the Thiruvithkanur king
is identified as Kalineesan, (one who is a captive of Kali) and the British are
identified as Venneesan (the white neesan) in the social sense. Ayyavazhi was
in the forefront of movements for Human Rights and Social Equality. Ayyavazhi
also effected many social changes in southern India, resulting in the emergence
of a series of social and self-respect movements such as "Upper cloth
agitation", Temple entry agitation and other movements including those of
Narayana Guru, Chattampi Swamikal, Vallalar and Ayyankali. Worship centers. The
followers of Ayyavazhi established "Pathis" and "Nizhal Thangals", which are
centers of worship and religious learning in various parts of the country. They
serve as centres for propagation of the beliefs and practices of Ayyavazhi.
There are thousands of "Nizhal Thangals" throughout India, mostly in South
India. A research paper approved by Madurai Kamaraj University reports more
than 8000 worship centres in Tamil Nadu and Kerala alone. Reports from the
London Missionary Society (LMS) of the mid-19th century also speak of "Nizhal
Thangals". Since Ayyavazhi is not centrally organised, "Swamithope pathi"
serves as the religious headquarters for all. The "Pathi"s earn more importance
among the worship centers. The seven "Pathi"s, obtain their significance from
the fact that Vaikundar and his activities were historically associated with
these centers of worship. The "Swamithope pathi", though considered the
religion's headquarters, does not officially control the rest of the religious
centers. All "Pathis", except itself, are managed by independent committees.
The five "Pathis" known as Pancha pathi are considered foremost among Pathis.
Nizhal Thangals, compared with "Pathis", are simple small structures built for
worship and for learning the teachings of Vaikundar. They also served as
centers of school education during the early days. Food and shelter are offered
to the needy in these centres. Some of them were established when Vaikundar was
alive. Among them Arul Nool, specifies seven Thangals, and these are considered
primary over the others. Today, charity is one of the main activities conducted
in these centers. These centers emerged as the abode of Dharma. The Nizhal
Thangals form an important institution in the socio-religious life of the
people of Ayyavazhi. Panividai may be conducted up to three times daily, but
all worship centers provide Panividai at least once daily. Ethics. The ethics
of Ayyavazhi, integrated with the meta-narrative mythology, are found
throughout the primary scripture, "Akilattirattu Ammanai". Regarding ethics,
Arul Nool is an accumulation of the core concepts found in Akilam. In Akilam,
the ethical abstracts are pointed out as "told by God" at several places at
different situations to lesser god-heads, devas, saints, etc. when ever asked
by them. Neetham is the primary virtue of Ayyavazhi. This shows how society,
its people, the ruling king, etc., lived in absolute harmony with nature,
placing the power of Almighty in all their works, deeds and activities during
early ages. In return, nature and the divine beings protect the society which
follows the Neetham. Chastity and life in ultimate union with nature form the
central theme, an ethical form that is to be followed. As in Akilam, Vinchai is
the rules and regulations provided by God (Narayana) to Vaikundar. There are
three such Vinchais. Acts found there also fit to humans to improve their moral
code. The first "Vinchai of Tiruchendur" forms the largest ethical accumulation
found in Akilam. To an extent, the Dharmic teachings in Ayyavazhi are also
considered as ethics. Charity in social ethics and "attempting to realise the
ultimate truth of oneness" in spirituality are the ethical codes under the
banner of Ayyavazhi dharma. Akilam also gives separate ethics for Devas also.
It is notable that the Ayyavazhi ethics undergo a vast deviation from the
incarnation of Vaikundar since a universal change took place then. Over all, as
the foremost ethical code, people are advocated to overcome the evil force
kalimayai with the weapons of love, forbearance and peace, since Kaliyan as
maya rules the minds of people. Arul Nool constitutes the major role in forming
the rules and regulations of Ayyavazhi, including ethics. It gives separately
the social as well as divine ethics. The Sivakanda Athikara Pathiram here is
the section especially dedicated to teach the ethics. The rituals, especially
circumambulations, are to be followed to wash-out the sin committed related to
immoral thinking. Religious studies. It is difficult to give a clear-cut
listing to Ayyavazhi concepts because of the relation the Ayyavazhi scriptures
maintains with the Hindu scriptures. Akilam primarily says the central themes
of the existing scriptures (that of Hindu) had gone awry by the advent of
Vaikundar. It also narrates that Akilam was given to mankind as an alternative
because Kaliyan destroyed the original Vedas and Shastras, and at the beginning
of Kali Yuga, several additions were given to the previous scriptures by him.
Both of these view points give the views of Akilam on Hindu scriptures, and
place them as reasons for rejecting them. The philosophy, terms and mythology
of the Ayyavazhi scriptures are the basis of religious study on Ayyavazhi
theology. But several terms quoted in Akilam couldn't be understood wholly
unless by referring to the descriptive details of those terms in Hindu
scriptures. For example, if the 96 tatvas are understood, then the Kaliyan is
understood. Therefore theologians and philosophers today turn to Hindu
scriptures to further their understanding of the tatvas as properties of the
human body, which are not elaborated upon in Akilam. However, to understand
Akilam and its philosophy, one should have a basic knowledge over the Hindu
ideas and concepts. Since Akilam have no different view in this matter from
Hindu scriptures, it was left to be gathered from there. On mythical studies,
Akilam covers almost the entire main mythology of Hinduism, including
Mahabharata, Ramayana, Kantha Purana and Vishnu Purana, but with limited
details. It includes only the main events that are directly linked to the main-
stream story flow. But to undergo a detailed study on each, the appropriate
Hindu scriptures that include those events in detail need to be referred.
Akilam provides all these collectively in brief with an overall story line,
which make it unique. Many philosophical concepts from Hinduism are found in
Akilam; some of them are completely accepted, some are regenerated, while
others are rejected. Generally it was considered that once a particular concept
is not found well-described in Ayyavazhi scriptures, such as Akilattirattu
Ammanai or Arul Nool (as detail as in Hindu scriptures), and instead simply was
quoted, then that particular conception is accepted as in Hindu scriptures for
religious studies. But once Akilam has different views over something from that
of the existing (Hindu) scriptures, then it would be found deeply described in
Akilam itself and hence no need for referring other scriptures. God. The
theology of Ayyavazhi differs considerably from other monistic religions. It
speaks of Ekam, the Oneness from which all that exists formed, and also an
ultimate oneness that exists behind all differences. The Ekam, which is
articulated as the supreme divine power itself, is supposed to remain
unaffected by maya deep inside every changeable matters as an absolute
constant. In theological terms, God is, in the highest sense, formless,
infinite, genderless and beyond time and space. The term Ekam in Tamil language
give simply the meanings, "one", "absolute", "the whole which exists" and "the
incomparable"; all give some sort of direct monistic definition about God from
Ayyavazhi theology. Narrating through mythology, The "Sivam" and the "Sakthi"
are the first to get evolved from Ekam. The "Natham"(voice), Trimurthi, other
lesser gods and the entire universe further evolved. The Trimurthi are greater
among the personified Devas. Siva, one among the Trimurthi, was the supreme
power until Kali Yuga. Vishnu is the supreme from the advent of Kali Yuga.
Then, from the incarnation of Vaikundar, again the powers of all god-heads,
including that of Vishnu, is transformed to Vaikundar. Ekam, the supreme
oneness as one among the Trinity takes a place within Vaikundar for the present
age. Therefore, Vaikundar is said to be the only worshippable and supreme
power. However, a quote from Akilam thirteen says this supreme oneness (Ekam)
itself is created by Vaikundar, who is a personified God. In this regard,
Ayyavazhi being centered on Vaikundar, is more monotheistic rather than
monistic. No other god-heads, even the Father of Vaikundar, Narayana, have
gained an equal or greater status than Vaikundar. Vaikundar is a turine power
who includes the qualities of the Santror, Narayana and Ekam within himself. In
Ayyavazhi mythology, Kroni, a primordial evil manifestation, was fragmented
into six and each fragments took birth and plays an anti-Vishnu roles
throughout the successive six yugas. He was finally destroyed by a final
judgment which is followed by the god-ruled Dharma Yukam. This narration gives
some dualistic dimension to Ayyavazhi theology. But since the focus of Arul
Nool, the accumulation of Ayyavazhi teachings is extremely monistic and since
the final fragment of Kroni itself is called "Kalimayai" (a conception rather
than a physical or material incarnation), it was commonly accepted that the
'Maya' is symbolised in such a way that contrasts the dualistic view on
Ayyavazhi. Apart from all these, there are also separate quotes in Ayyavazhi
scriptures which give pantheistic and panentheistic definition to Ayyavazhi
theology. Festivals and rituals. There are two yearly festivals for Ayyavazhi.
The Ayya Vaikunda Avataram is celebrated on the twentieth day of the Tamil
month "Masi" (March ‚Äì April). This is the only Ayyavazhi festival to be
celebrated as per the Solar calendar. The mass procession conducted on this day
from Nagercoil to Swamithoppe is a popular one in this part of the country. The
Thiru Edu-Vasippu is a festival of seventeen days celebrated in the Tamil month
of Karthigai (November‚ÄìDecember). This celebration of textual reciting as a
festival itself is a unique feature to Ayyavazhi. Apart from this, there is a
tri-yearly celebration of Kodiyettru Thirunal in Swamithope. Another unique
feature is the celebration of every day as a festival in Swamithope,(exclusive
to Swamithope) called as " 'Nitham Thirunal' ". In addition to the
philosophical concepts and mythology, the rituals of Ayyavazhi evolved in their
own way. Most of the rituals have different operational and historical
meanings. Historically, the rituals were used or viewed as an attempt to break
the caste-based inequalities prevailed in the society of the time, and to
strengthen and uplift the sociologically downtrodden and ill-treated. Examples
of this include the charity on food as " 'Anna Dharmam' ", physical as well as
spiritual cleanliness through Thuvayal Thavasu, eliminating untouchability
through Thottunamam, self-respect and courage through headgear, and unifying
various castes through Muthirikkinaru. But they too reveal, however, high
philosophical ideas preached in a ritual language. The Muthirikkinaru and
Thirunamam are treated religiously as if the "Patham" and "Namam" of them have
the power to heal all sorts of mental as well as physical illness. Thuvayal
thavasu is suggested as a training to reach the ultimate aim of Dharma Yukam.
The use of the crown reveals that "all are kings", visualising an ideology
similar to "advaita". Also, Ayyavazhi scriptures succeeded very much in helping
to understand these philosophical ideas to the common mass which is very much
unusual. The individual rituals, the ecstatic religiosity and the ritual
healing, which are the features of Ayyavazhi worship, contributed to the
formation of an idea of emancipation and a social discourse. Rituals attempt to
uplift and treat the disenfranchised. Another important thing to be noted is
the alternative phrases religiously used in Ayyavazhi universe different from
Hinduism, to represent certain practices. Inclusiveness and exclusivity. The
formula of inclusiveness and exclusivity, as applied in the religio-cultural
universe of Ayyavazhi, is unique because both the theories are mixed up in
Ayyavazhi scriptures. The inclusive theory accepts the views of different
religions for a certain period of time, and from then onwards exclusively
rejects all of them in its narrative. Ayyavazhi accepts different god-heads of
several religions, like the concept of Allah and almost all the god-heads of
Hinduism. It also says that the one and the same God incarnates in different
parts of the world at different time for rescuing the people from sufferings.
But due to the advent of Kaliyan and because of the cruel nature of his boons,
for the first time, the supreme power Ekam incarnates in the world as
Vaikundar, and so all the lesser god-heads and previous scriptures had lost
their substances. So after the time of the Vaikunda Avatar, Vaikundar was said
to be the only worshippable God and hence, the theology of Ayyavazhi was
channeled towards exclusivism. The manner in which Akilam treats the scriptures
of different religions is complicated. For instance, while there is no direct
reference to the terms 'Christ' or 'Bible' anywhere in any of the Ayyavazhi
texts, there is an indirect reference in Akilam thirteen which is supposed to
be an implication that Christ was an incarnation of Narayana, but it was widely
thought that it did not recognise the Bible composition. It seems the view of
Akilam on Bible is "it was created with the intention of man and not that of
God". In common, creation of religions and shaping individualities for them are
heavily criticised. The concepts 'God' and 'Religion' are kept poles apart in
Akilam, and it seems to maintain an ideology something like " 'Accept God;
Reject religion' ". Ayyavazhi accepts various incarnations in Hinduism, but
necessarily rejects the so-called ' "Hindu" ' scriptures. It initially accepts
Vedas. Later since Kaliyan had bought the Vedas as boon they too lost their
substance by the advent of Kaliyan, and so had gone invalid. It also says that
he (Kaliyan) had performed several additions and had hidden some of their
content. And hence God incarnated as Vaikundar. So for the present age, Akilam
is said to be the only " 'Book of Perfection' ". By this Ayyavazhi rejects all
other scriptures and follows only its own. Akilam highly condemns the creation
of religions especially exclusivistic religious and theological ideas. It shows
them as the foremost "Kali mayai" (evil of Kali). The scriptures teach sensibly
and symbolically that God and his activities are beyond the reach of religions.
It also preaches about universal oneness. Mythology. The mythology of Ayyavazhi
narrates that the essence of this vision is an account of a history ‚Äì a past,
a present and a future ‚Äì meant by weaving together of empirical facts,
historical events as well as mythical accounts. It moves around three axiomatic
typologies, namely Santror, Kali Yukam and Dharma Yukam, placing their base on
the concepts and events of previous yugas that are associated also with Hindu
mythology. The basic concepts give a symbolic vision which is at once religious
and social. It is closely linked to that of Hinduism. Akilam talks about the
previous yugas and the evolution of Kroni through them. Events, mythical
characters, and concepts are shared with Hinduism, though they may be
engendered in different form. The number of Yugas and Avatars differs in
Ayyavazhi from Hinduism. The personification of the entity of Evil for the
current yuga, Kaliyan, is unique to Ayyavazhi. Akilam says that the true
concepts were destroyed, so that all previous scriptures had lost their
substances due to the advent of Kali. The book also speaks of God incarnating
in the world in the Kali Yukam (the present age) to destroy the evil spirit,
the final and the most serious manifestation of Kroni. God incarnates as
Vaikundar, and since Vaikundar lived recently, he was well known in history. So
in the second part of the mythology many mythical as well as historical facts
were woven together. Most of the events such as Muthirikkinaru, Wearing of
Headgear during worship, Thuvayal Thavasu all were noted in history. Though
there are quotes in Arul Nool to accredit the ten Avatars of Vishnu, it seems
that they are not seen in equal status with these incarnations "(as in the
table)". It was considered secondary to the primary avatars, who are associated
with the destructions of the fragments of Kroni. This view is not inconsistent
with Hinduism, as only Narasimha, Rama and Krishna are considered the primary
avatars who are still worshipped. The other avatars are considered secondary
avatars who are not worshipped. Santror and Dharma yukam. The Santror is the
subject of the religious vision of Ayyavazhi. There is both a religious and a
social category in its connotation. In the social sense, it is believed that
the term Santror fits rightly to the early "Chanars", who were called by the
Arabs as "Al Hind", and known in biblical times as the "People of Five Rivers";
they are now scattered with more than 250 branches throughout the world. But in
turn, in ideological sense and from the literary meaning of the term "Santror"
in Tamil, it represents one who is noble and lives with dignity and supreme
knowledge, giving an inclusive character and universal reach. Historians
account that in ancient dravidian cultures, zealous devotees of God were called
as 'Chanars'. A quote from Akilam too reads, "Chanars (Santror) are those who
have the ability to see 'the invisible' constantly." The Santror are given a
historical background in Ayyavazhi mythology as seven boys who were made to
born in the mythical garden Ayodha Amirtha Vanam "(supposed to be between
present-day Srirangam, Tamil Nadu and Triconamalee, Srilanka)" by using the
seven seeds from seven upper worlds, by Thirumal, to the seven virgins.
Theologians interpret that these 'Seven boys' refer to the ancestors of the
whole human race, and hence the term "Santror" refers to the entire human race.
Their lineage started at the end phase of Dvapara Yukam and continued through
the Kali Yukam into the Dharma Yukam. It is believed that Kali is being
destroyed continuously by the activities of the Santror in the Path of
Vaikundar, and so the Dharma Yukam unfolds eventually. In this sense they have
a considerable roll in the destruction of Kali, the foremost evil. The
Ayyavazhi proposes an emancipatory utopia under the banner of Dharma Yukam. The
basis of the belief is that Ayya Vaikundar had come to establish and rule as
the everlasting king over the Dharma Yukam in the place of Kali Yukam after
sentencing Kroni to hell by a final judgment from the Lion-throne of "Dwaraka
pathi", the rising mythical landmass (which was sunken at the end of Dwapara
Yuga by Krishna) located south east of present-day Kanyakumari. The Dharma
Yukam is narrated as beyond the limits of time and space. It is often related
to Moksha‚Äîthe personal liberation, and to the state of 'Oneness' too.
Relation with Hinduism. The Hindu and Ayyavazhi ideologies are closely tied to
each other. The place where Ayyavazhi and Hinduism depart from each other is at
the advent of Kali Yuga. Akilam says that until Kali Yuga, the Vedas and all
other Hindu scriptures remain with divinity. Each of the gods referred to in
scriptures (Hindu) also remain with all their powers. But from the beginning of
Kali Yuga, they and all their virtues collapsed. Kaliyan was a part of the
mundane primordial manifestation who spread maya or illusion upon the existing
scriptures and Devas. In Kali Yuga, all true scriptures are bound to maya and
are unhelpful. The reason, as stated in Akilam for the disintegration of the
entire system is that, towards the end of Dwapara Yuga there in Kailash, Siva
believing the words of devas, created Kaliyan without discussing to Vishnu, he
who had the responsibility to destroy the Kaliyan as per the previous deeds. So
Vishnu refused to take birth in the world to destroy Kaliyan. So Siva and
Brahma surrendered all their powers to Vishnu. Until this event, Siva was the
supreme power as per Akilam. It is notable that this is a theological idea
something similar to Shaivism, where Siva is supreme to all. Now onwards,
however, Vishnu is the supreme power. Here the ideology changes similar to that
of Vaishnavism. This supremacy of Vishnu remains like this from the beginning
of Kali Yuga until the incarnation of Vaikundar, from where it changes further.
During the incarnation, Vishnu himself can not incarnate directly in the world
to destroy Kaliyan, since he (Kaliyan) had bought as boon the power of Devas,
including Vishnu's, and spread it all over the world as maya. So God needs to
be incarnated with a new set of rules and with unique importance. A total
universal transformation of the power relation of god-heads, the rules of
scriptures, the dharma, etc., took place, and Vaikundar was given birth by
taking in the power of Ekam, by Lakshmi and Vishnu conjoining together inside
the sea. And from now onwards all the powers were handled over from Vishnu to
Vaikundar inside the sea. Siva, Vishnu and Brahma therefore form a part within
Vaikundar. This ideology about Trimurthi (three are equal in power) is similar
to that of Smartism. Vishnu alone forms a double role; one, within Vaikundar,
and the other, as the father of him, remain inside the sea and regulating
Vaikundar through Vinchais. After Vaikundar was given birth to, by assuming the
Power of Ekam, Vaikundar was supreme to Vishnu and all other God-heads, though
Vishnu playing the role of Father to Vaikundar. However, Vaikundar had to obey
the order of Vishnu, since Vaikundar was given birth to perform the duties of
Vishnu, which he (Vishnu) could not do. Vaikundar (and scriptures given by him)
is the manifestation of the supreme Ekam so, in Ayyavazhi spirituality, he is
the only worshippable universal power Regarding scriptures, the first part of
Akilam is summed-up events of the previous yugas, which are present in Hindu
scriptures. The second part says about the universal transformation and the
uniqueness of Vaikundar and his incarnational activities. So as a summary, till
the beginning of Kali yuga, what is Hinduism, that is Ayyavazhi. From then
onwards for a series of reasons, Akilam says that 'Hindu' scriptures and its
ideology had lost its purity and was destroyed, and so the Dharma was re-
configured in the name of Akilam and Vaikundar and the 'Hindu' ideas were re-
formed. Phenomenology. "Akilam" points out its basis as a regeneration of
Dharma in the form of an entirely new ideology. But today, most of the
followers of Ayyavazhi address Vaikundar merely as the incarnation of Vishnu.
Likewise, most of the Nizhal Thangals were called "Narayana Swami Pathi" or
"Narayana Swami Temple", similar to Hindu Vaishnavism. Most of the followers
also worship Hindu deities such as Kali, Hanuman and other folk deities in
spite of the anti-polytheistic ideas based on Ayyavazhi scripture. Some
followers of Ayyavazhi include Vaikundar as part of the ten Avatars of Vishnu
as Kalki, while some denominations strongly advocate moksha, the personal
liberation, though it is not stated directly in Akilam. Some even reject the
Trinity conception in Ayyavazhi and believe Narayana to be the supreme
universal power. The unique monotheistic belief which is the central theme of
Akilam is completely unknown among most of the followers today. Deviating far
away from the strict monotheistic teachings of Akilam, some thangals provides
"panividais" for other lesser gods too. The spread of Ayyavazhi among the
common people was mainly due to the practice of Shamanism. Being similar to
Hindus in almost all aspects Ayyavazhi followers are hard to be identified. The
only sign to distinguish the practitioners of Ayyavazhi is the fact that they
wore the Thirunamam (a sign on their forehead). The Nizhal Thangals are
identified among the other temples by the fact that idols are replaced by
mirrors in the Palliyarai. Only the recitations of a handful of scholars
educated in the Ayyavazhi scriptures point out the real facts and concepts of
Akilam and the philosophical and ideological deviation of Ayyavazhi from
Hinduism. Not even the Payyans from the headquarters able to portray the
Akilam-based ideology clearly. All these philosophical, ideological and
religious variations in the society of Ayyavazhi make them hard to be
identified and differentiated as a separate belief and instead taken as a Hindu
sect. Social structure. Ayyavazhi worship was marked by its simplicity. The
absence of idol worship and priestly mediation, and inclusion of alternate type
of centres of worship, the Pathis and Nizhal Thangals, were other
characteristics of Ayyavazhi worship. Rituals of Ayyavazhi are a reform or
revolutionary activity, focusing upon social equality, deviating from Hinduism.
The rituals are also characterised and bound by religious beliefs that give
them an alternative spiritual meaning. Its scriptures cover basic elements and
ideas throughout Hinduism. They refer to Shastras, Agamas, Vedas and Puranas.
But address them all to be gone awry by the Advent of Vaikundar, from where
Ayyavazhi scriptures forms negative ideas over all other traditions. Though
Ayyavazhi shares many god-heads with Hinduism, it weaves unique ideology and
power assumption for them. Ayyavazhi can be portrayed as a "Hindu renaissance".
Ayyavazhi is viewed as a reform movement too, as it brought many social changes
there in the Tamil and keralite society during the 19th century. The religious
structure evolved in the path of Ayyavazhi scriptures and, as a result, it
transfigured itself as an alternative religio-cultural system in the social
category. The Ayyavazhis addressed their system as ""Path of God"" with the
phrase ""Ayya Vazhi"". On one hand, they believe that their tradition had come
to replace all old traditions (religions), but on the other hand, they believe
that Ayyavazhi is the synopsis of the world's religious knowledge. On one hand,
they believe that Vaikundar unified all deities within him; on the other, as
all the previous had gone awry by the advent of Vaikundar. Apart from this,
Ayyavazhi has separate theology, mythology, holy places, worship centres, and
ethics of its own. Though many new papers, academic researchers and some of its
followers consider it as a separate religion, many of the followers are even of
the opinion that this is but a Hindu sect rather than an autonomous religion.
They indulge in the mystic practices of possessions and divinations similar to
the tribal religions of Tamil Nadu. Also, many of its core beliefs are similar
to some Hindu sects such as Advaita and Smartism. Regarding demographics,
Ayyavazhi followers are highly concentrated in South India though found across
India, comparatively in less numbers. In Kanyakumari and Tirunelveli districts
of Tamil Nadu, it is very hard to find a village without a worship centre of
Ayyavazhi. Apart from the listings from the religious headquarters (though it
is evident that Ayyavazhi followers are spread across the India from university
papers) there are no official figures for the number of followers of Ayyavazhi
because they are considered Hindus in the census.
