Aztec mythology Aztec mythology is the body or collection of myths of Aztec
civilization of Central Mexico. The Aztecs were Nahuatl speaking groups living
in central Mexico and much of their mythology is similar to that of other
Mesoamerican cultures. According to legend, the various groups who were to
become the Aztecs arrived from the north into the Anahuac valley around Lake
Texcoco. The location of this valley and lake of destination is clear – it is
the heart of modern Mexico City – but little can be known with certainty
about the origin of the Aztec. There are different accounts of their origin. In
the myth the ancestors of the Mexica/Aztec came from a place in the north
called Aztlan, the last of seven "nahuatlacas" (Nahuatl-speaking tribes, from
"tlaca", "man") to make the journey southward, hence their name "Azteca." Other
accounts cite their origin in Chicomostoc, "the place of the seven caves," or
at Tamoanchan (the legendary origin of all civilizations). The Mexica/Aztec
were said to be guided by their god Huitzilopochtli, meaning "Left-handed
Hummingbird" or "Hummingbird from the South." When they arrived at an island in
the lake, they saw an eagle which was perched on a nopal cactus full of its
fruits ("nochtli"). (Due to a mistranslation of an account by Tesozomoc, it
became popular to say the eagle was devouring a snake, but in the original
Aztec accounts, the snake is not mentioned. One states that it was eating a
bird, another indicates that it was only perched in the cactus, and a third
just says it was eating something.) This vision fulfilled a prophecy telling
them that they should found their new home on that spot. The Aztecs built their
city of Tenochtitlan on that site, building a great artificial island, which
today is in the center of Mexico City. This legendary vision is pictured on the
Coat of Arms of Mexico. Creation myth. According to legend, when the Mexicans
arrived in the Anahuac valley around Lake Texcoco, they were considered by the
other groups as the least civilized of all, but the Mexican/Aztec decided to
learn, and they took all they could from other people, especially from the
ancient Toltec (whom they seem to have partially confused with the more ancient
civilization of Teotihuacan). To the Aztec, the Toltec were the originators of
all culture; "Toltecayotl" was a synonym for culture. Aztec legends identify
the Toltecs and the cult of Quetzalcoatl with the legendary city of Tollan,
which they also identified with the more ancient Teotihuacan. Because the Aztec
adopted and combined several traditions with their own earlier traditions, they
had several creation myths. One of these, the Five Suns describes four great
ages preceding the present world, each of which ended in a catastrophe, and
"were named in function of the force or divine element that violently put an
end to each one of them". Coatlicue was the mother of Centzon Huitznahua ("Four
Hundred Southerners"), her sons, and Coyolxauhqui, her daughter. She found a
ball filled with feathers and placed it in her waistband, becoming pregnant
with Huitzilpochtli. Her other children became suspicious as to the identity of
the father and vowed to kill their mother. She gave birth on Mount Coatepec,
pursued by her children, but the newborn Huitzilpochtli defeated most of his
brothers, who became the stars. He also killed his half-sister Coyolxauhqui by
tearing out her heart using a Xiuhcoatl (a blue snake) and throwing her body
down the mountain. This was said to inspire the Aztecs to rip the hearts out of
their victims and throw their bodies down the sides of the temple dedicated to
Huitzilpochtli, who represents the sun chasing away the stars at dawn. Our age
("Nahui-Ollin"), the fifth age, or fifth creation, began in the ancient city of
Teotihuacan. According to the myth, all the gods had gathered to self-sacrifice
themselves and create a new age. Although the world and the sun had already
been created, it would only be through their sacrifice that the sun would be
set into motion and time as well as history could begin. The handsomest and
strongest of the gods, Tecuciztecatl, was supposed to sacrifice himself but
when it came time to self-immolate, he could not jump into the fire. Instead,
Nanahuatl the smallest and humblest of the gods, who was also covered in boils,
sacrificed himself first and jumped into the flames. The sun was set into
motion with his sacrifice and time began. Humiliated by Nanahuatl's sacrifice,
Tecuciztecatl too leaped into the fire and became the moon . Cosmology. In the
beginning there was Ometeotl, (known Ilhuicateotl « Sky god », Moyocoyan «
Whom invented himself and created himself », Tloque Nahuaque « Mighty »,
Ipalnemohuani « Surrounding »), god of the duality, who divided himself in to
two primordial beings Ometecuhtli (the male essence of the creator) and
Omecihuatl (the female essence of the creator). The aztec gods and goddess were
mainly taken from the sources of Francisco Javier Clavijero, Alfredo Chavero,
Francisco del Paso y Troncoso, Manuel Orozco y Berra and Bernardino de
Sahagún, where depending on the source the suffixes of the Aztec names are
exchanged "Lli", "Li", "Tl", "Tli", "Tlli" as occasionally the initials of the
Aztec names are changed "Ch", "C", "Qu", "X", "K", "Z". Aztec gods are mostly
mentioned in the codex Borgia, Fejérváry-Mayer, Chimalpopoca, Magliabechiano,
Borbonicus, Ríos, Vaticanus, Laud, Cospi, Ixtlilxochitl, Telleriano-Remensis.
Pantheon. Creator-gods. They are part of the major gods in the aztec pantheon,
and the sons of the creator couple Ometecuhtli and Omecihuatl, who received the
gift of the creation from their parents, they are the only gods who can create
other living beings without childbearing.
