Noahidism Noahidism is a Biblical-Talmudic and monotheistic ideology based on
the Seven Laws of Noah, and on their traditional interpretations within
Judaism. According to Jewish law, non-Jews are not obligated to convert to
Judaism, but they are required to observe the Seven Laws of Noah to be assured
of a place in the World to Come (Olam Haba), the final reward of the righteous.
The penalty for violating any of these Noahide Laws is subject to
interpretation in the Talmud. Those who subscribe to the observance of such
laws and their supporting organizations are referred to as "Bene Noach" ("B'nei
Noah") (), "Children of Noah", "Noahides" or "Noahites". Historically, the
Hebrew term "Bene Noach" has applied to all non-Jews as descendants of Noah.
However, nowadays it is also used to refer specifically to those non-Jews who
observe the Noahide Laws. Theological background. According to the Book of
Genesis, the first book of Hebrew Bible, all humanity descends from Noah. Noah
and his three children Shem, Ham, and Japheth survived the Flood aboard the
Ark, along with their wives (Genesis 7:13, 8:16). Once the survivors were able
to leave the ark for dry ground, they started new families and repopulated the
earth (Genesis 9:18-19). When Noah's family left the Ark, God made a covenant
with them (Genesis 9:8) as well all the creatures they had made aboard on the
ark thus survived (Genesis 9:9). Although the account in Genesis 9 explicitly
refers only two things on eating flesh meat in a right way (Genesis 9:4) and
prohibition of human murder (Genesis 9:5), according to the Talmud, this
covenant included the Seven Laws of Noah. Thus, to the B'nei Noah, all living
humans as descendants of Noah are subject to the Noahide laws. Maimonides
(Rabbi Moshe Ben Maimon, also known as "the Rambam") collected all of the
talmudic and halakhic decisions in his time, and laid them out clearly in his
work the "Mishneh Torah"; in addition to Jewish laws and their explanations,
Noahide Laws were also collected with their explanation in Maimonides' "Sefer
Shoftim" ("Book of Judges") in the last section "Hilchot Melachim
U’Milchamot" ("The Laws of Kings and Wars") 8:9–10:12, which is available
in English online. Some details of these laws are also found in the Midrashic
literature. The Seven Laws of Noah. The seven laws listed by the Mishnah in
Sanhedrin 56a are Historical Movements. There have been many Noahide movements
in history. The Sebomenoi or God-fearers are a prime example, out of whom came
the religions of Karaite-Karaism (not to be confused with Karaite Judaism),
early Christianity, and perhaps even Islam. Modern movement. A modern movement
known as the B'nei Noah or B'nei Noach has appeared in which members endeavour
to follow the Noahide Laws. Orthodox Judaism does not usually promote
conversion to Judaism but does, on the other hand, believe that the Jewish
people have a duty to provide information to those interested in fulfilling the
Noahide Laws, based on Maimonides. Some Jewish groups have been particularly
active in promoting the Seven Laws, notably the Chabad-Lubavitch movement
(whose late leader, Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson, launched the global
Noahide Campaign), groups affiliated with Dor Daim, and strict students of
Maimonides. Small groups calling themselves the B'nei Noah (children of Noah)
have recently organised themselves to form communities to abide by these laws
and lead their lives with perceived morality. The High Council of B'nei Noah is
particularly reflective of an apparent success at forming ties with Orthodox
Judaism and Observant Noahides. High Council of B’nei Noah. A High Council of
B’nei Noah was endorsed on January 10, 2006 by a group established in Israel
in 2004 that claims to be 'the new Sanhedrin'; this Council was set up to
represent B'nei Noah communities around the world. Acknowledgment of B'nei
Noah. The Chabad-Lubavitch movement has been the most politically active in
Noahide matters, believing that there is spiritual value for non-Jews in simply
acknowledging the seven laws. In 1991 they had a reference to these laws
enshrined in a congressional proclamation: Presidential Proclamation 5956,
then-President George H. W. Bush, recalling Joint House Resolution 173, and
recalling that the ethical and moral principles of all civilizations come in
part from the Seven Noahide Laws, proclaimed March 26, 1991 as "Education Day,
U.S.A." Subsequently, Public Law 102-14, formally designated the Lubavitcher
Rebbe's birthday as "Education Day, U.S.A.", with Congress recalling that
"without these ethical values and principles the edifice of civilization stands
in serious peril of returning to chaos", and that "society is profoundly
concerned with the recent weakening of these principles that has resulted in
crises that beleaguer and threaten the fabric of civilized society". In April
2006, the spiritual leader of the Druze community in Israel, Sheikh Mowafak
Tarif, met with a representative of Chabad-Lubavitch to sign a declaration
calling on all non-Jews in Israel to observe the Noahide Laws as laid down in
the Bible and expounded upon in Jewish tradition. The mayor of the Galilean
city of Shefa-'Amr (Shfaram) — where Muslim, Christian and Druze communities
live side-by-side — also signed the document. In March 2007, Chabad-Lubavitch
gathered ambassadors from six different countries to take part in a gathering
to declare, in the name of the states they represent, their support of the
universal teachings of Noahide Laws. They represented Poland, Latvia, Mexico,
Panama, Ghana, and Japan. They were part of a special program organized by
Harav Boaz Kali. In April, the Abu Gosh mayor Salim Jaber accepted the seven
Noahide laws as part of a mass rally by Chabad at the Bloomfield Stadium in Tel
Aviv. In May, the newly elected president of France, Nicolas Sarkozy, met with
a Chabad-Lubavitch rabbi, Dovid Zaoui, who presented him with literature on the
universal teachings of the Noahide Laws. The Ten Commandments. There is
disagreement by some biblical commentators that, in addition to the seven laws
of Noah, gentiles are bound to keep the Ten Commandments. The disagreement
arises from the English mistranslation of the Hebrew term for the Ten
Commandments. In Hebrew, the ten laws of Moses inscribed on the tablets at
Mount Sinai are literal recorded as "עשרת הדברות", meaning the ten
sayings or laws, but not Mitzvot, which is the Hebrew term for commandment.
