Baʿal Baʿal (Biblical Hebrew , , usually spelled Baal in English) is a
Northwest Semitic title and honorific meaning "master" or "lord" that is used
for various gods who were patrons of cities in the Levant and Asia Minor,
cognate to Akkadian "Bēlu". A Baalist or Baalite means a worshipper of Baal.
"Baʿal" can refer to any god and even to human officials. In some texts it is
used for Hadad, a god of the rain, thunder, fertility and agriculture, and the
lord of Heaven. Since only priests were allowed to utter his divine name,
Hadad, Ba‛al was commonly used. Nevertheless, few if any Biblical uses of
"Baʿal" refer to Hadad, the lord over the assembly of gods on the holy mount
of Heaven, but rather refer to any number of local spirit-deities worshipped as
cult images, each called "baʿal" and regarded in the Hebrew Bible in that
context as a "false god". Etymology. (bet-ayin-lamedh) is a Semitic word
signifying "The Lord, master, owner (male), keeper, husband". Cognates include
Standard Hebrew (Bet-Ayin-Lamed); , "", Akkadian "Bēl" and Arabic . In Hebrew,
the word ba'al means "husband" or "owner", and is related to a verb meaning to
take possession of, for a man, to consummate a marriage. The word "ba'al" is
also used in many Hebrew phrases, denoting both concrete ownership as well as
possession of different qualities in one's personality. The feminine form is
(Hebrew , Arabic "") signifying "lady, mistress, owner (female), wife". The
words themselves had no exclusively religious connotation, they are honorific
titles for heads of households or master craftsmen, but not for royalty. The
meaning of "lord" as a member of royalty or nobility is more accurately
translated as "Adon" in Semitic. In Hebrew the basic term for a homeowner is
"ba'al ha-bayith", with the connotation of a middle-class, bourgeois
townsperson in traditional Jewish texts and in the Yiddish language (pronounced
"baalabus" in Yiddish, pl. "baalei-batim"). A feminine version of the term in
Hebrew, "ba'alat ha-bayith", means "the woman of the house", and traditionally
had the connotation of a strong, even dominant, woman, who maintains the
household in an effective and result-oriented manner, the Yiddish version of
the term being "baalabusta". "Baʿal ul bayt" in modern Levantine Arabic is
widely used to mean the head of the household, literally 'Master of the House'
and has a somewhat jocular, semi-mocking connotation. In modern Levantine
Arabic, the word serves as an adjective describing farming that relies only on
rainwater as a source of irrigation. Probably it is the last remnant of the
sense of Baal the god in the minds of the people of the region. In the Amharic
language, the Semitic word for "owner" or "husband, spouse" survives with the
spelling "bal". Deities called Baʿal and Baʿalath. Because more than one god
bore the title "Baʿal" and more than one goddess bore the title "Baʿalat" or
"Ba`alah," only the context of a text can indicate of which Baʿal 'lord' or
Baʿalath 'Lady' a particular inscription or text is speaking. Hadad in Ugarit.
In the Bronze Age, Hadad (or Haddad or Adad) was especially likely to be called
Baʿal; however, Hadad was far from the only god to have that title. In the
Canaanite pantheon as attested in Ugaritic sources, Hadad was the son of El,
who had once been the primary god of the Canaanite pantheon. El and Baʿal are
often associated with the bull in Ugaritic texts, as a symbol both of strength
and fertility. Baʿal of Tyre. Melqart is the son of El in the Phoenician triad
of worship. He was the god of Tyre and was often called the Baʿal of Tyre.
relates that Ahab, king of Israel, married Jezebel, daughter of Ethba’al,
king of the Sidonians, and then served "habba’al" ('the Baʿal'.) The cult of
this god was prominent in Israel until the reign of Jehu, who put an end to it.
"And they brought out the pillars ("massebahs") of the house of the Baʿal and
burned them. And they pulled down the pillar ("massebah") of the Baʿal and
pulled down the house of the Baʿal and turned it into a latrine until this
day." () Which is likely A biblical reference to the early BC temple of Ba'al
at Baalbek; Located in present day Lebanon. Where some of the worlds largest
megalithic stones are found. It should be noted that many of these megaliths
weigh an excess of 700 tons, & originally served as an infrastructure for a
much older temple. One that predated the Greeks Heliopolis; Which was erected
on top of the Baalbek platform. Similar to its contemporary; The southern Roman
temple of Jupiter (Zeus), as its now commonly referred to. Some scholars claim
it is uncertain whether "Baʿal" "the Lord" in Kings 10:26 refers to Melqart.
They point out that Hadad was also worshiped in Tyre. This point of view
ignores the possibility that Hadad and Melqart are the same god with different
names because of different languages and cultures, Hadad being Canaanite and
Melqart being Phoenician. In favor of the latter interpretation, both Hadad and
Melqart are described as the son of El, both carrying the same secondary
position in the pantheons of each culture. Josephus ("Antiquities" 8.13.1)
states clearly that Jezebel "built a temple to the god of the Tyrians, which
they call Belus" which certainly refers to the Baal of Tyre, or Melqart. 1
Kings 16:30-33 In any case, King Ahab, despite supporting the cult of this
Baʿal, had a semblance of worship to Yahweh (1 Kings 16-22). Ahab still
consulted Yahweh's prophets and cherished Yahweh's protection when he named his
sons Ahaziah ("Yahweh holds") and Jehoram ("Yahweh is high.") Baʿal of
Carthage. The worship of Baʿal Hammon flourished in the Phoenician colony of
Carthage. Baʿal Hammon was the supreme god of the Carthaginians, and is
believed that this supremacy dates back to the 5th century BC, apparently after
a breaking off of relationships between Carthage and Tyre at the time of the
Punic defeat in Himera. He is generally identified by modern scholars either
with the Northwest Semitic god El or with Dagon, and generally identified by
the Greeks, by "interpretatio Graeca" with Greek Cronus and similarly by the
Romans with Saturn. The meaning of "Hammon" or "Hamon" is unclear. In the 19th
century when Ernest Renan excavated the ruins of Hammon (), the modern Umm
between Tyre and Acre, he found two Phoenician inscriptions dedicated to El-
Hammon. Since El was normally identified with Cronus and Hammon was also
identified with Cronus, it seemed possible they could be equated. More often a
connection with Hebrew/Phoenician ' 'brazier' has been proposed, in the sense
of "Baal (lord) of the brazier". He has been therefore identified with a solar
deity. Frank Moore Cross argued for a connection to ', the Ugaritic and
Akkadian name for Mount Amanus, the great mountain separating Syria from
Cilicia based on the occurrence of an Ugaritic description of El as the one of
the Mountain Haman. Classical sources relate how the Carthaginians burned their
children as offerings to Baʿal Hammon. See Moloch for a discussion of these
traditions and conflicting thoughts on the matter. From the attributes of his
Roman form, African Saturn, it is possible to conclude that Hammon was a
fertility god. Scholars tend to see Baʿal Hammon as more or less identical
with the god El, who was also generally identified with Cronus and Saturn.
However, Yigael Yadin thought him to be a moon god. Edward Lipinski identifies
him with the god Dagon in his "Dictionnaire de la civilisation phenicienne et
punique" (1992: ISBN 2-503-50033-1). Inscriptions about Punic deities tend to
be rather uninformative. In Carthage and North Africa Baʿal Hammon was
especially associated with the ram and was worshiped also as Baʿal Qarnaim
("Lord of Two Horns") in an open-air sanctuary at Jebel Bu Kornein ("the two-
horned hill") across the bay from Carthage. Baʿal Hammon's female cult partner
was Tanit. He was probably not ever identified with Baʿal Melqart, although
one finds this equation in older scholarship. Ba`alat Gebal ("Lady of Byblos")
appears to have been generally identified with , although Sanchuniathon
distinguishes the two. Priests of Baʿal. The Priests of Baʿal are mentioned
in the Hebrew Bible numerous times, including a confrontation with the Prophet
Elijah (), the burning of incense symbolic of prayer (), and rituals followed
by priests adorned in special vestments () offering sacrifices similar to those
given to honor the Hebrew God. The confrontation with the Prophet Elijah is
also mentioned in the Qur'an (37:123-125) "Baʿal" as a divine title in Israel
and Judah. The sense of competition between the priestly forces of Yahweh and
of Baʿal in the ninth century is nowhere more directly attested than in ,
where, Elijah the prophet offering a sacrifice to Yahweh, Baʿal's followers
did the same. Baʿal in the Hebrew text did not light his followers' sacrifice,
but Yahweh sent heavenly fire to burn Elijah's sacrifice to ashes, even after
it had been soaked with water. Since "Baʿal" simply means 'master', there is
no obvious reason for which it could not be applied to Yahweh as well as other
gods. In fact, Hebrews generally referred to Yahweh as "Adonai" ('my lord') in
prayer. The judge Gideon was also called Jerubaʿal, a name which seems to mean
'Baʿal strives', though the Yahwists' explanation in is that the theophoric
name was given to mock the god Baʿal, whose shrine Gideon had destroyed, the
intention being to imply: "Let Baʿal strive as much as he can ... it will come
to nothing." After Gideon's death, according to , the Israelites went astray
and started to worship the Baʿalîm (the Baʿals) especially Baʿal Berith
("Lord of the Covenant.") A few verses later () the story turns to all the
citizens of Shechem — actually "kol-ba‘alê šəkem" another case of normal
use of "ba‘al" not applied to a deity. These citizens of Shechem support
Abimelech's attempt to become king by giving him 70 shekels from the House of
Ba‘al Berith. It is hard to dissociate this Lord of the Covenant who is
worshipped in Shechem from the covenant at Shechem described earlier in , in
which the people agree to worship Yahweh. It is especially hard to do so when
relates that all "the holders of the tower of Shechem" ("kol-ba‘alê midgal-
šəkem") enter "bêt ’ēl bərît" 'the House of El Berith', that is, 'the
House of God of the Covenant'. Either "Baʿal" was here a title for El, or the
covenant of Shechem perhaps originally did not involve El at all, but some
other god who bore the title Baʿal. Whether there were different viewpoints
about Yahweh, some seeing him as an aspect of Hadad, some as an aspect of El,
some with other perceptions cannot be unambiguously answered. Baʿal appears in
theophoric names. One also finds Eshbaʿal (one of Saul's sons) and Beʿeliada
(a son of David). The last name also appears as "Eliada". This might show that
at some period Baʿal and El were used interchangeably; even in the same name
applied to the same person. More likely a later hand has cleaned up the text.
Editors did play around with some names, sometimes substituting the form
"bosheth" 'abomination' for "ba‘al" in names, whence the forms "Ishbosheth"
instead of "Eshbaʿal" and "Mephibosheth" which is rendered "Meribaʿal" in .
mentions the name Beʿaliah (more accurately "be‘alyâ") meaning "Yahweh is
Baʿal." Then shall the cities of Judah and inhabitants of Jerusalem go and cry
to the gods to whom they offer incense: but they shall not save them at all in
the time of their trouble. For according to the number of your cities are your
gods, O Judah; and according to the number of the streets of Jerusalem you have
set up altars to the abominination, altars to burn incense to the Ba‘al.
Multiple Baʿals and ʿAshtarts. One finds in the "Tanakh" the plural forms
"bə'ālîm" 'Baʿals' or 'Lords' and "aštārôt" "Ashtarts", though such
plurals don't appear in Phoenician or Canaanite or independent Aramaic sources.
One theory is that the people of each territory or in each wandering clan
worshipped their own Baʿal, as the chief deity of each, the source of all the
gifts of nature, the mysterious god of their fathers. As the god of fertility
all the produce of the soil would be his, and his adherents would bring to him
their tribute of first-fruits. He would be the patron of all growth and
fertility, and, by the use of analogy characteristic of early thought, this
Baʿal would be the god of the productive element in its widest sense.
Originating perhaps in the observation of the fertilizing effect of rains and
streams upon the receptive and reproductive soil, Baʿal worship became
identical with nature-worship. Joined with the Baʿals there would naturally be
corresponding female figures which might be called ʿAshtarts, embodiments of
'Ashtart. Baʿal Hadad is associated with the goddess "Virgin" Anat, his sister
and lover. Through analogy and through the belief that one can control or aid
the powers of nature by the practice of magic, particularly sympathetic magic,
sexuality might characterize part of the cult of the Baʿals and ʿAshtarts.
Post-Exilic allusions to the cult of Baʿal Pe'or suggest that orgies
prevailed. On the summits of hills and mountains flourished the cult of the
givers of increase, and "under every green tree" was practised the
licentiousness which was held to secure abundance of crops. Human sacrifice,
the burning of incense, violent and ecstatic exercises, ceremonial acts of
bowing and kissing, the preparing of sacred cakes (see also Asherah), appear
among the offences denounced by the post-Exilic prophets; and show that the
cult of Baʿal (and ʿAshtart) included characteristic features of worship
which recur in various parts of the Semitic (and non-Semitic) world, although
attached to other names. But it is also possible that such rites were performed
to a local Baʿal "Lord" and a local ʿAshtart without much concern as to
whether they were the same as that of a nearby community or how they fitted
into the national theology of Yahweh who had become a ruling high god of the
heavens, increasingly disassociated from such things, at least in the minds of
some worshippers. Another theory is that the references to Baʿals and
ʿAshtarts (and Asherahs) are to images or other standard symbols of these
deities, statues, and icons of Baʿal Hadad, ʿAshtart, and Asherah set-up in
various high places as well as those of other gods, the author listing the most
prominent as types for all. A reminiscence of Baʿal as a title of a local
fertility god (or referring to a particular god of subterraneous water) may
occur in the Talmudic Hebrew phrases "field of the Baʿal" and "place of the
Baʿal" and Arabic "ba'l" used of land fertilised by subterraneous waters
rather than by rain. The identification of Baʿal as a sun-god in historical
scholarship came to be abandoned by the end of the 19th century as it became
clear that Baʿal was the title of numerous local gods and not necessarily a
single deity in origin. It also became clear that the "astralizing"
(association or identification with heavenly bodies) of Ancient Near Eastern
deities was a late (Iron Age) development in no way connected with the origin
of religion as theorized by some 19th-century schools of thought. Baʿal
Zebûb. Baal Zebub (Hebrew בעל זבוב) occurs in 2 Kings 1:2–6 as the
name of the Philistine god of Ekron. "Ba‘al Zəbûb" is variously understood
to mean "lord of flies", or "lord of the (heavenly) dwelling". Originally the
name of a Philistine god, Ba'al, meaning "Lord" in Ugaritic, was used in
conjunction with a descriptive name of a specific God. Jewish scholars have
interpreted the title of "Lord of Flies" as the Hebrew way of calling Ba'al a
pile of dung, and comparing Ba'al followers to flies. The Septuagint renders
the name as "Baalzebub" (βααλζεβούβ) and as "Baal muian" (βααλ
μυιαν, "Baal of flies"), but Symmachus the Ebionite may have reflected a
tradition of its offensive ancient name when he rendered it as "Beelzeboul".
New Testament. Beelzebub, also Beelzebul, is also identified in the New
Testament as Satan, the "prince of the demons". In Arabic the name is retained
as "Ba‘al dhubaab / zubaab" (بعل الذباب), literally "Lord of the
Flies". Biblical scholar Thomas Kelly Cheyne suggested that it might be a
derogatory corruption of "Ba‘al Zəbûl", "Lord of the High Place" (i.e.,
Heaven) or "High Lord". The word Beelzebub in rabbinical texts is a mockery of
the Ba'al religion, which ancient Hebrews considered to be idol (or, false God)
worship. In Islam. The word Baal appears in the Quran. The Quran (37:125)
mentions that Elias (Elijah) a prophet of God was sent to his people to tell
them not to worship Baal and worship one true God. Milton and Christian
demonology. With these came they, who from the bordring flood Of old Euphrates
to the Brook that parts Egypt from Syrian ground, had general Names Of Baalim
and Ashtaroth, those male, These Feminine. The 17th Century grimoire the Goetia
also contains a demon called Baal
