Babylonian calendar The Babylonian calendar was a lunisolar calendar with years
consisting of 12 lunar months, each beginning when a new crescent moon was
first sighted low on the western horizon at sunset, plus an intercalary month
inserted as needed by decree. The calendar is based on a Sumerian (Ur III)
predecessor preserved in the Umma calendar of Shulgi (c. 21st century BC).
Months. The year begins in spring, and is divided into "beginning", "middle",
and "end of the year". The name for "month" was (status constructus ). That the
calendar originates in Babylonian, not Assyrian times is shown by the fact that
the chief deity of the Assyrians is assigned the surplus intercalary month.
During the 6th century BC Babylonian exile of the Hebrews, the Babylonian month
names were adopted into the Hebrew calendar. The Syrian calendar used in the
Levant countries also uses many of the same names for its months, such as
Iyyar, Tammuz, Ab, Elul, Tishri, and Adar. Until the 5th century BC the
calendar was fully observational, but beginning about 499 BC the months began
to be regulated by a lunisolar cycle of 19 years equaling 235 months. Although
usually called the Metonic cycle, Meton (432 BC) probably learned of the cycle
from the Babylonians. After no more than three isolated exceptions, by 380 BC
the months of the calendar were regulated by the cycle without exception. In
the cycle of 19 years, the month Adaru 2 was intercalated, except in the year
that was number 17 in the cycle, when the month Ululu 2 was inserted. During
this period, the first day of each month (beginning at sunset) continued to be
the day when a new crescent moon was first sighted—the calendar never used a
specified number of days in any month. Days. Counting from the new moon, the
Babylonians celebrated every seventh day as a "holy-day", also called an "evil
day" (meaning "unsuitable" for prohibited activities). On these days officials
were prohibited from various activities and common men were forbidden to "make
a wish", and at least the 28th was known as a "rest-day". On each of them,
offerings were made to a different god and goddess, apparently at nightfall to
avoid the prohibitions: Merodach and Ishtar on the 7th, Ninlil and Nergal on
the 14th, Sin and Shamash on the 21st, and Enki and Mah on the 28th. Tablets
from the sixth-century BC reigns of Cyrus the Great and Cambyses indicate these
dates were sometimes approximate. The lunation of 29 or 30 days basically
contained three seven-day weeks, and a final week of eight or nine days
inclusive, breaking the continuous seven-day cycle. Among other theories of
"Shabbat" origin, the "Universal Jewish Encyclopedia" advanced a theory of
Assyriologists like Friedrich Delitzsch that "Shabbat" originally arose from
the lunar cycle, containing four weeks ending in Sabbath, plus one or two
additional unreckoned days per month. The difficulties of this theory include
reconciling the differences between an unbroken week and a lunar week, and
explaining the absence of texts naming the lunar week as "Shabbat" in any
language. According to Marcello Craveri: "The Sabbath (in Hebrew "Shabbath")
was almost certainly derived from the Babylonian "Shabattu", the festival of
the full moon, but, all trace of any such origin having been lost, the Hebrews
ascribed it to Biblical legend." The Babylonians additionally celebrated the
19th as a special "evil day", the "day of anger", because it was roughly the
49th day of the (preceding) month, completing a "week of weeks". Sacrifices
were offered to Ninurta and the day dedicated to Gula, and it may be supposed
that prohibitions were strengthened. Further, reconstruction of a broken tablet
seems to define the rarely attested "Sapattum" or "Sabattum" as the 15th day of
the lunation, more or less the full moon. This word is cognate with Hebrew
"Shabbat", but is monthly rather than weekly; it is regarded as a form of
Sumerian "sa-bat" ("mid-rest"), attested in Akkadian as "um nuh libbi" ("day of
mid-repose"). This conclusion is a contextual restoration of the damaged Enûma
Eliš creation account, which reads: "shalt thou then encounter, mid[monthly."
