Bahá'í calendar The Bahá'í calendar, also called the Badí‘ calendar
("badí‘" means "wondrous" or "unique" ), used by Bábism and the Bahá'í
Faith, is a solar calendar with regular years of 365 days, and leap years of
366 days. Years are composed of 19 months of 19 days each, (361 days) plus an
extra period of "Intercalary Days" (4 in regular and 5 in leap years). Years in
the calendar begin at the vernal equinox, and are counted with the date
notation of BE (Bahá'í Era), with 21 March 1844 CE being the first day of the
first year. The period from 21 March to 20 March is the year BE. At present,
the Bahá'í calendar is synchronized to the Gregorian calendar, meaning that
the extra day of a leap year occurs simultaneously in both calendars. Note: The
Badi calendar was implemented during the Bábí faith and then adapted in the
Bahá'í Faith. Babi version of the calendar. The early version of the calendar
begun to be implemented during the ministry of the Báb and his appointed
successor Subh-i-Azal depended on the Báb's Persian Bayan and other works. It
used a scheme of 19 months of 19 days (19x19) for a 361 day calendar and
intercalary days assigned differently than the Baha'i implementation later.
There is also a cycle of 19 years. William Miller's polemical work against the
Bahá'í Faith claims that the date the calendar was to begin was 1850 CE
though most sources agree the date was with the Declaration of the Bab to
Mullá Husayn, May 23, 1844 CE. The beginning of the calendar year was with
Nowruz. The calendar contains symbolic connections to prophecies of the Báb
about the next Manifestation of God termed He whom God shall make manifest.
History. The Bahá'í calendar started from the original Badí‘ calendar,
created by the Báb. Bahá'u'lláh confirmed and adopted this calendar and made
Naw-Rúz the first day of the year, and also clarified the intercalary days.
Bahá'u'lláh set Naw-Rúz to the day on which the sun passes into the
constellation Aries. Bahá'ís interpret this formula as a specification of the
vernal equinox. Although the vernal equinox can occur on March 20, 21 or 22,
Shoghi Effendi declared that, for the time being, the Badí‘ calendar is
'locked' to the Gregorian calendar with the new year "always" starting at
sunset on 20 March. Without this, the calendar could vary by a day or two when
compared to the Gregorian calendar. The implementation of the variable calendar
with respect to the beginning of Naw-Rúz will require the Universal House of
Justice selecting a single location for the fixing of the date of the equinox,
such as the Qiblih. The 'locked' calendar is the one described in this article.
Years in the Bahá'í calendar are counted from Thursday, 21 March 1844, the
beginning of the Bahá'í Era or Badí‘ Era (abbreviated "BE" or "B.E.").
Year 1 BE thus began at sundown 20 March 1844. Using the Bahá'í names for the
weekday and month, day one of the Bahá'í Era was "Istijlál" (Majesty), 1
"Bahá" (Splendour) 1 BE. As detailed below, the names of the Bahá'í months
and days reflect attributes of God. Months. The Bahá'í calendar is composed
of 19 months, each with 19 days. The Nineteen Day Fast is held during the final
month of ‘Alá’ (2 March – 20 March), and is preceded by the intercalary
days, known as Ayyám-i-Há. There are four intercalary days in a regular year,
and five in a leap year. The introduction of intercalation marked an important
break from Islam, as under the Islamic calendar the practice of intercalation
had been specifically prohibited in the Qur'an. The month of fasting is
followed by Naw-Rúz, the new year. Because the calendar is currently
synchronized with the Gregorian calendar, the Bahá'í leap years happen on
common era leap years. In addition, the intercalary days include 28 February
and 1 March, causing precise synchronization of the 19 months with the
Gregorian calendar. The names of the months were taken by the Báb from the
Du'ay-i-Sahar, a Ramadan dawn prayer by Imam Muhammad al-Baqir, the fifth Imam
of Twelver Shi'ah Islam. These month names are described as describing
attributes of God. Holy days. There are eleven holy days in the Bahá'í
calendar; on nine of these holy days, work is suspended. The Festival of
Ridván, a twelve day festival that commemorates Bahá'u'lláh's announcement
of prophethood, is the most holy Bahá'í festival and is referred to as the
"Most Great Festival." On the Islamic lunar calendar, the births of the Báb
and Bahá'u'lláh fall on consecutive days; the first and second day of
Muharram, respectively. The Universal House of Justice has decided to celebrate
them on the solar calendar, but has the authority to change the observance to
the lunar calendar days, which migrate through the solar calendar by 11 or 12
days each year. Weekdays. The Bahá'í week starts on Saturday, and ends on
Friday. Like Judaism and Islam, days begin at sunset on the previous solar day
and end at sunset of the present solar day. Bahá'í writings indicate that
Friday is to be kept as a day of rest. The practice of keeping Friday as a day
of rest is not observed by all Bahá'ís, however; for example, in the UK, the
National Spiritual Assembly of the Bahá’ís does not currently keep this
practice. Váḥid and Kull-i-Shay’. Also existing in the Bahá'í calendar
system is a 19-year cycle called Váḥid and a 361-year (19x19) supercycle
called Kull-i-Shay’ (literally, "All Things"). Each of the 19 years in a
Vahid has been given a name as shown in the table below. The 9th Váḥid of
the 1st Kull-i-Shay’ started on 21 March 1996, and the 10th Váḥid will
begin in 2015. The current Bahá'í year, year 169 BE (21 March 2012 - 20 March
2013), is year Bahí of the 9th Váḥid of the 1st Kull-i-Shay’. The 2nd
Kull-i-Shay’ will begin in 2205. The concept of a 19-year cycle has existed
in some form since the 4th century BC. The Metonic cycle represents an invented
measure that approximately correlates solar and lunar markings of time and
which appears in several calendar systems.
