Bakkah Bakkah () is an ancient name for Mecca, the most holy city of Islam.
Most people believe they are synonyms, but to Muslim scholars there is a
distinction: Bakkah refers to the Kaaba and the sacred site immediately
surrounding it, while Mecca is the name of the city in which they are both
located. Bakkah is mentioned in "sura" 3 (Al-i-Imran), "ayah" 96 of the Qur'an,
where it is said to be the site of the first place of worship. Others also
identify it with the Biblical "valley of Baca" from Psalms 84 (). Bakkah and
Mecca. Bakkah (also transliterated "Baca", "Baka", 'Bakke',"Bakah", "Bakka",
"Becca", "Bekka", etc.) is the ancient name for the site of Mecca. An Arabic
language word, its etymology, like that of Mecca, is obscure. One meaning
ascribed to it is "narrow," seen as descriptive of the area in which the valley
of the holy places and the city of Mecca are located, pressed in upon as they
are by mountains. Widely believed to be a synonym for Mecca, it is said to be
more specifically the early name for the valley located therein, while Muslim
scholars generally use it to refer to the sacred area of the city that
immediately surrounds and includes the Kaaba. The form Bakkah is used for the
name Mecca in the Quran in 3:96, while the form Mecca is used in 48:24. In
South Arabic, the language in use in the southern portion of the Arabian
Peninsula at the time of Muhammad, the "b" and "m" were interchangeable. The
Quranic passage using the form Bakkah says: "The first sanctuary appointed for
mankind was that at Bakkah, a blessed place, a guidance for the peoples." Other
references to Mecca in the Quran (6:92, 42:5) call it "Umm al-Qura", meaning
"mother of all settlements." In Islamic tradition, Bakkah is where Hagar and
Ishmael (Ism훮'카l) settled after being taken by Abraham (Ibr훮h카m) to the
wilderness, a story related in the Bible's Book of Genesis (21:14-21). Genesis
tells of how after Hagar and Ishmael ran out of water to drink. In Arab
tradition, Hagar runs back and forth between two elevated points seven times to
search for help before sitting down in despair, at which point the angel speaks
as recorded in Genesis 21:17-19: Here, the tradition holds that a spring gushed
forth from the spot where Hagar had laid Ishmael, and this spring came to be
known as the Well of Zamzam. When Muslims on hajj run between the hills of Safa
and Marwah seven times, it is to commemorate Hagar's search for help and the
resulting revelation of the well of Zamzam. It is also believed that Hagar and
Ishamel settled in Bakkah, and the Quran relates that Abraham came to Mecca to
help his son Ishmael build the Kaaba adjacent to the well of Zamzam. Ibn Ishaq,
the 8th century Arab Muslim historian, relates that during the renovation of
Kaaba undertaken by Muhammad, the prophet of Islam, in 605 CE, the Quraysh
found an inscription in one of the corners of the foundation of the building
that mentions Bakkah. Composed in Syriac, it was incomprehensible to the
Quraysh until a Jew translated it for them as follows: "I am Allah, the Lord of
Bakka. I created it on the day I created heaven and earth and formed the sun
and the moon, and I surrounded it with seven pious angels. It will stand while
its two mountains stand, a blessing to its people with milk and water." The
name Bakkah is woven into the kiswa, the cloth covering the Kaaba that is
replaced each year before the Hajj. Valley of Baca. The Valley of Baca is
mentioned in Psalm 84 of the Bible in the following passage: The original
Hebrew language phrase for the Valley of Baca is "emeq ha-Baka". It can also be
translated as "Valley of the Balsam Tree" or "Valley of the Weeper". This
otherwise unidentified valley has been connected to Bakkah by Islamic writers.
