Balor In Irish mythology, Balor of the Evil Eye (sometimes spelled Balar or
Bolar) was a king of the Fomorians, a race of giants. His father was Buarainech
and his wife was Cethlenn. According to legend, he lived on Tory Island. Balor
was notable for his eye in the middle of his forehead and one directly opposite
at the back, which meant he couldn't be sneaked up on from behind. According to
prophecy, Balor was to be killed by his grandson. To avoid his fate, he locked
his daughter, Ethlinn, in a tower made of crystal to keep her from becoming
pregnant. However, Cian, one of the Tuatha Dé Danann, managed to enter the
tower with the help of the druidess Birog. Ethlinn gave birth to triplets by
him, but Balor threw them into the ocean. Birog saved one, Lugh, and gave him
to Manannan mac Lir, who became his foster father. He was called Lugh Lamhfada
and became a member of the Tuatha Dé Danann. Lugh led the Tuatha in the second
Battle of Magh Tuiredh against the Fomorians. Ogma disarmed Balor during this
battle, but Balor killed Nuada with his eye. Lugh shot a sling-stone, which
drove Balor's eye out the back of his head, where it continued to wreak its
deadly power on the Fomorian army. In other versions, Lugh blinded Balor with a
spear made by Goibniu or decapitated him and used his eye against the
Fomorians. One legend tells that, when Balor was slain by Lugh, Balor's eye was
still open when he fell face first into the ground. Thus his deadly eye beam
burned a hole into the earth. Long after, the hole filled with water and became
a lake which is now known as Loch na Súl, or "Lake of the Eye", which is to be
found in County Sligo. The folklorist Alexander Hagerty Krappe (1894–1947)
discusses the Balor legend in his book "Balor With the Evil Eye: Studies in
Celtic and French Literature" (1927). Krappe believes Balor comes from a very
ancient myth, perhaps, he suggests, going back to fertility rites at the time
of the introduction of agriculture, of a woman (the earth) shut away by an old
man (the old year), impregnated by another man, whose child (the new year),
then kills the old man. Other versions of this myth: Gilgamesh, Osiris, Balder,
Danaë, Balor in Ireland, the "May Count" in Sweden, and "it has even
penetrated to Uganda, where it is told of a local chief." Moreover, according
to Krappe, Balor is related to Janus, Kronos, the Serbian monster "Vy," the
Welsh Ysbaddaden Pennkawr, and other versions of a two-headed god with an evil
eye. Krappe also suggests that the woman may originally have been a cow
goddess, such as Hathor, Io or Hera.
