Baptism Baptism (from the Greek noun Œ≤Œ¨œÄœÑŒπœÉŒºŒ± "baptisma"; itself
derived from Œ≤Œ±œÄœÑŒπœÉŒºœåœÇ "baptismos", washing) is a Christian rite of
admission (or adoption), almost invariably with the use of water, into the
Christian Church generally and also a particular church tradition. Baptism has
been called a sacrament and an ordinance of Jesus Christ. In some traditions,
baptism is also called christening, but for others the word "christening" is
reserved for the baptism of infants. The New Testament reports that Jesus was
baptized. The usual form of baptism among the earliest Christians was for the
naked candidate to be immersed totally (submersion) or partially (standing or
kneeling in water while water was poured on him or her). While John the
Baptist's use of a deep river for his baptism suggests immersion, pictorial and
archaeological evidence of Christian baptism from the 3rd century onward
indicates that a normal form was to have the candidate stand in water while
water was poured over the upper body. Other common forms of baptism now in use
include pouring water three times on the forehead. Martyrdom was identified
early in Church history as "baptism by blood", enabling martyrs who had not
been baptized by water to be saved. Later, the Catholic Church identified a
baptism of desire, by which those preparing for baptism who die before actually
receiving the sacrament are considered saved. As evidenced also in the common
Christian practice of infant baptism, baptism was universally seen by
Christians as in some sense necessary for salvation, until Huldrych Zwingli in
the 16th century denied its necessity. Today, some Christians, particularly
Quakers and the Salvation Army, do not see baptism as necessary, and do not
practice the rite. Among those that do, differences can be found in the manner
and mode of baptizing and in the understanding of the significance of the rite.
Most Christians baptize "in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Spirit" (following the Great Commission), but some baptize in Jesus' name
only. Most Christians baptize infants; many others hold that only believer‚Äôs
baptism is true baptism. Some insist on submersion or at least partial
immersion of the person who is baptized, others consider that any form of
washing by water, as long as the water flows on the head, is sufficient.
"Baptism" has also been used to refer to any ceremony, trial, or experience by
which a person is initiated, purified, or given a name‚Äîsee Other initiation
ceremonies. Etymology. The English word "baptism" is derived indirectly through
Latin from the neuter Greek concept noun "baptisma" (Greek Œ≤Œ¨œÄœÑŒπœÉŒºŒ±,
"washing-ism"), which is a neologism in the New Testament derived from the
masculine Greek noun "baptismos" (Œ≤Œ±œÄœÑŒπœÉŒºœåœÇ) which is a term for
ritual washing in Greek language texts of Hellenistic Judaism during the Second
Temple period, such as the Septuagint. Both of these nouns are nouns derived
from "baptizein" (Œ≤Œ±œÄœÑŒØŒ∂œâ, "I wash" transitive verb) which is used in
Jewish texts for ritual washing, and in the New Testament both for ritual
washing and also for the apparently new rite of "baptisma". The Greek verb root
"bpt" in turn is hypothetically traced to a reconstructed Indo-European root
*"gwabh-" or *"gwebh-" in the suffixed zero-grade form *"gw…ôbh-yo-" The Greek
words are used in a great variety of meanings. New Testament meaning of the
related Greek nouns and verbs. As Christians of different traditions dispute
whether total immersion (submersion) is necessary for baptism, the precise
meaning of the Greek noun "baptisma" in the New Testament has become important
for discussion. Meaning of the Greek verb "baptizein". The Greek-English
Lexicon of Liddell and Scott gives the primary meaning of the verb "baptizein"
(1st Person "Œ≤Œ±œÄœÑŒØŒ∂œâ" "baptiz√¥"), from which the English verb "baptize"
is derived, as "dip, plunge", and by giving examples of the use of
Œ≤Œ±œÄœÑŒØŒ∂œâ for plunging a sword into a throat or an embryo and for drawing
wine by dipping a cup in the bowl indicates that the dipping or plunging need
not be complete; for New Testament usage it gives two meanings: "baptize", with
which it associates the Septuagint mention of Naaman dipping himself in the
Jordan River, and "perform ablutions", as in . Although the Greek verb
"baptizein" does not exclusively mean dip, plunge or immerse (it is used with
literal and figurative meanings such as "sink", "disable", "overwhelm", "go
under", "overborne", "draw from a bowl"), lexical sources typically cite this
as a meaning of the word in both the Septuagint and the New Testament. "While
it is true that the basic root meaning of the Greek words for baptize and
baptism is immerse/immersion, it is not true that the words can simply be
reduced to this meaning, as can be seen from , , //, ." Two passages in the
Gospels indicate that the verb "baptizein" did not always indicate submersion.
The first is , which tells how a Pharisee, at whose house Jesus ate, "was
astonished to see that he did not first wash ("·ºêŒ≤Œ±œÄœÑŒØœÉŒ∏Œ∑", aorist
passive of "Œ≤Œ±œÄœÑŒØŒ∂œâ"‚Äîliterally, "be baptized") before dinner." This is
the passage that Liddell and Scott cites as an instance of the use of ' to mean
"perform ablutions". Jesus' omission of this action is similar to that of his
disciples: "Then came to Jesus scribes and Pharisees, which were of Jerusalem,
saying, Why do thy disciples transgress the tradition of the elders? for they
wash (') not their hands when they eat bread" (). The other Gospel passage
pointed to is: "The Pharisees‚Ä¶do not eat unless they wash ("", the ordinary
word for washing) their hands thoroughly, observing the tradition of the
elders; and when they come from the market place, they do not eat unless they
wash themselves (literally, "baptize themselves"‚Äî"Œ≤Œ±œÄœÑŒØœÉœâŒΩœÑŒ±Œπ",
passive or middle voice of "Œ≤Œ±œÄœÑŒØŒ∂œâ")" (). Scholars of various
denominations claim that these two passages show that invited guests, or people
returning from market, would not be expected to immerse themselves ("baptize
themselves") totally in water but only to practise the partial immersion of
dipping their hands in water or to pour water over them, as is the only form
admitted by present Jewish custom. In the second of the two passages, it is
actually the hands that are specifically identified as "washed" (Mark 7:3), not
the entire person, for whom the verb used is "baptizomai", literally "be
baptized", "be immersed" (Mark 7:4), a fact obscured by English versions that
use "wash" as a translation of both verbs. Zodhiates concludes that the washing
of the hands was done by immersing them. The Liddell-Scott-Jones Greek-English
Lexicon (1996) cites the other passage (Luke 11:38) as an instance of the use
of the verb "baptizein" to mean "perform ablutions", not "submerge". References
to the cleaning of vessels which use Œ≤Œ±œÄœÑŒØŒ∂œâ also refer to immersion. As
already mentioned, the lexicographical work of Zodhiates says that, in the
second of these two cases, , the verb "baptizein" indicates that, after coming
from the market, the Pharisees washed their hands by immersing them in
collected water. Balz & Schneider understand the meaning of Œ≤Œ±œÄœÑŒØŒ∂œâ,
used in place of ·ø•Œ±ŒΩœÑŒØœÉœâŒΩœÑŒ±Œπ (sprinkle), to be the same as
Œ≤Œ¨œÄœÑœâ, to dip or immerse, a verb used of the partial dipping of a morsel
held in the hand into wine or of a finger into spilled blood. A possible
additional use of the verb "baptizein" to relate to ritual washing is suggested
by Peter Leithart (2007) who suggests that Paul's phrase "Else what shall they
do who are baptized for the dead?" relates to Jewish ritual washing. In Jewish
Greek the verb "baptizein" "baptized" has a wider reference than just "baptism"
and in Jewish context primarily applies to the masculine noun "baptismos"
"ritual washing" The verb "baptizein" occurs four times in the Septuagint in
the context of ritual washing, "baptismos"; Judith cleansing herself from
menstrual impurity, Naaman washing seven times to be cleansed from leprosy,
etc. Additionally, in the New Testament only, the verb "baptizein" can also
relate to the neuter noun "baptisma" "baptism" which is a neologism unknown in
the Septuagint and other pre-Christian Jewish texts. This broadness in the
meaning of "baptizein" is reflected in English Bibles rendering "wash", where
Jewish ritual washing is meant: for example Mark 7:4 states that the Pharisees
"except they wash (Greek "baptize"), they do not eat", and "baptize" where
"baptisma", the new Christian rite, is intended. History. Background in Jewish
ritual. Although the term "baptism" is not used to describe the Jewish rituals,
the purification rites in Jewish laws and tradition, called "Tvilah", have some
similarity to baptism, and the two have been linked. The "Tvilah" is the act of
immersion in natural sourced water, called a "Mikvah" In the Jewish Bible and
other Jewish texts, immersion in water for ritual purification was established
for restoration to a condition of "ritual purity" in specific circumstances.
For example, Jews who (according to the Law of Moses) became ritually defiled
by contact with a corpse had to use the mikvah before being allowed to
participate in the Holy Temple. Immersion is required for converts to Judaism
as part of their conversion. Immersion in the mikvah represents a change in
status in regards to purification, restoration, and qualification for full
religious participation in the life of the community, ensuring that the
cleansed person will not impose uncleanness on property or its owners ( and
Babylonian Talmud, Tractate"Chagigah", p.¬ 12). It did not become customary,
however, to immerse converts to Judaism until after the Babylonian Captivity.
This change of status by the mikvah could be obtained repeatedly, while
Christian baptism, like circumcision, is, in the general view of Christians,
unique and not repeatable. Even the so-called rebaptism by some Christian
denominations is not seen by them as a repetition of an earlier valid baptism
and is viewed by them as not itself repeatable. During the Second Temple period
the Greek noun "baptismos" was used to refer to ritual washing in Hellenistic
Judaism. John the Baptist. John the Baptist adopted baptism as the central
sacrament in his messianic movement, seen as a forerunner of Christianity.
Early Christianity. Baptism has been part of Christianity from the start, as
shown by the many mentions in the Acts of the Apostles and the Pauline
epistles. Christians consider Jesus to have instituted the sacrament of
baptism. How explicit Jesus' intentions were and whether he envisioned a
continuing, organized Church is a matter of dispute among scholars. Early
Middle Ages. Infant baptism became common, alongside the developing theology of
original sin, displacing the earlier common practice of delaying baptism until
the deathbed. Against Pelagius, Augustine insisted that baptism was necessary
for salvation even for virtuous people and for children. Middle Ages. In 895,
the provincial Council of Tribur commented on the traditional teaching that
that the triple immersion in baptism was an imitation of Christ for the three
days he spent in the tomb, and the rising from the water an imitation of the
resurrection of Jesus. The linking of the baptismal immersion in and rising
from the water with the burial and resurrection of Jesus arguably goes back to
Saint Paul, and the linking of the triple immersion with the three days in the
tomb is found in Cyril of Jerusalem (c. 313-386) and Gregory of Nyssa (c.335-
after 394). The 12th century saw the meaning of the word "sacrament" narrowed
down and restricted to seven rites, among them that of baptism, while other
symbolic rites came to be called "sacramentals". In the period between the 12th
and the 14th centuries, affusion became the usual manner of administering
baptism in Western Europe, though immersion continued to be found in some
places even as late as the 16th century. Throughout the Middle Ages, there was
therefore considerable variation in the kind of facility required for baptism,
from the baptismal pool large enough to immerse several adults simultaneously
of the 13th century Baptistery at Pisa, to the half-metre deep basin in the 6th
century baptistery of the old Cologne Cathedral. Both East and West considered
washing with water and the Trinitarian baptismal formula necessary for
administering the rite. Scholasticism referred to these two elements as the
matter and the form of the sacrament, employing terms taken from the then
prevailing Aristotelian philosophy. The Catechism of the Catholic Church, while
teaching the necessity of both elements, nowhere uses these philosophical terms
when speaking of any of the sacraments. Reformation. Martin Luther, despite
eventually demoting five of the seven Catholic sacraments, kept the sacramental
status of baptism and the Eucharist (on account of their explicit appearance in
the New Testament). For the Lutherans, baptism is a "means of grace" through
which God creates and strengthens "saving faith" as the "washing of
regeneration" in which infants and adults are reborn. Since the creation of
faith is exclusively God's work, it does not depend on the actions of the one
baptized, whether infant or adult. Even though baptized infants cannot
articulate that faith, Lutherans believe that it is present all the same.
Because it is faith alone that receives these divine gifts, Lutherans confess
that baptism "works forgiveness of sins, delivers from death and the devil, and
gives eternal salvation to all who believe this, as the words and promises of
God declare." In the special section on infant baptism in his Large Catechism,
Luther argues that infant baptism is God-pleasing because persons so baptized
were reborn and sanctified by the Holy Spirit. Swiss Reformer Huldrych Zwingli
differed with the Lutherans by denying sacramental status of baptism. Zwingli
identified baptism and the Lord's supper as sacraments, but in the sense of an
initiatory ceremony. His understanding of these sacraments as symbolic
differentiated him from Luther. Anabaptists (a word that means "rebaptizers")
rejected so thoroughly the tradition maintained by Lutherans as well as
Catholics that they denied the validity of baptism outside their group. They
"rebaptized" converts on the grounds that one cannot be baptized without
wishing it, and an infant, who does not understand what happens in a baptism
ceremony and who has no knowledge of the concepts of Christianity, is not
really baptized. They saw as non-biblical the baptism of infants, who cannot
confess their faith and who, not having yet committed any sins, are not in the
same need of salvation. Anabaptists and other Baptist groups do not consider
that they "re"baptize those who have been baptized as infants, since, in their
view, infant baptism is without effect. The Amish, Restoration churches
(Churches of Christ/ Christian Church), Hutterites, Baptists, Mennonites and
other groups descend from this tradition. Pentecostal, charismatic and most
non-denominational churches share this view as well. Mode and manner.
Aspersion. Aspersion is the sprinkling of water on the head. Affusion. Affusion
is the pouring of water over the head. Immersion. The word "immersion" is
derived from late Latin "immersionem", a noun derived from the verb "immergere"
("in" ‚Äì "into" + "mergere" "dip"). In relation to baptism, some use it to
refer to any form of dipping, whether the body is put completely under water or
is only partly dipped in water; they thus speak of immersion as being either
total or partial. Others, of the Anabaptist tradition, use "immersion" to mean
exclusively plunging someone entirely under the surface of the water
(submersion). The term "immersion" is also used of a form of baptism in which
water is poured over someone standing in water, without submersion of the
person. On these three meanings of the word "immersion", see Immersion baptism.
When "immersion" is used in opposition to "submersion", it indicates the form
of baptism in which the candidate stands or kneels in water and water is poured
over the upper part of the body. Immersion in this sense has been employed in
West and East since at least the 2nd century and is the form in which baptism
is generally depicted in early Christian art. In the West, this method of
baptism began to be replaced by affusion baptism from around the 8th century,
but it continues in use in Eastern Christianity. Submersion. The word
Submersion comes from the late Latin ("sub-" "under, below" + "mergere"
"plunge, dip") and is also sometimes called "complete immersion". It is the
form of baptism in which the water completely covers the candidate's body.
Submersion is practiced in the Orthodox and several other Eastern Churches, as
well as in the Ambrosian Rite. It is one of the methods provided in the Roman
Rite of the baptism of infants. Apparel. 2. The removal of clothing represented
the "image of putting off the old man with his deeds" (as per Cyril, above), so
the stripping of the body before for baptism represented taking off the
trappings of sinful self, so that the "new man," which is given by Jesus, can
be put on. 3. As St. Cyril again asserts above, as Adam and Eve in scripture
and tradition were naked, innocent and unashamed in the Garden of Eden,
nakedness during baptism was seen as a renewal of that innocence and state of
original sinlessness. Other parallels can also be drawn, such as between the
exposed condition of Christ during His crucifixion, and the crucifixion of the
"old man" of the repentant sinner in preparation for baptism. Changing customs
and concerns regarding modesty probably contributed to the practice of
permitting or requiring the baptismal candidate to either retain their
undergarments (as in many Renaissance paintings of baptism such as those by da
Vinci, Tintoretto, Van Scorel, Masaccio, de Wit and others) and/or to wear, as
is almost universally the practice today, baptismal robes. These robes are most
often white, symbolizing purity. Some groups today allow any suitable clothes
to be worn, such as trousers and a t-shirt‚Äîpractical considerations include
how easily the clothes will dry (denim is discouraged), and whether they will
become see-through when wet. Meaning and effects. The Churches of Christ and
The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints also espouse baptism as
necessary for salvation. For Roman Catholics, baptism by water is a sacrament
of initiation into the life of the children of God ("Catechism of the Catholic
Church", 1212‚Äì13). It configures the person to Christ (CCC 1272), and obliges
the Christian to share in the Church's apostolic and missionary activity (CCC
1270). The Catholic Tradition holds that there are three types of baptism by
which one can be saved: sacramental baptism (with water), baptism of desire
(explicit or implicit desire to be part of the Church founded by Jesus Christ),
and baptism of blood (martyrdom). Pope Pius XII, in his encyclical "The
Mystical Body of Christ", June 29, 1943, includes "all baptized Christians" as
members of Christ, members of the one true Church, which is the body of Jesus
Christ himself, as God the Holy Spirit has taught through the Apostle Paul.
("Mystici Corporis Christi"‚Äìfull text) ("the bold emphasis provided here is
not in the encyclical") By contrast, most Reformed (Calvinist), evangelical,
and fundamentalist Protestant groups recognize baptism as an act of obedience
to and identification with Jesus as the Christ. They say that baptism has no
sacramental (saving) power, and only testifies outwardly to the invisible and
internal operation of God's power, which is completely separate from the rite
itself. Churches of Christ consistently teach that in baptism a believer
surrenders his life in faith and obedience to God, and that God "by the merits
of Christ's blood, cleanses one from sin and truly changes the state of the
person from an alien to a citizen of God's kingdom. Baptism is not a human
work; it is the place where God does the work that only God can do." Thus, they
see baptism as a passive act of faith rather than a meritorious work; it "is a
confession that a person has nothing to offer God." Christian traditions. The
liturgy of baptism in the Catholic, Eastern Orthodox, Lutheran, Anglican, and
Methodist traditions makes clear reference to baptism as not only a symbolic
burial and resurrection, but an actual supernatural transformation, one that
draws parallels to the experience of Noah and the passage of the Israelites
through the Red Sea divided by Moses. Thus, baptism is literally and
symbolically not only cleansing, but also dying and rising again with Christ.
Catholics believe that baptism is necessary for the cleansing of the taint of
original sin, and for that reason infant baptism is a common practice. The
Eastern Churches (Eastern Orthodox Church and Oriental Orthodoxy) also baptize
infants on the basis of texts, such as , which are interpreted as supporting
full Church membership for children. In these traditions, baptism is
immediately followed by Chrismation and Communion at the next Divine Liturgy,
regardless of age. Orthodox likewise believe that baptism removes what they
call the ancestral sin of Adam. Anglicans believe that Baptism is also the
entry into the Church and therefore allows them access to all rights and
responsibilities as full members, including the privilege to receive Holy
Communion. Most Methodists and Anglicans agree that it also cleanses the taint
of what in the West is called original sin, in the East ancestral sin. Eastern
Orthodox Christians usually insist on complete threefold immersion as both a
symbol of death and rebirth into Christ, and as a washing away of sin. Latin
Rite Catholics generally baptize by affusion (pouring); Eastern Catholics
usually by submersion, or at least partial immersion. However, submersion is
gaining in popularity within the Latin Catholic Church. In newer church
sanctuaries, the baptismal font may be designed to expressly allow for baptism
by immersion. Anglicans baptize by submersion, immersion, affusion or
sprinkling. According to a tradition, evidence of which can be traced back to
at latest about the year 200, sponsors or godparents are present at baptism and
vow to uphold the Christian education and life of the baptized. Baptists argue
that the Greek word originally meant "to immerse". They interpret some Biblical
passages concerning baptism as requiring submersion of the body in water. They
also state that only submersion reflects the symbolic significance of being
"buried" and "raised" with Christ. Baptist Churches baptize in the name of the
Trinity‚Äîthe Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit. However, they do not
believe that baptism is necessary for salvation; but rather that it is an act
of Christian obedience. Some "full gospel" charismatic churches such as Oneness
Pentecostals baptize only in the name of Jesus Christ, citing Peter's preaching
baptism in the name of Jesus as their authority. They also point to several
historical sources that maintain that the early church always baptized in the
name of the Lord Jesus until development of the Trinity Doctrine in the 2nd
century. Ecumenical statements. Those who heard, who were baptized and entered
the community's life, were already made witnesses of and partakers in the
promises of God for the last days: the forgiveness of sins through baptism in
the name of Jesus and the outpouring of the Holy Ghost on all flesh. Similarly,
in what may well be a baptismal pattern, 1 Peter testifies that proclamation of
the resurrection of Jesus Christ and teaching about new life lead to
purification and new birth. This, in turn, is followed by eating and drinking
God's food, by participation in the life of the community‚Äîthe royal
priesthood, the new temple, the people of God‚Äîand by further moral formation.
At the beginning of 1 Peter the writer sets this baptism in the context of
obedience to Christ and sanctification by the Spirit. So baptism into Christ is
seen as baptism into the Spirit. In the fourth gospel Jesus' discourse with
Nicodemus indicates that birth by water and Spirit becomes the gracious means
of entry into the place where God rules. Validity considerations by some
churches. Since the Catholic, Orthodox, Anglican, Methodist and Lutheran
Churches teach that baptism is a sacrament that has actual spiritual and
salvific effects, certain key criteria must be complied with for it to be
valid, i.e., to actually have those effects. If these key criteria are met,
violation of some rules regarding baptism, such as varying the authorized rite
for the ceremony, renders the baptism illicit (contrary to the Church's laws)
but still valid. One of the criteria for validity is use of the correct form of
words. The Roman Catholic Church teaches that the use of the verb "baptize" is
essential. Catholics of Latin Rite, Anglicans and Methodists use the form "I
baptize you‚Ä¶." Eastern Orthodox and some Eastern Catholics use the form "The
Servant/(Handmaiden) of God is baptized in the name of..." or "This person is
baptized by my hands‚Ä¶." These Churches generally recognize each other's form
of baptism as valid. Most Eastern Orthodox Churches consider the baptisms of
Catholic and Oriental Orthodox Churches to be valid, therefore converts from
those churches are received through the Sacrament of Holy Chrismation. Not all
Eastern Orthodox Churches consider the baptismal rites of Protestants as valid.
Therefore Protestant converts would be received into the church through Baptism
and Chrismation regardless of prior Protestant Baptism. Most Oriental Orthodox
Churches follow similar rules. Use of the Trinitarian formula "in the name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit" is also considered
essential; thus these churches do not accept as valid baptisms of non-
Trinitarian churches such as Oneness Pentecostals. Another essential condition
is use of water. A baptism in which some other liquid was used would not be
considered valid. Another requirement is that the celebrant intends to perform
baptism. This requirement entails merely the intention "to do what the Church
does", not necessarily to have Christian faith, since it is not the person
baptizing, but the Holy Spirit working through the sacrament, who produces the
effects of the sacrament. Doubt about the faith of the baptizer is thus no
ground for doubt about the validity of the baptism. Some conditions expressly
do not affect validity‚Äîfor example, whether submersion, immersion, affusion
or aspersion is used. However, if water is sprinkled, there is a danger that
the water may not touch the skin of the unbaptized. If the water does not flow
on the skin, there is no ablution and so no baptism. For many communions,
validity is not affected if a single submersion or pouring is performed rather
than a triple, but in Orthodoxy this is controversial. According to the
Catholic Church, baptism imparts an indelible "seal" upon the soul of the
baptized and therefore a person who has already been baptized cannot be validly
baptized again. This teaching was affirmed against the Donatists who practiced
rebaptism. The grace received in baptism is believed to operate "ex opere
operato" and is therefore considered valid even if administered in heretical or
schismatic groups. Recognition by other denominations. The Catholic, Lutheran,
Anglican, Presbyterian and Methodist Churches accept baptism performed by other
denominations within this group as valid, subject to certain conditions,
including the use of the Trinitarian formula. It is only possible to be
baptized once, thus people with valid baptisms from other denominations may not
be baptized again upon conversion or transfer. Such people are accepted upon
making a profession of faith and, if they have not yet validly received the
sacrament of confirmation or chrismation, by being confirmed. In some cases it
can be difficult to decide if the original baptism was in fact valid; if there
is doubt, conditional baptism is administered, with a formula on the lines of
"If you are not yet baptized, I baptize you‚Ä¶." In the still recent past, it
was common practice in the Roman Catholic Church to baptize conditionally
almost every convert from Protestantism because of a perceived difficulty in
judging about the validity in any concrete case. In the case of the major
Protestant Churches, agreements involving assurances about the manner in which
they administer baptism has ended this practice, which sometimes continues for
other groups of Protestant tradition. The Catholic Church has always recognized
the validity of baptism in the Churches of Eastern Christianity, but it has
explicitly denied the validity of the baptism conferred in the Church of Jesus
Christ of Latter-day Saints. Practice in the Eastern Orthodox Church for
converts from other communions is not uniform. However, generally baptisms
performed in the name of the Holy Trinity are accepted by the Orthodox
Christian Church. If a convert has not received the sacrament (mysterion) of
baptism, he or she must be baptised in the name of the Holy Trinity before they
may enter into communion with the Orthodox Church. If he has been baptized in
another Christian confession (other than Orthodox Christianity)his previous
baptism is considered retroactively filled with grace by chrismation or, in
rare circumstances, confession of faith alone as long as the baptism was done
in the name of the Holy Trinity (Father, Son and Holy Spirit). The exact
procedure is dependent on local canons and is the subject of some controversy.
Oriental Orthodox Churches recognise the validity of baptisms performed within
the Eastern Orthodox Communion. Some also recognise baptisms performed by
Catholic Churches. Any supposed baptism not performed using the Trinitarian
formula is considered invalid. In the eyes of the Catholic Church, all Orthodox
Churches, Anglican and Lutheran Churches, the baptism conferred by the Church
of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is invalid. An article published together
with the official declaration to that effect gave reasons for that judgment,
summed up in the following words: "The Baptism of the Catholic Church and that
of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints differ essentially, both for
what concerns faith in the Father, Son and Holy Spirit, in whose name Baptism
is conferred, and for what concerns the relationship to Christ who instituted
it." The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints stresses that baptism must
be administered by one having proper authority; consequently, the Church does
not recognize the baptism of any other church as valid. Jehovah's Witnesses do
not recognise any other baptism occurring after 1914 as valid, as they believe
that they are now the one true church of Christ, and that the rest of
"Christendom" is false religion. Officiator. There is debate among Christian
churches as to who can administer baptism. The examples given in the New
Testament only show apostles and deacons administering baptism. Ancient
Christian churches interpret this as indicating that baptism should be
performed by the clergy except "in extremis", i.e., when the one being baptized
is in immediate danger of death. Then anyone may baptize, provided, in the view
of the Eastern Orthodox Church, the person who does the baptizing is a member
of that Church, or, in the view of the Catholic Church, that the person, even
if not baptized, intends to do what the Church does in administering the rite.
Many Protestant churches see no specific prohibition in the biblical examples
and permit any believer to baptize another. In the Roman Catholic Church, canon
law for the Latin Rite lays down that the ordinary minister of baptism is a
bishop, priest or deacon, but its administration is one of the functions
"especially entrusted to the parish priest". If the person to be baptized is at
least fourteen years old, that person's baptism is to be referred to the
bishop, so that he can decide whether to confer the baptism himself. If no
ordinary minister is available, a catechist or some other person whom the local
ordinary has appointed for this purpose may licitly do the baptism; indeed in a
case of necessity "any" person (irrespective of that person's religion) who has
the requisite intention may confer the baptism By "a case of necessity" is
meant imminent danger of death because of either illness or an external threat.
"The requisite intention" is, at the minimum level, the intention "to do what
the Church does" through the rite of baptism. In the Eastern Catholic Churches,
a deacon is not considered an ordinary minister. Administration of the
sacrament is reserved to the Parish Priest or to another priest to whom he or
the local hierarch grants permission, a permission that can be presumed if in
accordance with canon law. However, "in case of necessity, baptism can be
administered by a deacon or, in his absence or if he is impeded, by another
cleric, a member of an institute of consecrated life, or by any other Christian
faithful; even by the mother or father, if another person is not available who
knows how to baptize." The discipline of the Eastern Orthodox Church, Oriental
Orthodoxy and the Assyrian Church of the East is similar to that of the Eastern
Catholic Churches. They require the baptizer, even in cases of necessity, to be
of their own faith, on the grounds that a person cannot convey what he himself
does not possess, in this case membership in the Church. The Latin Rite
Catholic Church does not insist on this condition, considering that the effect
of the sacrament, such as membership of the Church, is not produced by the
person who baptizes, but by the Holy Spirit. For the Orthodox, while Baptism
"in extremis" may be administered by a deacon or any lay-person, if the newly
baptized person survives, a priest must still perform the other prayers of the
Rite of Baptism, and administer the Mystery of Chrismation. The discipline of
Anglicanism and Lutheranism is similar to that of the Latin Rite Catholic
Church. For Methodists and many other Protestant denominations, too, the
ordinary minister of baptism is a duly ordained or appointed minister of
religion. Newer movements of Protestant Evangelical churches, particularly non-
denominational, allow laypeople to baptize. In The Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints, only a man who has been ordained to the Aaronic Priesthood
holding the priesthood office of Priest or higher office in the Melchizedek
Priesthood may administer baptism. A Jehovah's Witnesses baptism is performed
by a "dedicated male" adherent. Only in extraordinary circumstances would a
"dedicated" baptizer be unbaptized (see section "Jehovah's Witnesses"). Other
traditions. Anabaptist. Anabaptists ("re-baptizers") and Baptists promote adult
baptism, or "believer's baptism". Baptism is seen as an act identifying one as
having accepted Jesus Christ as Savior. Early Anabaptists were given that name
because they re-baptized persons who they felt had not been properly baptized,
having received infant baptism, sprinkling, or baptism of any sort by another
denomination. Anabaptists perform baptisms indoors in a baptismal font, a
swimming pool, or a bathtub, or outdoors in a creek or river. Baptism
memorializes the death, burial and resurrection of Jesus. Baptism does not
accomplish anything in itself, but is an outward personal sign or testimony
that the person's sins have already been washed away by the cross of Christ. It
is considered a covenantal act, signifying entrance into the New Covenant of
Christ. Baptist. For the majority of Baptists, Christian baptism is the
immersion of a believer in water in the name of the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Spirit. It is an act of obedience symbolizing the believer's faith in a
crucified, buried, and risen Saviour, the believer's death to sin, the burial
of the old life, and the resurrection to walk in newness of life in Christ
Jesus. It is a testimony to the believer's faith in the final resurrection of
the dead. Churches of Christ. Baptism in Churches of Christ is performed only
by full bodily immersion, based on the Koine Greek verb "baptizo" which is
understood to mean to dip, immerse, submerge or plunge. Submersion is seen as
more closely conforming to the death, burial and resurrection of Jesus than
other modes of baptism. Churches of Christ argue that historically immersion
was the mode used in the 1st century, and that pouring and sprinkling later
emerged as secondary modes when immersion was not possible. Over time these
secondary modes came to replace immersion. Only those mentally capable of
belief and repentance are baptized (i.e., infant baptism is not practiced
because the New Testament has no precedent for it). Churches of Christ have
historically had the most conservative position on baptism among the various
branches of the Restoration Movement, understanding baptism by immersion to be
a necessary part of conversion. The most significant disagreements concerned
the extent to which a correct understanding of the role of baptism is necessary
for its validity. David Lipscomb insisted that if a believer was baptized out
of a desire to obey God, the baptism was valid, even if the individual did not
fully understand the role baptism plays in salvation. Austin McGary contended
that to be valid, the convert must also understand that baptism is for the
forgiveness of sins. McGary's view became the prevailing one in the early 20th
century, but the approach advocated by Lipscomb never totally disappeared. More
recently, the rise of the International Churches of Christ (who based on the
need to fully understand the role baptism plays in salvation, required many to
be "re-baptized") has caused some to reexamine the issue. Churches of Christ
consistently teach that in baptism a believer surrenders his life in faith and
obedience to God, and that God "by the merits of Christ's blood, cleanses one
from sin and truly changes the state of the person from an alien to a citizen
of God's kingdom. Baptism is not a human work; it is the place where God does
the work that only God can do." Baptism is a passive act of faith rather than a
meritorious work; it "is a confession that a person has nothing to offer God."
While Churches of Christ do not describe baptism as a "sacrament", their view
of it can legitimately be described as "sacramental." They see the power of
baptism coming from God, who chose to use baptism as a vehicle, rather than
from the water or the act itself, and understand baptism to be an integral part
of the conversion process, rather than just a symbol of conversion. A recent
trend is to emphasize the transformational aspect of baptism: instead of
describing it as just a legal requirement or sign of something that happened in
the past, it is seen as "the event that places the believer 'into Christ' where
God does the ongoing work of transformation." There is a minority that
downplays the importance of baptism in order to avoid sectarianism, but the
broader trend is to "reexamine the richness of the biblical teaching of baptism
and to reinforce its central and essential place in Christianity." Because of
the belief that baptism is a necessary part of salvation, some Baptists hold
that the Churches of Christ endorse the doctrine of baptismal regeneration.
However, members of the Churches of Christ reject this, arguing that since
faith and repentance are necessary, and that the cleansing of sins is by the
blood of Christ through the grace of God, baptism is not an inherently
redeeming ritual. Rather, their inclination is to point to the biblical passage
in which Peter, analogizing baptism to Noah's flood, posits that "likewise
baptism doth also now save us" but parenthetically clarifies that baptism is
""not" the putting away of the filth of the flesh but the "response of a good
conscience" toward God" (1 Peter 3:21). One author from the churches of Christ
describes the relationship between faith and baptism this way, ""Faith" is the
"reason why" a person is a child of God; "baptism" is the "time at which" one
is incorporated into Christ and so becomes a child of God" (italics are in the
source). Baptism is understood as a confessional expression of faith and
repentance, rather than a "work" that earns salvation. Reformed and Covenant
theology view. Paedobaptist Covenant theologians see the administration of all
the biblical covenants, including the New Covenant, as including a principle of
familial, corporate inclusion or "generational succession". The biblical
covenants between God and man include signs and seals that visibly represent
the realities behind the covenants. These visible signs and symbols of God's
covenant redemption are administered in a corporate manner (for instance, to
households), not in an exclusively individualistic manner. Baptism is
considered by the Reformed churches as the visible sign of entrance into the
New Covenant and therefore may be administered individually to new believers
making a public profession of faith. Paedobaptists further believe this extends
corporately to the households of believers which typically would include
children, or individually to children or infants of believing parents (see
Infant baptism). In this view, baptism is thus seen as the functional
replacement and sacramental equivalent of the Abrahamic rite of circumcision
and symbolizes the internal cleansing from sin, among other things. Catholic.
In Catholic teaching, baptism is believed to be usually essential for
salvation. This teaching is based on Jesus' words in the Gospel according to
John: "Truly, truly, I say to you, unless one is born of water and the Spirit,
he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God." It dates back to the teachings and
practices of 1st-century Christians, and the connection between salvation and
baptism was not, on the whole, an item of major dispute until Huldrych Zwingli
denied the necessity of baptism, which he saw as merely a sign granting
admission to the Christian community. The Catechism of the Catholic Church
states that "Baptism is necessary for salvation for those to whom the Gospel
has been proclaimed and who have had the possibility of asking for this
sacrament." The Council of Trent also states in session six states that baptism
is necessary for salvation. Since it was infallibly declared by the Council of
Trent it is heresy for Catholics not be believe it. Present church law
excommunicates all heretics. A person who knowingly, willfully and
unrepentantly rejects baptism has no hope of salvation. However, if knowledge
is absent, "those also can attain to salvation who through no fault of their
own do not know the Gospel of Christ or His Church, yet sincerely seek God and
moved by grace strive by their deeds to do His will as it is known to them
through the dictates of conscience." The Catechism of the Catholic Church also
states: "Since Baptism signifies liberation from sin and from its instigator
the devil, one or more exorcisms are pronounced over the candidate". In the
Roman Rite of the baptism of a child, the wording of the prayer of exorcism is:
"Almighty and ever-living God, you sent your only Son into the world to cast
out the power of Satan, spirit of evil, to rescue man from the kingdom of
darkness and bring him into the splendour of your kingdom of light. We pray for
this child: set him (her) free from original sin, make him (her) a temple of
your glory, and send your Holy Spirit to dwell with him (her). Through Christ
our Lord." Catholics are baptized in water, by submersion, immersion or
affusion, in the name (singular) of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy
Spirit‚Äînot three gods, but one God subsisting in three Persons. While sharing
in the one divine essence, the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are distinct, not
simply three "masks" or manifestations of one divine being. The faith of the
Church and of the individual Christian is based on a relationship with these
three "Persons" of the one God. Adults can also be baptized through the Rite of
Christian Initiation of Adults. It is claimed that Pope Stephen I, St. Ambrose
and Pope Nicholas I declared that baptisms in the name of "Jesus" only as well
as in the name of "Father, Son and Holy Spirit" were valid. The correct
interpretation of their words is disputed. Current canonical law requires the
Trinitarian formula and water for validity. The Church has always held the firm
conviction that those who suffer death for the sake of the faith without having
received Baptism are baptized by their death for and with Christ. This "Baptism
of blood", like the desire for Baptism, brings about the fruits of Baptism
without being a sacrament. (1258) For catechumens who die before their Baptism,
their explicit desire to receive it, together with repentance for their sins,
and charity, assures them the salvation that they were not able to receive
through the sacrament. (1259) The Catholic Church holds that non-Christians who
seek God with a sincere heart and, moved by grace, try to do God's will as they
know it through the dictates of conscience can also be saved without water
baptism as they are said to desire it implicitly. As for unbaptized infants,
the Church is unsure of their fate; "the Church can only entrust them to the
mercy of God" (Catechism, 1261). Jehovah's Witnesses. Jehovah's Witnesses
believe that baptism should be performed by complete immersion (submersion)
only when an individual is old enough to understand its significance. They
believe that water baptism is an outward symbol that a person has made an
unconditional dedication through Jesus Christ to do the will of God. They
consider baptism to constitute ordination as a minister. Prospective candidates
for baptism must express their desire to be baptized well in advance of a
planned baptismal event, to allow for congregation elders to assess their
suitability. Elders approve candidates for baptism if the candidates are
considered to understand what is expected of members of the religion and to
demonstrate sincere dedication to the faith. Only baptized males may baptize
new members. Baptizers and candidates wear swimsuits or other informal clothing
for baptism, but are directed to avoid clothing that is considered undignified
or revealing. Generally, candidates are individually immersed by a single
baptizer, unless a candidate has special circumstances such as a physical
disability. In circumstances of extended isolation, a qualified candidate's
dedication and stated intention to become baptized may serve to identify him as
a member of Jehovah's Witnesses, even if immersion itself must be delayed. In
rare instances, unbaptized males who had stated such an intention have
reciprocally baptized each other, with both baptisms accepted as valid.
Individuals who had been baptized in the 1930s and 1940s by female Witnesses,
such as in concentration camps, were later re-baptized but recognized their
original baptism dates. Latter-Day Saints. In Latter-Day Saint theology,
baptism has the main purpose of remitting the sins of the participant. It is
followed by confirmation, which inducts the person into membership in the
church and constitutes a baptism with the Holy Spirit. Latter-day Saints
believe that baptism must be by full immersion, and by a precise ritualized
ordinance: if some part of the participant is not fully immersed, or the
ordinance was not recited verbatim, the ritual must be repeated. It typically
occurs in a baptismal font. In addition, Latter-day Saints do not believe a
baptism is valid unless it is performed by a Latter-day Saint priest or elder.
Authority is passed down through a form of apostolic succession. All new
converts to the faith must be baptized or re-baptized. Baptism is seen as
symbolic both of Jesus' death, burial and resurrection and is also symbolic of
the baptized individual discarding their "natural" self and donning a new
identity as a disciple of Jesus. According to Latter-day Saint theology, faith
and repentance are prerequisites to baptism. The ritual does not cleanse the
participant of original sin, as Latter-day Saints do not believe the doctrine
of original sin. Mormonism rejects infant baptism and baptism must occur after
the age of accountability, defined in Latter-day Saint scripture as eight years
old. Latter-day Saint theology also teaches baptism for the dead in which
deceased ancestors are baptized vicariously by the living, and believe that
their practice is what Paul wrote of in . This occurs in Latter-day Saint
temples. Non-practitioners. Quakers. Barclay argued that water baptism was only
something that happened until the time of Christ, but that now, people are
baptised inwardly by the spirit of Christ, and hence there is no need for the
external sacrament of water baptism, which Quakers argue is meaningless.
Salvation Army. The Salvation Army does not practice water baptism, or indeed
other outward sacraments. William Booth and Catherine Booth, the founders of
the Salvation Army, believed that many Christians had come to rely on the
outward signs of spiritual grace rather than on grace itself. They believed
what was important was spiritual grace itself. However, although the Salvation
Army does not practice baptism, they are not opposed to baptism within other
Christian denominations. Hyperdispensationalism. Water baptism found early in
the Book of Acts is, according to this view, now supplanted by the one baptism
foretold by John the Baptist. The one baptism for today, it is asserted, is the
"baptism of the Holy Spirit". Many in this group also argue that John's
promised baptism by fire is pending, referring to the destruction of the world
by fire. John, as he said "baptized with water", as did Jesus's disciples to
the early, Jewish Christian church. Jesus himself never personally baptized
with water, but did so through his disciples. Unlike Jesus' first Apostles,
Paul, his Apostle to the Gentiles, was sent to preach rather than to baptize
but did occasionally baptize, for instance in Corinth and in Philippi, in the
same manner as they.cf. He also taught the spiritual significance of the
submerging in baptism and how one contacts the atoning death of Christ in such.
Other Hyperdispensationalists believe that baptism was necessary only for a
short period between Christ's ascension and mid-Acts. The great commission and
its baptism was directed to early Jewish believers, not the Gentile believers
of mid-Acts or later. Any Jew who believed did not receive salvation or the
Holy Spirit until they were baptized. This period ended with the calling of
Paul. Peter's reaction when the Gentiles received the Holy Spirit before
baptism is worthy of note. Comparative summary. Comparative Summary of Baptisms
of Denominations of Christian Influence. (This section does not give a complete
listing of denominations, and therefore, it only mentions a fraction of the
churches practicing "believer's baptism".) Other initiation ceremonies. Many
cultures practice or have practiced initiation rites, with or without the use
of water, including the ancient Egyptian, the Hebraic/Jewish, the Babylonian,
the Mayan, and the Norse cultures. The modern Japanese practice of Miyamairi is
such as ceremony that does not use water. In some, such evidence may be
archaeological and descriptive in nature, rather than a modern practice.
Mystery religion initiation rites. Apuleius, a 2nd-century Roman writer,
described an initiation into the mysteries of Isis. The initiation was preceded
by a normal bathing in the public baths and a ceremonial sprinkling by the
priest of Isis, after which the candidate was given secret instructions in the
temple of the goddess. The candidate then fasted for ten days from meat and
wine, after which he was dressed in linen and led at night into the innermost
part of the sanctuary, where the actual initiation, the details of which were
secret, took place. On the next two days, dressed in the robes of his
consecration, he participated in feasting. Apuleius describes also an
initiation into the cult of Osiris and yet a third initiation, of the same
pattern as the initiation into the cult of Isis, without mention of a
preliminary bathing. The water-less initiations of Lucius, the character in
Apuleius's story who had been turned into an ass and changed back by Isis into
human form, into the successive degrees of the rites of the goddess was
accomplished only after a significant period of study to demonstrate his
loyalty and trustworthiness, akin to catechumenal practices preceding baptism
in Christianity. Mandaeanism. Mandaeans revere John the Baptist and practice
frequent baptism as a ritual of purification, not of initiation. Gnostic
Catholicism and Thelema. The Ecclesia Gnostica Catholica, or Gnostic Catholic
Church (the ecclesiastical arm of Ordo Templi Orientis), offers its Rite of
Baptism to any person at least 11¬ years old. The ceremony is performed before
a Gnostic Mass and represents a symbolic birth into the Thelemic community.
Baptism of objects. The word "baptism" or "christening" is sometimes used to
describe the inauguration of certain objects for use. Debaptism. Mainline
Christian churches see baptism as a once-in-a-lifetime event that can be
neither repeated nor undone. They hold that those who have been baptized remain
baptized, even if they renounce the Christian faith by adopting a non-Christian
religion or by rejecting religion entirely. In addition to "de facto"
renunciation through apostasy, heresy, or schism, the Roman Catholic Church
envisaged from 1983 to 2009 the possibility of formal defection from the Church
through a decision manifested personally, consciously and freely, and in
writing, to the competent church authority, who was then to judge whether it
was genuinely a case of "true separation from the constitutive elements of the
life of the Church ... (by) an act of apostasy, heresy or schism." A formal
defection of this kind was then noted in the register of the person's baptism,
an annotation that, like those of marriage or ordination, was independent of
the fact of the baptism and was not an actual "debaptism", even if the person
who formally defected from the Catholic Church had also defected from the
Christian religion. The fact of having been baptized remains a fact and the
Catholic Church holds that baptism marks a person with a lasting seal or
character that "is an ontological and permanent bond which is not lost by
reason of any act or fact of defection." Nonetheless, formal requests for
debaptisms are made; in France, a man sued the French catholic church for "its
refusal to let him nullify his baptism." He had been "un-baptized" in 2000, and
ten years later he demanded to have his name stricken from the baptismal
records, a request granted by a judge in Normany, a decision appealed by the
church. Some atheist organizations, such as the Italian Union of Rationalist
Atheists and Agnostics and the British National Secular Society, offer
certificates of "debaptism". Not even those who provide the certificates
consider them as having legal or canonical effect. The Church of England
refuses to take any action on presentation of the certificate. The Roman
Catholic Church likewise treats it as any other act of renunciation of the
Catholic faith, although for a few years, from 2006 to 2009, it did note in the
baptismal register any formal act of defection from the Catholic Church, a
concept quite distinct from that of presentation of such a certificate. Using a
hair dryer, some atheist groups have conducted tongue-in-cheek "debaptism"
ceremonies, not intended to be taken seriously.
