Baptism with the Holy Spirit Baptism with the Holy Spirit (alternatively
Baptism in the Holy Spirit or Holy Ghost) in Christian theology is a term
describing baptism (washing or immersion) in or with the Spirit of God and is
frequently associated with the bestowal of spiritual gifts and empowerment for
Christian ministry. While the phrase "baptism with the Holy Spirit" is found in
the New Testament and all Christian traditions accept it as a theological
concept, each has interpreted it in a way consistent with their own beliefs on
ecclesiology and Christian initiation. One view holds that the term refers only
to Pentecost, the "once-for-all" event for the whole Church described in the
second chapter of the Book of Acts. Another view holds that the term also
refers to an experience of the individual believer distinct from salvation and
initiation into the Church. Before the emergence of the holiness movement in
the mid 19th century and Pentecostalism in the early 20th century, most
denominations believed that Christians received the baptism with the Holy
Spirit either upon conversion and regeneration or through rites of Christian
initiation. Since the growth and spread of Pentecostal and charismatic
churches, however, the belief that the baptism with the Holy Spirit is an
experience distinct from regeneration has come into increasing prominence.
Biblical description. In Christian theology, the work of the Holy Spirit under
the Old Covenant is viewed as less powerful and less extensive than that under
the New Covenant inaugurated on the day of Pentecost. The Spirit was restricted
to certain chosen individuals, such as high priests and prophets. Often termed
the “spirit of prophecy” in rabbinic writings, the Holy Spirit was closely
associated with prophecy and divine inspiration. It was anticipated that in the
future messianic age God would pour out his spirit upon all of Israel, which
would become a nation of prophets. While the exact phrase "baptism with the
Holy Spirit" is not found in the New Testament, two forms of the phrase are
found in the canonical gospels using the verb "baptize". The baptism was spoken
about by John the Baptist, who contrasted his water baptism for the forgiveness
of sins with the baptism of Jesus. In Mark and John, the Baptist proclaimed
that Jesus "will baptize in (the) Holy Spirit"; while in Matthew and Luke, he
"will baptize with Holy Spirit and fire". Jesus is considered the first person
to receive the baptism with the Holy Spirit. The Holy Spirit descended on Jesus
during his baptism, and he was anointed with power. Afterward, Jesus began his
ministry and displayed his power by casting out demons, healing the sick, and
teaching with authority. The phrase "baptized in the Holy Spirit" occurs two
times in Acts, first in Acts 1:4-5 and second in Acts 11:16. Other terminology
is used in Acts to indicate Spirit baptism, such as "filled". "Baptized in the
Spirit" indicates an outward immersion into the reality of the Holy Spirit,
while "filled with the Spirit" suggests an internal diffusion. Both terms speak
to the totality of receiving the Spirit. The baptism with the Holy Spirit is
described in various places as the Spirit "poured out upon", "falling upon",
"coming upon" people. To "pour out" suggests abundance and reflects John 3:34,
"God gives the Spirit without limit". Another expression, "come upon" is
related to a statement by Jesus in , "I am sending the promise of my Father
upon you. But stay in the city until you are clothed with power from on high".
The language of "come on" and "clothed with" suggest possession by and
endowment with the Holy Spirit. The narrative of Acts begins after Jesus’
crucifixion and resurrection. The resurrected Jesus directed his disciples to
wait in Jerusalem for the baptism in the Holy Spirit and promised, "you will
receive power when the Holy Spirit has come upon you, and you will be my
witnesses in Jerusalem and in all Judea and Samaria, and to the end of the
earth". After his ascension, he was given authority to pour out the Holy
Spirit. In the New Testament, the messianic expectations found in early Judaism
were fulfilled on the day of Pentecost recorded in . The Christian community
was gathered together in Jerusalem when a sound from heaven like rushing wind
was heard and tongues like tongues of flame rested on everyone. They were
filled with the Holy Spirit and began to speak in tongues, miraculously
praising God in foreign languages. A crowd gathered and was addressed by the
Apostle Peter who stated that the occurrence was the fulfillment of Joel’s
prophecy, "And in the last days it shall be, God declares, that I will pour out
my Spirit on all flesh, and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy". He
then explained how the Spirit came to be poured out, recounting Jesus’
ministry and passion and then proclaiming his resurrection and enthronement at
the right hand of God. In response, the crowd asked Peter what they should do.
He responded that they should repent and be baptized for the forgiveness of
sins in order to receive the gift of the Holy Spirit. Peter finished his speech
stating that the promise "is for you and for your children and for all who are
far off, everyone whom the Lord our God calls to himself". Baptism in the Holy
Spirit occurs elsewhere in Acts. The gospel had been proclaimed in Samaria and
the apostles Peter and John were sent from Jerusalem. The new believers had
been water baptized, but the Holy Spirit had not yet fallen on them. The
Samaritans received the Holy Spirit when Peter and John laid their hands on
them. The Apostle Paul was also filled with the Holy Spirit when Ananias of
Damascus laid hands on him, and afterwards Paul was baptized with water. Later
in Acts, Peter preached the gospel to the household of Cornelius the Centurion,
a Gentile. While he preached, the Holy Spirit fell on the gentiles, and they
began to speak in tongues. The Jewish believers with Peter were amazed, and the
household was water baptized. While the apostle Paul was in Ephesus, he found
disciples there and discovered that they did not know of the existence of the
Holy Spirit and had only received John the Baptist’s baptism. After baptizing
them in Jesus’ name, Paul laid his hands on them, and they began to speak in
tongues and prophesy. History. In the early Church, the imposition of hands on
the newly baptized to impart the gift of the Holy Spirit was the origin of the
sacrament of confirmation. In the Eastern church, confirmation continued to be
celebrated immediately after water baptism. The two rites were separated in the
Western church. In mid-19th century America, the Wesleyan holiness movement
began to teach that entire sanctification was less a process and more of a
state that one entered into by faith at a definite moment in time. This second
blessing, as it was commonly called, allowed Christians to be freed from the
power of sin. The baptism in the Holy Spirit was generally understood to be
synonymous with second blessing sanctification. After his conversion in 1821,
Presbyterian minister and revivalist Charles Grandison Finney experienced what
he called "baptism in the Holy Spirit" accompanied by "unutterable gushings" of
praise. Finney and other Reformed writers, known as Oberlin perfectionists,
agreed that there was a life altering experience after conversion, but unlike
their Wesleyan holiness counterparts, they conceived of it as an ongoing
process enabling believers to devote themselves wholly to Christ's service.
Similarly, the English Higher Life movement taught that the second blessing was
an "enduement of power". Spirit baptism gave Christians the ability to witness
and to serve. Wesleyan teachers emphasized purity while Oberlin and higher life
advocates stressed power as the defining outcome of Spirit baptism. In the
early 1890s, R.C. Horner, a Canadian holiness evangelist, introduced a
theological distinction that would be important for the development of
Pentecostalism. He argued in his books "Pentecost" (1891) and "Bible Doctrines"
(1909) that the baptism in the Holy Spirit was not synonymous with the second
blessing but was actually a third work of grace subsequent to salvation and
sanctification that empowered the believer for service. Charles Fox Parham
would build on this doctrinal foundation when he identified speaking in tongues
as the Bible evidence of Spirit baptism. Views. The diverse views on Spirit-
baptism held among Christian traditions can be categorized into three main
groups. These are baptism with the Spirit as sacramental initiation (Orthodox
and Catholic churches), regeneration (Reformed tradition), and empowerment for
witness and vocation (Pentecostals and charismatics). Roman Catholic. The
Catholic Church teaches that baptism, confirmation, and the Eucharist—the
sacraments of Christian initiation—lay the foundations of the Christian life.
The Christian life is based on baptism. It is "the gateway to life in the
Spirit" and "signifies and actually brings about the birth of water and the
Spirit". The post-baptismal anointing (Chrismation in the Eastern churches)
signifies the gift of the Holy Spirit and announces a second anointing to be
conferred later in confirmation that completes the baptismal anointing.
Confirmation, then, is necessary for the completion of baptismal grace. When
confirmed, Catholics receive the "special outpouring of the Holy Spirit as once
granted to the apostles on the day of Pentecost". For the confirmand it
increases the seven gifts of the Holy Spirit (wisdom, understanding, counsel,
fortitude, knowledge, piety, and fear of the Lord), unites more fully to Christ
and the Church, and gives strength to confess Christ and defend the faith. The
rite of confirmation orients toward mission, and many liturgical texts remind
the initiate that the gift of the Holy Spirit should be used for service to the
church and the world. Reformed. The Reformed position on Spirit baptism is that
the gift of the Holy Spirit is given at the moment of regeneration, which, in
Protestant terms, is not predicated on water baptism or membership in the
visible church. Rather, all who have faith in Jesus Christ are members of the
invisible church and as such are given the Holy Spirit. Wesleyanism. Within the
Wesleyan tradition, baptism with the Holy Spirit has often been linked to a
sanctified life. The United Methodist Church has a sacramental view of baptism,
believing that it is by both water and Spirit and "involves dying to sin,
newness of life, union with Christ, receiving the Holy Spirit, and
incorporation into Christ's church". It also believes that baptism is the
"doorway to the sanctified life" defined as "a gift of the gracious presence of
the Holy Spirit, a yielding to the Spirit's power, a deepening of our love for
God and neighbor". Mormonism. In the Latter Day Saint movement, the "Baptism of
fire and of the Holy Ghost" refers to the experience of one who undergoes the
ordinance of confirmation with the laying on of hands to receive the gift of
the Holy Ghost. It follows baptism in water and is essential to salvation. The
gift of the Holy Ghost is the privilege of receiving inspiration, divine
manifestations, direction, spiritual gifts, and other blessings from the Holy
Spirit. It begins the lifetime process of sanctification. Pentecostal and
charismatic. Pentecostal and charismatic Christians believe that all Christians
have the Holy Spirit dwelling in them. However, they believe that the
experience commonly called "baptism in the Holy Spirit" is a separate and
distinct experience occurring sometime after regeneration. It is an empowering
experience, equipping Spirit-filled believers for witness and ministry.
Extending from this is the belief that all the spiritual gifts mentioned in the
New Testament are to be sought and exercised to build up the Church. It is
Spirit baptism that initiates the believer in the use of the spiritual gifts.
Pentecostals and charismatics look to the Bible to support their doctrinal
position. According to their biblical interpretation, the Gospel of John 20:22
shows that the disciples of Jesus were already born again before the Holy
Spirit fell at Pentecost. They then cite biblical examples in the Book of Acts
2, 8, 10, and 19 to show that it was common in the New Testament for Spirit
baptism to occur after conversion. In following the biblical pattern, they
argue, Christians today should also ask Jesus for this baptism which results in
greater power for ministry and witness. There are differences between
Pentecostal and charismatic Christians' understanding of Spirit baptism.
Classical Pentecostalism. Classical Pentecostalism includes any denomination or
group which has origins in the Pentecostal revival that began in 1901 and is
most identified with the Azusa Street Mission of Los Angeles. Some Pentecostal
denominations teach that speaking in tongues (see glossolalia) will always
follow Spirit baptism, though this is by no means universally believed or
practiced among Pentecostals. In some accounts of Spirit baptism, Pentecostals
report receiving visions, such as the account of Lucy Leatherman, an Azusa
Street participant: Charismatics. Charismatics trace their historical origins
to the charismatic movement of the 1960s and 1970s. They are distinguished from
Pentecostals because they tend to allow for differing viewpoints on whether
Spirit baptism is subsequent to conversion and whether tongues is always a sign
of receiving the baptism. Some charismatics remain within existing Protestant
and Catholic churches while others have started new denominations. The Catholic
Charismatic Renewal believes that there is a further experience of empowerment
with the Holy Spirit. As stated by Rev. Fr. Raniero Cantalamessa, "baptism in
the Spirit is not a sacrament, but it is related to a sacrament…to the
sacraments of Christian initiation. The baptism in the Spirit makes real and in
a way renews Christian initiation". Emphasis of the event is on the release of
existing spiritual gifts already given to the individual through baptism in
water and confirmation. During the 1980s, another renewal movement emerged
called the "Third Wave of the Holy Spirit" (the first wave was Pentecostalism
and the second wave was the charismatic movement). Third wave charismatics
stress that the preaching of the gospel, following the New Testament pattern,
should be accompanied by "signs, wonders, and miracles". They believe that all
Christians are baptized with the Holy Spirit at conversion, and prefer to call
subsequent experiences as "filling" with the Holy Spirit. John Wimber and the
Vineyard churches are most prominently associated with this label.
