Baptism for the dead Baptism for the dead, vicarious baptism or proxy baptism
today commonly refers to the religious practice of baptizing a person on behalf
of one who is dead—a living person receiving the ordinance on behalf of a
deceased person. Baptism for the dead is best known as a doctrine of the Latter
Day Saint movement, where it has been practiced since 1840. It is currently
practiced by The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church),
where it is performed only in dedicated temples, as well as in several (but not
all) other current factions of the Latter-day Saint movement. Those who
practice this rite view baptism as an indispensable requirement to enter the
Kingdom of God, and thus practice Baptism for the Dead to give those who have
died without ever having had the opportunity to receive baptism the opportunity
to receive it by proxy. The LDS Church teaches that those who have died may
choose to accept or reject the baptism done on their behalf. The modern term
itself is derived from a phrase "baptised for the dead" occurring twice in the
New Testament (), though the meaning of that phrase is an open question among
scholars. Early heresiologists Tertullian ("Against Marcion" 10) and Chrysostom
("Homilies" 40) attributed the practice to the Marcionites, whom they
identified as a heretical "gnostic" group. Consequently the practice was
forbidden by the Catholic Church, and is not practiced in modern mainstream
Christianity, whether Catholic, Eastern Orthodox, or Protestant. Practice. The
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. In the practice of The Church of
Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (or "Mormons"), a living person, acting as
proxy, is baptized by immersion on behalf of a deceased person. After giving a
short prayer that includes the name of the deceased individual, the proxy is
immersed briefly in the water, then brought up again. Baptism for the dead is a
distinctive ordinance of the church and is based on the belief that baptism is
a required ordinance for entry into the Kingdom of God. Community of Christ.
Some members of the early Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day
Saints (now known as the Community of Christ) also believed in baptism for the
dead, but it was never officially sanctioned by that organization, and was
considered highly controversial. A revelation and two letters written by Joseph
Smith, Jr. appertaining to baptism for the dead were removed from the RLDS
"Doctrine and Covenants" by a church general conference in 1970. Other Latter
Day Saint churches. In the Restoration Branches movement, which broke from the
RLDS Church in the 1980s, the question of Baptism for the Dead is at best
unsettled, reflecting their RLDS origin. Many adherents reject the validity of
this ordinance completely. Other Latter Day Saint denominations that accept
baptism for the dead include the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints
(Strangite) and The Church of Jesus Christ (Cutlerite). The Strangite Church
performed baptisms for the dead during the 1840s in Voree, Wisconsin and later
during the 1850s on Beaver Island, Michigan. In each case, the practice was
authorized by revelation given by James J. Strang. The question of whether the
Strangite Church still practices proxy baptism is an open one, but belief is
considered orthodox. Cutlerite practice permits baptisms for the dead to be
performed in baptismal fonts in Cutlerite meetinghouses (of which only two
exist today, one in Clitherall, Minnesota and the other in Independence,
Missouri). Though Cutlerites believe in the concept of temples, it is not
required that baptisms for the dead be performed in one. The meetinghouse
baptismal fonts are used for baptism of the living "and" for the dead.
Cutlerites have practiced baptisms for the dead sporadically throughout their
history (including during the early 1990s), but it is not known if they still
do so. As with the LDS Church and the Strangite Church, belief in this doctrine
is considered orthodox. Other Christian Churches. As part of their Sacraments,
the New Apostolic Church and Old Apostolic Church also practices Baptism for
the Dead, as well as Communion and Sealing to the Departed. In this practice a
proxy or substitute is baptised in the place of an unknown number of deceased
persons. According to NAC and OAC doctrine the deceased do not enter the body
of the substitute. In the Reformed Old Apostolic Church it is believed that all
deceased persons that are baptised reside within the body of the substitute.
Outside of Christianity. Outside of Christianity, proxy baptisms are practiced
by the Mandaeans of Iraq and Iran. Origins in Christianity. John Chrysostom
("Homilies" 40) alleges a similar practice among the Marcionites of the same
century: if one of their followers who was being prepared for baptism died
before receiving baptism, the dead person's corpse was addressed with the
question whether he wished to be baptized, whereupon another answered
affirmatively and was baptized for the dead person. In the same passage,
explained Paul's mention of people being "baptized "for" the dead" as a
reference to the profession of faith in their own future resurrection that
Christians made before being baptized. 1 Corinthians 15:29. In the context of
insisting that "in Christ shall all be made alive .. Christ the firstfruits;
afterward they that are Christ's", Paul wrote in : "Else what shall they do
which are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not at all? why are they then
baptized for the dead?" Different views have been expressed on the meaning of
the phrase "baptized for the dead", and on whether Paul gave his approval to
the practice. Meanings of the verb "baptizein". The Greek verb in Paul's phrase
"baptized for the dead" is "baptizein", which in Jewish Greek has a wider
reference than "baptism", applying primarily to the masculine noun "baptismos"
"ritual washing" The verb occurs four times in the Septuagint in the context of
ritual washing, "baptismos": Judith cleansing herself from menstrual impurity,
Naaman washing seven times to be cleansed from leprosy, etc. In the New
Testament only, the verb "baptizein" can also relate to the neuter noun
"baptisma" "baptism", a neologism unknown in the Septuagint and other pre-
Christian Jewish texts. This broadness in the meaning of "baptizein" is
reflected in English Bibles rendering "wash," where Jewish ritual washing is
meant, for example in Mark 7:4, which states that the Pharisees "except they
wash (Greek "baptize"), they do not eat", and "baptize" where "baptisma", the
new Christian rite, is intended. The older ritual washing use of "baptizein" is
relevant in the context of funerals since any Jew coming into contact with the
dead body must undertake ritual washing. During the Second Temple and early
Rabbinical period the regulations on "ritual washing" (Greek masculine noun
"baptismos") expanded and multiplied. This is documented in the Halakhah
Tractate Yadayim and Dead Sea Scrolls Peter Leithart (2007) suggests that
Paul's comment "why do they.." is an analogy between baptism (i.e. neuter
concept noun "baptisma") with Jewish ritual washing (i.e. masculine concrete
noun "baptismos") for contact with the dead following the Mosaic regulations in
Numbers 19. The phrase "ritually washed for the dead" does not occur in
intertestamental literature, but a possibly related idea of prayer for the dead
occurs in 2 Maccabees. Since the New Testament idea of "baptism" (Greek
"baptisma"), the rite of baptism, is not mentioned in the verse, it is open to
interpretation whether the verb "baptizein" refers to "ritual washing" (Greek
"baptismos") or "the rite of baptism" (Greek "baptisma") or is an analogy
between both. Meaning of the phrase. Some interpret "baptized for the dead" as
a metaphor for martyrdom, as in and baptism is a metaphor for suffering or
martyrdom; accordingly they would translate it as "being baptized with a view
to death". In this interpretation, the phrase is closely linked with what Paul
says immediately afterwards of the suffering that he himself faces and is
enabled to endure precisely because of his faith in his resurrection. This
interpretation is similar to that of John Chrysostom. Others interpret the
phrase as referring to simple baptism of an individual. For Martin Luther it
regarded a practice of being baptized "above" (the first of the meanings of the
preposition ὑπέρ, generally translated in this passage as "for") the tombs
of the dead. John Calvin saw it as a reference to being baptized when close to
death. The third interpretation sees the phrase as referring to vicarious
baptism on behalf of dead people performed in the belief that the dead were
thereby benefitted in some way. This belief is put forward as the reason why,
when Paul compares the Corinthians' experience to that of the Israelites in
crossing the Red Sea and being fed on manna, he insists that the Israelites
were not thereby prevented from sinning. Approved by Paul? The Tyndale Bible
Dictionary concludes that Paul probably did not approve the practice of baptism
for the dead. He refers to its practitioners as "they", not as "you" (the
Corinthian Christians to whom he wrote). The note in the Catholic New American
Bible is more cautious: "Baptized for the dead: this practice is not further
explained here, nor is it necessarily mentioned with approval, but Paul cites
it as something in their experience that attests in one more way to belief in
the resurrection." In this, it stays close to what Tertullian wrote in the year
207 or 208, when he said that Paul's only aim in alluding to the practice of
baptism for the dead, "whatever it may have been", was "that he might all the
more firmly insist upon the resurrection of the body, in proportion as they who
were vainly baptized for the dead resorted to the practice from their belief of
such a resurrection." Other views. Elaine Pagels (1992) seeks to explain 1
Corinthians as having reference to the Valentinian sect later numbered among
the "Gnostic" heresies. However Pagels view of Paul's epistles is not supported
by other scholars. Trinitarian Christian denominations generally do not accept
the Latter-day Saint interpretation of "baptism for the dead", mentioned in ,
though a few other contemporary Christian churches do practice such an
ordinance. LDS Church doctrine. Members of The Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints believe that baptism is a prerequisite for entry into the
kingdom of God as stated by Jesus in : "Except that a man be born of water and
of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God" (KJV). The LDS Church
teaches that performing baptisms for the dead allows this saving ordinance to
be offered on behalf of those who have died without accepting or knowing Jesus
Christ or his teachings during their mortal lives. It is taught that this is
the method by which all who have lived upon the earth will have the opportunity
to receive baptism and to thereby enter the Kingdom of God. Among other
Biblical references, Latter-day Saints cite Peter's statements that Jesus
preached to the spirits of the dead (KJV 1 Peter 3:19; 4:6) as evidence that
God in his justice provides an opportunity for the deceased to hear and accept
the gospel, if they don't receive that chance in mortality. As Peter affirmed
in Acts 2:37-38, the next step after acceptance of the gospel is baptism for
the remission of sins, which "doth also now save us" (KJV 1 Peter 3:21). The
LDS Church teaches that those in the afterlife who have been baptized by proxy
are free to accept or reject the ordinance done on their behalf. Baptism on
behalf of a deceased individual is not binding if that individual chooses to
reject it in the afterlife. Any member of the LDS Church, male or female, who
is at least 12 years old and holds a current temple recommend may act as a
proxy in this ordinance. Men must also hold the Aaronic Priesthood prior to
entering the temple. A man must act as proxy for a deceased man, and a woman
must act as proxy for a deceased woman. The concept of a spiritual proxy is
compared by some in the LDS Church to the belief that Jesus acted as proxy for
every human when he atoned for the sins of the world. Only an adult male holder
of the Melchizedek priesthood who has undergone the Endowment ordinance may
baptize others as proxies for the dead. Modern origin. LDS Church scripture
expands further upon this doctrine and states that such baptisms are to be
performed in temples. Vicarious baptism is performed in connection with other
vicarious ordinances in temples of the LDS Church, such as the Endowment and
celestial marriage. Initially, women could be baptized for dead men, and vice
versa; this, however, was changed in order to ensure that the person being
baptized for a dead man could also be ordained on their behalf to the
priesthood. Genealogy and baptism. The LDS Church holds that deceased persons
who have not accepted or had the opportunity to accept the gospel of Christ in
this life will have the opportunity to accept the gospel in the afterlife. As
all must follow Jesus Christ, they must also receive all the ordinances that a
living person is expected to receive, including baptism. For this reason,
members of the LDS Church are encouraged to research their genealogy. This
research is then used as the basis for church performing temple ordinances for
as many deceased persons as possible. As a part of these efforts, Mormons have
performed temple ordinances on behalf of a number of high profile people. Of
particular interest are: the Founding Fathers of the U.S., Presidents of the
U.S., Pope John Paul II, John Wesley, Christopher Columbus, Adolf Hitler, and
others. While members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints
consider it a great service to perform vicarious ordinances for the deceased,
some non-members have taken offense. To be sensitive to the issue of proxy
baptizing for non-Mormons that are not related to church members, the church in
recent years has published a general policy of performing temple ordinances
only for direct ancestors of church members. For example, the church is in the
process of removing sensitive names (such as Jewish Holocaust victims) from its
International Genealogical Index (IGI). D. Todd Christofferson of the church's
Presidency of the Seventy stated that removing the names is an "ongoing, labor
intensive process requiring name-by-name research ... When the Church is made
aware of documented concerns, action is taken ... Plans are underway to refine
this process." The LDS Church keeps records of the temple ordinances performed
for deceased persons, however the new FamilySearch, a web application for
accessing the church's genealogical databases, shows information on temple
ordinances only to registered LDS Church members and not to non-members. In
2008, a directive from the Vatican Congregation for the Clergy directed
Catholic dioceses to prevent the LDS Church from "microfilming and digitizing
information" contained in Catholic sacramental registers so that those whose
names were contained therein would not be subjected to vicarious Mormon
baptism, even though the Vatican had previously declared that Mormon baptism
was invalid. Controversy. Baptisms for the dead by the Church of Jesus Christ
of Latter-day Saints. Jewish Holocaust victims. The Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints performs vicarious baptisms for individuals regardless of
their race, sex, creed, religion, or morality. Some members of the LDS Church
have been baptized for both victims and perpetrators of the Holocaust,
including Anne Frank and Adolf Hitler, contrary to Church policy. Some Jewish
Holocaust survivors and some Jewish organizations have objected to this
practice. The LDS Church has urged members to submit the names of only their
own ancestors for ordinances, and to request permission of surviving family
members of people who have died within the past 95 years. Hundreds of thousands
of improperly submitted names not adhering to this policy have been removed
from the records of the church. Latter-day Saint apostle Boyd K. Packer has
stated the LDS Church is clear that it uses the public records it collects for
temple ordinance work. Despite the guidelines, some members of the church have
submitted the names of Holocaust victims, and prominent Nazis, such as Heinrich
Himmler, for vicarious baptism without adequate permission. In December 2002,
independent researcher Helen Radkey published a report showing that, following
a 1995 promise from the church to remove Jewish Nazi victims from its
International Genealogical Index, the church's database included the names of
about 19,000 who had a 40 to 50 percent chance "to be Holocaust victims ... in
Russia, Poland, France, and Austria." Genealogist Bernard Kouchel conducted a
search of the International Genealogical Index, and discovered that many well
known Jews had been vicariously baptized, including Maimonides, Albert
Einstein, and Irving Berlin, without family permission. Church official D. Todd
Christofferson told the "New York Times" that the church expends massive
amounts of resources attempting to purge improperly submitted names, but that
it is not feasible to expect the church to find each and every last one, and
that the agreement in 1995 did not place this type of responsibility on the
centralized church leadership. Jewish groups such as the Simon Wiesenthal
Center spoke out against the vicarious baptism of Holocaust perpetrators and
victims in the mid-1990s and again in the 2000s when they discovered the
practice, which they consider insensitive to the living and the dead, was
continuing. The associate dean of the Simon Wiesenthal Center, Abraham Cooper,
complained that infamous figures such as Adolf Hitler and Eva Braun appeared on
LDS genealogical records: "Whether official or not, the fact remains that this
is exactly the kind of activity that enraged and hurt, really, so many victims
of the Holocaust and caused alarm in the Jewish community." In 2008, the
American Gathering of Jewish Holocaust Survivors announced that, since the
church had repeatedly violated previous agreements, it would no longer
negotiate with the church to try to prevent vicarious baptism. Speaking on the
anniversary of Kristallnacht, Ernest Michel, a Holocaust survivor who reported
on the Nuremberg Trials, speaking as the honorary chairman of the American
Gathering of Holocaust Survivors, called on the LDS Church to "implement a
mechanism to undo what have done", and declared that the LDS Church had
repeatedly violated their agreements, and that talks with Mormon leaders were
now ended. Jewish groups, he said, would now turn to the court of public
opinion for justice. Michel called the practice a revision of history that
plays into the hands of Holocaust deniers, stating: "They tell me, that my
parents' Jewishness has not been altered but ... 100 years from now, how will
they be able to guarantee that my mother and father of blessed memory who lived
as Jews and were slaughtered by Hitler for no other reason than they were Jews,
will someday not be identified as Mormon victims of the Holocaust?" Church
officials, in response, stated that the church does not teach that vicarious
baptisms coerce deceased persons to become Mormons, nor does the church add
those names to its list of church members. Church officials have also stated
that, in accordance with the 1995 agreement, it has removed more than 300,000
names of Jewish Holocaust victims from its databases, as well as subsequently
removing names later identified by Jewish groups. Church officials have also
stated that a new version of the database, New FamilySearch, has been developed
and is currently being implemented that would help prevent the submission of
Holocaust victim names for temple ordinances. In February 2012, the issue re-
emerged after it was found that the parents of Holocaust survivor and Jewish
rights advocate Simon Wiesenthal were added to the genealogical database.
Shortly afterward, news stories announced that Anne Frank had been baptized by
proxy for the ninth time, at a Latter-day Saint temple in the Dominican
Republic. Barack Obama's mother. In May 2009, it was discovered that President
Barack Obama's mother, Stanley Ann Dunham, "who died in 1995, was baptized
posthumously into The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints last year
during her son's campaign. The White House declined to comment Tuesday 5,
2009." The June 4, 2008 baptism was performed in the Provo Utah Temple, and a
week later the ritual of endowment was performed on behalf of Dunham. LDS
Church spokesman Scott Trotter confirmed that someone did perform a proxy
baptism for Dunham, but said it was "counter to Church policy for a church
member to submit names for baptism for persons to whom they are not related."
