Bar and Bat Mitzvah Bar Mitzvah () and Bat Mitzvah () are Jewish coming of age
rituals. Bar "בר" is a Jewish Babylonian Aramaic word literally meaning son,
in Hebrew it's Ben "בן". Bat "בת" is Hebrew for girl, and Mitzvah
"מצוה" is a commandment and a law. While this literally translates to "son
of the law" or "daughter of the law", the rabbinical phrase "bar" means here
"under the category of" or "subject to", making "Bar Mitzvah" translate to "an
who is subject to the law". According to Jewish law, when Jewish boys become
13, they become accountable for their actions and become a Bar Mitzvah (plural:
"B'nai Mitzvah"). A Bat Mitzvah occurs when Jewish girls become 12, and it
means the same as it does for boys- a rite of passage from being considered
unable to properly understand the Torah to being considered old enough to begin
to understand and thus for boys and girls alike to be treated more like adults.
In addition to being considered accountable for their actions from a religious
perspective, B'nai mitzvah may be counted towards a minyan (prayer quorum) and
may lead prayer and other religious services in the family and the community.
The age of B'nai Mitzvah was selected because it roughly coincides with
physical puberty. Prior to a child reaching Bar or Bat Mitzvah, the child's
parents hold the responsibility for the child's actions. After this age,
children bear their own responsibility for Jewish ritual law, tradition, and
ethics and are able to participate in all areas of Jewish community life.
Significance. Reaching the age of bar mitzvah signifies becoming a full-fledged
member of the Jewish community with the responsibilities that come with it.
These include moral responsibility for own actions, eligibility to be called to
read from the Torah and lead or participate in a Minyan, May possess personal
property, May be legally married according to Jewish law, Must follow the 613
laws of the Torah and keep the Halakha, May testify as a witness in a Beth Din
(Rabbinical court) case. Many congregations require pre-bar mitzvah children to
attend a minimum number of Shabbat prayer services at the synagogue, study at a
Hebrew School, take on a charity or community service project, and maintain
membership in good standing with the synagogue. In addition to study and
preparation offered through the synagogue and Hebrew schools, bar mitzvah
tutors may be hired to prepare the youngster through the study of Hebrew, Torah
cantillation and basic Jewish concepts. Aliyah to the Torah. The widespread
practice is that on the first Sabbath of his thirteenth year, a boy is called
up to read from the weekly portion of the Law (five books of Moses), either as
one of the first seven men or as the last, in which case he will read the
closing verses and the Haftarah (selections from the books of the Prophets);
and if he is unable to read, to recite at least the benediction before and
after the reading. (Calling someone up to say the Torah blessings during a
service is called an Aliyah, from the Hebrew: עֲלִיָּה, from the verb
"la'alot", לעלות, meaning, "to rise, to ascend; to go up"). He may also
give a d'var Torah (a discussion of some Torah issue, such as a discussion of
that week's Torah portion) and/or lead part or all of the prayer services. In
non-orthodox circles, the above applies to a girl at the time of her Bat
Mitzvah as well. In Orthodox congregations, a Bat Mitzvah ceremony will not
include the Bat Mitzvah girl leading religious services, as women are
ineligible to lead communal religious services in the Orthodox tradition. Some
progressive Orthodox congregations do allow women, including Bat Mitzvah girls,
to read Torah or lead prayers at women-only prayer groups. Precisely what the
Bar/Bat Mitzvah should lead during the service varies in Judaism's different
denominations and from one congregation to another and is not fixed by Jewish
law. In Orthodox circles, the occasion is sometimes celebrated during a weekday
service that includes reading from the Torah, such as a Monday or Thursday
morning service, in which case the Bar Mitzvah will also lay tefillin for the
first time publicly. Some communities or families may delay the celebration for
reasons such as availability of a Shabbat during which no other celebration has
been scheduled, or due to the desire to permit family to travel to the event.
However, this does not delay the onset of rights and responsibilities of being
a Jewish adult which comes about strictly by virtue of age. Tefillin. The
custom of laying tefillin begins when a boy reaches bar mitzvah age. In some
Orthodox circles, however, the custom is for the Bar Mitzvah boy to begin
putting Tefillin on one to three months before his Bar Mitzvah. This way, by
the time he is obligated in the commandment, he will already know how to
fulfill it properly. Bar mitzvah parties. B'nai Mitzvah festivities typically
include a seudat mitzvah a celebratory meal with family, friends, and members
of the community. Others may celebrate in different ways such as taking the bar
mitzvah on a special trip or organizing some special event in the celebrant's
honor. In many communities, the celebrant is given a certificate. The main idea
according to the Orthodox view is that this boy or girl is so happy that they
are now commanded to do mitzvah and now they will earn reward in the next world
for their efforts, that they throw a party and have a festive meal. Bar and Bat
Mitzvah parties in America are often lavish affairs held at hotels and country
clubs with hundreds of guests. The trend has been mocked, most notably in the
movie "Keeping Up With The Steins". Rabbi Shmuley Boteach says that over-the-
top bar mitzvah parties were already common when he was growing up in Miami in
the 1970s. Bat mitzvah customs. Today most non-Orthodox Jews celebrate a girl's
Bat Mitzvah in the same way as a boy's Bar Mitzvah. All Reform and
Reconstructionist, and most Conservative synagogues have egalitarian
participation, in which women read from the Torah and lead services. The
majority of Orthodox Jews reject the idea that a woman can publicly read from
the Torah or lead prayer services whenever there is a minyan (quorum of 10
males) available to do so. However, the public celebration of a girl becoming
Bat Mitzvah in other ways has made strong inroads into Modern Orthodox Judaism
and also into some elements of Haredi Judaism. In these congregations, women do
not read from the Torah or lead prayer services, but they occasionally lecture
on a Jewish topic to mark their coming of age, learn a book of Tanakh, recite
verses from the Book of Esther or the Book of Psalms, or say prayers from the
siddur. In some Modern Orthodox circles, Bat Mitzvah girls will read from the
Torah and lead prayer services in a women's tefillah. Rabbi Moshe Feinstein, a
prominent Orthodox "posek," has ruled that Bat Mitzvah celebrations are
allowable and should not be construed as imitating non-Jewish customs; however,
they do not have the status of seudat mitzvah. Rabbi Ovadiah Yosef holds that
it is a seudat mitzvah. The event is celebrated by joyous festivity, the Bat
Mitzvah girl delivering on this occasion a learned discourse or oration at the
table before the invited guests, who offer her presents, while the rabbi or
teacher gives her her blessing, accompanying it at times with an address. There
were occasional attempts to recognize a girl's coming of age in eastern Europe
in the 19th and 20th centuries, the former in Warsaw (1843) and the latter in
Lemberg (1902). The occasion was marked by a party without any ritual in the
synagogue. According to the archivist at the Great Synagogue in Rome, the
custom of a young woman being called up in synagogue before the entire
community dates back to the early years of the Roman Jewish community
approximately 2,300 years ago. The community recognized her as "being of age"
and acknowledged her in a public fashion. This would support more modern
documents that record an Orthodox Jewish Italian rite for becoming Bat Mitzvah
(which involved an "entrance into the minyan" ceremony, in which boys of
thirteen and girls of twelve recited a blessing) since the mid-19th century.
There were also Bat Mitzvahs held in the 19th century in Iraq. All this may
have influenced the American rabbi Mordecai M. Kaplan, who held the first
public celebration of a Bat Mitzvah in the United States, for his daughter
Judith, on March 18, 1922, at the Society for the Advancement of Judaism (his
synagogue) in New York City. Judith recited the preliminary blessing, read a
portion of that week's Torah portion in Hebrew and English, and then intoned
the closing blessing. Kaplan, who at that time claimed to be an Orthodox rabbi,
joined Conservative Judaism and then became the founder of Reconstructionist
Judaism, influenced Jews from all branches of non-Orthodox Judaism, through his
position at the Jewish Theological Seminary of America. At the time, most
Orthodox rabbis strongly rejected the idea of a Bat Mitzvah ceremony.
Alternative ceremonies. Instead of reading from the Torah, some Humanist Jews
prefer a research paper on a topic in Jewish history to mark their coming of
age. Secular Jewish Sunday schools and communities—including those affiliated
with the Congress of Secular Jewish Organizations and the Arbeiter Ring
(Workmen's Circle)—encourage the youngsters to select any topic that
interests them and relates to the Jewish part of their identities. The kibbutz
movement in Israel also encouraged the celebration of the Bar Mitzvah. All
those coming of age in the community for that year would take on a project and
research in a topic of Jewish or Zionist interest. Today many kibbutz children
are opting for a more traditional barmitzvah celebration. Among some Jews, a
man who has reached the age of 83 will customarily celebrate a second bar
mitzvah, under the logic that in the Torah it says that a "normal" lifespan is
70 years, so that an 83-year-old can be considered 13 in a second lifetime.
This practice has become increasingly uncommon. As the ceremony became accepted
for females as well as males, many women chose to celebrate the ceremony even
though they were much older, as a way of formalizing and celebrating their
place in the adult Jewish community. A Bark Mitzvah is a pseudo-traditional
observance and celebration of a dog's coming of age, as in the Jewish
traditional Bar Mitzvah and Bat Mitzvah. The term has been in use since at
least as early as 1997, and Bark Mitzvahs are sometimes held as an adjunct to
the festival of Purim. Gifts. Bar or Bat Mitzvah celebrations have become an
occasion to give the celebrant a commemorative gift. Traditionally, common
gifts include books with religious or educational value, religious items,
writing implements, savings bonds (to be used for the child's college
education), gift certificates, or money. Gifts of cash have become commonplace
in recent times. As with charity and all other gifts, it has become common to
give in multiples of 18, since the "gematria", or numerical equivalent of the
Hebrew word for "life", ("chai"), is the number 18. Monetary gifts in multiples
of 18 are considered to be particularly auspicious and have become very common
for Bar/Bat Mitzvahs. Many Bar/Bat Mitzvah also receive their first tallit (a
Jewish prayer shawl) from their parents to be used for the occasion and
tefillin where this is appropriate. Jewellery is a common gift for girls at a
Bat Mitzvah celebration. Another meaningful gift for the Bat Mitzvah girl are
Shabbat candlesticks because it is the duty and honour of the woman to light
the candles. References. Notes Further reading External links. What happens in
the ceroo
