Beatific vision The beatific vision () – in Christian theology is the
ultimate direct self communication of God to the individual person, when she or
he reaches, as a member of redeemed humanity in the "communion of saints",
perfect salvation in its entirety, i.e. heaven. The notion of vision stresses
the intellectual component of salvation, though it encompasses the whole of
human experience of joy, happiness coming from seeing God finally "face to
face" and not imperfectly through faith (1 Cor 13:11–12). It is related to
the Catholic and Eastern Orthodox belief in theosis, and is seen in most – if
not all – church denominations as the reward for Christians in the afterlife.
Christianity. While humans' understanding of God while alive is indirect
(mediation/prayer, not actually "looking" at Him), the beatific vision is
direct (immediate, visual) or literal seeing God. In other words, the beatific
vision means a soul is actually "looking" at God, as is, viewing Him without
any sort of censorship like that depicted by the prophet Isaiah. Furthermore,
seeing God in Beatific vision does "not" take the viewer's life, as it would on
earth. History of the beatific vision. In Christianity, the Bible teaches that
God "dwells in unapproachable light, whom no one has even seen or can see" (1
Timothy 6:16), but when God reveals Himself to us in heaven we will then see
Him "face to face" (1 Corinthians 13:12; Matthew 5:8; Psalm 17:15). This
concept has been termed "the beatific vision of God" by theologians of the
Catholic Church as well as various Protestant denominations, including the
Lutheran Church and the Methodist Church. Saint Cyprian wrote of the saved
seeing God in the Kingdom of Heaven. "How great will your glory and happiness
be, to be allowed to see God, to be honored with sharing the joy of salvation
and eternal light with Christ your Lord and God... to delight in the joy of
immortality in the Kingdom of Heaven with the righteous and God's friends" ~
St. Cyprian Pace, Edward. "Beatific Vision." The Catholic Encyclopedia. Vol. 2.
New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1907. 5 Jan. 2011
www.newadvent.org/cathen/02364a.htm>. In Catholic theology, the intercession of
saints is valid because those who have died in the Faith are with God in Heaven
and enjoy the Beatific Vision, i.e., unmediated access to God's Presence,
actually in Paradise itself, seeing God. Thomas Aquinas. Thomas Aquinas defined
the beatific vision as the human being's "final end" in which one attains to a
perfect happiness. Thomas reasons that one is perfectly happy only when all
one's desires are perfectly satisfied, to the degree that happiness could not
increase and could not be lost. "Man is not perfectly happy, so long as
something remains for him to desire and seek."STh I–II, q., 3, a. 8. But this
kind of perfect happiness cannot be found in any physical pleasure, any amount
of worldly power, any degree of temporal fame or honor, or indeed in any finite
reality. It can only be found in something that is infinite and perfect – and
this is God. STh I–II, q. 2, a. 8. And since God is not a material thing but
is pure spirit, we are united to God by knowing and loving him. Consequently,
the most perfect union with God is the most perfect human happiness and the
goal of the whole of the human life. But we cannot attain to this happiness by
our own natural powers; it is a gift that must be given to us by God, who
strengthens us by the "light of glory" so that we can see him as he is, without
any intermediary. (Thomas quotes Psalm 35:10 on this point: "In your light we
shall see light.")STh I, q. 12, a. 4. Further, since every created image or
likeness of God (including even the most perfect "ideas" or "images" of God we
might generate in our minds) is necessarily finite, it would thus be infinitely
less than God himself.STh I, q. 12, a. 2. The only perfect and infinite good,
therefore, is God himself, which is why Aquinas argues that our perfect
happiness and final end can only be the direct union with God himself and not
with any created image of him. This union comes about by a kind of "seeing"
perfectly the divine essence itself, a gift given to our intellects when God
joins them directly to himself without any intermediary. And since in seeing
this perfect vision of what (and who) God is, we grasp also his perfect
goodness, this act of "seeing" is at the same time a perfect act of loving God
as the highest and infinite goodness. According to Aquinas, the Beatific Vision
surpasses both faith and reason. Rational knowledge does not fully satisfy
humankind's innate desire to know God, since reason is primarily concerned with
sensible objects and thus can only infer its conclusions about God indirectly.
"Summa Theologiae" The theological virtue of faith, too, is incomplete, since
Aquinas thinks that it always implies some imperfection in the understanding.
The believer does not wish to remain merely on the level of faith but to grasp
directly the object of faith, who is God himself. "Summa Contra Gentiles" Thus
only the fullness of the Beatific Vision satisfies this fundamental desire of
the human soul to know God. Quoting St Paul, Aquinas notes ""We see now in a
glass darkly, but then face to face"" (i Cor. 13:12). The Beatific Vision is
the final reward for those saints elect by God to partake in and "enjoy the
same happiness wherewith God is happy, seeing Him in the way which He sees
Himself" in the next life. "Summa Contra Gentiles" Pope John XXII and the
Beatific Vision controversy. Pope John XXII (1316–1334) caused a controversy
involving the Beatific Vision. He said not as Pope but as a private theologian
that the saved do not attain the Beatific Vision until Judgment Day, a view
more consistent with soul sleep.： The general understanding at the time was
that the saved attained Heaven after being purified and before Judgment Day. He
never proclaimed his belief as doctrine but rather as an opinion (see ex
cathedra, as defined at the First Vatican Council in 1870). The Sacred College
of Cardinals held a consistory on the problem in January 1334, and Pope John
backed away from his novel views to the more standard understanding. His
successor, Pope Benedict XII, declared it doctrine that the saved see Heaven
(and thus, God) before Judgment Day. Platonism. In the philosophy of Plato, the
beatific vision is the vision of the "My opinion is that in the world of
knowledge the idea of good (the Good) appears last of all, and is seen only
with an effort; and, when seen, is also inferred to be the universal author of
all things beautiful and right, parent of light and of the lord of light in
this visible world, and the immediate source of reason and truth in the
intellectual." (517b,c) Thus, for Plato, the Good appears to correspond to God
in Christian theology. St. Augustine expressed views similar to Plato's on this
subject, and was familiar with Plato's ideas, most likely via Neoplatonist
writings. In the Eleusinian Mysteries Socrates' mystic vision of initiation
from Plato's Phaedrus. There was a time when with the rest of the happy band
they saw beauty shining in brightness, – we philosophers following in the
train of Zeus, others in company with other gods; and then we beheld the
beatific vision and were initiated into a mystery which may be truly called
most blessed, celebrated by us in our state of innocence before we had any
experience of evils to come, when we were admitted to the sight of apparitions
innocent and simple and calm and happy, which we beheld shining in pure light.
Phaedrus:250 Hinduism. The vedic concept of having a visual perception of God
is generically called darshan. The key difference seems to be that one can also
have a darshan when God appears while the person is living. The seeing of blue
and yellow colors while in samadhi, which is a state of union with the
omnipresent Brahman, who is beyond all duality, is also similar to the idea of
beatific vision. Islam. Sunni Islam also has the idea of beatific vision. The
Qur'an speaks of believers seeing Allah in paradise. In chapter 75, verses
22–23, it states ""On that day, faces shall be radiant, gazing upon their
Lord."." "Jarir bin `Abdullah Al-Bajali reported: We were sitting with the
Messenger of Allah when he looked at the full moon and observed, "You will see
your Lord in the Hereafter as you see this moon having no difficulty in seeing
it." chapter 10 Hadith number 529" Shia Islam, however, is against this idea.
Shiites believe that it's impossible to see God because if god can be seen then
god has a form. And if god has a form then god needs the form and that can't be
because god is absolute.
