Beelzebub Beelzebub ( or ; (, "Baʿal Zəvûv" , "Ba‘al az-Zubab";, literally
"Lord of the Flies"; , "Velzevoúl"; ), with numerous archaic variants, is a
Semitic deity that was worshiped in the Philistine city of Ekron. In later
Christian and Biblical sources, he is referred to as another name for Satan,
and in demonology, is one of the seven princes of Hell. Hebrew Bible. The
source for the name Ba‘al Zebûb / Beelzebub is in , where King Ahaziah of
Israel, after seriously injuring himself in a fall, sends messengers to inquire
of Ba‘al Zebûb, the god of the Philistine city of Ekron, to learn if he will
recover. Elijah the Prophet then condemns Ahaziah to die by Yahweh's words
because Ahaziah sought counsel from Ba‘al Zebûb rather than from Yahweh.
"Ba‘al Zəbûb" is variously understood to mean "lord of the flies" or "lord
of the (heavenly) dwelling". Originally the name of a Philistine god, "Ba'al",
meaning "Lord" in Ugaritic, was used in conjunction with a descriptive name of
a specific god. Jewish scholars have interpreted the title of "Lord of Flies"
as the Hebrew way of calling Ba'al a pile of dung and comparing Ba'al followers
to flies. The Septuagint renders the name as "Baalzebub" (βααλζεβούβ)
and as "Baal muian" (βααλ μυιαν, "Baal of flies"), but Symmachus the
Ebionite may have reflected a tradition of its offensive ancient name when he
rendered it as "Beelzeboul". Scholars are divided, in regard to the god of
Ekron, between the belief that "zebub" may be the original affix to Baal and
that it is a substitute for an original "zbl" which, after the discoveries of
Ras Shamra, has been connected with the title of "prince", frequently
attributed to Baal in mythological texts. In addition to the intrinsic weakness
of this last position, which is not supported by the versions, is the fact that
it was long ago suggested that there was a relationship between the Philistine
god and cults of fly or apotropaic divinities appearing in the Hellenic world,
such as Zeus Apomyios or Myiagros. It is exactly this last connection which is
confirmed by the Ugaritic text when we examine how Baal affects the expulsion
of the flies which are the patient's sickness. According to Francesco Saracino
(1982) this series of elements may be inconclusive as evidence, but the fact
that in relationship to Baal Zebub, the two constituent terms are here linked,
joined by a function ("ndy") that is typical of some divinities attested in the
Mediterranean world, is a strong argument in favor of the authenticity of the
name of the god of Ekron, and of his possible therapeutic activities, which are
implicit in , etc. Second temple period literature. In the "Testament of
Solomon", a Hellenistic Jewish text but with substantial Christian
interpolations, Beelzebul (not Beelzebub) appears as prince of the demons and
says (6.2) that he was formerly a leading heavenly angel who was (6.7)
associated with the star Hesperus (which is the normal Greek name for the
planet Venus (Αφροδíτη) as evening star). Seemingly, Beelzebul here is
simply Satan/Lucifer. Beelzebul claims to cause destruction through tyrants, to
cause demons to be worshipped among men, to excite priests to lust, to cause
jealousies in cities and murders, and to bring on war. Rabbinical literature.
Rabbinical literature commentary equates Baal Zebub of Ekron as lord of the
"fly." The word "Beelzebub" in rabbinical texts is a mockery of the Ba'al
religion, which ancient Hebrews considered to be idol (or false God) worship.
New Testament. In , the Pharisees accuse Jesus of driving out demons by the
power of Beelzeboul, prince of demons, the name also appearing in the expanded
version in and . The name also occurs in . It is unknown whether Symmachus was
correct in identifying these names, because we otherwise know nothing about
either of them. "Zeboul" might derive from a slurred pronunciation of "zebûb";
from "zebel", a word used to mean "dung" in the Targums; or from Hebrew
"zebûl" found in in the phrase "bêt-zebûl", "lofty house". In any case, the
form "Beelzebub" was substituted for "Beelzeboul" in the Syriac translation and
Latin Vulgate translation of the gospels, and this substitution was repeated in
the King James Version of the Bible, the resulting in the form "Beelzeboul"
being mostly unknown to Western European and descendant cultures until some
more recent translations restored it. Beelzebub is also identified in the New
Testament as Satan, the "prince of the demons". Biblical scholar Thomas Kelly
Cheyne suggested that it might be a derogatory corruption of "Ba‘al Zəbûl",
"Lord of the High Place" (i.e., Heaven) or "High Lord". In Arabic, the name is
retained as "Ba‘al dhubaab / zubaab" (بعل الذباب), literally "Lord
of the flies". Christian tradition. Texts of the "Acts of Pilate" (also known
as the "Gospel of Nicodemus") vary in whether they use "Beelzebul" or
"Beelzebub". The name is used by Hades as a secondary name for Satan, but it
may vary with each translation of the text; other versions give the name
Beelzebub as Beelzebub, but separates him from Satan. Christian demonology and
occult. Beelzebub is commonly described as placed high in Hell's hierarchy; he
was of the order of Seraphim, which in Hebrew means "fiery serpents". According
to the stories of the 16th-century occultist Johann Weyer, Beelzebub led a
successful revolt against Satan, is the chief lieutenant of Lucifer, the
Emperor of Hell, and presides over the Order of the Fly. Similarly, the 17th-
century exorcist Sebastien Michaelis, in his "Admirable History" (1612), placed
Beelzebub among the three most prominent fallen angels, the other two being
Lucifer and Leviathan, whereas two 18th-century works identified an unholy
trinity consisting of Beelzebub, Lucifer, and Astaroth. John Milton featured
Beelzebub seemingly as the second-ranking of the many fallen cherubim in the
epic poem "Paradise Lost", first published in 1667. Milton wrote of Beelzebub,
"than whom, Satan except, none higher sat." Beelzebub is also a character in
John Bunyan's "The Pilgrim's Progress", first published in 1678. Sebastien
Michaelis associated Beelzebub with the deadly sin of pride. However, according
to Peter Binsfeld, Beelzebub was the demon of gluttony, one of the other seven
deadly sins, whereas Francis Barrett asserted that Beelzebub was the prince of
false gods. In any event, Beelzebub was frequently named as an object of
supplication by confessed witches. Within religious circles, the accusation of
demon possession has been used as both an insult and an attempt to categorise
unexplained behavior. Not only have the Pharisees disparagingly accused Jesus
of using Beelzebub's demonic powers to heal people (Luke 11:14-26), but others
have been labeled possessed for acts of an extreme nature. Down through
history, Beelzebub has been held responsible for many cases of demon
possession, such as that of Sister Madeleine de Demandolx de la Palud, Aix-en-
Provence in 1611, whose relationship with Father Jean-Baptiste Gaufridi led not
only to countless traumatic events at the hands of her inquisitors but also to
the torture and execution of that "bewitcher of young nuns", Gaufridi himself.
Beelzebub was also imagined to be sowing his influence in Salem, Massachusetts:
his name came up repeatedly during the Salem witch trials, the last large-scale
public expression of witch hysteria in North America or Europe, and afterwards,
Rev. Cotton Mather wrote a pamphlet entitled "Of Beelzebub and his Plot".
