Order of Saint Benedict The Order of Saint Benedict (Latin name: "Ordo Sancti
Benedicti") is a Roman Catholic religious order of independent monastic
communities that observe the Rule of Saint Benedict. Within the order, each
individual community (which may be a monastery, a priory or abbey) maintains
its own autonomy, while the organization as a whole exists to represent their
mutual interests. Today the terms ""Order of Saint Benedict"" and ""Benedictine
Order"" are also used frequently to refer to the total of the independent
Benedictine abbeys, thereby giving the wrong impression of a "generalate" or
"motherhouse" with jurisdiction over dependent communities. The Benedictine
Confederation, which was established in 1883 by Pope Leo XIII in his brief
"Summum semper", is the international governing body of the order, headed by
the Abbot Primate. Members of the order generally use the initials O.S.B. after
their name. Historical development. The monastery at Subiaco established in
Italy by Saint Benedict of Nursia circa 529 was the first of a dozen
monasteries founded by him. Even so, there is no evidence to suggest that he
intended to found an order. To the contrary, the Rule of St Benedict
presupposes the autonomy of each community. Despite the absence of a
Benedictine order, since most monasteries founded during the Middle Ages
adopted the Rule of St Benedict, it became the standard for Western
Monasticism. Today Benedictine monasticism is fundamentally different from
other Western religious orders insofar as its individual communities are not
part of a religious order with "Generalates" and "Superiors General". Rather,
in modern times, the various houses have formed themselves loosely into
congregations (for example, Cassinese, English, Solesmes, Subiaco, Camaldolese,
Sylvestrines) that in turn are represented in the Benedictine Confederation
that came into existence through Pope Leo XIII's Apostolic Brief "Summum
semper" on July 12, 1883. This organization facilitates dialogue of Benedictine
communities with each other and the relationship between Benedictine
communities and other religious orders and the church at large. The Rule of
Saint Benedict is also used by a number of religious orders that began as
reforms of the Benedictine tradition such as the Cistercians and Trappists
although none of these groups are part of the Benedictine Confederation. The
largest number of Benedictines are Roman Catholics, but there are also some
within the Anglican Communion and occasionally within other Christian
denominations as well, for example, within the Lutheran Church. England. In the
English Reformation, all monasteries were dissolved and their lands confiscated
by the Crown, forcing their Catholic members to flee into exile on the
Continent, although during the 19th century they were able to return to
England, including to Selby Abbey in Yorkshire, one of the few great monastic
churches to survive the Dissolution. Noteworthy, too, is St. Mildred's Priory,
Isle of Thanet, Kent, built in 1027 on the site of an Abbey founded in 670 by
the daughter of the first Christian King of Kent. Currently the Priory is home
to a community of Benedictine nuns. Four of the most notable English Abbeys are
the Basilica of St Gregory the Great at Downside, commonly known as Downside
Abbey, Ealing Abbey in Ealing, West London and St. Lawrence's in Yorkshire
(Ampleforth Abbey)and Worth Abbey which has appeared in two BBC2 TV programmes;
'The Monastery (BBC TV series)' and 'The Big Silence' . In 1928, Prinknash
Abbey was officially returned to the Benedictines after four hundred years.
Henry VIII had used the site as a hunting lodge. During the next few years,
Prinknash Park, so called, was used as a home, until it was returned to the
order. Since the Oxford Movement there has also been a modest flourishing of
Benedictine monasticism in the Anglican Church and Protestant Churches.
Anglican Benedictine Abbots are invited guests of the Benedictine Abbot Primate
in Rome at Abbatial gatherings at Sant'Anselmo. There are an estimated 2,400
celibate Anglican Religious (1080 men and 1320 women) in the Anglican Communion
as a whole, some of whom have adopted the Rule of St. Benedict. For a full list
of all historic Benedictine houses in England & Wales see below. France.
Monasticism had been introduced into the region of modern France during the
Roman era by St. Martin of Tours, who founded the first monastery in Western
Europe. The Rule of St. Benedict was promoted by various rulers of France,
especially the House of Capet. Figures such as Benedict of Aniane were
authorized by the Emperor Louis the Pious and his successors to promote its
adoption by monasteries throughout the Holy Roman Empire. It expanded
throughout the next millennium, growing through periods of revival and decay
over the centuries. Monasteries were among the institutions of the Catholic
Church swept away during the French Revolution. Monasteries were again allowed
to form in the 19th century under the Bourbon Restoration. Later that century,
under the Third French Republic, laws were enacted preventing religious
teaching. The original intent was to allow secular schools. Thus in 1880 and
1882, Benedictine teaching monks were effectively exiled; this was not
completed until 1901. Benedictine vow and life. The Rule of Saint Benedict (ch.
58.17) requires candidates for reception into a Benedictine community to
promise solemnly "stability" (to remain in the same monastery), "conversatio
morum" (an idiomatic Latin phrase suggesting "conversion of manners"), and
"obedience" (to the superior, because the superior holds the place of Christ in
their community). This solemn commitment tends to be referred to as the
"Benedictine vow" and is the Benedictine antecedent and equivalent of the
evangelical counsels professed by candidates for reception into a religious
order. Much scholarship over the last 50 years has been dedicated to the
translation of "conversatio morum". The older translation "conversion of life"
has generally been replaced with phrases such as "a monastic manner of life,"
drawing from the Vulgate's use of "conversatio" as the translation of
"citizenship" in Philippians 3:22. Some scholars have claimed that the vow
formula of the Rule is best translated as "to live in this place as a monk, in
obedience to its rule and abbot." Benedictine abbots and abbesses have full
jurisdiction of their abbey and thus absolute authority over the monks or nuns
who are resident. This authority includes the power to assign duties, to decide
which books may or may not be read, to regulate comings and goings, and to
punish and excommunicate. A tight communal timetable (horarium) is meant to
ensure that the time given by God is not wasted but in whichever way necessary
used in his service, whether for prayer, work, meals, spiritual reading, sleep.
Although Benedictines do not take a vow of silence, hours of strict silence are
set, and at other time silence is maintained as much as is practically
possible. Social conversations tend to be limited to communal recreation times.
But such details, like many others details of the daily routine of a
Benedictine house that the Rule of St Benedict leaves to the discretion of the
superior, are set out in its customary. In the Roman Catholic Church according
to the norms of the Code of Canon Law 1983 a Benedictine abbey is a "religious
institute", and its professed members are therefore members of the "Consecrated
Life", commonly referred to as "Religious". Benedictine monks who have not been
ordained and all nuns are members of the laity among the Christian faithful.
Only those Benedictine monks who have been ordained as a deacon or priest are
also members of the clergy of the Roman Catholic Church. Benedictine Oblates
endeavor to embrace the spirit of the Benedictine vow in their own life in the
world.
