Bhakti movement The Bhakti movement is a Hindu religious movement in which the
main spiritual practice is loving devotion among the Shaivite and Vaishnava
saints. The Bhakti movement originated in ancient Tamil Nadu and began to
spread to the north during the late medieval ages when north India was under
Islamic rule. The Islamic rulers were pressing public to convert religion from
Hindu to Islam. The Bhakti movement was counter to the prevalent caste ideology
which was dividing Hinduism. So, the Bhakti movement has its own importance to
save Hinduism. There was no grouping of the mystics into Shaiva and Vaishnava
devotees as in the south. The movement was spontaneous and the mystics had
their own versions of devotional expression. Unlike in the south, where
devotion was centered on both Shiva and Vishnu (in all his forms), the northern
devotional movement was centered on Rama and Krishna, both of whom are
considered incarnations of Vishnu. Despite this, the sect of Shiva or of the
Devi did not go into decline. In fact for all of its history the Bhakti
movement co-existed peacefully with the other movements in Hinduism. It was
initially considered unorthodox, as it rebelled against caste distinctions and
disregarded Brahmanic rituals, which according to Bhakti saints were not
necessary for salvation. In the course of time, however, owing to its immense
popularity among the masses (and even royal patronage) it became 'orthodox' and
continues to be one of the most important modes of religious expression in
modern India. During the 14th–17th centuries, a great "Bhakti" movement swept
through central and northern India, initiated by a loosely associated group of
teachers or "sants". Ramananda, Ravidas, Srimanta Sankardeva, Chaitanya
Mahaprabhu, Vallabhacharya, Surdas, Meera Bai, Kabir, Tulsidas, Namdev,
Dnyaneshwar, Tukaram and other mystics spearheaded the Bhakti movement in the
North while Annamacharya, Bhadrachala Ramadas, Tyagaraja among others
propagated Bhakti in the South. They taught that people could cast aside the
heavy burdens of ritual and caste, and the subtle complexities of philosophy,
and simply express their overwhelming love for God. This period was also
characterized by a spate of devotional literature in vernacular prose and
poetry in the ethnic languages of the various Indian states or provinces. While
many of the Bhakti mystics focused their attention on Krishna or Rama, it did
not necessarily mean that the sect of Shiva was marginalized. In the twelfth
century Basava founded the ViraShaiva school or Virashaivism. He rejected the
caste system, denied the supremacy of the Brahmins, condemned ritual sacrifice
and insisted on Bhakti and the worship of the one God, Shiva. His followers
were called Vira-Shaivas, meaning "stalwart Shiva-worshipers". The Saiva-
Siddhanta school is a form of Shaivism found in the south and is of hoary
antiquity. It incorporates the teachings of the Shaiva "nayanars" and espouses
the belief that Shiva is Brahman and his infinite love is revealed in the
divine acts of the creation, preservation and destruction of the universe, and
in the liberation of the soul. Seminal Bhakti works in Bengali include the many
songs of Ramprasad Sen. His pieces are known as Shyama Sangeet. Coming from the
17th century, they cover an astonishing range of emotional responses to Ma
Kali, detailing philosophical statements based on Vedanta teachings and more
visceral pronouncements of his love of Devi. Using inventive allegory,
Ramprasad had 'dialogues' with the Mother Goddess through his poetry, at times
chiding her, adoring her, celebrating her as the Divine Mother, reckless
consort of Shiva and capricious Shakti, the universal female creative energy,
of the cosmos. Rama Bhakti. Ramananda was the leader of the Bhakti movement
focusing on Rama as God. Very little is known about him, but he is believed to
have lived in the first half of the 15th century. He taught that Lord Rama is
the supreme Lord, and that salvation could be attained only through love for
and devotion to him, and through the repetition of his sacred name. Ramananda's
ashram in Varanasi became a powerful center of religious influence, from which
his ideas spread far and wide among all classes of Indians. One of the reasons
for his great popularity was that he renounced Sanskrit and used the language
of the people for the composition of his hymns. This paved the way for the
modern tendency in northern India to write literary texts in local languages.
Devotees of Krishna worship him in different mellows, known as "rasas". Two
major systems of Krishna worship developed, each with its own philosophical
system. These two systems are "aishwaryamaya Bhakti" and "madhuryamaya Bhakti".
"Aishwaryamaya Bhakti" is revealed in the abode of queens and kingdom of
Krishna in Dwaraka. "Madhuryamaya Bhakti" is revealed in the abode of "braja".
Thus Krishna is worshiped according to the development of devotees' taste in
worshiping the Supreme Personality of Godhead (Krishna) as father, friend,
master or beloved. Shri Madhvacharya (1238–1317) born at Pajaka near Udupi
advocated Dwait philosophy. He defeated many scholars in religious debates
identified God with Vishnu. His view of reality is purely dualistic, in that he
understood a fundamental differentiation between the ultimate Godhead and the
individual soul, and the system is therefore called Dvaita (dualistic) Vedanta.
Madhva is considered one of the most influential theologians in Hindu history.
His influence was profound, and he is one of the fathers of the Vaishnava
Bhakti movement. Great leaders of the Vaishnava Bhakti movement in Karnataka
like Purandara Dasa, Kanaka Dasa, Raghavendra Swami and many others were
influenced by Dvaita traditions. Srimanta Sankardeva's (1449–1568) propagated
his school of thought, called Ekasarana Dharma, in the greater Assam region. An
example of "dasya" "Bhakti", there is no place for Radha in this tradition. The
most important symbol of this tradition is the "namghar" or prayer hall, which
dot Assam's landscape. This form of worship is very strong in Assam today, and
much of the traditions are maintained by the monasteries ("Sattras").
Vallabhacharya (1479–1531) called his school of thought Shuddhadvaita, or
pure monism. According to him, it is by God's grace alone that one can obtain
release from bondage and attain Krishna's heaven. This heaven is far above the
"heavens" of Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva, for Krishna is the eternal Brahman.
Chaitanya Mahaprabhu (1486–1534) defined his system of philosophy as Achintya
Bheda Abheda (inconceivable and simultaneous oneness and difference). It
synthesizes elements of monism and dualism into a single system. Chaitanya's
philosophy is taught by the contemporary International Society for Krishna
Consciousness, or "Hare Krishna" movement. Vaishnava Bhakti. Prominent
historical personalities include: Influences. Beyond the confines of such
formal schools and movements, however, the development of "Bhakti" as a major
form of Hindu practice has left an indelible stamp on the faith. Philosophical
speculation was of concern to the elite, and even the great Advaitist scholar
Adi Shankaracharya, when questioned as to the way to God, said that chanting
the name of the lord was essential. The philosophical schools changed the way
people thought, but Bhakti was immediately accessible to all, calling to the
instinctive emotion of love and redirecting it to the highest pursuit of God
and self-realization. In general a liberal movement, its denouncement of caste
offered recourse for Hindus from the orthodox Brahaminical systems. Of course
Bhakti's message of tolerance and love was not often heeded by those ensconced
in the societal construct of caste. Altogether, Bhakti resulted in a mass of
devotional literature, music and art that has enriched the world and given
India renewed spiritual impetus, one eschewing unnecessary ritual and
artificial social boundaries.
