Bhakti Bhakti (also spelled Bhakthi, ) in Hinduism and Buddhism is religious
devotion in the form of active involvement of a devotee in worship of the
divine. Within monotheistic Hinduism, it is the love felt by the worshipper
towards the personal God, a concept expressed in Hindu theology as I·π£·π≠a-
devatƒÅ (also as "Svayam Bhagavan" in Gaudiya Vaishnavism). "Bhakthi" can be
used of either tradition of Hindu monotheism, Shaivaism or Vaishnavism. While
"bhakti" as designating a religious path is already a central concept in the
Bhagavad Gita, it rises to importance in the medieval history of Hinduism,
where the Bhakti movement saw a rapid growth of "bhakti" beginning in Southern
India with the Vaisnava Alvars (6th-9th century CE) and Saiva Nayanars (5th-
10th century CE), who spread "bhakti" poetry and devotion throughout India by
the 12th-18th century CE. The Bhagavata Purana¬ is text associated with the
Bhakti movement which elaborates the concept of "bhakti" as found in the
Bhagavad Gita. The Bhakti movement reached North India in the Delhi Sultanate
and throughout the Mughal era¬ contributed significantly to the characteristics
of Hinduism¬ as the religion of the general population under the rule of a
Muslim elite. After their encounter with the spreading faith of Islam, Bhakti
proponents, whom are traditionally referred to as "saints," elaborated
egalitarian doctrine that transcended the caste system and encouraged
individuals to seek personal union with the divine. Its influence also spread
to other religions during this period, and became an integral aspect of Hindu
culture and society in the modern era. Terminology. The Sanskrit and old Hindi
noun "bhakti" is derived from the verb root "bhaj", whose meanings include "to
share in", "to belong to", and "to worship". It also occurs in compounds where
it means "being a part of" and "that which belongs to or is contained in
anything else." "Bhajan", or devotional singing to God, is also derived from
the same root. "Devotion" as an English translation for "bhakti" doesn't fully
convey two important aspects of "bhakti"‚Äîthe sense of participation that is
central to the relationship between the devotee and God, and the intense
feeling that is more typically associated with the word "love". An advaitic
interpretation of "bhakti" goes beyond "devotion" to the realization of union
with the essential nature of reality as "ananda", or divine bliss. "Bhakti" is
sometimes used in the broader sense of reverence toward a deity or teacher.
"Bhaktimarga" is usually used to describe a "bhakti" path with complete
dedication to one form of God. A more literal translation of "bhakti" would be
"participation"; The sage Narada defines Bhakti as "intense love" for God.
Similarly Sage Shandilya defines Bhakti as "intense attraction" for God. One
who practices "bhakti" is called a "bhakta", while "bhakti" as a spiritual path
is referred to as "bhakti marga", or the "bhakti" way. "Bhakti" is an important
component of many branches of Hinduism, defined differently by various sects
and schools. "Bhakti" emphasises religious devotion and sentiment above ritual
and orthopraxy. In this sense it parallels the early 20th century movement of
Pentecostalism in Christian history, where direct personal experience of God
was also emphasized over liturgy or ritual. The Classical Sanskrit term
"bhakti" has a general meaning of "attachment, devotion, fondness for, devotion
to" etc. also in terms of human relationships, most often as beloved-lover,
friend-friend, parent-child, and master-servant. It may refer to devotion to a
spiritual teacher (Guru) as "guru-bhakti", to a personal form of God, or to
divinity without form ("nirguna"). History. Scholarly consensus sees "bhakti"
as a post-Vedic movement that developed primarily during the era of Indian epic
poetry. The Bhagavad Gita is the first text to explicitly use the word
""bhakti"" to designate a religious path, using it as a term for one of three
possible religious approaches. The Bhagavata Purana develops the idea more
elaborately, while the Shvetashvatara Upanishad evidences a fully developed
"Shiva-bhakti" (devotion to Shiva) and signs of "guru-bhakti". An early sutra
by PƒÅ·πáini (c. 5th century BCE) is considered by some scholars as the first
appearance of the concept of "bhakti", where the word ""vun"" may refer to
"bhakti" toward ""Vasudevarjunabhya"" (with implied reference to Krishna
Vasudeva). Other scholars question this interpretation. The "Bhakti Movement"
was a rapid growth of "bhakti" beginning in Tamil Nadu in Southern India with
the Saiva Nayanars (4th-10th century CE) and the Vaisnava Alvars (3rd-9th
century CE) who spread "bhakti" poetry and devotion throughout India by the
12th-18th century CE. The Alvars ("those immersed in God") were Vaishnava poet-
saints who wandered from temple to temple singing the praises of Vishnu. They
established temple sites (Srirangam is one) and converted many people to
Vaishnavism. Their poems were collected in the 10th century as the "Four
Thousand Divine Compositions" also referred to as Dravida Veda or Alwar
Arulicheyalgal or Divya Prabhandham, which became an influential scripture for
the Vaishnavas. The Alwars and Nayanmars were instrumental in propagating the
Bhakti tradition. For the first time, Bagwan or God reached the masses and the
masses were able to associate themselves with the religion. Another significant
thing was that the Alwars and Naynmars came from various background and castes
including that of the Sudras (working class). The Bhagavata Purana's references
to the South Indian Alvar saints, along with its emphasis on a more emotional
bhakti, have led many scholars to give it South Indian origins, though there is
no definitive evidence of this. Like the Alvars the Saiva Nayanar poets
softened the distinctions of caste and gender. The "Tirumurai", a compilation
of hymns by sixty-three Nayanar poets, is still of great importance in South
India. Hymns by three of the most prominent poets, Appar (7th century CE),
Campantar (7th century) and Cuntarar (9th century), were compiled into the
"Tevaram", the first volumes of the "Tirumurai". The poets' itinerant lifestyle
helped create temple and pilgrimage sites and spread devotion to Shiva. Early
Tamil-Siva "bhakti" poets quoted the Black Yajurveda specifically. By the 12th
to 18th centuries, the "bhakti" movement had spread to all regions and
languages of India. "Bhakti" poetry and attitudes began to color many aspects
of Hindu culture, religious and secular, and became an integral part of Indian
society. Prominent "bhakti" poets such as Ravidas and Kabir wrote against the
hierarchy of caste. It extended its influence to Sufism, Sikhism, Christianity,
and Jainism. "Bhakti" offered the possibility of religious experience by
anyone, anywhere, at any time. "Bhakti" Yoga. The Bhagavad Gita introduces
bhakti yoga in combination with "karma yoga" and "jnana yoga", while the
Bhagavata Purana expands on bhakti yoga, offering nine specific activities for
the "bhakti" yogi. Bhakti in the Bhagavad Gita offered an alternative to two
dominant practices of religion at the time: the isolation of the sannyasin and
the practice of religious ritual. "Bhakti Yoga" is described by Swami
Vivekananda as "the path of systematized devotion for the attainment of union
with the Absolute". In the twelfth chapter of the Gita Krishna describes
"bhakti yoga" as a path to the highest spiritual attainments. In the ninth
chapter, he says, Swarupananda, Srimad-Bhagavad-Gita Shandilya and Narada
produced two important "Bhakti" texts, the "Shandilya Bhakti Sutra" and "Narada
Bhakti Sutra". They define devotion, emphasize its importance and superiority,
and classify its forms. Types and classifications.  (1) "≈õrava·πáa"
("listening" to the scriptural stories of and his companions), (2) "kƒ´rtana"
("praising", usually refers to ecstatic group singing), (3) "smara·πáa"
("remembering" or fixing the mind on Vi·π£·πáu), (4) "pƒÅda-sevana" (rendering
service), (5) "arcana" (worshiping an image), (6) "vandana" (paying homage),
(7) "dƒÅsya" (servitude), (8) "sƒÅkhya" (friendship), and (9) "ƒÅtma-nivedana"
(self-surrender). (from "Bhagata Purana", 7.5.23-24) "Bhavas". Traditional
Hinduism speaks of five different "bhƒÅvas" or "affective essences". In this
sense, "bhƒÅvas" are different attitudes that a devotee takes according to his
individual temperament to express his devotion towards God in some form. The
different "bhƒÅvas" are: "≈õƒÅnta", placid love for God; "dƒÅsya", the attitude
of a servant; "sakhya", the attitude of a friend; "vƒÅtsalya", the attitude of
a mother towards her child; and "madhura", the attitude of a woman towards her
lover. Several saints are known to have practiced these "bhavas". The
nineteenth century mystic, Ramakrishna is said to have practiced these five
"bhavas". The attitude of Hanuman towards lord Rama is considered to be of
"dasya bhava". The attitude of Arjuna and the shepherd boys of Vrindavan
towards Krishna is regarded as "sakhya bhava". The attitude of Radha towards
Krishna is regarded as "madhura bhava". The attitude of Yashoda, who looked
after Krishna during his childhood is regarded as "vatsalya bhava". Caitanya-
caritamrta mentions that Mahaprabhu came to distribute the four spiritual
sentiments of Vraja loka: dasya, sakhya, vatsalya, and sringara. Sringara is
the relationship of the intimate love. Name. As a name, Bhakthi is a unisex
name. It's in use by both males and females.
