Biblical inerrancy Biblical inerrancy is the doctrine that the Bible is
accurate and totally free of error (except for errors made in translation or
transcription), that "Scripture in the original manuscripts does not affirm
anything that is contrary to fact." Some equate "inerrancy" with
"infallibility"; others do not. Advocates of biblical inerrancy, called
biblical inerrantists, generally believe that the original text was without
error because God inspired the authors and redactors of the Bible. Although
none of the original manuscripts currently exist, some biblical inerranists
argue that the original text has been perfectly preserved and passed down
through time. Others hold that scholarly reconstructions come as near as
possible to the original text and so can be said to be inerrant. These
reconstructions are based upon scholars' comparison of thousands of biblical
manuscripts (such as the Dead Sea Scrolls) and thousands of biblical citations
in the writings of the early Church Fathers. Terms and opinions. Another often-
used adjective to characterize the Bible is "infallible". From dictionary
definitions, Frame (2002) insists that this is a stronger term than "inerrant".
"'Inerrant' means there are no errors; 'infallible' means there "can be" no
errors." Yet he agrees that "modern theologians insist on redefining that word
also, so that it actually says less than 'inerrancy.'" Lindsell (1978) states
that "The very nature of inspiration renders the Bible infallible, which means
that it cannot deceive us. It is inerrant in that it is not false, mistaken, or
defective." Judaism had never promulgated a belief in the literal word of the
Hebrew Bible, hence the co-existence of the Oral Torah. Within Christianity,
some mainstream Evangelical and Protestant groups adhere to the current
inerrancy of Scripture as it reads today. However, some note that "Evangelical
scholars ... doubt that accepting the doctrine of biblical inerrancy is the
best way to assert their belief in biblical authority." In an article for "The
Catholic Study Bible", "The Bible in Catholic Life", Daniel J. Harrington, S.J.
highlights the teachings found in the Second Vatican Council's document
"Dogmatic Constitution on Divine Revelation" ("Dei Verbum") which he says
"should be taken as the authoritative climax of a long series of developments
in the Church's attitude toward the Bible." The document then cites .
Conservative theologians in some religions often use the term "inerrancy": in
Christianity to refer to the Old and New Testaments, in Islam to refer to the
Qur'an, and in other religions to refer to their own holy books. Some
literalist or conservative Christians teach that the Bible lacks error in every
way in all matters: chronology, history, biology, sociology, psychology,
politics, physics, math, art, and so on. Other Christians believe that the
Scriptures are always right (do not err) only in fulfilling their primary
purpose: revealing God, God's vision, God's purposes, and God's good news to
humanity. Mainstream Judaism and Christian traditions hold that the Torah or
Pentateuch of the Hebrew Bible was physically written by Moses — not by God
himself, although in the process of transcription many thousands of times
copyists have allowed errors, or (some suggest) even forgeries in the text to
accumulate. According to this position, God originally spoke through a select
person to reveal his purpose, character and plan for humanity. However the
Bible does record some direct statements from God (i.e.,""Thus says the Lord
...", "And God said ..."," etc.). The significance of most phrases, their
parts, grammar, and occasionally individual words, letters and even
pronunciation in the Hebrew Bible are the subject of many rabbinic discussions
in the Talmud. History. During the 18th and 19th centuries, various episodes of
the Bible (for example the Noahide worldwide flood, the creation in six days,
and the creation of women from a man's rib) began increasingly to be seen as
legendary. This led to an increasing questioning as to the veracity of Biblical
texts. According to an article in "Theology Today" published in 1975, "There
have been long periods in the history of the church when biblical inerrancy has
not been a critical question. It has in fact been noted that only in the last
two centuries can we legitimately speak of a formal doctrine of inerrancy. The
arguments pro and con have filled many books, and almost anyone can join in the
debate." In the 1970s and '80s, however, the debate in theological circles,
which centered on the issue of whether or not the Bible was infallible or both
infallible and inerrant, came into the spotlight. Some notable Christian
seminaries, such as Princeton Theological Seminary and Fuller Theological
Seminary, were formally adopting the doctrine of infallibility while rejecting
the doctrine of inerrancy. The other side of this debate focused largely around
the magazine "Christianity Today" and the book entitled "The Battle for the
Bible" by Harold Lindsell. The author asserted that losing the doctrine of the
inerrancy of Scripture was the thread that would unravel the church.
Conservative Christians rallied behind this idea, agreeing that once "sola
scriptura" Christians disregard the ultimate truthfulness of the Bible,
anything can become justifiable. Textual tradition of the New Testament. There
are over 5,600 Greek manuscripts containing all or part of the New Testament,
as well as over 10,000 Latin manuscripts, and perhaps 500 other manuscripts of
various other languages. Additionally, there are the Patristic writings which
contain copious quotes, across the early centuries, of the scriptures. Most of
these manuscripts date to the Middle Ages. The oldest complete copy of the New
Testament, the Codex Sinaiticus, which includes two other books not now
included in the accepted NT canon, dates to the 4th century. The earliest
fragment of a New Testament book is the Rylands Library Papyrus P52 which dates
to the mid 2nd century and is the size of a business card. Very early
manuscripts are rare. The average NT manuscript is about 200 pages, and in all,
there are about 1.3 million pages of text. No two manuscripts are identical,
except in the smallest fragments, and the many manuscripts which preserve New
Testament texts differ among themselves in many respects, with some estimates
of 200,000 to 300,000 differences among the various manuscripts. According to
Bart Ehrman, In the 2008 Greer-Heard debate series, noted New Testament
scholars Bart Ehrman and Daniel B. Wallace discussed these variances in detail.
Wallace mentioned that understanding the meaning of the number of variances is
not as simple as looking at the number of variances, but one must consider also
the number of manuscripts, the types of errors, and among the more serious
discrepancies, what impact they do or do not have. For hundreds of years,
biblical and textual scholars have examined the manuscripts extensively. Since
the eighteenth century, they have employed the techniques of textual criticism
to reconstruct how the extant manuscripts of the New Testament texts might have
descended, and to recover earlier recensions of the texts. However, King James
Version (KJV)-only inerrantists often prefer the traditional texts (i.e.,
Textus Receptus which is the basis of KJV) used in their churches to modern
attempts of reconstruction (i.e., Nestle-Aland Greek Text which is the basis of
modern translations), arguing that the Holy Spirit is just as active in the
preservation of the scriptures as in their creation. These inerrantists are
found particularly in non-Protestant churches, but also a few Protestant groups
hold such views. KJV-only inerrantist Jack Moorman says that at least 356
doctrinal passages are affected by the differences between the Textus Receptus
and the Nestle-Aland Greek Text. Some familiar examples of Gospel passages in
the Textus Receptus thought to have been added by later interpolaters and
omitted in the Nestle Aland Greek Text include the Pericope Adulteræ, the
Comma Johanneum, and the longer ending in Mark 16. Many modern Bibles have
footnotes to indicate areas where there is disagreement between source
documents. Bible commentaries offer discussions of these. Inerrantist response.
Evangelical inerrantists. Evangelical Christians generally accept the findings
of textual criticism, and nearly all modern translations, including the popular
New International Version, work from a Greek New Testament based on modern
textual criticism. Since this means that the manuscript copies are not perfect,
inerrancy is only applied to the original autographs (the manuscripts written
by the original authors) rather than the copies. For instance, the Chicago
Statement on Biblical Inerrancy says, "We affirm that inspiration, strictly
speaking, applies only to the autographic text of Scripture." King James Only
inerrantists. A faction of those in the "King James Only movement" rejects the
whole discipline of textual criticism and holds that the translators of the
King James Version English Bible were guided by God, and that the KJV thus is
to be taken as the authoritative English Bible. However, those who hold this
opinion do not extend it to the KJV translation into English of the Apocryphal
books, which were produced along with the rest of the Authorized Version.
Modern translations differ from the KJV on numerous points, sometimes resulting
from access to different early texts, largely as a result of work in the field
of textual criticism. Upholders of the KJV-only position nevertheless hold that
the Protestant canon of KJV is itself an inspired text and therefore remains
authoritative. The King James Only movement asserts that the KJV is the "sole"
English translation free from error. Textus Receptus. Similar to the King James
Only view is the view that translations must be derived from the Textus
Receptus in order to be considered inerrant. As the King James Version is an
English translation, this leaves speakers of other languages in a difficult
position, hence the belief in the Textus Receptus as the inerrant source text
for translations to modern languages. For example, in Spanish-speaking cultures
the commonly accepted "KJV-equivalent" is the Reina-Valera 1909 revision (with
different groups accepting, in addition to the 1909 or in its place, the
revisions of 1862 or 1960). It should also be noted that the New King James
Version was also translated from the Textus Receptus. Justifications. A number
of reasons are offered by Christian theologians to justify Biblical inerrancy.
Daniel B. Wallace, Professor of New Testament at Dallas Theological Seminary,
divides the various evidences into two approaches - deductive and inductive
approaches. Deductive justifications. The first deductive justification is that
the Bible claims to be inspired by God (for instance "All Scripture is God-
breathed and is useful for teaching, rebuking, correcting and training in
righteousness") and because God is perfect, the Bible must also be perfect, and
hence free from error. For instance, the statement of faith of the Evangelical
Theological Society says, "The Bible alone, and the Bible in its entirety, is
the Word of God written and is therefore inerrant in the autographs."
Supportive of this, is the idea that God cannot lie. W J Mcrea writes:McRea,
WJ, "A book to die for", Clements publishing, 2002.And Grenz has: Grenz, SJ,
"Theology for the community of God", Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing, 2000 Also,
from Geisler:Geisler, NL, "Inerrancy", Zondervan, 1980, p271. A second reason
offered is that Jesus and the apostles used the Old Testament in a way which
assumes it is inerrant. For instance in , Paul bases his argument on the fact
that the word "seed" in the Genesis reference to "Abraham and his seed", is
singular rather than plural. This (as claimed) sets a precedent for inerrant
interpretation down to the individual letters of the words. Similarly Jesus
said that every minute detail of the Old Testament Law must be fulfilled,
indicating (it is claimed) that every detail must be correct. Although in these
verses Jesus and the apostles are only referring to the Old Testament, the
argument extends to the New Testament writings, because accords the status of
Scripture to New Testament writings also: "He (Paul) writes the same way in all
his letters... which ignorant and unstable people distort, as they do the other
Scriptures." Another deductive argument would be the strength of
falsifiability. The argument is that Biblical inerrancy is a falsifiable stance
(it can be proven false). In this case, if errors are proven in the Biblical
text then the stance of Biblical inerrancy is itself false. Inductive
justifications.  Warfield lays out an argument for inerrancy that has been
virtually ignored by today's evangelicals. Essentially, he makes a case for
inerrancy on the basis of inductive evidence, rather than deductive reasoning.
Most evangelicals today follow E. J. Young's deductive approach toward
bibliology, forgetting the great articulator of inerrancy. But Warfield starts
with the evidence that the Bible is a historical document, rather than with the
presupposition that it is inspired. Inspiration. In the Nicene Creed Christians
confess their belief that the Holy Spirit "has spoken through the prophets."
This creed has been normative for Roman Catholics, Eastern Orthodox, Anglicans,
Lutherans and all mainline Protestant denominations except for those descended
from the non-credal Stone-Campbell movement. As noted by Alister E. McGrath,
"An important element in any discussion of the manner in which Scripture is
inspired, and the significance which is attached to this, is 2 Timothy 3:16-17,
which speaks of Scripture as 'God-breathed' ("theopneustos")." According to
McGrath, "the reformers did not see the issue of inspiration as linked with the
absolute historical reliability or factual inerrancy of the biblical texts." He
says, "The development of ideas of 'biblical infallibility' or 'inerrancy'
within Protestantism can be traced to the United States in the middle of the
nineteenth century." People who believe in inerrancy think that the Bible does
not merely contain the Word of God, but every word of it is, because of verbal
inspiration, the direct, immediate word of God. The Lutheran Apology of the
Augsburg Confession identifies Holy Scripture with the Word of God and calls
the Holy Spirit the author of the Bible. Because of this, Lutherans confess in
the Formula of Concord, "we receive and embrace with our whole heart the
prophetic and apostolic Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments as the pure,
clear fountain of Israel." Lutherans (and other Protestants) believe apocryphal
books are not inspired nor written by prophets, and that they contain errors
and were never included in the "Palestinian Canon" that Jesus and the Apostles
are said to have used, and therefore are not a part of Holy Scripture. The
prophetic and apostolic Scriptures are authentic as written by the prophets and
apostles. A correct translation of their writings is God's Word because it has
the same meaning as the original Hebrew and Greek. A mistranslation is not
God's word, and no human authority can invest it with divine authority. Divine
authority. For a believer in biblical inerrancy, Holy Scripture is the Word of
God, and carries the full authority of God. Every single statement of the Bible
calls for instant and unqualified acceptance. Every doctrine of the Bible is
the teaching of God and therefore requires full agreement. Every promise of the
Bible calls for unshakable trust in its fulfillment. Every command of the Bible
is the directive of God himself and therefore demands willing observance.
Sufficiency. According to some believers, the Bible contains everything that
they need to know in order to obtain salvation and to live a Christian life,
and there are no deficiencies in Scripture that need to be filled with by
tradition, pronouncements of the Pope, new revelations, or present-day
development of doctrine. Clarifications. Accuracy. Harold Lindsell points out
that it is a "gross distortion" to state that people who believe in inerrancy
suppose every statement made in the Bible is true (as opposed to accurate). He
indicates there are expressly false statements in the Bible which are reported
accurately. He notes that "All the Bible does, for example in the case of
Satan, is to report what Satan actually said. Whether what he said was true or
false is another matter. Christ stated that the devil is a liar." Limitations.
Many who believe in the "Inspiration" of scripture teach that it is
"infallible" but not inerrant. Those who subscribe to infallibility believe
that what the scriptures say regarding matters of faith and Christian practice
are wholly useful and true. Some denominations that teach infallibility hold
that the historical or scientific details, which may be irrelevant to matters
of faith and Christian practice, may contain errors. Those who believe in
inerrancy hold that the scientific, geographic, and historic details of the
scriptural texts in their original manuscripts are completely true and without
error, though the scientific claims of scripture must be interpreted in the
light of its phenomenological nature, not just with strict, clinical
literality, which was foreign to historical narratives. Proponents of biblical
inerrancy generally do not teach that the Bible was dictated directly by God,
but that God used the "distinctive personalities and literary styles of the
writers" of scripture and that God's inspiration guided them to flawlessly
project his message through their own language and personality. Infallibility
and inerrancy refer to the original texts of the Bible. And while conservative
scholars acknowledge the potential for human error in transmission and
translation, modern translations are considered to "faithfully represent the
originals". Criticism. Scientific and historical criticism. Biblical inerrancy
has been criticized on the grounds that many statements, including, but not
exclusively, history or science that are found in Scripture, if taken
literally, rather than phenomenologically, are untenable or contradictory.
Inerrancy is argued to be a falsifiable proposition: if the Bible is found to
contain any mistakes or contradictions, the proposition of strict inerrancy has
been refuted. Theological criticism. "Theological criticism" refers to
criticisms which are that the Bible does not teach, or require, its own
inerrancy. Proponents of biblical inerrancy often prefer the translations of
that render it as "all scripture is given by inspiration of God," and they
interpret this to mean that the whole Bible is inerrant. However, critics of
this doctrine think that the Bible makes no direct claim to be inerrant or
infallible. C. H. Dodd argues the same sentence can also be translated "Every
inspired scripture is also useful..." nor does the verse define the Biblical
canon. In context, this passage refers only to the Old Testament writings
understood to be scripture at the time it was written. However, there are
indications that Paul's writings were being considered, at least by the author
of the Second Epistle of Peter, as comparable to the Old Testament. The idea
that the Bible contains no mistakes is mainly justified by appeal to prooftexts
that refer to its divine inspiration. However, this argument has been
criticized as circular reasoning, because these statements only have to be
accepted as true if the Bible is already thought to be inerrant. None of these
texts say that because a text is inspired, it is therefore always correct in
its historical statements. Meaning of the "Word of God". Much debate over the
kind of authority that should be accorded biblical texts centers on what is
meant by the "Word of God". The term can refer to Christ himself as well as to
the proclamation of his ministry as kerygma. However, biblical inerrancy
differs from this orthodoxy in viewing the Word of God to mean the entire text
of the Bible when interpreted didactically as God's teaching. The idea of the
Bible itself as Word of God, as being itself God's revelation, is criticized in
neo-orthodoxy. Here the Bible is seen as a unique witness to the people and
deeds that do make up the Word of God. However, it is a wholly human witness.
All books of the Bible were written by human beings. Thus, whether the Bible
is—in whole or in part—the Word of God is not clear. However, critics argue
that the Bible can still be construed as the "Word of God" in the sense that
these authors' statements may have been representative of, and perhaps even
directly influenced by, God's own knowledge. There is only one instance in the
Bible where the phrase "the Word of God" refers to something "written". The
reference is to the Decalogue. However, most of the other references are to
reported speech that is preserved in the Bible. The New Testament also contains
a number of statements which refer to passages from the Old Testament as God's
words, for instance (which says that the Jews have been "entrusted with the
very words of God"), or the book of Hebrews, which often prefaces Old Testament
quotations with words such as "God says." The Bible also contains words spoken
by human beings "about" God, such as Eliphaz () and the prayers and songs of
the Psalter. That these are God's words addressed to us was at the root of a
lively medieval controversy. The idea of the word of God is more that God is
encountered in scripture, than that every line of scripture is a statement made
by God. While the phrase "the Word of God" is never applied to the modern Bible
within the Bible itself, supporters of inerrancy argue that that is simply
because the Biblical canon was not closed. In , the apostle Paul wrote to the
church in Thessalonica "when you received the word of God which you heard from
us, you welcomed it not as the word of men, but as it is in truth, the word of
God." Translation. Translation has given rise to a number of issues, as the
original languages are often quite different in grammar as well as word
meaning. While the Chicago Statement on Biblical Inerrancy states that
inerrancy applies only to the original languages, some believers trust their
own translation to be the accurate one. One such group of believers is known as
the King James Only movement. For readability, clarity, or other reasons,
translators may choose different wording or sentence structure, and some
translations may choose to paraphrase passages. Because some of the words in
the original language have ambiguous or difficult to translate meanings,
debates over the correct interpretation occur. Criticisms are also sometimes
raised because of inconsistencies arising between different English
translations of the Hebrew or Greek text. Some Christian interpretations are
criticized for reflecting specific doctrinal bias. The virgin birth. One
translation problem concerns the New Testament assertion that Jesus Christ was
born of a virgin. If the Bible were inerrant, then this would be true. However,
critics have suggested that the use of the word "virgin" may have been merely a
translation error. On this point, Browning's "A Dictionary of the Bible" states
that in the Septuagint, "the Greek "parthenos" was used to translate the Hebrew
"almah", which means a 'young woman'". Also, "As early as the 2nd cent. CE, the
Jewish Trypho was pointing out that the Hebrew did not mean a virgin." The
dictionary also notes that "the earliest writers of the Testament (Mark and
Paul) show no knowledge of such a virginal conception." Another writer, David
Strauss in "The Life of Jesus", has: "... question ought to be decided by the
fact that the word does not signify an immaculate, but a marriageable young
woman." He suggests that Isaiah was referring to events of his own time, and
that the young woman in question may have been "perhaps the prophet's own
wife."
