Bible translations The Bible has been translated into many languages from the
biblical languages of Hebrew, Aramaic and Greek. Indeed, the full Bible has
been translated into over 450 languages, and some sections of the Bible have
been translated into over 2,000 languages. The Latin Vulgate was dominant in
Western Christianity through the Middle Ages. Since then, the Bible has been
translated into many more languages. English Bible translations in particular
have a rich and varied history of more than a millennium. Original text. Hebrew
Bible. The Tanakh was mainly written in Biblical Hebrew, with some portions
(notably in Daniel and Ezra) in Biblical Aramaic. From the 9th century to the
15th century, Jewish scholars, today known as Masoretes, compared the text of
all known biblical manuscripts in an effort to create a unified, standardized
text. A series of highly similar texts eventually emerged, and any of these
texts are known as Masoretic Texts (MT). The Masoretes also added vowel points
(called niqqud) to the text, since the original text only contained consonant
letters. This sometimes required the selection of an interpretation, since some
words differ only in their vowels—their meaning can vary in accordance with
the vowels chosen. In antiquity, variant Hebrew readings existed, some of which
have survived in the Samaritan Pentateuch and other ancient fragments, as well
as being attested in ancient versions in other languages. New Testament. The
New Testament was written in Koine Greek. The discovery of older manuscripts,
which belong to the Alexandrian text-type, including the 4th century Codex
Vaticanus and Codex Sinaiticus, led scholars to revise their view about the
original Greek text. Attempts to reconstruct the original text are called
"critical editions". Karl Lachmann based his critical edition of 1831 on
manuscripts dating from the 4th century and earlier, to demonstrate that the
"Textus Receptus" must be corrected according to these earlier texts. The
"autographs", the Greek manuscripts written by the original authors, have not
survived. Scholars surmise the original Greek text from the versions that do
survive. The three main textual traditions of the Greek New Testament are
sometimes called the Alexandrian text-type (generally minimalist), the
Byzantine text-type (generally maximalist), and the Western text-type
(occasionally wild). Together they comprise most of the ancient manuscripts.
Most variants among the manuscripts are minor, such as alternative spelling,
alternative word order, the presence or absence of an optional definite article
("the"), and so on. Occasionally, a major variant happens when a portion of a
text was accidentally omitted (or perhaps even censored), or was added from a
marginal gloss. Fortunately, major variants tend to be easier to correct.
Examples of major variants are the endings of Mark, the Pericope Adulteræ, the
Comma Johanneum, and the Western version of Acts. Early manuscripts of the
letters of Paul and other New Testament writings show no punctuation
whatsoever. The punctuation was added later by other editors, according to
their own understanding of the text. History of Bible translations. Ancient
translations of the Hebrew Bible. Aramaic Targums. Some of the first
translations of the Jewish Torah began during the first exile in Babylonia,
when Aramaic became the lingua franca of the Jews. With most people speaking
only Aramaic and not understanding Hebrew, the Targums were created to allow
the common person to understand the Torah as it was read in ancient synagogues.
Greek Septuagint. By the 3rd century BC, Alexandria had become the center of
Hellenistic Judaism, and a Koine Greek translation was compiled in several
stages during the 3rd to 2nd centuries BC (known to have been complete by 132
BC). The Talmud ascribes the translation effort to Ptolemy II Philadelphus (r.
285-246 BC) who is said to have hired 72 Jewish scholars for the purpose, for
which reason the translation is commonly known as the Septuagint, a name which
it gained around AD 354-430, "the time of Augustine of Hippo". The Septuagint
(LXX) was the very first translation of the Hebrew Bible into Greek, and later
became the accepted text of the Old Testament in the church and the basis of
its canon. The Latin Vulgate by Jerome was based upon the Hebrew for those
books of the Bible preserved in the Jewish canon (as reflected in the masoretic
text), and on the Greek text for the deuterocanonical books. In his "City of
God" 18.42, while repeating the story of Aristeas with typical embellishments,
Augustine adds the remark, "It is their translation that it has now become
traditional to call the Septuagint" ...omitted... Augustine thus indicates that
this name for the Greek translation of the scriptures was a recent development.
However, he offers no clue as to which of the possible antecedents led to this
development: and was widely used by Greek-speaking Jews, and later by
Christians. It differs somewhat from the later standardized Hebrew (Masoretic
Text). This translation was promoted by way of a legend (primarily recorded as
the Letter of Aristeas) that seventy (or in some sources, seventy-two) separate
translators all produced identical texts; supposedly proving its accuracy.
Versions of the Septuagint contain several passages and whole books beyond what
was included in the Masoretic texts of the Tanakh. In some cases these
additions were originally composed in Greek, while in other cases they are
translations of Hebrew books or variants not present in the Masoretic texts.
Recent discoveries have shown that more of the Septuagint additions have a
Hebrew origin than was once thought. While there are no complete surviving
manuscripts of the Hebrew texts on which the Septuagint was based, many
scholars believe that they represent a different textual tradition ("Vorlage")
from the one that became the basis for the Masoretic texts. Early translations
in Late Antiquity. Origen's "Hexapla" placed side by side six versions of the
Old Testament, including the 2nd century Greek translations of Aquila of Sinope
and Symmachus the Ebionite. His eclectic recension of the Septuagint had a
significant influence on the Old Testament text in several important
manuscripts. The canonical Christian Bible was formally established by Bishop
Cyril of Jerusalem in 350 (although it had been generally accepted by the
church previously), confirmed by the Council of Laodicea in 363 (both lacked
the book of Revelation), and later established by Athanasius of Alexandria in
367 (with Revelation added), and Jerome's "Vulgate" Latin translation dates to
between AD 382 and 420. Latin translations predating Jerome are collectively
known as "Vetus Latina" texts. Christian translations also tend to be based
upon the Hebrew, though some denominations prefer the Septuagint (or may cite
variant readings from both). Bible translations incorporating modern textual
criticism usually begin with the masoretic text, but also take into account
possible variants from all available ancient versions. The received text of the
Christian New Testament is in Koine Greek, and nearly all translations are
based upon the Greek text. Jerome began by revising the earlier Latin
translations, but ended by going back to the original Greek, bypassing all
translations, and going back to the original Hebrew wherever he could instead
of the Septuagint. The New Testament was translated into Gothic in the 4th
century by Ulfilas. In the 5th century, Saint Mesrob translated the bible into
Armenian. Also dating from the same period are the Syriac, Coptic, Old Nubian,
Ethiopic and Georgian translations. There are also several ancient
translations, most important of which are in the Syriac dialect of Aramaic
(including the Peshitta and the Diatessaron gospel harmony), in the Ethiopian
language of Ge'ez, and in Latin (both the Vetus Latina and the Vulgate). The
Bishop of the Goths Wulfila in the today's Bulgaria translated the Bible into
Gothic in the mid-4th century. In 331, the Emperor Constantine commissioned
Eusebius to deliver fifty Bibles for the Church of Constantinople. Athanasius
("Apol. Const. 4") recorded Alexandrian scribes around 340 preparing Bibles for
Constans. Little else is known, though there is plenty of speculation. For
example, it is speculated that this may have provided motivation for canon
lists, and that Codex Vaticanus Graecus 1209, Codex Sinaiticus and Codex
Alexandrinus are examples of these Bibles. Together with the Peshitta, these
are the earliest extant Christian Bibles. Middle Ages. When ancient scribes
copied earlier books, they wrote notes on the margins of the page ("marginal
glosses") to correct their text—especially if a scribe accidentally omitted a
word or line—and to comment about the text. When later scribes were copying
the copy, they were sometimes uncertain if a note was intended to be included
as part of the text. See textual criticism. Over time, different regions
evolved different versions, each with its own assemblage of omissions and
additions. The earliest surviving complete manuscript of the entire Bible is
the Codex Amiatinus, a Latin Vulgate edition produced in 8th century England at
the double monastery of Wearmouth-Jarrow. During the Middle Ages, translation,
particularly of the Old Testament was discouraged. Nevertheless, there are some
fragmentary Old English Bible translations, notably a lost translation of the
Gospel of John into Old English by the Venerable Bede, which he is said to have
prepared shortly before his death around the year 735. An Old High German
version of the gospel of Matthew dates to 748. Charlemagne in ca. 800 charged
Alcuin with a revision of the Latin Vulgate. The translation into Old Church
Slavonic was started in 863 by Cyril and Methodius. Alfred the Great had a
number of passages of the Bible circulated in the vernacular in around 900.
These included passages from the Ten Commandments and the Pentateuch, which he
prefixed to a code of laws he promulgated around this time. In approximately
990, a full and freestanding version of the four Gospels in idiomatic Old
English appeared, in the West Saxon dialect; these are called the "Wessex
Gospels". Pope Innocent III in 1199 banned unauthorized versions of the Bible
as a reaction to the Cathar and Waldensian heresies. The synods of Toulouse and
Tarragona (1234) outlawed possession of such renderings. There is evidence of
some vernacular translations being permitted while others were being
scrutinized. The complete Bible was translated into Old French in the late 13th
century. Parts of this translation were included in editions of the popular
"Bible historiale", and there is no evidence of this translation being
suppressed by the Church. The entire Bible was translated into Czech around
1360. The most notable Middle English Bible translation, Wyclif's Bible (1383),
based on the Vulgate, was banned by the Oxford Synod in 1408. A Hungarian
Hussite Bible appeared in the mid 15th century, and in 1478, a Catalan
translation in the dialect of Valencia. Many parts of the Bible were printed by
William Caxton in his translation of the Golden Legend, and in "Speculum Vitae
Christi" ("The Mirror of the Blessed Life of Jesus Christ"). Reformation and
Early Modern period. The earliest printed edition of the Greek New Testament
appeared in 1516 from the Froben press, by Desiderius Erasmus, who
reconstructed its Greek text from several recent manuscripts of the Byzantine
text-type. He occasionally added a Greek translation of the Latin Vulgate for
parts that did not exist in the Greek manuscripts. He produced four later
editions of this text. Erasmus was Roman Catholic, but his preference for the
Byzantine Greek manuscripts rather than the Latin Vulgate led some church
authorities to view him with suspicion. In 1521, Martin Luther was placed under
the Ban of the Empire, and he retired to the Wartburg Castle. During his time
there, he translated the New Testament from Greek into German. It was printed
in September 1522. The first complete Dutch Bible, partly based on the existing
portions of Luther's translation, was printed in Antwerp in 1526 by Jacob van
Liesvelt. The first printed edition with "critical apparatus" (noting variant
readings among the manuscripts) was produced by the printer Robert Estienne of
Paris in 1550. The Greek text of this edition and of those of Erasmus became
known as the "Textus Receptus" (Latin for "received text"), a name given to it
in the Elzevier edition of 1633, which termed it as the text "nunc ab omnibus
receptum" ("now received by all"). Later critical editions incorporate ongoing
scholarly research, including discoveries of Greek papyrus fragments from near
Alexandria, Egypt, that date in some cases within a few decades of the original
New Testament writings. Today, most critical editions of the Greek New
Testament, such as UBS4 and NA27, consider the Alexandrian text-type corrected
by papyri, to be the Greek text that is closest to the original "autographs".
Their "apparatus" includes the result of votes among scholars, ranging from
certain {A} to doubtful {E}, on which variants best preserve the original Greek
text of the New Testament. Critical editions that rely primarily on the
Alexandrian text-type inform nearly all modern translations (and revisions of
older translations). For reasons of tradition, however, some translators prefer
to use the Textus Receptus for the Greek text, or use the "Majority Text" which
is similar to it but is a critical edition that relies on earlier manuscripts
of the Byzantine text-type. Among these, some argue that the Byzantine
tradition contains scribal additions, but these later interpolations preserve
the orthodox interpretations of the biblical text—as part of the ongoing
Christian experience—and in this sense are authoritative. Distrust of the
textual basis of modern translations has contributed to the King-James-Only
Movement. The churches of the Protestant Reformation translated the Greek of
the Textus Receptus to produce vernacular Bibles, such as the German Luther
Bible (1522), the Polish Brest Bible (1563) and the English King James Bible
(1611). Tyndale's New Testament translation (1526, revised in 1534, 1535 and
1536) and his translation of the Pentateuch (1530, 1534) and the Book of Jonah
were met with heavy sanctions given the widespread belief that Tyndale
"changed" the Bible as he attempted to translate it. The first complete French
Bible was a translation by Jacques Lefèvre d'Étaples, published in 1530 in
Antwerp. The Froschauer Bible of 1531 and the Luther Bible of 1534 (both
appearing in portions throughout the 1520s) were an important part of the
Reformation. The first English translations of Psalms (1530), Isaiah (1531),
Proverbs (1533), Ecclesiastes (1533), Jeremiah (1534) and Lamentations (1534),
were executed by the Protestant Bible translator George Joye in Antwerp. In
1535 Myles Coverdale published the first complete English Bible also in
Antwerp. In 1584 both Old and New Testaments were translated to Slovene by
Protestant writer and theologian Jurij Dalmatin. The Slovenes thus became the
12th nation in the world with a complete Bible in their language. Samuel
Bogusław Chyliński (1631–1668) translated and published the first Bible
translation into Lithuanian. The missionary activity of the Jesuit order led to
a large number of 17th century translations into languages of the New World.
Modern translation efforts. The Bible continues to be the most translated book
in the world. The following numbers are approximations. , at least one book of
the Bible has been translated into 2,400 of the 6,900 languages listed by SIL,
including 680 languages in Africa, followed by 590 in Asia, 420 in Oceania, 420
in Latin America and the Caribbean, 210 in Europe, and 75 in North America. The
United Bible Societies are presently assisting in over 600 Bible translation
projects. The Bible is available in whole or in part to some 98 percent of the
world's population in a language in which they are fluent. The United Bible
Society announced that as of 31 December 2007 the Bible was available in 438
languages, 123 of which included the deuterocanonical material as well as the
Tanakh and New Testament. Either the Tanakh or the New Testament alone was
available in an additional 1168 languages, and portions of the Bible were
available in another 848 languages, for a total of 2,454 languages. In 1999,
Wycliffe Bible Translators announced "Vision 2025". This project aims to see
Bible translation begun by 2025 in every remaining language community that
needs it. They currently estimate that 2,251 languages, representing 193
million people, lack a Bible translation. In 2001, Mike Coles, an RE teacher in
Stepney, translated The Bible into Cockney Rhyming slang and in 2008, graphic
representations of The Bible in Manga and "Lego" brick form were given approval
by the Archbishop of Canterbury. Differences in Bible translations. Dynamic or
formal translation policy. though modern linguists such as Bible scholar Dr.
Joel Hoffman disagrees with this classification. As Hebrew and Greek, the
original languages of the Bible, like all languages, have some idioms and
concepts not easily translated, there is in some cases an ongoing critical
tension about whether it is better to give a word for word translation or to
give a translation that gives a parallel idiom in the target language. For
instance, in the New American Bible, which is the English language Catholic
translation, as well as Protestant translations like the King James Version,
the Darby Bible, the New Revised Standard Version, the Modern Literal Version,
and the New American Standard Bible are seen as more literal translations (or
"word for word"), whereas translations like the New International Version and
New Living Translation sometimes attempt to give relevant parallel idioms. The
Living Bible and The Message are two paraphrases of the Bible that try to
convey the original meaning in contemporary language. The further away one gets
from word for word translation, the text becomes easier to read while relying
more on the theological, linguistic or cultural understanding of the
translator, which one would not normally expect a lay reader to require.
Doctrinal differences and translation policy. In addition to linguistic
concerns, theological issues also drive Bible translations. Some translations
of the Bible, produced by single churches or groups of churches, may be seen as
subject to a point of view by the translation committee. Among these the New
World Translation, produced by Jehovah's Witnesses, is seen as controversial by
some because of the renderings of key verses. Especially verses, that in other
Bible translations support the deity of Christ, are rendered differently in the
NWT. Also, the NWT often translates the New Testament "Kyrios", "Lord," as
"Jehovah" when referring to God. The publishers argue that this can be
supported by the fact that the oldest copies of the Greek Septuagint found
among the Dead Sea Scrolls (such as 8HevXIIgr) generally have the Hebrew
tetragrammaton in the Greek text rather than Greek "Kyrios" as found in later
Septuagint manuscripts. An exception to this is the Cave4 Leviticus fragment,
which has Greek "Iao". The NWT translators believe that when Jesus read from
such earlier scrolls he would have used his father's name and not the title.
(Luke 4:18, Jo 17:6, 26) The NWT translators did this despite the fact that the
tetragrammaton does not appear in the Greek manuscript of the New Testament
books. The Greek manuscripts use "Kyrios" to refer both to Jesus Christ and God
the Father.
