Biblical Sabbath Biblical Sabbath is a weekly day of rest or time of worship.
It is observed differently in Judaism and Christianity and informs a similar
occasion in several other faiths. Though many viewpoints and definitions have
arisen over the millennia, most originate in the same textual tradition.
Sabbath in the Bible is first mentioned in the Genesis creation narrative,
where the seventh day is set aside as a day of rest and made holy by God.
Observation and remembrance of Sabbath is one of the Ten Commandments (the
fourth in the original Jewish, the Eastern Orthodox, and most Protestant
traditions, the third in Roman Catholic and Lutheran traditions). Most people
who observe Biblical Sabbath regard it as having been instituted as a
"perpetual covenant the children of Israel" (, , ), a rule which also applies
to proselytes, and a sign in respect for the day during which God rested after
having completed creation in six days (, ). Isaiah extends the term to include
even corrupted rest-day traditions (). Etymology. Sabbath. The Anglicized term
"Sabbath" is in Hebrew "Shabbath" (שבת, now usually "Shabbat", Strong's
Concordance number 7676). It derives from the verb of same Hebrew spelling but
different pointing ("shabath", 7673, often "shavat"), defined as ""repose",
i.e. "desist" from exertion" (often "rest" or "cease"). (Another noun form of
this root, "shebeth" ("cessation", 7674), is identical to the infinitive (7675)
of the common word "to sit" ("yashav", 3427).) "Shabbath" is the intensified
form and is used only for a weekly cessation, 107 times in the Tanakh. The name
form is "Shabbethai" ("Shabbethay", "restful", 7678), a name appearing three
times in the Tanakh, and the name of Sabbatai Zevi. The Talmud also contains a
pun on "shebeth", where it secondarily means "dill", a spice. Another related
word is modern Hebrew "shevita", a labor strike, with the same focus on active
cessation of labor. And in over thirty languages other than English, the common
name for Saturday is a cognate of "Sabbath". The rarely attested Babylonian
"Sapattum" or "Sabattum" is cognate, but is said to be monthly rather than
weekly, on the evidence of the reconstruction of a broken tablet; this word is
regarded as a form of Sumerian "sa-bat" ("mid-rest"), attested in Akkadian as
"um nuh libbi" ("day of mid-repose"). It is unclear which form of the concept
is older. The dependent Greek cognate is "Sabbaton" ("4521"), used in the New
Testament 68 times in 62 verses. Two inflections, Hebrew "Shabbathown" (7677)
and Greek "σαββατισμός" ("Sabbatismós", "4520"), are both
translated "sabbatism" in Strong's (a "special holiday" or "the "repose" of
Christianity"). The Hebrew form refers to High Sabbaths. The Greek form is
cognate to the Septuagint verb "sabbatizo" (e.g., ; ; ; ). In English, the
concept of "Sabbatical" is cognate to these two forms. The King James Bible
uses the English form "sabbath(s)" 172 times. In the Old Testament, "sabbath
(s)" translates "Shabbath" all 107 times (including 35 plurals), plus "shebeth"
three times, "shabath" once, and the related "mishbath" once (plural). In the
New Testament, "sabbath" translates "Sabbaton" 59 times and "prosabbaton" once
(the day before Sabbath); "Sabbaton" is also translated as "week" nine times,
by synecdoche. Shmita. The year of "Shmita" (Hebrew "shemittah", שמטה,
Strong's 8059), also called Sabbatical Year, is the seventh year of the seven-
year agricultural cycle mandated by the Torah for the Land of Israel. During
"Shmita", the land is left to lie fallow and all agricultural
activity—including plowing, planting, pruning, and harvesting—is forbidden
by Torah law. The term is translated "release" five times in the Book of
Deuteronomy (from the root "shamat", ""desist", "remit"", 8058). Textual
tradition. New Testament. Gospels. Matthew, Mark, and Luke contain several
synoptic accounts, which John occasionally concurs in. Frameworks. Three
primary interpretative frameworks exist, with many subcategories.
Interpretation is complicated by the differing meanings attributed to
unambiguous seventh-day Sabbath prior to the resurrection of Jesus; the
ambiguity of events after the resurrection, including first-day and seventh-day
events (, , perhaps ; , , , , , and ); and several early Christian observances
being attested as daily or on nonspecific days (, , ). Early Christians also
observed Jewish practices as a sect of Judaism (, , , , , ), and observed
Tanakh feasts (Passover, , , , , ; Pentecost, , , , ; Atonement, ).
Interpreters of each framework consider the high regard for the New Covenant
described in (cf. ) as supporting their Sabbath positions. Seventh day.
Seventh-day Sabbatarians rest on the seventh Hebrew day. Jewish "Shabbat" is
observed from sundown on Friday until the appearance of three stars in the sky
on Saturday night; it is also observed by a minority of Christians. Thirty-nine
activities prohibited on "Shabbat" are listed in Tractate "Shabbat" (Talmud).
Customarily, "Shabbat" is ushered in by lighting candles shortly before sunset,
at halakhically calculated times that change from week to week and from place
to place. "Shabbat" ends approximately one hour after sunset by rabbinical
ordinance to extend the Tanakh's sunset-to-sunset Sabbath into the first day of
the week. The Jewish interpretation usually states that the New Covenant ()
refers to the future Messianic Kingdom. Several Christian denominations (such
as Seventh Day Baptist, Seventh-day Adventist, Sabbath Rest Advent Church,
Church of God (Seventh Day), and other Churches of God) observe Sabbath
similarly to or less rigorously than Judaism, but observance ends at Saturday
sunset instead of Saturday nightfall. Like the Jews with "Shabbat", they
believe that keeping seventh-day Sabbath is a moral responsibility, equal to
that of any of the Ten Commandments, that honors God as Creator and Deliverer.
The Christian seventh-day interpretation usually states that Sabbath belongs
inherently to all nations (, , ) and remains part of the New Covenant after the
crucifixion of Jesus (, , , ). Many seventh-day Sabbatarians also use "Lord's
Day" to mean the seventh day, based on Scriptures in which God calls the day
"my Sabbath" () and "to the " (); some count Sunday separately as Lord's Day
and many consider it appropriate for communal worship (but not for first-day
rest, which would be considered breaking the Ten Commandments). In this way,
St. Ignatius saw believers "no longer observing the Sabbath, but living in the
observance of the Lord's Day", and amplified this point as follows: "Let us
therefore no longer keep the Sabbath after the Jewish manner, and rejoice in
days of idleness ... But let every one of you keep the Sabbath after a
spiritual manner, rejoicing in meditation on the law, not in relaxation of the
body, admiring the workmanship of God, and not eating things prepared the day
before, nor using lukewarm drinks, and walking within a prescribed space, nor
finding delight in dancing and plaudits which have no sense in them. And after
the observance of the Sabbath, let every friend of Christ keep the Lord's Day
as a festival, the resurrection-day, the queen and chief of all the days." The
Seventh-day Adventist official 28 fundamental beliefs (at 20) state: The
Doctrinal Points of the Church of God (7th day) (Salem Conference, at 17)
state: Both Jewish and Christian seventh-day interpretation usually state that
Jesus' teachings relate to the Pharisaic position on Sabbath observance, and
that Jesus kept seventh-day Sabbath throughout his life on earth. Sunday law.
Noticing the rise of blue laws, the Seventh-day Adventist church in particular
has traditionally taught that in the end time a coalition of religious and
secular authorities will enforce an international Sunday law; church pioneers
saw observance of seventh-day Sabbath as a "mark" or "seal" or test of God's
people that seals them, even as those who do not observe Sunday rest will be
persecuted and killed. Ellen G. White interpreted , , , , and in this way,
describing the subject of persecution in prophecy as being about Sabbath
commandments. First day. First-day Sabbatarians worship communally on the first
(Hebrew or Roman) day. In most Christian denominations (Roman Catholic, some
Eastern Orthodox, and most Protestant), "Sabbath" is a synonym of "Lord's Day"
(Sunday), which is kept in commemoration of the resurrection of Christ, and
often celebrated with the Eucharist (Catholic Catechism 2177). It is often also
the day of rest. Lord's Day is considered both the first day and the "eighth
day" of the seven-day week, symbolizing both first creation and new creation
(2174). (Alternatively, in some calendars, Sunday is designated the seventh day
of the week.) Relatively few Christians regard first-day observance as
entailing all of the ordinances of "Shabbat". This interpretation usually
states that the Holy Spirit through the Apostles instituted the worship
celebration of the first day to commemorate Jesus' resurrection, and that the
New Covenant transfers Sabbath-keeping (whether defined as rest or communal
worship or both) to the first day by implication. In Roman Catholicism, the
transfer is described as based on their church's authority and papal
infallibility. Roman Catholics (and many Protestants) view the first day as a
day for assembly for worship (2178, ), but consider a day of rigorous rest not
obligatory on Christians (, ). Catholics count the prohibition of servile work
as transferred from seventh-day Sabbath to Sunday (2175-6), but do not hinder
participation in "ordinary and innocent occupations". Similarly, second-century
father Justin Martyr believed in keeping perpetual Sabbath by repentance,
holding that Gentile Christians need not rest as Jews were commanded; but he
accepted extant non-Judaizing seventh-day Sabbatarian Christians "in all things
as kinsmen and brethren". In other Protestant denominations, Lord's Day is kept
as a rest day with similar rigor as Jewish Sabbath. The Westminster Confession
of Faith 21:7-8, a Reformed Sabbatarian creed, states: Assemblies. The
following textual evidence for first-day assembly is usually combined with the
notion that the rest day should follow the assembly day to support first-day
Sabbatarianism. On the first day of the week (usually considered the day of
Firstfruits), after Jesus has been raised from the dead (), he appears to Mary
Magdalene, Peter, Cleopas, and others. "On the evening of that first day of the
week" (Roman time), or the evening beginning the second day (Hebrew time), the
resurrected Jesus appears at a meeting of ten apostles and other disciples ().
The same time of the week "a week later" (NIV) or, more literally, "after eight
days again" inclusive (KJV), Jesus appears to the eleven apostles and others
(). After Jesus ascends (), on the feast of Pentecost or Shavuot (the 50th day
from Firstfruits and thus usually calculated as the first day of the week), the
Spirit of God is given to the disciples, who baptize 3,000 people into the
apostolic fellowship. Later, on one occasion in Troas, the early Christians
meet on the first day (Hebrew) to break bread and to listen to Christian
preaching (). Paul also states that the churches of Corinth and Galatia should
set aside donations on the first day for collection (). Didache 14:1 (AD 70-
120?) contains an ambiguous text, translated by Roberts as, "But every Lord's
day gather yourselves together, and break bread, and give thanksgiving"; the
first clause in Greek, " ", literally means "On the Lord's of the Lord", and
translators supply the elided noun (e.g., "day", "commandment" (from 13:7), or
"doctrine"). Gleason Archer regards this as one of only two extrabiblical
Christian uses of "κυριακήν" where it does not clearly refer to Sunday.
Breaking bread may refer to Christian fellowship, agape feasts, or Eucharist
(cf. , ). Other interpreters believe these references do not support the
concept of transfer of the seventh-day rest, and some add that they do not
sufficiently prove that Sunday observance was an established practice in the
primitive New Testament church. By the second century, Justin Martyr stated,
"We all gather on the day of the sun" (recalling both the creation of light and
the resurrection); and the Epistle of Barnabas on stated the eighth-day
assembly marks the resurrection and the new creation: "He is saying there: 'It
is not these sabbaths of the present age that I find acceptable, but the one of
my own appointment: the one that, after I have set all things at rest, is to
usher in the Eighth Day, the commencement of a new world.' (And we too rejoice
in celebrating the Eighth Day; because that was when Jesus rose from the dead,
and showed Himself again, and ascended into heaven.)" Unspecified day. Non-
Sabbatarians affirm human liberty not to observe a weekly rest or worship day.
While keepers of weekly days usually believe in religious liberty, non-
Sabbatarians are particularly free to uphold Sabbath principles, or not,
without limiting observance to either Saturday or Sunday. Some advocate Sabbath
rest on any chosen day of the week, and some advocate Sabbath as a symbolic
metaphor for rest in Christ; the concept of "Lord's Day" is usually treated as
synonymous with "Sabbath". The non-Sabbatarian interpretation usually states
that Jesus' obedience and the New Covenant fulfilled the laws of Sabbath, which
are thus often considered abolished or abrogated. Some of Jesus' teachings are
considered as redefining the Sabbath laws of the Pharisees (, , ). Since Jesus
is understood to have fulfilled Torah (, ), non-Sabbatarian Christians believe
that they are not bound by Sabbath as legalists consider themselves to be. Non-
Sabbatarians can thus exhibit either Christian liberty or antinomianism. On
principles of religious liberty, non-Sabbatarian Jews similarly affirm their
freedom not to observe "Shabbat" as Orthodox Jews do. Non-Sabbatarian
Christians also cite , in which believers are compared to "a letter from
Christ, the result of our ministry, written ... not on tablets of stone but on
tablets of human hearts"; this interpretation states that Christians
accordingly no longer follow the Ten Commandments with dead orthodoxy ("tablets
of stone"), but follow a new law written upon "tablets of human hearts". adds
that "if the ministry that brought death, which was engraved in letters on
stone, came with glory ..., will not the ministry of the Spirit be even more
glorious? ... And if what was fading away came with glory, how much greater is
the glory of that which lasts!" This is interpreted as teaching that new-
covenant Christians are not under the Mosaic law, and that Sabbath-keeping is
not required. Further, because "love is the fulfillment of the law" (), the
new-covenant "law" is considered to be based entirely upon love and to rescind
Sabbath requirements. Non-Sabbatarians who affirm that Sabbath-keeping remains
for God's people (as in ) often regard this as present spiritual rest and/or
future heavenly rest rather than as physical weekly rest. For instance,
Irenaeus saw Sabbath rest from secular affairs for one day each week as a sign
of the way that Christians were called to permanently devote themselves to God
and an eschatological symbol. Interpretations. Genesis 2. Based on Genesis 2:1-
4, Sabbath is considered by seventh-day Sabbatarians to be the first holy day
mentioned in the Bible, with God, Adam, and Eve being the first to observe it.
In order to reconcile an omnipotent God with a resting on the seventh day of
Creation, the notion of active cessation from labor, rather than passive rest,
has been regarded as a more consistent reading of God's activity in this
passage. Non-Sabbatarians and many first-day Sabbatarians consider this passage
not to have instituted observance of Sabbath, which they place as beginning
with Moses and the manna. Walter Brueggemann emphasizes Sabbath is rooted in
the history of the Book of Exodus. Matthew 5. Jesus' statement, "Do not think
that I have come to abolish the Law or the Prophets; I have not come to abolish
them but to fulfill them," is highly debated. Some non-Sabbatarians and others
such as Anabaptists believe Jesus greatly reformed the Law and thus that
Sabbath could only be justified if it were reaffirmed by Jesus. Antinomianism,
generally regarded as a heresy, holds that, because Jesus accomplished all that
was required by the law, thus "fulfilling" it, he made it unnecessary for
anyone to do anything further. Strict Sabbatarians follow or expand Augustine's
statement in "Reply to Faustus" that Jesus empowered his people to obey the law
and gave additional commands that furthered its true intentions. This passage
is often related to Colossians 2, from which maintenance, transference, or
abolition of Sabbath are variously taught. Colossians 2. The English Standard
Version at ("Therefore let no one pass judgment on you in questions of food and
drink, or with regard to a festival or a new moon or a Sabbath. These are a
shadow of the things to come, but the substance belongs to Christ.") is taken
as affirming non-Sabbatarian freedom from obligations to Sabbath, whether this
means only annual Sabbaths () or specifically weekly Sabbath (). This passage's
threefold categorization of events is parallel to , , , , ( mentions Sabbaths
and festivals but not new moons). Accordingly, non-Sabbatarians and some first-
day Sabbatarians believe this passage indicates Sabbath-keeping is part of an
Old Covenant that is not mandatory (cf. ). Seventh-day Sabbatarians and strict
first-day Sabbatarians believe this passage indicates that weekly Sabbath
remains to be kept as a shadow of things future to Paul's day and/or a memorial
of creation past. Additionally, states, "And you, who were dead in your
trespasses and the uncircumcision of your flesh, God made alive together with
him, having forgiven us all our trespasses, by canceling the record of debt
that stood against us with its legal demands. This he set aside, nailing it to
the cross. He disarmed the rulers and authorities and put them to open shame,
by triumphing over them in him." The ESV footnote regards ""in it" (that is,
the cross)" as equivalent to the closing "in him" (Christ). First-day
Sabbatarians and non-Sabbatarians regard Sabbath as changed, either to Lord's
Day or to spiritual Sabbath, by the "record of debt" being nailed to the cross.
Some seventh-day Sabbatarians regard only High Sabbaths as abolished due to
their foreshadowing the cross, holding it impossible for weekly Sabbath (which
preceded sin) to foreshadow deliverance from sin in the cross. Others see the
"record of debt" (accusations) as distinct from God's unchanging law, believing
it to be in force and affirmed by the evangelists after Jesus died on the
cross, taking Sabbath, new moon, and High Sabbaths not as nailed to the cross
but as foreshadowing the eternal plan of God. Hebrews 4. The unique word
"sabbatismos" in Hebrews 4:9 is translated "rest" in the Authorized Version and
others; "Sabbath rest" in the New International Version and other modern
translations; "Sabbatism" (a transliteration) in the Darby Bible; "Sabbath
observance" in the Scriptures 98 Edition; and "Sabbath keeping" in the Bible in
Basic English. The word also appears in Plutarch, "De Superstitione" 3 (Moralia
166A); Justin, "Dialogue with Trypho" 23:3; Epiphanius, "Adversus Haereses" 30:
2:2; "Martyrium Petri et Pauli" 1; and "Apostolic Constitutions" 2:36:2. Andrew
Lincoln states, "In each of these places the term denotes the observance or
celebration of the Sabbath ... Thus the writer to the Hebrews is saying that
since the time of Joshua an observance of the Sabbath rest has been
outstanding." Sabbatarians believe the primary abiding Christian duty intended
is weekly Sabbath-keeping, while non-Sabbatarians believe it is spiritual or
eschatological Sabbath-keeping; both meanings may be intended. Justin uses
"sabbatismos" in "Trypho" 23:3 to mean weekly Sabbath-keeping. However, Justin
does not speak of Hebrews 4, instead holding that there is no longer any need
for weekly Sabbath-keeping for anyone. Hippolytus of Rome, in the early third
century, interpreted the term in Hebrews 4 to have special reference to a
millennial Sabbath kingdom after six millennia of labor. St. Chrysostom
interpreted the term as having reference to three rests: God's rest from His
labor on the seventh day, the rest of the Israelites in arriving in Canaan, and
the heavenly (eschatological) rest for the faithful. He argued that the "rest"
which "has been outstanding" is the heavenly rest, since the first two rests
had already been going on. He also interpreted weekly Sabbath as a symbol of
this heavenly rest: "And well did he conclude the argument. For he said not
rest but 'Sabbath-keeping'; calling the kingdom 'Sabbath-keeping,' by the
appropriate name, and that which they rejoiced in and were attracted by. For
as, on the Sabbath He commands to abstain from all evil things; and that those
things only which relate to the Service of God should be done, which things the
Priests were wont to accomplish, and whatsoever profits the soul, and nothing
else; so also it be then." Matthew Henry calls this "a rest of grace, and
comfort, and holiness, in the gospel state. And a rest in glory, where the
people of God shall enjoy the end of their faith, and the object of all their
desires ... undoubtedly the heavenly rest, which remains to the people of God,
and is opposed to a state of labour and trouble in this world. It is the rest
they shall obtain when the Lord Jesus shall appear from heaven ... God has
always declared man's rest to be in him, and his love to be the only real
happiness of the soul." This is taken to support the belief that Sabbath-
keeping is a metaphor for the eternal "rest" that Christians enjoy in Christ,
prefigured by the promised land of Canaan. Hebrews 8. Non-Sabbatarians and some
first-day Sabbatarians believe Hebrews 8 indicates Sabbath-keeping is not
mandatory, because "in that he saith, a new covenant, he hath made the first
old" ( KJV; or "obsolete" NIV). Seventh-day Sabbatarians and strict first-day
Sabbatarians believe Hebrews 8 indicates the Law of God (including Sabbath)
remains on the hearts of God's people to be kept, but not fallibly as in the
older covenant ().
