Binding of Isaac The Binding of Isaac (in Hebrew the עֲקֵידַת
יִצְחַק, "Akedát Yitzḥák", also known simply as "The Binding"
הָ)עֲקֵידָה), the Akedah or Aqedah, or in Arabic as the "Dhabih"
(ذبيح) or "Slaughter"), is a story from the Hebrew Bible in which God asks
Abraham to sacrifice his son, Isaac, on Mount Moriah. The account states that
Abraham "bound Isaac his son" before placing him on the altar, resulting in the
popular name for the incident. Biblical narrative. According to the biblical
story, God commands Abraham to offer his son Isaac as a sacrifice. (Genesis and
). After Isaac is bound to an altar, the angel of God stops Abraham at the last
minute, saying "now I know you fear God." At this point Abraham sees a ram
caught in some nearby bushes and sacrifices the ram instead of Isaac. The Book
of Genesis does not tell the age of Isaac at the time. While it is often
presented that Isaac was a small child, verse 6 of Chapter 22 indicates that
Isaac was at least grown enough to walk alongside Abraham up the mountain
carrying the load of wood that his father had gathered (). The Talmudic sages
teach that Isaac was thirty-seven, likely based on the next biblical story,
which is of Sarah's death at 127, being 90 when Isaac was born. Bishop Ussher's
chronology places Isaac at about 20 years of age. Genesis 22:14 states that it
occurred at "the mount of the LORD". 2 Chronicles ; Psalm ; Isaiah & ; and
Zechariah , identify the location of this event as the hill on which Solomon
was said to later build the Temple, now known as the Temple Mount in Jerusalem.
Jewish views. The majority of Jewish Biblical commentators argue that God was
testing Abraham to see if he would actually kill his own son, as a test of his
loyalty. However, a number of Jewish Biblical commentators from the medieval
era, and many in the modern era, read the text in another way. The early
rabbinic midrash "Genesis Rabbah" imagines God as saying "I never considered
telling Abraham to slaughter Isaac (using the Hebrew root letters for
"slaughter", not "sacrifice")". Rabbi Yona Ibn Janach (Spain, 11th century)
wrote that God demanded only a symbolic sacrifice. Rabbi Yosef Ibn Caspi
(Spain, early 14th century) wrote that Abraham's "imagination" led him astray,
making him believe that he had been commanded to sacrifice his son. Ibn Caspi
writes "How could God command such a revolting thing?" But according to Rabbi
Joseph H. Hertz (Chief Rabbi of the British Empire), child sacrifice was
actually "rife among the Semitic peoples," and suggests that "in that age, it
was astounding that Abraham's God should have interposed "to prevent" the
sacrifice, not that He should have asked for it." Hertz interprets the "Akedah"
as demonstrating to the Jews that human sacrifice is abhorrent. "Unlike the
cruel heathen deities, "it was the spiritual surrender alone that God
required."" In Jeremiah 32:35, God states that the later Israelite practice of
child sacrifice to the deity Molech "had entered My mind that they should do
this abomination." Other rabbinic scholars also note that Abraham was willing
to do everything to spare his son, even if it meant going against the divine
command: while it was God who ordered Abraham to sacrifice his son, it was an
angel, a lesser being in the celestial hierarchy, that commanded him to stop.
However, the actions and words of angels (from the Greek for "messenger") are
generally understood to derive directly from God's will. In some later Jewish
writings, most notably those of the Hasidic masters, the theology of a "divine
test" is rejected, and the sacrifice of Isaac is interpreted as a "punishment"
for Abraham's earlier "mistreatment" of Ishmael, his elder son, whom he
expelled from his household at the request of his wife, Sarah. According to
this view, Abraham failed to show compassion for his son, so God punished him
by ostensibly failing to show compassion for Abraham's son. This is a somewhat
flawed theory, since the Bible says that God agreed with Sarah, and it was only
at His insistence that Abraham actually had Ishmael leave. In "The Last Trial",
Shalom Spiegel argues that these commentators were interpreting the Biblical
narration as an implicit rebuke against Christianity's claim that God would
sacrifice His own son. The Tzemach Tzedek cites a question asked by Rabbi
Menachem Mendel of Vitebsk: At first glance, this appears to have been mainly a
test of Isaac, for he was the one to be giving up his life "al kiddush Hashem"
(in order to sanctify God’s Name). However the Torah states (Gen. 22:1) that
God meant to test Abraham, not Isaac? Rabbi Menachem Mendel answers that
although it is a very great Mitzvah to give up one’s life, it is unremarkable
in the annals of Jewish history. Even the most unlettered and “ordinary”
Jews would surrender their lives in martyrdom. Thus, as great a Mitzvah as it
is, this test is considered trivial for someone of the spiritual stature of
Isaac, who, as one of our forefathers, was likened to God’s “chariot”
(Gen. Rabba 47:6) for he served as a vehicle for the divine traits of kindness,
strictness, and compassion. Rather, at the binding the main one tested was
Abraham. It was a test of faith to see whether he would doubt God's words.
Abraham had been assured by God that “Your seed will be called through
Isaac” (Gen. 21:12), i.e., Isaac (and not Ishmael) would father a great
nation—the Jewish people. However, Abraham could apparently have asked a very
glaring question: at the time that God commanded him to offer up Isaac as a
sacrifice, Isaac was still single, and if Isaac would die now, how could he
possibly father the nation which was to be born from Abraham? Moreover, isn’t
God eternal and unchanging, as God declares: “I have not changed” (Malachi
3:6), implying that He does not change His mind? Yet Abraham paid no attention
to this altogether logical question. Instead, he dismissed it totally from his
consciousness and believed with pure and simple faith that if this is what God
was telling him to do now, this was surely the right thing to do. It was
passing this test that was remarkable even for someone of Abraham's stature. In
"The Binding of Isaac, Religious Murders & Kabbalah", Lippman Bodoff argues
that Abraham never intended to actually sacrifice his son, and that he had
faith that God had no intention that he do so. Others suggest that Abraham's
apparent complicity with the sacrifice was actually his way of testing God.
Abraham had previously argued with God to save lives in Sodom and Gomorrah. By
silently complying with God's instructions to kill Isaac, Abraham was putting
pressure on God to act in a moral way to preserve life. More evidence that
Abraham thought that he won't actually sacrifice Isaac comes from Genesis 22:5,
where Abraham said to his servants, "You stay here with the ass. The boy and I
will go up there; we will worship and we will return to you." By saying that we
(as opposed to I), he meant that both he and Isaac will return. Thus, he didn't
believe that Isaac would be sacrificed in the end In "The Guide for the
Perplexed", Maimonides argues that the story of the Binding of Isaac contains
two "great notions." First, Abraham's willingness to sacrifice Isaac
demonstrates the limit of humanity's capability to both love and fear God.
Second, because Abraham acted on a prophetic vision of what God had asked him
to do, the story exemplifies how prophetic revelation has the same truth value
as philosophical argument and thus carries equal certainty, notwithstanding the
fact that it comes in a dream or vision. In "Glory and Agony: Isaac's Sacrifice
and National Narrative", Yael S. Feldman argues that the story of Isaac's
Binding, in both its biblical and post-biblical versions (the New Testament
included) has had a great impact on the ethos of altruist heroism and self-
sacrifice in modern Hebrew national culture. As her study demonstrates, over
the last century the "Binding of Isaac" has morphed into the "Sacrifice of
Isaac," connoting both the glory and agony of heroic death on the battlefield.
Christian views. The Binding of Isaac is mentioned in the New Testament Epistle
to the Hebrews among many acts of faith recorded in the Old Testament: "By
faith Abraham, when he was tested, offered up Isaac, and he who had received
the promises offered up his only begotten son, of whom it was said, "In Isaac
your seed shall be called," concluding that God was able to raise him up, even
from the dead, from which he also received him in a figurative sense." (Hebrews
11:17–19, NKJV) Abraham's faith in God is such that he felt God would be able
to resurrect the slain Isaac, in order that his prophecy (Genesis 21:12) might
be fulfilled. Early Christian preaching sometimes accepted Jewish
interpretations of the binding of Isaac without elaborating. For example
Hippolytus of Rome says in his "Commentary on the Song of Songs", "The blessed
Isaac became desirous of the anointing and he wished to sacrifice himself for
the sake of the world" ("On the Song" 2:15). Other Christians from the period
saw Isaac as a type of the "Word of God" who prefigured Christ. (Origen,
"Homilies on Genesis" 11–13) The majority of Christian Biblical commentators
view this episode as prefiguring God's plan to have his own Son, Jesus, die on
the cross as a substitute for humanity, much like the ram God provided for
Abraham. Abraham's willingness to give up his own son Isaac is seen, in this
view, as foreshadowing the willingness of God the Father to sacrifice his Son;
also contrasted is Isaac's submission in the whole ordeal with Christ's, the
two choosing to lay down their own lives in order for the will of God to be
accomplished, as no struggle is mentioned in the Genesis account. Indeed, both
stories portray the participants carrying the wood for their own sacrifice up a
mountain. Genesis 22:2 states that it occurred "in the region of Moriah". There
has been speculation within Christianity whether the Binding occurred upon the
Temple Mount or upon Calvary, the hill upon which Christ was crucified, or
somewhere else. An alternate interpretation proposes that Calvary was on a
section of Mount Moriah, the temple mount, which has subsequently been divided
from the main part for the purpose of defending Jerusalem. As such the
crucifixion would occur on the same mountain. Muslim views. The Islamic version
differs from the Bible. In Islamic sources, when Abraham tells his son about
the vision, his son accepted to be sacrificed for fulfillment of God's command,
and no binding to the altar occurred. The Quran states that when Abraham asked
for a righteous son, God granted him a son possessing forbearance. The son is
not however named directly in the Quran. When the son was able to walk and work
with him, Abraham saw a vision about sacrificing his son. When he told his son
about it, his son accepted to fulfill the command of God in the vision. When
they both had submitted their will to God and were ready for the sacrifice, God
told Abraham he had fulfilled the vision, and provided him with a ram to
sacrifice instead. God promised to reward Abraham. The next two verses state
God also granted Abraham the righteous son Isaac, and promised more rewards.
Muslim scholars have endorsed the belief that it was the first-born son
Ishmael, not Isaac, who was asked to be sacrificed in the vision, and that the
second son Isaac was born later as one of the rewards for Abraham's fulfillment
of his vision. Among early Muslim scholars, however, there was a dispute over
the identity of the son. The argument of those early scholars who believed it
was Isaac rather than Ishmael (notably Ibn Ḳutayba, and al-Ṭabarī) was
that "God's perfecting his mercy on Abraham and Isaac" referred to his making
Abraham his friend and saving him from the burning bush, and to his rescuing
Isaac. On the contrary, the other parties held that the promise to Sarah was of
a son, Isaac, and a grandson, Jacob, excluded the possibility of a premature
death of Isaac. Muslims consider that visions experienced by prophets are
revelations from God, and as such it was a divine order to Abraham. The entire
episode of the sacrifice is regarded as a trial of God for Abraham and his son,
and both are seen as having passed the test by submitting to God and showing
their awareness that God is the Owner and Giver of all that we have and
cherish, including life and offspring. The submission of Abraham and his son is
celebrated and commemorated by Muslims on the days of Eid al-Adha. During the
festival, those who can afford and the ones in the pilgrimage sacrifice a ram,
cow, sheep or a camel. Part of the sacrifice meat is eaten by the household and
remaining is distributed to the neighbors and the needy. The festival happens
marks the end of the Hajj pilgrimage to Mecca. The well-known site of Marwah
(Arabic مروة) may be identified with the biblical Moriah (Hebrew
מוריה) in Gn 22:2. Marwah being the mount just outside the perimeter of
the Kaaba. However, it should be noted that the Hebrew Bible identifies the
Temple Mount in Jerusalem as Mount Moriah, as early as the First Temple period
in the book of Second Chronicles chapter 3 , around 1,700 years predating
Islam's account. Modern research of origins. Modern-critical scholars operating
under the framework of the documentary hypothesis commonly ascribe the
Binding's narrative to the biblical source E, on the grounds that it generally
uses God (אלוהים) for the deity, and also parallels characteristic E
compositions. On that view, the second angelic appearance to Abraham (v.
14–18), praising his obedience and blessing his offspring, is in fact a later
interpolation to E’s original account (v.1-13, 19). This is supported by the
style and composition of these verses, as well as by the use of YHWH (יהוה)
for the deity. More recent studies question this analysis. It is argued that
Abraham’s obedience to God’s command in fact necessitates praise and
blessing, which he only receives in the second angelic speech. That speech,
therefore, could not have been simply interpolated into E’s original account.
This has suggested to many that the author responsible for the interpolation of
the second angelic appearance has left his mark also on the original account
(v. 1-13-19). More recently it has been suggested that these traces are in fact
the first angelic appearance (v. 11–12), in which the Angel of YHWH stops
Abraham before he kills Isaac. The style and composition of these verses
resemble that of the second angelic speech, and YHWH is used for the deity
rather than God. On that reading, in the original E version of the Binding
Abraham disobeys God’s command, sacrificing the ram “instead of his son”
(v.13) on his own responsibility and without being stopped by an angel: "And
Abraham stretched forth his hand, and took the knife to slay his son; but
Abraham lifted up his eyes and looked and beheld, behind him was a ram, caught
in a thicket by his horns; and Abraham went, and took the ram, and offered it
up as a burnt offering instead of his son" (v. 10,13). By interpolating the
first appearance of the angel, a later redactor shifted responsibility for
halting the test from Abraham to the angel (v. 11–12); due to that shift of
responsibility, the second angelic appearance, in which Abraham is rewarded for
his obedience (v. 14–18), became necessary. This analysis of the story sheds
light on the connection between the Binding and the story of Sodom (), in which
Abraham protests against God's unethical plan to destroy the city, without
distinguishing between the righteous and the wicked: "Far be it from you to do
such a thing.. Shall not the judge of all the earth do what is just?" Abraham's
ethical rebellion against God in Sodom culminates in his disobedience to God,
refusing to sacrifice Isaac. Francesca Stavrakopoulou has speculated that it is
possible that the story "contains traces of a tradition in which Abraham does
sacrifice Isaac. Richard Elliott Friedman has argued that in the original E
story Abraham may have carried out the sacrifice of Isaac, but that later
repugnance at the idea of a human sacrifice led the redactor of JE to add the
lines in which a ram is substituted for Isaac. Richard Dawkins wrote about the
' binding of Isaac ', " A modern moralist cannot help but wonder how a child
could ever recover from such psychological trauma. By the standards of modern
morality, this disgraceful story is an example simultaneously of child abuse,
bullying in two asymmetrical power relationships, and the first recorded use of
the Nuremberg defence: ' I was only obeying orders ' Yet the legend is one of
the great foundational myths of all three monotheistic religions." The Binding
also figures prominently in the writings of several of the more important
modern theologians, such as Søren Kierkegaard in "Fear and Trembling" and
Shalom Spiegel in "The Last Trial". Jewish communities regularly review this
literature, for instance the recent mock trial held by more than 600 members of
the University Synagogue of Orange County, California. Jacques Derrida also
looks at the story of the sacrifice as well as Kierkegaard's reading in "The
Gift of Death". In "Mimesis: The Representation of Reality in Western
Literature," the literary critic Erich Auerbach considers the Hebrew narrative
of the Binding of Isaac, along with Homer's description of Odysseus's scar, as
the two paradigmatic models for the representation of reality in literature.
Auerbach contrasts Homer's attention to detail and foregrounding of the
spatial, historical, as well as personal contexts for events to the Bible's
sparse account, in which virtually all context is kept in the background or
left outside of the narrative. As Auerbach observes, this narrative strategy
virtually compels readers to add their own interpretations to the text.
