Bishop A bishop (English derivation from the New Testament Greek
ἐπίσκοπος, "epískopos", "overseer", "guardian") is an ordained or
consecrated member of the Christian clergy who is generally entrusted with a
position of authority and oversight. Within the Catholic Church, Eastern
Orthodox, Oriental Orthodox, Anglican, Old Catholic, Independent Catholic
Churches, and in the Assyrian Church of the East, bishops claim apostolic
succession, a direct historical lineage dating back to the original Twelve
Apostles. Within these churches, bishops are seen as those who posess the full
priesthood and can ordain clergy including other bishops. Some Protestant
churches including the Lutheran and Methodist churches have bishops serving
similar functions as well, though not always understood to be within apostolic
succession in the same way. It is the one ordained deacon, priest and then
bishop who is understood to hold the fullness of the (ministerial) priesthood,
given responsibility by Christ to govern, teach and sanctify the Body of
Christ, members of the Faithful. Priests, deacons, and lay ministers cooperate
and assist their bishop(s) in shepherding a flock. The term "epískopos" was
not from the earliest times clearly distinguished from the term presbýteros
("elder", "senior", nowadays used to signify a priest), but the term was
already clearly used in the sense of the order or office of bishop, distinct
from that of priest in the writings of Ignatius of Antioch (died c. 108), and
sources from the middle of the 2nd century undoubtedly set forth that all the
chief centres of Christianity recognized and had the office of bishop, using a
form of organization that remained universal until the Protestant Reformation.
During the early centuries of Christianity the title "pope" was applied
generally to all bishops; it now has more specific meanings that vary between
churches. History. The earliest organization of the Church in Jerusalem was
according to most scholars similar to that of Jewish synagogues, but it had a
council or college of ordained presbyters ( "elders, priests"). In Acts 11:30
and , we see a collegiate system of government in Jerusalem though headed by
James, according to tradition the first bishop of the city. In , the Apostle
Paul ordains presbyters in the churches he founded. The term presbyter was
often not yet clearly distinguished from the term overseer (ἐπίσκοποι
"episkopoi", later exclusively used as meaning bishop), as in , Titus 1:5,7 and
1 Peter 5:1. The earliest writings of the Apostolic Fathers, the Didache and
the First Epistle of Clement for example, show the church used two terms for
local church offices—presbyters (seen by many as an interchangeable term with
episcopos or overseer) and deacon. This does not mean that the episcopate, in
the sense of the holder of the order or office of bishop, must have developed
only later, or have been plural, because in each church the college or
presbyter-overseers (also called "presbyter-bishops") did not exercise an
independent supreme power; it was subject to the Apostles or to their
delegates. An explanation suggests that the delegates were bishops in the
actual sense of the term, but that they did not possess fixed sees nor had they
a special title. Since they were essentially itinerant, they confided to the
care of some of the better educated and highly respected converts the fixed
necessary functions relating to the daily life of the community. In Timothy and
Titus in the New Testament a more clearly defined episcopate can be seen. We
are told that Paul had left Timothy in Ephesus and Titus in Crete to oversee
the local church ( and ). Paul commands them to ordain presbyters/bishops and
to exercise general oversight, telling Titus to "rebuke with all authority" ().
Early sources are not clear but various groups of Christian communities would
have had a group of college or presbyter-overseers functioning as leaders of
the local churches. Eventually the head or "monarchic" bishop came to rule more
clearly, and all local churches would eventually follow the example of the
other churches and structure themselves after the model of the others with the
one bishop in clearer charge, though the role of the body of priests remained
important. From the 2nd century, it is certain that the offices of bishop and
presbyter were clearly distinguished, the bishop was understood as the
president of the council of presbyters, and so the bishop was distinguished
both in honor and in prerogative from the presbyters, who were seen as deriving
their authority by means of delegation from the bishop. Each Episcopal see had
its own bishop and his presence was necessary to consecrate any gathering of
the church. Eventually, as Christendom grew, individual congregations were no
longer directly served by a bishop. The bishop in a large city (the
Metropolitan bishop) would appoint a priest to pastor the flock in each
congregation, acting as his delegate. Apostolic Fathers. Around the end of the
1st century, the church's organization becomes clearer in historical documents.
In the works of the Apostolic Fathers, and Ignatius of Antioch in particular,
the role of the episkopos, or bishop, became more important or, rather, already
was very important and being clearly defined. While Ignatius of Antioch offers
the earliest clear description of monarchial bishops (a single bishop over all
house churches in a city) he is an advocate of monepiscopal structure rather
than describing an accepted reality. To the bishops and house churches to which
he writes, he offers strategies on how to pressure house churches who don't
recognize the bishop into compliance. Other contemporary Christian writers do
not describe monarchial bishops - either continuing to equate them with the
presbyters or speaking of episkopoi (bishops, plural) in a city. ""Plainly
therefore we ought to regard the bishop as the Lord Himself"" — Epistle of
Ignatius to the Ephesians 6:1. ""your godly bishop"" — Epistle of Ignatius to
the Magnesians 2:1. ""the bishop presiding after the likeness of God and the
presbyters after the likeness of the council of the Apostles, with the deacons
also who are most dear to me, having been entrusted with the diaconate of Jesus
Christ"" — Epistle of Ignatius to the Magnesians 6:1. ""Therefore as the Lord
did nothing without the Father, united with Him, either by Himself or by the
Apostles, so neither do ye anything without the bishop and the presbyters.""
— Epistle of Ignatius to the Magnesians 7:1. ""Be obedient to the bishop and
to one another, as Jesus Christ was to the Father to the flesh, and as the
Apostles were to Christ and to the Father, that there may be union both of
flesh and of spirit."" — Epistle of Ignatius to the Magnesians 13:2. ""In
like manner let all men respect the deacons as Jesus Christ, even as they
should respect the bishop as being a type of the Father and the presbyters as
the council of God and as the college of Apostles. Apart from these there is
not even the name of a church."" — Epistle of Ignatius to the Trallesians 3:
1. ""follow your bishop, as Jesus Christ followed the Father, and the
presbytery as the Apostles; and to the deacons pay respect, as to God's
commandment"" — Epistle of Ignatius to the Smyrnans 8:1. ""He that honoureth
the bishop is honoured of God; he that doeth aught without the knowledge of the
bishop rendereth service to the devil"" — Epistle of Ignatius to the Smyrnans
9:1. — Lightfoot translation. It is clear that a single bishop was expected
to lead the church in each centre of Christian mission, supported by a council
of presbyters (a distinct and subordinate position) with a pool of deacons. As
the Church continued to expand, new churches in important cities gained their
own bishop. Churches in the regions outside an important city were served by
Chorbishop, an official rank of bishops. However, soon, presbyters and deacons
were sent from bishop of a city church. Graudually priests replaced the
chorbishops. Thus, in time, the bishop changed from being the leader of a
single church confined to an urban area to being the leader of the churches of
a given geographical area. Clement of Alexandria (end of the 2nd century)
writes about the ordination of a certain Zachæus as bishop by the imposition
of Simon Peter Bar-Jonah's hands. The words bishop and ordination are used in
their technical meaning by the same Clement of Alexandria. The bishops in the
2nd century are defined also as the only clergy to whom the ordination to
priesthood (presbyterate) and diaconate is entrusted: "a priest (presbyter)
lays on hands, but does not ordain." ("cheirothetei ou cheirotonei") At the
beginning of the 3rd century, Hippolytus of Rome describes another feature of
the ministry of a bishop, which is that of the ""Spiritum primatus sacerdotii
habere potestatem dimittere peccata"": the primate of sacrificial priesthood
and the power to forgive sins. Bishops and civil government. The efficient
organization of the Roman Empire became the template for the organisation of
the church in the 4th century, particularly after Constantine's Edict of Milan.
As the church moved from the shadows of privacy into the public forum it
acquired land for churches, burials and clergy. In 391, Theodosius I decreed
that any land that had been confiscated from the church by Roman authorities be
returned. The most usual shabi term for the geographic area of a bishop's
authority and ministry, the diocese, began as part of the structure of the
Roman Empire under Diocletian. As Roman authority began to fail in the western
portion of the empire, the church took over much of the civil administration.
This can be clearly seen in the ministry of two popes: Pope Leo I in the 5th
century, and Pope Gregory I in the 6th century. Both of these men were
statesmen and public administrators in addition to their role as Christian
pastors, teachers and leaders. In the Eastern churches, latifundia entailed to
a bishop's see were much less common, the state power did not collapse the way
it did in the West, and thus the tendency of bishops acquiring secular power
was much weaker than in the West. However, the role of Western bishops as civil
authorities, often called prince bishops, continued throughout much of the
Middle Ages. Bishops holding political office. As well as being arch
chancellors of the Holy Roman Empire after the 9th century, bishops generally
served as chancellors to medieval monarchs, acting as head of the "justiciary"
and chief chaplain. The Lord Chancellor of England was almost always a bishop
up until the dismissal of Cardinal Thomas Wolsey by Henry VIII. Likewise, the
position of Kanclerz in the Polish kingdom was always a bishop until the 16th
century. In France before the French Revolution, representatives of the clergy
— in practice, bishops and abbots of the largest monasteries — comprised
the First Estate of the Estates-General, until their role was abolished during
the French Revolution. In the 21st century, the more senior bishops of the
Church of England continue to sit in the House of Lords of the Parliament of
the United Kingdom, as representatives of the established church, and are known
as Lords Spiritual. The Bishop of Sodor and Man, whose diocese lies outside of
the United Kingdom, is an ex officio member of the Legislative Council of the
Isle of Man. In the past, the Bishop of Durham, known as a prince bishop, had
extensive viceregal powers within his northern diocese — the power to mint
money, collect taxes and raise an army to defend against the Scots. Eastern
Orthodox bishops, along with all other members of the clergy, are canonically
forbidden to hold political office. Occasional exceptions to this rule are
tolerated when the alternative is political chaos. In the Ottoman Empire, the
Patriarch of Constantinople, for example, had de facto administrative, fiscal,
cultural and legal jurisdiction, as well as spiritual, over all the Christians
of the empire. A recent prominent example of this was Archbishop Makarios III
of Cyprus, who served as President of the Republic of Cyprus from 1960 to 1977.
In 2001, Peter Hollingworth, AC, OBE – then the Anglican Archbishop of
Brisbane – was controversially appointed Governor-General of Australia.
Though Hollingworth gave up his episcopal position to accept the appointment,
it still attracted considerable opposition in a country which maintains a
formal separation between Church and State. Episcopacy during the English Civil
War. During the period of the English Civil War, the role of bishops as
wielders of political power and as upholders of the established church became a
matter of heated political controversy. John Calvin formulated a doctrine of
Presbyterianism, which held that in the New Testament the offices of
"presbyter" and "episkopos" were identical; he rejected the doctrine of
apostolic succession. Calvin's follower John Knox brought Presbyterianism to
Scotland when the Scottish church was reformed in 1560. In practice,
Presbyterianism meant that committees of lay elders had a substantial voice in
church government, as opposed to merely being subjects to a ruling hierarchy.
Churches. Catholic Church, Orthodox churches and Anglican churches. Bishops
form the leadership in the Roman Catholic Church, the Eastern Orthodox Church,
the Oriental Orthodox Churches, the Anglican Communion, the Lutheran Church,
the Independent Catholic Churches, the Independent Anglican Churches, and
certain other, smaller, denominations. The traditional role of a bishop is as
pastor of a diocese (also called a bishopric, synod, eparchy or see), and so to
serve as a "diocesan bishop," or "eparch" as it is called in many Eastern
Christian churches. Dioceses vary considerably in size, geographically and
population-wise. Some dioceses around the Mediterranean Sea which were
Christianised early are rather compact, whereas dioceses in areas of rapid
modern growth in Christian commitment—as in some parts of Sub-Saharan Africa,
South America and the Far East—are much larger and more populous. As well as
traditional diocesan bishops, many churches have a well-developed structure of
church leadership that involves a number of layers of authority and
responsibility. Duties. In Catholicism, Eastern Orthodoxy, Oriental Orthodoxy,
Lutheranism, and Anglicanism, only a bishop can ordain other bishops, priests,
and deacons. In the Eastern liturgical tradition, a priest can celebrate the
Divine Liturgy only with the blessing of a bishop. In Byzantine usage, an
antimension signed by the bishop is kept on the altar partly as a reminder of
whose altar it is and under whose omophorion the priest at a local parish is
serving. In Syriac Church usage, a consecrated wooden block called a thabilitho
is kept for the same reasons. The pope, in addition to being the Bishop of Rome
and spiritual head of the Catholic Church, is also the Patriarch of the Latin
Rite. Each bishop within the Latin Rite is answerable directly to the Pope and
not any other bishop except to metropolitans in certain oversight instances.
The pope previously used the title "Patriarch of the West", but this title was
dropped from use in 2006 a move which caused some concern within the Orthodox
Communion as, to them, it implied wider papal jurisdiction. In Catholic,
Eastern Orthodox, Oriental Orthodox and Anglican cathedrals there is a special
chair set aside for the exclusive use of the bishop. This is the bishop's
"cathedra" and is often called the throne. In some Christian denominations, for
example, the Anglican Communion, parish churches may maintain a chair for the
use of the bishop when he visits; this is to signify the parish's union with
the bishop. The bishop is the ordinary minister of the sacrament of
confirmation in the Latin Rite Catholic Church, and in the Anglican and Old
Catholic communion only a bishop may administer this sacrament. However, in the
Byzantine and other Eastern rites, whether Eastern or Oriental Orthodox or
Eastern Catholic, chrismation is done immediately after baptism, and thus the
priest is the one who confirms, using chrism blessed by a bishop. Ordination of
Catholic, Orthodox and Anglican bishops. Bishops in all of these communions are
ordained by other bishops through the laying on of hands. While traditional
teaching maintains that any bishop with apostolic succession can validly
perform the ordination of another bishop, some churches require two or three
bishops participate, either to ensure sacramental validity or to conform with
church law. Roman Catholic doctrine holds that one bishop can validly ordain
another male (priest) as a bishop. Though a minimum of three bishops
participating is desirable (there are usually several more) in order to
demonstrate collegiality, canonically only one bishop is necessary. The
practice of only one bishop ordaining was normal in countries where the Church
was persecuted under Communist rule. Apart from the ordination, which is always
done by other bishops, there are different methods as to the actual selection
of a candidate for ordination as bishop. In the Catholic Church the
Congregation for Bishops oversees the selection of new bishops with the
approval of the pope. The papal nuncio usually solicits names from the bishops
of a country, and then selects three to be forwarded to the Holy See. Most
Eastern Orthodox churches allow varying amounts of formalised laity and/or
lower clergy influence on the choice of bishops. This also applies in those
Eastern churches which are in union with the pope, though it is required that
he give assent. Catholic, Orthodox, Anglican, Old Catholic and some Lutheran
bishops (for example, Sweden) claim to be part of the continuous sequence of
ordained bishops since the days of the apostles referred to as apostolic
succession. Since Pope Leo XIII issued the bull "Apostolicae Curae" in 1896,
the Catholic Church has insisted that Anglican orders are invalid because of
changes in the Anglican ordination rites of the 16th century and divergence in
understanding of the theology of priesthood, episcopacy and Eucharist. However,
since the 1930s, Utrecht Old Catholic bishops (recognised by the Holy See as
validily ordained) have sometimes taken part in the ordination of Anglican
bishops. According to the writer Timothy Dufort, by 1969, all Church of England
bishops had acquired Old Catholic lines of apostolic succession recognised by
the Holy See. This development has muddied the waters somewhat as it could be
argued that the strain of apostolic succession has been re-introduced into
Anglicanism, at least within the Church of England. The Catholic Church does
recognise as valid (though illicit) ordinations done by breakaway Catholic, Old
Catholic or Oriental bishops, and groups descended from them; it also regards
as both valid and licit those ordinations done by bishops of the Eastern
churches, so long as those receiving the ordination conform to other canonical
requirements (for example, is an adult male) and an orthodox rite of episcopal
ordination, expressing the proper functions and sacramental status of a bishop,
is used; this has given rise to the phenomenon of "episcopi vagantes" (for
example, clergy of the Independent Catholic groups which claim apostolic
succession, though this claim is rejected by both Orthodoxy and Catholicism).
The Orthodox Churches would not accept the validity of any ordinations
performed by the Independent Catholic groups, as Orthodoxy considers to be
spurious any consecration outside of the Church as a whole. Orthodoxy considers
apostolic succession to exist only within the Universal Church, and not through
any authority held by individual bishops; thus, if a bishop ordains someone to
serve outside of the (Orthodox) Church, the ceremony is ineffectual, and no
ordination has taken place regardless of the ritual used or the ordaining
prelate's position within the Orthodox Churches. The position of Roman
Catholicism is slightly different. Whilst it does recognise the validity of the
orders of certain groups which separated from communion with Holy See. The Holy
See accepts as valid the ordinations of the Old Catholics in communion with
Utrecht, as well as the Polish National Catholic Church (which received its
orders directly from Utrecht, and was—until recently—part of that
communion); but Roman Catholicism does not recognise the orders of any group
whose teaching is at variance with what they consider the core tenets of
Christianity; this is the case even though the clergy of the Independent
Catholic groups may use the proper ordination ritual. There are also other
reasons why the Holy See does not recognise the validity of the orders of the
Independent clergy: Whilst members of the Independent Catholic movement take
seriously the issue of valid orders, it is highly significant that the relevant
Vatican Congregations tend not to respond to petitions from Independent
Catholic bishops and clergy who seek to be received into communion with the
Holy See, hoping to continue in some sacramental role. In those instances where
the pope does grant reconciliation, those deemed to be clerics within the
Independent Old Catholic movement are invariably admitted as laity and not
priests or bishops. There is a mutual recognition of the validity of orders
amongst Roman Catholic, Eastern Orthodox, Old Catholic, Oriental Orthodox and
Assyrian Nestorian churches. Some provinces of the Anglican Communion have
begun ordaining women as bishops in recent decades for example, the United
States, New Zealand, Canada and Cuba. The first woman bishop within Anglicanism
was Barbara Clementine Harris, who was ordained in the United States in 1989.
In 2006, Katharine Jefferts Schori, the Episcopal Bishop of Nevada, became the
first woman to become the Presiding Bishop of the Episcopal Church.
Lutheranism. In the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America (ELCA) and the
Evangelical Lutheran Church in Canada (ELCIC), the largest Lutheran Church
bodies in the United States and Canada respectively and roughly based on the
Nordic Lutheran state churches (similar to that of the Church of England),
bishops are elected by Synod Assemblies, consisting of both lay members and
clergy, for a term of 6 years, which can be renewed, depending upon the local
synod's "constitution" (which is mirrored on either the ELCA or ELCIC's
national constitution). Since the implementation of concordats between the ELCA
and the Episcopal Church of the United States and the ELCIC and the Anglican
Church of Canada, all bishops, including the Presiding Bishop (ELCA) or the
National Bishop (ELCIC), have been consecrated using the historic succession,
with at least one Anglican bishop serving as co-consecrator. Since going into
ecumenical communion with their respective Anglican body, bishops in the ELCA
or the ELCIC not only approve the "rostering" of all ordained pastors, diaconal
ministers, and associates in ministry, but they serve as the principal
celebrant of all pastoral ordination and installation ceremonies, diaconal
consecration ceremonies, as well as serving as the "chief pastor" of the local
synod, upholding the teachings of Martin Luther as well as the documentations
of the Ninety-Five Theses and the Augsburg Confession. Unlike their
counterparts in the United Methodist Church, ELCA and ELCIC synod bishops do
not appoint pastors to local congregations (pastors, like their counterparts in
the Episcopal Church, are called by local congregations). The Presiding Bishop
of the ELCA and the National Bishop of the ELCIC, the national bishops of their
respective bodies, is elected for a single 6-year term and may be elected to an
additional term. Although ELCA agreed with the Episcopal Church to limit
ordination to the bishop "ordinarily", ELCA pastor-"ordinators" are given
permission to perform the rites in "extraordinary" circumstance. In practice,
"extraordinary" circumstance have included disagreeing with Episcopalian views
of the episcopate, and as a result, ELCA pastors ordained by other pastors are
not permitted to be deployed to Episcopal Churches (they can, however, serve in
Presbyterian Church USA, United Methodist Church, Reformed Church in America,
and Moravian Church congregations, as the ELCA is in full communion with these
denominations). The Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod (LCMS) and the Wisconsin
Evangelical Lutheran Synod (WELS), the second and third largest Lutheran bodies
in the United States and the two largest Confessional Lutheran bodies in North
America, do not have a bishop as the head of the church or middle jurisdiction,
practicing a form of congregationalism similar to the United Church of Christ.
It should also be noted that the second largest of the three predecessor bodies
of the ELCA, the American Lutheran Church, was a congregationalist body, with
national and synod presidents before they were re-titled as bishops (borrowing
from the Lutheran churches in Germany) in the 1980s. Methodism. United
Methodist Church. In the United Methodist Church (the largest branch of
Methodism in the United States) bishops serve as administrative and pastoral
superintendents of the church. They are elected for life from among the
ordained elders (presbyters) by vote of the delegates in regional (called
jurisdictional) conferences, and are consecrated by the other bishops present
at the conference through the laying on of hands. In the United Methodist
Church bishops remain members of the "Order of Elders" while being consecrated
to the "Office of the Episcopacy". Within the United Methodist Church only
bishops are empowered to consecrate bishops and ordain clergy. Among their most
critical duties is the ordination and appointment of clergy to serve local
churches as pastor, presiding at sessions of the Annual, Jurisdictional, and
General Conferences, providing pastoral ministry for the clergy under their
charge, and safeguarding the doctrine and discipline of the Church.
Furthermore, individual bishops, or the Council of Bishops as a whole, often
serve a prophetic role, making statements on important social issues and
setting forth a vision for the denomination, though they have no legislative
authority of their own. In all of these areas, bishops of the United Methodist
Church function very much in the historic meaning of the term. According to the
"Book of Discipline of the United Methodist Church", a bishop's
responsibilities are In each Annual Conference, United Methodist bishops serve
for four year terms, and may serve up to three terms before either retirement
or appointment to a new Conference. United Methodist bishops may be male or
female, with the Rev. Marjorie Matthews being the first woman to be consecrated
a bishop in 1980. The collegial expression of episcopal leadership in the
United Methodist Church is known as the Council of Bishops. The Council of
Bishops speaks to the Church and through the Church into the world and gives
leadership in the quest for Christian unity and interreligious relationships.
The "Conference of Methodist Bishops" includes the United Methodist "Council of
Bishops" plus bishops from affiliated autonomous Methodist or United Churches.
John Wesley consecrated Thomas Coke a "General Superintendent," and directed
that Francis Asbury also be consecrated for the United States of America in
1784, where the Methodist Episcopal Church first became a separate denomination
apart from the Church of England. Coke soon returned to England, but Asbury was
the primary builder of the new church. At first he did not call himself bishop,
but eventually submitted to the usage by the denomination. Notable bishops in
United Methodist history include Coke, Asbury, Richard Whatcoat, Philip William
Otterbein, Martin Boehm, Jacob Albright, John Seybert, Matthew Simpson, John S.
Stamm, William Ragsdale Cannon, Marjorie Matthews, Leontine T. Kelly, William
B. Oden, Ntambo Nkulu Ntanda, Joseph Sprague, William Henry Willimon, and
Thomas Bickerton. British Methodism. Methodists in Britain acquired their own
bishops early in the 19th century , after the Methodist movement in Britain
formally parted company with the Church of England. The position no longer
exists in British Methodism. A system of polity known as "Connexionalism" is
now used, where superintendents carry out the equivalent role of bishops.
Christian Methodist Episcopal Church. In the Christian Methodist Episcopal
Church in the United States, bishops are administrative superintendents of the
church; they are elected by "delegate" votes for as many years deemed until the
age of 74, then he/she must retire. Among their duties, are responsibility for
appointing clergy to serve local churches as pastor, for performing
ordinations, and for safeguarding the doctrine and discipline of the Church.
The General Conference, a meeting every four years, has an equal number of
clergy and lay delegates. In each Annual Conference, CME bishops serve for four
year terms. CME Church bishops may be male or female. The Church of Jesus
Christ of Latter-day Saints. In The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
Saints, the Bishop is the leader of a local congregation, called a ward. As
with most Mormon priesthood, the bishop is a part-time lay minister and earns a
living through other employment; in all cases, he is a married man. As such, it
is his duty to preside at services, call local leaders, and judge the
worthiness of members for service. The bishop does not deliver sermons at every
service (generally asking members to do so), but is expected to be a spiritual
guide for his congregation. It is therefore believed that he has both the right
and ability to receive divine inspiration (through the Holy Spirit) for the
ward under his direction. Because it is a part-time position, all able members
are expected to assist in the management of the ward by holding delegated lay
positions (for example, women's and youth leaders, teachers) referred to as
'callings.' Although members are asked to confess serious sins to him, unlike
the Roman Catholic Church, he is not the instrument of divine forgiveness,
merely a guide through the repentance process (and a judge in case
transgressions warrant excommunication or other official discipline). The
bishop is also responsible for the physical welfare of the ward, and thus
collects tithing and fast offerings and distributes financial assistance where
needed. A bishop is the president of the Aaronic priesthood in his ward (and is
thus a form of Mormon Kohen; in fact, a literal descendant of Aaron has "legal
right" to act as a Bishop after being found worthy and ordained by the First
Presidency). In the absence of a literal descendant of Aaron, a High priest in
the Melchizedek priesthood is called to be a Bishop. Each bishop is selected
from resident members of the ward by the stake presidency with approval of the
First Presidency, and chooses two "counselors" to form a "bishopric". In
special circumstances (such as a ward consisting entirely of young university
students), a bishop may be chosen from outside the ward. A bishop is typically
released after about five years and a new bishop is called to the position.
Although the former bishop is released from his duties, he continues to hold
the Aaronic priesthood office of Bishop. Church members frequently refer to a
former bishop as "Bishop" as a sign of respect and affection. Latter-day Saint
bishops do not wear any special clothing or insignia the way clergy in many
other churches do, but are expected to dress and groom themselves neatly and
conservatively per their local culture, especially when performing official
duties. Bishops (as well as other members of the priesthood) can trace their
line of authority back to Joseph Smith, Jr., who, according to church doctrine,
was ordained to lead the Church in modern times by the ancient apostles Peter,
James, and John, who were ordained to lead the Church by Jesus Christ. The
Presiding Bishop oversees the temporal affairs (buildings, properties,
commercial corporations, and so on) of the worldwide Church, including the
Church's massive global humanitarian aid and social welfare programs. The
Presiding Bishop has two counselors; the three together form the Presiding
Bishopric. New Apostolic Church. The New Apostolic Church (NAC) knows three
classes of ministries: Deacons, Priests and Apostles. The Apostles, who are all
included in the apostolate with the Chief Apostle as head, are the highest
ministries. Of the several kinds of priest...ministries, the bishop is the
highest. Nearly all bishops are set in line directly from the chief apostle.
They support and help their superior apostle. Church of God (Cleveland,
Tennessee). In the polity of the Church of God (Cleveland, Tennessee), the
international leader is the Presiding Bishop, and the members of the Executive
Committee are Executive Bishops. Collectively, they supervise and appoint
national and state leaders across the world. Leaders of individual states and
regions are Administrative Bishops, who have jurisdiction over local churches
in their respective states and are vested with appointment authority for local
pastorates. All ministers are credentialed at one of three levels of licensure,
the most senior of which is the rank of Ordained Bishop. To be eligible to
serve in state, national, or international positions of authority, a minister
must hold the rank of Ordained Bishop. Pentecostal Church of God. In 2002, the
general convention of the Pentecostal Church of God came to a consensus to
change the title of their overseer from General Superintendent to Bishop. The
change was brought on because internationally, the term Bishop is more commonly
related to religious leaders than the previous title. The title Bishop is used
for both the General (International leader) and the district (state) leaders.
The title is sometimes used in conjunction with the previous thus becoming
General (District) Superintendent/Bishop. Others. Some Baptists have begun
taking on the title of Bishop. In some smaller Protestant denominations and
independent churches the term bishop is used in the same way as pastor, to
refer to the leader of the local congregation, and may be male or female. This
usage is especially common in African American churches in the USA. In the
Church of Scotland, which has a Presbyterian church structure, the word
"bishop" refers to an ordained person, usually a normal parish minister, who
has temporary oversight of a trainee minister. In the Presbyterian Church
(U.S.A.), the term bishop is an expressive name for a Minister of Word and
Sacrament who serves a congregation and exercises "the oversight of the flock
of Christ." The term is traceable to the 1789 Form of Government of the PC
(U.S.A.) and the Presbyterian understanding of the pastoral office. While not
considered orthodox Christian, the Ecclesia Gnostica Catholica uses roles and
titles derived from Christianity for its clerical hierarchy, including bishops
who have much the same authority and responsibilities as in Roman Catholicism.
The Salvation Army does not have bishops but have appointed leaders of
geographical areas known as Divisional Commanders. Larger geographical areas,
called Territories, are led by a Territorial Commander, who is the highest-
ranking officer in that Territory. Dress and insignia. Traditionally, a number
of items are associated with the office of a bishop, most notably the mitre,
crosier, and ecclesiastical ring. Other vestments and insignia vary between
Eastern and Western Christianity. In the Latin Rite of the Catholic Church, the
choir dress of a bishop includes the purple cassock with amaranth trim, rochet,
purple zucchetto (skull cap), purple biretta, and pectoral cross. The cappa
magna may be worn, but only within the bishop's own diocese and on especially
solemn occasions. The mitre, zuchetto, and stole are generally worn by bishops
when presiding over liturgical functions. For liturgical functions other than
the Mass the bishop typically wears the cope. Within his own diocese and when
celebrating solemnly elsewhere with the consent of the local ordinary, he also
uses the crosier. When celebrating Mass, a bishop, like a priest, wears the
chasuble. The Caeremoniale Episcoporum recommends, but does not impose, that in
solemn celebrations a bishop should also wear a dalmatic, which can always be
white, beneath the chasuble, especially when administering the sacrament of
holy orders, blessing an abbot or abbess, and dedicating a church or an altar.
The Caeremoniale Episcoporum no longer makes mention of episcopal gloves,
episcopal sandals, liturgical stockings (also known as buskins), or the
accoutrements that it once prescribed for the bishop's horse. The coat of arms
of a Latin Rite Catholic bishop usually displays a galero with a cross and
crosier behind the escutcheon; the specifics differ by location and
ecclesiastical rank (see Ecclesiastical heraldry). Anglican bishops generally
make use of the mitre, crosier, ecclesiastical ring, purple cassock, purple
zucchetto, and pectoral cross. However, the traditional choir dress of Anglican
bishops is quite different from that of their Catholic counterparts; it
consists of a long rochet which is worn with a chimere. In the Eastern Churches
(Eastern Orthodox, Eastern Rite Catholic) a bishop will wear the mandyas,
panagia (and perhaps an enkolpion), sakkos, omophorion and an Eastern-style
mitre. Eastern bishops do not normally wear an episcopal ring; the faithful
kiss the bishop's hand. To seal official documents, he will usually use an
inked stamp. An Eastern bishop's coat of arms will normally display an Eastern-
style mitre, cross, eastern style crosier and a red and white (or red and gold)
mantle. The arms of Oriental Orthodox bishops will display the episcopal
insignia (mitre or turban) specific to their own liturgical traditions.
Variations occur based upon jurisdiction and national customs.
