Bishops' Bible The Bishops' Bible is an English translation of the Bible which
was produced under the authority of the established Church of England in 1568.
It was substantially revised in 1572, and this revised edition was to be
prescribed as the base text for the Authorized King James Version of 1611.
History. The thorough Calvinism of the Geneva Bible (displayed in the marginal
notes more so than in the translation itself) offended the high-church party of
the Church of England, to which almost all of its bishops subscribed. They
associated Calvinism with Presbyterianism, which sought to replace government
of the church by bishops (Episcopalian) with government by lay elders. However,
they were aware that the Great Bible of 1539 —which was the only version then
legally authorized for use in Anglican worship—was severely deficient; in
that much of the Old Testament and Apocrypha was translated from the Latin
Vulgate, rather than from the original Hebrew, Aramaic and Greek. In an attempt
to replace the objectionable Geneva translation, they circulated one of their
own, which became known as the Bishops' Bible. The promoter of the exercise,
and the leading figure in translating was Matthew Parker, Archbishop of
Canterbury. It was at his instigation that the various sections translated by
Parker and his fellow bishops were followed by their initials in the early
editions. For instance, at the end of the book of Deuteronomy, we find the
initials "W.E.", which, according to a letter Parker wrote to Sir William
Cecil, stands for William Alley, Bishop of Exeter. Parker tells Cecil that this
system was "to make translators more diligent, as answerable for their doings."
Unhappily, Parker failed to commission anyone to act as supervisory editor for
the work completed by the various translators—and was too busy to do so
himself, and accordingly translation practice varies greatly from book to book.
Hence, in most of the Hebrew Bible (as is standard in English Versions) the
tetragrammaton YHWH is represented by "the Lord", and the Hebrew "Elohim" is
represented by "God". But in the Psalms the practice is the opposite way
around. The books that Parker himself worked on are fairly sparingly edited
from the text of the Great Bible, while those undertaken by Grindal of London
emerged much closer to the Geneva text. The bishops depute to revise the
Apocrypha appear to have delivered very little, as the text in these books
reproduce that of the Great Bible broadly the same. As the Apocrypha of the
Great Bible was translated from the Latin Vulgate, the Bishops' Bible cannot
strictly claim to have been entirely translated from the original tongues. The
Bishops' Bible was first published in 1568, but was then re-issued in an
extensively revised form in 1572. In the revision a number of switches were
made to the New Testament in the direction of more "ecclesiastical" language
(e.g. introducing the term "charity" into I Corinthians 13), but otherwise to
correct the text more in line with that found in the Geneva Bible; and in the
Old Testament, the Psalms from the Great Bible were printed alongside those in
the new translation—which had proved impossible to sing. From 1577 the new
psalm translation was dropped altogether; while further incremental changes
were made to the text of the New Testament in subsequent editions. The Bible
had the authority of the royal warrant, and was the second version appointed to
be read aloud in church services (cf. Great Bible, King James Bible). It failed
to displace the Geneva Bible as a domestic Bible to be read at home, but that
was not its intended purpose. The intention was for it to be used in church as
what would today be termed a pulpit Bible. The version was more grandiloquent
than the Geneva Bible. The first edition was exceptionally large and included
124 full-page illustrations. The second and subsequent editions were rather
smaller, around the same size as the first printing of the King James Bible,
and mostly lacked illustrations other than frontispieces and maps. The text
lacked most of the notes and cross-references in the Geneva Bible, which
contained much controversial theology, but which were helpful to people among
whom the Bible was just beginning to circulate in the vernacular. The last
edition of the complete Bible was issued in 1602, but the New Testament was
reissued until at least 1617. William Fulke published several parallel editions
up to 1633, with the New Testament of the Bishops' Bible alongside the Rheims
New Testament, specifically to controvert the latter's polemical annotations.
The Bishops' Bible or its New Testament went through over 50 editions, whereas
the Geneva Bible was reprinted more than 150 times. Legacy. The translators of
the King James Version were instructed to take the 1602 edition of the Bishops'
Bible as their basis, although several other existing translations were taken
into account. After it was published in 1611, the King James Version soon took
the Bishops' Bible's place as the "de facto" standard of the Church of England.
Later judgments of the Bishops' Bible have not been favorable; David Daniell,
in his important edition of William Tyndale's New Testament, states that the
Bishops' Bible "was, and is, not loved. Where it reprints Geneva it is
acceptable, but most of the original work is incompetent, both in its
scholarship and its verbosity". Unlike Tyndale's translations and the Geneva
Bible, the Bishops' Bible has rarely been reprinted. The most available
reprinting of its New Testament portion (minus its marginal notes) can be found
in the fourth column of the "New Testament Octapla" edited by Luther Weigle,
chairman of the translation committee that produced the Revised Standard
Version. The Bishops' Bible is also known as the "Treacle Bible" because of its
translation of Jeremiah 8:22 which reads "Is there not treacle at Gilead?", a
rendering also found in several earlier versions as well such as the Great
Bible. In the Authorized Version of 1611, "treacle" was changed to "balm".
