Blessed Virgin Mary (Roman Catholic) Roman Catholic veneration of the Blessed
Virgin Mary (the mother of Jesus) is based on dogma as well as Scripture. The
incarnation of the Son of God through Mary thus signifies her honour as Mother
of God. From the Council of Ephesus in 431, which dogmatized this belief, to
the Second Vatican Council and Pope John Paul II's encyclical "Redemptoris
Mater", the Virgin Mary has come to be seen and venerated not only as the
Mother of God but also as the Mother of the Church. As the mother of Jesus,
Mary has a central role in the Roman Catholic Church. The church's veneration
of her as the Blessed Virgin Mary has grown over time both in importance and
manifestation, not only in prayer but in art, poetry and music. Popes have
encouraged this veneration but from time to time have also taken steps to
reform it. Overall, there are significantly more titles, feasts and venerative
Marian practices among Roman Catholics than any other Christian traditions.
Pope Benedict XVI maintains that the Virgin Mary possesses divine motherhood
which she continues to bestow as intercessory "graces associated with God's
blessing." The key role of the Virgin Mary in Roman Catholic beliefs, her
veneration, and the growth of Roman Catholic Mariology have not only come about
by official statements made in Rome but have often been driven from "the ground
up", by the Marian writings of the saints and from the masses of believers, and
at times via reported Marian apparitions to young and simple children on remote
hilltops, which have then influenced the higher levels of the Holy See via
sensus fidei. The Holy See continues to approve of Marian apparitions on remote
mountains, the latest approval being as recent as May 2008. Some apparitions,
such as Fatima, have given rise to Marian Movements and Societies with millions
of members, and many other Marian societies exist around the world. From Christ
to Mary in the Roman Catholic tradition. Theological basis for the veneration
of Mary. The Catholic veneration of Mary is based on two aspects: the workings
of God who made a virgin the Mother of God, and the biblical view of Mary as
the selected maiden of the Lord who is greeted and praisedby both Elisabeth.
God's work is further illuminated in the Marian dogmas of the Roman Catholic
Church such as the Immaculate Conception and the Assumption, the factual basis
of both taking place in "apostolic time" and are, in the Roman Catholic view,
part of the apostolic tradition and divine revelation. Mysteries of Christ and
Mary. In the Roman Catholic tradition "Mariology is Christology developed to
its full potential". Mary and her son Jesus are very close but not identical in
Catholic theology. Mary contributes to a fuller understanding of her Son, who
Christ is and what He did. A Christology "without" Mary is erroneous in the
Roman Catholic view, because it is not based on the total revelation of the
Bible. Traces of this parallel interpretation go back to the early days of
Christianity and numerous saints have since focused on it. The development of
this approach continued into the 20th century, e.g. in his 1946 publication
"Compendium Mariologiae", the respected Mariologist Gabriel Roschini explained
that Mary not only participated in the birth of the physical Jesus, but, with
conception, she entered with him into a spiritual union. The divine salvation
plan, being not only material, includes a permanent spiritual unity with
Christ. It is necessary to go back to Mary if we want to return to that "truth
about Jesus Christ," "truth about the Church" and "truth about man". when he
suggested a redirection of the whole Church towards the program of Pope John
Paul II in order to ensure an authentic approach to Christology via a return to
the "whole truth about Mary". From veneration to theology. Marian venerative
practices predated both the liturgical developments and theological definitions
relating to the Virgin Mary. While the venerative practices date back to the
2nd century, the first theological definitions started only in the 5th century.
Thereafter, venerative and devotional practices have often preceded formal
theological declarations by the Magisterium. The veneration of the Blessed
Virgin takes place in various ways. Marian prayers and hymns usually begin with
a praise of her, followed by petitions. The number of Marian titles continued
to grow as of the 3rd century, and many titles existed by the 5th century,
growing especially during the Middle Ages. Early veneration in Rome. Early
veneration of the Blessed Virgin is documented in Roman Catacombs, underground
cemeteries, where Christians hid in times of persecution. In the catacombs
paintings show the Blessed Virgin holding the Christ Child. More unusual and
indicating the burial ground of Saint Peter excavations in the crypt of St
Peter's Basilica discovered a very early fresco of Mary together with Saint
Peter. The Roman Priscilla catacombs depict the oldest Marian paintings from
the middle of the 2nd century Mary is shown with Jesus on her lap, a standing
man with tunic left hand a book right hand a star over his head symbol of
messiahs. Priscilla also has a depiction of the annunciation. After the edict
of Milan in AD 313, Christians were permitted to worship openly. The veneration
of Mary became public as well. In the following decades Cathedrals and churches
were built for public worship. The first Marian churches in Rome date from the
5th and 6th centuries, Santa Maria in Trastevere, Santa Maria Antiqua and Santa
Maria Maggiore. However, the very earliest church dedicated to the Virgin Mary
dates to the late 4th century in Syria where an inscription dedicating it to
the Theotokos was found among the ruins. This new freedom also permitted
literary development of the Marian mysteries. Hippolytus of Rome being early
example. Saint Ambrose, who lived in Rome before going to Milan as its bishop,
venerated Mary as example of Christian life, and is credited with starting a
Marian cult of virginity in the 4th century. --> Liturgical aspects. The first
Christians did not celebrate the liturgy and liturgical feast in the same way
as later Christians; the feasts of Easter and Christmas were not known,
although the Eucharist was celebrated. Liturgical venerations of the saints are
believed to have originated in the 2nd century and in the first three
centuries, the emphasis was on the veneration of martyrs, as a continuation of
the yearly celebrations of their death, e.g. as noted in the early Christian
text on the Martyrdom of Polycarp. However, in the early part of the 3rd
century, Hippolytus of Rome recorded the first liturgical reference to the
Virgin Mary, as part of the ordination rite of a bishop. Marian feasts appeared
in the 4th century, and the feast of the "Memory of Mary, Mother of God" was
celebrated on August 15 in Jerusalem by the year 350. Growth of Marian culture.
From the middle of the 11th century onwards, more and more churches, including
many of Europe's greatest cathedrals (e.g. Notre Dame de Paris and Notre-Dame
de Bayeux among others), were dedicated to Mary. Marian pilgrimage developed
large popular followings and prayers such as the Regina Coeli were composed. At
the height of the pilgrimage movement in the 11th and 12th centuries, hundreds
of people were traveling almost constantly from one Marian shrine to the next.
In the 12th century, the book Speculum Virginum ("mirror of Virgins" in Latin)
provided one of the earliest justifications of cloistered religious life, as it
sought to strengthen the resolve of women who contemplated a dedicated
religious life, and encouraged them to follow the example of the life of the
Virgin Mary. By the 14th century, Mary had become greatly popular as a
compassionate intercessor and protector of humanity and during the great
plagues such as the Black Death, her help was sought against the just judgment
of God. The Renaissance witnessed a dramatic growth in venerative Marian art.
By the 16th century, the Protestant Reformation had introduced a tide against
Marian venerations in Europe. However, at the same time new Marian devotions
were starting in South America based on Saint Juan Diego's 1531 reported vision
of Our Lady of Guadalupe which added almost 8 million people to the ranks of
Catholics. The ensuing Marian pilgrimages have continued to date and the Marian
Basilica on Tepeyac Hill remains the most visited Catholic shrine in the world.
In the 17th and 18th centuries writings by the saints, coupled with papal
encouragements, increased the growth of Marian devotions, and gave rise to the
definition and declaration of new Marian doctrines. Marian culture continues to
be developed within the Catholic Church. For instance, in 1974, after 4 years
of preparation, Pope Paul VI issued the Apostolic Letter "Marialis Cultus". In
this document, (which was subtitled "For the Right Ordering and Development of
Devotion to the Blessed Virgin Mary") Paul VI not only discussed the history of
Marian devotions, but overviewed their rationale and provided suggestions for
their future direction, emphasising their theological and pastoral value.
Multitude of views and perspectives. Throughout the centuries, Catholics have
viewed the Virgin Mary from a multitude of perspectives, at times derived from
specific Marian attributes ranging from queenship to humility, and at times
based on cultural preferences of events taking place at specific points in
history. An example of the cultural adaptation of perspective include the view
of the Virgin Mary as a mother with humility (rather than a heavenly queen) as
the Franciscans began to preach in China, and its similarity to local Chinese
motherly and merciful figure of Kuanyin, which was much admired in south China.
Another example is the Saint Juan Diego's account of the appearance of the
Virgin of Guadalupe in 1531 as a tanned Aztec princess who spoke in his local
Nahuatl language. The clothing of the Virgin of Guadalupe image has been
identified as that of an Aztec princess. Other views such as the Virgin Mary as
a "miracle worker" have existed for centuries and are still held by many
Catholics today. Instances include the Black Madonna of Częstochowa which
continues to be venerated today as the Patron of Poland and Our Lady of Lourdes
which receives millions of pilgrims per year. However, the Vatican has
generally been reluctant to approve of modern miracles, unless they have been
subject to extensive analysis and scrunity. Development of Marian doctrines.
Throughout the centuries, the growth of Marian devotional and venerative
practices has been parallelled by the definition of specific Marian doctrines
by the Magisterium. Apart from the title of Mother of God which holds Mary as
Theotokos, two specific doctrines relate to the birth of Jesus and the
virginity of Mary. These are distinct doctrines which were defined and declared
as dogmas at different times. Since the 4th century, Roman Catholics have
believed in the Virgin birth of Jesus, namely that Jesus was miraculously
conceived through the action of the Holy Spirit while Mary remained a virgin.
This was decided at the First Council of Nicaea in 325. Going beyond the virgin
birth of Jesus, the doctrine of Perpetual virginity of Mary holds that before
giving birth to Jesus and even thereafter Mary remained a virgin all her life.
This dates back to the Council of Constantinople in 533. Two separate doctrines
address the Virgin Mary's conception and death. The doctrine of Immaculate
Conception states that Mary was conceived without original sin, namely that she
was filled with grace from the very moment of her conception in her mother's
womb. The Immaculate Conception was proclaimed a dogma "Ex Cathedra" by Pope
Pius IX in 1854, as the first definitive exercise of papal infallibility. The
dogma of the Assumption of Mary states that she was assumed into Heaven body
and soul. This was also defined by Pope Pius XII in 1950. "Lumen Gentium", the
dogmatic constitution derived from Vatican II in 1964, declared that the Lord
had consecrated Mary as "Queen of the universe", reflecting the contemporary
expansion of knowledge regarding outer space. Mary's protection and
intercession. Roman Catholic views of the Virgin Mary place emphasis on her
roles as a mediatrix of men to God, refuge and advocate of sinners, protector
from dangers and most powerful intercessor with her Son, Jesus, who is God.
These views are expressed in prayers and artistic depictions, theology, popular
and devotional writings, as well as in the use of Marian Sacramentals and
images. The earliest known prayer to Mary, the Sub tuum praesidium, (Latin for
"under your protection") begins with the words: "Beneath your compassion, we
take refuge." The artistic depictions of the Virgin of Mercy portray the role
of Mary as the protector of Christians, as she shelters them under her mantle.
The Virgin of Mercy depictions sometimes include arrows raining from above,
with the Virgin's cloak protecting the people.  Catholics have continued to
seek the protection of Mary as the Mother of Sorrows (who understands and shows
compassion) and relied on her intercession as the Queen of Heaven since the
Middle Ages. Building on that sentiment, popes have entrusted specific causes
to the protection of the Virgin Mary. For instance, pope Benedict XV entrusted
the protection of the world through the intercession of Mary Queen of Peace
during the first world war . For many centuries, Catholics have used Marian
Sacramentals. Since the Middle Ages the wearing of the Scapular of Our Lady of
Mount Carmel (Brown Scapular) by Catholics has been a sign of their seeking her
protection. Pope John Paul II wore a Brown Scapular since childhood and as he
momentarily gained consciousness when he was shot on 13 May 1981 he asked to
keep his scapular during the operation to remove the bullet. The depictions of
Our Lady of Navigators arose from the prayers and devotions of Portuguese
navigators, who saw the Virgin Mary as their protector during storms and other
hazards. Prayers to Our Lady of Navigators are well known in South America,
specially Brazil, where its February 2 feast is an official holiday. The Virgin
of the Navigators (a variant of the Virgin of Mercy), depicting ships under her
mantle, is the earliest known painting whose subject is the discovery of the
Americas. Both Miguel Hidalgo and Emiliano Zapata flew flags of Our Lady of
Guadalupe as their protector, and Zapata's men wore the Guadalupan image around
their necks and on their sombreros. In 1979 ceremony Pope John Paul II placed
Mexico under the protection of the Virgin of Guadalupe. The Order of the
Blessed Virgin Mary of Mercy, also known as the order of "Our Lady of Ransom"
or "Order of Captives" began in the 13th century in the Kingdom of Aragon
(Spain) to ransom impoverished captive Christians (slaves) held in Muslim
hands. The order now focuses on the role of the Virgin Mary as the protector of
captives and prisoners. The Sodality of Our Lady founded in 1563 was also
placed under her protection. "Never was it known that anyone who fled to Thy
protection, implored Thy help or sought Thy intercession, was left unaided."
Saint Louis de Montfort taught that God appointed Mary as "the dispenser of
grace", and to receive grace from God, one can receive it through the hands of
the Blessed Virgin, as a child receives from a mother. This concept of Mary as
""the mother to us in the order of grace"" who can intercede for ""the gift of
eternal salvation"" was restated in the 1960s in "Lumen Gentium", one of the
principal documents of the Second Vatican Council. Consecration and entrustment
to Mary. For centuries, Marian devotions among Roman Catholics have included
many examples of personal or collective acts of consecration and entrustment to
the Virgin Mary; the Latin terms "oblatio", "servitus", "commendatio" and
"dedicatio" were used in this context. Consecration is an act by which a person
is dedicated to a sacred service, or an act which separates an object, location
or region from a common and profane mode to one for sacred use. Consecration to
the Virgin Mary has been practiced by Catholics for many centuries, at the
personal, societal and papal levels, where individuals, societies, regions and
the whole world have been consecrated to her. The Catholic Church makes it
clear that the use of the term "consecration" with regard to Mary is only
applied in the "broad and non-technical sense" and is different from "those
self-offerings which have God as their object, and which are characterised by
totality and perpetuity, which are guaranteed by the Church's intervention and
have as their basis the Sacraments of Baptism and Confirmation." Further, "the
faithful should be carefully instructed about the practice of consecration to
the Blessed Virgin Mary...it is, in reality, only analogously a 'consecration
to God,' and should be expressed in a correct liturgical manner: to the Father,
through Christ in the Holy Spirit, imploring the intercession of the Blessed
Virgin Mary, to whom we entrust ourselves completely, so as to keep our
baptismal commitments and live as her children. The act of consecration Mary
should take place outside of the celebration of the Eucharistic Sacrifice,
since it is a devotional act which cannot be assimilated to the Liturgy. It
should also be borne in mind that the act of consecration to Mary differs
substantially from other forms of liturgical consecration." Individuals
declaring their "entrustment" to Mary make a personal act to show their
devotion and dedication to Mary as the Mother of God, who, though holy, is not
herself a divine being. Such individuals seek her intercession before God
through her son Jesus Christ, for she has no divine power. Devotions to Mary
are also commonly directed to Mary herself, to the Immaculate Heart, and/or to
the Immaculata; true consecration is only to God. Consecration to the Virgin
Mary by Roman Catholics has taken place from three perspectives, namely
personal, societal and regional and with three forms: to the Virgin herself as
a whole, to the Immaculate Heart of Mary and to the Immaculata. In Catholic
teachings, consecration to Mary does not diminish or substitute the love of
God, but enhances it, for all consecration is ultimately made to God. Pope Leo
XIII, specially encouraged everyone to make acts of consecration to the Virgin
Mary based on the methods of Saint Louis de Montfort (who was beatified by
Leo), and granted indulgences for such consecrations. Pope Benedict XV also
provided strong support for Marian consecration. Pope John Paul II's motto
Totus Tuus (i.e. "totally yours") reflected his personal consecration to Mary.
In the 18th century, Saint Louis Marie de Montfort became a tireless advocate
of "total consecration to Jesus through Mary." In "True Devotion", St. Louis
stated, "...the most perfect consecration to Jesus Christ is nothing else than
a perfect and entire consecration of ourselves to the Blessed Virgin and this
is the devotion I teach; or, in other words, a perfect renewal of the vows and
promises of holy Baptism." The reputed 1858 messages of Our Lady of Lourdes, in
which the Virgin Mary was called the "Immaculate Conception", built significant
"sensus fidelium" among Catholics at large, and consecrations to the Immaculata
began to take form. Early in the 20th century, the Saint Maximilian Kolbe,
called the Apostle of Consecration to Mary, began a vigorous program of
promoting consecration to the Immaculata and published "Miles Immaculatae"
which reached a circulation of 750,000 copies a month. In modern times, Pope
John Paul II clarified consecration to Mary in his 1987 encyclical, "Mother of
the Redeemer", in which he stated, "Mary's motherhood...is a gift which Christ
himself makes personally to every individual." John Paul II suggested
Christians could best "entrust" themselves to Mary by becoming her spiritual
sons and daughters. Theologian Garrigou-Lagrange designated personal
consecration to Mary as the highest level among Marian devotions. His student,
Pope John Paul II made Marian devotions and consecrations a hallmark of his
papacy, often referring to , and heavily relying on the spirituality of Saint
Louis de Montfort. He also consecrated the entire world to the Immaculate Heart
of Mary. Mary's role in salvation and redemption. One of the components of the
Catholic veneration of Mary is the focus on her participation in the processes
of salvation and redemption. Entire books have been devoted to the exploration
of the Catholic perspectives on Mary's role in salvation and redemption. The
underlying theological issues have been discussed as far back as St. Thomas
Aquinas in the 13th century and were intertwined with the discussions of the
Immaculate Conception. One of the first scholars to offer theological
foundations in this area was the Franciscan Duns Scotus who developed the
notion that Mary was preserved from sin by the redemptive virtue of Jesus.
Devotions to and the veneration of the Virgin Mary continued to spread, as she
came to be seen as the helpful mother of Christians, and by the 15th century
these practices had oriented all the Catholic devotions. As of the 17th
century, a common thread in the writings of saints and theologians alike is the
role of the Hearts of Jesus and Mary as joint symbols of redemption and
coredemption. Saint Veronica Giuliani expressed how Mary's suffering in Calvary
united her heart with that of Jesus as she suffered each torment along with
him. The joint devotion to the hearts was formalised by Saint Jean Eudes who
organised the scriptural and theological foundations and developed its
liturgical themes. John Eudes wrote that: "The Virgin Mary began to cooperate
in the plan of salvation, from the moment she gave her consent to the
Incarnation of the Son of God". The venerative aspects of the united nature of
the two hearts continued through the centuries and in 1985 Pope John Paul II
coined the term "Alliance of the Hearts of Jesus and Mary", and in 1986
addressed the international conference on that topic held at Fátima, Portugal.
Thou art the gate through which all find Jesus; through thee I also hope to
find Him." Saint Louis de Montfort, whose writings later influenced popes, was
an ardent supporter of the Virgin Mary's role in salvation. The Catholic focus
on the role of Mary in salvation and redemption continued into the 20th
century, e.g. Pope John Paul II's 1987 encyclical "Redemptoris Mater" began
with the sentence: "The Mother of the Redeemer has a precise place in the plan
of salvation." Catholic saints and the Blessed Virgin Mary. The Roman Catholic
perspective on the Virgin Mary has not simply been shaped by the theological
studies by a few scholars, but also by devotional concepts embraced by millions
of Catholics who venerate the Blessed Virgin Mary. These devotions have relied
on the writings of numerous saints throughout history who have attested to the
central role of Mary in God's plan of salvation. Early saints included Saint
Irenaeus of Lyons in the 2nd century who was perhaps the earliest of the Church
Fathers to write systematically about the Virgin Mary, and he set out a
forthright account of her role in the economy of salvation. Saint Ambrose of
Milan (339–397) based the veneration of Mary not only on her virginity but
also on her extraordinary courage. In the Middle Ages, Saint Bernhard of
Clairvaux, a Doctor of the Church, was a fervent supporter of Mary. He
highlighted her virginity and humility as the basis for her veneration. A
particularly significant contribution to Mariology came from John Duns Scotus
who in the 13th century defended the doctrine of the Immaculate Conception.
Scotus identified the key theological foundations which led to the declaration
of the dogma of Immaculate Conception centuries later. In the 16th century,
Saint Ignatius of Loyola promulgated an ardent love to the Virgin Mary.
Ignatius admired images of the Virgin Mary and before his death his death
instructed the Jesuits to preserve "Madonna della Strada", was later enshrined
in the Church of the Gesu in Rome. Filippo Neri, a contemporary of Ignatius,
called Mary "mother and advocate" and is credited with the innovation of daily
Marian devotions during the month of May. Saint Peter Canisius is credited with
adding the Hail Mary to his catechism of 1555. In the 18th century, Saint
Alphonsus Liguori wrote the classic book "The Glories of Mary" in which he
called Mary the "Gate of Heaven". Saint Louis de Montfort's book "True Devotion
to Mary" synthesized many of the earlier saints' writings and teachings on
Mary. His approach of "total consecration to Jesus Christ through Mary" had a
strong impact on Marian devotion both in popular piety and in the spirituality
of religious institutes. One of his well-known followers was Pope John Paul II
who said that reading Montfort's book was a "decisive turning point" in his
life. Mary in Roman Catholic liturgy. The Roman Catholic liturgy is one of the
most important elements of Marian devotions. Marian feasts are superior to the
feast days of the saints. The liturgical texts of the Marian feast days all
link Mary to Jesus Christ and keep Marian awareness awake within the Church.
Catholic Marian feast days. The earliest Christian feasts that relate to Mary
grew out of the cycle of feasts that celebrated the Nativity of Jesus. By the
7th century a feast dedicated to Mary was celebrated just before Christmas in
the Churches of Milan and Ravenna in Italy. Over time, the number of feasts
(and the associated Titles of Mary) and the venerative practices that accompany
them increased and today Roman Catholics have more Marian feasts, titles and
venerative practices than any other Christians. Marian feasts have continued to
be developed in the Catholic Church, e.g. the feast of the Queenship of Mary
was declared in the 1954 in the papal encyclical "Ad Caeli Reginam" by pope
Pius XII. Some Marian feasts relate to specific events, e.g. the Feast of Our
Lady of Victory (later renamed Feast of Our Lady of the Rosary) was based on
the 1571 victory of the Papal States against the Muslims in the Battle of
Lepanto. It is now celebrated on the 7th of October. The month of October was
then established as the "month of the Rosary" by Pope Leo XIII, who recommended
daily Rosary devotions in October. When we are involved in our May Devotions,
we are engaged in a Christian understanding of the human situation. Titles of
the Blessed Virgin Mary. A large number of titles to honour Mary or ask for her
intercession are used by Roman Catholics. While "Mater Dei" (i.e. "Mother of
God" as confirmed by the First Council of Ephesus, 431) is common in Latin, a
large number of other titles have been used by Roman Catholics – far more
than any other Christians. Titles used to refer to the Virgin Mary throughout
history, at times reflect the changing attitudes towards her. "Domina" (lady),
"Regina" (queen) and "Stella Maris" (star of the sea) are some of the early
titles of Mary, of which Regina is the earliest. Domina and Sella Maris are
found in Jerome who perhaps originated the etymology of Mary as Stella Maris in
the 5th century. While the early emphasis in Stella Maris was on Mary as the
Star that bore Christ, by the 9th century, the attention had focused on Mary
herself, as indicated in the hymn Ave Maris Stella. By the 11th century, Mary
herself had emerged as the star that acted as a guiding light. By the 13th
century, as Mariology was growing, Saint Anthony of Padua had composed Mary Our
Queen. Titles continue to be interpreted, e.g. Queen of Heaven was further
elaborated in 1954 in the papal encyclical Ad Caeli Reginam by pope Pius XII.
Marian Music. One of the earliest Marian compositions is the popular Salve
Regina in Latin from a Benedictine monk, which exists in several Gregorian
versions. The liturgy of the hour includes several offices to be sung. At the
close of the Office, one of four "Marian antiphons" is sung. These songs, Alma
Redemptoris Mater Ave Regina caelorum, Regina caeli, and Salve Regina, have
been described as "among the most beautiful creations of the late Middle Ages."
It is difficult to trace the beginning of non-Gregorian Marian liturgical
music. In 1277 Pope Nicholas III prescribed rules for liturgy in Roman
churches. In the Graduale Romanum, Kyriale IX and X are both for Marian feasts.
Over the centuries, Marian master pieces have continued to appear, e.g.
Mozart's Coronation Mass. The list of compositions by Giovanni Pierluigi da
Palestrina includes numerous Marian masses: "Salve Regina", "Alma Redemptoris",
"Assumpta est Maria", "Regina coeli", "de beata Virgine", "Ave Regina
coelorum", "Descendit Angelus Domini", and "O Virgo simul et Mater". Joseph
Haydn wrote several Marian compositions including two famous Marian Masses.
Marian prayers, poems and hymns. Throughout the centuries the veneration of the
Virgin Mary has given rise to a number of poems and hymns, as well as prayers.
Author Emily Shapcote lists 150 Marian poems and hymns in her book "Mary the
Perfect Woman".  Beneath your compassion, We take refuge, O Mother of God: do
not despise our petitions in time of trouble: but rescue us from dangers, only
pure, only blessed one. While the Regina Coelorum goes back to the 4th century,
the Regina Coeli was composed towards the end of the 11th century. The first
part of the Hail Mary, based on the salutation of angle Gabriel in the
Visitation was introduced in the 11tth century, although its current form can
be traced to the 16th century. During the 11th century, as the number of
monasteries grew, so did Marian prayers. In this period the Little Office of
the Blessed Virgin Mary was introduced and was modeled after the Divine office
but was much shorter. It was adopted not only by monks but by pious people who
could read. And the growth of the Tertiary orders helped spread its use. During
the First Crusade, Pope Urban II ordered it to be said for the success of the
Christians. In this period, Hermannus Contractus (Herman the Cripple) at the
abbey of Reichenau composed the Alma Redemptoris Mater and hymns to Mary became
part of daily life at monasteries such as the Benedictine Abbey of Cluny in
France. Take away Mary, this star of the sea, the sea truly great and wide:
what is left but enveloping darkness and the shadow of death and the densest
blackness? Stronger evidences are discernible in the pious meditations on the
"Ave Maria" and the "Salve Regina", usually attributed either to St. Anselm of
Lucca (d. 1080) or St. Bernard; and also in the large book "De laudibus B.
Mariae Virginis" (Douai, 1625) by Richard de Saint-Laurent. Other famous Marian
prayers include the Magnificat, the Angelus and the Litany of the Blessed
Virgin Mary. Marian hymns include "O Mary, we Crown Thee With Blossoms Today",
"Hail Queen of Heaven", the "Regina Coeli", and the "Ave Maria". Marian
devotions. A Catholic devotion is a willingness and desire for pious dedication
and service but is an "external practice" which is not part of the official
liturgy of the Catholic Church. A wide range of Marian devotions are followed
by Catholics ranging from simple Rosary recitations to formalized, multi-day
Novenas to activities which do not involve any prayers, such the wearing of
scapulars or maintaining a Mary garden. Two well known Marian devotions are the
Rosary recitation and the wearing of the Brown Scapular. Following their joint
growth in the 18th and 19th centuries, by the early 20th century the Rosary and
the devotional Scapular had gained such a strong following among Catholics
worldwide that the Catholic Encyclopedia of 1914 stated: ""Like the Rosary, the
Brown Scapular has become the badge of the devout Catholic"." In his encyclical
"Rosarium Virginis Mariae" Pope John Paul II emphasized the importance of the
Rosary. The Mariological basis of the Scapular devotion is effectively the same
as Marian consecration, as discussed in the dogmatic constitution "Lumen
Gentium" of Pope Paul VI, namely the role of the Virgin Mary as ""the mother to
us in the order of grace"" which allows her to intercede for ""the gift of
eternal salvation"". Roman Catholic tradition includes specific prayers and
devotions as "Acts of Reparation to the Virgin Mary" for insults that she
suffers. The Raccolta Roman Catholic prayer book (approved by a Decree of 1854,
and published by the Holy See in 1898) includes a number of such prayers. These
prayers do not involve a petition for a living or deceased beneficiary, but aim
to "repair the sins of others" against the Virgin Mary. Catholic view of Marian
apparitions. The term "Marian apparition" is usually used in cases where
visions of the Virgin Mary are reported, either with or without a conversation.
There are, however, cases (e.g. Saint Padre Pio or Sister Maria Pierina De
Micheli) where visions of Jesus and Mary and conversations with both are
reported. Well-known apparitions include Our Lady of Lourdes, Our Lady of
Guadalupe and Our Lady of Fatima. The official position of the Holy See is that
while the Holy Office has approved a few apparitions of the Virgin Mary, Roman
Catholics at large are not required to believe them. However, many Catholics
express belief in Marian apparitions. This has included popes, e.g. four popes,
i.e. Pope Pius XII, Pope John XXIII, Pope Paul VI and Pope John Paul II have
supported the Our Lady of Fátima messages as supernatural. Pope John Paul II
was particularly attached to Fátima and credited Our Lady of Fátima with
saving his life after he was shot in Rome on the Feast Day of Our Lady of
Fátima in May 1981. He donated the bullet that wounded him on that day to the
Roman Catholic sanctuary at Fátima Portugal. As a historical pattern, Vatican
approval seems to have followed general acceptance of a vision by well over a
century in most cases. According to Father Salvatore M. Perrella of the
Mariunum Pontifical Institute in Rome, of the 295 reported apparitions studied
by the Holy See through the centuries only 12 have been approved, the latest
being in May 2008. Veneration through Marian art. The tradition of honouring
Mary by venerating images of her goes back to 3rd century Christianity.
Following the period of iconoclasm, the position of the Church with respect to
the veneration of images was formalized at the Second Council of Nicaea in 787.
A summary of the doctrine is included in the current "Catechism of the Catholic
Church".  No image (in either the Western or the Eastern Church) permeates
Christian art as the image of Madonna and Child. The images of the Virgin Mary
have become central icons of Roman Catholicism and Eastern Orthodox
Christianity where Mary remains a central artistic topic. The Virgin Mary has
been one of the major subjects of Christian Art, Catholic Art and Western Art
since Early Christian art and she has been very widely portrayed in iconic
"portraits", often known as Madonnas, with the infant Jesus in the "Madonna and
Child", and in a number of narrative scenes from her life known as the "Life of
the Virgin", as well as scenes illustrating particular doctrines or beliefs:
from masters such as Michelangelo, Raphael, Murillo and Botticelli to folk art.
Marian art enjoys a significant level of diversity, e.g. with distinct styles
of statues of the Virgin Mary present on different continents (as depicted in
the galleries in Roman Catholic Marian art). These depictions are not
restricted to European art, and also appear in South American paintings. The
South American tradition of Marian veneration through art dates back to the
16th century, with the Virgin of Copacabana gaining fame in 1582. Marian
movements and societies. Throughout the centuries the devotion to and the
veneration of the Virgin Mary by Roman Catholics has both led to, and been
influenced by a number of Roman Catholic Marian Movements and Societies. These
societies form part of the fabric of Roman Catholic Mariology since they
contribute to the sensus fidelium, a century-old sense of the faithful, shared
by the Magisterium. As early as the 16th century, the Holy See endorsed the
Sodality of Our Lady and Pope Gregory XIII issued a Papal Bull commending it
and granting it indulgences and establishing it as the "mother sodality", and
other sodalities were formed thereafter. The 18th and 19th centuries saw a
number of missionary Marian organisations such as Company of Mary, the
Marianists, Marist Fathers and Marist Brothers. Some of these missionaries,
e.g. Saint Peter Chanel were martyred as they travelled to new lands. The 20th
century witnessed the formation of Marian organisations with millions of
members, e.g. the Legion of Mary and Blue Army of Our Lady of Fatima. Marian
shrines and patronages. In the Roman Catholic Church a shrine is a church or
sacred place which receives many faithful pilgrims for a specific pious reason.
The local ordinary must approve the shrine. Marian shrines account for major
veneration centers and pilgrimage sites for Roman Catholics. According to
Bishop Francesco Giogia, at the end of the 20th century, the most visited
Catholic shrine in the world was that of the Virgin of Guadalupe in Mexico
City. In third place was Our Lady of Aparecida in Brazil, with the non-Marian
shrine of San Giovanni Rotondo in second place. The visual effect of Marian
pilgrimages can be dramatic, e.g. on May 13 and October 13 of each year close
to one million Catholic pilgrims walk the country road that leads to the
Sanctuary of Our Lady of Fátima. Around 2 million pilgrim journey up Tepeyac
hill on December 12 each year to visit the Basilica of Our Lady of Guadalupe.
While in 1968 Aparecida had about four million pilgrims, the number has since
reached eight million pilgrims per year. There are other Marian pilgrimage
sites such as Medjugorje, which is not considered a shrine by the Holy See, but
yet receives a large number of pilgrims every year. The number of pilgrims who
visit some of the approved shrines every year can be significant. E.g. Lourdes
with a population of around 15,000 people, receives about 5,000,000 pilgrims
every year. In 1881 a French priest, Julien Gouyet, led by the visions of Jesus
and Mary of the Blessed Anne Catherine Emmerich (Klemens Brentano, 1852)
discovered the House of the Virgin Mary near Ephesus in Turkey. A number of
countries, cities and professions consider the Blessed Virgin their patron
saint. For a list, see Patronage of the Blessed Virgin Mary.
