Blessed Sacrament The Blessed Sacrament, or the Body and Blood of Christ, is a
devotional name used in the Roman Catholic Church, Eastern Catholic Churches,
Old Catholic, Anglican, and Lutheran churches, to refer to the Host after it
has been consecrated in the sacrament of the Eucharist. Christians in these
traditions believe in the Real Presence of Jesus Christ in the Eucharistic
elements of the bread and wine and some of them, therefore, practice
Eucharistic reservation and Eucharistic adoration. This belief is based on
interpretations of biblical scripture and tradition. The Roman Catholic
understanding is defined by numerous church councils including the Fourth
Lateran Council and the Council of Trent and is quoted in the Catechism of the
Catholic Church (which explains the meaning of "Transubstantiation"). Roman
Catholicism. The Blessed Sacrament may be received by Catholics who have
undergone the First Holy Communion (i.e., given by a priest or or Deacon or
Extraordinary Minister of Holy Communion to a Catholic, and immediately
consumed by the communicant) as part of the "Liturgy of the Eucharist" during
Mass. The soul of the person receiving the Eucharist should be in a "state of
grace," i.e., have no mortal sin on their soul at the time of communion (Matt
5:23-24). The Blessed Sacrament can also be exposed (displayed) on an altar in
a Monstrance. Rites involving the exposure of the Blessed Sacrament include
Benediction and Eucharistic adoration. According to Catholic theology, the
host, after the Rite of Consecration, is no longer bread, but the Body and
Blood, Soul and Divinity of Christ, who is transubstantiated "in" it. Catholics
know that Jesus is the sacrificial Lamb of God prefigured in the Old Testament
Passover. Unless the flesh of that passover sacrificial lamb was consumed, the
members of the household would not be saved from death. As the Passover was the
Old Covenant, so the Eucharist became the New Covenant. (Matt 26:26-28), (Mark
14:22-24), (Luke 22: 19-20), and (John 6:48-58) Anglicanism. Reception of the
Blessed Sacrament in the Anglican Communion and other Anglican jurisdictions
varies by province. Formerly, Confirmation was generally required as a
precondition to reception, but many provinces now allow all the baptised to
partake, as long as they are in good standing with the Church and have
previously received First Communion. Devotions to the Blessed Sacrament vary.
Individuals will genuflect or bow in the presence of the Blessed Sacrament,
which may be reserved in a tabernacle or aumbry on, behind, or near the altar.
Its presence is usually indicated by a lamp suspended over or placed near the
tabernacle or aumbry. Except among Anglo-Catholics, the use of a monstrance is
rare. This is in keeping with the Article XXV of the Thirty-Nine Articles that
"the Sacraments were not ordained of Christ to be gazed upon, or to be carried
about, but that we should duly use Them." Nonetheless, many parishes do have
services of devotions to the Blessed Sacrament, in which the ciborium is
removed from the tabernacle or aumbry and hymns, prayers, psalms, and sentences
of devotion are sung or read. In some parishes, when the Blessed Sacrament is
moved between tabernacles (say, from the High Altar to a chapel altar), sanctus
bells are rung and all who are present kneel. Lutheranism. In most Lutheran
churches, a person must have had catechetical training prior to a First
Communion (or have received Confirmation in the Lutheran Church) to receive the
Eucharist. Recently, more liberal churches allow all who are baptized to
received it. Similar to the Anglican teaching, Lutherans are also taught to
genuflect or bow in the presence of the Blessed Sacrament, which is normally
located on an altar. In the Lutheran churches that still celebrate the Corpus
Christi, like the Roman Catholic Church, a Monstrance is used to display the
Blessed Sacrament during the Benediction. Lutheranism has its roots mostly in
German cultural area and therefore the terminology may often historically
differ slightly from general English use. Therefore traditionally the English
term "Blessed Sacrament" has been substituted by "Sacrament of the Altar",
(lat. "Sanctissimum Sacramentum Altaris") which is used in the same meaning in
Luther's Small Catechism. Later due to Reformed influence "The Sacrament of the
Altar" has often been wrongly and misguidedly used as the term of the
Eucharistic liturgy.
