Bodhi Bodhi (Sanskrit: ; and Pali) in Buddhism is the understanding possessed
by a Buddha regarding the nature of things. It is traditionally translated into
English with the word enlightenment and literally means awakened. Bodhi is
knowledge into the causal mechanism by which beings incarnate into material
form and experience suffering. Although its most common usage is in the context
of Buddhism, bodhi is also present as a concept in other Indian philosophies
and traditions. Etymology. "Bodhi" is an abstract noun formed from the verbal
root "budh" (to awake, become aware, notice, know or understand) corresponding
to the verbs "bujjhati" (PƒÅli) and "bodhati" or "budhyate" (Sanskrit). Also
from the same root are the Sanskrit words "bodha" (also meaning knowledge or
intelligence) and "buddhi" which is the exact equivalent to the Greek word
"nous". Soteriological meaning. The soteriological goal of Indian religions is
liberation or "moksha" (also called "mukti"). Liberation is simultaneously
freedom from suffering and the endless round of existences. Within the Sramanic
traditions one who has attained liberation is called an "arhat" (Sanskrit;
Pali: "arahant"), an honorific term meaning 'worthy' acknowledging the skill
and effort required to overcome the obstacles to the goal of "nirvana".
According to the Buddha the path to liberation is one of progressively coming
out of delusion (Pali: "Moha"). This path is therefore regarded as a path of
awakening. Progressing along the path towards Nirvana one gains insight into
the true nature of things. A Buddha is one who has attained liberation and an
understanding of the causal mechanism by means of which sentient beings come
into existence. This mechanism is called "pratitya samutpada" or dependent
origination. The knowledge or understanding of this is called "bodhi". Buddha's
awakening. In the suttapitaka, the Buddhist canon as preserved in the
Theravada-tradition, a number of texts can be found in which the Buddha tells
about his own awakening. Insight into the Four Noble Truths is here called
awakening. The monk ("bhikkhu") has Awakening is also described as synonymous
with Nirvana, the extinction of the passions whereby suffering is ended and no
more rebirths take place. The insight arises that this liberation is certain:
So awakening is insight into karma and rebirth, insight into the Four Noble
Truths, the extinction of the passions whereby Nirvana is reached, √ nd the
certainty th√ t liberation has been reached. The Buddhist Path. The Buddhist
tradition gives a wide variety of descriptions of the Buddhist Path ("magga")
to liberation. Tradition describes the Buddha's awakening, and the descriptions
of the path given in the Sutta Pitaka. By following this path Buddhahood can be
attained. Following this path dissolves the ten fetters and terminates
volitional actions that bind a human being to the wheel of samsara. The
Theravada-tradition follows the Path to purification described by Buddhaghosa
in his Visuddhimagga. It features four progressive stages culminating in full
enlightenment. The four stages are Sotapanna, Sakadagami, Anagami and Arahat.
Three types of buddha are recognized: Development of the concept. The term
bodhi acquired a variety of meanings and connotations during the development of
Buddhist thoughts in the various schools. Early Buddhism. In early Buddhism,
"bodhi" carried a meaning synonymous to "nirvana", using only some different
metaphors to describe the insight, which implied the extinction of "lobha"
(greed), "dosa" (hate) and "moha" (delusion). In Theravada Buddhism, bodhi and
nirvana carry the same meaning, that of being freed from greed, hate and
delusion. Mahayana. In Mahayana-thought, bodhi is the realisation of the
inseparability of samsara and nirvana, and the unity of subject and object. It
is similar to prajna, to realizing the Buddha-nature, realizing sunyata and
realizing suchness. Within the various Mahayana-schools exist various further
explanations and interpretations. Buddha-nature. According to these doctrines
bodhi is always there within one's mind, but requires the defilements to be
removed. This vision is expounded in texts such as the Shurangama Sutra and the
Uttaratantra. In Shingon Buddhism, the state of Bodhi is also seen as naturally
inherent in the mind. It is the mind's natural and pure state, where no
distinction is being made between a perceiving subject and perceived objects.
This is also the understanding of Bodhi found in Yogacara Buddhism and the
mind's natural and pure state as in Dzogchen.
