Born again (Christianity) In Christianity, to be born again is to undergo a
"spiritual rebirth" (regeneration) of the human soul or spirit, contrasted with
the physical birth everyone experiences. The origin of the term "born again" is
the New Testament: "Jesus replied, 'Very truly I tell you, no one can see the
kingdom of God without being "born again".'" It is a term associated with
salvation in Christianity. Individuals who profess to be born again often state
that they have a personal relationship with Jesus Christ. History. To many
historic church denominations, to be "born again" was understood as spiritual
regeneration via the sacrament of baptism by the power of water and word. This
is still the understanding in Roman Catholicism, some parts of Anglicanism,
Lutheranism and Eastern Orthodoxy. However, beginning sometime after the
Reformation, being "born again" has been predominantly understood by some
Protestants (of the "anabaptist" branch) to be an experience of conversion
symbolized by water baptism, and rooted in a commitment to one's own personal
faith in Jesus Christ for salvation. This same belief is also an integral part
of Methodist doctrine, and is connected with the doctrine of Justification.
Following an interpretation of, for instance, , adherents of the "Born again"
concept believe that when a person accepts Jesus as the Messiah and receives
the Holy Spirit, a radical "change of heart" occurs. This change is marked by
an aversion to sin and a passion for obedience to the commandments of Jesus
Christ, as outlined in the Christian scriptures. Many associate the term "born
again" with the revelation of a new concept, or an experience of conversion,
defined as mental assent to the acceptance of Jesus Christ as one's personal
Savior; though some believe that this experience or mental assent (See
Gnosticism) is not alone sufficient to merit Christian salvation. Rather, in
addition, this is brought about by repentance, the aforementioned "new birth"
of the Holy Spirit, and faith in Jesus Christ's propitiation for sins. Origin.
Biblical foundation. The King James' Version uses the phrase "born again" three
times. Two are found in chapter 3 of the Gospel of John, verses 3 and 7. Jesus
is speaking to Nicodemus, a Pharisee described as "a ruler of the Jews", who
says that, because of his miracles, Jesus is known "to be a teacher come from
God". Jesus immediately replies: "Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man
be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God."(KJV). John's Gospel was
written in Greek, and the Greek word translated as "again" is "ανωΘεν"
(anothen), which could mean "again", or "from above". This latter translation
is preferred by the New Revised Standard Version. Here, the Greek word
translated as "born again" is "αναγεγεννημενοι"
(anagegennemenoy). Interpretations. The traditional Jewish understanding of the
promise of salvation was that being rooted in "the seed of Abraham" referred to
physical lineage from Abraham. Jesus explained to Nicodemus that this doctrine
was in error—that every person must have two births—the natural birth of
the physical body, the other of the water and the spirit. This discourse with
Nicodemus established the Christian belief that all human beings—whether Jew
or Gentile—must be "born again" of the spiritual seed of Christ. The Apostle
Peter further reinforced this understanding in . The "Catholic Encyclopedia"
states that "A controversy existed in the primitive church over the
interpretation of the expression "the seed of Abraham". It is Apostle Paul's
teaching in one instance that all who are Christ's by faith are Abraham's seed,
and heirs according to promise. He is concerned, however, with the fact that
the promise is not being fulfilled to the seed of Abraham (referring to the
Jews)." Charles Hodge writes that "The subjective change wrought in the soul by
the grace of God, is variously designated in Scripture" with terms such as new
birth, resurrection, new life, new creation, renewing of the mind, dying to sin
and living to righteousness, and translation from darkness to light. An early
example of the term in its more modern use is found in the sermons of John
Wesley. In the sermon printed under the title of "A New Birth", he said "none
can be holy unless he be born again", and "except he be born again, none can be
happy even in this world. For ... a man should not be happy who is not holy."
Also, "I say, man may be born again and so become an heir of salvation." Wesley
also states infants who are baptized are born again, but for adults it is
different:Wesley, J., "The works of the Reverend John Wesley", Methodist
Episcopal Church, 1831, pp. 405–406. Denominational positions. For American
Christians, "The Oxford Handbook of Religion and American Politics" notes: "The
GSS ... has asked a born-again question on three occasions ... 'Would you say
you have been 'born again' or have had a 'born-again' experience?" The Handbook
says that "Evangelical, black, and Latino Protestants tend to respond
similarly, with about two-thirds of each group answering in the affirmative. In
contrast, only about one third of mainline Protestants and one sixth of
Catholics (Anglo and Latino) claim a born-again experience." However, the
handbook suggests that "born-again questions are poor measures even for
capturing evangelical respondents. ... it is likely that people who report a
born-again experience also claim it as an identity." Catholicism. At the
Council of Trent, on 15 November 1551, the necessity for a "second conversion"
after baptism was delineated: David MacDonald, a Catholic apologist, has
written in regards to paragraph 1428, that "this endeavor of conversion is not
just a human work. It is the movement of a 'contrite heart,' drawn and moved by
grace to respond to the merciful love of God who loved us first." Protestant.
In "The Encylopedia of Protestantism", JG Melton writes: "While often
associated with Evangelical Christianity, the again phenomenon is common across
the entire spectrum of Protestant churches." He continues: "In churches that
emphasise evangelism, the 'born-again' experience tends to become the norm, and
everyone is expected to recount such an experience." The only mention of the
phrase in the 39 Articles of the Church of England is in article XV, which is
headed "Of Christ alone without Sin". In part, it reads: "sin, as S. John
saith, was not in Him. But all we the rest, although baptized and born again in
Christ, yet offend in many things: and if we say we have no sin, we deceive
ourselves, and the truth is not in us." Evangelical Protestants employ the
translation of John 3:3 as "born again" rather than "from above". "Although
many evangelicals allow that conversion can be a process, generally they see it
as a specific, identifiable moment of time when a person simply and sincerely
trusts in Jesus Christ as savior." They teach that to see the Kingdom of God
one has to be born again. They also use the biblical verse of Romans 10:9 "That
if you confess with your mouth, 'Jesus is Lord', and believe in your heart that
God raised him from the dead, you will be saved." So, to be born again means to
be saved because in order to be saved one has to confess Jesus is Lord with
one's mouth and believe it in one's heart. Also, to be born again means to
follow Romans 10:10 that "with your heart that you believe and are justified,
and it is with your mouth that you profess your faith and are saved". Jehovah's
Witnesses. Jehovah’s Witnesses believe that individuals do not have the power
to be born again, because it is God who calls and selects his followers. This
follows from the verse in John 6:44, "No man can come to me, except the Father
which hath sent me draw him." (King James Version) They consider that when
Jesus said in John 3:5 that one has to be born from "water and the spirit" to
enter the kingdom of God, it was not a command but a necessity, because the
text states "Ye must be born again". On this point, their publishing
organisation, the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania, prefers
the translation: "should be born from above". They write: "Thus, according to
that alternate rendering, the new birth originates 'from above'—that is,
'from heaven,' or 'from the Father.' ... Yes it is caused by God." For further
evidence, Jehovah's Witnesses note that in Mark 1:9-10, after Jesus was
baptised in water by John the Baptist, he was baptised by the spirit symbolised
by a dove. Also, in Acts 1:5, Jesus assured his disciples that they too would
soon be baptised in holy spirit: "For John truly baptized with water; but ye
shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost not many days hence." (KJV) The
Watchtower states: "Note that Jesus first got baptized with water. Then he
received the holy spirit. Similarly, the early disciples had first been
baptized in water ... and then they received the holy spirit." This occurred
"On the day of Pentecost in the year 33 C.E." Public stances. In recent
history, "born again" is a term that has been widely associated with the
evangelical Christian renewal since the late 1960s, first in the United States
and then later around the world. Associated perhaps initially with Jesus People
and the Christian counterculture, "born again" came to refer to a conversion
experience, accepting Jesus Christ as Lord and Savior in order to be saved from
Hell and given eternal life with God in Heaven, and was increasingly used as a
term to identify devout believers. By the mid 1970s, "born again" Christians
were increasingly referred to in the mainstream media as part of the born again
movement. In 1976, Watergate conspirator Chuck Colson's book "Born Again"
gained international notice. "Time" magazine named him "One of the 25 most
influential Evangelicals in America." The term was sufficiently prevalent that
during the year's Presidential campaign, most notably with Democratic party
nominee Jimmy Carter describing himself as "born again" in the first "Playboy"
magazine interview of an American Presidential candidate. Modern musicians such
as Little Richard, Mark Farner, Dan Peek, Donna Summer, Bob Dylan, Kerry
Livgren, Dave Hope, Dave Mustaine, Nicko McBrain, Roger McGuinn, Ted Nugent,
Kanye West, Carrie Underwood, Johnny Cash, Brian Welch, Keith Farley, Cliff
Richard, Charlie Daniels, Randy Travis, Alice Cooper, Steven Tyler, Mariah
Carey, Nick Cannon, and Lou Gramm were artists whose born again conversions had
an impact on modern culture. Others such as department store magnate James Cash
Penney, Chick-fil-A founder Truett Cathy, actor/martial artist Chuck Norris,
wrestlers Shawn Michaels, Chris Jericho, AJ Styles, Ted DiBiase and wrestler
Sting, and actors Jesse McCartney, Kirk Cameron, and Mr. T are also mentioned
as being born again. Born-again athletes like New York Jets quarterback Tim
Tebow, St. Louis Rams quarterback Sam Bradford and former Rams Superbowl XXXIV
winning quarterback Kurt Warner, Olympic hurderler Lolo Jones, boxer Katie
Taylor and New York Knicks player Jeremy Lin. Former Alabama governor and
American presidential candidate George Wallace became born again in the late
1970s, which led him to apologize for his earlier segregationist views. Chuck
Colson. In his book "Born Again" (1976 and 2008), Watergate conspirator Chuck
Colson describes his path to faith in conjunction with his criminal
imprisonment and played a significant role in solidifying the "born again"
identity as a cultural construct in the US. He writes that his spiritual
experience followed considerable struggle and hesitancy to have a "personal
encounter with God." He recalls:Colson, Charles W. "Born Again." Chosen Books
(Baker Publishing), 2008. Born-again and US politics. The first born-again
President of the United States was Jimmy Carter in 1976. "In the 1980 campaign,
all three of the major candidates ... stated that they had been born-again" The
Gallup Organization reported that "In 2003, 42% of U.S. adults said they were
born-again or evangelical; the 2004 percentage is 41%." Also, "Black Americans
are far more likely to identify themselves as born-again or evangelical, with
63% of blacks saying they are born-again, compared with 39% of white Americans.
" and "Republicans are far more likely to say they are born-again (52%) than
Democrats (36%) or independents (32%)." Criticism. Biblical arguments. The
quotation from the Gospel of John has raised some questions about the meaning
and authenticity of the phrase "born again". In the chapter, Nicodemus is
puzzled and asks Jesus what he means by saying that "Ye must be born again". He
questions: "How can a man re-enter his mother's womb?" Scholar Bart D. Ehrman
says that this confusion is because in Greek (the language of the gospel) the
word "again" is ambiguous. It might mean "again" or "a second time" or "from
above", which would explain Nicodemus' confusion. However, the Jews at Jesus'
time were actually speaking Aramaic, in which language there would not have
been a double meaning. Ehrman says that this raises questions about the
authenticity of the dialogue, the meaning of the words, and, therefore, the use
of the phrase. A 19th century source notes that the phrase was not mentioned by
the other Evangelists, nor by the Apostles except Peter. "It was not regarded
by any of the Evangelists but John of sufficient importance to record." And,
without John, "we should hardly have known that it was necessary for one to be
born again." This suggests that "the text and context was meant to apply to
Nicodemus particularly, and not to the world." Otherwise, it would have been
mentioned more often. Names inspired by the term. The idea of being "born again
in Christ" inspired some common European forenames: French René/Renée (also
used in the Netherlands), Dutch Renaat/Renate, Italian, Spanish and Portuguese
Renato/Renata, Latin Renatus/Renata, which all mean "reborn", "born again".
