Brahmin Brahmin (also called Brahmana; from the Sanskrit ) is a term in the
traditional Hindu societies of Nepal and India. Brahmins were engaged in
attaining the highest spiritual knowledge (brahmavidya) and adhered to
different branches (shakhas) of Vedas. This was described to be a difficult
path of discipline of body, mind, and intellect. However, certain persons,
though very few in number, were born into other varnas but dedicated themselves
to such an austere life that they were also recognized as Brahmins in ancient
India (e.g., sage Vishwamitra, a non-brahmin who attained brahmavidya and
composed the Gayatri mantra was venerated as "Brahmarishi", not by caste but by
title / pre-fix accorded to him by the well-read in general in those days).
Historically, the semantic change from a tribal state into the Hindu state of
the jati-varna matrix saw the conversion and absorption of tribals into the
Brahmin class, through adoption of the priestly occupation. In medieval and
colonial India, people in different occupations also proselytized themselves
into Brahmins, usually upon leading an austere life, gaining positions of power
or upon becoming wealthy. The priestly class is expected to practice self-
abnegation and play the role of being the custodians of Dharma (as a BrƒÅhman
who is well versed in Vedic texts). The fee paid to the Brahmana for
performance of a sacrifice was considered as a return for the priestly duties.
History. Most sampradayas (sects) of modern Brahmins claim to take inspiration
from the Vedas. According to orthodox Hindu tradition, the Vedas are "" and
"anƒÅdi" (beginning-less), and are revealed truths of eternal validity. The
Vedas are considered "≈öruti" ("that which is heard") and are the paramount
source on which Brahmin tradition claims to be based. ≈öruti texts include the
four Vedas (the Rigveda, the Yajurveda, the Samaveda and the Atharvaveda), and
their respective Brahmanas, Aranyakas and Upanishads. In 1931, Brahmins
accounted for 4.32% of the total population of the subcontinent. Today, it
comprises 3% of the total population. In West Bengal the figures stand at 5%,
whereas in Uttar Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Rajasthan, Bihar and Orissa the
Brahmin population is quite near 10%. Megasthenes writes, that Brahmins are,
""philosophers who are first in rank but form the smallest class in point of
number.""" He also compares the Brahmins to the non-Brahmin Shramanas.
Megasthenes also writes, ""The philosophers are of two kinds: (I) Brachmanes
and (2) Sarmanes. The Brachmanes are the best esteemed, for they have a more
consistent dogmatic system."" Practices. Brahmins, basically adhere to the
principles of the Vedas, related to the texts of the ≈öruti and Smriti which
are some the foundations of Hinduism, and practise Sanatana Dharma. Vedic ""
have six occupational duties, of which three are compulsory¬ ‚Äî studying the
Vedas, performing Vedic rituals and practicing dharma. By teaching the insights
of the Vedic literature which deals with all aspects of life including
spirituality, philosophy, yoga, religion, rituals, temples, arts and culture,
music, dance, grammar, pronunciation, metre, astrology, astronomy, logic, law,
medicine, surgery, technology, martial arts, military strategy, etc. By
spreading its philosophy, and by accepting back from the community, the
Brahmins receive the necessities of life. Brahmins practice vegetarianism or
lacto-vegetarianism which has been a custom for centuries, dating back to the
pre-Christian era. However, some Brahmins inhabiting regions of Mithila,
Punjab, Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, West Bengal and Nepal, are non-vegetarian.
Most Brahmin sects wear the Yagnopaveetham (or sacred thread) that is a symbol
of initiation to the Gayatri recital. This ritual is often referred to as
Upanayana. This marks the learning of the Gayatri hymn. Brahmin sects also
generally identify themselves as belonging to a particular Gotra, a
classification based on patrilineal descent, which is specific for each family
and indicates their origin. Brahmin communities. The Brahmin castes may be
broadly divided into two regional groups: Pancha-Gauda Brahmins from the
Northern part of India (considered to be the region north of the Vindhya
mountains) and Pancha-Dravida Brahmins from the region south of the Vindhya
mountains as per the shloka asdof Kalhana. This shloka was composed only in the
11th century CE. Pancha-Gauda. Those from "Uttarapatha" ("Aryavarta") (northern
and eastern India) approximately ordered according to geographical regions.
Gauda Brahmins. Gaur brahmin Among Gaur brahmana of Haryana,Rajasthan & west
Uttar Pradesh,Adi Gaur /Pachauri,Sanadhya & Paliwal are also Gaur brahmans.
Rajasthan. Jangid Brahman are the followers of Angira Rishi. The sect of Jangid
Brahmins are widely found in Rajasthan. Jangid Brahmins are now also found in
Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh and Nepal. Bagra Brahmin (pronounced as Bagda) is
a part of the Brahmin community mainly concentrated in and around Jaipur
district of Rajasthan, India, although members of this community can be found
throughout India and also in foreign countries. Bias Brahmins. The Bias
Brahmins, or sometimes pronounces "Vyas" are a Brahmin caste found in the
Indian state of Haryana. They are also known as Bararia and Srimali. The word
"bias" means a preacher in Sanskrit, and Bias Brahmin are a group of Nagar
Brahmins, who settled in Haryana some six centuries ago. Kamarupa (Assamese)
Brahmins. Main article: Assamese Brahmins See also: Kamrupi Brahmins Assamese
Brahmins are found mostly in Lower Assam, Upper Assam i.e. throughout the
Brahmaputra Valley. They are believed to have their origins in ancient Kannauj,
and have migrated during the Kamarupa period to Lower Assam and then to the
rest of the Brahmaputra Valley. With respect to faith and customs, Brahmins in
Assam are the same as other Brahmin communities across India. Each Brahmin
family within the community identify themselves to a specific Gotra. Sarma/
Sharma, Bhagawati, Goswami, Chakraborty are a few common Assamese Brahmin
surnames. Kamrupi kings were known to take regular advice from Brahmins for
political and religious purposes. Kamrupi king Bhaskar Varman regularly grant
land, cows etc. to Brahmins and issue copper plate seals mentioning the same.
Utkala Brahmins (Orissa). The Sanskrit text BrƒÅhma·πáotpatti-MƒÅrta·πá·∏ça by
Pt. Harikrishna ≈öƒÅstri mentions that a king named Utkala invited Brahmins
from the Gangetic Valley to perform a yajna in Jagannath-Puri in Orissa. When
the yajna ended, these Brahmins laid the foundation of Lord Jagannath there and
settled around Orissa, Jharkhand and Medinipur. The Utkala Brahmins are of
three classes 1) Shrautiya (vaidika), 2) Sevayata and 3) Halua Brahmins.
Maithil Brahmins (Mithila). Maithil BrƒÅhama·πáas, are a group of Brahmins
typically originating from and living in and around Mithila, which is part of
North Bihar. They are a community of highly cohesive, traditional Brahmins who
strive to follow rites and rituals according to ancient Hindu canons. They have
a reputation for orthodoxy and interest in learning. A large number of Maithil
Brahmins migrated a few centuries ago to adjoining areas of South-east Bihar
and Jharkhand, as well as to adjoining Terai regions of Nepal. Most of the
Maithil Brahmins are ≈öƒÅktas (worshippers of ≈öakti) . Maithili is their
mother tongue, though many use Angika (a south-eastern dialect of Maithili) as
their mother tongue. Nepali Brahmin. See Nepal. Pancha-Dravida.
‡§ï‡§∞‡•ç‡§£‡§æ‡§ü‡§ï‡§æ‡§∂‡•ç‡§ö ‡§§‡•à‡§≤‡§Ç‡§ó‡§æ ‡§¶‡•ç‡§∞‡§æ‡§µ‡§ø‡§°‡§æ
‡§Æ‡§π‡§æ‡§∞‡§æ‡§∑‡•ç‡§ü‡•ç‡§∞‡§ï‡§æ‡§É,
‡§ó‡•Å‡§∞‡•ç‡§ú‡§∞‡§æ‡§∂‡•ç‡§ö‡•á‡§§‡§ø ‡§™‡§û‡•ç‡§ö‡•à‡§µ
‡§¶‡•ç‡§∞‡§æ‡§µ‡§ø‡§°‡§æ ‡§µ‡§ø‡§®‡•ç‡§ß‡•ç‡§Ø‡§¶‡§ï‡•ç‡§∑‡§ø‡§£‡•á ||
(Karnatakaashcha Telangaa Dravidaa Maharashtrakaaha, Gurjarashcheti panchauva
dravidaa vindhyadakshine) Brahmins who live in south of Vidhya mountains are
called Pancha-Dravida Brahmins and they are divided in to following groups.
Andhra Pradesh. Brahmins of Andhra Pradesh known as Telugu Brahmins are broadly
classified into four groups: Vaidiki Brahmins, Niyogi, Dravida Brahmins, and
VaikhƒÅnasa. Vaidiki Brahmins are further divided into the following sub-
categories: Dravidlu (Aadi Shaivulu, Shaivulu), Vaidiki Velanadu, Vaidiki
Venginadu, Vaidiki Kosalanadu or Kasalnadu, Vaidiki Mulakanadu, Vaidiki
Murikinadu, Vaidiki Telaganya (Originated from Telangana but might have
migrated to other regions). Niyogis are further divided into the following
subcategories: Nandavarika Niyogi, Prathama Shakha Niyogi, Aaru Vela Niyogulu,
Golkonda Vyapari, Karanaalu, Sistukaranalu, Karana kamma vyaparlu,
Karanakammulu. Each Rishi's name is mentioned in the Yajurveda (4.3.3). Sanaga
(Son of Manu (Shiva)) Sanatana (Son of Maya (Vishnu)) Abhuvana (Son of Tvashta
(Brahma of four faces)) Pratanan (Son of Shilpi (Indra)) Another sub-section,
known as Dravida Brahmins, is made up of a group of Saraswat Brahmins who
migrated to Andhra Pradesh from Tamil Nadu. They had originally migrated to
Tamil Nadu from Saurashtra. Islamic invasions affected this group by forcing
its slow migration from Kashmir to Andhra Pradesh via Gujarat and Tamil Nadu.
As a result of their migration from Tamil Nadu, this group of Brahmins is known
as Dravida Brahmins or Dravidlu. They remain with the Vedic traditions. This
sect is also related to the Vadama Brahmins. Gujarat. Girinarayan Brahmin,
Shrigod Brahmin, Sachora Brahmin, Anavil Brahmin, Sidhra-Rudhra Brahmins,
Prashnora Brahmins, Vadadra Brahmin, Sree gauda Brahmin, Trivedi Mewada
Brahmin, Palival Brahmin (Dasha and visha), Modh Brahmin, Tapodhan Brahmin,
Audichya Brahmin, Sahastra Audichya Gorwal Brahmin, Nagar Brahmin, Pushkarna
Brahmin, Saurashtra Bhatt Mewada Brahmin, Saurashtra Trivedi Mewad Brahmin,
Chauriyasi Mewada Brahmin, Rajgor Brahmin (Gujarat Origin), Bajkhedawal
Brahmins (origin Kheda in central Gujarat or Khedbrahma in north Gujarat),
Jangid Brahmin, Rajgor Brahmin, Bhatt Mewada Brahmin, Shrimali Brahmins and
Chvyan Brahmin (or bharah gaon Brahmin), Adhyagoud Brahmins (Rajasthan origin)
and Jaiswal Brahmin (North-Indian origin),Rayakwad Brahmin(Kubabthal region)
Kanaujiya or Kanyakumbj Brahmins migrated from Kanauj and entered the Kutch
area via Sindh along with the lohanas. They are divided into the categories
bhuvdiyas, vondhiyas and sandhliyas, according to their village temple. Others
in Gujarat are mainly found in Jamnagar, Morbi, Junaghath and Rajkot. Surnames
like Bhatt, Kaileyas, Bhaglani, Pingal, Lakhlani, Ghediya etc. are common among
them. Maharashtra. They include the following : Goud Saraswat Brahmins,
Chitpavan Brahmins (Konkanastha), Daivadnya Brahmins, Deshastha Brahmins,
Karhade Brahmins and Devrukhe Brahmins. Karnataka. Kannada BrƒÅhmans
(‡≤ï‡≤®‡≥ç‡≤®‡≤° ‡≤¨‡≥ç‡≤∞‡≤æ‡≤π‡≥ç‡≤Æ‡≤£): The BrƒÅhmans of the Carnatic, or
the Canarese country. The Canarese area comprises Mysore State, and the British
Districts of Canara, Dharwar and Belgaum. These are further subdivided into the
following castes : Babbur Kamme Brahmins, Badaganadu Brahmins, Deshastha
Brahmin, Hale naadu Karnataka Brahmins, Havyaka Brahmin, Hasan Iyengars, Hebbar
Iyengars, Hoysala Karnataka Brahmins, Jangam Brahmins, Karhade Brahmin, Koota
Brahmins, Madhva Brahmins, Mandyam Iyengars, Mysore Iyengars, Vishwabrahmin,
Niyogi Brahmins, Panchagrama Brahmins, Sankethi Brahmins, Sattada vaishnava
Brahmins, Shukla Yajurveda Brahmins, Smartha Brahmins, Srivaishnava Brahmins,
Sthanika Brahmins, Ulucha Kamme Brahmins Kerala. Kerala Brahmins include the
following categories of Brahmins: Namboothiri Brahmin, Embranthiri, Pushpaka
Brahmin (subdivided into Nambissans and Unnis), Sharada Brahmins,
Vishwabrahmins Gotras and pravaras. Brahmins classify themselves on the basis
of their patrilineal descent from a notable ancestor. These ancestors are
either ancient Indian sages or kshatriyas (warriors), who chose to become
Brahmins. The major gotras that trace descent from sages are: Shri Vatsya,
Kanva, Jamadagni, Bhrigu, Bharadv√¢ja, Kaundinya, Gautama Maharishi, Sandilya,
Bhrigu, Vashista, ParƒÅshara, Atryasa, Harithasa, Kashyapa, and Agastya gotra.
Other gotras are Mitra, Vishvamitra and Chaurasia gotra. In general, gotra
denotes any person who traces descent in an unbroken male line from a common
male ancestor. PƒÅ·πáini defines gotra for grammatical purposes as 'apatyam
pautraprabhrti gotram' (IV. 1. 162), which means: "the word gotra denotes the
progeny (of a sage) beginning with the son's son". When a person says, "I am
Kashypasa-gotra", he means that he traces his descent from the ancient sage
Kashyapa by unbroken male descent. This enumeration of eight primary gotras
seems to have been known to PƒÅ·πáini. These gotras are not directly connected
to Prajapathy or latter brama. The offspring (apatya) of these Eight are
gotras; and others than these are called 'gotr√¢vayava'.Provide Vepachedu's
Sources The gotras are divided into three tiers of ganas, then into pakshas,
and finally into individual gotras. According to the √Çsval√¢yana-srautas√ªtra,
there are four subdivisions of the Vashista gana, viz. Upamanyu, ParƒÅshara,
Kundina and Vashista (other than the first three). The first has survived in
the Bhrigu and ƒÄngirasa gana. According to Baudh, the principal eight gotras
were divided into pakshas. The pravara of Upamanyu is Vashista, Bharadvasu,
Indrapramada; the pravara of the Par√¢shara gotra is Vashista, Sh√¢ktya,
P√¢r√¢sharya; the pravara of the Kundina gotra is Vashista, Maitr√¢varuna,
Kaundinya and the pravara of Vashistas other than these three is simply
Vashista. Therefore some define pravara as the group of sages that
distinguishes the founder (lit. the starter) of one gotra from another. There
are two kinds of pravaras, 'sishya-prasishya-rishi-parampara' and
'putrparampara'. Gotrapravaras can be ekarsheya, dwarsheya, triarsheya,
pancharsheya, saptarsheya, and up to 19 rishis. Kashyapasa gotra has at least
two distinct pravaras in Andhra Pradesh: one with three sages (triarsheya
pravara) and the other with seven sages (saptarsheya pravara). This pravara may
be either sishya-prasishya-rishi-parampara or putraparampara. Similarly,
Srivatsasa gotra has five sages or is called Pancharsheya and are the
descendants of Jamadagni. For a sishya-prasishya-rishi-parampara marriage it is
not acceptable if half, or more than half, of the rishis are the same in both
bride and bridegroom gotras. If it is putraparampara, a marriage is totally
unacceptable even if one rishi matches.Provide Vepachedu's Sources- Sects and
Rishis. Due to the diversity in religious and cultural traditions and
practices, and the Vedic schools to which they belong, Brahmins are further
divided into various subcastes. During the sutra period, roughly between 1000
BCE to 200 BCE, Brahmins became divided into various Shakhas (branches), based
on the adoption of different Vedas and different rescension Vedas. Sects for
different denominations of the same branch of the Vedas were formed, under the
leadership of distinguished teachers among the Brahmins. There are several
Brahmin law givers, such as Angiras, Apasthambha, Atri, Bhrigu, Brihaspati,
Boudhayana, Daksha, Gautama, Harita, Katyayana, Likhita, Manu, Parasara,
Samvarta, Shankha, Shatatapa, Ushanasa, Vashista, Vishnu, Vyasa, Yajnavalkya,
and Yama. These twenty-one rishis were the propounders of the Smritis. The
oldest among these smritis are Apastamba, Baudhayana, Gautama, and Vashista
Sutras.Provide Vepachedu's Sources Descendants of the Brahmins. Many Indians
and non-Indians claim descent from the Vedic Rishis of both Brahmin and non-
Brahmin descent. For example, the Dasharna and Nagas are said to be the
descendants of Kashyapa Muni. The descent of Brahmins is generally indicated by
the gotra, which refers to his patrilineage. It is indicated by the name of the
'great sage' to whose descent the Brahmin is said to belong. The Vishwakarmas
are the descendants of Pancha Rishis or Brahmarishies. According to Yajurveda
and Brahmanda purana, they are Sanaka, Sanatana, Abhuvanasa, Prajnasa, and
Suparnasa. The Panchal movement to reclaim Brahminical rights claimed that the
Panchals have Brahminic culture, or sacraments, and perform their ceremonies
according to Vedic Rituals. The Kani tribe of South India claim to descend from
Agastya Muni. The Gondhali, Kanet, Bhot, Lohar, Dagi, and Hessis claim to be
from Renuka Devi. The Kasi Kapadi Sudras claim to originate from the Brahmin
Sukradeva. Their duty was to transfer water to the sacred city of Kashi. The
Padmashalis claim they came from the Maharishi Markandeya, who wrote the
Markandeya Purana. The Saini (gardener) community claim in one of their stories
that they descended from a Brahmin and call themselves Parpadh Brahman, which
in course of time became Phulmali. Dadheech Brahmins/dayama Brahmin trace their
roots from Dadhichi Rishi. Many Jat clans claim to descend from Dadhichi Rishi
while the Dudi Jats claim to be in the lineage of Duda Rishi. Lord Buddha was a
descendant of Angirasa through Gautama. There were Kshatriyas of other clans
whose members descend from Angirasa, to fulfill a childless king's wish. The
(so-called) backward caste Matangs claim to descend from Matang Muni, who
became a Brahmin through his karma. According to one legend, the nomadic tribe
of Kerala, the Kakkarissi, were descendants of a Brahmin who came out of the
mouth of Garuda, the vehicle of Lord Vishnu. The Roman Catholic Brahmin caste
among the Goan Catholics and Mangalorean Catholics are descended from Konkani
Brahmins who converted to Roman Catholicism during the Portuguese colonial rule
in Goa. Claimants of Brahmin Status. In Andhra Pradesh the Panchanamvaru, the
artisan caste of five groups (goldsmith, carpenters, blacksmiths, brasiers and
stone-cutters) claim to descend from Vishwakarma and his five sons (Manu, Maya,
Silpa, Tvastra and Daivagna), and claim to be Vishwa-Brahmin. The Vipravinodins
also claim the status. In Bengal (West Bengal State and Bangladesh) the
Namasudras, now named as Namasudra (Namassej) also claimed Brahmin status. It
is claimed that King Ballal Sen expelled them from society and declared them as
out-castes. A Vyavastha was signed in 1901 by forty odd Brahmin pundits, headed
by Chief Brahmin pundit (Nabadwip) of Bengal. This is supported by Dr. Nihar
Ray in "The History Of Bengali People , Ancient Period", published in "Desh",
The Famous Bengali Literary Magazine in 1951, and included in the special issue
of "Articles of One Century". It is claimed that the 1931 census of India shows
that the two states of the Ganga River Valley basin, Uttar Pradesh and Bihar,
had a 10% Brahmin population and adjacent Orissa also had a 10% population, but
Bengal had exactly half, 5%. Dr. N.R. Ray mentions in his book that Namasudra
(Namassejas) are the Lost Tribe. In Gujarat, the Brahmbhatts, Brahmakshatriyas,
Panchals, and Shrimali Sonis claim Brahmin status. In Haryana, the Tagas claim
to be a Brahmins who had abandoned the priestly profession and taken to
agriculture. In Karnataka, the Sthanika Brahmins claim to be Saiva Brahmins. In
Punjab, the Misari of the Multan Langrials claim descent from Brahmins of
Bikanir. Both the Langrail and Golia claim that they were Brahmin Charans. In
Uttar Pradesh the Oudh Belwar also claim descent from the Sanadhya Brahmin
caste. Even in the time of the Buddha there were a few Brahmins who took up
laboring professions. For example, Subhadra, the loast convert of the Buddha,
and a Brahmin by caste was a barber by profession in Atuma village. Brahmins
have taken on many professions¬ ‚Äì from being priests, ascetics and scholars
to warriors and business people, as is attested for example in Kalhana's
Rajatarangini. Brahmins with the qualities of Kshatriyas are known as
'Brahmakshatriyas'. An example mentioned in mythology is the sage Parashurama
who is considered an avatar of Vishnu. Sage Parashurama is portrayed as a
powerful warrior who defeated the Haiheya kshatriyas twenty one times, was an
expert in the use of weapons, and trained others to fight without weapons. He
is said to have established the Bhumihar Brahmins as landowners once he
destroyed the Kshatriya race. These Brahmins, after having mostly abandoned
their priestly functions (although some still perform), took to land-owning
(Zamindar) as a profession. Brahmin sects that have taken up the profession of
medicine include the Vaidya (or Baidya) Brahmins of Bengal, with surnames
Gupta, Dasgupta and Senguptas. They are considered descendants of Dhanvantari,
the Hindu god of medicine and father of Ayurveda. Kshatriya Brahmin and Brahma-
kshatriya are terms associated with people of both the Brahmin and Kshatriya
caste components. Brahmin Kings. Among the Royal Rajput households, Brahmins
who became the personal teachers and protectors of the royal princes rose to
the status of Rajpurohit and taught the princes everything, including martial
arts. They would also become the keepers of the Royal lineage and its history.
They would also be the protectors of the throne in case the regent was orphaned
and a minor. The well-known Brahmin Chanakya was a Rajpurohit for Chandragupta
Maurya, founder of the Mauryan empire, who helped Chandragupta get a grip on
the well-established Nanda Empire and prevent Alexander the Great from invading
India. The Pallava kings also claimed to be Brahmakshatriyas. King Jayavarma I
of Kambuja (Kampuchea) of 781 A.D. was a Brahma-kshatriya. King Lalitaditya
Muktapida of Kashmir ruled all of India and even Central Asia. King Rudravarma
of Champa (Vietnam) of 657 A.D. was the son of a Brahmin father. Medieval king
Samrat Hem Chandra Vikramaditya or Hemu, born into a family of Purohits,
started the manufacture of cannons for the first time in North India in 1540s,
with Portuguese know-how and dealt in gunpowder supplies to Sher Shah Suri's
army. Later he became Prime Minister and Chief of Army of the Suris and Emperor
of North India in 1556, defeating Akbar's army at Agra and Battle for Delhi at
Tughlakabad Fort in Delhi. Brahmins with the qualities of a Vaisya or merchant
are known as 'Brahmvyasya'. An example of such persons are people of the
Ambastha caste, which exist in South India. They perform medical work, and
claim that from ancient times they have practised Ayurveda and have been
Vaidyas (or doctors). During British rule, when the government desired to
promote caste mobility, they started bearing the sacred thread also, but
neither the government nor the Hindu oligarchs supported any such sanction .
Sampradayas. The three sampradayas (sects) of Brahmins, mostly in South India
are the Smarta sampradaya, the Srivaishnava sampradaya and the Madhva
sampradaya. Smartism. "Smartism" (or Smarta Sampradaya, "Smarta Tradition", as
it is termed in Sanskrit) is a liberal or nonsectarian denomination of the
Hindu religion. This tradition is based on the Advaithic teachings of Adi
Sankaracharya. He united various sects of Hinduism under on umbrella by
accepting all the major Hindu deities as forms of the one Brahman. He implored
the Smarthas to have an Ishta devatha in the form of Siva, Sakthi, Vishnu,
Ganesha, Murugan (Subrahmanya) or Sun. The term Smarta refers to adherents who
follow the Vedas and Shastras. Vaishnavism. One form of Vaishnavism is Madhwa
(Dwaita Sampradaya), and the other is Sri Vaishnava (Vishishtadvaita
sampradaya). Madhwa Brahmins are mainly located in the Carnatic plains and some
of them are seen in Andhra, Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu and Kerala. They follow the
teachings of Sri Madhvacharya, who was born in South Canara district of
Karnataka in the 12th Century. He preached Dvaita, which says that God and atma
(soul) are different entities, which is contradictory to the teachings of Sri
Adi Sankaracharya, who preached Advaita vedanta (non-duality). In South India,
Sri Vaishnava sampradayam was propagated by Srimad Ramanujacharya. Shaivism.
Shaivism (sometimes called "Shivaism") is a belief system where Lord Shiva is
worshipped as the Supreme Lord. It is a derivative faith of the core Vedic
tradition. Saiva sects contains many subsects, such as Asdisaivas, Rudrasaivas,
Veerasiavas, Paramasaivas, etc. Ravana, the ruler of Lanka in the Hindu epic
Ramayana, was a staunch Siva devotee, who was the grandson of creator Brahma.
Buddhism. Brahmins(caste) were treated as equals to all the rest, in the eyes
of the Buddha and there are countless references to Brahmins throughout the
Buddhist scriptures also.Buddha rejected the notion of gradation along caste
lines and of the legitimacy of the higher social status,as well as the notion
of ritual purity as claimed by the Brahmins compared to others . Many of the
major Buddhist followers and teachers were from Brahmins. They include
Sariputra, Maudgalyayana, Mahakashyapa, Nagarjuna, Asvaghosha, Padmasambhava,
Shantarakshita, Nagasena, Kumarajiva and Shantideva, all of whom were referred
by their titles devoid of their caste as Arahats etc. The word Brahmin, meaning
"priest class", was redefined by the Buddha and it continued to be used
alongside Arahat in their relevant contexts. Max Muller points out that in the
Dhamapada, Buddha etymologizes the word "Bahama", the Prakrit form of
"Brahmana", by playing off the Sanskrit/Prakrit etymon -bra. In the Ambattha
Sutra, we find the Buddha debated many Brahmins who were clearly not Arahats.
Also in many important dharanis, Brahmins are mentioned in an entirely
different capacity from Arahats, and therefore there is a marked difference
depending on the context. The Buddha insisted that Brahmins had to live up to
seek the truth ,hence reach liberation(Nirvana) through the Dhamma, and this
could not be by ascriptive factor of birth alone. In the Dhammapada, the Buddha
mentions Brahmins and Arahats in very different capacities and dedicates an
entire chapter to what it means to be a real Brahmin called the Brahmana-vagga
as well. The Buddha did not believe in caste discrimination but he did endorse
a fair division of labour based on merit and equality, while condemning
pathological division of labour through slavery , forced labour ,superstition
etc. According to him, Brahmins were not to discriminate against lower castes
and those of their own who joined the sangha, through the notion of purity and
superior social status ,which according to the buddha was false.but were to
serve them wholeheartedly. Many sutras indicate that the Buddha himself was a
Brahmin in a previous life and, due to his good merit as in the previous lives,
was reborn as the Buddha. The notion of ritual purity provided a conceptual
foundation for the caste system, by identifying occupations and duties
associated with impure or taboo objects as being themselves impure. Regulations
imposing such a system of ritual purity and taboos are absent from the Buddhist
monastic code, and not generally regarded as being part of Buddhist teachings
On the contrary, the early Buddhist scriptures defined purity as determined by
one's state of mind, and refer to anyone who behaves unethically, of whatever
caste, as "rotting within", or "a rubbish heap of impurity". There are many
places in which the Buddha explains his use of the word "brahman". At Sutta
Nipata 1.7, "Vasala Sutta", verse 12, he states: "Not by birth is one an
outcast; not by birth is one a brahman. By deed one becomes an outcast, by deed
one becomes a brahman." Miscellaneous sects. The Mahima Dharma or "Satya Mahima
Alekha Dharma" was founded by the Brahmin Mukunda Das of present-day Orissa,
popularly known by followers as Mahima Swami according to the "Bhima Bhoi"
text. He was born in the last part of the 18th century, in the former state of
Baudh, a son of Ananta Mishra. He was Brahmin by caste as mentioned in Mahima
Vinod of "Bhima Bhoi" in Vol.11. This sampradaya is similar to Vaishnavism.
Although the members of this sect do not worship Lord Vishnu as their Ishta-
Deva, they believe that the Srimad Bhagavatam is sacred. The founder of this
sect was a Vaishnavite before founding the new order. This sampradaya was
founded in the latter part of the 18th century. There is also the Avadhoot
Panth, wherein Lord Dattatreya and his forms such as Narasimha Saraswati and
Sai Baba of Shirdi are worshiped. Lord Dattatreya is worshiped by many as the
Hindu trinity¬ ‚Äì Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva in one divine entity. Many even
worship Dattatreya as an Avatar of Vishnu or of Shiva. Nepal. Bahun is a
colloquial Nepali term for a member of the Pahari or "hill" Brahmin
(‡§¨‡•ç‡§∞‡§æ‡§π‡•ç‡§Æ‡§£) caste, who are traditionally educators, scholars and
priests of Hinduism. They are also known as Barmu in Newari. Brahmins are the
second largest caste group in Nepal (31% of the population), with the Chhetri
(Kshatriya) being the first (42%). Brahmins were inhabitants of Nepal in
prehistoric times. The Brahmin community is the major part of the indigenous
Khas community of Nepal. They moved eastward along Xinjiang province of China,
Western Tibet, the Himalayan foothills from Kashmir and Kumao/Garwal. They
settled first in the Karnali River basin, then the Gandaki and finally the Kosi
basin and into Sikkim and Bhutan. Some Jaiswal Brahmins are Chaurasi Brahmins
from Nepal or North India. There are references about Brahmins of Nepal in
bansawali and purans. By tradition‚Äîand by civil law until 1962‚Äîthey
represented the highest of the four Hindu varna or castes. Bahuns from the
"hills" have been represented disproportionately in Nepal's education system,
political parties and civil service since the country was unified by Prithvi
Narayan Shah and his heirs in the 18th century. The top leaders of the all the
major parties are also Bahuns: the Maoist opposition (Pushpa Kamal Dahal and
Baburam Bhattarai), the Communist Party of Nepal (Unified Marxist-Leninist)
Jhalanath Khanal, Madhav Kumar (Nepal), and the Nepali Congress (Sushil
Koirla). Very often, Khas Bahuns can be identified by their middle names being
Dev (‡§¶‡•á‡§µ), Nath (‡§®‡§æ‡§•), Mani (‡§Æ‡§£‡§ø), Raj (‡§∞‡§æ‡§ú), Prasad
(‡§™‡•ç‡§∞‡§∏‡§æ‡§¶), Devi (‡§¶‡•á‡§µ‡•Ä) or Kumari (‡§ï‡•Å‡§Æ‡§æ‡§∞‡•Ä). They
never use bahadur (‡§¨‡§π‡§æ‡§¶‡•Å‡§∞) in their names because it is associated
mainly with Chhetris (Kshatriya) and "martial tribes". The Audichya Brahmin
community is connected with Parashurama (Bhargava-Gotra), and are said to have
earned a good deal of confidence and respect among kings. Burma (Myanmar).
According to Burmese chronicles, Brahmins in Burma were subject to the four-
caste system, which included brahmanas (), kshatriyas (), vaishya (), and
shudra (). Because the Burmese monarchy enforced the caste system for Indians,
Brahmins who broke caste traditions and laws were subject to punishment. In the
Arakanese kingdom, punished Brahmins often became "kyun ponna" (), literally
'slave Brahmins', who made flower offerings to Buddha images and performed
menial tasks. During the Konbaung dynasty, caste was indicated by the number of
"salwe" (threads) worn; Brahmins wore nine, while the lowest caste wore none.
Brahmins are also fundamental in the Nine-God cult, called the Nine Divinities
("Phaya Ko Su" ) which is essentially a Burmese puja ("puzaw" in Burmese) for
appeasing nine divinities, Buddha and the eight arahats, or a group of nine
deities, five Hindu gods and four nat spirits. This practice continues to be
practiced in modern-day Burma. Thailand. Brahmins in Thailand are known as
'Phram' or 'Paahm' and claim ancestry to Indian Brahmins who migrated to
Thailand in the 6th century AD There are fewer Brahmins in Thailand than in
Burma. One of the theories that orthodox Brahmins of Thailand believe in is
that the earth shall be destroyed by fire, and that a new Earth will be created
after the destruction. In the 19th century at Bangkok all the medical
practitioners were Chinese or Cochin - Chinese, while astronomy and divination
was in the hands of the Brahmins.
