Brahma Kumaris World Spiritual University Brahma Kumaris World Spiritual
University (BKWSU) or Prajapita Brahma Kumaris Ishwariya Vishwa Vidyalaya is a
monastic, renunciate millenarian new religious movement (NRM) of Indian origin.
It teaches a form of meditation adherents called "Raja Yoga", but which differs
from the classical Raja Yoga described by Patanjali and derives from teachings
given through mediumship and spirit possession. A neo-Hindu religious movement,
the Brahma Kumaris (, pron. , abbrv. BK) pre-date the New Age movement but have
developed characteristics that link them to its thinking. It advocates a
lifestyle which includes a vegetarian diet, celibacy, and avoidance of alcohol,
drugs and tobacco. Historically, the Brahma Kumaris have not been without
controversy and a range of accusations against them have been made – see the
section on controversies below for details. The controversies have involved
researchers, previous members, government agency reports and the press. The aim
of the BKWSU is to rule the world following a forthcoming apocalypse which they
believe only they will survive. The Brahma Kumaris view themselves as the
world’s true rulers and that they will be reborn as leaders amongst 900,000
souls who will reincarnate during a Golden Age and enjoy 1,250 years of peace
and plenty on earth. Early history. The origin of BKWSU can be traced to the
group "Om Mandli", founded by Lekhraj Kripalani (1884–1969) in Hyderabad,
Sindh in the 1930s. Lekhraj Kripalani, known as "Dada Lekhraj" and later known
as "Brahma Baba" to his followers, was a Diamond merchant and follower of the
Vaishnavite Vallabhacharya Sect. Dada Lekhraj (Brahma Baba) retired from his
business with assets of 1,000,000 Indian rupees to turn to spirituality. Their
original spiritual knowledge was obtained though "divine revelations" and
"divine visions" by sisters who channeled messages, and included "detailed
knowledge ... on the basic concepts of soul, God, World, Time, Space, Karma,
Mukti, Jeevanmukti, Heaven, Hell, Creation, Sustenance, Destruction, various
Yugas, Maya and its various forms, the true kind of Yoga-Meditation, the divine
virtues and the methodology to practise them." Lekhraj started holding satsangs
which attracted many people and the group became known as Om Mandali. In the
beginning of the movement, members considered God to be omnipresent, a belief
which did not change until at least the 1950s. In 1937, he named some of his
followers to a managing committee, then reportedly transferred his fortune to
the committee. Several women joined Om Mandali, and contributed their wealth to
the association as well. Some members of the local Sindhi people reacted
unfavorably to this movement because women were given an elevated status. Many
young married Sindhi women attended his ashram and were being encouraged to
take vows of celibacy, so the Om Mandali was accused of breaking up families.
Some Hindu members of the Sindh Assembly threatened to resign unless the Om
Mandali was outlawed. So, the Sindh Government used the Criminal Law Amendment
Act of 1908 to declare the Om Mandali an unlawful association. Under further
pressure from the Hindu leaders in the Assembly, the Government also ordered
the Om Mandali to close and vacate its premises. The Om Mandali successfully
appealed against the Government order in court. In April 1950, after the
partition of India, the Brahma Kumaris moved to Mount Abu in India, saying that
they had been instructed by God to do so. After Dada Lekhraj's (Brahma Baba)
death in 1969, his followers expanded the movement to other countries.
Expansion. Beginning in the 1950s, the Brahma Kumaris began an
internationalization expansion program, establishing centers across India with
female teachers. From 1964 to 1969 methods of outreach began involving
exhibitions, seminars and conferences in different parts of India. The
leadership of the BK movement remains primarily female. For example, in the UK,
only one-third of the 42 centers are run by males. According to the BKWSU
website, there are currently 825,000 students and over 8,500 Raja Yoga centres
in 100 countries and territories. According to sources quoted in the Adherents
website, worldwide membership ranges from 35,000 (in 1993) to 400,000 (in
1998). A number of Brahma Kumari splinter groups exist, the most notable
documented by Dr. John Walliss as the Advance Party, Shankar Party or AIVV to
the BKWSU. Elsewhere they are referred to as the Prajapita Brahma Kumaris or
PBKs. Walliss states that as Lekhraj Kripalani's original message of
separation, spiritual introversion and violent Destruction becomes repackaged
as the emergence of a New Age through self-understanding and self-development,
this direction has caused discontent within certain segments of the Brahma
Kumari movement, likening them to the "Protestant Reformers to the BKWSU's
mediaeval Catholic Church". The "Advance Party" offer a radicalised rendition
of the BKWSU's original millenarian message. In particular, they are
exceptionally hostile to the University's New Age and UN involvement claim that
Shiva is now manifesting Himself through a different medium to correctly
interpret the original teachings and that Lekhraj Kirpalani's business partner
Sevak Ram was the original medium. PBKs report hostile resistance from the
BKWSU and Walliss met with a wall of silence and irate phone call from the
University threatening him that the BKWSU would "block every step of the way if
[he persisted along this line of investigation". The University restricting its
member's "knowledge and access to the group so as to prevent any further
defections." Founder Baba Dev Dixit was debarred from the BKWSU. According to
the "Encyclopedia of New Religious Movements", Since the Kumaris University
spread to Western societies it has increasingly accommodated people with little
interest in its theodicy but attracted to the practical applications of BK
spiritual practices. The community service programmes of the 1980s and 1990s
stimulated creative renderings of BK meditation as a tool for psychological
healing and eclectic spiritual exploration. The casual participants whom the
BKs have attracted in this way probably made up the vast majority of the
450,000 people on the University's records at the turn of the 20th to 21st
century. Beliefs. In 1952, after a 14-year period of retreat during which Dada
Lekhraj (Brahma Baba) published numerous pamphlets, newspaper articles and
wrote letters to important national and international figures, a more
structured form of teaching began to be offered to the public by way of a seven
lesson course. The movement has distinguished itself from Hinduism and projects
itself as a vehicle for spiritual teaching rather than a religion. God. The
Brahma Kumaris claim their spirit guide, who they call Shiva, is the God of all
religions. Shiva is an eternal soul, just like human souls but the Supreme one,
and speaks to humanity exclusively via the Brahma Kumaris spirit mediums. They
claim Shiva is the same spirit being known as Allah or Jahweh and its purpose
is to awaken humanity, destroy other religions, and to eliminate evil and
negativity. He is not the creator of matter which is itself considered to be
eternal. God, they believe, possesses the religion's spirit mediums at mass
seances at its headquarters in India and speaks to its followers in person.
These messages called "Murlis" becoming the scriptures of the religion but are
available to members only. Hidden from outsiders, they are continually being
re-edited by the leadership. Self. Human and even animal souls, called atmas,
are believed to be an infinitesimal point of spiritual light residing in the
forehead of the body it occupies. Souls are believed to originally exist with
God in a "Soul World", a world of infinite light, peace and silence called
Nirvana. Here souls are in a state of rest and beyond experience. Souls enter
bodies to take birth in order to experience life and give expression to their
personality. Unlike other Eastern traditions, the soul is not thought to
transmigrate into other species and does not evolve but rather devolves birth
after birth. Within this "point of light" all aspects of the personality are
contained and is said to enter the human body in the 4th to 5th month of
pregnancy. Brahma Kumari adherents believe that a soul can inhabit the body of
another, or possess them, against their will. Cycle of time. Time is considered
to be cyclic, repeating identically every 5,000 years, and is composed of five
ages ("yugas"): the Golden Age ("Sat Yuga"), the Silver Age ("Treta Yuga"), the
Copper Age ("Dwapar Yuga"), the Iron Age ("Kali Yuga") each exactly 1,250 years
long, and the Confluence Age ("Sangam Yuga"). During the first half of the
cycle, which the Brahma Kumaris will rule, procreation is believed to be
possible through the power of yoga without sexual intercourse. The Universe is
never transformed into primordial or atomic state matter, nor does the world
ever becomes devoid of human beings. Destruction. According to the Brahma
Kumaris, the age between hell on earth and heaven on earth is said to be 100
years long, and believed to have begun again in 1936 with the descent of Shiva.
During this time, present day civilization is to be completely destroyed by
natural disasters, civil and nuclear war which followers call Destruction. This
event is generally hidden from non-members. Numerous false predictions of the
date of Destruction have been made, such as 1976, 1987, etc., and the
philosophy re-written to suit, but followers are still being told it is
extremely soon. The current expected date for the beginning of the Golden Age
is 2036. Tree of humanity. It is taught that all of life will die and return to
Nirvana, then take birth in the forthcoming cycle at their predestined time and
place. This is portrayed as the "Kalpa Vriksha Tree", or the "Tree of
Humanity", in which the founder Brahma Baba (Dada Lekhraj) and his Brahma
Kumaris followers are shown as the roots of the humanity. A new world order
starting with the birth of Krishna and a population of 900,000 is believed to
go on to enjoy 2,500 years of paradise as living deities before humanity splits
and the religious founders incarnate. Each creates their own branch and brings
with them their own followers from the Infinite Light, until they too decline
and splits, schisms, cults and sects appear at the end of the Iron Age. The aim
of the individual Brahma Kumari is to gain a high status in the coming
paradise, perhaps even a select 108 who are 'totally victorious' and will rule
there. Members of the physical families of Brahma Kumaris who have contact with
the University are said to become members of the 16,000 top souls and at the
end of each Cycle, everyone will see visions in which their personal destinies
will be fully disclosed. Meditation. The Brahma Kumaris teach a form of
meditation called "Raja Yoga", which according to Reender Kranenborg may not be
the same as classical Raja Yoga as described by Patanjali, through which
members are encouraged to purify their minds. This may be done by sitting
tranquilly in front of a screen on to which Dada Lekhraj's image is projected,
then making affirmations regarding the eternal nature of the soul. Lawrence
Babbs described another practise where "the student or students sit in a semi-
darkened room facing the teacher (usually a woman). Just above and behind the
teacher's head is a red plastic ovoid that glows from a lightbulb within, in
its center is a tiny hole which appears as an intense whitelight against the
red glow. This device represents the Supreme Soul (known as Shiv Baba) who is
the presiding deity of the universe. With devotional songs playing softly in
the background, student and teacher gaze intently at each other, either in the
eyes or at the forehead. While doing this the student is supposed to imagine
him or herself as a soul and not as a body. The student is told to think of
themself as separate from the body, as bodiless, as light, as power, as bathed
in the love and light of the Supreme Soul, and so on. This might continue for
fifteen or twenty minutes". Babb also states that while staring (gazing into
the eyes of an adept) at the teacher, many students experience visual
hallucinations involving lights. Murlis. David Barrett states, "Unlike
traditional forms of Hinduism, the Brahma Kumaris' teachings come not so much
from ancient scriptures but from revelations given in trance states". However,
the mediumistic messages known by Brahma Kumaris as "Murlis" read at the 6.30
am meetings are slowly developing the nature of potential scriptures. The
earlier ones channeled by Lekhraj Kripalani while he was alive, are now
repeated in a five year cycle. They are supplemented by later murlis channelled
by Hirday Mohini of Delhi in trance states, and these too are written down.
There are two types of mediumistic messages; "sakar" and "avyakt"; One must
complete the Brahma Kumaris foundation course before starting to attend morning
murli class and visiting the headquarters in India during the period when,
according to Howell and Nelson, "deceased founder communicates via trance-
medium". Activities and recognition. The Brahma Kumaris conduct seven one-hour-
long courses in their philosophy and open-eyed meditation technique. The
organization offers courses in "positive thinking", "self management
leadership", and "living values." They also have a number of voluntary outreach
programs in prisons. Concluding that "doctrinal assertions are socially
divisive and thus counterproductive to their primary goal" the Brahma Kumaris
have starting building coalitions and leading conglomerated networks of
cooperation. One such example, with the support of Vicente Fox, was carried out
under the guise of a commercial enterprise introducing Brahma Kumari teachings
and practises to the Government of Mexico through the "Self Management
Leadership" course which grew out of Brahma Kumaris beliefs and is the backbone
of Brahma Kumaris management philosophy. 90 trained facilitators ran programs
through which 25,000 people at the top level of government have passed. In
India, the BKWSU runs a charitable Village Outreach Programme in Mount Abu and
administers the Global Hospital and Research Centre (GHRC), established in 1991
and funded by the J. Wattammull Memorial Trust. In 2004, the Brahma Kumaris
established the G.V. Mody Rural Health Care Centre & Eye Hospital, located at
the base of Mount Abu. The Brahma Kumaris World Spiritual University is an
international non-governmental organization (NGO) in general consultative
status with the Economic and Social Council of the United Nations and UNICEF.
It is associated with the UN Department of Public Information. The Brahma
Kumaris have undertaken two major international projects; ‘The Million
Minutes for Peace’ in 1986 for which they received 7 Peace Messenger Awards
and ‘Global Cooperation for a Better World’ in 1988. The organization now
has hundreds of branches internationally and Use of mediumship. The BKWSU is
believed by its members to have been established by "Shiva Baba" (God-Father
Shiva, described as the Supreme Soul and conceived as the one God of all
religions) through the medium of the group's founder Lekhraj Kripalani. From
the beginning, a number of trance-messengers have received messages and
teachings. According to an account by Sister Denise, who was at that time
Director of the San Francisco Center, a medium has been used to directly
channel a message from a deceased senior Brahma Kumari, Didi Manmohini. In its
early days, children would commonly go into trances, having visions of Krishna
and Vaikunth (Golden Age Heaven) and engaging in ecstatic dances for as long as
7 days. A number of mediumistic female followers known as "Sandeshputris"
(trance messengers) also helped add to the group's spiritual knowledge through
psychic visions. The deceased human founder Lekhraj Kripalani continues to be
channelled through a senior sister (Hirdaya Mohini, referred to familiarly as
Dadi Gulzar) at the organization's Rajasthan headquarters. The combined
presence of the BKWSU's human founder and the spiritual being the BKWSU believe
is God are referred to as "BapDada" (meaning Father and Grandfather) by BKs,
especially in the context of their manifestation via this trance medium,
through which the pair continue to direct the organization to this day.
Pratibha Patil, the UPA-Left candidate and current president of India said on
camera during the Indian presidential election, 2007, that she spoke to the
spirit of the deceased leader of the Brahma Kumaris World Spiritual University
at their headquarters in Mount Abu, Rajasthan. Patil stated that she had
received a mediumistic message indicating great responsibility coming her way
during the last season in which the spirits called "Bapdada" communicated with
the faithful of the Brahma Kumaris sect. She had gone to seek the blessings of
Hirday Mohini, also known as Dadi Gulzar or Dadiji. Legal action against
critics. In 2007, the Brahma Kumaris World Spiritual Organization instituted
legal action which would effectively shut down an independent website critical
of the organization, brahmakumaris.info. It failed to do so.
