Buddha-nature Buddha-nature, Buddha-dhatu or Buddha Principle (Skt: "Buddha-
dhātu", "Tathāgatagarbha"; Jap: "Bussho"), is taught differently in various
Mahayana Buddhism traditions. Broadly speaking Buddha-nature is concerned with
ascertaining what allows sentient beings to become Buddhas. The term, Buddha
nature, is a translation of the Sanskrit coinage, 'Buddha-dhātu', which seems
first to have appeared in the Mahayana Mahaparinirvana Sutra, where it refers
to 'a sacred nature that is the basis for [beings'] becoming buddhas.'
Etymology. Buddha-nature (Classical Chinese: 佛性, modern pinyin "fó xìng")
literally corresponds to the Sanskrit "Buddha-dhātu" - "Buddha Element",
"Buddha-Principle", but seems to have been used most frequently to translate
the Sanskrit ""Tathāgatagarbha"". The Sanskrit term ""tathāgatagarbha"" may
be parsed into "tathāgata" ("the one thus gone", referring to the Buddha) and
"garbha" ("root/embryo"). The latter has the meanings: "embryo", "essence";
whilst the former may be parsed into ""tathā"" ("who has there" and ""āgata""
(semantic field: "come", "arrived") and/or ""gata"" ("gone"). For the various
equivalents of the Sanskrit term ""tathāgatagarbha"" in other languages
(Chinese, Japanese, Vietnamese), see Glossary of Buddhism, "tathagatagarbha"
Development of the concept of Buddha-nature. The idea of Buddha-nature
originated in India, and was further developed in China, due to the different
culture Buddhism had to adapt to. It was the result of an interplay between
various strands of Buddhist thought, on the nature of human consciousness and
the means of awakening. Early Indian Buddhism. Nikayas - Luminous mind. The
Mahāsāṃghika coupled this idea of the luminous mind with the idea of the
mulavijnana, the substratum consciousness that serves as the basis
consciousness. Abhidhamma - The seed of awakening. The Buddha-nature doctrine
may be traced back, in part, to the "abhidharmic" debates over metaphysics.
Those arose among the "Nikāya" schools as they attempted to reconcile various
perceived problems. One problem is how to integrate the doctrine of "anatta"
with the idea of karma and rebirth. The anatta-doctrine stipulates that there
is no underlying self, while the idea of karma and rebirth seems to implicate
an underlying essence that's being reborn. A solution to this problem was the
proposition of the existence of "karmic seeds". The karmic effects of the human
deeds lay dormant, as seeds, until they germinate in this or a next life. Not
an individual self, but these karmic seeds are the base for the generation of a
following life. This concept of "seeds" was espoused by the Sautrāntika in
debate with the Sarvāstivādins over the metaphysical status of phenomena
("dharmas"). It is a precursor to the ālaya-vijñāna, the store-consciousness
of the Yogācāra school which contains all these seeds. Originally ālaya-
vijñāna simply meant defiled consciousness: defiled by the workings of the
five senses and the mind. It was also seen as the mūla-vijñāna, the base-
consciousness or "stream of consciousness" from which awareness and perception
spring. According to Yogacara, awakening is the result of a seed that comes
from "outside" the human psyche, namely by hearing the teaching. Indian
Mahayana. Avatamsaka Sutra. The Avatamsaka Sutra (1st-3rd century CE) was the
next step in the development of the Buddha-nature thought, The Avatamsaka Sutra
does not contain a "singular discussion of the concept", but the idea of "a
universal penetration of sentient beings by the wisdom of the Buddha
("buddhajnana")" was complementary to the concept of the Buddha-womb. All
levels of reality are related and interpenetrated. This is depicted in the
image of Indra's net. This "unity in totality allows every individual entity of
the phenomenal world its uniqueness without attributing an inherent nature to
anything". Tathāgatagarbha Sutras. 'Sentient beings are said to possess a
sacred nature that is the basis for them becoming buddhas ... this buddha-
nature is in fact our true nature ... universal and completely unsullied by
whatever psychological and karmic state an individual may be in.' The
tathagatagarbha-sutras originated in India, but their ideas were more
influential in the development of East Asian Buddhism. The earliest tathagata-
garbha sutra is the Tathāgatagarbha Sūtra. The most important of those sutras
is "The Lion's Roar of Queen Srimala". Another influential sutra, especially in
Chinese thought, is the Mahāparinirvāṇa Sūtra. The Uttaratantra gives a
synthesis of tathagatagarbha-thought, and gives an overview of authoritative
tathagatagarbha sutras. Tathāgatagarbha Sūtra. The Tathāgatagarbha Sūtra
(200-250 CE) is considered... It states that one is already or primordially
awakened. Mahāparinirvāṇa Sūtra. The "Mahāparinirvāṇa Sūtra" (written
2nd century CE) was very influential in the Chinese reception of the Buddhist
teachings. This sutra was understood to postulate an underlying essence, 'the
true Self', as it sometimes terms the Buddha-nature of all beings, though this
sutra is ambivalent. The "Mahāyāna Mahāparinirvāṇa Sūtra" states that
Buddha-nature is everlasting, pure and blissful, and is 'the Self of living
beings'. The self of which the Buddha speaks is said by him to be the
"essential intrinsic being" ("svabhava") or even "life-essence" ("jīvaka") of
each person, and this essential being is none other than the Buddha himself -
"radiantly luminous" and "as indestructible as a diamond". The Buddha-nature is
taught to be an ultimate, conceptually inconceivable, immortal reality. But the
Mahaparinirvana-sutra also contrasts its doctrine of the True Self with that of
the "Astikas". The Astikas were the orthodox teachings of India, embracing the
idea of Atman. The sutra rejects the idea of the self as an indwelling
miniature man, a homunculus: Ratnagotravibhāga (Uttaratantra). The
Uttaratantra (5th century CE) is a sastra in which It gives an overview of
authoritative tathagatagarbha sutras, mentioning the Tathāgatagarbha Sūtra,
the Śrīmālādevī Sūtra, Mahāparinirvāṇa Sūtra, the Angulimaliya
Sutra, the Anunatva-Apurnatva-Nirdesa and the Mahābherīharaka-sūtra.
According to the Ratnagotravibhāga, The Ratnagotravibhāga equates
enlightenment with the "Nirvana-realm" and the Dharmakaya. Lotus Sutra. The
Lotus Sutra (written between 100 BCE and 200 CE) further developed and
popularized the doctrine of the Buddha-nature. It influenced subsequent later
sutras. The tenth chapter emphasizes, in accordance with the Bodhisattva-ideal
of the Mahayana-teachings, that everyone can be liberated. All living beings
can become a buddha, not only monks and nuns, but also laypeople, shravakas,
bodhisattvas, non-human creatures, dragon kings and centaurs. It also details
that all living beings can be a 'teacher of the Dharma'. The twelfth chapter of
the Lotus Sutra details that Buddha nature is universal among all people. Even
the historical Devadatta has the potential to become a buddha. The story of
Devadatta is followed by another story about a dragon princess who is both a
nāga and a female, whom the bodhisattva Mañjuśrī proclaims will reach
enlightenment immediately, in her present form. Trikaya. Mahayana Buddhism
developed new ideas on the appearance of the Buddha. These ideas first appeared
in the Lotus Sutra, which distinguishes between the heavenly Buddha and earthly
Buddhas. The Transformation-body is the earthly manifestation of the Buddha.
The Enjoyment-body is a subtle body, by which the Buddha appears to
bodhisattvas to teach them. Tathagatagarbha and Alayavijnana. The Lankavatara
Sutra "assimilates Tathagata-garbha thought to the Yogacara-viewpoint, and this
assimilation is further developed in [...] The Treatise on the Awakening of
Faith in the Mahayana". Lankavatara-sutra. The Lankavatara Sutra (compiled 350-
400 CE) synthesized the tathagatagarba-doctrine and the alija-vijnana doctrine.
The alija-vijnana is supposed to contain the pure seed, or tathagatagarbha,
from which awakening arises. Chinese Mahayana. When Buddhism was introduced to
China, in the first century CE, Buddhism was understood through comparisons of
its teachings to Chinese terms and ways of thinking. Immortality and emptiness,
central notions in Taoïsm, gave a frame of reference for the understanding of
reincarnation and sunyata. In the Chinese thinking of that time reincarnation
was only possible if there was a soul or essence to reincarnate. Early Chinese
Buddhism therefore assumed that this was also the teaching of the Buddha. In
the 6th century CE it dawned that anatman and sunyata are central Buddhist
teachings, which make the postulation of an eternal self problematic. Another
point of confusion was the Two truths doctrine of Madhyamaka, the relative
truth and the absolute truth. Chinese thinking took this to refer to two
"ontological truths": reality exists of two levels, a relative level and an
absolute level. But in Madhyamaka these are two "epistemological truths": two
different ways to look at reality. Based on their understanding of the Mahayana
Mahaparinirvana Sutra the Chinese supposed that the teaching of the Buddha-
nature was, as stated by that sutra, the final Buddhist teaching, and that
there is an essential truth above sunyata and the two truths. Halfway through
the 6th century CE the "Awakening of Faith in the Mahayana" took shape, in
which a synthesis was offered of Chinese buddhist thinking. In the Awakening of
Faith the 'one mind' has two aspects, namely tathata, suchness, the things as
they are, and samsara, the cycle of birth and death. This sutra was in line
with an essay by emperor Wu of the Liang Dynasty (reign 502-549 CE), in which
he postulated a pure essence, the enlightened mind, trapped in darkness, which
is ignorance. By this ignorance the pure mind is trapped in samsara. This
resembles the tathagata-garba and the idea of the defilement of the luminous
mind. In a commentary on this essay Shen Yue stated that insight into this true
essence is awakened by stopping the thoughts - a point of view which is also
being found in the Platform Sutra of Hui-neng. The joining together of these
different ideas supported the notion of the "Lotus ekayana", the one vehicle:
absolute oneness, all-pervading Buddha-wisdom and as a holistic whole. This
synthesis was a reflection of the unity which was attained in China with the
united Song Dynasty. Interpretation within Buddhist traditions. Indian Mahayana
Buddhism. Prajna-paramita sutras. The prajna-paramita sutras, which emerged
from the first century BCE on, reject the idea of an eternal self or underlying
essence. They emphasize the notion of emptiness. According to Kalupahana they
are an early reaction to the "emergence of absolutist tendencies". Madhyamaka.
It is possible to do a Madhyamaka interpretation of "tathāgatagarbha"
literature. According to Kalupahana, the Madhyamaka of Nagarjuna, but also the
Yogacara of Vasubandhu are a later reaction to the "emergence of absolutist
tendencies". Nagarjuna's work is founded on the prajnaparamita-sutras, which
reach back to the anatman doctrine. Yogacara. Vasubandhu gives an analysis of
the workings of the human mind and consciousness, based on the analysis of the
working of the five skandhas. Vasubandhu's original analysis leaves ample room
for the proposition of a transcendent essence, but was interpreted in an
idealist way by later followers. Tibetan Buddhism. According to the Nyingma and
Sakya schools, tathāgatagarbha is the inseparability of the clarity and
emptiness of one's mind. According to the Gelug school, it is the potential for
sentient beings to awaken since they are empty (i.e. dependently originated).
According to the Jonang school, it refers to the innate qualities of the mind
which expresses itself in terms of omniscience etc. when adventitious
obscurations are removed. Jonangpa. The Jonangpa School of Tibetan Buddhism,
whose foremost historical figure was the Tibetan scholar-monk Dolpopa, sees the
Buddha-nature as the very ground of the Buddha himself, as the "permanent
indwelling of the Buddha in the basal state". Dolpopa comments that certain key
"tathāgatagarbha" sutras indicate this truth. Moreover, the Buddhist tantric
scripture entitled "Chanting the Names of Mañjuśrī ()", repeatedly exalts,
as portrayed by Dolpopa, not the non-Self but the Self, and applies the
following terms to this ultimate reality : 'The Buddha-Self, the beginningless
Self, the solid Self, the diamond Self'. These terms are applied in a manner
which reflects the cataphatic approach to Buddhism, typical of much of
Dolpopa's writings. Dolpopa further expressed the viewpoint that the Buddha-
nature transcends the chain of dependent origination. It is not empty of its
own ultimately real essence, but only of extraneous, transitory and relative
phenomena. The Rimé movement. Ringu Tulku says, In 2006, Khentrul Rinpoche
Jamphal Lodro founded "The Tibetan Buddhist Rimé Institute" in Melbourne,
Australia. It aims to propagate the Rimé view of harmony within all Buddhist
traditions and to introduce the rare Jonang Kalachakra Tantra lineage teachings
in the western world. Chinese Buddhism. Tiantai. Based on the metaphors of the
Lotus Sutra, Tiantai developed the teaching of revealing the Buddha nature in
one's current form. Chán. In Chinese Ch’an Buddhism the Buddha-nature tends
to be seen as the essential nature of all beings. But the Zen tradition also
emphasizes that Buddha-nature is Sunyata, the absence of an independent and
substantial "self".. Alayavijñāna. lso as described in the "Laṅkāvatāra
Sūtra", in Chan/Zen the "tathāgatagarbha" is identical to the
"ālayavijñāna", known prior to awakening as the storehouse-consciousness or
8th consciousness. Chan/Zen masters from Huineng in 7th century China to Hakuin
in 18th century Japan to Hsu Yun in 20th century China, have all taught that
the process of awakening begins with the light of the mind turning around
within the 8th consciousness, so that the "ālayavijñāna", also known as the
"tathāgatagarbha", is transformed into the "bright mirror wisdom". When this
active transformation is complete the other seven consciousnesses are also
transformed. The 7th consciousness of delusive discrimination becomes
transformed into the "equality wisdom". The 6th consciousness of thinking sense
becomes transformed into the "profound observing wisdom", and the 1st to 5th
consciousnesses of the five sensory senses become transformed into the "all-
performing wisdom". Contemporary Chán/Zen-understanding. According to Heng-
Ching Shih, the teaching of the universal Buddha-nature does not intend to
assert the existence of substantial, entity-like self endowed with excellent
features of a Buddha. Rather, Buddha-nature simply represents the potentiality
to be realized in the future. Japanese Buddhism. Nichiren Buddhism. Nichiren
(1222–1282) was a Buddhist monk who taught devotion to the Lotus Sutra as the
exclusive means to attain enlightenment, and the chanting of Nam-Myōhō-Renge-
Kyō as the essential practice of the teaching. Nichiren Buddhism includes
various schools with diverging interpretations of Nichiren's teachings.
Nichiren Buddhism views the Buddha nature as "The inner potential for attaining
Buddhahood", common to all people. The potential for Buddhahood exists in the
whole spectrum of the Ten Worlds of life, and this means that all people,
including evil doers, have Buddha nature, which remains as a dormant
possibility or a theoretical potential in the field of emptiness or non-
substantiality until it is materialized in reality through Buddhist practice.
Modern scholarship. Modern scholarship points to the various possible
interpretations of Buddha Nature as either an essential self, as Sunyata, or as
the "inherent possibility" of awakening. Sunyata. According to Heng-Ching Shih,
the "tathāgatagarbha"/Buddha nature does not represent a substantial self
("ātman"). Rather, it is a positive language expression of emptiness
("śūnyatā"), which emphasizes the potentiality to realize Buddhahood through
Buddhist practices. The intention of the teaching of "tathāgatagarbha"/Buddha
nature is soteriological rather than theoretical. Critical Buddhism. According
to Matsumoto Shiro and Hakamaya Noriaki, essentialist conceptions of Buddha-
nature are at odds with the fundamental Buddhist doctrine of dependent
origination. Sallie B King objects their view. She sees the Buddha-nature as a
metaphor for the potential in all beings to attain Buddhahood, rather than as
an ontological reality. This view of the Buddha-nature as non-Buddhist is
termed Critical Buddhism. Paul Williams has criticised this view, saying that
Critical Buddhism is too narrow in its definition of what constitutes Buddhism.
According to Williams, Multiple meanings. Sutton agrees with this critique on
the narrowness of interpretation. In discussing the inadequacy of modern
scholarship on Buddha-nature, Sutton states, Of these three, Sutton claims that
only the third connotation has any soteriological significance, while the other
two posit Buddha-nature as an ontological reality and essential nature behind
all phenomena.
