Báb Siyyid `Alí Muḥammad Shírází (, ; October 20, 1819 – July 9, 1850)
was the founder of Bábism, and one of three central figures of the Bahá'í
Faith. He was a merchant from Shíráz, Persia, who at the age of twenty-four
(on May 23, 1844) claimed to be the promised Qá'im (or Mahdi). After his
declaration he took the title of Báb (, ) meaning "Gate". He composed hundreds
of letters and books (often termed "tablets") in which he stated his messianic
claims and defined his teachings, which constituted a new "sharí'ah" or
religious law. His movement eventually acquired tens of thousands of
supporters, was opposed by Iran's Shi'a clergy, and was suppressed by the
Iranian government, leading to the persecution and killing of thousands of his
followers, called Bábís. In 1850, at the age of thirty, the Báb was shot by
a firing squad in Tabríz. Bahá'ís claim that the Báb was also the spiritual
return of Elijah and John the Baptist, that he was the "Ushídar-Máh" referred
to in the Zoroastrian scriptures, and that he was the forerunner of their own
religion. Bahá'u'lláh, the founder of the Bahá'í Faith, was a follower of
the Báb and claimed to be the fulfillment of his promise that God would send
another messenger. Life. Early life. Siyyid `Alí Muḥammad Shírází was
born on October 20, 1819, in Shiraz to a middle-class merchant of the city. His
father was Siyyid Muhammad Ridá, and his mother was Fátimih Bagum
(1800–1881), a daughter of a prominent merchant in Shiraz (she later became a
Bahá'í). His father died while he was quite young and the boy was raised by
his maternal uncle, Hájí Mírzá Siyyid `Alí, who was also a merchant. He
claimed to be a descendant from Muhammad through Imam Husayn through both his
parents. When he was in Shiraz his uncle sent him to Maktab (school) and he was
there for six or seven years. Sometime between when he was 15 and 20, he joined
his uncle in the family business, a trading house, and became a merchant in the
city of Bushehr, Iran, near the Persian Gulf. Some of his earlier writings
suggest that he did not enjoy the family business and instead applied himself
to the study of religious literature. A contemporary described him as "very
taciturn, and would never utter a word unless it was absolutely necessary. He
did not even answer our questions. He was constantly absorbed in his own
thoughts, and was preoccupied with repetition of his prayers and verses. He is
described as a handsome man with a thin beard, dressed in clean clothes,
wearing a green shawl and a black turban." An English physician described the
young man by saying: "He was a very mild and delicate-looking man, rather small
in stature and very fair for a Persian, with a melodious soft voice, which
struck me much" Marriage. In 1842 he married Khadíjih-Bagum (1822–1882); he
was 23 and she was 20. She was the daughter of a prominent merchant in
Shíráz. The marriage proved to be a happy one, and they had one child, a boy
named Ahmad who died the year he was born (1843). The pregnancy jeopardized
Khadíjih-Bagum's life, and she never conceived again. The young couple
occupied a modest house in Shíráz along with the Báb's mother. Later,
Khadíjih-Bagum became a Bahá'í. The Shaykhi movement. In the 1790s in
Persia, Shaykh Aḥmad (1753–1826) began a religious movement within Shi'a
Islam. His followers, who became known as Shaykhis, were expecting the imminent
appearance of the Qá'im of the House of Muhammad, also called the Mahdi. After
the death of Shaykh Ahmad, leadership was passed on to Sayyid Kázim of Rasht
(1793–1843). Around 1839–40 the Báb went on pilgrimage to Iraq, and stayed
mostly in and around Karbala. There he is believed to have met the leader of
the Shaykhis, Sayyid Kázim, who showed a high regard for him. He is believed
to have attended some of Siyyid Kazim's lectures; however, this period is
almost entirely undocumented. As of his death in December 1843, Sayyid Kázim
had counselled his followers to leave their homes to seek the Mahdi, who,
according to his prophecies, would soon appear. One of these followers, named
Mullá Husayn, after keeping vigil for forty days in a mosque, travelled to
Shiraz, where he met the Báb. Declaration to Mullá Husayn. Soon after he
arrived in Shiraz, Mullá Husayn came into contact with the Báb. On the night
of May 22, 1844, Mullá Husayn was invited by the Báb to his home; on that
night Mullá Husayn told him that he was searching for the possible successor
to Siyyid Kázim, the Promised One. The Báb told Mullá Husayn privately that
he was Siyyid Kázim's successor and the bearer of divine knowledge. After some
consideration, Mullá Husayn became the first to accept the Báb's claims as
the gateway to Truth and as the initiator of a new prophetic cycle. The Báb
had replied satisfactorily to all of Mullá Husayn's questions and had written
in his presence, with extreme rapidity, a long commentary of Surah of Joseph,
which has come to be known as the Qayyúmu'l-Asmá' and is considered the
Báb's first revealed work. Letters of the Living. Mullá Husayn was the Báb's
first disciple. Within five months, seventeen other disciples of Siyyid
Káẓim had independently recognized the Báb as a Manifestation of God. Among
them was one woman, Fátimih Zarrín Táj Baragháni, a poetess, who later
received the name of Táhirih (the Pure). These 18 disciples were later to be
known as the Letters of the Living and were given the task of spreading the new
faith across Iran and Iraq. The Báb emphasized the spiritual station of these
18 individuals, who, along with himself, made the first "Unity" of his religion
(in Arabic the term "unity" (Wáhid) has a numerical value of 19 using Abjad
numerals). The Báb, in his book the Persian Bayán, gives the metaphorical
identity of the Letters of the Living as the Fourteen Infallibles in Shí'í
Islam (Muhammad, the Twelve Imams, and Fatimah) and the four archangels. In
some ways, they parallel the Twelve Apostles of Christ. Proclamation. In his
early writings, the Báb appears to identify himself as the gate ("báb") to
the Hidden Twelfth Imam, and later he begins explicitly to proclaim his station
as that of the Hidden Imam and a new messenger from God. Rather than being a
discontinued or evolving consciousness, Saiedi states that the works of the
Báb are unitary throughout, and that the gradual disclosure of the Báb's
identity is defined by the principle of unity in diversity throughout reality.
In the Báb's early writings, the exalted identity he was claiming was
unmistakable, but because of the reception of the people, his writings appear
to convey the impression that he is only the gate to the Hidden Twelfth Imam.
To his circle of early believers, the Báb was equivocal about his exact
status, gradually confiding in them that he was not merely a gate to the Hidden
Imam, but the Manifestation of the Hidden Imam and the Qa'im himself. During
his early meetings with Mullá Husayn, the Báb described himself as the Master
and the Promised One; he did not consider himself to be simply Siyyid Kazim's
successor, but claimed a prophetic status, a kind of deputy, delegated not just
by the Hidden Imam but through Divine authority. His early texts such as the
"Commentary on the Surih of Joseph" used Quranic language that implied divine
authority and identified himself effectively with the Imam. When Mullá `Alí
Basṭámí, the second Letter of the Living, was put on trial in Baghdad for
preaching about the Báb, clerics studied the "Commentary on the Surih of
Joseph," recognized in it a claim to divine revelation, and quoted from it
extensively to prove that the author had made a messianic claim. However, in
the early phase of his declaration to the public, the title "báb" was
emphasized as that of the gate leading to the Hidden Imam, as the Báb had told
his early believers not to fully disclose his claims or reveal his name. The
approach of laying claim to a lower position was intended to create a sense of
anticipation for the appearance of the Hidden Imam, as well to avoid
persecution and imprisonment, because a public proclamation of mahdi status
could have brought upon the Báb a swift penalty of death. After a couple of
months, as the Báb observed further acceptance and readiness among his
believers and the public, he gradually shifted his public claim to that of the
Hidden Imam. Then in his final years he publicly announced his station as a
Manifestation of God; in his trial, he boldly proclaimed himself, in the
presence of the Heir to the Throne of Persia and other notables, to be the
Promised One. In the early months of his public declarations, the adoption of a
cautious policy had essentially achieved maximum attention with minimum
controversy. The gradual unfolding of his claims, however, did cause some
confusion, both among the public and for some of his believers. A number of his
early followers had instantly recognized his station as a messenger from God
with divine authority, and this resulted in disagreement within the Bábi
community. Furthermore, even though the Báb had intended to convey his message
with discretion, many of his followers (such as Táhirih) openly declared the
coming of the promised Hidden Imam and Mahdi. Travels and imprisonment. After
the eighteen Letters of the Living had recognized him, the Báb and the
eighteenth Letter of the Living, Quddús, left on a pilgrimage to Mecca and
Medina, the sacred cities of Islam. In Mecca, the Báb wrote to the Sharif of
Mecca, Custodian of the Kaaba, proclaiming his mission. After their pilgrimage,
the Báb and Quddús returned to Bushehr, Iran. After some time, preaching by
the Letters of the Living led to opposition by the Islamic clergy, prompting
the Governor of Shiraz to order the Báb's arrest. The Báb, upon hearing of
the arrest order, left Bushehr for Shiraz in June 1845 and presented himself to
the authorities. He was placed under house arrest at the home of his uncle
until a cholera epidemic broke out in the city in September 1846. The Báb was
released and departed for Isfahan. There, many came to see him at the house of
the imám jum'ih, head of the local clergy, who became sympathetic. After an
informal gathering where the Báb debated the local clergy and displayed his
speed in producing instantaneous verses, his popularity soared. After the death
of the Governor of Isfahan, who had become his supporter, pressure from the
clergy of the province led to the Shah, Mohammad Shah Qajar, ordering the Báb
to Tehran in January 1847. After spending several months in a camp outside
Tehran, and before the Báb could meet the Shah, the Prime Minister sent the
Báb to Tabriz in the northwestern corner of the country, where he was
confined. After forty days in Tabriz, the Báb was then transferred to the
fortress of Máh-Kú in the province of Azarbaijan close to the Turkish border.
During his incarceration there, the Báb began his most important work, the
Persian Bayán, which he never finished. Because of the Báb's growing
popularity in Máh-Kú and the governor of Máh-Kú converting, the prime
minister transferred him to the fortress of Chihríq in April 1848. In that
place as well, the Báb's popularity grew and his jailors relaxed restrictions
on him. It was at this time that Áqa Bálá Big Shíshvání Naqshbandí
painted the portrait of the Báb. Hence the Prime Minister ordered the Báb
back to Tabriz where the government called on religious authorities to put the
Báb on trial for blasphemy and apostasy. Trial. The trial, attended by the
Crown Prince, occurred in July 1848 and involved numerous local clergy. They
questioned the Báb about the nature of his claims, his teachings, and demanded
that he produce miracles to prove his divine authority. They admonished him to
recant his claims. There are nine extant eyewitness reports of the trial, of
which several may originate from an earlier source. Six of the reports are from
Muslim accounts, and portray the Báb in an unfavourable light. There are 62
questions that are found in the nine sources, however eighteen occur in only
one source, fifteen in two, eight in three, five in four, thirteen in five, and
three in six. Not including "yes" and "he did not answer", there are thirty-
five answers, of which ten occur in one source, eight in two, six in three,
three in four, two in five, five in six. Only one answer is found in all nine
eyewitness sources, where the Báb states that "I am that person you have been
awaiting for one thousand years." His claim to Mahdihood was bold and
unequivocal. The trial did not bring a decisive result. Some clergy called for
capital punishment, but the government pressured them to issue a lenient
judgement because the Báb was popular. The government asked medical experts to
declare the Báb insane so that he could not be executed. It is also likely
that the government, to appease the religious clergy, spread rumours that the
Báb had recanted. The Shaykh al-Islam (a very prominent local cleric), the
champion of the anti-Bábí campaign, who was not at the Báb's trial, issued a
conditional death sentence if the Báb was found to be sane. A fatwa was issued
establishing the Báb's apostasy and stated "The repentance of an incorrigible
apostate is not accepted, and the only thing which has caused the postponement
of thy execution is a doubt as to thy sanity of mind." The crown prince's
physician, William Cormick, examined the Báb and complied with the
government's request to find grounds for clemency. The physician's opinion
saved the Báb from execution for a time, but the clergy insisted that he face
corporal punishment instead, so the Báb was bastinadoed (administered twenty
lashes to the bottoms of his feet). The official report states that because of
his harsh beating, the Báb recanted, apologized, and stated that he would not
continue to advance claims of divinity. While various government sources
indicate that the Báb recanted his claim, there is little non-governmental
evidence of their validity. Some theorise that the assertions were made to
embarrass the Báb and undermine his credibility with the public. There exists
an unsigned and undated document that was supposedly written shortly after the
Báb's trial in Tabriz where the Báb recants his claims to a divine station.
But the language of this document is very different from the Báb's usual
style; it could have been prepared by the authorities, but the Báb refused to
sign it. The Báb was finally ordered back to the fortress of Chihríq.
Execution. In mid 1850 a new prime-minister, Amir Kabir, ordered the execution
of the Báb, probably because various Bábí insurrections had been defeated
and the movement's popularity appeared to be waning. The Báb was brought back
to Tabríz from Chihríq, so that he could be shot by a firing squad. The night
before his execution, as he was being conducted to his cell, a young Bábí,
Muḥammad-`Alíy-i-Zunúzí, called Anís, threw himself at the feet of the
Báb and begged to be killed with him. He was immediately arrested and placed
in the same cell as the Báb. On the morning of July 9, 1850, the Báb was
taken to the courtyard of the barracks in which he was being held, where
thousands of people had gathered to watch his execution. The Báb and Anís
were suspended on a wall and a large firing squad of Christian soldiers
prepared to shoot. Numerous eye-witness reports, including those of Western
diplomats, recount the result. The order was given to fire and the barracks
square filled with musket smoke. When it cleared the Báb was no longer in the
courtyard and his companion stood there unharmed; the bullets apparently had
not harmed either man, but had cut the rope suspending them from the wall.
There was a great commotion, many in the crowd believing the Báb had ascended
to heaven or simply disappeared. But the soldiers subsequently found the Báb
in another part of the barracks, completely unharmed, giving his final
instructions to his secretary. He and Anís were tied up for execution a second
time, a second firing squad of Muslim soldiers was ranged in front of them, and
a second order to fire was given. This time, the Báb and his companion were
killed. In the Bábí–Bahá'í tradition, the failure of the first firing
squad to kill the Báb is believed to have been a miracle. Their remains were
dumped outside the gates of the town to be eaten by animals. The remains,
however, were clandestinely rescued by a handful of Bábis and were hidden.
Over time the remains were secretly transported by way of Isfahan, Kirmanshah,
Baghdad and Damascus, to Beirut and thence by sea to Acre on the plain below
Mount Carmel in 1899. On March 21, 1909, the remains were then interred in a
special tomb, erected for this purpose by `Abdu'l-Bahá, on Mount Carmel in
Haifa, Israel. The Bahá'í World Centre is located close to this site and
visitors are welcome to tour the gardens. Succession. In most of his prominent
writings, The Báb alluded to a Promised One, most commonly referred to as "man
yazhiruhu'lláh", "Him Whom God shall make manifest", and that he himself was
"but a ring upon the hand of Him Whom God shall make manifest." Within 20 years
of the Báb's death, over 25 people claimed to be the Promised One, most
significantly Bahá'u'lláh. Before the Báb's death, he sent a letter to
Mírzá Yahyá, titled Subh-i-Azal, which is considered to be his will and
testament. The letter is recognized as appointing Subh-i-Azal to be the leader
of the Bábí community after the death of the Báb. He is also ordered to obey
the Promised One when he appears. At the time Subh-i-Azal was still a teenager,
had never demonstrated leadership in the Bábí movement, and was still living
in the house of his older brother, Bahá'u'lláh. All of this lends credence to
the Bahá'í claim that the Báb appointed Subh-i-Azal the head of the Bábí
Faith so as to divert attention away from Bahá'u'lláh, while allowing Bábís
to visit Bahá'u'lláh and consult with him freely, and allowing Bahá'u'lláh
to write to Bábís easily and freely. Furthermore, there is a long history in
Shí`ism of hidden leaders, with their deputies wielding the true power (the
four bábs themselves are the first examples of this, as is `Alí-Muhammad's
choice of the title "the Báb"). Bahá'u'lláh claimed that in 1852, while a
prisoner in Tehran, he was visited by a "Maid of Heaven", which symbolically
marked the beginning of his mission as a Messenger of God. Ten years later in
Baghdad, he made his first public declaration and eventually was recognized by
the vast majority of Bábís as "He Whom God shall make manifest". His
followers began calling themselves Bahá'ís. Subh-i-Azal continued to live
with or close to Bahá'u'lláh throughout the latter's exiles from Iran to
Baghdad and then to Istanbul and Edirne, even though Bahá'u'lláh's claim to
be a Manifestation of God in 1863 theoretically rendered moot Subh-i-Azal's
authority as the head of the Bábí community. In September 1867, in Edirne,
the rival claims to authority came to a head. Subh-i-Azal challenged
Bahá'u'lláh to a test of the divine will in a local mosque in Edirne
(Adrianople), such that "God would strike down the impostor". Bahá'u'lláh
agreed and went to the Sultan Selim Mosque at the appointed time, but Mirza
Yahya failed to show up. Subh-i-Azal's followers became known as Azalis or
Azali Bábís. For the Bábís who did not recognize Bahá'u'lláh, Subh-i-Azal
remained their leader until his death in 1912. Whether or not he had a
successor is disputed. Bahá'í sources report that 11 of the 18 "witnesses"
appointed by Subh-i-Azal to oversee the Bábí community became Bahá'ís, as
well as his son. The man allegedly appointed by Subh-i-Azal to succeed him,
Hadíy-i-Dawlat-Abádí, later publicly recanted his faith in the Báb and
Subh-i-Azal. Ultimately, Bahá'u'llah emerged more successful and nearly all of
the Báb's followers abandoned Subh-i-Azal and became Bahá'ís. Today
Bahá'ís have several million followers, while estimates of the number of
Azalís are generally around one thousand, isolated in Iran. Teachings. The
Báb's teachings can be grouped into three broad stages which each have a
dominant thematic focus. His earliest teachings are primarily defined by his
interpretation of the Qur'an and other Islamic traditions. While this
interpretive mode continues throughout all three stages of his teachings, a
shift takes place where his emphasis moves to philosophical elucidation and
finally to legislative pronouncements. In the second philosophical stage, the
Báb gives an explanation of the metaphysics of being and creation, and in the
third legislative stage his mystical and historical principles are explicitly
united. An analysis of the Báb's writings throughout the three stages shows
that all of his teachings were animated by a common principle that had multiple
dimensions and forms. Writings. Most of the writings of the Báb have been
lost. The Báb himself stated they exceeded five hundred thousand verses in
length; the Qur'an, in contrast, is 6300 verses in length. If one assumes 25
verses per page, that would equal 20,000 pages of text. Nabíl-i-Zarandí, in
"The Dawn-breakers", mentions nine complete commentaries on the Qur'an,
revealed during the Báb's imprisonment at Máh-Kú, which have been lost
without a trace. Establishing the true text of the works that are still extant,
as already noted, is not always easy, and some texts will require considerable
work. Others, however, are in good shape; several of the Báb's major works are
available in the handwriting of his trusted secretaries. Most works were
revealed in response to specific questions by Bábís. This is not unusual; the
genre of the letter has been a venerable medium for composing authoritative
texts as far back as the Apostle Paul. Three quarters of the chapters of the
New Testament are letters, were composed to imitate letters, or contain letters
within them. Sometimes the Báb revealed works very rapidly by chanting them in
the presence of a secretary and eye-witnesses. The Archives Department at the
Bahá'í World Centre currently holds about 190 Tablets of the Báb. Excerpts
from several principal works have been published in the only English-language
compilation of the Báb's writings: "Selections from the Writings of the Báb".
Denis MacEoin, in his "Sources for Early Bābī Doctrine and History", gives a
description of many works; much of the following summary is derived from that
source. In addition to major works, the Báb revealed numerous letters to his
wife and followers, many prayers for various purposes, numerous commentaries on
verses or chapters of the Qur'an, and many "khutbihs" or sermons (most of which
were never delivered). Many of these have been lost; others have survived in
compilations. The Báb has been criticized for his inconsistent use of correct
and incorrect Arabic grammar in his religious works, though in his Arabic
letters made very few mistakes. A reason for this inconsistency could be to
distinguish those who could not see past the outer form of the words from those
that could understand the deeper meaning of his message. Writings before his
declaration. Todd Lawson noted this in his doctoral dissertation about the
"Tafsír-i-súrih-i-baqarih" or "Commentary on the Surih of the Cow", a work
the Báb wrote on a chapter of the Qur'an. This Qur'an commentary was started
by the Báb in November or December 1843, some six months before declaring his
mission. The first half was completed by February or March 1844; the second
half was revealed after the Báb's declaration. It is the only work of the
Báb's revealed before his declaration that has survived intact. It also sheds
light on the Báb's attitude toward Shí`í beliefs. His wife also refers to
important episodes before his declaration. Bushehr and Shiraz, March 1845 –
September 1846. The Báb was in Bushehr March through June 1845, then in
Shiraz. Máh-Kú, late summer 1847 – May 1848. The Báb left Isfahán in
March 1847, sojourned outside Tehran several months, then was sent to a
fortress at Máh-Kú, close to the Turkish border. It witnessed the composition
of some of the Báb's most important works.
