Calendar of saints The calendar of saints is a traditional Christian method of
organizing a liturgical year by associating each day with one or more saints
and referring to the feast day of said saint. The system arose from the early
Christian custom of annual commemoration of martyrs on the dates of their
deaths, or birth into heaven, and is thus referred to in Latin as dies natalis
(""day of birth""). In the Eastern Orthodox Church, it is called a
"Menologion". Menologion may also refer to a set of icons on which saints are
depicted along the order of dates of their feasts, often made in two panels.
History. As the number of recognized saints increased during Late Antiquity and
the first half of the Middle Ages, eventually every day of the year had at
least one saint who was commemorated on that date. To deal with this increase,
some saints were moved to alternate days in some traditions or completely
removed, with the result that some saints have different feast days in
different calendars. For example, Ss. Perpetua and Felicity died on 7 March,
but this date was later assigned to St. Thomas Aquinas, allowing them only a
commemoration (see Tridentine Calendar), so in 1908 they were moved one day
earlier. When the 1969 reform of the Catholic calendar moved him to 28 January,
they were moved back to 7 March (see General Roman Calendar). Both days can
thus be said to be their feast day, in different traditions. The Roman Catholic
calendars of saints in their various forms, which list those saints celebrated
in the entire church, contains only a selection of the saints for each of its
days. A fuller list is found in the Roman Martyrology, and some of the saints
there may be celebrated locally. The earliest feast days of saints were those
of martyrs, venerated as having shown for Christ the greatest form of love, in
accordance with the teaching: "Greater love has no one than this, that someone
lay down his life for his friends." Saint Martin of Tours is said to be the
first or at least one of the first non-martyrs to be venerated as a saint. The
title "confessor" was used for such saints, who had confessed their faith in
Christ by their lives rather than by their deaths. Martyrs are regarded as
dying in the service of the Lord, and confessors are people who died natural
deaths. A broader range of titles was used later, such as: Virgin, Pastor,
Bishop, Monk, Priest, Founder, Abbot, Apostle, Doctor of the Church. The
Tridentine Missal has common formulas for Masses of Martyrs, Confessors who
were bishops, Doctors of the Church, Confessors who were not Bishops, Abbots,
Virgins, Non-Virgins, Dedication of Churches, and Feast Days of the Blessed
Virgin Mary. Pope Pius XII added a common formula for Popes. The 1962 Roman
Missal of Pope John XXIII omitted the common of Apostles, assigning a proper
Mass to every feast day of an Apostle. The present Roman Missal has common
formulas for the Dedication of Churches, the Blessed Virgin Mary, Martyrs (with
special formulas for missionary martyrs and virgin martyrs), Pastors
(subdivided into bishops, generic pastors, founders of churches, and
missionaries), Doctors of the Church, Virgins, and (generic) Saints (with
special formulas for abbots, monks, nuns, religious, those noted for works of
mercy, educators, and women saints). This calendar system, when combined with
major church festivals and movable and immovable feasts, constructs a very
human and personalised yet often localized way of organizing the year and
identifying dates. Some Christians continue the tradition of dating by saints'
days: their works may appear "dated" as "The Feast of Saint Martin". Poets such
as John Keats commemorate the importance of "The Eve of Saint Agnes". As
different denominations of Christianity developed, differing lists of saints
began as the same individual may be considered (as an extreme) a saint or
doctor by one denomination and a heretic by another, as in the case of
Nestorius. As the ecumenical movement has sought to converge each
denominational lectionary into a unified Revised Common Lectionary, Dr. Philip
Pfatteicher sought to unify different saints calendars (among Protestants) by
authoring the "New Book of Festivals and Commemorations: A Proposed Common
Calendar of Saints", August 1, 2008. Ranking of feast days. Feast days are
ranked in accordance with their importance. In what is now the ordinary form of
the Roman Rite, feast days are ranked (in descending order of importance) as
solemnities, feasts or memorials (obligatory or optional). The 1962 version,
whose use is authorized by the motu proprio "Summorum Pontificum" as an
extraordinary form of the Roman Rite, divides liturgical days into I, II, III,
and IV class days, as decreed by Pope John XXIII in 1960. Those who use even
earlier forms of the Roman Rite rank feast days as Doubles (of three or four
kinds), Semidoubles, and Simples. See Ranking of liturgical days in the Roman
Rite. In the Eastern Orthodox Church the ranking of feasts varies from church
to church. In the Russian Orthodox Church they are: Great Feasts, middle, and
minor feasts. Each portion of such feasts may also be called feasts as follows:
All-Night Vigils, Polyeleos, Great Doxology, Sextuple ("sixfold", having six
stichera at Vespers and six troparia at the Canon of Matins). There are also
distinctions between Simple feasts and Double (i.e., two simple feasts
celebrated together). In Double Feasts the order of hymns and readings for each
feast are rigidly instructed in Typikon, the liturgy book. In the Church of
England, there are Principal Feasts and Principal Holy Days, Festivals, Lesser
Festivals, and Commemorations.
