Cambridge Declaration The Cambridge Declaration is a statement of faith written
in 1996 by the Alliance of Confessing Evangelicals, a group of Reformed and
Lutheran Evangelicals who were concerned with the state of the Evangelical
movement in America, and throughout the world. Beginnings. "No Place for
Truth". Both the conference and the eventual declaration came about as a result
of David F. Wells' 1993 book "No Place for Truth or Whatever Happened to
Evangelical Theology?" (ISBN 0-8028-0747-X). This book was highly critical of
the Evangelical church in America for abandoning its historical and theological
roots, and instead embracing the philosophies and pragmatism of the world.
While not a best seller, the book was critically acclaimed by a number of
important Evangelical leaders. In 1994 a number of these leaders formed the
"Alliance of Confessing Evangelicals". Since much of Wells' thesis stemmed from
the modern church's abandonment of historical confessions of faith (such as The
Westminster Confession and the 1689 Baptist Confession of Faith), the Alliance
was based upon Evangelicals who not only adhered to these Reformed confessions
of faith, but were able to direct their ministries accordingly. The two
principal players involved in spearheading the conference from which the
Cambridge Declaration emerged were James Montgomery Boice of Evangelical
Ministries (Philadelphia, PA), and Dr. Michael S. Horton of Christians United
for Reformation (Anaheim, CA). Like Wells, Horton and Boice were both strong
critics of the shallow nature of contemporary Evangelicalism, and had published
a book to that effect "Power Religion: The Selling Out of the Evangelical
Church" (1993) edited by Horton, and featuring Boice as a contributing author.
Later in 1996, these men joined forces by merging their respective
organizations into The Alliance of Confessing Evangelicals. Conference in
Cambridge. Eventually a conference was held between April 17-20 1996 in the
town of Cambridge, Massachusetts. The choice of location was deliberate, since
Cambridge was the seat of Harvard and thus the center of ecclesiastical and
intellectual life in 17th century America. Cambridge was also the location of
The Cambridge Platform, a declaration of church polity made in 1648 by New
England Puritans. Approximately 100 delegates from around the world gathered
for the four day conference, with the explicit intention of creating an
official declaration that would be released once the conference concluded. The
conference was also important because it included the presence of evangelical
Lutherans, who had traditionally kept themselves apart from mainline
Evangelical and Reformed movements. Throughout the conference, a document was
drafted and suggestions / changes were solicited from the various delegates.
The two principal authors of the Cambridge Declaration, however, were Dr. David
F. Wells, and Dr. Michael S. Horton. The various papers delivered at the
conference were later edited and published in the book Here We Stand (Baker
Books), edited by James Boice and Ben Sasse (republished in 2004). Content of
the Declaration. 1. Sola Scriptura: The Erosion Of Authority 2. Solus Christus:
The Erosion Of Christ-Centered Faith 3. Sola Gratia: The Erosion Of The Gospel
4. Sola Fide: The Erosion Of The Chief Article 5. Soli Deo Gloria: The Erosion
Of God-Centered Worship 2007 Council members. Alliance Council Members
