Canadian Unitarian Council The Canadian Unitarian Council (CUC) is the national
body for Unitarian Universalists in Canada. The CUC is a member of the
International Council of Unitarians and Universalists. Principles and sources.
""The Principles and Sources of Our Religious Faith"" from the Canadian
Unitarian Council Sources. Grateful for the religious pluralism which enriches
and ennobles our faith, we are inspired to deepen our understanding and expand
our vision. As free congregations we enter into this covenant, promising to one
another our mutual trust and support. The current Principles and Sources are
based on the UUA's Principles and Purposes. The CUC had a task force whose
mandate was to consider revising them. Organization. The CUC is divided into
four regions: "BC" (British Columbia), "Western" (Alberta to Thunder Bay),
"Central" (between Thunder Bay and Kingston), and "Eastern" (Kingston, Ottawa
and everything east of that). However, for Young Religious Unitarian
Universalists (YRUU) programming in Canada, the "Central" and "Eastern" regions
are combined to form a youth region known as "QuOM" (Quebec, Ontario and the
Maritimes), giving the youth only three regions for their activities. Member
congregations are served by volunteer Service Consultants, Congregational
Networkers, and a series of other committees. There are two directors of
regional services, one for the Western two regions, and one for the Eastern two
regions. The Director of Lifespan Learning oversees development of religious
education programming. Founding. The formation of the CUC was a long-held
dream. Proposals to form a Canadian organization were made by G.C. Holland,
minister of the Ottawa church, in 1898, Samuel A. Eliot, President of the
American Unitarian Association in 1908, Charles Huntingdon Pennoyer, minister
of the Halifax Universalist Church in 1909, and Horace Westwood, a Unitarian
minister in Winnipeg in 1913. In 1946 The Commission on the Work of the
Churches of the British Unitarians recommended that ‚Äúthe Assembly should
interest itself in the formation of a Canadian Unitarian Association which many
Unitarians there believe to be necessary.‚Äù The first native seeds were
planted with the publication of The Canadian Unitarian in Ottawa from 1940 to
1946, a small newsletter distributed with the newsletters of Canadian churches.
After the Second World War, the growth of the Unitarians in Canada began to
show the strength which would make some Canadian organization feasible, if not
imperative. Unitarians, most notably Toronto ministers, generated considerable
media attention from the centre of Canada‚Äôs English-language media. The
Unitarian Service Committee of Canada, founded in 1945, was receiving
considerable attention both in city newspapers and on television, so much so
that the word ‚ÄúUnitarian‚Äù became a household world, though its meaning was
not that widely known. In 1946 there were six Icelandic Unitarian churches with
272 members, and five English-speaking churches with 1,049 members. The
Universalists had five churches with 459 members. In 1961 there were three
Universalist churches with 68 members, and three Icelandic and eleven English-
speaking Unitarian churches with 3,476 members, and in addition 22 Unitarian
fellowships with 773 members. The Universalists almost disappeared in Canada,
outside of a small rural church in southwest Ontario, and were probably saved
in the other two surviving locations by influx of Canadian Unitarians. By
contrast, Unitarian membership more than tripled in the same fifteen years. In
1953 there were six Unitarian ministers serving congregations in Canada. Ten
years later there were five ministers in the Toronto area alone. In early
April, 1961, a meeting with delegates from ten congregations was held in
Montreal. The plan was approved 8 to 1, with the understanding that ‚ÄúThe
Council will function within the framework of the continental Unitarian
Universalist Association.‚Äù Relationship to the Unitarian Universalist
Association. Up until July 2002, almost all member congregations of the CUC
were also members of the Unitarian Universalist Association (UUA). In the past,
most services to CUC member congregations were provided by the UUA. However,
with an agreement in 2001 between the UUA and CUC, from July 2002 onwards most
services have been provided by the CUC to its own member congregations. The
Canadian Unitarian Universalist youth of the day disapproved of this change in
relationship. It is quite evident in the words of this statement, which was
adopted by the attendees of the 2001 youth conference held at the Unitarian
Church of Montreal: http://cuc.ca/wp-content/uploads/2011/10/canu_july2001.pdf
Debating the autonomy resolution¬ ‚Äî Youth are worried The UUA continues to
provide services relating to ministerial settlement as well as a very small
amount of the youth (14‚Äì20) and young adult (18‚Äì35) programming and
services. Unitarians and Universalists. While the name of the organization is
the Canadian Unitarian Council, the CUC includes congregations with Unitarian,
Universalist, Unitarian Universalist and Universalist Unitarian in their names.
Changing the name of the CUC has occasionally been debated, but there have been
no successful motions. To recognize the diversity, the abbreviation is often
written as U*U (and playfully read as "You star, you"). Note, not all CUC
members like this playful reading and so when these people write the
abbreviation they leave out the star(*), just writing UU instead.
