Candomblé Candomblé () is an African-originated or Afro-Brazilian religion,
practiced mainly in Brazil by the "povo do santo" (saint people). It originated
in the cities of Salvador, the capital of Bahia and Cachoeira, at the time one
of the main commercial crossroads for the distribution of products and slave
trade to other parts of Bahia state in Brazil. Although Candomblé is practiced
primarily in Brazil, it is also practiced in other countries in the Americas,
including Uruguay, Argentina, Venezuela, Colombia, Panama; and in Europe in
Germany, Italy, Portugal and Spain. The religion is based in the anima (soul)
of the natural environment, and is therefore a kind of Animism. It was
developed in Brazil with the knowledge of African Priests that were enslaved
and brought to Brazil, together with their mythology, their culture and
language, between 1549 and 1888. The rituals involve the possession of the
initiated by Orishas, offerings and sacrifices of the mineral, vegetable and
animal kingdom, healing, dancing/trance,and percussion. Candomblé draws
inspiration from a variety of people of the African Diaspora, but it mainly
features aspects of Yoruba orisha veneration. Overview. In many parts of Latin
America, Orishás are now conflated with Roman Catholic saints. This religion,
like many African religions, is an oral tradition and therefore has not been
put into text throughout the years. Only recently have scholars and people of
this religion begun to write down their practices. The name Batuque is also
used, especially before the 19th century when "Candomblé" became more common.
Both words are believed to derive from a Bantu-family language, mainly that of
(Kongo Kingdom). Candomblé may be called Macumba in some regions, notably Rio
de Janeiro and São Paulo, although Macumba has a distinct set of practices
more akin to European witchcraft. Candomblé can also be distinguished from
Umbanda, a religion founded in the early 20th century by combining African
elements with Kardecism; and from similar African-derived religions such as
Quimbanda, Haitian Vodou, Cuban Santería, and Obeah, which developed
independently of Candomblé and are virtually unknown in Brazil. There are 2
million Candombles worldwide [http://www.bbc.co.uk/religion/religions/
candomble/]. Nations. Brazilian slaves came from a number of African ethnic
groups, including Igbo, Yoruba, Ewe, Fon, and Bantu. Slave handlers classified
them by the shore of embarkment, so the relation to their actual ethnicity may
be accurate or not. As the religion developed semi-independently in different
regions of the country, among different ethnic groups, it evolved into several
"sects" or "nations" ("nações"), distinguished chiefly by the set of
worshiped deities, as well as the music and language used in the rituals. The
division into nations was also influenced by the religious and beneficent
brotherhoods ("irmandades") of Brazilian slaves organized by the Catholic
Church in the 18th and 19th centuries. These fraternities, organized along
ethnic lines to allow preaching in the slaves' native languages, provided a
legitimate cover for slave reunions, and ultimately may have aided the
establishment of Candomblé. Beliefs. These deities were created by a supreme
God: Olodumare, Olorun etc. of the Yoruba, Zambi or Zambiapongo of the Bantu,
and Nana Buluku of the Fon. On the other hand, deities from one nation may be
acculturated as "guests" in houses and ceremonies of another nation, besides
those of the latter. Some nations assign new names to guest spirits, while some
retain the names used in the nation of origin. Syncretism. There is also an
Islamic-linked sect within Candomblé which was more common during the slave
days in Brazil. Slaves coming from West Africa had been acculturated with
Muslim traditions. These Malês set aside Fridays as the day to worship deities
as do the Muslims for prayer and meditation. Malês were the instigators of
many slave revolts in Brazil leading in all white with amulets and skull caps
as in traditional Islam. In this regard, it is worth noting that some
Candomblé rites have also incorporated local Native American gods — which,
to the Church, were just as pagan as the Orishás — because they were seen as
the "Orishas of the land". Finally, one should keep in mind that many (if not
most) practitioners of Candomblé through the times had not only African roots
but European ones as well. Although syncretism still seems to be prevalent, in
recent years the lessening of religious and racial prejudices has given rise to
a "traditionalist" movement in Candomblé, that rejects the Christian elements
and seeks to recreate a "pure" cult based exclusively in Africa. Rituals. The
Candomblé ritual has two parts: the "preparation", attended only by priests
and initiates, which may start a week in advance; and a festive public "mass"
and banquet that starts in the late evening and ends around midnight. In the
first part, initiates and aides wash and iron the costumes for the ceremony,
and decorate the house with paper flags and festoons, in the colors favored by
the Orixas that are to be honored on that occasion. They also prepare food for
the banquet. Some domestic animals are slaughtered; some parts reserved for
sacrifice, the rest is prepared for the banquet. On the day of the ceremony,
starting in the early morning, cowrie-shell divinations ("jogo de búzios") are
performed, and sacrifices are offered to the desired Orixás, and to the
messenger spirit (Exú in Ketu). In the public part of the ceremony, "saint-
children" (mediunic priests) invoke and "incorporate" Orixás, falling into a
trance-like state. After having fallen into trance, the priest-spirits perform
dances symbolic of the Orixá's attributes, while the "babalorixá" or "father
of saint" (leading male priest) leads songs that celebrate the spirit's deeds.
The ceremony ends with a banquet. Candomblé music, an essential part of the
ritual, derives from African music and has had a strong influence in other
popular (non-religious) Brazilian music styles. The word "batuque", for
instance, has entered the Brazilian vernacular as a synonym of "rhythmic
percussion music". Temples and priesthood. Candomblé temples are called
"houses" ("casas"), "plantations" ("roças"), or " yards" ("terreiros"). Most
Candomblé houses are small, independently owned and managed by the respective
higher priests (female mãe-de-santo or male pai-de-santo). A few of the older
and larger houses have a more institutional character and more formal
hierarchy. There is no central administration. Inside the place of worship are
the altars to the Orixás, or "Pejis". Candomblé priesthood is organized into
symbolic "families", whose members are not necessarily relatives in the common
sense. Each "family" owns and manages one "house". In most Candomblé houses,
especially the larger ones, the head of the "family" is always a woman, the
mãe-de-santo or ialorixá ("mother-of-saint"), seconded by the pai-de-santo or
babalorixá ("father-of-saint"). The priests and priestesses may also be known
as babalaos (interpreters of búzios), babas, babaloshas and candomblezeiros.
Some houses have a more flexible hierarchy which allows the male "pai-de-santo"
to be the head priest. Often during the slave period, the women became the
diviners and healers which was not part of African tradition; however, the male
slaves were constantly working and did not have the time to take care of daily
instances. Or, nursing the children, the women were in the capacity of teaching
the knowledge of their old religions to the newer generations. Admission to the
priesthood and progression in the hierarchy is conditioned to approval by the
Orixás, possession of the necessary qualities, learning the necessary
knowledge, and performance of lengthy initiation rites, which last seven years
or more. There are generally two types of priesthood in the different nations
of Candomble, and they are made up of those who fall in trance by the Orixá
(iyawo) and those who do not (Oga – male/Ekeji – female). It is important
not to confuse the meaning and usage of the Yoruba term "iyawò" (bride in
Yoruba) with other African derived religions that use the same term with
different meanings. The seclusion period for the initiation of an iyawo lasts
generally 21 days in the Ketu nation and varies depending on the nation. The
iyawo's role in the religion is assigned by a divination made by her/his
babalorixá/ialorixá; one function that an iyawo can be assigned for is to
take care of neophytes as they in their initiatic seclusion period, becoming an
expert in all the Orisa foods, becoming an iya or babalorisa themselves, or
knowing all ritual songs, etc... The iyawos follow a 7 years period of
apprenticeship within which they offer periodical sacrifices in order to
reinforce their initiatic links in the form of the so-called obligations of 1,
3 and 7 years. At the 7th year, the iyawos earn their title and can get an
honorific title or religious post ("oye" in Yoruba). Once the iyawo has
accomplished their 7th year cycle obligation, they become elders ("egbon" in
Yoruba, "egbomi" in Brazil, which means "my elder") within their religious
family. The other priesthood is reserved for those who do not fall in trance.
Ogas and Ekejis do not endure the same path to eldership as do iyawos; they are
regarded as elders immediately after their initiation. Their role is to help
the baba/ialorixá in different specific ritual tasks like drumming, singing,
cooking, taking care of the orixá shrines and when he/she comes down in
possession trance, etc... Ogas and Ekejis usually do not go on to become baba/
ialorixá, nor do they open their own temples or have "filhos de santo" (they
do not initiate others). Priesthood Initiation. In Brazil: Ifá, Egungun,
Orisha (Orixa), Vodun and Nkisi, are separated by type of priesthood
initiation.
