Canon (priest) A canon (from the Latin "canonicus", itself derived from the
Greek , "kanonikós", "relating to a rule", "regulary") is a priest or minister
who is a member of certain bodies of the Christian clergy subject to an
ecclesiastical rule (canon). Originally, a canon was a cleric living with
others in a clergyhouse or, later, in one of the houses within the precinct of
or close to a cathedral and ordering his life according to the orders or rules
of the church. This way of life grew common (and is first documented) in the
eighth century. In the eleventh century, some churches required clergy thus
living together to adopt the rule first proposed by Saint Augustine that they
renounce private wealth. Those who embraced this change were known as
Augustinians or Canons Regular, whilst those who did not were known as secular
canons. Secular canons. In the Roman Catholic Church, the members of the
chapter of a cathedral (cathedral chapter) or of a collegiate church (so called
after their chapter) are canons. Depending on the title of the church, several
languages use specific titles, e.g., in German "Domherr or Domkapitular" in a
"Dom" (i.e., cathedral), "Stiftsherr" in a prelature that has the status of a
"Stift" (notably under a prince of the Church). One of the functions of the
cathedral chapter in the Roman Catholic Church was to elect a Vicar Capitular
(now named a Diocesan Administrator) to serve during a sede vacante period of
the diocese. Since the 1983 revision of the Code of Canon Law, this
responsibility belongs to the college of consultors, unless the national
Bishops Conference decides that the functions that canon law ascribes to the
college of consultors, including this one, are to be entrusted to the cathedral
chapter. All canons of the Church of England have been secular since the
Reformation, although an individual canon may himself also be a member of a
religious order. Mostly, however, they are ordained, that is, priests or
members of the clergy. Today, the system of canons is retained almost
exclusively in connection with cathedral churches. A canon is a member of the
chapter of (for the most part) priests, headed by a dean, which is responsible
for administering a cathedral or certain other churches that are styled
collegiate churches. The dean and chapter are the formal body which has legal
responsibility for the cathedral and for electing the (arch)bishop. Honorary
canons. The title of Canon is still given in many dioceses to senior parish
priests (including but not limited to some Area Deans, Rural Deans and their
lieutenants and similar) as a largely honorary title. It is usually awarded in
recognition of long and dedicated service to the diocese. Honorary canons are
members of the chapter in name but are non-residential and receive no
emoluments. They are entitled to call themselves canon and have a role in the
administration of the cathedral. Generally speaking, canons in the Anglican
Communion are of this sort, and thus are equivalent to a monsignor in the
Catholic Church, often wearing the violet or violet-trimmed cassock which is
associated with that rank. Honorary canons within the Catholic Church have no
longer been nominated after the Second Vatican Council, although the French
president, currently François Hollande, is ex officio the "first and only
honorary canon" of the Basilica of St John Lateran, a title inherited from the
Kings of France, who have held it since Henry IV of France. Also, priests (and
honorary chaplains)of the Sovereign Military Order of Malta and the Equestrian
Order of the Holy Sepulchre are, in fact, honorary canons of these respective
Orders and have the right to the honorific title of "Canon" and "Monsignor" in
addition to the choir dress of a canon, which includes the mozetta (black with
purple piping for Malta and white with a red Jerusalem cross for Holy
Sepulchre.) Lay canons. In addition to canons who are clerks in holy orders,
cathedrals in the Anglican communion may also appoint lay persons as canons.
The rank of ""lay canon"" is especially conferred upon diocesan chancellors
(the senior legal officer of the diocese, who is usually, though not
exclusively, a lay person). Since the reign of King Henry IV, the heads of
state of France have been granted by the pope the title of sole honorary canon
of Saint John Lateran. The proto-canon of the Basilica of St. Mary Major is
still the King of Spain. It has traditionally been said that the King of
England (now of the United Kingdom) is a canon or prebendary of St David’s
Cathedral, Wales. However, this is based on a misconception. The canonry of St
Mary’s College, St David’s became the property of the Crown on the
dissolution of the monasteries. The King was never a canon of St David’s,
even as a layman. See The Thirty-Nine Articles of Religion (1562) Article 37.
Canon-Professors at Oxford §2 of The Church of England (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Measure 1995 was passed for the express purpose of enabling Christ
Church, Oxford, to appoint not more than two lay canons. One of the motivations
for this provision was the fact that, under the Ecclesiastical Commissioners
Act 1840 (§6), the position of Regius Professor of Ecclesiastical History in
the University of Oxford was annexed to a Residentiary Canonry of the
cathedral, meaning that the Regius professorship could be held only by an
Anglican priest. Following the death of Peter Hinchliff in 1995 the Regius
professorship was held by Henry Mayr-Harting, a Roman Catholic layman, from
1997 until 2003, and was taken up by another lay person, Sarah Foot, in
Michaelmas Term 2007. Three other Statutory Professorships, the Regius
Professorship of Divinity, Lady Margaret Professorship of Divinity, and Regius
Professorship of Moral and Pastoral Theology, are annexed to canonries of
Christ Church and must be held by Anglican priests. Minor canons. Minor canons
are those clergy who are members of the cathedral's establishment and take part
in the daily services but are not part of the formal Chapter. These are
generally more junior clergy, who in a parish church would be serving a curacy.
Canons regular. Canons regular are the members of certain religious orders in
the Roman Catholic Church (not to be confused with clerics regular), composed
of priests and some choir canons who live in community, together in the past
with lay brothers. There are a variety of congregations of canons, some of whom
are part of the Confederation of Canons Regular of St. Augustine. Many bishops
endeavoured to imitate St. Augustine and St. Eusebius, and to live a common
life with the clergy of their church. Rules taken from the sacred canons were
even drawn up for their use, of which the most celebrated is that of St.
Chrodegang, Bishop of Metz (766). In the tenth century, this institution
declined; the canons, as the clergy attached to a church and living a common
life were called, began to live separately; some of them, however, resisted
this relaxation of discipline, and even added poverty to their common life.
This is the origin of the canons regular. Pope Benedict XII by his constitution
"Ad decorem" (15 May 1339) prescribed a general reform of the canons regular.
The canons regular ex professo united Holy Orders with religious life, and
being attached to a church, devoted themselves to promoting the dignity of
divine worship. With monks, Holy Orders are incidental and secondary, and are
superadded to the religious life. With canons as with the clerks regular, Holy
Orders are the principal thing, and the religious life is superadded to the
Holy Orders.
