Cantor (church) The Cantor, sometimes "Precentor", or the Protopsaltes (Gr.
œÄœÅœâœÑŒøœàŒ¨ŒªœÑŒ∑œÇ, "first of the singers"; from Gr. œàŒ¨ŒªœÑŒ∑œÇ,
"singer") is the chief singer, and usually instructor, employed in a cathedral
or monastery with responsibilities for the ecclesiastical choir and the
preparation of the divine services in the context of a secular or monastic
liturgy. The cantor's duties and qualifications have varied considerably
according to time, place, and rite, and often its prestige was so high that it
came close to the highest offices in the ecclesiatical hierarchy, for instance
monastic cantors promoted to the office of an abbot or abbess. Sometimes the
office was connected with administrative, militaric, and governmental duties
(the "Maestro di Capella" at San Marco di Venezia), even with those of a school
teacher, as in case of the Thomaskantor in charge of the Thomasschule zu
Leipzig. But generally a cantor must be competent to chose and to conduct the
vocals for the choir, to start any chant on demand, and to be able to identify
and correct the missteps of singers placed under him. He may be held
accountable for the immediate rendering of the music, showing the course of the
melody by movements of the hand(s) ("cheironomia"), similar to a conductor.
Eastern Christianity. In the Eastern Orthodox, Oriental Orthodox and Eastern
Catholic Churches, a cantor, also called a chanter (in Greek, œàŒ¨ŒªœÑŒ∑œÇ,
psaltis; in Slavonic, –ü—£–≤–µ—Ü—ä, pievets), is a monk or a lay person in
minor orders who chants responses and hymns in the services of the church.
There are several titles for the psaltes which depend on the recognition of his
capabilities as a chanter, sometimes connected with an employment, by the local
or Ecumenical Patriarchate. In some smaller communities it is also possible,
that the community sings within an oral tradition and without any instruction
by a protopsaltes, in other Orthodox Rites, there are various hierarchical
offices, which can be passed during a long career, connected with a lifelong
process of learning. Constantinople of the Byzantine and the Ottoman Empire,
and the Fener District of Istanbul. Particularly in the Byzantine tradition,
the cantor in charge of doing the music for a service is referred to as the
protopsaltis (Gr. Œ œÅœâœÑŒøœàŒ¨ŒªœÑŒ∑œÇ), a term which may also refer to an
office within a diocese or whole jurisdiction (see Domestikos). The cantor or
chanters sing the many hymns called for during the Divine Services and the
Divine Liturgy. A chanter must be knowledgeable about the ecclesiastical modes
as well as the complex structure of the services. At Constantinople the charge
of a protopsaltes was prestigious and connected with Byzantine offices. In the
tradition of the cathedral rite at Hagia Sophia, there was a distinction
between the leader of the right choir (Domestikos) and the leader of the left
choir (Lampadarios). Still during the last centuries, the usual career was to
start (after serving as Protopsaltes of other cathedrals) as the "Second
Domestikos of the Great Church" who assisted the first, then to proceed in the
office of the teacher, and later even to the Lampadarios, who often replaced
the left choir as a soloist called "monophonares" (see Kontakarion), and
finally this career was sometimes continued by the promotion to the
"Protopsaltes or Archon Psaltes (·ºÑœÅœáŒøŒΩœÑŒµœÇ œàŒ¨ŒªœÑŒ±Œπ) of the Great
Church" of the Ecumenical Patriarchate. The Vestments in Different Orthodox
Rites. In the Greek tradition, a chanter will often wear the "exorason", a
black outer cassock with angel-wing sleeves. The Slavic tradition‚Äîwhich tends
more commonly to use a choir rather than a cantor‚Äîassigns no specific
vestment to the chanters, unless an individual has been ordained a Reader, in
which case he would wear only the inner cassock ("podryasnik") and put on the
sticharion when he receives Holy Communion. In the Greek tradition, the
chanters are stationed at a psalterion, a chanting podium positioned to the
south and sometimes also to the north side of the sanctuary. In the Slavic
tradition, the chanters are similarly positioned, and the area is referred to
as the kliros. Western Christianity. Catholic Cantors. Before Vatican II, in
the Roman Catholic Church a cantor was the leading singer of the choir, a bona
fide clerical role. The medieval Cantor of the papal Schola cantorum was called
"Prior scholae" or "Primicerius". In medieval cathedrals, the cantor or
precentor directed the music and chant, and was also one of the ranking
dignitaries of the chapter. During the 14th century in many churches, the
cantor began to delegate his instruction of the singers to a master of music.
After the introduction of harmonized music, some duties naturally fell to the
conductor or choir-master. Today, the cantor is a role that can be performed by
a lay person. In parishes without a choir, the cantor serves to lead the
responsorial singing with the congregation. The cantor's locality in the church
is most generally to the right of the choir, and directly to his left is his
assistant, formerly called the "Succentor". A common custom for cantors was the
bearing of the staff, which was the mark of his dignity and a visual
representative of his sacred role inside the church. This custom still survives
in some places. Protestant Cantors. In Protestant Churches the role of the
cantor can be lay or pastoral. In Northern European cities, especially in
Germany, the title of Cantor or Kantor survived the Reformation, and referred
to a musician who supervised the music in several principal churches, taught in
the boys' secondary school, and provided music for civic functions. Johann
Sebastian Bach (Leipzig) and Georg Philipp Telemann (Hamburg) were among the
famous musicians employed under this system. Sources. "This article
incorporates text from the public-domain Catholic Encyclopedia of 1913."
