Carmelites The Order of the Brothers of Our Lady of Mount Carmel or Carmelites
(sometimes simply Carmel by synecdoche; ) is a Roman Catholic religious order
founded, probably in the 12th century, on Mount Carmel, hence its name.
However, historical records about its origin remain uncertain. Saint Bertold
has traditionally been associated with the founding of the order, but few clear
records of early Carmelite history have survived and this is likely to be a
later extrapolation by hagiographers. There is a very small body of Anglican
Carmelites. Charism and origin. The charism (or spiritual focus) of the
Carmelite Order is contemplative prayer. The Order is considered by the Church
to be under the special protection of the Blessed Virgin Mary and thus has a
strong Marian devotion. As in most of the orders dating to medieval times, the
First Order is the friars (who are active/contemplative), the Second Order is
the nuns (who are cloistered) and the Third Order consists of laypeople who
continue to live in the world, and can be married, but participate in the
charism of the order by liturgical prayers, apostolates, and contemplative
prayer. There are also offshoots such as active Carmelite sisters. Carmelite
tradition traces the origin of the order to a community of hermits on Mount
Carmel that succeeded the schools of the prophets in ancient Israel, although
there are no certain records of hermits on this mountain before the 1190s. By
this date a group of men had gathered at the well of Elijah on Mount Carmel.
These men, who had gone to Palestine from Europe either as pilgrims or as
crusaders, chose Mount Carmel in part because it was the traditional home of
Elijah. The foundation was believed to have been dedicated to the Blessed
Virgin Mary. The conventual buildings were destroyed several times, but a
monastery of Discalced Carmelite friars was built close to the original site
under the auspices of Fr. Julius of the Saviour and duly consecrated on 12 June
1836. Some time between 1209 and 1214 the hermits received a formula vitae "in
keeping with their avowed purpose" (Rule Ch. 1) from the Latin Patriarch of
Jerusalem and Papal legate St. Albert of Jerusalem. Albert had been responsible
for giving a rule to the Humiliati during his long tenure as Bishop of
Vercelli, and was well-versed in diplomacy, being sent by Pope Innocent III as
Papal Legate to what was known as the Eastern Province. As an experienced
prelate he created a document which is both juridically terse and replete with
Scriptural allusions, thereby rooting the hermits in the life of the universal
Church and their own aspirations. The original Carmelite Rule of St. Albert
addresses a prior whose name is only listed as "B." When later required to name
their founders, the Brothers referred to both Elijah and the Blessed Virgin as
early models of the community. Later, under pressure from other European
Mendicant orders to be more specific, the name "Saint Bertold" was given,
possibly drawn from the oral tradition of the Order. The rule consisted of
sixteen articles, which enjoined strict obedience to their prior, residence in
individual cells, constancy in prayer, the hearing of Mass every morning in the
oratory of the community, vows of poverty and toil, daily silence from vespers
until terce the next morning, abstinence from all forms of meat except in cases
of severe illness, and fasting from Holy Cross Day (September 14) until the
Easter of the following year. History. Early history. The Rule of St. Albert
received the approval of Pope Honorius III in 1226. With the increasing
cleavage between the West and the East, however, the Carmelites found it
advisable to leave their original home, and in 1238 they settled in Cyprus and
Sicily. In 1242 they were in Aylesford, Kent, England, and two years later in
southern France, while by 1245 they were so numerous that they were able to
hold their first general chapter at Aylesford, where Saint Simon Stock, then
eighty years of age, was chosen general. During his rule of twenty years the
order prospered, especially by the establishment of a priory at Paris by Saint
Louis in 1259. Reforms. Quite early in their history the Carmelites began to
develop ministries in keeping with their new status as mendicant religious.
This resulted in the production of a letter Ignea Sagitta (Flaming Arrow) by
the ruling prior general, Nicholas of Narbonne, who called for a return to a
strictly eremitical life. His belief that most friars were ill-suited to an
active apostolate was based on a number of scandals. However, the tendentious
letter is not found quoted in early extant Carmelite texts, raising the
question whether it was ever issued. In any case, Nicholas resigned from office
at the General Chapter in Paris in 1271 to pursue the solitary life he
favoured. This tension within the charism of the Order remains - the need for
solitude and the need to respond to the Church's apostolic mission. In the 14th
and 15th centuries the Carmelites, like a number of other religious orders,
declined and reform became imperative. Shortly before 1433 three priories in
Valais, Tuscany, and Mantua were reformed by the preaching of Thomas Conecte of
Rennes and formed the Congregation of Mantua, which was declared independent of
the rest of the Order with its own special set of Constitutions as ratified by
Pope Eugene IV and governed by its own vice prior general. In 1431 or 1432 the
same pope sanctioned certain modifications of the Carmelite rule and, in 1459,
Pope Pius II left the regulation of fasts to the discretion of the prior
general. Blessed John Soreth, who was then prior general and had already
established the order of Carmelite nuns in 1452, accordingly sought until his
death in 1471 to restore the primitive asceticism. In 1476, a papal bull cum
nulla of Pope Sixtus IV founded the Carmelites of the Third Order, who received
a special rule in 1635, which was amended in 1678. The 16th century saw a
number of short-lived reforms, but it was not until the second half of the same
century that a thorough reformation of the Carmelites in parts of Spain was
carried out by Saint Teresa of Ávila, who, together with Saint John of the
Cross, established the Discalced Carmelites. Teresa's foundations, although
welcomed by King Philip II of Spain - who was most anxious for all Orders to be
reformed according to the principles of the Council of Trent (1545–1563) -
did create practical problems at grassroots level. The proliferation of new
religious houses in towns that were already struggling to cope was an unwelcome
prospect, creating a backlash from local townspeople to nobility and diocesan
clergy. Teresa made a point of trying to make her monasteries as self-
sufficient as was practicable and restricted the number of nuns per community
accordingly. Out of concern over the advent of Protestantism, the Order was now
inspired with a new asceticism and fervour. In 1593, the Discalced Carmelites
had their own superior general styled propositus general - the first being Fr.
Nicloas Doria. Due to the politics of foundation, the Discalced friars in Italy
were canonically erected as a separate juridical entity. The prior general, Fr.
John Baptist Rossi, realized that if reform was going to work, it could not be
left to the whims individual provinces. The problems created by Teresa's
movement for those stubbornly rejecting the need for reform had created the
fragmentation of the Order in Castile and many committed nuns and friars now
belonged to a completely separate Order. Fr. Rossi laid the groundwork for a
more systematic programme of reform. The place that offered the best conditions
was the Province of Tourraine, which gave its name to the reform. One of its
great figures was Br. John of St. Samson. The Congregation of Mantua continued
to function in its little corner of Italy throughout this period. It was only
at the end of the 19th century that those following the reform of Tourraine (by
this time known as the "strict observance") and the Mantuan Congregation were
formally merged under one set of Constitutions. The friars following Mantua
conceded to Tourraine's Constitutions but insisted that the older form of the
habit - namely their own - should be adopted. In a photograph of the period
Blessed Titus Brandsma is shown in the habit of Tourraine as a novice; in all
subsequent images he wears that of the newly styled Ancient Observance.
Controversies with other orders. By the middle of the 17th century the
Carmelites had reached their zenith. At this period, however, they became
involved in controversies with other orders, particularly with the Jesuits. The
special objects of attack were the traditional origin of the Carmelites and the
source of their scapular. The Sorbonne, represented by Jean Launoy, joined the
Jesuits in their polemics against the Carmelites. Papebroch, the Bollandist
editor of the "Acta Sanctorum", was answered by the Carmelite Sebastian of St.
Paul, who made such serious charges against the orthodoxy of his opponent's
writings that the very existence of the Bollandists was threatened. The peril
was averted, however, and in 1696 a decree of Juan Tomás de Rocaberti,
archbishop of Valencia and inquisitor-general of the Holy Office, forbade all
further controversies between the Carmelites and Jesuits. Two years later, on
November 20, 1698, Pope Innocent XII issued a brief which definitely ended the
controversy on pain of excommunication, and placed all writings in violation of
the brief on the Index Librorum Prohibitorum. Modern history. The French
Revolution, the secularization in Germany, and the repercussions on religious
orders following the unification of Italy were heavy blows to the Carmelites.
By the last decades of the 19th century, there were approximately 200 Carmelite
men throughout the world. At the beginning of the 20th century, however, new
leadership and less political interference allowed a rebirth of the Order.
Existing provinces began re-founding provinces that had gone out of existence.
The theological preparation of the Carmelites was strengthened, particularly
with the foundation of St. Albert's College in Rome. By 2001, the membership
had increased to approximately 2,100 men in 25 provinces, 700 enclosed nuns in
70 monasteries, and 13 affiliated Congregations and Institutes. In addition,
the Third Order of lay Carmelites count 25,000-30,000 members throughout the
world. Provinces exist in Australia, Brazil, Britain, Canada, Hungary,
Germany,India, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Malta, the Netherlands, Poland,
Singapore, Spain, Portugal and the United States. Delegations directly under
the Prior General exist in Argentina, France, the Czech Republic, the Dominican
Republic, the Lebanon, the Philippines and Portugal. Carmelite Missions exist
in Bolivia, Burkino Faso, Cameroon, Colombia, India, Kenya, Lithuania, Mexico,
Mozambique, Peru, Romania, Tanzania, Trinidad, Venezuela and Zimbabwe.
Monasteries of enclosed Carmelite nuns exist in Brazil, the Dominican Republic,
Finland, Germany, Hungary, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Kenya, the Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Peru, the Philippines, Spain, Portugal, the United Kingdom and the
United States. Hermit communities of either men or women exist in Brazil,
France, Indonesia, Lebanon, Italy and the United States. The Discalced
Carmelite Order also built the priory of Elijah (1911) at the site of Elijah's
epic contest with the prophets of Ba'al (1 Kings 18:20-40. The monastery is
situated about 25 kilometers south of Haifa on the eastern side of the Carmel,
and stands on the foundations of a series of earlier monasteries. The site is
held sacred by Christians, Jews and Muslims; the name of the area, is el-
Muhraqa, an Arabic construction meaning "place of burning", and is a direct
reference to the biblical account. There are several Carmelite figures who have
received significant attention in the 20th century, including Saint Thérèse
of Lisieux, one of only four female Doctors of the Church, so named because of
her famous teaching on the "way of confidence and love" set forth in her best-
selling memoir, "Story of a Soul"; Titus Brandsma, a Dutch scholar and writer
who was killed in Dachau Concentration Camp because of his stance against
Nazism; and Saint Teresa Benedicta of the Cross (née Edith Stein), a Jewish
convert to Catholicism who was also imprisoned and died at Auschwitz. Saint
Raphael Kalinowski (1835–1907) was the first friar to be sainted in the Order
since co-founder Saint John of the Cross. The writings and teachings of Brother
Lawrence of the Resurrection, a Carmelite friar of the 17th century, continue
as a spiritual classic under the title "The Practice of the Presence of God".
Other non-religious ("i.e.," non-vowed monastic) great figures include Saint
George Preca, a Maltese priest and Carmelite Tertiary. Habit and scapular. The
original way of life of the order was changed to conform to that of the
mendicant orders on the initiative of St. Simon Stock and at the command of
Pope Innocent IV. Their former habit of a mantle with black and white or brown
and white stripes—the black or brown stripes representing the scorches the
mantle of Elijah received from the fiery chariot as it fell from his
shoulders—was discarded and they wore the same habit as the Dominicans,
except that the cloak was white. They also borrowed much from the Dominican and
Franciscan constitutions. Their distinctive garment was a scapular of two
strips of dark cloth, worn on the breast and back, and fastened at the
shoulders. Tradition holds that this was given to St. Simon Stock by the
Blessed Virgin Mary, who appeared to him and promised that all who wore it with
faith and piety and who died clothed in it would be saved. There arose a
sodality of the scapular, which affiliated a large number of laymen with the
Carmelites. The order made some grandiose claims, however, contesting the
"invention" of the rosary with the Dominicans, terming themselves the brothers
of the Virgin, and asserting, on the basis of their traditional association
with Elijah, that all the prophets of the Old Testament, as well as the Virgin
and the Apostles, had been Carmelites. A miniature version of the Carmelite
scapular is popular among Roman Catholics and is one of the most popular
devotions in the Church. Wearers usually believe that if they faithfully wear
the Carmelite scapular (also called "the brown scapular" or simply "the
scapular") and die in a state of grace, they will be saved from eternal
damnation. Catholics who decide to wear the scapular are usually enrolled by a
priest, and some choose to enter the Scapular Confraternity. The Lay Carmelites
of the Third Order of Our Lady of Mount Carmel wear a scapular which is smaller
than the shortened scapular worn by some Carmelite religious for sleeping, but
still larger than the devotional scapulars. Visions and devotions. Among the
various Catholic orders, Carmelite nuns have had a proportionally high ratio of
visions of Jesus and Mary and have been responsible for key Catholic devotions.
From the time of her clothing in the Carmelite religious habit (1583) until her
death (1607) the life of Saint Mary Magdalene de Pazzi is said to have had a
series of raptures and ecstasies. Sister Antónia d'Astónaco, a Carmelite nun
from Portugal, reported during her life a private revelation by Saint Michael
the Archangel. Based on that revelation, the Archangel Michael had told in an
apparition to the devoted Servant of God that he would like to be honored, and
God glorified, by the praying of nine special invocations. These nine
invocations correspond to invocations to the nine choirs of angels and origins
the Chaplet of Saint Michael. This private revelation and prayers were fully
approved by Pope Pius IX in 1851. Sister Marie of St Peter, a Carmelite nun in
Tours France, started the devotion to the Holy Face of Jesus. She said that in
an 1844 vision Jesus told her: ""Oh if you only knew what great merit you
acquire by saying even once, Admirable is the Name of God, in a spirit of
reparation for blasphemy."" In the 19th century, another Carmelite nun, Saint
Thérèse of the Child Jesus and the Holy Face, was instrumental in spreading
this devotion throughout France in the 1890s with her many poems and prayers.
Eventually Pope Pius XII approved the devotion in 1958 and declared the Feast
of the Holy Face of Jesus as Shrove Tuesday (the day before Ash Wednesday) for
all Catholics. Therese of Lisieux emerged as one of the most popular saints for
Catholics in the 20th century, and a statue of her can be found in many
European and North American Catholic churches built prior to the Second Vatican
Council (after which the number of statues tended to be reduced when churches
were built). In the 20th century, in the last apparition of the Blessed Virgin
Mary in Fátima, Portugal, Sister Lúcia, one of the most famous visionaries of
Our Lady, said that the Virgin appeared to her as Our Lady of Mount Carmel
(holding the Brown Scapular). Many years after, Lúcia became a Carmelite nun.
When Sister Lúcia was asked in an interview why the Blessed Virgin appeared as
Our Lady of Mount Carmel in her last apparition, she replied: ""Because Our
Lady wants all to wear the Scapular... The reason for this,"" she explained,
""is that the Scapular is our sign of consecration to the Immaculate Heart of
Mary"". When asked if the Brown Scapular is as necessary to the fulfillment of
Our Lady’s requests as the Rosary, Sister Lúcia answered: ""The Scapular and
the Rosary are inseparable"".
