Catechism of the Catholic Church The Catechism of the Catholic Church (or CCC)
is a catechism promulgated for the Catholic Church by Pope John Paul II.
Publication history. The decision to publish a catechism was taken at the
Extraordinary Assembly of the Synod of Bishops that was convened by Pope John
Paul II on 25 January 1985 for the 20th anniversary of the close of the Second
Vatican Council, and in 1986, the pope put a commission composed of 12 bishops
and cardinals in charge of the project. The commission was assisted by a seven
member committee including diocesan bishops and experts in theology and
catechesis. The text was approved by Pope John Paul II on 25 June 1992, and
promulgated by him on 11 October 1992, the 30th anniversary of the opening of
the Second Vatican Council, with his apostolic constitution, "Fidei depositum".
It was published in the French language in 1992 and was then translated into
many other languages. In the United States, the English translation was
published by the U.S. bishops in 1994, with a note that it was "subject to
revision according to the Latin typical edition ("editio typica") when it is
published." On August 15, 1997—the Solemnity of the Assumption of the Blessed
Virgin Mary—Pope John Paul II promulgated the Latin typical edition, with his
apostolic letter, "Laetamur Magnopere". The Latin text, which became the
official text of reference ("editio typica"), amended the contents of the
provisional French text at a few points. One of the changes consisted in the
inclusion of the position on death penalty that is defended in John Paul II's
encyclical Evangelium Vitae of 1995. As a result, the earlier translations from
the French into other languages (including English) had to be amended and re-
published as "second editions". Doctrinal value. In Fidei Depositum, Pope John
Paul II declared that the Catechism of the Catholic Church was ""a valid and
legitimate instrument for ecclesial communion and a sure norm for teaching the
faith", and stressed that it ""is not intended to replace the local catechisms
duly approved by the ecclesiastical authorities, the diocesan Bishops and the
Episcopal Conferences"". Contents. A catechism has been defined as "a summary
of principles, often in question-and-answer format". Documents of religious
instruction have been written since the beginning of Christianity and the
catechism is typically an assemblage of these smaller documents into one large
compilation of Church doctrine and teachings. The Catechism of the Catholic
Church, for which the usual English-language abbreviation is "CCC", is instead
a source on which to base such catechisms (e.g. "Youcat" and the "U.S. Catholic
Catechism for Adults") and other expositions of Catholic doctrine, called a
"major catechism." It was given, as stated in the Apostolic Constitution "Fidei
depositum", with which its publication was ordered, "that it may be a sure and
authentic reference text for teaching catholic doctrine and particularly for
preparing local catechisms." The "CCC" is in fact not in question and answer
format. What corresponds the more common idea of a catechism is perhaps the
"Compendium of the Catechism of the Catholic Church". This scheme is often
referred to as the “Four Pillars” of the Faith. The contents are abundantly
footnoted with references to sources of the teaching, in particular the
Scriptures, the Church Fathers, and the Ecumenical Councils and other
authoritative Catholic statements, principally those issued by recent Popes.
The section on Scripture in the "CCC" (nos. 101–141) recovers the Patristic
tradition of "spiritual exegesis" as further developed through the scholastic
doctrine of the "four senses." This return to spiritual exegesis is based on
the Second Vatican Council's 1965 "Dogmatic Constitution on Divine Revelation",
which taught that Scripture should be "read and interpreted in light of the
same Spirit by whom it was written" ("Dei Verbum" 12). The "CCC" amplifies "Dei
Verbum" by specifying that the necessary spiritual interpretation should be
sought through the four senses of Scripture (nos. 111, 113, 115–119), which
encompass the literal sense and the three spiritual senses (allegorical, moral,
and anagogical). The literal sense (no. 116) pertains to the meaning of the
words themselves, including any figurative meanings. The spiritual senses (no.
117) pertain to the significance of the things (persons, places, objects or
events) denoted by the words. Of the three spiritual senses, the allegorical
sense is foundational. It relates persons, events, and institutions of earlier
covenants to those of later covenants, and especially to the New Covenant.
Building on the allegorical sense, the moral sense instructs in regard to
action, and the anagogical sense points to man's final destiny. The teaching of
the "CCC" on Scripture has encouraged the recent pursuit of covenantal
theology, an approach that employs the four senses to structure salvation
history via the biblical covenants. Comments. American Catholic bishops have
stated that, though theological opinion was not intended to be a part of "CCC",
it in fact "does not distinguish between matters of faith and theological
opinion." A commentator, quoting Pope Paul VI to the effect that the Catholic
Church has made a conscious attempt to adopt "a more humble and fraternal
attitude ... that of a search for the truth", claims that "CCC" displays a
shift away from presenting dogma as fact and toward presenting the Catholic
faith itself as a search for truth. Referring also to the statement in the
Apostolic Constitution "Fidei Depositum" that "the contents are often presented
in a new way in order to respond to the questions of our age," he claims that
the "new catechesis…attempts to produce existential reactions rather than
intellectual conviction." Derived works. The "Compendium of the Catechism of
the Catholic Church" was published in 2005, and the first edition in English in
2006. It is a more concise and dialogic version of the CCC. The text is
available in twelve languages on the Vatican website, which also gives the text
of the Catechism itself in nine languages. YouCat, a catechism for the youth
based on the Catechism of the Catholic Church and on the Compendium of the
catechism of the Catholic Church, was published in 2011. Some critics argue
that its teachings on the status of non-Catholic religions, homosexuality,
contraception, euthanasia, evolution, and Scripture are departures from
traditional Catholic doctrine.
