Cathedral A cathedral (French "cathédrale" from Lat. "cathedra", "seat" from
the Greek "kathedra" (καθέδρα), seat, bench, from "kata" "down" +
"hedra" seat, base, chair) is a Christian church which contains the seat of a
bishop, thus serving as the central church of a diocese, conference, or
episcopate. Although the word "cathedral" is sometimes loosely applied,
churches with the function of "cathedral" occur specifically and only in those
denominations with an episcopal hierarchy, such as the Roman Catholic,
Anglican, Orthodox, and some Lutheran and Methodist churches. In the Greek
Orthodox Church, the terms "kathedrikos naos" (literally: "cathedral shrine")
is sometimes used for the church at which an archbishop or "metropolitan"
presides. The term "metropolis" (literally "mother city") is used more commonly
than "diocese" to signify an area of governance within the church. There are
certain variations on the use of the term "cathedral"; for example, some pre-
Reformation cathedrals in Scotland now within the Church of Scotland still
retain the term cathedral, despite that church's Presbyterian polity that does
not have bishops. The same occurs in Germany, where Protestant churches (many
with a presbyterian or congregational polity) co-operate under an umbrella
organisation, the Evangelical Church in Germany, with some retaining cathedrals
or using the term as a merely honorary title and function, void of any
hierarchical supremacy. As cathedrals are often particularly impressive
edifices, the term "cathedral" is often applied colloquially to any large and
impressive church, regardless of whether it functions as a cathedral, such as
the Crystal Cathedral in California or figuratively to imply that a church is
of outstanding beauty such as St John the Baptist, Tideswell, known as the
"Cathedral of the Peak". Several cathedrals in Europe, such as that of
Strasbourg, Essen, Freiburg i.B., and in England at York, Lincoln and
Southwell, are referred to as "Minster" (German: "Münster") churches, from
Latin "monasterium", because the establishments were served by canons living in
community or may have been an abbey, prior to the Reformation. The other kind
of great church in Western Europe is the abbey. Definition. The word cathedral
is derived from the Latin word cathedra ("seat" or "chair"), and refers to the
presence of the bishop's or archbishop's chair or throne. In the ancient world,
the chair was the symbol of a teacher and thus of the bishop's role as teacher,
and also of an official presiding as a magistrate and thus of the bishop's role
in governing a diocese. Though now grammatically used as a noun, the term
"cathedral" was originally the adjective in the phrase "cathedral church", from
the Latin "ecclesia cathedralis". The seat marks the place set aside in the
prominent church of the diocese for the head of that diocese and is therefore a
major symbol of authority. Early Middle Ages: religious communities. The
history of the body of clergy attached to the cathedral church is obscure, and
in each case local considerations affected its development, however the main
features were more or less common to all. Originally the bishop and cathedral
clergy formed a kind of religious community, which, while not in the true sense
a monastery, was nevertheless often called a "monasterium", the word not having
the restricted meaning which it afterwards acquired. In this lies the reason
for the apparent anomaly that churches like York Minster and Lincoln Cathedral,
which never had any monks attached to them, have inherited the name of minster
or monastery. In these early communities the clergy often lived apart in their
own dwellings, and were not infrequently married. In the 8th century
Chrodegang, Bishop of Metz (743-766), compiled a code of rules for the clergy
of the cathedral churches, which, though widely accepted in Germany and other
parts of the continent, gained little acceptance in England. According to
Chrodegang's rule, the cathedral clergy were to live under a common roof,
occupy a common dormitory and submit to the authority of a special officer. The
rule of Chrodegang was, in fact, a modification of the Benedictine rule. Gisa,
a native of Lorraine, who was bishop of Wells from 1061 to 1088, introduced it
into England, and imposed its observance on the clergy of his cathedral church,
but it was not followed for long there, or elsewhere in England. Late Middle
Ages: monastic and secular cathedrals. During the 10th and 11th centuries, the
cathedral clergy became more definitely organized and were divided into two
classes. One was that of a monastic establishment of some recognized order of
monks, often the Benedictines, while the other class was that of a college of
clergy, bound by no vows except those of their ordination, but governed by a
code of statutes or canons. Hence the name of "canon". In this way arose the
distinction between the monastic and secular cathedral churches. Outside of
Great Britain, monastic cathedrals are known only at Monreale in Sicily and
Downpatrick in Ireland. In the case of monastic cathedral churches, the
internal government was that of the religious order to which the chapter
belonged and all the members kept perpetual residence. The alternative of this
was the cathedral ruled by a secular chapter; the dignities of provost, dean,
precentor, chancellor, treasurer, etc., came into being for the regulation and
good order of the church and its services, while the non-residence of the
canons, rather than their perpetual residence, became the rule, and led to
their duties being performed by a body of "vicars", who officiated for them at
the services of the church. Reformation. Prior to the Reformation all
cathedrals of Western Europe were of the Roman Catholic Church. In England, the
entire structure of the monastic and cathedral system was reconstituted during
the Reformation. Cathedrals which were once Roman Catholic came under the
governance of the Church of England. All the English monastic cathedral
chapters were dissolved by Henry VIII and, with two exceptions, were refounded
by him as churches of secular chapters of canons, with a dean as the head and
with subordinate officers as minor canons. In Germany and other parts of
Europe, with the spread of the Lutheran Church, some ancient churches, like
Nidaros Cathedral, Norway, and Lübeck Cathedral, Germany, became the seats of
Protestant Bishops, as in England. Many new churches were built which serve the
regional administrative function of a cathedral. However, not all churches that
function as the seat of a bishop are known as "cathedral", the custom varying
from place to place, according to local tradition. Some are simply designated
"church", as occurs at Budolfi Church, the Lutheran cathedral of Aalborg in
Denmark. Roles within the cathedral. Provost. In most of Europe, the earliest
head of a secular church seems to have been the provost ("praepositus",
"probst", etc.), who was charged not only with the internal regulation of the
church and oversight of the members of the chapter and control of the services,
but was also the steward or seneschal of the lands and possessions of the
church. The latter often mainly engaged his attention, to the neglect of his
domestic and ecclesiastical duties, and complaints were soon raised that the
provost was too much mixed in worldly affairs, and was too frequently absent
from his spiritual duties. This led, in many cases, to the institution of a new
officer called the "dean", who had charge of that portion of the provost's
duties which related to the internal discipline of the chapter and the services
of the church. In some cases, the office of provost was abolished, but in
others it was continued: the provost, who was occasionally an archdeacon as
well, remaining head of the chapter. This arrangement was most commonly
followed in Germany. In England the provost was almost unknown. Bishop Gisa
introduced a provost as head of the chapter of Wells Cathedral, but the office
was afterwards subordinated to the other dignities and the provost became
simply the steward of certain of the prebendal lands. The provost of the
collegiate church of Beverley Minster was the most notable instance of such an
officer in England, but at Beverley he was an external officer with authority
in the government of the church, no stall in the choir and no vote in chapter.
In Germany and Scandinavia, and in a few of the cathedral churches in the south
of France, the provost was the ordinary head of the cathedral chapter, but the
office was not common elsewhere. As regards France, of one 136 cathedral
churches existing at the Revolution, 38 only, and those either on the borders
of Germany or in the extreme south, had a provost as the head of the chapter.
In others the provost existed as a subordinate officer. There were two provosts
at Autun, and Lyon and Chartres had four each, all as subordinate officers.
Secular chapter. The normal constitution of the chapter of a secular cathedral
church comprised four dignitaries (there might be more), in addition to the
canons. These are the dean, the precentor, the chancellor and the treasurer.
These four dignitaries, occupying the four corner stalls in the choir, are
called in many of the statutes the "quatuor majores personae" of the church.
Dean. The role of dean (from "decanus") seems to have derived its designation
from the Benedictine "dean" who had ten monks under his charge. The role of
dean came into existence to supply the place of the provost in the internal
management of the church and chapter. In England every secular cathedral church
was headed by a dean who was originally elected by the chapter and confirmed in
office by the bishop. The dean is president of the chapter, and within the
cathedral has charge of the performance of the services, taking specified
portions of them by statute on the principal festivals. The dean sits in the
chief stall in the choir, which is usually the first on the right hand on
entering the choir at the west. Precentor. Next to the dean (as a rule) is the
precentor ("primicerius", "cantor", etc.), whose special duty is that of
regulating the musical portion of the services. The precentor presides in the
dean's absence, and occupies the corresponding stall on the left side, although
there are exceptions to this rule, where, as at St Paul's, the archdeacon of
the cathedral city ranks second and occupies what is usually the precentor's
stall. Chancellor. The third dignitary is the chancellor ("scholasticus",
"écoldtre", "capiscol", "magistral", etc.), who must not be confounded with
the chancellor of the diocese. The chancellor of the cathedral church is
charged with the oversight of its schools, ought to read divinity lectures, and
superintend the lections in the choir and correct slovenly readers. The
chancellor is often the secretary and librarian of the chapter. In the absence
of the dean and precentor, the chancellor is president of the chapter, and
within the cathedral is usually assigned the easternmost stall, on the dean's
side of the choir. Treasurer. The fourth dignitary is the treasurer ("custo",
"sacrisla", "cheficier") who is guardian of the fabric, and of all the
furniture and ornaments of the church, and whose duty was to provide bread and
wine for the Eucharist, and candles and incense. The treasurer also regulated
such matters as the ringing of the bells. The treasurer's stall is opposite to
that of the chancellor. Additional clergy. In many cathedral churches are
additional dignitaries, as the praelector, subdean, vice-chancellor, succentor-
canonicorum, and others, whose roles came into existence to supply the places
of the other absent dignitaries, for non-residence was the fatal blot of the
secular churches, and in this they contrasted very badly with the monastic
churches, where all the members were in continuous residence. Besides the
dignitaries there were the ordinary canons, each of whom, as a rule, held a
separate prebend or endowment, besides receiving his share of the common funds
of the church. For the most part the canons also speedily became non-resident,
and this led to the distinction of residentiary and non-residentiary canons,
till in most churches the number of resident canons became definitely limited
in number, and the non-residentiary canons, who no longer shared in the common
funds, became generally known as prebendaries only, although by their non-
residence they did not forfeit their position as canons, and retained their
votes in chapter like the others. This system of non-residence led also to the
institution of vicars choral, each canon having his own vicar, who sat in his
stall in his absence, and when the canon was present, in the stall immediately
below, on the second form. The vicars had no place or vote in chapter, and,
though irremovable except for offences, were the servants of their absent
canons whose stalls they occupied, and whose duties they performed. Outside
Britain they were often called demi-prebendaries, and they formed the bachcrur
of the French churches. As time went on the vicars were themselves often
incorporated as a kind of lesser chapter, or college, under the supervision of
the dean and chapter. Relationship of chapter and bishop. There was no
distinction between the monastic cathedral chapters and those of the secular
canons, in their relation to the bishop or diocese. In both cases the chapter
was the bishop's consilium which he was bound to consult on all important
matters and without doing so he could not act. Thus, a judicial decision of a
bishop needed the confirmation of the chapter before it could be enforced. He
could not change the service books, or "use" of the church or diocese, without
capitular consent, and there are episcopal acts, such as the appointment of a
diocesan chancellor, or vicar general, which still need confirmation by the
chapter, but the older theory of the chapter as the bishop's council in ruling
the diocese has become a thing of the past, in Europe. In its corporate
capacity the chapter takes charge sede vacante of a diocese. In England,
however (except as regards Salisbury and Durham), this custom has never
obtained, the two archbishops having, from time immemorial, taken charge of the
vacant dioceses in their respective provinces. When, however, either of the
sees of Canterbury or York is vacant the chapters of those churches take
charge, not only of the diocese, but of the province as well, and incidentally,
therefore, of any of the dioceses of the province which may be vacant at the
same time. Functions of a cathedral. The role of the cathedral is chiefly to
serve God in the community, through its hierarchical and organisational
position in the church structure. The building itself, by its physical
presence, symbolises both the glory of God and of the church. A cathedral, its
bishop and dignitaries have traditional functions which are mostly religious in
nature, but may also be closely associated with the civil and communal life of
the city and region. Symbolic functions of the cathedral building. The
cathedral is frequently the most imposing building, and one of the most ancient
buildings in its town. The great size and splendour of the cathedral may be out
of all proportion to the town itself. The money and talents expended on the
building are seen as honouring God, and may also demonstrate both the devotion
and the status of the patrons. Cathedrals are very often oriented east/west, so
that the worshippers look towards the rising sun, symbolising the Risen Christ.
The architectural form of the building most frequently has the groundplan of a
cross. This form is both functional and symbolic, its symbolism referring to
the cross on which Jesus was crucified. The form is liturgically functional as
it allows the building to be divided into sections where different activities
take place, or that are occupied by different people, such as the clergy, the
choir and the laity. The main body of the building, making the longer arm of
the cross, is called the nave, and is where worshippers congregate, The term is
from the Latin word for ship. The cathedral is symbolically a ship bearing the
people of God through the storms of life. The nave is also used for major
processions, which gather or enter at the furthest door (liturgically generally
called the West Door). The aisles on each side of the nave facilitate the
movement of people within the building, without disrupting worshippers in the
central space. The arms of the cross are called the transepts and often contain
a number of chapels. Furthest from the main entry is the "sanctuary" where the
Blessed Sacrament is laid on the altar or communion table for the consecration.
"Sanctuary" means "Holy Place". The word has passed into modern English with an
altered meaning because traditionally a criminal who could gain access to this
area without capture was thereby given the sanctuary of the church. Cathedral
buildings of the Western European tradition symbolise the progression of the
Christian soul towards Salvation. Many cathedrals of Eastern European tradition
are centrally planned. These churches are almost always domed. The symbolism in
these cathedral structures is of the hierarchy of Earth and Heaven, and often
reveals its meaning through the internal decoration of the building with
frescos or mosaics. Religious functions. Apart from its organisational function
as the seat of the bishop, and the meeting place for the chapter of the
diocese, the cathedral has a liturgical function in offering daily church
services. Most cathedrals have at least three services of worship every day,
often taking the form of matins, Holy Communion and an evening service which is
often sung by the precentor and choir. There are often additional services on
Sunday. Cathedrals generally have an area dedicated to the performance of
choral services and with seating specifically for the choir and dignitories of
the church and town. This part of the building is called the Choir or Quire,
and is generally located between the sanctuary and the nave. Because music
often plays an important part in the performance of the liturgy, cathedrals
generally have a pipe organ to accompany the choir. Cathedrals always have a
font or water basin at which the rite of Baptism is performed, in which a
person is formally accepted into the Christian church. The font is often placed
towards the door because the Baptism signifies entry into the community of the
church. In some cathedrals, most particularly in Italy, the rite of Baptism is
performed in a separate building. One of the functions of the cathedral is the
reading and expounding upon the Holy Scripture. The cathedral generally has a
lectern from which the scripture is read. This often takes the form of an eagle
of brass or carved wood which supports the book on its outstretched wings and
is the symbol of John the Evangelist. However, some cathedrals retain elaborate
medieval structures on either side of the church, one for the reading of the
Gospel and the other for the reading of the Epistle. The function of expounding
on the scriptures is traditionally performed from the pulpit which is generally
constructed in such a way that the voice of the preacher is projected out to
the congregation. The pulpit is often decorated with the winged figures of a
man, a lion, a bull and an eagle, representing the Gospel writers, Matthew,
Mark, Luke and John. The services that are held within the cathedral follow an
annual cycle. The designated scriptural readings for each day of the church's
year establish a pattern which alternates periods of introspection and
penitence with periods of celebration, and is punctuated by the two great
celebrations of Christmas and Easter. Many cathedrals are places of pilgrimage
to which people travel in order to worship or venerate a holy object or the
reliquary of a saint. Many cathedrals are regarded as places that have provided
rewarding religious experiences, where prayers have been answered or miracles
have taken place. Pilgrimage was particularly popular in the late medieval
period. Some cathedrals such as Santiago de Compostela continue to attract
pilgrims. Civic and social functions. The formal cathedral services are linked
to the cycle of the year and respond to the seasons of the Northern Hemisphere,
Christmas falling in the winter and Easter in the spring. Cathedrals often hold
a service of thanksgiving called Harvest Festival in the autumn. Births,
marriages and deaths are often celebrated by services at cathedrals and the
cathedral often acts as a repository of local history by recording these
events. The cathedral marks times of national and local civic celebration and
sadness with special services. The funerals of those famous within the
community are invariably held at cathedrals. People who have served the
community or the church are often buried within the cathedral with which they
are associated. Alternatively, they may be commemorated by a memorial. Some
cathedrals, such as Aachen and Rheims are the traditional coronation places of
monarchs. Another civic function of the cathedral is the imparting of
significant civil information. Announcements may be to the populace from the
steps of the cathedral, or within the cathedral itself. Most cathedrals have a
bell or bells. These are used to announce that a service is soon to take place.
They are also used to convey information and celebration. The ringing of peals
signifies a time of rejoicing, such as a wedding. An extended ringing of peals
or "changes" conveys a time of great civic celebration. The slow tolling of the
deepest bell signifies a death or disaster. Many cathedrals have a clock with
associated chimes which announce the time. The bells of a cathedral are
traditionally used to signal the outbreak and the ending of war. Cathedrals are
often associated with significant secular organisations such as the office of
the local mayor and council, the local court, the local regiment, schools,
sporting organisations and service clubs. The cathedral often has its own
school, primarily for the education of choristers, but often including other
children as well. The cathedral, often being a large building, serves as a
meeting place for many people. The cathedral often forms a centre of different
activities related to community service, youth activities, study, music and
decorative arts. Cathedral buildings. Cathedral buildings, especially those
dating from the Medieval period, are frequently the grandest of churches in the
diocese (and country). The ancient cathedrals of England, of Northern France,
Belgium, Spain, Portugal, Germany and Sicily, the Baroque cathedrals of South
America, and many individual cathedrals from Italy and other parts of Europe,
are among the largest and finest religious buildings. Many are renowned for
their architecture or their decorative features such as sculpture, stained
glass and frescos. While cathedral buildings, in general, tend to be large,
size and grandeur have rarely been essential requirements. Early Celtic and
Saxon cathedrals tended to be of diminutive size, as is the Byzantine so-called
"Little Metropole Cathedral" of Athens. In Italy, with a few notable exceptions
such as Florence Cathedral and Milan Cathedral, cathedrals are numerous and are
often similar in form and size to monastic or large parish churches. In modern
times, where functionality is the foremost consideration, a cathedral church
may be a modest structure. Cathedrals of monastic foundation, and some of
secular clergy have cloisters which traditionally provided an open area where
secular activities took place protected from wind and rain. Some cathedrals
also have a chapter house where the chapter could meet. In England, where these
buildings have survived, they are often octagonal. A cathedral may front onto
the main square of a town, as in Florence, or it may be set in a walled "close"
as at Canterbury. There may be a number of associated monastic or clergy
buildings, a bishop's palace and often a school to educate the choristers.
Artworks, treasures and tourism. Many cathedral buildings are very famous for
their architecture and have local and national significance, both artistically
and historically. Many are listed among the UNESCO World Heritage Sites. Many
cathedrals, because of their large size and the fact that they often have
towers, spires or domes, have until the 20th century, been the major landmarks
in cities or in views across the countryside. With highrise building, civil
action has been taken in some cases, such as the Cologne Cathedral to prevent
the vista of the cathedral from being spoiled. Because many cathedrals took
centuries to build and decorate, they constitute a major artistic investment
for the city in which they stand. Not only may the building itself be
architecturally significant, but the church often houses treasures such as
stained glass, stone and wood statues, historic tombs, richly carved furniture
and objects of both artistic and religious significance such as reliquaries.
Moreover, the cathedral often plays a major role in telling the story of the
town, through its plaques, inscriptions, tombs, stained glass and paintings.
For these reasons, tourists have travelled to cathedrals for hundreds of years.
Many cathedrals cater for tourists by charging a fee to any visitors outside
service times or requesting a donation or making a charge to take photos.
Cathedrals which are particularly popular tourist venues sometimes provide
guides, leaflets, souvenirs and cafes.
