Charismatic Movement The Charismatic Movement is the international trend of
historically-mainstream congregations adopting beliefs and practices similar to
Pentecostals. Fundamental to the movement is the belief that Christians may be
"filled with" or "baptized in" the Holy Spirit as a second experience
subsequent to salvation and that it will be evidenced by manifestations of the
Holy Spirit. Among Protestants, the movement began around 1960. Among Roman
Catholics, it originated around 1967. History. Pentecostalism began in the
early twentieth century. Its doctrinal distinctive was a dramatic encounter
with God termed baptism with the Holy Spirit. This experience was one of
empowerment for Christian life and service, and the evidence for having
received this experience was speaking in other tongues. Before 1955,
Pentecostal doctrinal distinctives were not embraced by the religious
mainstream. If a church member or clergyman openly expressed such views, they
would (either voluntarily or involuntarily) separate from their older
denomination. The charismatic movement was a reversal of this previous pattern
as those influenced by Pentecostal spirituality chose to remain in their
original denominations. The high church wing of the American Episcopal Church
was the first to feel the impact of the new movement. The beginning of the
charismatic movement is usually dated to Easter 1960, when Dennis Bennett,
rector of St Mark's Episcopal Church in Van Nuys, California, recounted his
Pentecostal experience to his parish. The resulting controversy and press
coverage created an awareness of the emerging charismatic movement. The
movement spread to other mainline churches, where clergy began receiving and
publicly announcing their Pentecostal experience. These clergy began holding
meetings for seekers and healing services where the sick were prayed for and
anointed. The Catholic Charismatic Renewal began in 1967 at Duquesne University
in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. The term "charismatic" was coined by American
Lutheran minister Harald Bredesen in 1962 to describe what was happening in
mainline Protestant denominations. Confronted with the term "neo-Pentecostal",
he preferred to call it "the charismatic renewal in the historic churches".
Despite the fact that Pentecostals shared more in common with evangelicals than
either Roman Catholics or mainline Protestants, the charismatic movement was
not initially influential among evangelical churches. Peter Wagner traces the
spread of the charismatic movement within evangelicalism to around 1985. He
termed this movement the Third Wave of the Holy Spirit. The Third Wave has
expressed itself through the formation of separate churches and denomination-
like organizations. These groups are referred to as "neo-charismatic". The
Vineyard Movement and the British New Church Movement are examples of Third
Wave or neo-charismatic organizations. Beliefs. Charismatic is an umbrella term
used to describe the belief that the gifts (Greek "charismata" χάρισμα,
from "charis" χάρις, grace) of the Holy Spirit as described in the New
Testament are available to contemporary Christians through the infilling or
baptism of the Holy Spirit, with-or-without the laying on of hands. These
spiritual gifts are believed to be manifest in the form of signs, miracles, and
wonders, including, but not limited to, speaking in tongues, interpretation of
tongues, prophecy, healing, and discernment of spirits. While Pentecostals and
charismatics share these beliefs, there are differences. Many in the
charismatic movement deliberately distanced themselves from Pentecostalism for
cultural and theological reasons. Foremost among theological reasons is the
tendency of many Pentecostals to insist that speaking in tongues is always the
initial physical sign of receiving Spirit baptism. Although specific teachings
will vary from group to group, charismatics generally believe that the baptism
with the Holy Spirit occurs at the new birth and prefer to call subsequent
encounters with the Holy Spirit by other names, such as "being filled". In
contrast to Pentecostals, charismatics tend to accept a range of supernatural
experiences (such as prophecy, miracles, healing, or "physical manifestations
of an altered state of consciousness") as evidence of having been baptized or
filled with the Holy Spirit. Pentecostals are also distinguished from the
charismatic movement on the basis of style. In addition, Pentecostals have
traditionally placed a high value on evangelization and missionary work.
Charismatics, on the other hand, have tended to see their movement as a force
for revitalization and renewal within their own church traditions.
Denominational distinctives. Anglican Communion (including Episcopalian). In
America, the Episcopalian Dennis Bennett is sometimes cited as one of the
charismatic movement's seminal influence. Bennett was the Rector at St Mark's
Episcopal Church in Van Nuys, California when he announced to the congregation
in 1960 that he had received the outpouring of the Holy Spirit. Soon after this
he was ministering in Vancouver where he ran many workshops and seminars about
the work of the Holy Spirit. This influenced tens of thousands of Anglicans
worldwide and also began a renewal movement within the Roman Catholic and
Orthodox churches. In the United Kingdom, Colin Urquhart, Michael Harper, David
Watson and others were in the vanguard of similar developments. The Massey
conference in New Zealand, 1964 was attended by several Anglicans including,
the Rev. Ray Muller who went on to invite Bennett to New Zealand in 1966, and
played a leading role in developing and promoting the "Life in the Spirit"
seminars. Other Charismatic movement leaders in New Zealand include Bill
Subritzky. Lutherans. Larry Christenson, a Lutheran theologian based in San
Pedro, California, did much in the 1960s and 1970s to interpret the charismatic
movement for Lutherans. A very large annual conference was held in Minneapolis
during those years. Charismatic Lutheran congregations in Minnesota became
especially large and influential; especially "Hosanna!" in Lakeville, and North
Heights in St. Paul. The next generation of Lutheran charismatics cluster
around the Alliance of Renewal Churches. There is currently considerable
charismatic activity among young Lutheran leaders in California centered around
an annual gathering at Robinwood Church in Huntington Beach. Eastern Orthodox.
The charismatic movement in the Eastern Orthodox Church never exerted the
influence that it did in other mainstream churches. Individual priests, such as
Fr. James Tavralides, Fr. Constantine Monios and Fr. David Buss, Fr. Athanasius
Emmert of the Antiochian Orthodox Christian Archdiocese, Fr. Eusebius Stephanou
of the Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of North America, founder of the Brotherhood
of St. Symeon the New Theologian and editor of "The Logos", and Fr. Boris
Zabrodsky of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church in America, founder of the Service
Committee for Orthodox Spiritual Renewal (SCOSR) which published "Theosis"
Newsletter, were some of the more prominent leaders of the charismatic renewal
in Orthodoxy. Reformed Churches. In the more traditionally Calvinist or
Reformed Theology there are differing views regarding present-day continuation
or cessation of the charismatic gifts. Generally, reformed charismatics
distance themselves from movements that display over-emotional tendencies such
as Word of Faith, Toronto Blessing, Brownsville Revival and Lakeland Revival.
Roman Catholicism. Since 1967 the charismatic movement has been active within
the Roman Catholic Church.In the USA the Catholic Charismatic Renewal was
focused in individuals like Kevin Ranaghan and others at the University of
Notre Dame in Notre Dame, Indiana. Duquesne University in Pittsburgh, which was
founded by the Congregation of the Holy Spirit, a Catholic religious community,
began hosting charismatic revivals in 1977. In a forward to a 1983 book by
Léon Joseph Cardinal Suenens, at that time the Pope's delegate to the
Charismatic Renewal, the Prefect comments on the Post-Conciliar period stating,
and In the Roman Catholic church, the movement became particularly popular in
the Filipino, Korean, and Hispanic communities of the United States, in the
Philippines, and in Latin America, mainly Brazil. Travelling priests and lay
people associated with the movement often visit parishes and sing what are
known as charismatic masses. It is thought to be the second largest distinct
sub-movement (some 120 million members) within global Catholicism, along with
Traditional Catholicism. A further difficulty is the tendency for many
charismatic Catholics to take on what others in their church might consider
sacramental language and assertions of the necessity of "Baptism in the Holy
Spirit," as a universal act. This causes difficulty as there is little to
distinguish the "Baptism" from the sacrament of confirmation. In this regard, a
Study seminar organized jointly in Sao Paulo by the Pontifical Council for
Promoting Christian Unity and the Bishops Conference of Brazil raised these
issues. Technically, among Catholics, the "Baptism of the Holy Spirit" is
neither the highest nor fullest manifestation of the Holy Spirit. Thus "Baptism
of the Spirit" is one experience among many within Christianity (as are the
extraordinary manifestations of the Spirit in the lives of the saints, notably
St. Francis of Assisi and St. Teresa of Avila, who levitated), and thus less
dogmatically held by Catholic charismatics (than by Pentecostals). Possibly,
Padre Pio (now St. Pio) provides a modern-day Catholic example of this
experience. Describing his confirmation, when he as 12 year old, Padre Pio said
that he "wept with consolation" whenever he thought of that day because "I
remember what the Most Holy Spirit caused me to feel that day, a day unique and
unforgettable in all my life! What sweet raptures the Comforter made me feel
that day! At the thought of that day, I feel aflame from head to toe with a
brilliant flame that burns, consumes, but gives no pain." In this experience,
Padre Pio said he was made to feel God's "fullness and perfection." Thus a case
can be made that he was "baptized by the Spirit" on his confirmation day in
1899. It was one spiritual experience among many that he would have. 160. What
are Charisms? 799-801. Charisms are special gifts of the Holy Spirit which are
bestowed on individuals for the good of others, the needs of the world, and in
particular for the building up of the Church. The discernment of charisms is
the responsibility of the Magisterium. Seventh-day Adventist. A minority of
Seventh-day Adventists today are charismatic. They are strongly associated with
those holding more "progressive" Adventist beliefs. In the early decades of the
church charismatic or ecstatic phenomena were commonplace.
