Charles Wesley Charles Wesley (18 December 1707 ‚Äì 29 March 1788) was an
English leader of the Methodist movement, son of Anglican clergyman and poet
Samuel Wesley, the younger brother of Anglican clergyman John Wesley and
Anglican clergyman Samuel Wesley (the Younger), and father of musician Samuel
Wesley, and grandfather of musician Samuel Sebastian Wesley. Despite their
closeness, Charles and his brother John did not always agree on questions
relating to their beliefs. In particular, Charles was strongly opposed to the
idea of a breach with the Church of England into which they had been ordained.
Charles Wesley is chiefly remembered for the many hymns he wrote. He ministered
for part of his life in The New Room Chapel in Bristol. His house, located
nearby, can still be visited today. Biographical details. Charles Wesley was
the son of Susanna Wesley and Samuel Wesley. He was born in Epworth,
Lincolnshire, England, where his father was rector. He was educated at
Westminster School and Christ Church, Oxford, and formed the "Oxford Methodist"
group among his fellow students in 1727 which his elder brother, John joined in
1729 soon becoming its leader and moulding it to his own notions. George
Whitefield also joined this group. After graduating with a Masters' in
classical languages and literature, Charles followed his father and brother
into the church in 1735. On 14 October 1735, Charles and his brother John
sailed on "The Simmonds" from Gravesend, Kent for Savannah in the Georgia
Colony in British America at the request of the governor, James Oglethorpe.
Charles was appointed Secretary of Indian Affairs and while John remained in
Savannah, Charles went as chaplain to the garrison and colony at near-by Fort
Frederica, St. Simon's Island, arriving there Tuesday, 9 March 1736 according
to his journal entry. However, matters did not turn out well, and he was
largely rejected by the settlers. In July 1736, Charles was commissioned to
England as the bearer of dispatches to the trustees of the colony. On 16 August
1736, he sailed from Charleston, South Carolina, never to return to the Georgia
colony again. Charles lived and worked in the area around St Marylebone Parish
Church and so, just before his death, he sent for its rector John Harley and
told him "Sir, whatever the world may say of me, I have lived, and I die, a
member of the Church of England. I pray you to bury me in your churchyard." On
his death, his body was carried to the church by six clergymen of the Church of
England, and a memorial stone to him stands in the gardens in Marylebone High
Street, close to his burial spot. One of his sons, Samuel, became organist of
the church. Marriage and children. In April 1749, he married the much younger
Sarah Gwynne (1726‚Äì1822), also known as Sally. She was the daughter of
Marmaduke Gwynne, a wealthy Welsh magistrate who had been converted to
Methodism by Howell Harris. They moved into a house in Bristol in September
1749. Sarah accompanied the brothers on their evangelistic journeys throughout
Britain, until at least 1753. After 1756 Charles made no more journeys to
distant parts of the country, mainly just moving between Bristol and London. In
1771 Charles obtained another house, in London, and moved into it that year
with his elder son. By 1778 the whole family had transferred from Bristol to
the London house, at 1 Chesterfield Street, Marylebone, where they remained
until Charles' death and on into the 19th¬ century. The house in Bristol still
stands and has been restored, however the London house was demolished in the
mid 19th¬ century. Only three of the couple's children survived infancy:
Charles Wesley junior (1757‚Äì1834), Sarah Wesley (1759‚Äì1828), who like her
mother was also known as Sally and Samuel Wesley (1766‚Äì1837) Their other
children, John, Martha Maria, Susannah, Selina and John James are all buried in
Bristol having died between 1753 and 1768.{See monument in garden on north side
of junction of Lewis Mead and The Haymarket, Bristol} Both Samuel and Charles
junior were musical child prodigies and, like their father, became organists
and composers. Charles junior spent most of his career as the personal organist
of the English Royal family, and Samuel became one of the most accomplished
musicians in the world and often called "the English Mozart." Furthermore,
Samuel Wesley's son, Samuel Sebastian Wesley, was one of the foremost British
composers of the 19th¬ century. Best-known hymns. The lyrics to many more of
Charles Wesley's hymns can be found on Wikisource and "Hymns and Sacred Poems".
Some 150 of his hymns are in the Methodist hymn book "Hymns and Psalms",
including "Hark! the Herald Angels Sing, and ""The Church Hymn Book"" (In New
York and Chicago, USA, 1872) where "Jesus, Lover of My Soul" is published. Many
of his hymns are translated into other languages, and form the foundation for
Methodist hymnals, as the Swedish "Metodist-Episkopal-Kyrkans Psalmbok" printed
in Stockholm in 1892. Doctrine in Hymns. Wesley's conversion had a clear impact
on his doctrine, especially the doctrine of the Holy Spirit. The change in
doctrine can be seen in his sermons after 1738, but is most notable in his
hymns written after 1738. From Charles published work ‚ÄúHymns and Prayers to
the Trinity‚Äù and in Hymn number 62 he writes ‚ÄúThe Holy Ghost in part we
know, For with us He resides, Our whole of good to Him we owe, Whom by His
grace he guides, He doth our virtuous thoughts inspire, The evil he averts, And
every seed of good desire, He planted in our hearts.‚Äù Here in this one short
verse we have several doctrinal truths taught to us. We have the personal
indwelling of the Holy Spirit, the sanctifying work of the Holy Spirit, the
depravity of mankind, and our personal accountability to God. This was a vital
contribution not only to Methodism, but to modern theology as a whole. Legacy.
Wesley is still remembered for his ministry while in St. Simon's Island,
Georgia, by the South Georgia Conference of the United Methodist Church; in
1950, the conference opened a Christian retreat center on the island by the
banks of the Frederica River, designating it Epworth by the Sea in honor of his
and John's birthplace. He is commemorated in the Calendar of Saints of the
Evangelical Lutheran Church in America on 2 March with his brother John. The
Wesley brothers are also commemorated on 3 March in the Calendar of Saints of
the Episcopal Church and on 24 May in the Anglican calendar. Charles is
commemorated on 29 March in the Calendar of Commemorations by The Order of
Saint Luke; John is commemorated on 2 March; their parents are also
commemorated. As a result of his enduring hymnody, the Gospel Music Association
recognized his musical contributions to the art of gospel music in 1995 by
listing his name in the Gospel Music Hall of Fame. Wesley wrote two of the so-
called Great Four Anglican Hymns. Tercentenary. 24 May 2007 was celebrated as
the tercentenary of Wesley's birth, with many celebratory events held
throughout England, even though Wesley was in fact born in December 1707. The
date of 24 May is known to Methodists as "Aldersgate Day" and commemorates the
spiritual awakening of first Charles and then John Wesley in 1738. In
particular, in the Village of Epworth, North Lincolnshire, at the Wesley
Memorial Methodist Church, there was a flower festival, on 26 and 28 May, with
flower arrangements representing some of Wesley‚Äôs hymns, such as "O for a
Thousand Tongues to Sing," "And Can It Be," and "O For a Trumpet Voice". In
November 2007, An Post, the Irish Post Office, issued a 78c stamp to
commemorate the 300th anniversary of Wesley's birth.
