Cherub A cherub (Heb. כְּרוּב, pl. כְּרוּבִים, eng. trans
"kərūv", pl. "kərūvîm", dual "kərūvāyim" lat. "cherubpl "cherubi[m",
Assyrian ܟܪܘܒܐ) is a type of spiritual being mentioned in the Hebrew Bible
and cited later on in the Christian biblical canons, usually associated with
the presence of God. The plural can be written as cherubim, cherubimsKJV or
cherubs. In modern English the word "cherub" is sometimes used for what are
strictly putti — baby or toddler angels in art. This article is concerned
with the original sense of the word. Cherubim are mentioned in the Torah (five
books of Moses), the Book of Ezekiel, the Book of Genesis, and the Book of
Isaiah. They are also mentioned in the books of 1 Kings, 2 Kings, 1 Chronicles,
and 2 Chronicles mainly in the construction of the House of God. There is only
one mention in the New Testament, in Hebrews 9:5, referring to the mercy seat
of the Ark of the Covenant. Origins. The Hebrew term "cherubim" is cognate with
the Assyrian term "karabu", Akkadian term "kuribu", and Babylonian term
"karabu"; the Assyrian term means 'great, mighty', but the Akkadian and
Babylonian cognates mean 'propitious, blessed'. In some regions the Assyro-
Babylonian term came to refer in particular to spirits which served the gods,
in particular to the shedu (human-headed winged bulls); the Assyrians sometimes
referred to these as "kirubu", a term grammatically related to "karabu". They
were originally a version of the shedu, protective deities sometimes found as
pairs of colossal statues either side of objects to be protected, such as
doorways. However, although the shedu were popular in Mesopotamia,
archaeological remains from the Levant suggest that they were quite rare in the
immediate vicinity of the Israelites. The related Lammasu (human-headed winged
lions — to which the sphinx is similar in appearance), on the other hand,
were the most popular winged-creature in Phoenician art, and so scholars
suspect that Cherubim were originally a form of Lammasu. In particular, in a
scene reminiscent of Ezekiel's dream, the Megiddo Ivories — ivory carvings
found at Megiddo (which became a major Israelite city) — depict an unknown
king being carried on his throne by hybrid winged-creatures. The Lammasu was
originally depicted as having a king's head, a lion's body, and an eagle's
wings, but because of the artistic beauty of the wings, these rapidly became
the most prominent part in imagery; wings later came to be bestowed on men,
thus forming the stereotypical image of an angel. The griffin — a similar
creature but with an eagle's head rather than that of a king — has also been
proposed as an origin, arising in Israelite culture as a result of Hittite
usage of griffins (rather than being depicted as aggressive beasts, Hittite
depictions show them seated calmly, as if guarding), and some have proposed
that "griffin" may be cognate to "cherubim",Also see: Robert S. P.
Beekes,"Etymological Dictionary of Greek", volume 1, Leiden and Boston: Brill,
2010 ISBN 978-90-04-17420-7, page 289, entry for γρυπος,"From the
archaeological perspective, origin in Asia Minor (and the Near East: Elam) is
very probable." but Lammasu were significantly more important in Levantine
culture, and thus more likely to be the origin. Early Semitic tradition
conceived the cherubim as guardians, being devoid of human feelings, and
holding a duty both to represent the gods and to guard sanctuaries from
intruders, in a comparable way to an account found on Tablet 9 of the
inscriptions found at Nimrud. In this view, cherubim, like the shedu, were
probably originally depictions of storm deities, especially the storm winds.
This view is offered as a hypothesis to explain the reason for cherubim being
described as acting as the chariot of the in Ezekiel's visions, the Books of
Samuel, the parallel passages in the later Book of Chronicles, and passages in
the early Psalms: "and he rode upon a cherub and did fly: and he was seen upon
the wings of the wind". In the Bible. Cherubim first appear in the Bible in the
Garden of Eden, to guard the way to the Tree of life. In Isaiah 37:16, Hezekiah
prays, addressing Yahweh as "enthroned above the Cherubim" (referring to the
mercy seat). Cherubim feature at some length in the Book of Ezekiel. When they
first appear in chapter one, when Ezekiel was "by the river Chebar", they are
not called "cherubim", but he saw "the likeness of four living creatures".
(Ezekiel 1:5) Each of them had four faces and four wings, with straight feet
with a sole like the sole of a calf's foot, and "hands of a man" under their
wings. Each had four faces: The face of a man, the face of a lion on the right
side, the face of an ox on the left side, and the face of an eagle. (Ezekiel 1:
6-10) In Ezekiel chapter ten, another full description of the Cherubim appears
with slight differences in details. Three of the four faces are the same; man,
lion and eagle; but where chapter one had the face of an ox, Ezekiel 10:14 says
"face of a cherub". Ezekiel equates the Cherubim of chapter ten with the living
creature of chapter one by saying: "This "is" the living creature that I saw by
the river of Chebar", in Ezekiel 10:15, and in Ezekiel 10:20 he said: "This
"is" the living creature that I saw under the God of Israel by the river of
Chebar; and I knew that they "were" the cherubim." In a psalm of David that
appears in 2 Samuel 22:11 and Psalms 18:10, David said that the "rode upon a
cherub, and did fly: and he was seen upon the wings of the wind." The words
"Cherub" and "Cherubim" appear many other times in the holy scriptures,
referring to the Cherubim of beaten gold on the mercy seat of the Ark of the
Covenant, and images on the curtains of the tabernacle, and in Solomon's
temple, including two Cherubim made of olive wood overlaid with gold that were
ten cubits high. Post-biblical Judaism. Many forms of Judaism teach belief in
the existence of angels, including Cherubim within the Jewish angelic
hierarchy. The existences of angels is generally widely contested within
traditional rabbinic Judaism; there is, however, a wide range of views on what
angels actually are, and how literally one should interpret biblical passages
associated with them. In Kabbalah there has long been a strong belief in
Cherubim, with the Cherubim, and other angels, regarded as having mystical
roles. The Zohar, a highly significant collection of books in Jewish mysticism,
states that the Cherubim were led by one of their number, named Kerubiel. On
the other end of the philosophical spectrum is the view of Rabbi Moshe ben
Maimon, better known as Maimonides. He had a neo-Aristotelian interpretation of
the Bible. Maimonides writes that to the wise man, one sees that what the Bible
and Talmud refer to as "angels" are actually allusions for the various laws of
nature; they are the principles by which the physical universe operates. "Guide
of the Perplexed" II:4 and II:6. Maimonides says (Guide for the Perplexed III:
45) that the figures of the cherubayim were placed in the sanctuary only to
preserve among the people the belief in angels, there being two in order that
the people might not be led to believe that they were the image of God. Reform
Judaism and Reconstructionist Judaism generally either drop references to
angels or interpret them metaphorically. Cherubs are discussed within the
midrash literature. The two cherubayim placed by God at the entrance of
paradise (Gen. iii. 24) were angels created on the third day, and therefore
they had no definite shape; appearing either as men or women, or as spirits or
angelic beings (Genesis Rabbah xxi., end). The cherubim were the first objects
created in the universe (Tanna debe Eliyahu R., i. beginning). The following
sentence of the Midrash is characteristic: "When a man sleeps, the body tells
to the neshamah (soul) what it has done during the day; the neshamah then
reports it to the nefesh (spirit), the nefesh to the angel, the angel to the
cherub, and the cherub to the seraph, who then brings it before God (Leviticus
Rabbah xxii.; Eccl. Rabbah x. 20). A midrash states that when Pharaoh pursued
Israel at the Red Sea, God took a cherub from the wheels of His throne and flew
to the spot, for God inspects the heavenly worlds while sitting on a cherub.
The cherub, however, is "something not material", and is carried by God, not
vice versa (Midr. Teh. xviii. 15; Canticles Rabbah i. 9). In the passages of
the Talmud that describe the heavens and their inhabitants, the seraphim,
ofannim, and ḥayyot are mentioned, but not the cherubim (Ḥag. 12b); and the
ancient liturgy also mentions only these three classes. In the Talmud, Yose ha-
Gelili holds, when the Birkat HaMazon (Grace after Meals) is recited by at
least ten thousand seated at one meal, a special blessing, "Blessed is Ha-Shem
our God, the God of Israel, who dwells between the Cherubim", is added to the
regular liturgy. Catholicism. In Catholic theology, following the writings of
Pseudo-Dionysius, the cherubim are the second highest rank in the angelic
hierarchy, following the Seraphim. In western art, Putti are sometimes mistaken
for Cherubim, although they look nothing alike. Depictions. There were no
cherubim in Herodian reconstruction of the Temple, but according to some
authorities, its walls were painted with figures of cherubim. In Christian art
they are often represented with the faces of a lion, ox, eagle, and man peering
out from the center of an array of four wings (Ezekiel 1:5-11, 10:12,21
Revelation 4:8); (seraphim have six); the most frequently encountered
descriptor applied to cherubim in Christianity is many-eyed, and in depictions
the wings are often shown covered with a multitude of eyes (showing them to be
all seeing beings). Since the Renaissance, in Western Christianity cherubim
have become confused with putti—innocent souls, looking like winged children,
that sing praises to God daily—that can be seen in innumerable church
frescoes and in the work of painters such as Raphael.
