Child sacrifice Child sacrifice is the ritualistic killing of children in order
to please, propitiate or force a god or supernatural beings in order to achieve
a desired result. As such, it is a form of human sacrifice. Pre-Columbian
cultures. Aztec culture. Archeologists have found remains of 42 children
sacrificed to Tlaloc (and a few to Ehécatl, Quetzalcoatl and Huitzilopochtli)
in the offerings of the Great Pyramid of Tenochtitlan by the Aztecs of pre-
Columbian Mexico. Inca culture. The Inca culture sacrificed children in a
ritual called "capacocha". Their frozen corpses are still being discovered in
the South American mountaintops. The first of these corpses, a female child who
had died from a blow to the skull, was discovered in 1995 by Johan Reinhard.
Other methods of sacrifice included strangulation and simply leaving the
children, who had been given an intoxicating drink, to lose consciousness in
the extreme cold and low-oxygen conditions of the mountaintop, and to die of
exposure. Moche culture. The Moche of northern Peru practiced mass sacrifices
of men and boys. Ancient Near East. Tanakh (Hebrew Bible). References in the
Tanakh point to an awareness of human sacrifice in the history of ancient Near
Eastern practice. The king of Moab gives his firstborn son and heir as a whole
burnt offering ("olah", as used of the Temple sacrifice). It is apparently
effective, as his enemy is promptly repelled by a 'great wrath' (). In the book
of the prophet Micah, one asks, 'Shall I give my firstborn for my sin, the
fruit of my body for the sin of my soul?' (), and receives a response, 'He has
shown all you people what is good. And what does Yahweh require of you? To act
justly and to love mercy and to walk humbly with your God.' () The Tanakh also
implies that the Ammonites offered child sacrifices to Moloch. In Leviticus 18:
21, 20:3 and Deuteronomy 12:30-31, 18:10, the Torah contains a number of
imprecations against and laws forbidding child sacrifice. James Kugel argues
that the Torah's specifically forbidding child sacrifice indicates that it
happened in Israel as well. Mark S. Smith argues that the mention of "Topeth"
in Isaiah 30:27–33 indicates an acceptance of child sacrifice in the early
Jerusalem practices, to which the law in Leviticus 20:2–5 forbidding child
sacrifice is a response. Jon D. Levenson, Susan Nidditch and Susan Ackerman
have stated that at least some Israelites believed child sacrifice was a
legitimate part of ancient Israelite religion. Another instance of human
sacrifice mentioned in the Tanakh is the sacrifice of Jephthah's daughter in .
Jephthah is victorious in battle against the children of Ammon and vows to
sacrifice to God whatsoever comes to greet him at the door when he returns
home. The vow is stated in as Phoenicia and Carthage. Carthage was notorious to
its neighbors for child sacrifice. Plutarch (ca. 46–120 AD) mentions the
practice, as do Tertullian, Orosius and Diodorus Siculus. However, Livy and
Polybius do not. The Hebrew Bible also mentions what appears to be child
sacrifice practiced at a place called the Tophet ("roasting place") by the
Canaanites, ancestors of the Carthaginians, and by some Israelites. Some of
these sources suggest that babies were roasted to death on a heated bronze
statue. According to Diodorus Siculus, "There was in their city a bronze image
of Cronus extending its hands, palms up and sloping toward the ground, so that
each of the children when placed thereon rolled down and fell into a sort of
gaping pit filled with fire."(Bib. Hist. 20.14.6) Sites within Carthage and
other Phoenician centers revealed the remains of infants and children in large
numbers; some historians interpret this as evidence for frequent and prominent
child sacrifice to the god Ba'al Hammon. The accuracy of such stories is
disputed by some modern historians and archaeologists. At Carthage, a large
cemetery exists that combines the bodies of both very young children and small
animals, and those who argue in favor of child sacrifice have argued that if
the animals were sacrificed then so too were the children. However, recent
archaeological work has produced a detailed breakdown of the age of the buried
children and based on this, and especially on the presence of pre natal
individuals - that is still births, it is also argued that this site is
consistent with the burial of children who had died from natural causes in a
society that had a high infant mortality rate - as Carthage is assumed to have
been. I.e. this data supports the view that Tophets were cemeteries for those
who died shortly before or after birth, regardless of the cause. Greek, Roman
and Israelite writers refer to Phoenician child sacrifice. However, some
historians have disputed this interpretation, suggesting instead that these
were resting places for children miscarried or who died in infancy. Skeptics
suggest that the bodies of children found in Carthaginian and Phoenician
cemeteries were merely the cremated remains of children that died naturally.
Sergio Ribichini has argued that the Tophet was "a child necropolis designed to
receive the remains of infants who had died prematurely of sickness or other
natural causes, and who for this reason were "offered" to specific deities and
buried in a place different from the one reserved for the ordinary dead". The
few Carthaginian texts which have survived make absolutely no mention of child
sacrifice, though most of them pertain to matters entirely unrelated to
religion, such as the practice of agriculture. Later commentators have compared
the accounts of child sacrifice in the Old Testament with similar ones from
Greek and Latin sources speaking of the offering of children by fire as
sacrifices in the Punic city of Carthage, which was a Phoenician colony.
Cleitarchus, Diodorus Siculus and Plutarch all mention burning of children as
an offering to Cronus or Saturn, that is to Ba'al Hammon, the chief god of
Carthage (see Interpretatio graeca for clarification). Issues and practices
relating to Moloch and child sacrifice may also have been overemphasized for
effect. After the Romans finally defeated Carthage and totally destroyed the
city, they engaged in post-war propaganda to make their archenemies seem cruel
and less civilized. Pre-Islamic Arabia. The Quran documents pagan Arabians
sacrificing their children to idols. Prehistoric Britain. A young child was
found buried with its skull split by a weapon at Woodhenge. This was
interpreted by the excavators as a child sacrifice. Uganda. In the early 21st
century Uganda has experienced a revival of child sacrifice and in spite of
government attempts to downplay the issue an investigation by the BBC into
human sacrifice in Uganda found that ritual killings of children are more
common than Ugandan authorities admit. There are many indicators that
politicians and politically connected wealthy businessmen are involved in
sacrificing children which has become a commercial enterprise. Controversy.
Precious little actual archeological evidence of widespread child sacrifice
exists, leading some archaeologists to propose that child sacrifice may have
been less prevalent than historical documents may suggest. In the case of
Carthage, for instance, the only reports of child sacrifice come from Roman
sources. It is possible that, being mortal enemies of the Carthaginians, the
classic historians may have engaged in a sort of propaganda against their
enemies. This can also be seen in the Jewish case: as they accused others in
the Near East of child sacrifice, they themselves would come to be accused of
it in blood libel cases. In other cases, such as the Aztec and Inca child
sacrifices, archaeological evidence has supported the written sources, and even
added new information that keeps the debate open.
