Chosen people Throughout history, various groups of people have considered
themselves as chosen by a deity for a purpose, such as to act as the deity's
agent on earth. In monotheistic faiths, like Abrahamic religions, references to
God are used in constructs such as "God's Chosen People". Modern anthropology
regards these claims as a form of ethnocentrism. Judaism. In the Hebrew Bible,
(or the Tanakh), called the "Old Testament" by Christians, the "Treasured
People" is the exact phrase used in the text, referring to the Hebrews/
Israelites. In the Book of Deuteronomy, YHWH proclaims the Nation of Israel,
known originally as the Children of Israel, as his "treasured people out of all
the people on the face of the earth" (Deuteronomy 7:6). As mentioned in the
Book of Exodus, the Hebrew people are God's chosen people, and from them shall
come the Messiah, or redeemer of the world. The Israelites also possess the
"Word of God" and/or the "Law of God" in the form of the Torah as communicated
by God to Moses. In Judaism, chosenness is the belief that the Jews are a
people chosen to be in a covenant with God. The Jewish idea of being chosen is
first found in the Torah (five books of Moses) and is elaborated on in later
books of the Hebrew Bible. This status carries both responsibilities and
blessings as described in the Biblical covenants with God. Much is written
about this topic in rabbinic literature. The chosenness refers to a specific
set of responsibilities beyond the Seven Laws of Noah given to all mankind.
Every child of Noah (non-Jew) has the responsibility to live by the seven
Noahide laws. Though not held by authority figures of the religious Jews around
the world, there are people with the opinion that the acceptance to adhere to
the laws and commandments of Judaism make the chosen character as one of the
Jewish people choosing to be in the covenant with God and not the other way
around. The usual Orthodox thinking states that even completely secular Jews
are part of the Jewish nation and are 'full-fledged' Jews. Seventh-day
Adventism. In traditional Seventh-day Adventist theology, the Seventh-day
Adventist church is identified as the end time remnant identified in Revelation
12:17. According to this view, Adventists are "chosen" by God to proclaim the
three angels' messages of Revelation 14 to the world. Mormonism. In Mormonism,
all Latter Day Saints are viewed as covenant, or chosen, people; they have
accepted the name of Jesus Christ. This acceptance of entering the covenant is
initiated by baptism. In contrast to supersessionism, Latter Day Saints do not
dispute the "chosen" status of the Jewish people. In LDS doctrine all people
who have ever lived will have the ability to enter into this covenant during
the Millennium. Mormon eschatology holds that Jews, as a chosen people, will
ultimately accept Mormonism (See Jeremiah 31:31-34). Most practicing LDS
members receive a patriarchal blessing that reveals their lineage in the House
of Israel. This lineage may be blood related or through "adoption;" therefore,
a child may not necessarily share the lineage of her parents (but will still be
a member of the tribes of Israel). It is a widely held belief that most members
of the faith are in the tribe of Ephraim or the tribe of Manasseh. Rastafari.
Rastafaris beliefs contain six fundamental principles, including the complete
chosenness of the black race in the eyes of Jah (God incarnate), rendering them
supreme physically and spiritually to all other people. Many Rastas are also
physical immortalists who believe the chosen few will continue to live forever
in their current bodies. This idea of ever living (rather than everlasting)
life is very strong and important. Based on Jewish biblical tradition and
Ethiopian legend via Kebra Nagast, Rastas believe that Israel's King Solomon,
together with Ethiopian Queen of Sheba, conceived a child which began the
Solomonic line of kings in Ethiopia, rendering the African people as the true
children of Israel, and thereby chosen. Reinforcement of this belief occurred
when Beta Israel, Ethiopia's ancient Israelite First Temple community, were
rescued from Sudanese famine and brought to Israel during Operation Moses in
1985. Unification Church. Reverend Moon teaches that Korea is the chosen
nation, selected to serve a divine mission. Korea, Moon says, was "chosen by
God to be the birthplace of the leading figure of the age", and to be the
birthplace of "Heavenly Tradition", ushering in God's kingdom.
