Christianity and Judaism "*This article only considers the mainstream Christian
views, in contrast to, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints,
Adventism, Early Christianity, Nontrinitarianism and others." "*This article
only considers the mainstream Jewish views, in contrast to Karaite Judaism."
Christianity and Judaism share historical roots in the Second Temple period,
sometimes referred to as Judeo-Christian roots, but the two religions diverged
in the first centuries of the Christian Era. Since the First seven Ecumenical
Councils, Christendom places emphasis on correct belief (or "orthodoxy"),
focusing primarily on the New Covenant that the Christian Triune God made
through Jesus Christ. Judaism places emphasis on the right conduct (or
"orthopraxy"), focusing on the Mosaic Covenant that the God of Israel, made
with the Israelites, as recorded in the Torah and Talmud. Christians obtain
individual salvation from original sin through repentance of sin and receiving
Jesus Christ as their God and Savior through faith and grace. Jews individually
and collectively participate in an eternal dialogue with the God of Israel
through tradition, rituals, prayers and ethical actions. Christianity worships
a Triune God who also is human. Judaism emphasizes the Oneness of God and
rejects the Christian concept of God in human form. Self-identification.
Judaism's purpose is to carry out what it holds to be the only Covenant between
God and the Jewish people. The Torah (lit. "teaching"), both written and oral,
tell the story of this covenant, and provides Jews with the terms of the
covenant. The Oral Torah is the primary guide for Jews to abide by these terms,
as expressed in tractate Gittin 60b, "the Holy One, Blessed be He, did not make
His covenant with Israel except by virtue of the Oral Law" to help them learn
how to live a holy life, and to bring holiness, peace and love into the world
and into every part of life, so that life may be elevated to a high level of
kedushah, originally through study and practice of the Torah, and since the
destruction of the Second Temple, through prayer as expressed in tractate Sotah
49a "Since the destruction of the Temple, every day is more cursed than the
preceding one; and the existence of the world is assured only by the
kedusha...and the words spoken after the study of Torah." Since the adoption of
the Amidah, the acknowledgement of God through the declaration from Yishayah 6:
3 "Kadosh , kadosh, kadosh, is HaShem, Master of Legions; the whole world is
filled with His glory". as a replacement for the study of Torah, which is a
daily obligation for a Jew, and sanctifies God in itself. This continuous
maintenance of relationship between the individual Jew and God through either
study, or prayer repeated twice daily, is the confirmation of the original
covenant. This allows the Jewish people as a community to strive and fulfill
the prophecy "I, the Lord, have called you in righteousness, and will hold your
hand and keep you. And I will establish you as a Covenant of the people, for a
light unto the nations." ( (i.e., a role model) over the course of history, and
a part of the divine intent of bringing about an age of peace and sanctity
where ideally a faithful life and good deeds should be ends in themselves, not
means. See also Jewish principles of faith. The self-described purpose of
Christianity is to provide people with what it holds to be the only valid path
to salvation as announced by the apostles of what the Book of Acts describes
as, "The Way". Only in gentile (non-Jewish) settings is The Way referred to as
Christian. According to Christian theologian Alister McGrath, the Jewish
Christians affirmed every aspect of then contemporary Second Temple Judaism
with the addition of the belief that Jesus was the messiah, with Isaiah 49:6,
"an explicit parallel to 42:6" quoted by Paul in Acts 13:47 and reinterpreted
by Justin the Martyr. According to Christian writers, most notably Paul, the
Bible teaches that people are, in their current state, sinful, and the New
Testament reveals that Jesus is both the Son of man and the Son of God, united
in the hypostatic union, God the Son, God made incarnate; that Jesus' death by
crucifixion was a sacrifice to atone for all humanity's sins, and that
acceptance of Jesus as Savior and Lord saves one from Divine Judgment, giving
Eternal life. Jesus is the mediator of the New Covenant. His famous Sermon on
the Mount is considered by some Christian scholars to be the proclamation of
the New Covenant ethics, in contrast to the Mosaic Covenant of Moses from Mount
Sinai. See also Christian theology. National versus universal. The subject of
the Tanakh, or Hebrew Bible, is the history of the Children of Israel,
especially in terms of their relationship with God. Thus, Judaism has also been
characterized as a culture or as a civilization. The founder of the
Reconstructionist Movement, Rabbi Mordecai Kaplan defines Judaism as an
evolving religious civilization. One crucial sign of this is that one need not
believe, or even do, anything to be Jewish; the historic definition of
'Jewishness' requires only that one be born of a Jewish mother, or that one
convert to Judaism in accord with Jewish law. (Today, Reform and
Reconstructionist Jews also include those born of Jewish fathers and Gentile
mothers if the children are raised as Jews.) To many religious Jews, Jewish
ethnicity is closely tied to their relationship with God, and thus has a strong
theological component. This relationship is encapsulated in the notion that
Jews are a chosen people. For strictly observant Jews, being "chosen"
fundamentally means that it was God's wish that a group of people would exist
in a covenant, and would be bound to obey a certain set of laws as a duty of
their covenant, and that the Children of Israel "chose" to enter into this
covenant with God. They view their divine purpose as being ideally a "light
upon the nations" and a "holy people" (i.e., a people who live their lives
fully in accordance with Divine will as an example to others), not "the one
path to God". For Jews, salvation comes from God, freely given, and observance
of the Law is one way of responding to God's grace. Jews hold that other
nations and peoples are not required (nor expected) to obey the Law of Moses,
with the notable exception that the only laws Judaism believes are
automatically binding (in order to be assured of a place in the world to come)
on other nations are known as the Seven Laws of Noah. Thus, as an ethnic
religion, Judaism holds that others may have their own, different, paths to God
(or holiness, or "salvation"), as long as they are consistent with the "Seven
Laws of Noah". While ethnicity and culture play a large part in Jewish
identity, they are not the only way Jews define themselves as Jews. There are
secular Jews, who do use ethnicity and culture as their defining criteria. And
there are religious Jews, who do not. Rather, religious Jews define their
Jewishness within the context of their Judaism. In this context, a religious
convert could "feel" more Jewish than a secular ethnic Jew. While Rabbi Kaplan
defines Judaism as a civilization, there are many who would not agree, citing
millennia of religious tradition and observance as more than simple
civilization. Most observant Jews would say that Judaism is a love story.
Judaism and Christianity share the belief that there is One, True God, who is
the only one worthy to be worshipped. Judaism sees this One, True God as a
singular, ineffable, undefinable being. Phrases such as "Ground of All Being",
"Unfolding Reality" and "Creator and Sustainer of Life" capture only portions
of who God is to Jews. While God does not change, our perception of God does,
and so, Jews are open to new experiences of God's presence. Christianity, with
a few exceptions, sees the One, True God as having triune personhood: God the
Father, God the Son (Jesus) and God the Holy Spirit. God is the same yesterday,
today and tomorrow, so Christians generally look to the Scriptures (both Hebrew
and Christian) for an understanding of who God is. Christianity is
characterized by its claim to universality, which marks a significant break
from current Jewish identity and thought, but has its roots in Hellenistic
Judaism. Christians believe that Jesus represents the fulfillment of God's
promise to Abraham and the nation of Israel, that Israel would be a blessing to
all nations. Some Christians believe that the Law was "completed" by Jesus and
has become irrelevant to "faith life", for details see Biblical law in
Christianity. Although Christians generally believe their religion to be very
inclusive (since not only Jews but all gentiles can be Christian), Jews see
Christianity as highly exclusive, because some denominations view non-
Christians (such as Jews and Pagans) as having an incomplete or imperfect
relationship with God, and therefore excluded from grace, salvation, heaven, or
eternal life. For most Christians, it is the stated or "confessed" belief in
Jesus as Savior that makes God's grace available to an individual, and
salvation can come no other way (Solus Christus in Protestantism, Extra
Ecclesiam nulla salus in Catholicism, see Dual covenant theology for a
dissenting view). This crucial difference between the two religions has other
implications. For example, while in a conversion to Judaism a convert must
accept basic Jewish principles of faith, and renounce all other religions, the
process is more like a form of adoption, or changing national citizenship (i.e.
becoming a formal member of the people, or tribe), with the convert becoming a
"child of Abraham and Sarah." For many reasons, some historical and some
religious, Judaism does not encourage its members to convert others and in fact
would require the initiative from the person who would like to convert. In
contrast, most Christian denominations actively seek converts, following the
Great Commission, and conversion to Christianity is generally a declaration of
faith (although some denominations view it specifically as adoption into a
community of Christ, and orthodox Christian tradition views it as being a
literal joining together of the members of Christ's body). Both Christianity
and Judaism have been affected by the diverse cultures of their respective
members. For example, what Jews from Eastern Europe and from North Africa
consider "Jewish food" has more in common with the cuisines of non-Jewish
Eastern Europeans and North Africans than with each other, although for
religious Jews all food-preparation must conform to the same laws of Kashrut.
According to non-Orthodox Jews and critical historians, Jewish law too has been
affected by surrounding cultures (for example, some scholars argue that the
establishment of absolute monotheism in Judaism was a reaction against the
dualism of Zoroastrianism that Jews encountered when living under Persian rule;
Jews rejected polygamy during the Middle Ages, influenced by their Christian
neighbors). According to Orthodox Jews too there are variations in Jewish
custom from one part of the world to another. It was for this reason that
Joseph Karo's Shulchan Aruch did not become established as the authoritative
code of Jewish law until after Moshe Isserlis added his commentary, which
documented variations in local custom. Sacred texts. The Hebrew Bible is
composed of three parts; the Torah (Instruction, the Septuagint translated the
Hebrew to "nomos" or "Law"), the Nevi'im (Prophets) and the Ketuvim (Writings).
Collectively, these are known as the Tanakh. According to Rabbinic Judaism the
Torah was revealed by God to Moses; within it, Jews find 613 Mitzvot
(commandments). Rabbinic tradition asserts that God revealed two Torahs to
Moses, one that was written down, and one that was transmitted orally. Whereas
the written Torah has a fixed form, the Oral Torah is a living tradition that
includes not only specific supplements to the written Torah (for instance, what
is the proper manner of "shechita" and what is meant by "Frontlets" in the
Shema), but also procedures for understanding and talking about the written
Torah (thus, the Oral Torah revealed at Sinai includes debates among rabbis who
lived long after Moses). The Oral Law elaborations of narratives in the Bible
and stories about the rabbis are referred to as "aggadah". It also includes
elaboration of the 613 commandments in the form of laws referred to as
"halakha". Elements of the Oral Torah were committed to writing and edited by
Judah HaNasi in the Mishnah in 200 CE; much more of the Oral Torah were
committed to writing in the Babylonian and Jerusalem Talmuds, which were edited
around 600 CE and 450 CE, respectively. The Talmuds are notable for the way
they combine law and lore, for their explication of the midrashic method of
interpreting tests, and for their accounts of debates among rabbis, which
preserve divergent and conflicting interpretations of the Bible and legal
rulings. Since the transcription of the Talmud, notable rabbis have compiled
law codes that are generally held in high regard: the Mishneh Torah, the Tur,
and the Shulchan Aruch. The latter, which was based on earlier codes and
supplemented by the commentary by Moshe Isserles that notes other practices and
customs practiced by Jews in different communities, especially among
Ashkenazim, is generally held to be authoritative by Orthodox Jews. The Zohar,
which was written in the 13th century, is generally held as the most important
esoteric treatise of the Jews. All contemporary Jewish movements consider the
Tanakh, and the Oral Torah in the form of the Mishnah and Talmuds as sacred,
although movements are divided as to claims concerning their divine revelation,
and also their authority. For Jews, the Torah - written and oral - is the
primary guide to the relationship between God and man, a living document that
has unfolded and will continue to unfold whole new insights over the
generations and millennia. A saying that captures this goes, "Turn it Torah's
words over and over again, for everything is in it." Instead of the traditional
Jewish order and names for the books, Christians organize and name the books
closer to that found in the Septuagint. Some Christian denominations (such as
Anglican, Roman Catholic, and Eastern Orthodox), include a number of books that
are not in the Hebrew Bible (the biblical apocrypha or deuterocanonical books
or "Anagignoskomena", see Development of the Old Testament canon) in their
biblical canon that are not in today's Jewish canon, although they were
included in the Septuagint. Christians reject the Jewish Oral Torah, which was
still in oral, and therefore unwritten, form in the time of Jesus. Christians
believe that God has established a new covenant with people through Jesus, as
recorded in the Gospels, Acts of the Apostles, Epistles, and other books
collectively called the New Testament (the word "testament" attributed to
Tertullian is commonly interchanged with the word "covenant"). For some
Christians, such as Roman Catholics and Orthodox Christians, this New Covenant
includes authoritative Sacred Traditions and Canon law. Others, especially
Protestants, reject the authority of such traditions and instead hold to the
principle of "sola scriptura", which accepts only the Bible itself as the final
rule of faith and practice. Additionally, some denominations include the "oral
teachings of Jesus to the Apostles", which they believe have been handed down
to this day by Apostolic Succession. Christians refer to the Biblical books
about Jesus as the New Testament, and to the canon of Hebrew books as the Old
Testament, terms associated with Supersessionism. Judaism does not accept the
labeling of its sacred texts as the "Old Testament", and some Jews refer to the
New Testament as the Christian Testament or Christian Bible. Judaism rejects
all claims that the Christian New Covenant supersedes, abrogates, fulfills, or
is the unfolding or consummation of the covenant expressed in the Written and
Oral Torahs. Therefore, just as Christianity does not accept that Mosaic Law
has any authority over Christians, Judaism does not accept that the New
Testament has any religious authority over Jews. Many Jews view Christians as
having quite an ambivalent view of the Torah, or Mosaic law: on one hand
Christians speak of it as God's absolute word, but on the other, they apply its
commandments with a certain selectivity (compare Biblical law in Christianity).
Some Jews contend that Christians cite commandments from the Old Testament to
support one point of view but then ignore other commandments of a similar class
that are also of equal weight. Examples of this are certain commandments that
God states explicitly shall abide "for ever" (for example , ), or certain
practices which God prohibits as abominations, but which are not prohibited by
most Christian denominations. Christians explain that such selectivity is based
on rulings made by early Jewish Christians in the Book of Acts, at the Council
of Jerusalem, that, while believing gentiles did not need to fully convert to
Judaism, they should follow some aspects of Torah like avoiding idolatry and
fornication and blood, including, according to some interpretations,
homosexuality. This view is also reflected by modern Judaism, in that Righteous
Gentiles needn't convert to Judaism and need to observe only the Noahide Laws,
which also contain prohibitions against idolatry and fornication and blood.
Some Christians agree that Jews who accept Jesus should still observe all of
Torah, see for example Dual-covenant theology, based on warnings by Jesus to
Jews not to use him as an excuse to disregard it, and they support efforts of
those such as Messianic Jews (Messianic Judaism is considered by most
Christians and Jews to be a form of Christianity) to do that, but some
Protestant forms of Christianity oppose all observance to the Mosaic law, even
by Jews, which Luther criticised as "Antinomianism", see
Antinomianism#Antinomian Controversies in Lutheranism and Luther#Anti-
Antinomianism for details. A minority view in Christianity, known as Christian
Torah-submission, holds that the Mosaic law as it is written is binding on all
followers of God under the New Covenant, even for Gentiles, because it views
God‚Äôs commands as "everlasting" (, ; , ; ) and "good" (; ; ). Concepts of
God. Traditionally, both Judaism and Christianity believe in the God of
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, for Jews the God of the Tanakh, for Christians the
God of the Old Testament, the creator of the universe. Judaism and major sects
of Christianity reject the view that God is entirely immanent (although some
see this as the concept of the Holy Ghost) and within the world as a physical
presence, (although trinitarian Christians believe in the incarnation of God).
Both religions reject the view that God is entirely transcendent, and thus
separate from the world, as the pre-Christian Greek Unknown God. Both religions
reject atheism on one hand and polytheism on the other. Both religions agree
that God shares both transcendent and immanent qualities. How these religions
resolve this issue is where the religions differ. Christianity posits that God
exists as a Trinity; in this view God exists as three distinct persons who
share a single divine essence, or substance. In those three there is one, and
in that one there are three; the one God is indivisible, while the three
persons are distinct and unconfused, God the Father, God the Son, and God the
Holy Spirit. It teaches that God became especially immanent in physical form
through the Incarnation of God the Son who was born as Jesus of Nazareth, who
is believed to be at once fully God and fully human. There are "Christian"
sects that question one or more of these doctrines, however, see also
Nontrinitarianism. By contrast, Judaism sees God as a single entity, and views
trinitarianism as both incomprehensible and a violation of the Bible's teaching
that God is one. It rejects the notion that Jesus or any other object or living
being could be 'God', that God could have a literal 'son' in physical form or
is divisible in any way, or that God could be made to be joined to the material
world in such fashion. Although Judaism provides Jews with a word to label
God's transcendence ("Ein Sof", without end) and immanence ("Shekhinah", in-
dwelling), these are merely human words to describe two ways of experiencing
God; God is one and indivisible. Shituf. A minority Jewish view, which appears
in some codes of Jewish law, is that while Christian worship is polytheistic
(due to the multiplicity of the Trinity), it is permissible for them to swear
in God's name, since they are referring to the one God. This theology is
referred to in Hebrew as Shituf (literally "partnership" or "association").
Although worship of a trinity is considered to be not different from any other
form of idolatry for Jews, it may be an acceptable belief for non-Jews
(according to the ruling of some Rabbinic authorities). Right action. Faith
versus good deeds. Judaism teaches that the purpose of the Torah is to teach us
how to act correctly. God's existence is a given in Judaism, and not something
that most authorities see as a matter of required belief. Although some
authorities see the Torah as commanding Jews to believe in God, Jews see belief
in God as a necessary, but not sufficient, condition for a Jewish life. The
quintessential verbal expression of Judaism is the Shema Yisrael, the statement
that the God of the Bible is their God, and that this God is unique and one.
The quintessential physical expression of Judaism is behaving in accordance
with the 613 Mitzvot (the commandments specified in the Torah), and thus live
one's life in God's ways. Thus fundamentally in Judaism, one is enjoined to
bring holiness into life (with the guidance of God's laws), rather than
removing oneself from life to be holy. Much of Christianity also teaches that
God wants people to perform good works, but all branches hold that good works
alone will not lead to salvation, which is called Legalism. The exception is
Dual-covenant theology. Some Christian denominations hold that salvation
depends upon transformational faith in Jesus, which expresses itself in good
works as a testament (or witness) to ones faith for others to see (primarily
Eastern Orthodox Christianity and Roman Catholicism), while others (including
most Protestants) hold that faith alone is necessary for salvation. However,
the difference is not as great as it seems, because it really hinges on the
definition of "faith" used. The first group generally uses the term "faith" to
mean "intellectual and heartfelt assent and submission." Such a faith will not
be salvific until a person has allowed it to effect a life transforming
conversion (turning towards God) in their being (see Ontotheology). The
Christians that hold to "salvation by faith alone" (also called by its Latin
name "sola fide") define faith as being implicitly ontological‚Äîmere
intellectual assent is not termed "faith" by these groups. Faith, then, is
life-transforming by definition. Sin. In both religions, offenses against the
will of God are called sin. These sins can be thoughts, words, or deeds.
Catholicism categorizes sins into various groups. A wounding of the
relationship with God is often called venial sin; a complete rupture of the
relationship with God is often called mortal sin. Without salvation from sin
(see below), a person's separation from God is permanent, causing such a person
to enter Hell in the afterlife. Both the Catholic Church and the Orthodox
Church define sin more or less as a "macula", a spiritual stain or
uncleanliness that constitutes damage to man's image and likeness of God.
Hebrew has several words for sin, each with its own specific meaning. The word
"pesha", or "trespass", means a sin done out of rebelliousness. The word
"aveira" means "transgression". And the word "avone", or "iniquity", means a
sin done out of moral failing. The word most commonly translated simply as
"sin", "het", literally means "to go astray." Just as Jewish law, "halakha"
provides the proper "way" (or path) to live, sin involves straying from that
path. Judaism teaches that humans are born with freewill, and morally neutral,
with both a "yetzer hatov", (literally, "the good inclination", in some views,
a tendency towards goodness, in others, a tendency towards having a productive
life and a tendency to be concerned with others) and a "yetzer hara",
(literally "the evil inclination", in some views, a tendency towards evil, and
in others, a tendency towards base or animal behavior and a tendency to be
selfish). In Judaism all human beings are believed to have free will and can
choose the path in life that they will take. It does not teach that choosing
good is impossible - only at times more difficult. There is almost always a
"way back" if a person wills it. (Although texts mention certain categories for
whom the way back will be exceedingly hard, such as the slanderer, the habitual
gossip, and the malicious person) The rabbis recognize a positive value to the
"yetzer hara": one tradition identifies it with the observation on the last day
of creation that God's accomplishment was "very good" (God's work on the
preceding days was just described as "good") and explain that without the
yetzer ha'ra there would be no marriage, children, commerce or other fruits of
human labor; the implication is that yetzer ha'tov and yetzer ha'ra are best
understood not as moral categories of good and evil but as selfless versus
selfish orientations, either of which used rightly can serve God's will. In
contrast to the Jewish view of being morally balanced, Original Sin refers to
the idea that the sin of Adam and Eve's disobedience (sin "at the origin") has
passed on a spiritual heritage, so to speak. Christians teach that human beings
inherit a corrupted or damaged human nature in which the tendency to do bad is
greater than it would have been otherwise, so much so that human nature would
not be capable now of participating in the afterlife with God. This is not a
matter of being "guilty" of anything; each person is only personally guilty of
their own actual sins. However, this understanding of original sin is what lies
behind the Christian emphasis on the need for spiritual salvation from a
spiritual Saviour, who can forgive and set aside sin even though humans are not
inherently pure and worthy of such salvation. St. Paul in Romans and I
Corinthians placed special emphasis on this doctrine, and stressed that belief
in Jesus would allow Christians to overcome death and attain salvation in the
hereafter. Roman Catholics, Eastern Orthodox Christians, and some Protestants
teach the Sacrament of Baptism is the means by which each person's damaged
human nature is healed and Sanctifying Grace (capacity to enjoy and participate
in the spiritual life of God) is restored. This is referred to as "being born
of water and the Spirit", following the terminology in the Gospel of St. John.
Most Protestants believe this salvific grace comes about at the moment of
personal decision to follow Jesus, and that baptism is a symbol of the grace
already received. Love. Although love is central to both Christianity and
Judaism, literary critic Harold Bloom (in his "Jesus and Yahweh: The Names
Divine") argues that their notions of love are fundamentally different.
Specifically, he links the Jewish conception of love to justice, and the
Christian conception of love to charity. As in English, the Hebrew word for
"love", ahavah ◊ê◊î◊ë◊î, is used to describe intimate or romantic feelings or
relationships, such as the love between parent and child in Genesis 22:2; 25:
28; 37:3; the love between close friends in I Samuel 18:2, 20:17; or the love
between a young man and young woman in Song of Songs. Christians will often use
the Septuagint to make distinctions between the types of love: "philia" for
brotherly, "eros" for romantic and "agape" for self-sacrificing love. Like many
Jewish scholars and theologians, Bloom understands Judaism as fundamentally a
religion of love. But he argues that one can understand the Hebrew conception
of love only by looking at one of the core commandments of Judaism, Leviticus
19:18, "Love your neighbor as yourself", also called the second Great
Commandment. Talmudic sages Hillel and Rabbi Akiva commented that this is a
major element of the Jewish religion. Also, this commandment is arguably at the
center of the Jewish faith. As the third book of the Torah, Leviticus is
literally the central book. Historically, Jews have considered it of central
importance: traditionally, children began their study of the Torah with
Leviticus, and the midrashic literature on Leviticus is among the longest and
most detailed of midrashic literature (see Bamberger 1981: 737). Bernard
Bamberger considers Leviticus 19, beginning with God's commandment in verse
3‚Äî"You shall be holy, for I the Lord your God, am holy"‚Äîto be "the
climactic chapter of the book, the one most often read and quoted" (1981:889).
Leviticus 19:18 is itself the climax of this chapter. Abortion. The only
statements in the Tanakh about the status of a fetus state that killing an
unborn infant does not have the same status as killing a born human being, and
mandates a much lesser penalty (Exodus 21: 22-25). The Talmud states that the
fetus is not yet a full human being until it has been born (either the head or
the body is mostly outside of the woman), therefore killing a fetus is not
murder, and abortion - in restricted circumstances - has always been legal
under Jewish law. Rashi, the great 12th century commentator on the Bible and
Talmud, states clearly of the fetus "lav nefesh hu": "it is not a person." The
Talmud contains the expression "ubar yerech imo"--the fetus is as the thigh of
its mother,' i.e., the fetus is deemed to be part and parcel of the pregnant
woman's body." The Babylonian Talmud Yevamot 69b states that: "the embryo is
considered to be mere water until the fortieth day." Afterwards, it is
considered subhuman until it is born. Christians who agree with these views may
refer to this idea as abortion before the quickening of the fetus. Two
additional passages in the Talmud that shed some light on the Jewish belief
that the fetus is considered part of the woman, and not a separate entity. One
section states that if a man purchases a cow that is found to be pregnant, then
he is the owner both of the cow and the calf that is born from it. Another
states that if a pregnant woman converts to Judaism, that her conversion
applies also to her fetus. Judaism unilaterally supports, in fact mandates,
abortion if doctors believe that it is necessary to save the life of the woman.
Many rabbinic authorities allow abortions on the grounds of gross genetic
imperfections of the fetus. They also allow abortion if the woman were suicidal
because of such defects. However, Judaism holds that abortion is impermissible
for family planning or convenience reasons. Each case must be decided
individually, however, and the decision should lie with the pregnant woman, the
man who impregnated her and their Rabbi. Most branches of Christianity have
historically held abortion to be generally wrong, referring to Old Testament
passages such as Psalm 139 and Jeremiah 1, as well as New Testament passages
concerning both Jesus and John the Baptist while they were "in utero". Also,
the Didache, an early Church document, explicitly forbids abortion along with
infanticide, both common practices in the Roman Empire, as murder. The Catholic
Church condemns abortion in all circumstances, as the Catechism of the Catholic
Church states, "Human life must be respected and protected absolutely from the
moment of conception."(2270) Catholics who don't hold to this teaching are
derided as Cafeteria Catholics. Many Protestant Christians claim that the Ten
Commandments prohibit abortion under the heading of "Do not murder". Others
reject this view, as they hold that the context of the entire set of Biblical
laws includes those laws that restrict them to already born human beings. War,
violence and pacifism. Jews and Christians accept as valid and binding many of
the same moral principles taught in the Torah. There is a great deal of overlap
between the ethical systems of these two faiths. Nonetheless, there are some
highly significant doctrinal differences. Judaism has a great many teachings
about peace and compromise, and its teachings make physical violence the last
possible option. Nonetheless, the Talmud teaches that "If someone comes with
the intention to murder you, then one is obligated to kill in self-defense than
be killed". The clear implication is that to bare one's throat would be
tantamount to suicide (which Jewish law forbids) and it would also be
considered helping a murderer kill someone and thus would "place an obstacle in
front of a blind man" (i.e., makes it easier for another person to falter in
their ways). The tension between the laws dealing with peace, and the
obligation to self-defense, has led to a set of Jewish teachings that have been
described as tactical-pacifism. This is the avoidance of force and violence
whenever possible, but the use of force when necessary to save the lives of
one's self and one's people. Although killing oneself is forbidden under normal
Jewish law as being a denial of God's goodness in the world, under extreme
circumstances when there has seemed no choice but to either be killed or forced
to betray their religion, Jews have committed suicide or mass suicide (see
Masada, First French persecution of the Jews, and York Castle for examples). As
a grim reminder of those times, there is even a prayer in the Jewish liturgy
for "when the knife is at the throat", for those dying "to sanctify God's
Name". (See: "Martyrdom"). These acts have received mixed responses by Jewish
authorities. Where some Jews regard them as examples of heroic martyrdom, but
others saying that while Jews should always be willing to face martyrdom if
necessary, it was wrong for them to take their own lives. Because Judaism
focuses on this life, many questions to do with survival and conflict (such as
the classic moral dilemma of two people in a desert with only enough water for
one to survive) were analysed in great depth by the rabbis within the Talmud,
in the attempt to understand the principles a godly person should draw upon in
such a circumstance. The Sermon on the Mount records that Jesus taught that if
someone comes to harm you, then one must turn the other cheek. This has led
four Protestant Christian denominations to develop a theology of pacifism, the
avoidance of force and violence at all times. They are known historically as
the "peace churches", and have incorporated Christ's teachings on nonviolence
into their theology so as to apply it to participation in the use of violent
force; those denominations are the Quakers, Mennonites, Amish, and the Church
of the Brethren. Many other churches have people who hold to the doctrine
without making it a part of their doctrines, or who apply it to individuals but
not to governments, see also Evangelical counsels. The vast majority of
Christian nations and groups have not adopted this theology, nor have they
followed it in practice. See also But to bring a sword. Capital punishment.
Although the Hebrew Bible has many references to capital punishment, the Jewish
sages used their authority to make it nearly impossible for a Jewish court to
impose a death sentence. Even when such a sentence might have been imposed, the
Cities of Refuge and other sanctuaries, were at hand for those unintentionally
guilty of capital offences. It was said in the Talmud about the death penalty
in Judaism, that if a court killed more than one person in seventy years, it
was a barbarous (or "bloody") court and should be condemned as such.
Christianity usually reserved the death penalty for heresy, the denial of the
orthodox view of God's view, and witchcraft or similar non-Christian practices.
For example, in Spain, unrepentant Jews were exiled, and it was only those
crypto-Jews who had accepted baptism under pressure but retained Jewish customs
in private, who were punished in this way. It is presently acknowledged by most
of Christianity that these uses of capital punishment were deeply immoral.
Taboo food and drink. Orthodox Jews, unlike most Christians, still practice a
restrictive diet that has many rules. Most Christians believe that the kosher
food laws do not apply to them as they are no longer under the Law of Moses,
and that, as Jesus taught in Mark 7: what you eat doesn't make you unclean but
what comes out of a man's heart makes him unclean‚Äîalthough Roman Catholicism
and Eastern Orthodoxy have their own set of dietary observances. Eastern
Orthodoxy, in particular has very elaborate and strict rules of fasting, and
continues to observe the Council of Jerusalem's apostolic decree of Act 15. In
addition, some Christian denominations observe some Biblical food laws, for
example see Ital. Jehovah's Witnesses do not eat blood products and are known
for their refusal to accept blood transfusions based on not "eating blood".
Salvation. Judaism does not see human beings as inherently flawed or sinful and
needful of being saved from it, but rather capable with a free will of being
righteous, and unlike Christianity does not closely associate ideas of
"salvation" with a New Covenant delivered by a Jewish messiah, although in
Judaism Jewish people will have a renewed national commitment of observing
God's commandments under the New Covenant, and the Jewish Messiah will also be
ruling at a time of global peace and acceptance of God by all people. Judaism
holds instead that proper living is accomplished through good works and
heartfelt prayer, as well as a strong faith in God. Judaism also teaches that
gentiles can receive a share in "the world to come". This is codified in the
Mishna Avot 4:29, the Babylonian Talmud in tractates Avodah Zarah 10b, and
Ketubot 111b, and in Maimonides's 12th century law code, the "Mishneh Torah",
in "Hilkhot Melachim" (Laws of Kings) 8.11. The Christian view is that every
human is a sinner, and being saved by God's grace, not simply by the merit of
one's own actions, pardons a damnatory sentence to Hell. Judgment. Both
Christianity and Judaism believe in some form of judgment. Most Christians (the
exception is Full Preterism) believe in the future Second Coming of Jesus,
which includes the Resurrection of the Dead and the Last Judgment. Those who
have accepted Jesus as their personal saviour will be saved and live in God's
presence in the Kingdom of Heaven, those who have not accepted Jesus as their
saviour,will be cast into the Lake of Fire (eternal Hell or simply
annihilated), see for example The Sheep and the Goats. In Jewish liturgy there
is significant prayer and talk of a "book of life" that one is written into,
indicating that God judges each person each year even after death. This annual
judgment process begins on Rosh Hashanah and ends with Yom Kippur.
Additionally, God sits daily in judgment concerning a person's daily
activities. Upon the anticipated arrival of the Messiah, God will judge the
nations for their persecution of Israel during the exile. Later, God will also
judge the Jews over their observance of the Torah. Heaven and Hell. There is
little Jewish literature on heaven or hell as actual places, and there are few
references to the afterlife in the Hebrew Bible. One is the ghostly apparition
of Samuel, called up by the Witch of Endor at King Saul's command. Another is a
mention by the Prophet Daniel of those who sleep in the earth rising to either
everlasting life or everlasting abhorrence. Early Hebrew views were more
concerned with the fate of the nation of Israel as a whole, rather than with
individual immortality. A stronger belief in an afterlife for each person
developed during the Second Temple period but was contested by various Jewish
sects. Pharisees believed that in death, people rest in their graves until they
are physically resurrected with the coming of the Messiah, and within that
resurrected body the soul would exist eternally. Maimonides also included the
concept of resurrection in his Thirteen Principles of Faith. Judaism's view is
summed up by a biblical observation about the Torah: in the beginning God
clothes the naked (Adam), and at the end God buries the dead (Moses). The
Children of Israel mourned for 40¬ days, then got on with their lives. In
Judaism, Heaven is sometimes described as a place where God debates Talmudic
law with the angels, and where Jews spend eternity studying the Written and
Oral Torah. Jews do not believe in "Hell" as a place of eternal torment.
Gehenna is a place or condition of purgatory where Jews spend up to twelve
months purifying to get into heaven, depending on how sinful they have been,
although some suggest that certain types of sinners can never be purified
enough to go to heaven and rather than facing eternal torment, simply cease to
exist. Therefore, some violations like suicide would be punished by separation
from the community, such as not being buried in a Jewish cemetery (in practice,
rabbis often rule suicides to be mentally incompetent and thus not responsible
for their actions). Judaism also does not have a notion of hell as a place
ruled by Satan since God's dominion is total and Satan is only one of God's
angels. Catholics also believe in a purgatory for those who are going to
heaven, but Christians in general believe that Hell is a fiery place of torment
that never ceases, called the Lake of Fire. A small minority believe this is
not permanent, and that those who go there will eventually either be saved or
cease to exist. Heaven for Christians is depicted in various ways. As the
Kingdom of God described in the New Testament and particularly the Book of
Revelation, Heaven is a new or restored earth, a World to Come, free of sin and
death, with a New Jerusalem led by God, Jesus, and the most righteous of
believers starting with 144,000 Israelites from every tribe, and all others who
received salvation living peacefully and making pilgrimages to give glory to
the city. "A man should not say: I shall carry out the precepts of the Torah
and study her wisdom in order to receive all the blessings written therein or
in order to merit the life of the World to Come and I shall keep away from the
sins forbidden by the Torah in order to be spared the curses mentioned in the
Torah or in order not to be cut off from the life of the World to Come. It is
not proper to serve God in this fashion. For one who serves thus serves out of
fear. Such a way is not that of the prophets and sages. Only the ignorant, and
the women and children serve God in this way. These are trained to serve out of
fear until they obtain sufficient knowledge to serve out of love. One who
serves God out of love studies the Torah and practices the precepts and walks
in the way of wisdom for no ulterior motive at all, neither out of fear of evil
nor in order to acquire the good, but follows the truth because it is true and
the good will follow the merit of attaining to it. It is the stage of Abraham
our father whom the Holy One, blessed be God, called "My friend" (Isaiah 41:
8‚Äî"ohavi" = the one who loves me) because he served out of love alone. It is
regarding this stage that the Holy One, Blessed be God, commanded us through
Moses, as it is said: "You shall love the Lord your God" (Deuteronomy 6:5).
When man loves God with a love that is fitting he automatically carries out all
the precepts of love. The Messiah. The Christian view of Jesus as Messiah goes
beyond such claims and is the fulfillment and union of three anointed offices;
a prophet like Moses who delivers God's commands and covenant and frees people
from bondage, a High Priest in the order of Melchizedek overshadowing the
Levite priesthood and a king like King David ruling over Jews, and like God
ruling over the whole world and coming from the line of David. For Christians,
Jesus is also fully human and fully divine as the Word of God who sacrifices
himself so that humans can receive salvation. Jesus sits in Heaven at the Right
Hand of God and will judge humanity in the end times when he returns to earth.
Christian readings of the Hebrew Bible find many references to Jesus. This
takes the form in some cases of specific prophesy, but in most cases of
foreshadowing by types or forerunners. Traditionally, most Christian readings
of the Bible maintained that almost every prophecy was actually about the
coming of Jesus, and that the entire Old Testament of the Bible is a prophecy
about the coming of Jesus. Catholic views. Catholicism teaches "Extra Ecclesiam
Nulla Salus" ("Outside the Church there is no salvation"), which some, like Fr.
Leonard Feeney, interpreted as limiting salvation to Catholics only. At the
same time, it does not deny the possibility that those not visibly members of
the Church may attain salvation as well. In recent times, its teaching has been
most notably expressed in the Vatican II council documents "Unitatis
Redintegratio" (1964), "Lumen Gentium" (1964), "Nostra aetate" (1965), an
encyclical issued by Pope John Paul II: "Ut Unum Sint" (1995), and in a
document issued by the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith, "Dominus
Iesus" in 2000. The latter document has been criticised for claiming that non-
Christians are in a "gravely deficient situation" as compared to Catholics, but
also adds that "for those who are not formally and visibly members of the
Church, salvation in Christ is accessible by virtue of a grace which, while
having a mysterious relationship to the Church, does not make them formally
part of the Church, but enlightens them in a way which is accommodated to their
spiritual and material situation." Pope John Paul II on October 2, 2000
emphasized that this document did not say that non-Christians were actively
denied salvation: "...this confession does not deny salvation to non-
Christians, but points to its ultimate source in Christ, in whom man and God
are united". On December 6 the Pope issued a statement to further emphasize
that the Church continued to support its traditional stance that salvation was
available to believers of other faiths: "The gospel teaches us that those who
live in accordance with the Beatitudes--the poor in spirit, the pure of heart,
those who bear lovingly the sufferings of life--will enter God's kingdom." He
further added, "All who seek God with a sincere heart, including those who do
not know Christ and his church, contribute under the influence of Grace to the
building of this Kingdom." On August 13, 2002 American Catholic bishops issued
a joint statement with leaders of Reform and Conservative Judaism, called
"Reflections on Covenant and Mission", which affirmed that Christians should
not target Jews for conversion. The document stated: "Jews already dwell in a
saving covenant with God" and "Jews are also called by God to prepare the world
for God's Kingdom." However, some U.S.-led Baptist and other fundamentalist
denominations still believe it is their duty to engage in what they refer to as
outreach to "unbelieving" Jews. Eastern Orthodox views. Eastern Orthodox
Christianity emphasizes a continuing life of repentance or "metanoia", which
includes an increasing improvement in thought, belief and action. Regarding the
salvation of Jews, Muslims, and other non-Christians, the Orthodox have
traditionally taught that there is no salvation outside the church. Orthodoxy
recognizes that other religions may contain truth, to the extent that they are
in agreement with Christianity. Many Orthodox theologians believe that all
people will have an opportunity to embrace union with God, including Jesus,
after their death, and so become part of the Church at that time. God is
thought to be good, just, and merciful; it would not seem just to condemn
someone because they never heard the Gospel message, or were taught a distorted
version of the Gospel by heretics. Therefore, the reasoning goes, they must at
some point have an opportunity to make a genuine informed decision. Ultimately,
those who persist in rejecting God condemn themselves, by cutting themselves
off from the ultimate source of all Life, and from the God who is Love
embodied. Jews, Muslims, and members of other faiths, then, are expected to
convert to Christianity in the afterlife. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-
day Saints also holds this belief, and holds baptismal services in which
righteous people are baptized in behalf of their ancestors who, it is believed,
are given the opportunity to accept the ordinance. Proselytizing. Judaism is
not a proselytizing religion. Orthodox Judaism deliberately makes it very
difficult to convert and become a Jew, and requires a significant and full-time
effort in living, study, righteousness, and conduct over several years. The
final decision is by no means a foregone conclusion. A person cannot become
Jewish by marrying a Jew, or by joining a synagogue, nor by any degree of
involvement in the community or religion, but only by explicitly undertaking
intense, formal, and supervised work over years aimed towards that goal. Some
less strict versions of Judaism have made this process somewhat easier but it
is still far from common. In the past Judaism was more evangelistic, but this
was often more akin just to "greater openness to converts" rather than active
soliciting of conversions. Since Jews believe that one need not be a Jew to
approach God, there is no religious pressure to convert non-Jews to their
faith. The Chabad-Lubavitch branch of Hasidic Judaism has been an exception to
this non-proselytizing standard, since in recent decades it has been actively
promoting Noahide Laws for Gentiles as an alternative to Christianity. By
contrast, Christianity is an explicitly evangelistic religion. Christians are
commanded by Jesus to "Therefore go and make disciples of all nations".
Historically, evangelism has on rare occasions led to forced conversion under
threat of death or mass expulsion. While abuses of this sort are no longer
common, at certain times and in certain places, evangelism has veered into
high-pressure coercion, in those instances causing significant ill-will. Mutual
views. Common Jewish views of Christianity. Many Jews view Jesus as one in a
long list of failed Jewish claimants to be the Messiah, none of whom fulfilled
the tests of a prophet specified in the Law of Moses. Others see Jesus as a
teacher who worked with the gentiles and ascribe the messianic claims they find
objectionable to his later followers. Because much physical and spiritual
violence was done to Jews in the name of Jesus and his followers, and because
evangelism is still an active aspect of many church's activities, many Jews are
uncomfortable with discussing Jesus and treat him as a non-person. In answering
the question "What do Jews think of Jesus", philosopher Milton Steinberg
claims, for Jews, Jesus cannot be accepted as anything more than a teacher. "In
only a few respects did Jesus deviate from the Tradition," Steinberg concludes,
"and in all of them, Jews believe, he blundered." Judaism does not believe that
God requires the sacrifice of any human. This is emphasized in Jewish
traditions concerning the story of the Akedah, the binding of Isaac. In the
Jewish explanation, this is a story in the Torah whereby God wanted to test
Abraham's faith and willingness, and Isaac was never going to be actually
sacrificed. Thus, Judaism rejects the notion that anyone can or should die for
anyone else's sin. Judaism is more focused on the practicalities of
understanding how one may live a sacred life in the world according to God's
will, rather than a hope of a future one. Judaism does not believe in the
Christian concept of hell but does have a punishment stage in the afterlife
(i.e. Gehenna, the New Testament word translated as hell) as well as a Heaven
(Gan Eden), but the religion does not intend it as a focus. Judaism views the
worship of Jesus as inherently polytheistic, and rejects the Christian attempts
to explain the Trinity as a complex monotheism. Christmas and other Christian
festivals have no religious significance in Judaism and are not celebrated.
Celebration of Christian holy days is considered Avodah Zarah or idolatry and
is forbidden; however some secular Jews in the West treat Christmas as a
secular holiday. Common Christian views of Judaism. Christians believe that
Christianity is the fulfillment and successor of Judaism, retaining much of its
doctrine and many of its practices including monotheism, the belief in a
Messiah, and certain forms of worship like prayer and reading from religious
texts. Christians believe that Judaism requires blood sacrifice to atone for
sins, and believe that Judaism has abandoned this since the destruction of the
Second Temple. Most Christians consider that the Law was necessary as an
intermediate stage, but once the crucifixion of Jesus occurred, adherence to
civil and ceremonial Law was superseded by the New Covenant since the purpose
of these laws was to dictate a proper relationship to God through the
tabernacles and the temples in Jerusalem. Some Christians adhere to New
Covenant theology, which states that Jews have rejected Jesus as the Messiah
and Son of God have ceased being the Chosen People. This position has been
softened by some adherents, or completely rejected by other churches where Jews
are recognized to have a special status due to their covenant with God through
Abraham, so this continues to be an area of ongoing dispute among Christians.
This is in contrast to Dual-covenant theology. Some Christians who view the
Jewish people as close to God seek to understand and incorporate elements of
Jewish understanding or perspective into their beliefs as a means to respect
their "parent" religion of Judaism, or to more fully seek out and return to
their Christian roots. Christians embracing aspects of Judaism are sometimes
criticized as Biblical Judaizers by Christians when they pressure Gentile
Christians to observe Old Testament teachings rejected by many modern
Christians. Inter-relationship. In addition to each having varied views on the
other as a religion, there has also been a long and often painful history of
conflict, persecution and at times, reconciliation, between the two religions,
which have influenced their mutual views of their relationship over time.
Persecution, forcible conversion, and forcible displacement of Jews (i.e. hate
crimes) occurred for many centuries, with occasional gestures to reconciliation
from time to time. Pogroms were common throughout Christian Europe, including
organized violence, restrictive land ownership and professional lives, forcible
relocation and ghettoization, mandatory dress codes, and at times humiliating
actions and torture. All had major effects on Jewish cultures. There have also
been non-coercive outreach and missionary efforts such as the Church of
England's Ministry Among Jewish People, founded in 1809. What is clear is that
formally, there is mostly peaceful living side by side, with strong inter-
dialogue at many levels to reconcile past differences between the two groups,
and many Christians emphasize common historical heritage and religious
continuity with the ancient spiritual lineage of the Jews. Christians and Jews
attempt to coexist ultimately by recognizing the fact that they both worship
the same Almighty God, that they both recognize several of the same prophets,
and that both religions attempt to make the world a better place. Christians
view the Jews as keepers of the Old Covenant. Jews view Christians as gentiles
who worship the one God, but otherwise have their own distinct religion. What
is also likely is that for a long time to come, some within each will continue
to consider the other with varying degrees of suspicion and hostility. Martin
Buber, "The Two Foci of the Jewish Soul", cited in The Writings of Martin
Buber, Will Herberg (editor), New York: Meridian Books, 1956, p. 276. Following
the Holocaust, attempts have been made to construct a new Jewish-Christian
relationship of mutual respect for differences, through the inauguration of the
interfaith body the Council of Christians and Jews in 1942 and International
Council of Christians and Jews. The Seelisberg Conference in 1947 established
10 points relating to the sources of Christian antisemitism. The ICCJ's "Twelve
points of Berlin" sixty years later aim to reflect a recommitment to
interreligious dialogue between the two communities.
