Christian–Jewish reconciliation Reconciliation between Christianity and
Judaism refers to the efforts that are being made to improve understanding of
the Jewish people and of Judaism, to do away with Christian antisemitism and
Jewish anti-Christian sentiment. There has been significant progress in the
political reconciliation effort in recent years, especially by the Catholic
Church, but also by other Christian groups. Background. As a reaction to the
Holocaust (though earlier accounts of reconciliation exist) and many other
inquisitions and crusades throughout the course of human history, many
theologians, religious historians and educators dedicated their efforts to seek
reconciliation between Christians and Jews. Proselytism. There are a number of
sensitive issues that separate the two faiths. One of those issues is the issue
of proselytizing of Jews. A number of Progressive Christian denominations have
publicly declared that they will no longer proselytize Jews. A number of
mainline Christian and conservative Christian continue to advocate the
conversion of Jews and argue that that practice is not anti-semitic. In
contrast, groups such as the Anti-Defamation League have stated that attempts
to convert Jews are anti-semitic and have directly compared those efforts to
the holocaust. A recent survey of American Christians by the Pew Forum on
Religion and Public Life found that large- over 60%- majorities of most
denominations believe that Jews will receive eternal life after death alongside
Christians. Arab Christians. The continuing Israeli–Palestinian conflict has
created tensions between the Catholic Church and Israel. The Catholic Church.
To further the goal of reconciliation, the Catholic Church in 1971 established
an internal International Catholic-Jewish Liaison Committee and the
International Jewish Committee for Interreligious Consultations (this Committee
is not a part of the Church's Magisterium). After meeting of the committee on
May 4, 2001, Church officials stated that they would change how Judaism is
dealt with in Catholic seminaries and schools. This new understanding of the
relationship between Christians and Jews is reflected in the revised liturgy of
Good Friday in a particular way. The Good Friday Prayer of the Roman Rite had
Catholics praying for the "perfidious Jews" that they might be converted to the
truth. The ancient sense of the Latin word "perfidis" in that context was
"unbelieving", yet the English cognate "perfidious" had, over the centuries,
gradually acquired the sense of "treacherous." In order to eliminate
misunderstanding on this point, Pope Pius XII ordered in 1955 that, in Catholic
liturgical books, the Latin word "perfidis" be properly translated
"unbelieving", ensuring that the prayer be understood in its original sense:
praying for the Jews who remained "unbelieving" concerning the Messiah. Indeed,
the same adjective was used in many of the ancient rituals for receiving non-
Christian converts into the Catholic Church. Owing to the enduring potential
for confusion and misunderstanding because of the divergence of English usage
from the original Latin meaning, Pope John XXIII ordered that the Latin
adjective "perfidis" be dropped from the Good Friday Prayer for the Jews; in
1960 he ordered it removed from all rituals for the reception of converts. See:
Time Magazine August 15 1960. The current prayer of the Roman Liturgy for Good
Friday prays for "the Jewish people, first to hear the word of God, that they
may continue to grow in the love of His name and in faithfulness to His
covenant." The term "traditionalist Catholics" often is used to apply to
Catholic Christians who are particularly devoted to practicing the ancient
traditions of the Church; yet there are also groups calling themselves
"traditionalist Catholics" that either reject many of the changes made since
Vatican II, or regard Vatican II as an invalid Council, or who broke away
entirely from the Catholic Church after Vatican II. Some of these so-called
traditionalist Catholics believe that the Pope at the time, and all Popes
since, have led the majority of Catholic clergy and laity into heresy. They
view interfaith dialogue with Jews as unnecessary and potentially leading to a
"watering-down" of the Catholic faith. In the view of some traditionalist
Catholics, Jews are believed to be damned unless they convert to Christianity.
This, of course, is not the view of all who identify themselves as
"traditional". Christian Scholars Group. The Christian Scholars Group on
Christian-Jewish Relations is a group of 22 Christian scholars, theologians,
historians and clergy from six Christian Protestant denominations and the Roman
Catholic Church, which works to "develop more adequate Christian theologies of
the church's relationship to Judaism and the Jewish people." Orthodox
Christianity. Orthodox Christianity has a better history of relations between
its adherents and the Jewish community than that of Catholic or Protestant
Christianity. The Orthodox Christian attitude to the Jewish people is seen in a
16th century encyclical written by Ecumenical Patriarch Metrophanes III
(1520–1580) to the Greek Orthodox in Crete (1568) following reports that Jews
were being mistreated. Joint efforts. The International Council of Christians
and Jews (ICCJ) is an umbrella organisation of 38 national Jewish-Christian
dialogue organisations worldwide, governed according to the principles of the
Ten Points of the Seelisberg Conference, which was held in 1947 to explore the
relationship basis of Christianity and antisemitism. In 1993 (March 1)
International Council of Christians and Jews (ICCJ) published "Jews and
Christians in Search of a Common Religious Basis for Contributing Towards a
Better World." This document "contains both separate Jewish perspectives and
Christian perspectives concerning mutual communication and cooperation as well
as a joint view of a common religious basis for Jews and Christians to work
together for a better world...These considerations are not 'the' official
theological, philosophical nor ideological underpinnings of the ICCJ and its
member organisations, but are an invitation to consider what our work is all
about. They have no authority other than their intrinsic world..." The ICCJ
runs a website, "Jewish-Christian Relations", "which is devoted to fostering
mutual respect and understanding between Christians and Jews around the world."
According to their website, "Founded in 1987 by an interfaith coalition of
laity and clergy, the Institute for Christian & Jewish Studies offers a variety
of educational programs that highlight the distinctiveness of the Jewish and
Christian traditions and confront the dangerous misunderstandings that have
evolved in our two communities." Another important initiative to promote joint
initiatives between Jews and Christians was realized October 27, 2002, with the
establishment and approval of the bylaws of the Council of Centers of Jewish-
Christian Relations (CCJR). The Council is an association of centers and
institutes in the United States and Canada devoted to enhancing mutual
understanding between Jews and Christians. Although most of these centers or
institutes are located in the United States, there are also affiliate members
from Europe and Israel. Representatives from major Christian and Jewish
agencies and religious bodies in the United States are also members. Jewish
responses. The 1906 Jewish Encyclopedia article on "Gentile: Gentiles May Not
Be Taught the Torah" notes the following Jewish-Christian reconciliation:
Robert Gordis, a Conservative rabbi, wrote an essay on "Ground Rules for a
Christian Jewish Dialogue"; through his writings and similar writings of other
rabbis in all Jewish denominations, one form or another of these rules
eventually became more or less accepted by all parties engaging in interfaith
dialogue. Rabbis from all the non-Orthodox movements of Judaism became involved
in inter-faith theological dialogue with a number of Christian churches.
Conservative Jews and Reform Jews now commonly engage in inter-faith
theological dialogue; a small number of Modern Orthodox rabbis engage in such
dialogue as well. Most Orthodox rabbis do not engage in such dialogue. The
predominant position of Orthodoxy on this issue is based on the position of
Rabbi Joseph Soloveitchik; he held that Judaism and Christianity are "two faith
communities (which are) intrinsically antithetic". In his view "the language of
faith of a particular community is totally incomprehensible to the man of a
different faith community. Hence the confrontation should occur not at a
theological, but at a mundane human level... the great encounter between man
and God is a holy, personal and private affair, incomprehensible to the
outsider..." As such, he ruled that theological dialogue between Judaism and
Christianity was not possible. However, Rabbi Soloveitchik advocated closer
ties between the Jewish and Christian communities. He held that communication
between Jews and Christians was not merely permissible, but "desirable and even
essential" on non-theological issues such as war and peace, the war on poverty,
the struggle for people to gain freedom, issues of morality and civil rights,
and to work together against the perceived threat of secularism. As a result of
his ruling, Orthodox Jewish groups did not cooperate in interfaith discussions
between the Catholic Church and Judaism, nor did they participate in the later
interfaith dialogues between Protestant Christian groups and the Jewish
community. Modern Papal views. Pope John Paul II made great strides in
repairing relations between Judaism and Christianity (Catholicism in
particular) and is often seen as a major figure in opening up dialogue between
the Catholic and Jewish communities. He was the first Pope to make an official
visit to a synagogue, and made official apologies for wrongdoing against Jews
on behalf of the Roman Catholic church throughout history. His theology often
posed a dual covenant quality, and referred to Judaism as "the older brother"
of Christianity. Pope Benedict XVI has expressed very similar views to those of
some of the Orthodox rabbis, saying in a 2004 book with Marcello Pera that
inter-cultural dialogue could often be positive, but that theological dialogue
was practically impossible and not always desirable. National Council of
Synagogues. The National Council of Synagogues (NCS) is a partnership of the
non-Orthodox branches of Judaism. (Orthodox Jews have been invited to join, but
Orthodox leaders have ruled that an Orthodox rabbi may not work with non-
Orthodox rabbis as a matter of religious principle.) This group deals with
interfaith issues, and meets regularly with the representatives of the United
States Catholic Bishops Conference, the National Council of Churches of Christ
and various other denominations and religions. Their goal is to foster
religious conversation and dialogue in the spirit of religious pluralism.
Today. Today the Jewish leaders are having connection with the Christian
leaders. "Reflections on Covenant and Mission" is a statement developed jointly
by the NCS and the U.S. Bishops' Committee for Ecumenical and Interreligious
Affairs. Dabru Emet. Recently, more than 220 rabbis from all branches of
Judaism signed a document called Dabru Emet ("Speak the Truth") that has since
been used in Jewish education programs across the U.S.
