Christian tradition Christian tradition is a collection of traditions of
practices or beliefs associated with Christianity or groups with Christianity.
These beliefs have more or less authority based on the nature of the practices
or beliefs and on the group in question. Many churches have traditional
practices, such as particular patterns of worship or rites, that developed over
time. Deviations from such patterns are sometimes considered unacceptable or
heretical. Similarly, traditions can be stories or history that are or were
widely accepted without being part of Christian doctrine, e.g., the crucifixion
of Saint Peter, which is widely believed to have happened but is not recorded
in scripture. Similarly the names of the Magi who visited Jesus at his birth
are thought to have been invented much later than the events; they are not
considered authentic or obligatory, but can be considered a tradition.
Tradition also includes historic teaching of the recognized church authorities,
such as Church Councils and ecclesiastical officials (e.g., the Pope, Patriarch
of Constantinople, Archbishop of Canterbury, etc.), and includes the teaching
of significant individuals like the Church Fathers, the Protestant Reformers,
and founders of movements like John Wesley. Many creeds, confessions of faith,
and catechisms generated by these bodies and individuals are also part of the
traditions of various bodies. Tradition and ecclesial traditions. The Catholic
Church distinguishes between what it calls Apostolic Tradition (or Tradition
with a capital T) and ecclesial traditions. In the course of time ecclesial
traditions develop in theology, discipline, liturgy, and devotions. These the
Church may retain, modify or even abandon. Apostolic Tradition, on the other
hand, is the teaching that was handed down by the apostles by word of mouth, by
their example and "by the institutions they established", among which is the
apostolic succession of the bishops: "this living transmission, accomplished in
the Holy Spirit, is called Tradition". "And Tradition transmits in its entirety
the Word of God, which has been entrusted to the apostles by Christ the Lord
and the Holy Spirit." Branches. Among the main groups of Christianity, there
are Catholics, Orthodox, and Protestants. In the Catholic Church and Eastern
Orthodoxy, Sacred Tradition, but not "ecclesial traditions", is considered
official doctrine and of equal authoritative weight to the Bible. Among
conservative Protestants, the Bible itself is the only final authority (see
"sola scriptura" and "prima scriptura"), but tradition still plays an important
supporting role. All three groups generally accept the traditional developments
on the doctrine of the Trinity, for instance, and set bounds of orthodoxy and
heresy based on that tradition. They also have developed creedal and
confessional statements which summarize and develop their understanding of
biblical teaching.
