Christian anarchism Christian anarchism is a movement in political theology and
political philosophy. It is the belief that there is only one source of
authority to which Christians are ultimately answerable, the authority of God
as embodied in the teachings of Jesus. More than any other Bible source the
Sermon on the Mount, especially Jesus' call to not resist evil but to turn the
other cheek, is used as the basis for Christian anarchism. Most Christian
anarchists are pacifists and oppose the use of violence, such as war. The
foundation of Christian anarchism is a rejection of violence, with Leo
Tolstoy's "The Kingdom of God Is Within You" regarded as a key text. Christian
anarchists denounce the state as they claim it is violent, deceitful and, when
glorified, a form of idolatry. Origins. Old Testament. Jacques Ellul recounts
that at the end of the Book of Judges (Judges 21:25) there was no king in
Israel and everyone did as they saw fit. Later in the first Book of Samuel (1
Samuel 8) the people of Israel wanted a king to be like other nations. God
declared that the people had rejected him as their king. He warned that a human
king would lead to militarism, conscription and taxation, and that their pleas
for mercy from the king's demands would go unanswered. Samuel passed on God's
warning to the Israelites but they disregarded him and chose Saul as their
king. Much of the subsequent Old Testament chronicles them trying to live with
this decision. New Testament. More than any other Bible source, the Sermon on
the Mount is used as the basis for Christian anarchism. Alexandre
Christoyannopoulos explains that the Sermon perfectly illustrates Jesus'
central teaching of love and forgiveness. Christian anarchists claim that the
state, founded on violence, contravenes the Sermon and Jesus' call to .
Christian eschatology and various Christian anarchists, such as Jacques Ellul,
have identified the state and political power as the Beast in the Book of
Revelation. Early Church. Several of the Church Fathers' writings suggest
anarchism as God's ideal. The first Christians opposed the primacy of the
State: "We must obey God as ruler rather than men" (Acts 4:19, 5:29, 1
Corinthians 6:1-6); "Stripping the governments and the authorities bare, he
exhibited them in open public as conquered, leading them in a triumphal
procession by means of it." (Colossians 2:15). Also some early Christian
communities appear to have practised anarchist communism, such as the Jerusalem
group described in Acts, who shared their money and labor equally and fairly
among the members. Christian anarchists, such as Keven Craig, insist that these
communities were centred on true love and care for one another rather than
liturgy. They also allege that the reason the early Christians were persecuted
was not because they worshipped Jesus Christ, but because they refused to
worship human idols claiming divine status (see Imperial cult). Given that they
refused to worship the Roman Emperor they refused to swear any oath of
allegiance to the Empire. Thomas Merton in his introduction to a translation of
the "Sayings of the Desert Fathers" describes the early monastics as "Truly in
certain sense 'anarchists,' and it will do no harm to think of them as such."
From the earliest period, women and men seem to have shared religious duties
equally, though the public offices, such as missionary work and Temple
observances, seem to have been held mostly by men. However, in the case of
Phoebe in Romans 16:1-2: "I commend to you Phoebe our sister, who is a servant
(διάκονος) of the church in Cenchreae, that you may receive her in the
Lord in a manner worthy of the saints, and assist her in whatever business she
has need of you; for indeed she has been a helper of many and of myself also."
Referring here to Phoebe, the word rendered "servant" being in the Greek
διάκονος (di'a·ko·nos), the parallel English word being deaconess,
and in the context of the above quotation, this denotes a servant who is given
servants to manage, in effect, a deaconess, one who delegates, a manager,
though in most ways, Jewish Christianity did not differ from any of the other
Jewish sects of Second Temple Judaism. Conversion of the Roman Empire. For
Christian anarchists the moment which epitomises the degeneration of
Christianity is the conversion of Emperor Constantine after his victory at the
Battle of the Milvian Bridge in 312. Following this event Christianity was
legalised under the Edict of Milan in 313, hastening the Church's
transformation from a humble bottom-up sect to an authoritarian top-down
organization. Christian anarchists point out that this marked the beginning of
the "Constantinian shift", in which Christianity gradually came to be
identified with the will of the ruling elite, becoming the State church of the
Roman Empire, and in some cases (such as the Crusades, Inquisition and Wars of
Religion) a religious justification for violence. Middle Ages. Following
Constantine's conversion, Alexandre Christoyannopoulos recounts that Christian
pacifism and anarchism were submerged for nearly a millennium until the
emergence of thinkers such as Francis of Assisi and Petr Chelčický. Francis
of Assisi (c.1181–1226) was an ascetic preacher, pacifist and nature lover.
As the son of a wealthy family cloth merchant he led a privileged life and
fought as a soldier, but radically changed his beliefs and practices after a
spiritual awakening. Francis became a pacifist and eschewed material goods,
attempting to follow in the footsteps of Jesus. Peter Maurin, co-founder of the
Catholic Worker Movement, was heavily influenced by Francis of Assisi. Petr
Chelčický's (c.1390–c.1460) work, specifically "The Net of Faith",
influenced Leo Tolstoy and is referenced in his book "The Kingdom of God Is
Within You". Anarchist biblical views and practices. Church authority. With
some notable exceptions, such as the Catholic Worker Movement, many Christian
anarchists are critical of Church dogma and rituals. Christian anarchists wish
that Christians were less preoccupied with performing rituals and preaching
dogmatic theology, and more with following Jesus' teaching and practices.
Jacques Ellul and Dave Andrews claim that Jesus did not intend to be the
founder of an institutional religion, whilst Michael Elliot believes one of
Jesus' intentions was to bypass human intermediaries and do away with priests.
Pacifism and nonviolence. Christian anarchists, such as Leo Tolstoy, Ammon
Hennacy, Jacques Ellul, and Dave Andrews, follow Jesus' call to not resist evil
but turn the other cheek. This teaching they argue can only imply a
condemnation of the state as the police and army hold a monopoly over the
legitimate use of force. They believe freedom will only be guided by the grace
of God if they show compassion to others and turn the other cheek when
confronted with violence. Christian anarchists believe violence begets violence
and the ends never justify the means. Simple living. Christian anarchists, such
as Ammon Hennacy, Peter Maurin and Dorothy Day, often advocate voluntary
poverty. This can be for a variety of reasons, such as withdrawing support for
government by reducing taxable income or following Jesus' teachings. Jesus
appears to teach voluntary poverty when he told his disciples, "It is easier
for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter the
kingdom of God" (Mark 10:25) and "You cannot serve both God and Mammon" (Luke
16:13). State authority. The most common challenge for anarchist theologians is
interpreting Paul's Epistle to the Romans 13:1–7, in which Paul demanded
obedience to governing authorities and described them as God's servants
exacting punishment on wrongdoers. Romans 13:1–7 holds the most explicit
reference to the state in the New Testament but other parallel texts include
Titus 3:1, Hebrews 13:17 and 1 Peter 2:13-17. Established theologians, such as
C.E.B. Cranfield, have interpreted Romans 13:1–7 to mean the Church should
support the state, as God has sanctified the state to be his main tool to
preserve social order. In the case of the state being involved in a "just war",
theologians also argue that it's permissible for Christians to serve the state
and wield the sword. Christian anarchists do not share this interpretation of
Romans 13 but still recognize it as "a very embarrassing passage." Christians
who interpret Romans 13 as advocating support for governing authorities are
left with the difficulty of how to act under tyrants or dictators. Ernst
Käsemann, in his "Commentary on Romans", challenged the mainstream Christian
interpretation of the passage in light of German Lutheran Churches using this
passage to justify the Holocaust. Paul's letter to Roman Christians declares
"For rulers hold no terror for those who do right, but for those who do wrong."
However Christian anarchists point out an inconsistency if this text were to be
taken literally and in isolation, as both Jesus and Paul were executed by the
governing authorities or "rulers." There are also Christians anarchists, such
as Tolstoy and Hennacy, who do not see the need to integrate Paul's teachings
into their subversive way of life. Tolstoy believed Paul was instrumental in
the church's "deviation" from Jesus' teaching and practices, whilst Hennacy
believed "Paul spoiled the message of Christ" (see Jesuism). Hennacy and Ciaron
O'Reilly, in contrast to Eller, advocate nonviolent civil disobedience to
confront state oppression. Swearing of oaths. In the Sermon of the Mount
(Matthew 5:33-37) Jesus tells his followers to not swear oaths in the name of
God or Man. Tolstoy, Adin Ballou and Petr Chelčický understand this to mean
that Christians should never bind themselves to any oaths as they may not be
able to fulfil the will of God if they are bound to the will of a fellow-man.
Tolstoy takes the view that all oaths are evil, but especially an oath of
allegiance. Tax. Some Christian anarchists resist taxes in the belief that
their government is engaged in immoral, unethical or destructive activities
such as war, and paying taxes inevitably funds these activities, whilst others
submit to taxation. Adin Ballou wrote that if the act of resisting taxes
requires physical force to withhold what a government tries to take, then it is
important to submit to taxation. Ammon Hennacy, who, like Ballou also believed
in nonresistance, eased his conscience by simply living below the income tax
threshold. Vegetarianism. Vegetarianism in the Christian tradition has a long
history commencing in the first centuries of Church with the Desert Fathers and
Desert Mothers who abandoned the "world of men" for intimacy with the God of
Jesus Christ. Vegetarianism amongst hermits and Christian monastics in the
Eastern Christian and Roman Catholic traditions remains common to this day as a
means of simplifying one's life, and as a practice of asceticism. Leo Tolstoy,
Ammon Hennacy and Théodore Monod extended their belief in nonviolence and
compassion to all living beings through vegetarianism. Present-day Christian
anarchist groups. Brotherhood Church. The Brotherhood Church is a Christian
anarchist and pacifist community. The Brotherhood Church can be traced back to
1887 when a Congregationalist minister called John Bruce Wallace started a
magazine called ""The Brotherhood"" in Limavady, Northern Ireland. An
intentional community with Quaker origins has been located at Stapleton, near
Pontefract, Yorkshire, since 1921. Catholic Worker Movement. Established by
Peter Maurin and Dorothy Day in the early 1930s, the Catholic Worker Movement
is a Christian movement dedicated to nonviolence, personalism and voluntary
poverty. Over 130 Catholic Worker communities exist in the United States where
"houses of hospitality" care for the homeless. The Joe Hill House of
hospitality (which closed in 1968) in Salt Lake City, Utah featured an enormous
twelve feet by fifteen foot mural of Jesus Christ and Joe Hill. Present-day
Catholic Workers include Ciaron O'Reilly, an Irish-Australian civil rights and
anti-war activist. Maurin and Day were both baptized and confirmed in the
Catholic Church and believed in the institution, thus showing it is possible to
be a Christian anarchist and still choose to remain within a church. After her
death, Day was proposed for sainthood by the Claretian Missionaries in 1983.
Pope John Paul II granted the Archdiocese of New York permission to open Day's
cause for sainthood in March 2000, calling her a Servant of God. Online
communities. Numerous Christian anarchist websites, social networking sites,
forums, electronic mailing lists and blogs have emerged on the internet over
the last few years. These include: A Pinch of Salt, a 1980s Christian anarchist
magazine, revived in 2006 by Keith Hebden as a blog and bi-annual magazine;
Vine & Fig Tree founded by Kevin Craig in 1982; Jesus Radicals founded by
Mennonites Nekeisha and Andy Alexis-Baker in 2000; Lost Religion of Jesus
created by Adam Clark in 2005; Christian Anarchists created by Jason Barr in
2006; The Mormon Worker, a blog and newspaper, founded in 2007 by William Van
Wagenen to promote Mormonism, anarchism and pacifism; Academics and Students
Interested in Religious Anarchism (ASIRA) founded by Alexandre
Christoyannopoulos in 2008.
