Christian fundamentalism Christian fundamentalism, also known as Fundamentalist
Christianity, or Fundamentalism, refers to a movement within Christianity
upholding a literal reading of the Bible or official teachings of the Church.
The movement arose in British and American Protestantism in the late 19th
century and early 20th century among evangelical Christians. These Protestants,
in addition to Catholic fundamentalists, reacted against modernist theology. In
true Church Militant fashion of defending the Word of God, they asserted that
the inerrancy of the Bible and Church teaching were essential for true
Christianity and was being violated by the modernists. As an organized
movement, it began in the 1920s within Protestant churches — especially
Baptist and Presbyterian — in the United States. Fundamentalist Christianity
is often intertwined with Biblical literalism. Many such churches adopted a
"fighting style" and certain theological elements, such as Dispensationalism.
The broader term "evangelical" includes fundamentalists as well as people with
similar or identical religious beliefs who do not engage the outside challenge
to the Bible as actively. Fundamentalism is a movement, rather than a
denomination or a systematic theology, which gained ascendance after the
release of a ten-volume set of essays, apologetic and polemic, written by many
well-known conservative Protestant theologians to defend what they saw as
Protestant orthodoxy—covering a wide range of topics, from defenses of the
Divinity of Jesus Christ, his Virgin Birth, of the historicity of Biblical
narratives, Mosaic authorship of the Pentateuch, and of Biblical inerrancy
against the prevalent higher-critical theories of the day, to the falsity of
theological systems such as Christian Science, "Millennial Dawnism", Mormonism,
to the errors of "Romanism"—over the course of 1910-1915, called "The
Fundamentals: A Testimony to the Truth", from which the movement receives its
eponymous name. Catholic Fundamentalism stresses the need for adherence to
literal interpretation of Vatican declarations, particularly those pronounced
by the Pope. Since 1930, Fundamentalism has not been an organized movement, and
has not had a national body or official statement of beliefs. However, both
Catholic and Protestant fundamentalists have been criticized for presenting God
"more as a God of judgement and punishment than as a God of love and mercy."
Terminology. The term "fundamentalism" was coined by Baptist editor Curtis Lee
Laws in 1920 to designate Christians who were ready "to do battle royal for the
Fundamentals". The term was quickly adopted by all sides. Laws borrowed it from
the title of a series of essays published between 1910 and 1915 called "The
Fundamentals: A Testimony to the Truth". The term "Fundamentalism" entered the
English language in 1922, and is often capitalized when referring to the
religious movement. The term "fundamentalist" is controversial in the 21st
century, as it can carry the connotation of religious extremism, even though it
was coined by movement leaders. Some who hold these beliefs reject the label of
"fundamentalism", seeing it as too pejorative, while to others it has become a
banner of pride. Such Christians prefer to use the term "fundamental", as
opposed to "fundamentalist" (e.g., Independent Fundamental Baptist and
Independent Fundamental Churches of America). The term is sometimes confused
with "Christian legalism". Fundamentalist movement in the United States.
Fundamentalism had multiple roots in British and American theology of the 19th
century. One root was Dispensationalism, a new interpretation of the Bible
developed in the 1830s in England. It was a millenarian theory that divided all
of time into seven different stages, called "dispensations," which were seen as
stages of God's revelation. At the end of each stage, according to this theory,
God punished humanity for having been found wanting in God's testing.
Secularism, liberalism, and immorality in the 1920s were believed to be signs
that humanity had again failed God's testing. This means that the world is on
the verge of the last stage, where a final battle will take place at
Armageddon, followed by Christ's return and 1,000 year reign. One important
sign is the rebirth of Israel, support for which became the centerpiece of
Fundamentalist foreign policy. A second stream came from Princeton Theology in
the mid-19th century, which developed the doctrine of inerrancy in response to
higher criticism of the Bible. The work of Charles Hodge influenced fundamental
insistence that the Bible was inerrant because it had been dictated by God and
written by men who took that dictation. This meant that the Bible should be
read differently from any other historical document, and also that modernism
and liberalism were believed to lead people to hell just like non-Christian
religions. By the late 1920s the first two points had become central to
Fundamentalism. A fourth strand was the growing concern among many evangelical
Christians with modernism and the higher criticism of the Bible. This strand
concentrated on opposition to Darwinism. A fifth strand was the strong sense of
the need for public revivals, a common theme among many Evangelicals who did
not become Fundamentalists. Numerous efforts to form coordinating bodies
failed, and the most influential treatise came much later, in "Systematic
Theology" (1947) by Lewis S. Chafer, who founded the Dallas Theological
Seminary in 1924. Martin E. Marty has written that within Catholicism, the
movement has stressed "items that will 'stand out,' such as Mass in Latin,
opposition to women priests, optional clerical celibacy, or support for
dismissals of 'artificial birth control.'" The Society of St. Pius X, a product
of Lefebvre, is stronghold for Catholic fundamentalism. Much of the enthusiasm
for mobilizing Fundamentalism came from "Bible Colleges", especially those
modeled after the Moody Bible Institute in Chicago. Dwight Moody was
influential in preaching the imminence of the Kingdom of God that was so
important to dispensationalism. The Bible colleges prepared ministers who
lacked college or seminary experience with intense study of the Bible, often
using the "Scofield Reference Bible" of 1909, which was the King James version
with detailed notes explaining how to interpret Dispensationalist passages.
Organization. Fundamentalist movements were found in most North American
Protestant denominations by 1919, with the attack on modernism in theology
launched by the Fundamentalists in the Presbyterian and Baptist churches.
Fundamentalism was especially controversial among Presbyterians. Although it
began in the North its greatest popular strength was in the South, especially
among Southern Baptists. By the late 1920s the national media had identified it
with the South, largely ignoring manifestations elsewhere. The leading
organizer of the Fundamentalist campaign against modernism was William Bell
Riley, a Northern Baptist based in Minneapolis, where his Northwestern Bible
and Missionary Training School (1902), Northwestern Evangelical Seminary
(1935), and Northwestern College (1944) produced thousands of graduates. Riley
created, at a large conference in Philadelphia in 1919, the World's Christian
Fundamentals Association (WCFA). It became the chief interdenominational
fundamentalist organization in the 1920s. Although the fundamentalist drive of
the 1920s to take control of the major Protestant denominations failed at the
national level, the network of churches and missions fostered by Riley shows
the movement was growing in strength, especially in The South. Both rural and
urban in character, the flourishing movement acted as a denominational
surrogate and aimed at a militant orthodoxy of evangelical Christianity. Riley
was president until 1929, after which the WFCA faded in importance and was
never replaced. Literalism. A Biblical literalist is someone who literally
interprets the words of the Bible. A literal Biblical interpretation is
associated with the fundamentalist and evangelical hermeneutical approach to
Scripture, and is used almost exclusively by conservative Christians such as
Baptist, Conservative Mennonites and other similar groups. Catholic
Fundamentalists, however, also believe in a literal interpretation of Vatican
declarations, particularly those pronounced by the Pope. According to Catholic
fundamentalists, individuals who do not agree with the magisterium are
condemned by God. Evolution. Fundamentalists in the 1920s devoted themselves to
fighting the teaching of evolution in the nation's schools and colleges,
especially by passing state laws that affected public schools. Riley took the
initiative in the Scopes Trial in Tennessee in 1925 to bring in famed
politician William Jennings Bryan as an assistant to the local prosecutor.
Liberals saw a division between educated, tolerant Christians and narrow-
minded, tribal, obscurantist Christians. In the half century after the Scopes
Trial the Fundamentalists had little success in shaping government policy, and
generally were defeated in their efforts to reshape the mainline denominations.
The Mainline Protestant denominations refused to join the attacks on evolution
and welcomed modern ideas. However Edwards (2000) challenges the consensus view
among scholars that in the wake of the Scopes trial a humiliated fundamentalism
retreated into the political and cultural background, a viewpoint evidenced in
the movie "Inherit the Wind" and the majority of contemporary historical
accounts. Rather, he argues, the cause of fundamentalism's retreat was the
death of its leader, Bryan. Most fundamentalists saw the trial as a victory and
not a defeat, but Bryan's death soon after created a leadership void that no
other fundamentalist leader could fill. Bryan, unlike the other leaders,
brought name recognition, respectability, and the ability to forge a broad-
based coalition of fundamentalist religious groups to argue for the anti-
evolutionist position. Gatewood (1969) analyzes the transition from the anti-
evolution crusade of the 1920s to the creation science movement of the 1960s.
Despite some similarities between these two causes, the creation science
movement represented a shift from religious to scientific objections to
Darwin's theory. Creation science also differed in terms of popular leadership,
rhetorical tone, and sectional focus. It lacked a prestigious leader like
Bryan, utilized scientific rather than religious rhetoric, and was a product of
California and Michigan instead of the South. Other states. Webb (1991) traces
the political and legal struggles between strict creationists and Darwinists to
influence the extent to which evolution would be taught as science in Arizona
and California schools. After Scopes was convicted, creationists throughout the
United States sought similar antievolution laws for their states. These
included Reverends R. S. Beal and Aubrey L. Moore in Arizona and members of the
Creation Research Society in California, all supported by distinguished laymen.
They sought to ban evolution as a topic for study, or at least relegate it to
the status of unproven theory perhaps taught alongside the biblical version of
creation. Educators, scientists, and other distinguished laymen favored
evolution. This struggle occurred later in the Southwest than in other US areas
and persisted through the Sputnik era, which inspired increased faith in
evolutionism. Militancy and evangelicals. Fundamentalism is defined by
historian George M. Marsden in his seminal work "Fundamentalism and American
Culture" as "militant anti-modernist Protestant evangelicalism." Marsden
explains that Christian fundamentalists were American evangelical Christians
who in the 20th century opposed "both modernism in theology and the cultural
changes that modernism endorsed. Militant opposition to modernism was what most
clearly set off fundamentalism." Other historians agree that militancy is a
core characteristic of the movement. The Fundamentalists from the 1920s
insisted on "militant" action to counteract modernism and historians emphasize
that theme too. "Militant does not mean "violent", it means "aggressively
active in a cause." Recent scholars differentiate "fundamentalists" from
"evangelicals" by arguing the former were more militant and less willing to
collaborate with groups considered "modernist" in theology. McKim and Wright
(1992) argue,"in the 1920s, militant conservatives (fundamentalists) united to
mount a conservative counter-offensive. Fundamentalists sought to rescue their
denominations from the growth of modernism at home." In the 1940s the more
moderate faction of fundamentalists (or "postfundamentalists") maintained the
same theology but began calling themselves "evangelicals" to stress their less
militant position. Olson (2007) points out, "Most postfundamentalist
evangelicals do not wish to be called fundamentalists, even though their basic
theological orientation is not very different." A key event, Olson says, was
the formation of the National Association of Evangelicals (NAE) in 1942. As
Hankins (2008) notes, "Beginning in the 1940s...militant and separatist
evangelicals came to be called fundamentalists, while culturally engaged and
non-militant evangelicals were supposed to be called evangelicals." For
example, American evangelist Billy Graham came from a fundamentalist
background, but parted company with that movement because of his choice, early
in his ministry (1950s), to cooperate with other Christians. Graham represents
a movement that arose within fundamentalism, but has increasingly become
distinct from it, known as neo-evangelicalism or New Evangelicalism (a term
coined by Harold J. Ockenga, the "Father of New Evangelicalism"). The original
Fundamentalist Movement divided along clearly defined lines within conservative
Evangelical Protestantism as issues progressed. Many groupings, large and
small, were produced by this schism. Neo-evangelicalism, Reformed and Lutheran
Confessionalism, the Heritage movement, and Paleo-Orthodoxy have all developed
distinct identities, but none of them acknowledge any more than an historical
overlap with the Fundamentalist Movement, and the term is seldom used of them.
Christian right. The latter half of the twentieth century witnessed a surge
interest in politics by organized fundamentalists in the U.S. The sparks that
ignited their interest were decisions by the United States Supreme Court in
1962 to prohibit state-sanctioned prayer in public schools in the case of Engel
v. Vitale and in 1963 to prohibit mandatory Bible reading in public schools in
the case of Abington School District v. Schempp. By the time Ronald Reagan ran
for the presidency in 1980, fundamentalist preachers, like the prohibitionist
ministers of the early 20th century, were organizing their congregations to
vote for supportive candidates. Leaders of the political force included Rob
Grant and Jerry Falwell. Beginning with Grant's American Christian Cause in
1974, Christian Voice throughout the 1970s and Falwell's Moral Majority in the
1980s, the Christian Right began to have a major impact on American politics.
In the 1980s and 1990s, the Christian Right was influencing elections and
policy with groups such as the Family Research Council (founded 1981 by James
Dobson) and the Christian Coalition (formed in 1989 by Pat Robertson) helping
conservative politicians, especially Republicans to win state and national
elections. Canada. In Canada, Fundamentalism was less of a force, but it had an
aggressive leader in Englishman Thomas Todhunter Shields (1873–1955), who led
80 churches out of the Baptist federation in Ontario in 1927 and formed the
Union of regular Baptist churches of Ontario and Quebec. He was affiliated with
the "Baptist Bible Union", based in the United States. His newspaper, "The
Gospel Witness," reached 30,000 subscribers in 16 countries, giving him an
international reputation. He was one of the founders of the international
Council of Christian Churches. Oswald J. Smith (1889–1986), reared in rural
Ontario and educated at Moody Church in Chicago, set up The Peoples Church in
Toronto in 1928. A dynamic preacher and leader in Canadian fundamentalism,
Smith wrote 35 books and engaged in missionary work worldwide. The reverend
Billy Graham called him, "the greatest combination pastor, hymn writer,
missionary statesman, an evangelist of our time".
