Christian eschatology Christian eschatology is a major branch of study within
Christian theology. Eschatology, from two Greek words meaning "last"
(ἔσχατος, last) and "study" (λογία, lit. discourse), is the study
of the end of things, whether the end of an individual life, the end of the
age, or the end of the world. Broadly speaking, Christian eschatology is the
study of the destiny of humankind as it is revealed by the Bible, which is the
primary source for all Christian eschatology studies. The major issues and
events in Christian eschatology are death and the afterlife, Heaven and Hell,
the Second Coming of Jesus, the Resurrection of the Dead, the Rapture, the
Tribulation, Millennialism, the end of the world, the Last Judgment, and the
New Heaven and New Earth of the World to Come. Eschatological passages are
found in many places in the Bible, both in the Old and the New Testaments.
There are also many extrabiblical examples of eschatological prophecy, as well
as church traditions. History. Eschatology is an ancient branch of study in
Christian theology, presumably starting with the Olivet discourse, The Sheep
and the Goats, and other discourses of end times by Jesus, with the doctrine of
the Second Coming of Christ first touched on by Paul of Tarsus and Ignatius of
Antioch (c. 35–107 AD), then given more consideration by the Christian
apologist, Justin Martyr (c. 100–165). Treatment of eschatology continued in
the West in the teachings of Tertullian (c. 160–225), and was given fuller
reflection and speculation soon after by Origen (c. 185–254). It was
increasingly recognized as a formal division of theological study during the
20th century. Approaches to prophetic interpretation. The following approaches
arose from the study of Christianity’s most central eschatological document,
the Book of Revelation, but the principles embodied in them can be applied to
all prophecy in the Bible. They are by no means mutually exclusive and are
often combined to form a more complete and coherent interpretation of prophetic
passages. Most interpretations fit into one, or a combination of, these
approaches. Preterism. Preterism (from the Latin "praeteritus," meaning "gone
by") is an approach which sees prophecy as chiefly being fulfilled in the past,
especially (in the case of the Book of Revelation) during the first century.
Prophecies in general, therefore, have already been fulfilled. Revelation, for
example, may be seen as referring to the major players and events leading up to
the destruction of Jerusalem in the year 70 AD, or the struggle of Christianity
to survive the persecutions of the Roman Empire, as many other interpretations
are considered. There are two major views within preterism, Partial preterism
and Full preterism. Historicism. Historicism says that Biblical prophecies
provide us with a broad view of history, as well as an explanation of the
religious significance of historical events. Historicists attempt to identify
prophetic passages with major events in history. Futurism. In Futurism,
parallels may be drawn with historical events, but most eschatological
prophecies are chiefly referring to events which have not been fulfilled, but
will take place at the end of the age and the end of the world. Most prophecies
will be fulfilled during a global time of chaos known as the Great Tribulation
and afterwards. Idealism. In Idealism, also known as "spiritual" or "symbolic",
the events described in prophecy are neither past, present, nor future, but are
representative of larger ideals and principles. Eschatological prophecy deals
with the ongoing struggle between the forces of light and darkness, and the
ultimate triumph of good over evil. Its message is purely a spiritual one, an
allegory of the spiritual path, which is equally relevant in all ages and for
all people. Death and the afterlife. Jewish beliefs at the time of Jesus. There
were different schools of thought on the afterlife in Israel during the first
century, AD. The Sadducees, who recognized only the Torah (first five books of
the Old Testament) as authoritative, did not believe in an afterlife or a
Resurrection of the Dead. The Pharisees, who not only accepted the Torah, but
the rest of the Hebrew scriptures also, believed in the Resurrection of the
Dead, and it is known to have been a major point of contention between the two
groups (see ). The Pharisees based their belief on passages such as , which
says: “Multitudes who sleep in the dust of the earth will awake: some to
everlasting life, others to shame and everlasting contempt." The intermediate
state. Some traditions, notably the Seventh Day Adventists, teach that the soul
sleeps after death, and will not awake again until the Resurrection, while
others believe the spirit goes to an intermediate place where we will live
consciously until the Resurrection. For clarity it should be stated that SDA
understanding of Soul is not that of Calvin, by "soul" SDA theologians mean the
physical person (monism), and that no component of human nature survives death,
therefore each human will be "re_created" at resurrection. Purgatory. Most
denominations (a notable exception being the Seventh Day Adventists) would
affirm the statement from the "Catechism of the Catholic Church" (above), with
the exception of the parenthetical phrase, "through a purification or
immediately." This alludes to the Catholic belief in a spiritual state, known
as Purgatory, in which those souls who are not condemned to Hell, but are also
not completely pure as required for entry into Heaven, go through a final
process of purification before their full acceptance into Heaven. Eastern
Orthodoxy and Protestantism do not believe in Purgatory as such, though the
Orthodox Church is willing to allow for a period of continued sanctification
(the process of being made pure, or holy) after death. Most Protestants reject
the doctrine of Purgatory on the basis that, according to the Protestant
interpretation of Scripture, Christ has already made full atonement for our
sins on the cross, thereby removing all obstacles which prevent us from coming
directly into the presence of God after death. Resurrection of the dead. The
Doctrine of the Resurrection Predates Christianity. The word "resurrection"
comes from the Latin "resurrectus," which is the past participle of
"resurgere," meaning "to rise again." Although the doctrine of the resurrection
comes to the forefront in the New Testament, it predates the Christian era.
There is an apparent reference to the resurrection in the book of Job, where
Job says, "I know that my redeemer lives, and that he will stand at the latter
day upon the earth. And though... worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh I
will see God."19:25-27 Again, the prophet Daniel writes, "Many of those who
sleep in the dust of the earth will awake, some to everlasting life, some to
shame and everlasting contempt."12:2 Isaiah says: "Your dead will live.
Together with my dead body, they will arise. Awake and sing, you who dwell in
dust, for your dew is like the dew of herbs, and the earth will cast out the
dead".26:19 This belief was still common among the Jews in New Testament times,
as exemplified by the passage which relates the raising of Lazarus from the
dead. When Jesus told Lazarus’ sister, Martha, that Lazarus would rise again,
she replied, "I know that he will rise again in the resurrection at the last
day".11:24 Also, one of the two main branches of the Jewish religious
establishment, the Pharisees, believed in and taught the future resurrection of
the body.Acts 23:1-8 Two Resurrections. An important development in the New
Testament is the understanding that the resurrection of the wicked will not be
at the same time as that of the righteous. Revelation says: "Blessed and holy
is he who has part in the first resurrection. Over such, the second death has
no power, but they will be priests of God and of Christ, and will reign with
him a thousand years."20:6 The rest of the dead “did not live again until the
thousand years were finished."20:5 Jesus’ words concur with those of
Revelation: "The hour is coming in which all who are in the graves will hear
his voice and come forth: those who have done good, to the resurrection of
life, and those who have done evil, to the resurrection of condemnation."5:28,
29 The Resurrection Body. The Gospel authors wrote that our resurrection bodies
will be different from those we have now. Jesus said, "In the resurrection,
they neither marry nor are given in marriage, but are like the angels of God in
heaven."22:30 Paul adds, “So also is the resurrection of the dead: the
body… is sown a natural body; it is raised a spiritual body."Co. 15:42-44
Sectarian Views. Although Martin Luther personally believed and taught
resurrection of the dead in combination with soul sleep, this is not a
mainstream teaching of Lutheranism and most Lutherans traditionally believe in
resurrection of the body in combination with the immortal soul. Early 20th
century American preacher Billy Sunday epitomizes the Evangelical focus on
"going to heaven" in his sermon “Heaven: A Wonderful Place; Where There is No
More Death; Blessed Hope of the Christian.” In the message Sunday
characteristically explained the feelings of his audience by saying
“Everybody wants to go to Heaven. We are all curious. We want to know, where
Heaven is, how it looks, who are there, what they wear, and how to get
there!” Sunday speaks of many aspects of the afterlife such as the nice
weather and eternal health, although there is no mention of the resurrection of
the dead. He ends with an illustration about a man who dies and goes to heaven
exclaiming “Home, home at last!” as if he had arrived at the end of his
eschatological journey. Several churches, such as the Anabaptists and Socinians
of the Reformation, then Seventh-day Adventist Church, Christadelphians,
Jehovah's Witnesses, and theologians of different traditions reject the idea of
the immortality of a non-physical soul as a vestige of Neoplatonism, and other
pagan traditions. In this school of thought, the dead remain dead (and do not
immediately progress to a Heaven, Hell, or Purgatory) until a physical
resurrection of some or all of the dead occurs at the end of time. Some groups,
Christadelphians in particular, consider that it is not a universal
resurrection, and that at this time of resurrection that the Last Judgment will
take place. Rapture. In his letter to the church at Thessalonica, Paul writes,
"The Lord himself will descend from heaven... and the dead in Christ will rise
first.” But he adds that “we who are alive and remain will be caught up
together with them in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air."Th. 4:16-17 The
rising of those who are still alive to join the resurrected dead is known as
the "Rapture." This passage implies that Paul believed that the return of
Jesus, the Resurrection, and the Rapture would happen simultaneously. Rapture
is used in at least two senses, in the sense of pre-tribulation views in which
a group of people will be "left behind" and as a synonym for the Resurrection
generally. The Great Tribulation. The end comes at an unexpected time. There
are many passages in the Bible, both Old and New Testaments, which speak of a
time of terrible tribulation such as has never been known, a time of natural
and man-made disasters on an awesome scale. Jesus said that at the time of his
coming, "There will be great tribulation, such as has not been since the
beginning of the world to this time, no, nor ever will be. And unless those
days were shortened, no flesh would be saved; but for the elect's sake, those
days will be shortened."24:21-22 Paul echoes this theme, saying, "For when they
say, 'Peace and safety!' then sudden destruction comes upon them."Thess 5:3 The
Abomination of Desolation. The abomination of desolation (or desolating
sacrilege) is a term found in the Hebrew Bible, in the book of Daniel. The term
is used by Jesus Christ in the Olivet discourse, according to both the Gospel
of Matthew and the Gospel of Mark. In the Matthew account, Jesus is presented
as quoting Daniel explicitly. This verse in the Olivet Discourse also occurs in
the Gospel of Luke. Many biblical scholars conclude that Matthew 24:15 and Mark
13:14 are prophecies after the event about the siege of Jerusalem in AD 70 by
the Roman general Titus (see Dating of the Gospel of Mark). Preterist Christian
commentators believe that Jesus quoted this prophecy in Mark 13:14 as referring
to an event in his "1st century disciples'" immediate future, the siege of
Jerusalem in 70 AD. Futurist Christians consider the "Abomination of
Desolation" prophecy of Daniel mentioned by Jesus in and as referring to an
event in the end time future, when a 7 year peace treaty will be signed between
Israel and a world ruler called "the man of lawlessness", or the "Antichrist"
affirmed by the writings of the Apostle Paul in 2 Thessalonians. Other scholars
conclude that the Abomination of Desolation refers to the Crucifixion, an
attempt by the emperor Hadrian to erect a statue to Jupiter in the Jewish
temple, or an attempt by Caligula to have a statue depicting him as Zeus built
in the temple. The Seventy Weeks Prophecy. Many interpreters calculate the
length of the tribulation at seven years. The key to this understanding is the
"seventy weeks prophecy” in the book of Daniel. The Prophecy of Seventy
Septets (or literally 'seventy times seven') appears in the angel Gabriel's
reply to Daniel, beginning with verse 22 and ending with verse 27 in the ninth
chapter of the Book of Daniel, a work included in both the Jewish Tanakh and
the Christian Bible; as well as the Septuagint. The prophecy is part of both
the Jewish account of history and Christian eschatology. The Second Coming.
Last Day Counterfeits. These false Christs will perform great signs and are no
ordinary people "For they are spirits of demons, performing signs, which go out
to the kings of the earth and of the whole world, to gather them to the battle
of that great day of God Almighty." (Revelation 16:14) Satan's angels will also
appear as godly clergymen, and Satan will appear as an angel of light. "For
such are false apostles, deceitful workers, transforming themselves into
apostles of Christ. And no wonder! For Satan himself transforms himself into an
angel of light. Therefore it is no great thing if his ministers also transform
themselves into ministers of righteousness, whose end will be according to
their works." (2 Corinthians 11:13-15) "As his crowning miracle, Satan will
claim to be Jesus" (Matthew 24:23, 24). The Marriage of the Lamb. After Jesus
meets his followers “in the air,” the marriage of the Lamb takes place:
"Let us be glad and rejoice and give him glory, for the marriage of the Lamb
has come, and his wife has made herself ready. And to her was granted that she
should be arrayed in fine linen, clean and bright, for the fine linen is the
righteous acts of the saints."19:7-8 Christ is represented throughout
Revelation as “the Lamb,” symbolizing the giving of his life as an atoning
sacrifice for the people of the world, just as lambs were sacrificed on the
altar for the sins of Israel. His “wife” appears to represent the people of
God, for she is dressed in the “righteous acts of the saints.” As the
marriage takes place, there is a great celebration in heaven which involves a
"great multitude."19:6 Armageddon. The Book of Revelation states: "I saw heaven
opened, and behold, a white horse. And he who sat on him was called Faithful
and True, and with righteousness he judges and makes war."19:11 We now see
Christ, not as a lamb, but as a warrior, ready to make war against the forces
of evil. There is a passage in Zechariah which is identified with this event:
“I will gather all the nations to battle against Jerusalem. The city will be
taken, the houses looted, and the women raped… Then the Lord will go forth
and fight against those nations… Thus the Lord my God will come, and all the
saints with you.”14:2-5 In Matthew, Jesus says, "The sign of the Son of Man
will appear in heaven, and then all the tribes of the earth will mourn, and
they will see the Son of Man coming on the clouds of heaven with power and
great glory."24:30 The army of heaven is described in similar terms as the
resurrected and raptured believers: "The armies in heaven, clothed in fine
linen, white and clean, followed him on white horses."19:14 Revelation
continues: "I saw the beast, the kings of the earth, and their armies, gathered
together to make war against him who sat on the horse and against his army."19:
19 Isaiah also speaks of such a battle: "The Lord will come with fire and with
his chariots, like a whirlwind, to render his anger with fury, and his rebuke
with flames of fire. For by fire and by his sword the Lord will judge all
flesh, and the slain of the Lord will be many."66:15-16 The Millennium. Just as
the physical bodies of people are changed into spiritual bodies in the
resurrection (see above), so Isaiah implies that animals will undergo a
transformation which enables them to live in peace with human beings and with
each other. There is no more killing, either in the human or the animal
kingdoms. God reverses the covenant made with Noah in which he said, "The fear
and the dread of you will be on every beast of the earth, on every bird of the
air, on all that moves on the earth, and on all the fish of the sea."9:2 If the
passage in Isaiah is interpreted literally, a return to the vegetarian diet of
Eden seems to be a natural conclusion.Gen 1:29-30 The End of the World and the
Last Judgment. Satan released. According to the Bible, the Millennial age of
peace all but closes the history of planet Earth. However, the story is not yet
quite finished: "When the thousand years have expired, Satan will be released
from his prison and will go out to deceive the nations which are in the four
corners of the earth, Gog and Magog, to gather them together to battle, whose
number is as the sand of the sea."20:7-8 There is continuing discussion over
the identity of Gog and Magog. In the context of the passage, they seem to
equate to something like “east and west.” There is a passage in Ezekiel,
however, where God says to the prophet, "Set your face against Gog, of the land
of Magog, the prince of Rosh, Meshech, and Tubal, and prophesy against him."38:
2 Gog, in this instance, is the name of a person of the land of Magog, who is
ruler (“prince”) over the regions of Rosh, Meshech, and Tubal. Ezekiel says
of him: "You will ascend, coming like a storm, covering the land like a cloud,
you and all your troops and many peoples with you..."38:2 Despite this huge
show of force, the battle will be short-lived, for Ezekiel, Daniel, and
Revelation all say that this last desperate attempt to destroy the people and
the city of God will end in disaster: "I will bring him to judgment with
pestilence and bloodshed. I will rain down on him and on his troops, and on the
many peoples who are with him: flooding rain, great hailstones, fire and
brimstone." 38:22 Revelation concurs: "Fire came down from God out of heaven
and devoured them."20:9 It may be that the images of fire raining down are an
ancient vision of modern weapons, others would say a supernatural intervention
by God, yet others that they refer to events in history, and some would say
they are symbolic of larger ideas and should not be interpreted literally. The
Last Judgment. Following the defeat of Gog, the last judgment begins: "The
devil, who deceived them, was cast into the lake of fire and brimstone where
the beast and the false prophet are, and they will be tormented day and night
forever and ever."20:10 Satan will join the Antichrist and the False Prophet,
who were condemned to the lake of fire at the beginning of the Millennium. John
had earlier written, "Blessed and holy is he who has part in the first
resurrection. Over such the second death has no power."20:6 Those who are
included in the Resurrection and the Rapture are excluded from the final
judgment, and are not subject to the second death. Due to the description of
the seat upon which the Lord sits, this final judgment is often referred to as
the Great White Throne Judgment. New Heaven and Earth. New Jerusalem. In
Isaiah, God promises a new heaven and earth: "Behold, I create new heavens and
a new earth, and the former will not be remembered nor come to mind."65:17 The
author of Revelation has a corresponding vision: "I saw a new heaven and a new
earth, for the first heaven and the first earth had passed away."21:1 The focus
turns to one city in particular, the New Jerusalem. Once again, we see the
imagery of the marriage: "I, John, saw the holy city, New Jerusalem, coming
down from God out of heaven, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband."21:
2 In the New Jerusalem, God "will dwell with them, and they will be his people,
and God himself will be with them and be their God.."21:4 As a result, there is
“no temple in it, for the Lord God Almighty and the Lamb are its temple.”
Nor is there a need for the sun to give its light, “for the glory of God
illuminated it, and the Lamb is its light."21:22-23 The city will also be a
place of great peace and joy, for "God will wipe away every tear from their
eyes. There will be no more death, nor sorrow, nor crying; and there will be no
more pain, for the former things have passed away."21:1-4 Description. The city
itself has a large wall with twelve gates in it which are never shut, and which
have the names of the twelve tribes of Israel written on them. Each of the
gates is made of a single pearl, and there is an angel standing in each one.
The wall also has twelve foundations which are adorned with precious stones,
and upon the foundations are written the names of the twelve apostles. The
gates and foundations are often interpreted as symbolizing the people of God
before and after Christ. The city and its streets are pure gold, but not like
the gold we know, for this gold is described as being like clear glass. The
city is square in shape, and is twelve thousand furlongs long and wide (fifteen
hundred miles). If these are comparable to earthly measurements, the city will
cover an area about half the size of the contiguous United States. The height
is the same as the length and breadth, and although this has led most people to
conclude that it is shaped like a cube, it could also be a pyramid. The Tree of
Life. The city has a river which proceeds "out of the throne of God and of the
Lamb."22:1 Next to the river is the tree of life, which bears twelve fruits and
yields its fruit every month. The last time we saw the tree of life was in the
Garden of Eden.2:9 God drove Adam and Eve away from it because it bestowed
eternal life and he did not want them to have it in their degraded state.3:22
In the New Jerusalem, the tree of life reappears, and everyone in the city has
access to it. Genesis tells us that the earth was cursed because of Adam's
sin,3:17 but the author of John writes that in the New Jerusalem, "there will
be no more curse."22:3 Major theological positions. Premillennialism.
Pretribulation Rapture. Pretribulationists believe that the second coming will
be in two stages separated by a seven-year period of tribulation. At the
beginning of the tribulation, true Christians will rise to meet the Lord in the
air (the Rapture). Then follows a seven-year period of suffering in which the
Antichrist will conquer the world and persecute those who refuse to worship
him. At the end of this period, Christ returns to defeat the Antichrist and
establish the age of peace. This position is supported by a scripture which
says, "God did not appoint us to wrath, but to obtain salvation through our
Lord Jesus Christ.” Thess 5:9 Midtribulation Rapture. Midtribulationists
believe that the Rapture will take place at the halfway point of the seven-year
tribulation, i.e. after 3½ years. It coincides with the “abomination of
desolation” – a desecration of the temple where the Antichrist puts an end
to the Jewish sacrifices, sets up his own image in the temple, and demands that
he be worshiped as God. This event begins the second, most intense part of the
tribulation. Some interpreters find support for the "midtrib" position by
comparing a passage in Paul's epistles with the book of Revelation. Paul says,
"We shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed, in a moment, in the
twinkling of an eye, at the last trumpet. For the trumpet will sound, and the
dead will be raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed" (1 Cor 15:51-52).
Revelation divides the great tribulation into three sets of increasingly
catastrophic judgments: the Seven Seals, the Seven Trumpets, and the Seven
Bowls, in that order. If the "last trumpet" of Paul is equated with the last
trumpet of Revelation, the Rapture would be in the middle of the Tribulation.
(Not all interpreters agree with this literal interpretation of the chronology
of Revelation, however.) Posttribulation Rapture. Posttribulationists hold that
Christ will not return until the end of the tribulation. Christians, rather
than being raptured at the beginning of the tribulation, or halfway through,
will live through it and suffer for their faith during the ascendancy of the
Antichrist. Proponents of this position believe that the presence of believers
during the tribulation is necessary for a final evangelistic effort during a
time when external conditions will combine with the Gospel message to bring
great numbers of converts into the Church in time for the beginning of the
Millennium. Postmillennialism. Postmillennialism does not believe in a
premillennial appearance of Christ. The postmillennial position is that the
millennium began at the inauguration of Christ's kingdom reign when he ascended
to his heavenly throne and happens, not as a result of the coming of Christ,
but as the global population converts to Christianity as a result of
evangelization. The age of peace is still a progressing work of divine grace,
but without the visible presence of Christ to take the place of an Earthly
ruler. Christ will appear at the end of the millennium to lead his people into
the heavenly city, the New Jerusalem. Amillennialism. Amillennialism does not
believe in a literal Millennium. The "thousand years" is an expression, a way
of referring to the entire period from the first coming of Christ, two thousand
years ago, until the future second coming. Many amillennialists believe that
during this time period, the church will continue to evangelize and grow as
well as suffer declination in periods until Christ’s coming. The Second
Coming will be a natural culmination of the process of world evangelization,
rather than a revolutionary event that brings sudden and dramatic change.
Interpretive and hermeneutical overviews of the Bible. The hermeneutic method
held by an individual or church will greatly affect their interpretation of the
book of Revelation, and consequently their eschatological scheme.
Supersessionist. Supersessionism is the belief that the New Covenant in Christ
supersedes, or replaces, the Old Covenant with Israel. It comes in at least two
forms: covenant theology and kingdom theology. It was the predominant teaching
of the church until the rise of dispensationalism in the 19th century. Covenant
theology. Usually Historical-grammatical typologised and contextualised. There
are three covenants, the Covenant of Works (or Law), the Covenant of Redemption
and the Covenant of Grace. Under the Covenant of Works mankind, represented
ultimately in a covenantal sense under Adam beginning from the Garden of Eden,
failed to live as God intended and stood condemned. But beyond time the
Covenant of Redemption was made between the Father and Son, to agree that
Christ would live an acceptable substitutionary life on behalf of, and as a
covenantal representative for, those who would sin but would trust in Christ as
their substitutionary atonement, which bought them into the Covenant of Grace.
The Covenant of Grace applies to all who trust Christ for their salvation,
regardless of ethnicity, and thus the Covenant covers Jews and Gentiles alike
with regard to salvation, sanctification, and resurrection. The Covenant of
Grace forms the basis of the later covenants with Noah, Abraham, Moses, David
and the New Covenant in Christ. Held by many evangelical Reformed Protestant
Churches who take a Historical-grammatical and typological interpretation of
the Bible. Adherents would include the Reformed church, most of the
Presbyterian church, some low church Anglicans, some Baptist churches, some
Wesleyan/Methodist churches and certain Lutheran churches. Kingdom-Dominion
theology. Hermeneutics. Similar to the covenantal system, but emphasizes the
Kingdom of God rather than the three covenants. Exemplified in works such as
Graeme Goldsworthy's "Gospel and Kingdom". The Old Testament is interpreted
using typology and the grammatico-historical method. Revelation is read
according to the conventions of the apocalyptic genre. Overview. God's purpose
for all time was to redeem for himself a people through the death and
resurrection of Christ. The incarnation of Christ is the centrepoint of the
Bible and all history. The Old Testament is understood to contain a number of
covenants and "types" which are fulfilled in the past and future work of Jesus.
Goldsworthy schematizes the Kingdom of God as the expression of "God's rule"
over "God's people" in "God's place". In the beginning, God himself ruled over
Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden. After the fall, the rule of God was
expressed through the Law, the Judges, the King of Israel and finally the
promise that God would write his law on his people's hearts (Jer 31:33). "God's
place" came to be the Tabernacle in the wilderness, later the Temple in
Jerusalem, and finally the promise of the indwelling Spirit of God (Joel 2,
Ezek 37). His "people" were Abraham, the people of Israel, then the faithful
remnant of Israel, and finally the promised Messiah (Ps 2). In the New
Testament, God's rule is exercised through Jesus Christ the King, who is also
the temple of God (John 2:19-21), over his people the Church (of which Israel
was a type). Salvation for all people in all times is found by trusting
(explicitly or implicitly) in Jesus. Thus, Abraham, Moses, David, and all
Christians today are saved by the same faith. The Jews are regarded as special
in God's plan (as in Romans and Ephesians) and yet the Old Testament prophecies
regarding Israel find their fulfillment in Jesus and the Church rather than in
a literal restoration of Israel. Adherents. Held by reformed, evangelical
Protestants (especially Sydney Anglicans). Approaches to Revelation. Usually
idealist and amillennial. Revelation describes what is happening throughout the
Christian era, from Pentecost to the second coming. This view acknowledges that
there may be valid preteristic connections (e.g. the seven hills = Rome) but
the full understanding comes through an idealistic-historicism (but without
necessarily seeing the Roman Catholic Church as the antichrist). The events of
the book, while not to be tied to particular historical events, still describe
the sorts of things that will happen until Christ returns. The Book of
Revelation is interpreted according to apocalyptic conventions regarding
numbers and colours (7 = perfection/completion, white = victory) and the
enormous number of allusions to the rest of Scripture. Dispensational.
Interpretation as the literal, 'plain meaning' implies (i.e. rejection of
typological and allegorical methods, although not rejecting types or allegories
as being present in the Scriptures "per se"). Biblical references to Israel
tend to mean ancient "and" modern Israel. History is divided into (typically
seven) "dispensations" where God tests man's obedience differently. The present
"Church dispensation" concerns Christians (mainly Gentiles) and is a
parenthesis to God's main plan of dealing with and blessing his chosen people
the Jews. Because of the Jews' rejection of Jesus, Jewish sovereignty over the
promised earthly kingdom of Jerusalem and Palestine was postponed from the time
of Christ's first coming until prior to or just after his Second Coming when
most or all Jews will embrace him. There will be a rapture of the Gentile
church followed by a great tribulation of seven (or three-and-a-half) years'
duration during which Antichrist will arise and Armageddon will occur. Then
Jesus will return visibly to earth and re-establish the nation of Israel; the
Jewish temple will be rebuilt at Jerusalem and the Temple mount, possibly in
place of the Muslim Dome of the Rock (see Christian Zionism). Christ and the
people of Israel will reign in Jerusalem for a thousand years, followed by last
judgment and a new heavens and new earth. Held by groups who believe the
scriptures to be inerrant. Held by many Protestant groups who take what they
believe is a more literal interpretation of the Bible, including many, but not
most, Pentecostal Charismatic and Baptist churches and Independent and 'Non-
denominational' churches as well as a few of the Presbyterian Church and
Wesleyan/Methodist churches. Also held by most groups that are labelled
Fundamentalists. The more politically active sections within this
eschatological view often strongly support the Christian Zionism movement and
the associated political, military and economic support for Israel which comes
from certain groups within American politics and parts of the Christian right.
This view is also held in a modified form by groups such as the Latter Day
Saints, Christadelphians and Adventist splinter groups such as the Branch
Davidians. One of the main tenets of Dispensationalism is the strict dichotomy
that dispensationalists claim exists between Israel and the New Testament
Church. This is expressly denied by Covenant Theologians who claim the
existence of a relationship via “Spiritual Israel.” A dispensationalist
would claim that none of the prophecies pertaining to Israel are or will be
fulfilled in or by the New Testament Church. Covenant Theologians would claim
that some of the prophecies pertaining to Israel are, will, or may be fulfilled
in or by the New Testament Church. see supersessionism. Allegorical or
mythical. The Bible may or may not be factually accurate but is designed to
teach spiritual lessons through allegory and myth. The Bible is more literary
than historical. Typically, this stance is taken by churches and individuals
who do not place significant emphasis upon eschatology at all. Held by
Christian groups ranging from those who are Biblically inerrant to liberal
scholars who mostly belong to mainline Protestant denominations. Supporters of
this position also include high church Anglo-Catholic, Catholic-leaning
Lutherans, Eastern Orthodox churches, and traditional Roman Catholic groups.
Belief in the allegorical interpretation of the Bible does not exclude belief
in praxeological or literal hermeneutics. For example, Roman Catholic
hermeneutics holds that there are many senses in which the Bible is true in
addition to literal truth. The Catholic Apostolic Church believed that the
Bible should be interpreted allegorically. Some descendants of the Catholic
Apostolic Church also known as Irvingism, such as Apostelamt Jesu Christi,
Apostelamt Juda, Restored Apostolic Mission Church and the Old Apostolic Church
also believes in the allegorical interpretation of the Bible. Preterism v.
Historicism. Expositors of the traditional Protestant interpretation of
Revelation known as Historicism have often maintained that Revelation was
written in AD 96 and not AD 70. Edward Bishop Elliott, in the "Horae
Apocalypticae" (1862), argues that John wrote the book in exile on Patmos "at
the close of the reign of Domitian; that is near the end of the year 95 or
beginning of 96". He notes that Domitian was assassinated in September 96.
Elliot begins his lengthy review of historical evidence by quoting Irenaeus, a
disciple of Polycarp. Polycarp was a disciple of the Apostle John. Irenaeus
mentions that the Apocalypse was seen "no very long time ago almost in our own
age, toward the end of the reign of Domitian". Other historicists have seen no
significance in the date that Revelation was written, and have even held to an
early date while Kenneth L. Gentry, Jr., makes an exegetical and historical
argument for the pre-AD 70 composition of Revelation. Historicism v. Futurism.
The division between these interpretations can be somewhat blurred. Most
futurists are expecting a Rapture of the Church, an Antichrist, a Great
Tribulation and a Second coming of Christ in the near future. But they also
accept certain past events, such as the as the rebirth of the State of Israel
and the reunification of Jerusalem as prerequisites to them, in a manner which
the earlier historicists have done with other dates. Futurists, who do not
normally use the day-year principle, interpret the Prophecy of Seventy Weeks in
Daniel 9:24 as years, just as historicists do. Most historicists have chosen
time lines, from beginning to end, entirely in the past. But some, such as Adam
Clarke have time lines which also commenced with specific past events, but
require a future fulfillment. In his commentary on Daniel 8:14 published in
1831, he stated that the 2,300-year period should be calculated from 334 BC,
the year Alexander the Great began his conquest of the Persian Empire. His
calculation resulted in the year 1966. He seems to have overlooked the fact
that there is no “year zero” between BC and AD dates. For example, the year
following 1 BC is 1 AD. Thus his calculations should have required an
additional year, ending in 1967. He was not anticipating a literal regathering
of the Jewish people prior to the Second coming of Christ. But the date is of
special significance to futurists since it is the year of Jerusalem's capture
by Israeli forces during the Six-Day War. His commentary on Daniel 7:25
contains a 1260-year period commencing in 755 AD and ending in 2015.
