Chrismation Chrismation is the name given in Eastern Orthodox, Oriental
Orthodox and Eastern Catholic churches, as well as in the Assyrian Church of
the East initiation rites, to the sacrament or mystery more commonly known in
the West as confirmation, although Italian normally uses "cresima"
(chrismation), rather than "confermazione" (confirmation). The term
"chrismation" is used because the recipient of the sacrament is anointed with
"Chrism", which according to eastern Christan belief, the Apostles sanctified
and introduced for all priests to use as a replacement for laying on of hands
by the Apostles and consists of a "mixture of forty sweet-smelling substances
and pure olive oil" sanctified by a bishop with some older Chrism added in, in
the belief that some trace of the initial Chrism sanctified by the Apostles is
contained therein. Liturgical form. Eastern Orthodox Church. Common part of the
rite. The Chrism is washed off by a priest seven days later, according to the
written rubrics, the newly baptized wearing their white chitons and not washing
their anointed parts for that period. However, in the case of infant baptism
(and often also with adult chrismation contemporary practice), the ablution is
performed immediately after the rite of chrismation. As part of the baptismal
rite. Typically, one becomes a member of the Church by baptism and chrismation
performed by a priest as a single service. At the reconciliation of apostates.
In the Eastern Orthodox Church the sacrament may be conferred more than once
and it is customary to receive apostates by repeating chrismation. Saint
Methodius of Constantinople At the reception of certain converts. Although
normally administered in conjunction with baptism, in some cases chrismation
alone may be used to receive converts to Orthodoxy through the exercise of
"economia". Although practice in this regard varies, in general, if a convert
comes to Orthodoxy from another Christian confession and has previously
undergone a rite of baptism in the Trinitarian Formula ("in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit"), he or she may be received
into the Orthodox Church through the sacrament of chrismation, after which
receiving the Holy Eucharist. If, however, a convert comes from a Christian
confession that baptizes in the name of Jesus (such as Oneness Pentecostals),
from one which practices an invalid, non-Trinitarian baptism (such as Mormons
or Jehovah's Witnesses) or from one that does not practice baptism at all (such
as Quakers or The Salvation Army), baptism is a prerequisite for chrismation -
an initiate must always be validly baptized into the death of Jesus in the name
of the Holy Trinity before any further holy mysteries or sacraments of
initiation can be administered. The use of "economia" is at the discretion of,
and subject to the guidelines imposed by, the local bishop. Ware, 279
Sacramental theology. Eastern Churches. Unlike in the western Churches (e.g.,
Roman Catholic and Anglican), where confirmation is typically reserved to those
of "the age of reason", chrismation in the Eastern Churches, (including Eastern
Rite Catholic Churches), is ordinarily administered immediately after baptism,
most commonly infant baptism, and immediately (or at least shortly) before
one's first reception of Holy Communion. This sacramental rite may be performed
by a presbyter (priest). After receiving this sacrament, the recipient is
eligible to receive the Eucharist. In the Eastern tradition, chrismation shows
the unity of the church through the bishop in the continuation of the Apostolic
faith, because the Chrism used is presented to the priest by the bishop and
(together with the antimension) is the symbol of the priest's permission from
the bishop to perform the sacraments (see faculty). Although priests in the
Eastern churches are universally granted this faculty, it is thus ultimately
considered a sacrament granted by a bishop and associated with that Apostolic
office. Furthermore, because some of the previously sanctified Chrism is mixed
with the newly sanctified Chrism, there is a belief that the Chrism contains a
remnant of, or at least a connection to, the same Chrism which was sanctified
by the Apostles in the first century, and thus is a symbol of Apostolic
succession. Oriental Orthodox. The Coptic Orthodox Church follows a tradition
that states while the Apostles used to give Confirmation by the laying on of
the hands, they found they were not able to communicate such power. Thus they
ordered the collection of the spices which were used to anoint Christ's body,
and they were mixed with oil, forming, according to Coptic tradition, the first
chrism, or "myron", which, according to tradition, was brough to Egypt by St
Mark. The Coptic communion believes that, since that time, the "myron" has been
remade 28 times. Assyrian Church of the East. The Assyrian Church of the East,
which recognizes the "Latrocinium" or "Second Council of Ephesus" of 449 as an
ecumenical council, has some similar views to the Eastern Orthodox regarding
sacramental theology in chrismation.
