Christian Identity Christian Identity is a label applied to a wide variety of
loosely affiliated believers and churches with a white supremacist theology.
Most promote a racist interpretation of Christianity. According to Chester L.
Quarles, professor of criminal justice at the University of Mississippi, some
of the Christian Identity movement's followers hold that non-Caucasian peoples
have no souls, and can therefore never earn God's favor or be saved. Believers
in the theology affirm that Jesus Christ paid only for the sins of the House of
Israel and the House of Judah and that salvation must be received through both
redemption and race. In many variations of Christian Identity thought, a key
commonality is British Israelism, which teaches that many white Europeans are
the literal descendants of the Israelites through the ten tribes which were
taken away into captivity by the armies of Assyria. Christian Identity asserts
"in addition" that these (White European) Israelites are still God's Chosen
People, that Jesus was an Israelite of the tribe of Judah, and that modern Jews
are not at all Israelites nor Hebrews, but are instead descended from people
with Turco-Mongolian blood, or Khazars, or are descendants of the biblical
Esau-Edom, who traded his birthright for a bowl of red stew (Genesis 25:
29–34). The Christian Identity movement first received widespread attention
by mainstream media in 1984, when the white nationalist organization known as
The Order embarked on a murderous crime spree before being taken down by the
FBI. Tax resister and militia movement organizer Gordon Kahl, whose death in a
1983 shootout with authorities helped inspire The Order, also had connections
to the Christian Identity movement. The movement returned to public attention
in 1992 and 1993, in the wake of the deadly Ruby Ridge confrontation, when
newspapers discovered that former Green Beret and right-wing separatist Randy
Weaver had at least a loose association with Christian Identity believers. No
single document expresses the Christian Identity belief system; however,
adherents draw upon arguments from linguistic, historical, archaeological and
biblical sources to support their beliefs. Estimates are that these groups have
2,000 to 50,000 members in the United States, and an unknown number in Canada
and the rest of the British Commonwealth. Christian Identity believers reject
the beliefs of most contemporary Christian denominations. They claim that
modern Christian churches are teaching a heresy: the belief that God's promises
to Israel (through Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob) have been expanded to create a
spiritual people of "Israel", which constitutes the Christian "Church". In
turn, most modern Christian denominations and organizations denounce Christian
Identity as heresy and condemn the use of the Christian Bible as a basis for
promoting white supremacy and anti-Semitism. Adherents of Christian Identity
claim that Europeans are the true descendants of the biblical Jacob, hence they
are the true Israel, and that it is those who are against the interests of
European-descended Christians that are the true anti-Semites. Origins.
Christian Identity (CI) emerged as an offshoot sect from British Israelism in
the 1920s and 1930s. Relation to British Israelism. Another source describes
the emergence of Christian Identity from British Israelism as a 'remarkable
transition', also noting that traditional British Israelites were advocates of
Philo-Semitism which paradoxically changed to antisemitism and racism under
Christian Identity. In fact, British Israelism itself had several Jewish
members and it received support from rabbis throughout the 19th century and
within British politics it supported Benjamin Disraeli who was descended from
Sephardic Jews. However, Christian Identity which emerged in the 1920s, began
to be antisemitic teaching that the Jews are not descended from the tribe of
Judah (as British Israelites maintain) but are instead descended from Satan or
Edomite-Khazars. The British Israel form of the belief held no anti-Semitism,
its followers instead held the view that Jews made up a minority of the tribes
of Israel (Judah and Benjamin), with the British and other related Northern
European peoples making up the remainder. Early years. Christian Identity (CI)
has first been traced back to the 1920s to Howard Rand (1889–1991). Rand was
a Massachusetts lawyer who obtained a law degree at the University of Maine. He
was raised as a British Israelite, and his father introduced him to J. H.
Allen's work "Judah's Sceptre and Joseph's Birthright" (1902) at an early age.
While Rand's father was not an antisemite, nor was even Rand in his early
British Israelite years, Rand first added to British Israelism in the 1920s an
antisemitic element. He claimed as early as 1924 that the Jews were not really
descended from the tribe of Judah, but were instead the descendants of Esau or
Canaanites. Rand never though claimed that modern Jews were descendants of
Satan, or were in anyway inferior, just that they were not the true lineal
descendants of Judah. For this reason Rand is considered a 'transitional'
figure between British Israelism and Christian Identity, but not its actual
founder. However Rand first coined the term 'Christian Identity'. Rand had set
up the Anglo-Saxon Federation of America in 1933 which promoted his view that
Jews were not from Judah, which marked the first key transition of British
Israelism to Christian Identity. Beginning in May 1937 there were key meetings
between British Israelites in America who were attracted to Rand’s new theory
that the Jews were not really from Judah. This provided the catalyst for the
eventual emergence of Christian Identity, and by the late 1930s the Jews were
considered to be the offspring of Satan and were heavily demonised, as were
non-Caucasian races. William Dudley Pelley, founder of the fascist Silver
Shirts movement, also promoted an anti-semitic form of British Israelism in the
early 1930s. Links between Christian Identity and the Ku Klux Klan also emerged
in the late 1930s. Key developers. Wesley Swift (1913–1970) is considered by
the FBI to have been the single most significant figure in the early years of
the Christian Identity movement. Swift was born in New Jersey, and eventually
moved to Los Angeles in order to attend Bible college. It is claimed that he
may have been a "Ku Klux Klan organizer and a Klan rifle-team instructor." In
1946, he founded his own church in Lancaster, California. In the 1950s, he was
Gerald L. K. Smith's West Coast representative of the Christian Nationalist
Crusade. In addition, he had a daily radio broadcast in California during the
1950s and 60s, through which he was able to proclaim his ideology to a large
audience. With Swift's efforts, the message of his church spread, leading to
the creation of similar churches throughout the country. In 1957, the name of
his church was changed to The Church of Jesus Christ Christian, which is used
today by Aryan Nations (AN) churches. One of Swift's associates was retired
Col. William Potter Gale (1917–1988). Gale had apparently been an aide to
General Douglas MacArthur, and had coordinated guerrilla resistance in the
Philippines during World War II. Gale became a leading figure in the anti-tax
and paramilitary movements of the 1970s and 80s, beginning with the California
Rangers and the Posse Comitatus, and helping to found the militia movement.
Numerous Christian Identity churches preach similar messages and some espouse
more violent rhetoric than others, but all hold to the belief that Aryans are
God's chosen race. Gale introduced future Aryan Nations founder Richard Girnt
Butler to Swift. Until then, Butler had admired George Lincoln Rockwell and
Senator Joseph McCarthy, and had been relatively secular. Swift quickly
converted him to Christian Identity. When Swift died, Butler took over the
Church, to the apparent dismay of both Gale and Swift's family. Neither Butler
nor Gale were anything like the dynamic orator that Swift had been, and
attendance dwindled under the new pastor. Butler eventually renamed the
organisation "The Church of Jesus Christ Christian/Aryan Nations" and moved it
to Hayden Lake, Idaho. Lesser luminaries were also present as Christian
Identity theology took shape in the 1940s and 1950s, such as Baptist minister
and California Klansman San Jacinto Capt (who claimed that he had introduced
Wesley Swift to Christian Identity), and one-time San Diego Deputy City
Attorney (and lawyer for Gerald L. K. Smith) Bertrand Comparet (1901–1983).
But for the most part, today's Christian Identity groups seem to have been
spawned by Wesley Swift, through his lieutenants William Potter Gale and
Richard Butler. Ideology, tenets and beliefs. Christian Identity asserts that
the white people of Europe or Caucasians in general are God's servant people
according to the promises that were given to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. It
further asserts that the early European tribes were really the Ten Lost Tribes
of Israel and therefore the rightful heirs to God's promises, and God's chosen
people. Two House Theology. Like British Israelites, Christian Identity (CI)
adherents believe in Two House Theology. However the major difference between
British Israelism and CI is that British Israelites have always maintained that
Jews are descended from the tribe of Judah. In contrast, while also maintaining
a Two House distinction, Christian Identity proponents believe that the true
lineal descendants of Judah are "not" contemporary Jews, but instead White
Europeans who settled mainly in Scotland, Germany, and other European nations,
alongside the House of Israel. They are Anglo-Saxon, Celtic, Germanic, Nordic,
and kindred peoples. Some CI scholars teach that many contemporary Jews are the
descendants of Cain, citing Gen. 3:12,John 8:44 and 1 John 3:12) in support of
their position and that Cain was the spawn of Satan. Origin beliefs. Identity
teaches that "Israel" was the name given to Jacob after battling the angel at
Peniel in . "Israel" then had twelve sons, which began the twelve tribes of
Israel. In 975 B.C. the ten northern tribes revolted, seceded from the south,
and became the Kingdom of Israel. After being subsequently conquered by
Assyria, the ten tribes disappear from Biblical record, becoming the Lost
Tribes of Israel. Some followers claim that the Identity genealogy of the
Davidic line can be traced from its beginnings right down to the Royal rulers
of Britain and Queen Elizabeth herself. Thus Anglo-Saxons are the true
Israelites, God's chosen people who were given the divine right to rule the
world until the Second Coming of Christ. Adamites and pre-Adamites. A major
tenet of Christian Identity is Pre-Adamism. Christian Identity followers
believe that Adam and Eve are ancestors of whites alone, and that that Adam and
Eve were preceded by lesser, non-Caucasian races often (though not always)
identified as "beasts of the field" (Gen. 1:25); for example, the "beasts"
which wore sackcloth and cried unto God () are identified with the black races
by Christian Identity adherents. To support their theory on the racial identity
of Adam, Christian Identity proponents point out that the Hebrew etymology of
the word 'Adam' translates as 'be ruddy, red, to show blood (in the face)'
often quoting from James Strong's "Hebrew Dictionary" #119 (1890) and from this
conclude that only Caucasians or people with light white skin can blush or turn
rosy in the face (because hemoglobin only appears under pale skin). Proponents
of Christian Identity believe that Adam was only created 6,000 years ago, while
the other non-Caucasian races were created during far older epochs that
occurred on the other continents. "Dual Seedliner" Christian Identity
proponents—those who believe that Eve begat children by Satan as well as
Adam—believe that Eve was seduced by the Snake (Satan), shared her fallen
state with Adam by lying with him, and gave birth to twins with different
fathers: Satan's child Cain and Adam's son Abel. Cain then became the
progenitor of the Jews in his subsequent matings with the non-Adamic races.
This is referred to as the two-seedline doctrine. This doctrine is a revival of
a medieval folk belief ascribing the ancestry of legendary monsters such as
Grendel to Cain. A seminal influence on the Christian Identity movement's views
on pre-Adamism was a book published in 1900 by Charles Carroll entitled "The
Negro a Beast or In the Image of God?". Carroll concludes in the book that the
White race was made in the image and likeness of God and that Adam gave birth
to the White race only, while Negros are pre-Adamite beasts and could not have
possibly been made in God's image and likeness because they are beastlike,
immoral and ugly. Carroll claimed that the pre-Adamite races such as blacks did
not have souls. Carroll believed that race mixing was an insult to God and
spoiled God's racial plan of creation. According to Carroll the mixing of races
had also lead to the errors of atheism and evolutionism. Creationism. Christian
Identity proponents are Old Earth Creationists, but believe that Adamic man
(who they believe was the father of the white race or Caucasians) was only
created around 6,000 years ago, while they also believe that the Universe,
Earth is billions of years old and that non-Caucasian races were created
hundreds of thousands or even millions of years ago. Wesley Swift strongly
criticised Young Earth Creationism and the traditional Judeo-Christian view
that Noah's flood was global, but instead believed that the flood was only
local and that the Earth was billions of years old. Christian Identity
adherents claim that the flood in Genesis only rose high enough to drown the
region of the Tarim Basin below sea level (Gen. 7:20) and that therefore the
Hebrew word "eretz" which appears in those verses should be rendered "the land"
(as in a specific place) rather than "the earth." Racialism. Racialism, or race
based philosophy is the core tenet of Christian Identity, and most CI adherents
are White Nationalists or support racial segregation. Some believe that Jews
are genetically compelled by their Satanic or Edomite ancestry to carry on a
conspiracy against the Adamic seedline and today have achieved almost complete
control of the Earth through their illegitimate claim to the white race's
status as God's chosen people. As a general rule, Christian Identity followers
adhere to the traditional orthodox Christian views on the role of women,
abortion, and homosexuality, and view racial miscegenation as a sin and a
violation of God's laws as dictated in Genesis of "kind after kind" (Ex. 21:22,
Lev. 20:13). In addition to their strict fundamentalist racial views Christian
Identity adherents distinguish themselves from mainstream Protestant
Fundamentalism in various areas of theology. Some Christian Identity adherents
follow the Mosaic law of the Old Testament (e.g., dietary restrictions, the
seventh-day Sabbath, certain annual festivals such as Passover). It is also
commonplace for adherents to follow the Sacred Name Movement and they insist on
using the original Hebrew names when referring to God (Yahweh) and Jesus Christ
(Yahshua). Some Christian Identity writers criticize modern Bible editions as
well as the Jews for the removal of the original Hebrew name of God from the
Bible. Although their adherence to Old Testament Mosaic law may make them
appear "Jewish"; they claim that the Jewish interpretation of the law has been
corrupted through the Jews' Talmud. Unlike many Protestant Fundamentalists,
Christian Identity adherents reject the notion of a Rapture, believing it to be
a Judaized doctrine which the Bible does not teach. World's end and Armageddon.
Christian Identity supporters believe in the Second Coming and Armageddon.
Predictions vary, including race war or a Jewish-backed United Nations takeover
of the USA and endorse physical struggle against what they see as the forces of
evil. Anti-Jew and anti-homosexual. Identity Christianity asserts that disease,
addiction, cancer, and sexual venereal disease (herpes and AIDS) are spread by
human "rodents" via contact with "unclean" persons, such as through "race-
mixing". The first book of Enoch is used to justify these social theories; the
fallen angels of Heaven sexually desired Earth maidens and took them as wives,
resulting in the birth of abominations, which God ordered Michael the Archangel
to destroy, thus beginning a cosmic war between Light and Darkness. The mixing
of separate things (e.g. people of different races) is seen as defiling both,
and is against God's will. Identity preachers proclaim that, according to the
King James Bible, "the penaltys for race-mixing, homo-sexuality, and usury are
death." The justification for killing homosexuals is provided by "If a man also
lie with mankind, as he lieth with a woman, both of them have committed an
abomination: they shall surely be put to death; their blood shall be upon
them." , and Deuteronomy explicitly condemn usury. states "He who hath given
forth upon usury, and hath taken increase: shall he then live? he shall not
live: he hath done all these abominations; he shall surely die; his blood shall
be upon him." and is quoted as justification for killing Jews, since Jews have
traditionally had a large presence in the usury business. Identity followers
reject the label of "anti-Semitic", stating that they can't be anti-Semitic,
since in fact the true Semites "today are the great White Christian nations of
the western world", with modern Jews in fact being descendants of the
Canaanites. Anti-banking system. Identity doctrine asserts that the "root of
all evil" is paper money (in particular Federal Reserve Notes), and that usury
and banking systems are controlled by Jews. The creation of the Federal Reserve
Corporation in 1913 shifted control of money from Congress to private
institutions and violated the Constitution. The money system encourages the
Federal Reserve to take out loans, creating trillions of dollars of government
debt and allowing international bankers to control America. Credit/debit cards
and computerised bills are seen as the fulfillment of the Biblical scripture
warning against "the beast" (i.e. banking) as quoted in . Identity preacher
Sheldon Emry claims "Most of the owners of the largest banks in America are of
Eastern European (Jewish) ancestry and connected with the (Jewish) Rothschild
European banks", thus, in Identity doctrine, the global banking conspiracy is
led and controlled by Jewish interests. Groups. Christian Identity is a major
unifying theology for a number of diverse groups of white nationalist
Christians. It is a belief system that provides its members with a religious
basis for racial separatism. Herbert W. Armstrong is inaccurately described by
some of his critics, as well as by supporters of Christian Identity, as having
supported Christian Identity, due to his belief in a modified form of British
Israelism, and the fact that during his lifetime, he propounded observances
favoured by many Christian Identity groups, such as seventh-day Sabbatarianism
and biblical festivals. The Worldwide Church of God that Armstrong founded did
not subscribe to the anti-Semitism commonly espoused by the Christian or Israel
Identity groups but instead adhered to the traditional beliefs of British
Israelism; i.e., the belief held that modern day Jews were descendants of the
Tribe of Judah whereas the Anglo-Saxons, Celts, Danes, etc. were descendants of
the remaining Ten Tribes of Israel formerly known as the Northern Kingdom.
Note: the LaPorte Church of Christ is often mischaracterized as sympathetic to
Christian Identity, but the organization explicitly rejects this association.
Christian Identity groups include "The Covenant, The Sword, and the Arm of the
Lord", the Phineas Priesthood, the Oklahoma Constitutional Militia, also known
as The Universal Church of God. Christian Identity is also related to other
groups such as Aryan Nations, the Aryan Republican Army (ARA) and the Patriots
Council, Church of Jesus Christ Christian, Thomas Robb, Mission To Israel, Folk
And Faith, Jubilee (newspaper), Yahweh's Truth (James Wickstrom), Church of
Israel and Kingdom Identity Ministries. South African branches of Christian
Identity have been accused of involvement in terrorist activity, including the
2002 Soweto bombings. Aryan Nations. The Aryan Nations (AN) is a group that
adheres to the Christian Identity belief system. The group espouses dislike
towards Jews, blacks and other minorities, as well as the United States federal
government. The original ultimate goal of the AN is to forcibly take five
northwestern states – Oregon, Idaho, Wyoming, Washington and Montana – from
the United States government in order to establish an Aryan homeland. This
particular ideology is known throughout the White power movement as the
Northwest Territorial Imperative. The AN was headquartered at Hayden Lake,
Idaho from the late 1970s until February 2001. Its annual World Congress
attracted a number of different factions from the far-right. The World Congress
was a sort of round table to discuss racialist issues. Since the main Aryan
Nations property in Idaho was dismantled following a costly lawsuit against the
group and the death of Richard Butler, there have been several struggles over
control of the movement that are as yet unresolved.
