Christianity and antisemitism Christian attitudes to Judaism and to the Jewish
people developed from the early years of Christianity, the persecution of
Christians in the New Testament, and persisted over the ensuing centuries,
driven by numerous factors including theological differences, competition
between Church and Synagogue, the Christian drive for converts decreed by the
Great Commission, misunderstanding of Jewish beliefs and practices, and a
perceived Jewish hostility toward Christians. These attitudes were reinforced
in Christian preaching, art and popular teaching over the centuries containing
contempt for Jews. In many Christian countries, it led to civil and political
discrimination against Jews, legal disabilities, and in some instances to
physical attacks on Jews which occasionally ended in emigration, expulsion, and
even death. From time to time, anti-Jewish sentiments within European society
were exploited or fomented for internal political purposes and sometimes to
extract a financial advantage from Jewish subjects. Such sentiments made the
expansion of anti-Jewish measures politically acceptable. Antisemitism has been
described as primarily hatred against Jews as a race with its modern expression
rooted in 19th century racial theories, while anti-Judaism is described as
hostility to Jewish religion, but in Western Christianity it effectively merged
into antisemitism during the 12th century. Scholars have debated how Christian
antisemitism may have played a role in the Nazi Third Reich, World War II and
the Holocaust. Throughout Christian history, some Popes, bishops and some
Christian princes stepped up to protect Jews. But it was only in the mid-20th
century that the Catholic Church and many Protestant denominations issued major
statements repudiating anti-Judaic theology and began a process of constructive
Christian-Jewish interaction. Antecedents of Christian antisemitism. In Rome
and throughout the Roman Empire, religion was an integral part of the civil
government. The Emperor was from time to time declared to be a god and demanded
to be worshiped accordingly. This created religious difficulties for Jews, who
were prohibited from worshiping any other god than that of the Hebrew Bible.
This created problems in the relations between Rome and its Jewish subjects, as
well as for worshipers of Mithras, worshipers of Sabazius, and Christianity. In
the case of Jews, this led to several revolts against Rome and severe
persecutions by Rome as punishment. Many of the early gentile converts to
Christianity probably came from and shared this cultural bias. As gentile
converts they also were not well acquainted with the internal life of the
Jewish community. Hence they read many of the New Testament texts as
condemnations of Judaism as such, rather than as internal differences which
were commonplace within the Jewish community. Early differences. There have
been philosophical differences between Christianity and Rabbinical Judaism
since the founding of Christianity. Christians acknowledge the roots of
Christianity in Judaism. Some claim the entirety of Jewish religious heritage
as its own, while interpreting it very differently. Debates between the Early
Christians, who at first saw themselves as a movement within Judaism and not as
a separate religion, and other Jews initially revolved around the question
whether Jesus was the Messiah, which later encompassed the issue of his
divinity. Once gentiles were converted to Christianity, the question arose
whether and how far these gentile Christians were obliged to follow Jewish law
in order to follow Jesus (see Paul's letter to the Galatians). At the Council
of Jerusalem, it was decided that new gentile converts did not need to be
circumcised (the "Apostolic Decree" of ), while requiring acceptance to a set
of laws similar to Judaism's Noahide Law, (see also Old Testament#Christian
view of the Law for the modern debate), but Paul also questioned the validity
of Jewish Christians' adherence to the Jewish law in relation to faith in
Christ, according to some interpretations. The issue of Paul of Tarsus and
Judaism is still hotly debated. The increase of the numbers of gentile
Christians in comparison to Jewish Christians eventually resulted in a rift
between Christianity and Judaism, which was further increased by the Jewish-
Roman wars (66‚Äì73 and 132‚Äì135) that drove many more Jews into the diaspora
and reduced the influence of the Bishop of Jerusalem, leader of the first
Christian church. Early Christians also found in the Old Testament, prophecies
which seemed to indicate that God's original covenant with the Jews would be
expanded to include also the Gentiles, in other words Proselytes, God-fearers,
and Noachides. Thus the Church Fathers tend to emphasise that the Church is the
new "spiritual" Israel, completing or replacing the earthly Israel which was
but its prototype. In modern times, this view would come to be called
"Supersessionism". Also, the two religions differed in their legal status in
the Roman Empire: Judaism, restricted to the Jewish people and Jewish
Proselytes, was generally exempt from obligation to the Roman imperial cult and
since the reign of Julius Caesar enjoyed the status of a "licit religion",
though there were also occasional persecutions, for example in 19 Tiberius
expelled the Jews from Rome, as Claudius did again in 49. Christianity however
was not restricted to one people, and as Jewish Christians were excluded from
the synagogue (see Council of Jamnia), they also lost the protection of the
status of Judaism, though said "protection" did have its limits (see for
example Titus Flavius Clemens (consul), Akiba ben Joseph, and Ten Martyrs).
From the reign of Nero onwards, who is said to have blamed the Great Fire of
Rome on Christians, Christianity was considered to be illegal and Christians
were frequently subjected to persecution, differing regionally. Comparably,
Judaism suffered the setbacks of the Jewish-Roman wars, remembered in the
legacy of the Ten Martyrs. Robin Lane Fox traces the origin of much later
hostility to the period of persecution, where the commonest test by the
authorities of a suspected Christian was to require homage to be paid to the
deified emperor. Jews were exempt from this requirement as long as they paid
the Fiscus Judaicus, and Christians (many or mostly of Jewish origins) would
say they were Jewish but refused to pay the tax. This had to be confirmed by
the local Jewish authorities, who were likely to refuse to accept the
Christians as Jewish, often leading to their execution. The Birkat haMinim was
often brought forward as support for this charge that the Jews were responsible
for the Persecution of Christians in the Roman Empire. In the 3rd century
systematic persecution of Christians began and lasted until Constantine's
conversion to Christianity. In 390 Theodosius I made Christianity the state
church of the Roman Empire. While pagan cults and Manichaeism were suppressed,
Judaism retained its legal status as a licit religion, though anti-Jewish
violence still occurred. In the 5th century, some legal measures worsened the
status of the Jews in the Roman Empire (now more properly called the Byzantine
Empire since relocating to Constantinople). New Testament rejection of Judaism.
These elements of the New Testament have their origins in 1st-century history.
Christianity began as a revision of Judaism. Many of Jesus' followers during
his life were Jews, and it was even a matter of confusion, many years after his
death, as to whether non-Jews could even be considered Christians at all,
according to the way some interpret the Council of Jerusalem. Although the
Gospels offer accounts of confrontations and debates between Jesus and other
Jews, such conflicts were common among Jews at the time. Scholars disagree on
the historicity of the Gospels, and have offered different interpretations of
the complex relationship between Jewish authorities and Christians before and
following Jesus' death. These debates hinge on the meaning of the word
"messiah," and the claims of Early Christians. Rejection of Jesus as the
Messiah. Christianity says that Jesus is the Messiah which Judaism does not
accept. The Gospels claim that Jesus was a preacher, healer, and messiah. There
is no reason to think Jesus would have come into conflict with Jewish
authorities in 1st century Judea on account of his preaching and healing, yet
part of the gospel record is the Cleansing of the Temple. However, claims that
he was the Messiah were more controversial. The Hebrew word "mashiyakh"
(◊û◊©◊ô◊ó) typically signified a man, chosen by God or descended from a man
chosen by God, to serve as a civil and military authority. If Jesus made this
claim during his life, it is not surprising that many Jews, weary of Roman
occupation, would have supported him as a liberator. It is also likely that
Jewish authorities would have been cautious, out of fear of Roman reprisal.
Jesus was considered by Christians to be the Messiah, while for most Jews the
death of Jesus would have been sufficient proof that he was not the Jewish
Messiah. If early Christians preached that Jesus was about to return, it is
virtually certain that Jewish authorities would have opposed them out of fear
of Roman reprisal. Such fears would have been well grounded: Jews revolted
against the Romans in 66 CE, which culminated with the destruction of the
Second Temple in 70 CE. They revolted again under the leadership of the
professed messiah Simon Bar Kokhba in 132 CE, which culminated in the expulsion
of the Jews from Jerusalem, which Hadrian renamed into Aelia Capitolina in an
attempt to wipe out memory of Jews there. At the time, Christianity was still
considered a sect of Judaism, but the messianic claims alienated many
Christians (including Jewish converts) and sharply deepened the schism.
Observance of Mosaic law. Another source of tension between early Christians
and Jews was the question of observance of Mosaic Law which was also debated
among Proselytes. Early Christians were divided over the issue: Some Jewish
Christians or so-called Judaizers argued that Christians were bound to observe
Mosaic law, while Paul perhaps argued that only some of Mosaic Law applied to
Christians, though the issue of Paul of Tarsus and Judaism is still hotly
debated with some advocating complete abrogation. The issue was argued
especially in the context of whether Gentile converts were obligated to undergo
circumcision, which was a requirement for Jewish boys. The issue was hotly
debated in the 1st century and settled at the Council of Jerusalem, in which
Paul and Barnabas participated as representatives of the church at Antioch. The
Council decided that Gentile converts were not subject to most Mosaic Law,
including circumcision, but required them to stay away from eating meat with
blood still on it, eating the meat of strangled animals, eating food offered to
idols, and sexual immorality. See also Noahide Law and Proselyte. Conversion of
Gentiles to Judaism. After Paul's death, Christianity emerged as a separate
religion, and Pauline Christianity emerged as the dominant form of
Christianity, especially after Paul, James and the other apostles agreed on a
compromise set of requirements. Some Christians continued to adhere to Jewish
law, but they were few in number and often considered heretics by the Church.
One example is the Ebionites, which, according to the Catholic Encyclopedia,
were "infected with Judaistic errors" (language which Jews find offensive); for
instance, they denied the virgin birth of Jesus, the physical Resurrection of
Jesus, and most of the books that were later canonized as the New Testament,
see also "Judaizers" (a term which Jews find offensive). For example, the
Ethiopian Orthodox are often accused of being Judaizers because they still
observe Old Testament teachings such as the Sabbath, and conversely they accuse
their opponents of residual Marcionism. As late as the 4th century Church
Father John Chrysostom complained (see John Chrysostom#Sermons on Jews and
Judaizing Christians) that some Christians were still attending Jewish
synagogues. Criticism of the Pharisees. Many New Testament passages criticise
the Pharisees and it has been argued that these passages have shaped the way
that Christians viewed Jews. Like most Bible passages, however, they can and
have been interpreted in a variety of ways. During Jesus' life and at the time
of his execution, the Pharisees were only one of several Jewish groups such as
the Sadducees, Zealots, and Essenes; indeed, some have suggested that Jesus was
himself a Pharisee. Arguments by Jesus and his disciples against the Pharisees
and what he saw as their hypocrisy were most likely examples of disputes among
Jews and internal to Judaism that were common at the time, see for example
Hillel and Shammai. (Lutheran Pastor John Stendahl has pointed out that
"Christianity begins as a kind of Judaism, and we must recognize that words
spoken in a family conflict are inappropriately appropriated by those outside
the family.") Recent studies on Antisemitism in the New Testament. Professor
Lillian C. Freudmann, author of "Antisemitism in the New Testament" (University
Press of America, 1994) has published a detailed study of the description of
Jews in the New Testament, and the historical effects that such passages have
had in the Christian community throughout history. Similar studies of such
verses have been made by both Christian and Jewish scholars, including,
Professors Clark Williamsom (Christian Theological Seminary), Hyam Maccoby (The
Leo Baeck Institute), Norman A. Beck (Texas Lutheran College), and Michael
Berenbaum (Georgetown University). Most rabbis feel that these verses are
antisemitic, and many Christian scholars, in America and Europe, have reached
the same conclusion. Another example is John Dominic Crossan's 1995 "Who Killed
Jesus? Exposing the Roots of Anti-Semitism in the Gospel Story of the Death of
Jesus". The Church Fathers. Patristic bishops of the patristic era such as
Augustine argued that the Jews should be left alive and suffering as a
perpetual reminder of their murder of Christ. Other Church Fathers, such as
John Chrysostom went longer in their condemnation. Ephraim the Syrian wrote
polemics against Jews in the 4th century, including the repeated accusation
that Satan dwells among them as a partner. These writings were directed at
Christians who were being proselytized by Jews and who Ephraim feared were
slipping back into the religion of Judaism; thus he portrayed the Jews as
enemies of Christianity, like Satan, to emphasize the contrast between the two
religions, namely, that Christianity was Godly and true and Judaism was Satanic
and false. Like John Chrysostom, his objective was to dissuade Christians from
reverting to Judaism by emphasizing what he saw as the wickedness of the Jews
and their religion. Christians and Jews in Muslim lands. While in Christian
Europe Christianity had the upper hand as the religion of state, under Islam
Jews and Christians were on a more even footing. The Middle Ages. In the Middle
Ages, religion played a major role in driving antisemitism. Though not part of
Roman Catholic dogma, many Christians, including members of the clergy, have
held the Jewish people collectively responsible for killing Jesus, through the
so-called blood curse of Pontius Pilate in the Gospels, among other things.
Jews were subject to a wide range of legal disabilities and restrictions
throughout the Middle Ages, some of which lasted until the end of the 19th
century. Jews were excluded from many trades, the occupations varying with
place and time, and determined by the influence of various non-Jewish competing
interests. Often Jews were barred from all occupations but money-lending and
peddling, with even these at times forbidden. The number of Jews permitted to
reside in different places was limited; they were concentrated in ghettos, and
were not allowed to own land; they were subject to discriminatory taxes on
entering cities or districts other than their own, were forced to swear special
Jewish Oaths, and suffered a variety of other measures, including restrictions
on dress. The Fourth Lateran Council in 1215 was the first to proclaim the
requirement for Jews to wear something that distinguished them as Jews (and
Muslims the same). On many occasions, Jews were accused of a blood libel, the
supposed drinking of blood of Christian children in mockery of the Christian
Eucharist. Sicut Judaeis. Sicut Judaeis (the "Constitution for the Jews") was
the official position of the papacy regarding Jews throughout the Middle Ages
and later. The first bull was issued in about 1120 by Calixtus II, intended to
protect Jews who suffered during the First Crusade, and was reaffirmed by many
popes, even until the 15th century. The bull forbade, besides other things,
Christians from coercing Jews to convert, or to harm them, or to take their
property, or to disturb the celebration of their festivals, or to interfere
with their cemeteries, on pain of excommunication. Popular antisemitism.
Antisemitism in popular European Christian culture escalated beginning in the
13th century. Blood libels and host desecration drew popular attention and led
to many cases of persecution against Jews. Antisemitic imagery such as Judensau
and Ecclesia et Synagoga recurred in Christian art and architecture. In
Iceland, one of the hymns repeated in the days leading up to Easter include the
lines, Expulsions. Expulsion of Jews from England. King Edward I expelled all
the Jews from England in 1290 (only after ransoming some 3,000 among the most
wealthy of them), on the accusation of usury and undermining loyalty to the
dynasty. Expulsion of Jews from Spain. In 1492 Ferdinand II of Aragon and
Isabella I of Castile, the rulers of Spain who financed Christopher Columbus'
voyage to the New World just a few months later in 1492, declared that all Jews
in their territories should either convert to Catholicism or leave the country.
While some converted, many others left for Portugal, France, Italy (including
the Papal States), Netherlands, Poland, the Ottoman Empire, and North Africa.
Many of those who had fled to Portugal were latter expelled by King Manuel in
1497 or left to avoid forced conversion and persecution. Renaissance to the
17th century. Cum Nimis Absurdum. Cum nimis absurdum was a papal bull issued by
Pope Paul IV dated 14 July 1555. The bull revoked all the rights of the Jewish
community and placed religious and economic restrictions on Jews in the Papal
States, renewed anti-Jewish legislation and subjected Jews to various
degradations and restrictions on their personal freedom. The bull established
the Roman Ghetto and required the Jews of Rome, which had existed as a
community since before Christian times and which numbered about 2,000 at the
time, to live in it. The Ghetto was a walled quarter with three gates that were
locked at night. Jews were also restricted to one synagogue per city. Paul IV's
successor, Pope Pius IV, enforced the creation of other ghettos in most Italian
towns, and his successor, Pope Pius V, recommended them to other bordering
states. Protestant Reformation. Martin Luther at first made overtures towards
the Jews, believing that the "evils" of Catholicism had prevented their
conversion to Christianity. When his call to convert to his version of
Christianity was unsuccessful, he became hostile to them. In his book "On the
Jews and their Lies", he excoriates them as "venomous beasts, vipers,
disgusting scum, canders, devils incarnate." He provided detailed
recommendations for a pogrom against them, calling for their permanent
oppression and expulsion, writing "Their private houses must be destroyed and
devastated, they could be lodged in stables. Let the magistrates burn their
synagogues and let whatever escapes be covered with sand and mud. Let them
force to work, and if this avails nothing, we will be compelled to expel them
like dogs in order not to expose ourselves to incurring divine wrath and
eternal damnation from the Jews and their lies." At one point he wrote: "...we
are at fault in not slaying them..." a passage that "may be termed the first
work of modern antisemitism, and a giant step forward on the road to the
Holocaust." Luther's harsh comments about the Jews are seen by many as a
continuation of medieval Christian antisemitism. In his final sermon shortly
before his death, however, Luther preached: "We want to treat them with
Christian love and to pray for them, so that they might become converted and
would receive the Lord." 18th century. In accordance with the anti-Jewish
precepts of the Russian Orthodox Church, Russia's discriminatory policies
towards Jews intensified when the partition of Poland in the 18th century
resulted, for the first time in Russian history, in the possession of land with
a large Jewish population. This land was designated as the Pale of Settlement
from which Jews were forbidden to migrate into the interior of Russia. In 1772
Catherine II, the empress of Russia, forced the Jews of the Pale of Settlement
to stay in their "shtetls" and forbade them from returning to the towns that
they occupied before the partition of Poland. 19th century. Throughout the 19th
century and into the 20th, the Roman Catholic Church still incorporated strong
antisemitic elements, despite increasing attempts to separate anti-Judaism
(opposition to the Jewish religion on religious grounds) and racial
antisemitism. Pope Pius VII (1800‚Äì1823) had the walls of the Jewish ghetto in
Rome rebuilt after the Jews were emancipated by Napoleon, and Jews were
restricted to the ghetto through the end of the Papal States in 1870. Official
Catholic organizations, such as the Jesuits, banned candidates "who are
descended from the Jewish race unless it is clear that their father,
grandfather, and great-grandfather have belonged to the Catholic Church" until
1946. Brown University historian David Kertzer, working from the Vatican
archive, has argued in his book "The Popes Against the Jews" that in the 19th
century and early 20th century the Roman Catholic Church adhered to a
distinction between "good antisemitism" and "bad antisemitism". The "bad" kind
promoted hatred of Jews because of their descent. This was considered un-
Christian because the Christian message was intended for all of humanity
regardless of ethnicity; anyone could become a Christian. The "good" kind
criticized alleged Jewish conspiracies to control newspapers, banks, and other
institutions, to care only about accumulation of wealth, etc. Many Catholic
bishops wrote articles criticizing Jews on such grounds, and, when accused of
promoting hatred of Jews, would remind people that they condemned the "bad"
kind of antisemitism. Kertzer's work is not without critics. Scholar of Jewish-
Christian relations Rabbi David G. Dalin, for example, criticized Kertzer in
the "Weekly Standard" for using evidence selectively. 20th-century. WWI to the
eve of the WWII. In 1916, in the midst of the First World War, American Jews
petitioned Pope Benedict XV on behalf of the Polish Jews. Nazi antisemitism.
‚ÄúI have been attacked because of my handling of the Jewish question. The
Catholic Church considered the Jews pestilent for fifteen hundred years, put
them in ghettos, etc., because it recognized the Jews for what they were. In
the epoch of liberalism the danger was no longer recognized. I am moving back
toward the time in which a fifteen-hundred-year-long tradition was implemented.
I do not set race over religion, but I recognize the representatives of this
race as pestilent for the state and for the Church, and perhaps I am thereby
doing Christianity a great service by pushing them out of schools and public
functions.‚Äù The transcript of this discussion contains no response by Bishop
Berning. Martin Rhonheimer does not consider this unusual since, in his
opinion, for a Catholic Bishop in 1933 there was nothing particularly
objectionable "in this historically correct reminder". The Nazis used Martin
Luther's book, "On the Jews and Their Lies" (1543), to claim a moral
righteousness for their ideology. Luther even went so far as to advocate the
murder of those Jews who refused to convert to Christianity, writing that "we
are at fault in not slaying them" Archbishop Robert Runcie has asserted that:
"Without centuries of Christian antisemitism, Hitler's passionate hatred would
never have been so fervently echoed...because for centuries Christians have
held Jews collectively responsible for the death of Jesus. On Good Friday Jews,
have in times past, cowered behind locked doors with fear of a Christian mob
seeking 'revenge' for deicide. Without the poisoning of Christian minds through
the centuries, the Holocaust is unthinkable." The dissident Catholic priest
Hans K√ºng has written that "Nazi anti-Judaism was the work of godless, anti-
Christian criminals. But it would not have been possible without the almost two
thousand years' pre-history of 'Christian' anti-Judaism..." The document Dabru
Emet was issued by over 220 rabbis and intellectuals from all branches of
Judaism in 2000 as a statement about Jewish-Christian relations. This document
states, "Nazism was not a Christian phenomenon. Without the long history of
Christian anti-Judaism and Christian violence against Jews, Nazi ideology could
not have taken hold nor could it have been carried out. Too many Christians
participated in, or were sympathetic to, Nazi atrocities against Jews. Other
Christians did not protest sufficiently against these atrocities. But Nazism
itself was not an inevitable outcome of Christianity." According to American
historian Lucy Dawidowicz, antisemitism has a long history within Christianity.
The line of "antisemitic descent" from Luther, the author of On the Jews and
Their Lies, to Hitler is "easy to draw." In her "The War Against the Jews,
1933-1945", she contends that Luther and Hitler were obsessed by the
"demonologized universe" inhabited by Jews. Dawidowicz writes that the
similarities between Luther's anti-Jewish writings and modern antisemitism are
no coincidence, because they derived from a common history of "Judenhass",
which can be traced to Haman's advice to Ahasuerus. Although modern German
antisemitism also has its roots in German nationalism and the liberal
revolution of 1848, Christian antisemitism she writes is a foundation that was
laid by the Roman Catholic Church and "upon which Luther built." Opposition to
the Holocaust. The Confessing Church was, in 1934, the first Christian
opposition group. The Catholic Church officially condemned the Nazi theory of
racism in Germany in 1937 with the encyclical ""Mit Brennender Sorge"", signed
by Pope Pius XI, and Cardinal Michael von Faulhaber led the Catholic
opposition, preaching against racism. By the 1940s fewer Christians were
willing to oppose Nazi policy publicly, but many secretly helped save the lives
of Jews. There are many sections of Israel's Holocaust Remembrance Museum, Yad
Vashem, dedicated to honoring these "Righteous Among the Nations". Pope Pius
XII. See (Pope Pius XII and Judaism). Before becoming Pope, Cardinal Pacelli
presided as Papal Legate over the International Eucharistic Congress in
Budapest on 25‚Äì30 May 1938. At this time antisemitic laws were in the process
of being formulated in Hungary. Pacelli made reference to the Jews ""whose lips
curse and whose hearts reject him even today"". The 1937 encyclical "Mit
brennender Sorge" was issued by Pope Pius XI, but drafted by the future Pope
Pius XII and read from the pulpits of all German Catholic churches, it
condemned Nazi ideology and has been characterized by scholars as the "first
great official public document to dare to confront and criticize Nazism" and
"one of the greatest such condemnations ever issued by the Vatican." In the
summer of 1942, Pius explained to his college of Cardinals the reasons for the
great gulf that existed between Jews and Christians at the theological level:
""Jerusalem has responded to His call and to His grace with the same rigid
blindness and stubborn ingratitude that has led it along the path of guilt to
the murder of God."" Historian Guido Knopp describes these comments of Pius as
being ""incomprehensible"" at a time when ""Jerusalem was being murdered by the
million"". This traditional adversarial relationship with Judaism would be
reversed in Nostra Aetate issued during the Second Vatican Council. Prominent
members of the Jewish community have contradicted the criticisms of Pius and
spoke highly of his efforts to protect Jews. The Israeli historian Pinchas
Lapide interviewed war survivors and concluded that Pius XII "was instrumental
in saving at least 700,000, but probably as many as 860,000¬ Jews from certain
death at Nazi hands". Some historians dispute this estimate. The "White Power"
movement. The Christian Identity movement, the Ku Klux Klan and other White
supremacy groups have expressed antisemitic views. They claim that their
antisemitism is based on purported Jewish control of the media, international
banks, radical left wing politics, and the promotion of multiculturalism, anti-
Christian groups, liberalism and perverse organizations. They rebuke charges of
racism and claim Jews who share their ideology maintain membership in their
organizations. A racial belief common among these groups, but not universal, is
an alternative history doctrine, sometimes called British Israelism. In some
forms this doctrine absolutely denies that modern Jews have any racial
connection to Israel of the Bible. Instead, according to extreme forms of this
doctrine the true racial Israel and true humans are the Adamic (white) race.
These groups are often rejected and not considered to be Christian groups by
mainstream Christian denominations as well as the vast majority of Christians
around the world. Post World War II antisemitism. Antisemitism in Europe
remains a substantial problem. Antisemitism exists to a lesser or greater
degree in many other nations as well, including Eastern Europe, the former
Soviet Union, and the occasional tensions between some Muslim immigrants and
Jews across Europe. The US State Department reports that antisemitism has
increased dramatically in Europe and Eurasia since 2000. While in a decline
since the 1940s, there is still a measurable amount of antisemitism in the
United States of America as well, although acts of violence are rare. The 2001
survey by the Anti-Defamation League reported 1432 acts of antisemitism in the
United States that year. The figure included 877 acts of harassment, including
verbal intimidation, threats and physical assaults. Antisemitic pronouncements
still occur, however. John Hagee, a leading proponent of "Christian Zionism,"
reiterated a view‚Äîthe popularity of which is very hard to gauge but must
nonetheless be considered not simply isolated‚Äîthat the Jews brought the
Holocaust upon themselves by angering God. Anti-Judaism. Many Christians do not
consider anti-Judaism to be antisemitism. They regard anti-Judaism as a
disagreement of religiously sincere people with the tenets of Judaism, while
regarding antisemitism as an emotional bias or hatred not specifically
targeting the religion of Judaism. Under this approach, anti-Judaism is not
regarded as antisemitism as it only rejects the religious ideas of Judaism and
does not involve actual hostility to the Jewish people. Others see anti-Judaism
as the rejection of or opposition to beliefs and practices "essentially
because" of their source in Judaism or because a belief or practice is
associated with the Jewish people. (But see supersessionism) The position that
"Christian theological anti-Judaism is a phenomenon distinct from modern
antisemitism, which is rooted in economic and racial thought, so that Christian
teachings should not be held responsible for antisemitism" has been
articulated, among other places, by Pope John Paul II in 'We Re member: A
Reflection on the Shoah,' and the Jewish declaration on Christianity, Dabru
Emet. Several scholars, including Susannah Heschel, Gavin I Langmuir and Uriel
Tal have challenged this position, arguing that anti-Judaism led directly to
modern antisemitism. Although some Christians in the past did consider anti-
Judaism to be contrary to Christian teaching, this view was not widely
expressed by leaders and lay people. In many cases, the practical tolerance
towards the Jewish religion and Jews prevailed. Some Christian groups,
particularly in early years, condemned verbal anti-Judaism. Jewish converts.
The Southern Baptist Convention (SBC), the largest Protestant Christian
denomination in the U.S., has explicitly rejected suggestions that it should
back away from seeking to convert Jews, a position that critics have called
antisemitic, but that Baptists see as consistent with their view that salvation
is found solely through faith in Christ. In 1996 the SBC approved a resolution
calling for efforts to seek the conversion of Jews "as well as for the
salvation of 'every kindred and tongue and people and nation.'" Most
Evangelicals agree with the SBC position, and some have been supporting efforts
specifically seeking Jews' conversion. At the same time these groups are among
the most pro-Israeli groups. ("For more, see Christian Zionism".) Among the
controversial groups that has found support from some Evangelical churches is
Jews for Jesus, which claims that Jews can "complete" their Jewish faith by
accepting Jesus as the Messiah. The Presbyterian Church (USA), the United
Methodist Church, and the United Church of Canada have ended their efforts to
convert Jews. While Anglicans do not, as a rule, seek converts from other
Christian denominations, the General Synod has affirmed that "the good news of
salvation in Jesus Christ is for all and must be shared with all including
people from other faiths or of no faith and that to do anything else would be
to institutionalize discrimination". The Roman Catholic Church formerly had
religious congregations specifically aimed to conversion of Jews. Some of these
were founded by Jewish converts themselves, like the Community of Our Lady of
Zion, which was composed of nuns and ordained priests. Many Catholic saints
were noted specifically because of their missionary zeal in converting Jews,
such as Vincent Ferrer. After the Second Vatican Council many missionary orders
aimed at converting Jews to Christianity no longer actively sought to
missionize (or proselytize) among Jews. Traditionalist Roman Catholic groups,
congregations and clergymen, however, continue to support missionizing Jews
according to traditional patterns, sometimes with success ("e.g.", the Society
of St. Pius X which has notable Jewish converts among its faithful, many of
whom have become traditionalist priests). Some Jewish organizations have
described evangelism and missionary activity directed specifically at Jews as
antisemitic. Reconciliation between Judaism and Christian groups. In recent
years there has been much to note in the way of reconciliation between some
Christian groups and the Jews. Most of this reconciliation has occurred between
the Jewish community and the Catholic Church, and evangelical Christian
organizations.
