Christian Science Christian Science is a system of religious thought and
practice developed by Mary Baker Eddy based on her study of the Bible and
explained in her work "Science and Health With Key to the Scriptures". In it,
Eddy describes the teachings of Jesus as a complete and coherent divine
science. Its adherents may be, but are not required to be, members of the main
church, The First Church of Christ, Scientist, a branch church, or both. Its
central texts are the Bible and "Science and Health". The major teachings of
Christian Science include the belief that spiritual reality is the only reality
and all else is illusion or "error." In contrast to conventional Christian
theology, Christian Science rejects both the common Christian views of the
atonement and the concept of Hell as a place of eternal punishment. Christian
Scientists believe that sickness and disease are the result of fear, ignorance,
or sin, and should be healed through prayer or introspection. Combined with a
belief that the use of medicine is incompatible with Christian Science healing
methods, this has led to outbreaks of preventable disease and a number of
deaths. Its claim that sickness can be healed through prayer rather than
medicine, its rejection of science as illusory, and its attempts to present
itself as science make Christian Science a pseudoscience. Theology. The
theology of Christian Science follows the writings of its founder Mary Baker
Eddy, with little change. The central texts of Christian Science are the Bible
and "Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures". Christian Science has been
described as a form of philosophical idealism. She regarded the development of
Christian Science as an important event that resulted from embracing continuous
divine revelation. Christian Scientists do not view Jesus as having died for
our sins. Christian Science's focus on spiritual healing led to some measure of
stir in the theological realm at first. During the religion's early days of
rapid growth, the teachings were frequently attacked from the pulpit and press.
Christian Science's has an abstract, all-encompassing conception of God. The
core of Christian Science theology is the "scientific statement of being".
Adherents of Christian Science believe that Genesis contains two interleaved
stories of creation, one spiritual, the other material and hold that the
reality of all that God made is spiritual, and not material. They see this
reality as the only reality and all else as illusion or, in Christian Science
parlance, "error". They believe that the recognition and understanding of the
spiritual nature of reality allows for healing through prayer. Christian
Science theology is sometimes criticized by mainstream Christians because of
its assertion that evil and the material world are illusions, its definition of
the "Christ", its explanation of the Trinity, its de-emphasis on a personal God
and its rejection of anthropomorphism, its rejection of the teaching of
everlasting damnation, and its view of Jesus as the "Way-shower" (see moral
influence theory of atonement) rather than as one whose death per se provided
for humanity's atonement for sin. See chapter "Atonement and Eucharist" in
"Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures". Evangelical theologian and
writer Walter Ralston Martin believed that Christian Scientists were trained to
ignore "obnoxious literature" about the natural world and to disconnect by not
looking at evidence which may convince them that the world is not illusory.
Martin also remarked on Eddy's lack of experience in relevant areas such as
theology and history in biblical times. Medicine and science. Christian Science
is a pseudoscience. Christian Science is opposed to science and uses the
appearance of being a science to give itself extra legitimacy. Eddy regarded
Christian Science much like science, except she viewed its creation as a
spiritual rather than a physical discovery, with herself as the divinely chosen
discover. Christian Science regards science as not important and an illusion,
while the text by Eddy, "Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures" is
promoted by the Church as "a pioneer in the science of the mind body
connection". Eddy viewed herself as similar to Copernicus. She believed that
Christian Science healing is available to all people now as much as in biblical
times. Christian Scientists see themselves as practising a well-defined process
with a proven track record. Many Christian Scientists use prayer as their first
choice for treatment over medical treatments such as drugs and surgery. They
believe that healing only occurs through complete submission to God. In
Christian Science it is not forbidden to seek medical attention, but they
believe that those who do have turned their back on their beliefs. Eddy put
this as "if we trust matter, we distrust spirit". Exceptions described by Eddy
include going to the dentist, fixing broken limbs, and basic surgical
procedures. The official stance of the Church of Christ, Scientist is against
diagnosing illness. However, numerous claims of healings of near- and far-
sightedness, dental problems and broken bones have been reported in the
periodicals published by the Church. Eddy wrote that she learned the Christian
Science method of healing as she recovered from an injury in 1866 after reading
a Bible passage describing one of Jesus' healings. Eddy's healing principles
relied on some of the concepts of homoeopathy. From 1862 Eddy was a student of
the homoeopath and spiritualist Phineas Quimby after he helped her with a
spinal problem. She believed that Quimby had cured her because "the truth which
he establishes in the patient cures him", From 1863 at the latest, Quimby
referred to his theories as "Science of Health and Happiness", "Science of
Christ", and "Science" and in "Aristocracy and Democracy" he referred to it as
"Christian Science". For several years she defended him publicly and regularly
talked with him, and worked to perform healings based on his methods.
Eventually, in 1872 she distinguished her methods by the name of Christian
Science. Later, she stated that Quimby had not been a major influence and that
Quimby healed by animal magnetism, something which she had denied earlier in
her public writings. Increased Morbidity. Epidemiological studies show higher
mortality rates among Christian Scientists than those using conventional
medicine, and there is a lack of non-anecdotal evidence for the efficacy of
Christian Science. A study compared the morbidity of graduates of the Christian
Science school Principia College to graduates of the University of Kansas in
the College of Liberal Arts and Sciences. The study found that there was a much
higher death rate in the Christian Science group. A further study reported by
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention compared graduates of the
Christian Science school Principia College to graduates of a Seventh-day
Adventist college (Loma Linda University). The Christian Science school's
cohort had a higher overall mortality rate than the comparison cohort (though
the dietary habits of Seventh-day Adventists may make them less susceptible to
some diseases than the bulk of the population, possibly biasing that result).
Outbreaks of preventable diseases, for which there are known vaccines, can
occur due to intentional non-vaccination. Outbreaks which stem from a refusal
to vaccinate typically occur amongst those exempt from vaccination for
religious reasons, such as Christian Science. Due to Christian Science beliefs,
Christian Scientists are less likely to self-report illness to the authorities.
Since Christian Science members avoid vaccination, they can harbour disease
after encountering measles. The CDC reported on measles outbreaks in
communities of Christian Scientists: one in 1994 and with two separate
outbreaks in 1985. One outbreak was in a college, in which three people died,
and the other was in a camp. 90% of those infected with measles were exempt
from vaccination on religious grounds. These cases help inspire continuing
controversy over religious exemption to vaccination requirements. In a 1998
analysis of 172 children who died from medical neglect because of the religious
beliefs of their parents, 28 were from a Christian Science background. Health
of children. With respect to children, two important rights are in apparent
opposition: the rights of children to medical care and the rights of parents to
make decisions about the well-being of their children. The position that
constitutional protections of freedom of religion allow parents to choose the
method of healing which best benefits their children contradicts court rulings
which state that children cannot, on the basis of parental belief, be denied
what is regarded as essential health care. In a number of nationally publicized
cases in the early 1990s, prosecutors charged parents belonging to the
Christian Science church with murder or manslaughter after their children died
of likely curable ailments without being medically treated. The best-known of
these was the Twitchell Case in Massachusetts, in which parents David and
Ginger Twitchell were convicted in 1990 of involuntary manslaughter in the
death of their two-year-old son Robyn, who succumbed to a bowel obstruction. In
the United States, the constitutional guarantee of protection of religious
practice from intrusion by government has been used by Christian Scientists and
other religious groups to seek exemption from legal requirements regarding
medical treatment of children in more than three-quarters of the states. There
are statutes in 44 states which allow that children are not to be deemed
neglected because they are receiving treatment by spiritual means according to
the tenets of a recognized religion. While these exemptions take different
forms and interpretations in different states, the effect has been to limit the
ability to prosecute parents for medical neglect of children as a result of
religious practice. Social views. Christian Scientists generally defend the
separation of church and state as affording a protection for civil freedom and
religion. However, Eddy insisted on obedience by Christian Scientists to state
laws in regard to health care. Progressive for her time, she was in favor of
women's rights, and rejected the "corporeal punishment" of children. While she
generally steered clear of politics per se, she stated her support of the
Monroe Doctrine as well as her opposition to imperialism and economic monopoly.
The "Christian Science Monitor", which she founded, has traditionally been a
staunch defender of civil liberties and individual freedom; nonetheless, it
also supported the prohibition of alcohol. There are no specific references to
homosexuality in Eddy's writings. Her writings prescribe the living of a
morally decent life, which is not an explicit condemnation of homosexuality,
but it may account for some of the discomfort with homosexuality seen within
some Christian Science communities. There is some dissent among Christian
Scientists as to what exactly the position with regard to homosexuality ought
to be. In this matter, as in others (such as abortion), the Church chooses not
to have an official position, as it is considered that each individual
Christian Scientist should seek their own highest sense of right through
prayer. Church of Christ, Scientist. The Church of Christ, Scientist was
founded in 1879 in Boston, Massachusetts, USA, by Eddy. The first building
constructed as a Christian Science Church was erected in 1886 in Oconto,
Wisconsin and still stands at the corner of Main Street and Chicago Street. The
original edifice of the Mother Church was completed some years later on
Saturday, December 29, 1894, just in time for the first service held there the
following day. Eddy was the author of the book "Science and Health with Key to
the Scriptures," the Christian Science textbook and which, along with the
Bible, serve as the permanent "impersonal pastor" of the church. The church was
founded "to commemorate the word and works of Jesus" and "reinstate primitive
Christianity and its lost element of healing". Sunday services are held
throughout the year and weekly testimony meetings are held on Wednesday
evenings, where following brief readings from the Bible and the Christian
Science textbook, those in attendance are invited to give testimonies of
healing brought about through Christian Science prayer. Christian Science
metaphysics teach that God is Spirit and cites the first chapter of Genesis as
the true story of creation, where in the King James Bible, "man" is both "male
and female", created "in the image and likeness" of God. The story of Adam and
Eve is held to be an allegory. Healing on this basis is accomplished without
material means and is the traditional bedrock of the church. In the early
decades of the 20th century, churches sprang up in communities around the
world, though in the last several decades of that century, there was a marked
decline in membership, except in Africa, where there has been growth. Several
controversies have rocked the church and remain unresolved, according to
dissidents. Headquartered in Boston, the church has a worldwide membership of
about 85,000. Christian Scientists are usually, though not always or
necessarily, members of The First Church of Christ, Scientist (also called The
Mother Church) in Boston, Massachusetts. The Christian Science Board of
Directors is a five-person executive entity created by Eddy to conduct the
business of the Christian Science Church under the terms defined in the by-laws
of the Church Manual. Its functions and restrictions are defined by the
"Manual". There are also Christian Science "branch churches." Each Sunday,
church members hold services where citations from the Bible and "Science and
Health With Key to the Scriptures" by Eddy are read by lay members of the
church. These Readers are voted into office by the members of the church for a
limited period of time (usually for three years). Churches will most often hold
mid-week public Testimony Meetings, a time in which anyone can testify to what
they believe to be the healing power of the Christ in their lives. Christian
Scientists do not regard human affiliation to a church organization as crucial
to an individual's salvation. Each individual must follow his/her own path in
such matters according to their light, and a person describing him/herself as a
Christian Scientist may be a member of a branch church and/or of The First
Church of Christ, Scientist (or sometimes of neither). Some Christian
Scientists, after class instruction, become Christian Science Practitioners and
start public practices. Practitioners devote all of their time to healing, and
normally charge for their services, but may not usually take legal action
against patients for non-payment of fees. They are obliged to keep their
patients' confidences and are instructed to make concessions in the case of
indigent patients. There is no physical manipulation, or laying on of hands in
a Christian Science healing treatment. The church has at times been accused of
attempting to silence dissenters by methods such as delisting them as
practitioners in the Christian Science Journal, or excommunicating them. Some
dissenting groups continue to solicit support among current members of the
church. Practices. Christian Scientists celebrate the sacraments of baptism and
Eucharist in an entirely non-material way. "Our baptism," wrote Eddy, "is
purification from all error...Our Eucharist is spiritual communion with the one
God. Our bread, 'which cometh down from heaven,' is Truth. Our cup is the
cross. Our wine the inspiration of Love, the draught the Master drank and
commended to his followers". ("Science and Health," page 35) There are no
rituals in the Christian Science church, but at the communion service, held
twice a year, those in attendance are invited to kneel for silent prayer,
followed by the audible repetition of the Lord's Prayer. The communion service
is not held at The Mother Church. Marriage is not a sacrament of the Christian
Science church, but the church's by-laws require a legal, religious ceremony
for marriage: "If a Christian Scientist is to be married, the ceremony shall be
performed by a clergyman who is legally authorized." Christian Scientists may
take an intensive two-week "Primary" class from an authorized Christian Science
teacher. Those who wish to become "Journal-listed" (accredited) practitioners,
devoting themselves full-time to the public practice of healing, must first
have Primary class instruction. When they have a proven record of healing, they
may submit their names for publication in the directory of practitioners and
teachers in the "Christian Science Journal." A practitioner who has been listed
for at least three years' may apply for "Normal" class instruction, given just
once every three years. Those who receive a certificate are authorized to
teach. Both Primary and Normal classes are based on the Bible and the writings
of Mary Baker Eddy. The Primary class focuses on the chapter, "Recapitulation"
in "Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures". This chapter uses the
Socratic method of teaching and contains the "Scientific Statement of Being".
The "Normal" class focuses on the platform of Christian Science, contained on
pages 330-340 of "Science and Health." Services. Churches worldwide hold a one-
hour service each Sunday, consisting of hymns, prayer, and currently, readings
from the "King James Version" (KJV) of the Bible (although there is no
requirement that this version of the Bible be used) and "Science and Health
with Key to the Scriptures". These readings are the weekly Lesson-Sermon, which
is read aloud at all Sunday services in all Christian Science churches
worldwide, and is studied by individuals at home throughout the preceding week.
The Lesson, as it is informally called, is compiled by a committee at The
Mother Church, and is usually made up of six sections, each of which consists
of passages from the Bible (read by the Second Reader) and passages from
"Science and Health" (read by the First Reader). Eddy selected 26 subjects for
the Lesson-Sermon. These Lessons run in continuous rotation in the order she
established, hence each subject is studied twice a year. In years in which
there are 53 Sundays, the topic "Christ Jesus" occurs a third time, in
December. In addition, there is a special, shortened Lesson-Sermon for
Thanksgiving Day. Branch churches outside the United States may schedule their
Thanksgiving service when convenient for them, most choosing a day in October
or November, and the Thanksgiving Day proclamation by the United States
president, may be omitted. Because there are no clergy in the church, branch
church Sunday services are conducted by two Readers: the First Reader, who
reads passages from Science and Health, and the Second Reader, who reads
passages from the Bible. First Readers determine the beginning "scriptural
selection", hymns to be sung on Sundays, and the benediction. The vast majority
of the service is the reading of the weekly Bible lesson supplied by Boston,
and the order of the service set out by the Manual. To be elected the First
Reader in one's branch church is one of the highest and most important
positions the lay Christian Scientist may aspire to. Churches also hold a one-
hour Wednesday evening testimony meeting, with similar readings, after which,
those in attendance are invited to share accounts of healing through prayer. At
these services, the First Reader reads passages from the Bible and Science and
Health. Departing from denominational practice for over 120 years, English
language churches may now choose alternate Bible translations at these services
(i.e. Phillips). Branch churches also sponsor annual public talks (called
lectures) given by speakers selected annually by the Board of Lectureship in
Boston. Broadcasting. Beginning in the mid-1980s, church executives undertook a
controversial and ambitious foray into electronic broadcast media. The first
significant effort was to create a weekly half-hour syndicated television
program, The Christian Science Monitor Reports. "Monitor Reports" was anchored
in its first season by newspaper veteran Rob Nelson. He was replaced in the
second by the "Christian Science Monitor"'s former Moscow correspondent, David
Willis. The program was usually broadcast by independent stationsÂ â€” often at
odd hours. In 1988, Monitor Reports was supplanted by a nightly half-hour news
show, World Monitor, which was broadcast by the Discovery Channel. The program
was anchored by veteran journalist John Hart. The Church then purchased a
Boston cable TV station for elaborate in-house programming production. In
parallel, the church purchased a shortwave radio station and syndicated radio
production to National Public Radio. However, revenues fell far short of
optimistic predictions by church managers, who had ignored early warnings by
members and media experts. In October 1991, after a series of conflicts over
the boundaries between Christian Science teachings and his journalistic
independence, John Hart resigned. The Monitor Channel went off the air in June
1992. Most of the other operations closed in well under a decade. Public
accounts in both the mainstream and trade media reported that the church lost
approximately $250 million on these ventures. The hundreds of millions lost on
broadcasting brought the church to the brink of bankruptcy. However, with the
1991 publication of "The Destiny of The Mother Church" by the late Bliss Knapp,
the church secured a $90 million bequest from the Knapp trust. The trust
dictated that the book be published as "Authorized Literature," with neither
modification nor comment. Historically, the church had censured Knapp for
deviating at several points from Eddy's teaching, and had refused to publish
the work. The church's archivist, fired in anticipation of the book's
publication, wrote to branch churches to inform them of the book's history.
Many Christian Scientists thought the book violated the church's by-laws, and
the editors of the church's religious periodicals and several other church
employees resigned in protest. Alternate beneficiaries subsequently sued to
contest the church's claim it had complied fully with the will's terms, and the
church ultimately received only half of the original sum. The fallout of the
broadcasting debacle also sparked a minor revolt among some prominent church
members. In late 1993, a group of Christian Scientists filed suit against the
Board of Directors, alleging a willful disregard for the Manual of the Mother
Church in its financial dealings. The suit was thrown out by the Supreme
Judicial Court of Massachusetts in 1997, but a lingering discontent with the
church's financial matters persists to this day. Membership decline and
financial setbacks. In spite of its early meteoric rise, church membership has
declined sharply over the past eight decades, according to the church's former
treasurer, J. Edward Odegaard. Though the Church is prohibited by the Manual
from publishing membership figures, the number of branch churches in the United
States has fallen steadily since World War II. Dr. Stephen Barrett has reported
that since 1971, the number of practitioners and teachers in the United States
listed in the Christian Science Journal has fallen from nearly 5,000 to just
over 300 and the number of churches in the United States has fallen from about
1,800 to about 900. In 2009, for the first time in church history, more new
members came from Africa than the United States. Christian Science Monitor,
Journal and Sentinel. The Christian Science Monitor is a well-respected
newspaper run from the headquarters of the First Church of Christ, Scientist.
It was founded by Eddy under the slogan: "To injure no man, but to bless all
mankind". At its maximum it had a circulation of 200,000, but this had
contracted to 60,000 by 2005. Printed paper copies stopped in October 2008,
where it was making a loss of $18.9 million, and it is now available online. It
was not made with the goal of conversion to Christian Science, but for
providing news coverage. The Christian Science church publishes a weekly
periodical called the Christian Science Sentinel, a monthly publication called
the Christian Science Journal, a non-English publication called The Herald of
Christian Science. A project is currently under way to make all back issues of
the Christian Science publications (Journal, Sentinel and Herald) available on-
line. "The Christian Science Journal" and the "Christian Science Sentinel"
include comments from individuals claiming to have had been healed through the
use of Christian Science prayer. Testimonies of healings reported in Christian
Science publications are sometimes drawn from cases in which a doctor confirmed
the initial condition and the subsequent healing, according to the testifier.
Typically these testimonies, which generally include nothing but a vague
description, do not have doctors making the initial diagnosis. The verification
process requires the contact information for three people (one a member of "The
Mother Church") who "have either witnessed the healing or can vouch for its
accuracy based on their knowledge of testifier," according to the Christian
Science Publishing Society website. In 2005 the Boston Globe reported that the
church was considering consolidating Boston operations into fewer buildings and
leasing out space in buildings it owned. Church official Philip G. Davis noted
that the administration and Colonnade buildings had not been fully used for
many years and that vacancy increased after staff reductions in 2004. The
church posted an $8 million financial loss in fiscal 2003, and in 2004 cut 125
jobs, a quarter of the staff, at the "Christian Science Monitor". Conversely,
Davis said that "the financial situation right now is excellent" and stated
that the church was not facing financial problems. External links. Authorized
by The First Church of Christ, Scientist or the Christian Science Board of
Directors Additional Online Resources Dissenting, secessionist or independent
groups Criticism of Christian Science from atheist, Christian, and other
perspectives Wikimedia sister projects
