Christology Christology (from Greek Χριστός "Khristós" and , "") is the
field of study within Christian theology which is primarily concerned with the
nature and person of Jesus Christ as recorded in the canonical Gospels and the
epistles of the New Testament. Primary considerations include the relationship
of Jesus' nature and person with the nature and person of God the Father. As
such, Christology is concerned with the details of Jesus' ministry, his acts
and teachings, to arrive at a clearer understanding of who he is in his person,
and his role in salvation. A major component of the Christology of the
Apostolic Age was that of Paul the Apostle. His central themes were the notion
of the pre-existence of Christ and the worship of Christ as "Kyrios" (Greek:
"Lord"). Following the Apostolic Age, there was fierce and often politicized
debate in the early church on many interrelated issues. Christology was a major
focus of these debates, and was addressed at every one of the first seven
ecumenical councils. The second through fourth of these councils are generally
entitled "Christological councils," with the latter three mainly elucidating
what was taught in them and condemning incorrect interpretations. The Council
of Chalcedon in 451 issued a formulation of the being of Christ — that of two
natures, one human and one divine, "united with neither confusion nor
division." This is called the doctrine of the hypostatic union, which is still
held today amongst all Protestant, Catholic, and Orthodox Christians, referred
to as Chalcedonian Christianity. Due to politically charged differences in the
4th century, schisms developed, and the first denominations (from the Latin,
"to take a new name") formed. In the 13th century, Saint Thomas Aquinas
provided the first systematic Christology that consistently resolved a number
of the existing issues. In his Christology from above, Aquinas also championed
the principle of perfection of Christ's human attributes. The Middle Ages also
witnessed the emergence of the "tender image of Jesus" as a friend and a living
source of love and comfort, rather than just the "Kyrios" image. According to
Catholic theologian Karl Rahner, the purpose of modern Christology is to
formulate the Christian belief that "God became man and that God-made-man is
the individual Jesus Christ" in a manner that this statement can be understood
consistently, without the confusions of past debates and mythologies. Terms and
concepts. Over the centuries, a number of terms and concepts have been
developed within the framework of Christology to address the seemingly simple
questions: "who was Jesus and what did he do?" A good deal of theological
debate has ensued and significant schisms within Christian denominations took
place in the process of providing answers to these questions. After the Middle
Ages, systematic approaches to Christology were developed. The term
"Christology from above" refers to approaches that begin with the divinity and
pre-existence of Christ as the "Logos" (the Word), as expressed in the ().
These approaches interpret the works of Christ in terms of his divinity.
Christology from above was emphasized in the ancient Church, beginning with
Ignatius of Antioch in the second century. The term "Christology from below",
on the other hand, refers to approaches that begin with the human aspects and
the ministry of Jesus (including the miracles, parables, etc.) and move towards
his divinity and the mystery of incarnation. The concept of "Cosmic
Christology", first elaborated by Saint Paul, focuses on how the arrival of
Jesus as the Son of God forever changed the nature of the cosmos. The terms
"functional", "ontological" and "soteriological" have been used to refer to the
perspectives that analyze the "works", the "being" and the "salvific"
standpoints of Christology. Some essential sub-topics within the field of
Christology include the incarnation, the resurrection, and salvation. The term
"monastic Christology" has been used to describe spiritual approaches developed
by Anselm of Canterbury, Peter Abelard and Bernard of Clairvaux. The Franciscan
piety of the 12th and 13th centuries led to "popular Christology". Systematic
approaches by theologians, such as Thomas Aquinas, are called "scholastic
Christology". Beginnings. Early Christians found themselves confronted with a
set of new concepts and ideas relating to the life, death and resurrection of
Jesus, as well the notions of salvation and redemption, and had to use a new
set of terms, images and ideas to deal with them. The existing terms and
structures available to them were often insufficient to express these new set
of religious concepts, and taken together, these new forms of discourse led to
the beginnings of Christology as an attempt to understand, explain and discuss
their understanding of the nature of Christ. Furthermore, as early Christians
(following the Great Commission) had to explain their concepts to a new
audience which had at times been influenced by Greek philosophy, they had to
present arguments that at times resonated with, and at times confronted, the
beliefs of that audience. A key example is the Apostle Paul's Areopagus sermon
that appears in . Here, the apostle attempted to convey the underlying concepts
about Christ to a Greek audience, and the sermon illustrates some key elements
of future Christological discourses that were first brought forward by Paul.
The "Kyrios" title for Jesus is central to the development of New Testament
Christology, for the early Christians placed it at the center of their
understanding, and from that center attempted to understand the other issues
related to the Christian mysteries. In everyday Aramaic, "Mari" was a very
respectful form of polite address, which means more than just "Teacher" and was
somewhat similar to Rabbi. In Greek, this has at times been translated as
"Kyrios". While the term "Mari" expressed the relationship between Jesus and
his disciples during his life, the Greek "Kyrios" came to represent his
lordship over the world. Apostolic Christology. No writings were left by Jesus,
and the study of the various Christologies of the Apostolic Age is based on
early Christian documents. The Gospels provide episodes from the life of Jesus
and some of his works, but the authors of the New Testament show little
interest in an absolute chronology of Jesus or in synchronizing the episodes of
his life, and as in , the Gospels do not claim to be an exhaustive list of his
works. Christologies that can be gleaned from the three Synoptic Gospels
generally emphasize the humanity of Jesus, his sayings, his parables, and his
miracles. The Gospel of John provides a different perspective that focuses on
his divinity. The first 14 verses of the Gospel of John are devoted to the
divinity of Jesus as the "Logos", usually translated as "Word", along with his
pre-existence, and they emphasize the cosmic significance of Christ, e.g. :
"All things were made through him, and without him was not any thing made that
was made." In the context of these verses, the Word made flesh is identical
with the Word who was in the beginning with God, being exegetically equated
with Jesus. A foremost contribution to the Christology of the Apostolic Age is
that of Paul. The central Christology of Paul conveys the notion of Christ's
pre-existence and the identification of Christ as "Kyrios". The Pauline
epistles use "Kyrios" to identify Jesus almost 230 times, and express the theme
that the true mark of a Christian is the confession of Jesus as the true Lord.
Paul viewed the superiority of the Christian revelation over all other divine
manifestations as a consequence of the fact that Christ is the Son of God. The
Pauline epistles also advanced the "cosmic Christology" of the fourth gospel,
elaborating the cosmic implications of Jesus' existence as the Son of God, as
in : "Therefore, if anyone is in Christ, he is a new creation. The old has
passed away; behold, the new has come." Also, in : "He is the image of the
invisible God, the firstborn of all creation." Post-Apostolic controversies.
Following the Apostolic Age, from the second century onwards, a number of
controversies developed about how the human and divine are related within the
person of Jesus. As of the second century, a number of different and opposing
approaches developed among various groups. For example, Arianism did not
endorse divinity, Ebionism argued Jesus was an ordinary mortal, while
Gnosticism held docetic views which argued Christ was a spiritual being who
only appeared to have a physical body. The resulting tensions lead to schisms
within the church in the second and third centuries, and ecumenical councils
were convened in the fourth and fifth centuries to deal with the issues.
Eventually, by the Ecumenical Council of Chalcedon in 451, the "Hypostatic
union" was decreed—the proposition that Christ has one human nature "
[physis]" and one divine nature "", united with neither confusion nor
division—making this part of the creed of orthodox Christianity. Although
some of the debates seemed to be over a theological iota, they took place in
controversial political circumstances and resulted in a schism that formed the
Church of the East. In 325, the First Council of Nicaea defined the persons of
the Godhead and their relationship with one another - decisions which were
reratified at the First Council of Constantinople in 381. The language used was
that the one God exists in three persons (Father, Son, and Holy Spirit); in
particular, it was affirmed that the Son was "homoousios" (of same substance)
as the Father. The Nicene Creed declared the full divinity and full humanity of
Jesus. In 431, the First Council of Ephesus was initially called to address the
views of Nestorius on Mariology, but the problems soon extended to Christology,
and schisms followed. The 431 council was called because in defense of his
loyal priest Anastasius, Nestorius had denied the "Theotokos" title for Mary
and later contradicted Proclus during a sermon in Constantinople. Pope
Celestine I (who was already upset with Nestorius due to other matters) wrote
about this to Cyril of Alexandria, who orchestrated the council. During the
council, Nestorius defended his position by arguing there must be two persons
of Christ, one human, the other divine, and Mary had given birth only to a
human, hence could not be called the "Theotokos", i.e. "the one who gives birth
to God". The debate about the single or dual nature of Christ ensued in
Ephesus. The Council of Ephesus debated hypostasis (coexisting natures) versus
monophysitism (only one nature) versus miaphysitism (two natures united as one)
versus Nestorianism (disunion of two natures). From the Christological
viewpoint, the council adopted "hypostasis", i.e. coexisting natures, but its
language was less definitive than the 451 Council of Chalcedon. The Oriental
Orthodox rejected this and subsequent councils and to date consider themselves
to be "miaphysite". By contrast, Roman Catholics to date believe in the
hypostatic union and the Trinity. The council also confirmed the "Theotokos"
title and excommunicated Nestorius. The 451 Council of Chalcedon was highly
influential and marked a key turning point in the Christological debates that
broke apart the church of the Eastern Roman Empire in the fifth century. It
fully promulgated the hypostatic union, stating the human and divine natures of
Christ coexist, yet each is distinct and complete. Although, the Chalcedonian
Creed did not put an end to all Christological debate, it did clarify the terms
used and became a point of reference for many future Christologies. Most of the
major branches of Christianity — Roman Catholicism, Eastern Orthodoxy,
Anglicanism, Lutheranism, and Reformed — subscribe to the Chalcedonian
Christological formulation, while many branches of Eastern Christianity -
Syrian Orthodoxy, Assyrian Church, Coptic Orthodoxy, Ethiopian Orthodoxy, and
Armenian Apostolicism - reject it. Middle Ages to the Reformation. While the
concept of "Kyrios" dominated the Christology of the Apostolic Age, an
important supplementary element emerged in the Middle Ages. Based on the
influences of Anselm of Canterbury, Bernard of Clairvaux and women mystics, the
"tender image of Jesus" as a friend and a source of love and comfort was
developed. This contrasted with the images of Jesus as the Lord and as the key
to eventual salvation based on his sacrifice at Calvary. The Franciscan
approach to popular piety strengthened this friendly image. According to
Archbishop Rowan Williams, this made an important impact within the Christian
ministry by allowing Christians to feel the living presence of Jesus as a
loving figure "who is always there to harbor and nurture those who turn to him
for help and take delight in his presence". The Middle Ages, between the fifth
and 15th centuries, ushered in three new aspects of Christology: monastic,
popular and academic. The spiritual and monastic perspectives were due to
Anselm of Canterbury, Peter Abelard and Bernard of Clairvaux, each focusing on
a different variation of that theme. The popular piety championed by the
Franciscans led to a more widespread appreciation of Christology from the
Middle Ages onwards. At the same time, European universities embarked on a
systematic and scholarly approach to Christology, with Thomas Aquinas being the
key figure in that arena. Some key theological figures in this period, such as
Saint Augustine or John Calvin, never wrote specific works on Christology, yet
modern scholars have attempted to extract Christological insights from their
works, e.g. the study of Theocentricism in the writings of Augustine and the
analysis of Christ as "king, priest and prophet" in the writings of Calvin.
During the Middle Ages, many of the conflicts between Scripture and tradition
were resolved through the construction of theological arguments, and were
presented in terms of "summae", which summed up complete presentations of
discussions that led to knowledge. The apex of these in the 13th century was
provided by Saint Thomas Aquinas. His "Summa Theologiae" presented the first
systematic Christology that consistently resolved a number of the existing
issues. In his Christology from above, Aquinas also championed the principle of
perfection of Christ, namely that in every human sense, Jesus was the best that
could ever be. The question of "grace" was at the heart of the Reformation,
which Martin Luther initiated. This amounted to the question of where do I find
a gracious God? Luther believed the saving work of Christ is imputed for the
remission of sins via the words of the gospels. This led to his fourfold
formula of "solo Christo", "sola gratia", "sola fide", "sola scriptura", i.e.
only Christ, grace, faith and scripture. Martin Luther believed in the Creed of
Chalcedon and that Jesus was both God and man. He viewed incarnation as the
union of God and man. Christological issues. Person of Christ. The Person of
Christ refers to the study of the human and divine natures of Jesus Christ as
they coexist within one person. There are no direct discussions in the New
Testament regarding the dual nature of the Person of Christ as both divine and
human. Hence, since the early days of Christianity, theologians have debated
various approaches to the understanding of these natures, at times resulting in
schisms. Historically in the Alexandrian school of thought (fashioned on the
Gospel of John), Jesus Christ is the eternal "Logos" who already possesses
unity with the Father before the act of Incarnation. In contrast, the
Antiochian school views Christ as a single, unified human person apart from his
relationship to the divine. John Calvin maintained there was no human element
in the Person of Christ which could be separated from the Person of The Word.
Calvin also emphasized the importance of the "Work of Christ" in any attempt at
understanding the Person of Christ and cautioned against ignoring the Works of
Jesus during his ministry. The study of the Person of Christ continued into the
20th century, with modern theologians such as Karl Rahner and Hans von
Balthasar. Rahner pointed out the coincidence between the Person of Christ and
the Word of God, referring to and which state whoever is ashamed of the words
of Jesus is ashamed of the Lord himself. Balthasar argued the union of the
human and divine natures of Christ was achieved not by the "absorption" of
human attributes, but by their "assumption". Thus, in his view, the divine
nature of Christ was not affected by the human attributes and remained forever
divine. Nativity and the Holy Name. The Nativity of Jesus impacted the
Christological issues about his Person from the earliest days of Christianity.
Luke's Christology centers on the dialectics of the dual natures of the earthly
and heavenly manifestations of existence of the Christ, while Matthew's
Christology focuses on the mission of Jesus and his role as the savior. The
salvific emphasis of later impacted the theological issues and the devotions to
Holy Name of Jesus. provides a key to the "Emmanuel Christology" of Matthew.
Beginning with 1:23, Matthew shows a clear interest in identifying Jesus as
"God with us" and in later developing the Emmanuel characterization of Jesus at
key points throughout the rest of his Gospel. The name Emmanuel does not appear
elsewhere in the New Testament, but Matthew builds on it in ("I am with you
always, even unto the end of the world") to indicate Jesus will be with the
faithful to the end of the age. According to Ulrich Luz, the Emmanuel motif
brackets the entire Gospel of Matthew between 1:23 and 28:20, appearing
explicitly and implicitly in several other passages. Crucifixion and
Resurrection. The accounts of the crucifixion and subsequent resurrection of
Jesus provides a rich background for Christological analysis, from the
canonical Gospels to the Pauline Epistles. A central element in the Christology
presented in the Acts of the Apostles is the affirmation of the belief that the
death of Jesus by crucifixion happened "with the foreknowledge of God,
according to a definite plan". In this view, as in , the cross is not viewed as
a scandal, for the crucifixion of Jesus "at the hands of the lawless" is viewed
as the fulfilment of the plan of God. Paul's Christology has a specific focus
on the death and resurrection of Jesus. For Paul, the crucifixion of Jesus is
directly related to his resurrection and the term "the cross of Christ" used in
Galatians 6:12 may be viewed as his abbreviation of the message of the gospels.
For Paul, the crucifixion of Jesus was not an isolated event in history, but a
cosmic event with significant eschatological consequences, as in Cor 2:8. In
the Pauline view, Jesus, obedient to the point of death (Phil 2:8), died "at
the right time" (Rom 4:25) based on the plan of God. For Paul, the "power of
the cross" is not separable from the resurrection of Jesus. Threefold office.
The threefold office (Latin "munus triplex") of Jesus Christ is a Christian
doctrine based upon the teachings of the Old Testament. It was described by
Eusebius and more fully developed by John Calvin. It states that Jesus Christ
performed three functions (or "offices") in his earthly ministry - those of
prophet (Deuteronomy 18:14-22), priest (Psalm 110:1-4), and king (Psalm 2). In
the Old Testament, the appointment of someone to any of these three positions
could be indicated by anointing him or her by pouring oil over the head. Thus,
the term messiah, meaning "anointed one", is associated with the concept of the
threefold office. While the office of king is that most frequently associated
with the Messiah, the role of Jesus as priest is also prominent in the New
Testament, being most fully explained in chapters 7 to 10 of the Book of
Hebrews. Mariology. Some Christians, notably Roman Catholics, view Mariology as
a key component of Christology. In this view, not only is Mariology a logical
and necessary consequence of Christology, but without it, Christology is
incomplete, since the figure of Mary contributes to a fuller understanding of
who Christ is and what he did. Certain Christian traditions of Protestant
heritage tend not to hold this view. Joseph Cardinal Ratzinger (later Pope
Benedict XVI) expressed this sentiment about Roman Catholic Mariology when in
two separate occasions he stated, "The appearance of a truly Marian awareness
serves as the touchstone indicating whether or not the Christological substance
is fully present" and "It is necessary to go back to Mary, if we want to return
to the truth about Jesus Christ." Notes. See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Wikipedia:Footnotes for an explanation of how to generate footnotes using the
tags, and the template below.
