Church militant and church triumphant These terms are often used in the context
of the doctrine of the Communion of Saints; although Christians may be
physically separated from each other by the barrier of death, they nonetheless
remain united to each other in one Church, and support each other in prayer.
The Latin word "militans" has a primary meaning of "serving as a soldier,
military", but it acquired a secondary meaning of "to struggle, to make an
effort", which is the intended sense here. Christians on earth (the Church
Militant) are still struggling against sin in order that, when they die, they
might go to heaven and be members of the Church Triumphant, those who have
triumphed over sin. However, if this struggle is successful, but not completely
so, then after death they temporarily become members of the Church Suffering
before ultimately joining the Church Triumphant. The Catholic Church
commemorates the Church Triumphant and the Church Suffering on two consecutive
days: All Saints Day on November 1 (the Church Triumphant), and All Souls Day
on November 2 (the Church Suffering). These terms are not used in the modern
Catechism of the Catholic Church, the authoritative collection of the teaching
of Catholicism, first published in 1994. Many contemporary Catholics might
consider them belonging to another age. However, the teaching these terms
represent is precisely restated in paragraph 954 of the Catechism, which quote
Lumen Gentium, the Constitution on the Church of the Second Vatican Council:
"The three states of the Church. "When the Lord comes in glory, and all his
angels with him, death will be no more and all things will be subject to him.
But at the present time some of his disciples are pilgrims on earth. Others
have died and are being purified, while still others are in glory,
contemplating 'in full light, God himself triune and one, exactly as he is"'"
(CCC 954) The Methodist Church defines the Church Militant as "engaged in
constant warfare against the world, the flesh and the devil, and in that
respect is distinguished from the Church Triumphant." The Church Militant
includes all Christian denominations, such as Methodists, Presbyterians,
Baptists, Congregationalists, Episcopalians, among many others. In the same
fashion, it defines the Church Triumphant as "in heaven, and consists of those
who have washed their robes and made them immaculate and pure in the blood of
the Lamb."
