Church planting Church planting is a process that results in a new (local)
Christian church being established. It should be distinguished from church
development, where a new service, new worship centre or fresh expression is
created that is integrated into an already established congregation. For a
local church to be planted, it must eventually have a separate life of its own
and be able to function without its parent body, even if it continues to stay
in relationship denominationally or through being part of a network. History of
church planting. Anglican missionary efforts called church planting in British
colonies coincided with British colonialism. Church planting also describes the
missionary model of Baptist missionaries, for instance, in mid-twentieth
century Brazil. For Southern Baptists, church planting, with its focus on
establishing new and independent congregations, is a logical outcome of their
theology: "Southern Baptist mission work was driven by church planting. Based
on a voluntaristic faith, the work defined individual salvation as the
cornerstone of religious life; and religious life took place within local,
autonomous congregations." Models of church planting. These are some models for
church planting. In the "parachute drop" method, a church planter and family
move into a new location to start a church from scratch. Or, an existing church
or church planting organization (mother) provides the initial leadership and
resources (money and/or people) to get a new church (daughter) started.
Alternately, small groups form and multiply via a network of people meeting in
homes (see house church); in some cases, the individual cells are connected in
a larger network that meets together periodically in a large group setting. An
existing church may also split. Finally, the expansion of a Multi-site church
may result in new churches (rather than annexes of the larger church) being
established. Advocates. C. Peter Wagner describes Church planting as "the
single most effective evangelistic methodology under heaven" and for its
advocates this remains church planting's greatest rationale. Recent
practitioners have developed theologies of church, place, and community, to
answer the criticism of earlier models. Practical objections. For Anglicans and
Catholics, "church-planting" can be very problematic because of the territorial
nature of a diocese. For both the Catholic and Anglican churches, this practice
may be viewed as an abrogation of the rights of a local bishop. This is because
the bishop of the diocese has the right to decide where churches will be
planted, and the phenomenon of church planting sometimes ignores both courtesy
and obedience to the local bishop. This issue is particularly sensitive in
regard to the Anglican diocese of Sydney in Australia, from which many
Evangelical churches are "planted" in non-evangelical dioceses. The Church of
England has begun its Fresh Expressions initiative, which is seeking to
encourage the development of new congregations even when they are across parish
boundaries, for the sake of mission, under the bishop's permission. The recent
Anglican conference GAFCON contained a broad hint that it would consider
offering oversight to churches that have been planted without authorization
from the local bishops. Church Planting Movement. In a missiological context,
church planting may be defined as "initiating reproductive fellowships who
reflect the kingdom of God in the world." When this happens with rapid growth,
it is generally known as a Church Planting Movement. In a CPM, indigenous
churches plant more churches within a people group or geographic area. A church
will sponsor formation of multiple spinoff churches that will themselves very
quickly reproduce new churches, generally with common teachings and doctrine.
It is different from traditional missions in that the new churches are
generally started by a lay leader from the sponsoring church and not an outside
missionary. A key characteristic of an authentic church planting movement is
the rapidity with which a new congregation itself starts another similar
church. History of CPMs. The modern Church Planting Movement can trace its
roots to the mid-nineteenth century when Henry Venn and Rufus Anderson
developed the three-self formula of an indigenous missions policy: "they
believed that young churches should be self-propagating, self-supporting, and
self-governing from their inception." Donald McGavran, a missionary in India
who "coined the concept of 'people movements' to Christ," is credited as an
early proponent of the kind of missionary work that underlies the Church
Planting Movement, by focusing his missionary work on converting groups of
people ("groups, tribes, villages, ethnic groups") rather than individuals.
According to "ONE Magazine", the official organ of the National Association of
Free Will Baptists, such tactics were used successfully in Cuba in the 1940s by
Tom and Mabel Willey; in the 1950s in North India Carlisle and Marie Hanna; and
in the 1960s in Ivory Coast by LaVerne Miley. "Christianity Today" also claims
success in Cuba for the "Western Baptists, historically linked to the Southern
Baptist Convention." Essentials of CPMs. There are three key characteristics of
a Church Planting Movement: it reproduces rapidly, multiplying churches, and
that the churches are indigenous. Methods in Church Planting Movements. There
is not a solitary method used to spark a Church Planting Movement. The
"Training for Trainers (T4T)" method has been successful in China. It differs
from the Insider Movement in that leaders do not seek to act like indigenous
persons, but simply train locals who train others within their (or closely
related) people group.
