Civil religion The intended meaning of the term civil religion often varies
according to whether one is a sociologist of religion or a professional
political commentator. The following discussion includes both perspectives
followed by a brief history of the concept. Within the contexts of the
monotheistic, prophetic, revealed faiths, civil religion can be problematic
from a theological perspective. Being identified with a political culture and a
leadership hierarchy of an existing society, civil religion's priestly role,
can interfere with the prophetic mission of a religious faith. This has been
the challenge religion faces upon entering the public sphere throughout all
ages and cultures. At times of national crisis civil religion commonly renews
itself by becoming a platform for rebuking the sins of a people or its
institutions, and by calling on citizens to be true to the nation's deeper
values. Origin of term. Italian Historian Emilio Gentile has studied the roots
and development of the concept and proposed a division of two types of
religions of politics: a civil religion and a Political religion. Sociology of
religion. In the sociology of religion, civil religion is the folk religion of
a nation or a political culture. Civil religion stands somewhat above folk
religion in its social and political status, since by definition it suffuses an
entire society, or at least a segment of a society; and is often practiced by
leaders within that society. On the other hand, it is somewhat less than an
establishment of religion, since established churches have official clergy and
a relatively fixed and formal relationship with the government that establishes
them. Civil religion is usually practiced by political leaders who are
laypeople and whose leadership is not specifically spiritual. Examples. and
similar religious or quasi-religious practices. Practical political philosophy.
Professional commentators on political and social matters writing in newspapers
and magazines sometimes use the term civil religion or civic religion to refer
to ritual expressions of patriotism of a sort practiced in all countries, not
always including religion in the conventional sense of the word. Although "God"
is not mentioned in the Constitution of the United States of America, mention
is specifically made of "Nature's God" in the opening sentence of the
Declaration of Independence. Relation between the two conceptions. These two
conceptions (sociological and political) of civil religion substantially
overlap. In Britain, where church and state are constitutionally joined, the
monarch's coronation is an elaborate religious rite celebrated by the
Archbishop of Canterbury. In France, secular ceremonies are separated from
religious observances to a greater degree than in most countries. In the United
States of America, a president being inaugurated is told by the Constitution to
choose between saying "I do solemnly swear..." (customarily followed by "so
help me God", although those words are not Constitutionally required) and
saying "I do solemnly affirm..." (in which latter case no mention of God would
be expected). History. Prehistory & Classical antiquity. Practically all the
ancient and prehistoric reigns suffused politics with religion. Often the
leaders, such as the Pharaoh or the Chinese Emperor were considered
manifestations of a Divinity. Tribal world-view was often Pantheistic, the
tribe being an extension of its surrounding nature and the leaders having roles
and symbols derived from the animal hierarchy and significant natural phenomena
(such as storm). The religion of the Athenian polis was a secular polytheism
focused on the Olympian Gods and was celebrated in the civic festivals.
Religion was a matter of state and the Athenian Ecclesia deliberated on matters
of religion. Atheism and the introduction of foreign gods were forbidden in
Athens and punishable by death. Socrates was charged, tried, found guilty and
condemned to death by drinking hemlock by the Athenian ecclesia. The charge was
that he worshipped gods other than those sanctioned by the polis. Rome also had
a civil religion, whose first Emperor Augustus officially attempted to revive
the dutiful practice of Classical paganism. Greek and Roman religion were
essentially local in character; the Roman Empire attempted to unite its
disparate territories by inculcating an ideal of Roman piety, and by a
syncretistic identifying of the gods of conquered territories with the Greek
and Roman pantheon. In this campaign, Augustus erected monuments such as the
"Ara Pacis", the Altar of Peace, showing the Emperor and his family worshiping
the gods. He also encouraged the publication of works such as Virgil's
"Æneid", which depicted "pious Æneas", the legendary ancestor of Rome, as a
role model for Roman religiosity. Roman historians such as Livy told tales of
early Romans as morally improving stories of military prowess and civic virtue.
The Roman civil religion later became centered on the person of the Emperor
through the imperial cult, the worship of the genius of the Emperor. Modern
era. The phrase "civil religion" was first discussed extensively by Jean-
Jacques Rousseau in his 1762 treatise "The Social Contract" (although this is a
translation since Rousseau wrote in French). As typically interpreted, Rousseau
defined "civil religion" as a group of religious beliefs he believed to be
universal, and which he believed governments had a right to uphold and
maintain: belief in a deity; belief in an afterlife in which virtue is rewarded
and vice punished; and belief in religious tolerance. Beyond that, Rousseau
affirmed that individuals' religious opinions should be beyond the reach of
governments. United States. Historiography. In the 1960s and 1970s, scholars
such as Robert N. Bellah and Martin E. Marty studied civil religion as a
cultural phenomenon, attempting to identify the actual tenets of civil religion
in the United States of America, or to study civil religion as a phenomenon of
cultural anthropology. Within this American context, Marty wrote that Americans
approved of "religion in general" without being particularly concerned about
the content of that faith, and attempted to distinguish "priestly" and
"prophetic" roles within the practice of American civil religion, which he
preferred to call the "public theology". In "Civil Religion in America," a 1967
essay, Bellah wrote that civil religion in its priestly sense is "an
institutionalized collection of sacred beliefs about the American nation."
Bellah describes the prophetic role of civil religion as challenging "national
self-worship" and calling for "the subordination of the nation to ethical
principles that transcend it in terms of which it should be judged." Bellah
identified the American Revolution, the Civil War, and the Civil Rights
Movement as three decisive historical events that impacted the content and
imagery of civil religion in the United States. The application of the concept
of civil religion to the United States was in large part the work of
sociologist Robert Bellah. He identified an elaborate system of practices and
beliefs arising from America's unique historic experience and religiosity.
Civil Religion in the U.S. was originally Protestant but brought in Catholics
and Jews after World War II. Having no association with any religious sect,
Civil religion was been used in the 1960s to justify civil rights legislation.
Americans ever since the colonial era talk of their obligation both collective
and individual to carry out God's will on earth. George Washington was a sort
of high priest, and the documents of the Founding Fathers have been treated as
almost sacred texts. With the Civil War, says Bellah, came a new theme of
death, sacrifice and rebirth, as expressed through Memorial Day rituals. Unlike
France, the American civil religion was never anticlerical or militantly
secular. History. The United States was settled in part by religious dissenters
from the established Church of England, who desired a civil society founded on
a different religious vision. Catholic and other Protestant religious
traditions were strongly represented by some settlers and by later immigrants.
The American Revolution was the main source of the civil religion that has
shaped patriotism ever since. As historians have noted, the Revolution produced
a Moses-like leader (George Washington), prophets (Thomas Jefferson, Tom Paine)
and martyrs (Boston Massacre, Nathan Hale), as well as devils (Benedict
Arnold), sacred places (Valley Forge), rituals (raising the Liberty Tree),
flags (the Betsey Ross flag), sacred holidays (July 4) and a holy scripture
(The Declaration of Independence, the Constitution and the Bill of Rights). The
Church of England was disestablished (i.e. lost tax moneys) in Virginia and
several other states during the Revolution. The 1787 Constitution forbids a
national church and state taxation for churches disappeared after 1830.
Religious denominations compete with one another for allegiance in the public
sphere. Secularism and agnosticism are also publicly legitimated and
widespread. These facts have made public displays of religious piety by
political leaders important to a large sector of the population; lacking an
established church, they may seek public assurance of those leaders' religious
beliefs or general sense of moral conviction. Current issues. This assertive
civil religion of the United States is an occasional cause of political
friction between the U.S. and its friends in Europe, where the literally
religious form of civil religion has largely faded away in recent decades. In
the United States, civil religion is often invoked under the name of "Judeo-
Christian tradition", a phrase originally intended to be maximally inclusive of
the several religions practiced in the United States, assuming that these
faiths all worship the same God and share the same values. Some scholars have
argued that the American flag can be seen as a main totem of a national cult.
Arguing against mob violence and lynching, Abraham Lincoln declared in his 1838
Lyceum speech that the Constitution and the laws of the United States ought to
become the ‘political religion’ of each American.
