Clerical celibacy Clerical celibacy is the requirement that some or all members
of the clergy in certain religions be unmarried. These religions consider that,
outside of marriage, deliberate sexual thoughts, feelings, and behavior are
sinful; clerical celibacy also requires abstention from these. Within the
Catholic Church, clerical celibacy is mandated for all clergy in the Latin
Church except deacons who do not intend to become priests. Exceptions are
sometimes admitted for ordination to transitional diaconate and priesthood on a
case-by-case basis for married clergymen of other churches or communities who
become Catholics, but ordination of married men to the episcopacy is excluded
(see Personal ordinariate). Clerical marriage is not allowed and therefore, if
those for whom in some particular Church celibacy is optional (such as
permanent deacons in the Latin Church) wish to marry, they must do so before
ordination. Eastern Catholic Churches either follow the same rules as the Latin
Church or require celibacy only for bishops. In the Eastern Orthodox Church and
Oriental Orthodoxy, celibacy is the norm for bishops; married men may be
ordained to the priesthood, but even married priests whose wives pre-decease
them are not allowed to enter marriage after ordination, although today some
exceptions are made. The vast majority (more than 90%) of Orthodox priests are
married men—having married before they were ordained. Similarly, celibacy is
not a requirement for ordination as a deacon and in some Oriental Orthodox
churches deacons may marry after ordination. The Church of the East has not
applied the rule of celibacy even for ordination to the episcopate. Anglicanism
does not require celibacy of its clergy and allows clerical marriage. Meanings
of "celibacy". The word "celibacy" can mean either the state of being unmarried
or abstinence, especially because of religious vows, from sexual intercourse.
Permanent deacons, namely those deacons who are not intended to become priests,
are, in general, exempted from this rule. On the granting of permission, by
exception, for the priestly ordination of married men in the Latin Church, see
Rules, below. Background. In some Christian churches, a vow of chastity is made
by members of religious orders or monastic communities, along with vows of
poverty and obedience, in order to imitate the life of Jesus of Nazareth, see
also Evangelical counsels. This vow of chastity, made by people not all of whom
are clergy, is different from what is the obligation, not a vow, of clerical
continence and celibacy Celibacy for religious and monastics (monks and
sisters/nuns) and for bishops is upheld by both the Roman Catholic Church and
Orthodox Christian traditions. Bishops must be unmarried men or widowers; a
married man cannot become a bishop. In Latin Rite Catholicism and in some
Eastern Catholic Churches, most priests are celibate men. Exceptions are
admitted and there are over 200 married Catholic priests who converted from the
Anglican Communion and Protestant faiths. In most Orthodox traditions and in
some Eastern Catholic Churches men who are already married may be ordained
priests, but priests may not marry after ordination. Neither the Catholic nor
the Orthodox tradition considers the rule of clerical celibacy to be an
unchangeable dogma, but instead as a rule that could be adjusted if the Church
thought it appropriate and to which exceptions are admitted. From the time of
the first ecumenical council the Christian church forbids voluntary physical
castration, and the alleged self-castration of the theologian Origen was used
to discredit him. Clerical continence in Christianity. First century. The
earliest Christian leaders were largely married men. The mention in , , and of
Saint Peter's mother-in-law indicates that he had married (: "when Jesus was
come into Peter's house, he saw his wife's mother laid, and sick of a fever.")
According to Clement of Alexandria (Stromata, III, vi, ed. Dindorf, II, 276),
Peter was married and had children and his wife suffered martyrdom. Pope
Clement I wrote: "For Peter and Philip begat children". On the other hand, in
Jesus responds to Peter's statement that he and the other disciples had left
all and followed him by saying there is "no one who has left house or wife or
brothers or parents or children for the sake of the kingdom of God who will not
receive back an overabundant return in this present age and eternal life in the
age to come" Some hold that married men who became clergy were expected to live
in complete continence, refraining permanently from sexual relations with their
wives. They also conclude that, because of the exclusion of sexual relations,
the members of the clergy were even then not entitled to marry. On the other
hand, George T. Dennis SJ of Catholic University of America says: "There is
simply no clear evidence of a general tradition or practice, much less of an
obligation, of priestly celibacy-continence before the beginning of the fourth
century" Peter Fink SJ agrees, saying that underlying premises used in the
book, Apostolic Origins of Priestly Celibacy, "would not stand up so
comfortably to historical scrutiny". Dennis says this book provides no evidence
that celibacy had apostolic origins. However, evidence for the view that these
dismiss as a novelty was presented already in the 19th century by the
Protestant historian Philip Schaff, who pointed out that all marriages
contracted by clerics in Holy Orders were declared null and void in 530 by
Emperor Justinian I, who also declared the children of such marriages
illegitimate. In the New Testament, while ("The unmarried man is anxious about
the things of the Lord, how to please the Lord. But the married man is anxious
about worldly things, how to please his wife") is a "locus classicus" used in
favour of sacerdotal celibacy, the statement in that a bishop should be "the
husband of one wife" and "one who ruleth well his own house, having his
children in subjection", a "locus classicus" used against sacerdotal celibacy,
indicates that at that time married men could indeed become clergy. One
interpretation of "the husband of one wife" is that the man to be ordained
could not have been married more than once and that perfect continence, total
abstinence, was expected from him starting on the day of his ordination.
Philippe Delhaye wrote: "During the first three or four centuries, no law was
promulgated prohibiting clerical marriage. Celibacy was a matter of choice for
bishops, priests, and deacons. ... The apostolic constitutions ("c". 400)
excommunicated a priest or bishop who left his wife 'under pretense of piety'
("Sacrorum Conciliorum nova et amplissima collectio" 1:51).". Second and third
centuries. The North African Tertullian (c. 160 – c. 225), writing of the
apostles, indicated that he was obliged to believe that apart from Peter, who
was certainly married, the apostles were continent. In his "De praescriptione
contra haereticos", Tertullian mentioned continence as one of the customs in
Mithraism that he claimed were imitated from Christianity, but does not
associate it specifically with the clergy. The "Didascalia Apostolorum",
written in Greek in the first half of the 3rd century, mentions the
requirements of chastity on the part of both the bishop and his wife, and of
the children being already brought up, when it quotes as requiring that, before
someone is ordained a bishop, enquiry be made "whether he be "chaste", and
whether his wife also be a believer and "chaste"; and whether he "has" brought
up his children in the fear of God". There is record of a number of 3rd-century
married bishops in good standing, even in the West. They included: Passivus,
bishop of Fermo; Cassius, bishop of Narni; Aetherius, bishop of Vienne;
Aquilinus, bishop of Évreux; Faron, bishop of Meaux; Magnus, bishop of
Avignon. Filibaud, bishop of Aire-sur-l'Adour, was the father of St. Philibert
de Jumièges, and Sigilaicus, bishop of Tours, was the father of St. Cyran of
Brenne. No statement is made about whether they had children after becoming
bishops or only before. “A famous letter of SYNESIUS OF CYRENE (d. c. 414) is
evidence both for the respecting of personal decision in the matter and for
contemporary appreciation of celibacy. For priests and deacons clerical
marriage continued to be in vogue”. The consequence of the requirement from
higher clerics who lived in marriages to abstain permanently from sexual
intercourse with their wives was prohibition for those who were single of
entering a marriage after ordination. The Apostolic Canons of the Apostolic
Constitutions decreed that only lower clerics might still marry after their
ordination. Bishops, priests, and deacons were not allowed. Jerome, referred in
"Against Jovinianus" to marriage prohibition for priests when he argued that
Peter and the other apostles had been married, but had married before they were
called and subsequently gave up their marital relations. The Paphnutius legend
in the first half of the fifth century called the marriage prohibition an
ancient ecclesiastical tradition. Fourth century. The Council of Elvira (306)
is often seen as the first to issue a written regulation requiring clergy to
abstain from sexual intercourse. Its canon 33 decreed: "Bishops, presbyters,
deacons, and others with a position in the ministry are to abstain completely
from sexual intercourse with their wives and from the procreation of children.
If anyone disobeys, he shall be removed from the clerical office." It is
disputed whether this canon mandated permanent continence or only, as is the
practice in the Eastern Orthodox Church even for the laity, periodical
continence before partaking of the Eucharist. and Maurice Meigne even
interpreted it as meaning: "It was decided to forbid keeping back from one's
wife and not producing children". In 387 or 390, or according to others in 400,
a Council of Carthage decreed that bishops, priests and deacons abstain from
conjugal relations: "It is fitting that the holy bishops and priests of God as
well as the Levites, i.e. those who are in the service of the divine
sacraments, observe perfect continence, so that they may obtain in all
simplicity what they are asking from God; what the Apostles taught and what
antiquity itself observed, let us also endeavour to keep... It pleases us all
that bishop, priest and deacon, guardians of purity, abstain from conjugal
intercourse with their wives, so that those who serve at the altar may keep a
perfect chastity." The Directa Decretal of Pope Siricius (10 February 385)
states: "We have indeed discovered that many priests and deacons of Christ
brought children into the world, either through union with their wives or
through shameful intercourse. And they used as an excuse the fact that in the
Old Testament—as we can read—priests and ministers were permitted to beget
children." Saint Hilary of Poitiers (315–68), a Doctor of the Church, was a
married bishop and had a daughter named Apra, who was baptized together with
her father, when he and his wife became Christians. Among Popes of the 4th, 5th
and 6th centuries, the father of Pope Damasus I (366–84) was a bishop. Pope
Felix III (483–92), whose father was almost certainly a priest, was the
great-great-grandfather of Pope Gregory I the Great (590–604). Pope Hormisdas
(514–23) was the father of Pope Silverius (536–37). No statement is given
on whether, among these, the children in question were born when their fathers
were still laymen. As for the East, the Greek ecclesiastical historians
Socrates and Sozomen, who wrote a century after the event, reported that the
First Council of Nicaea (325) considered ordering all married clergy to refrain
from conjugal relations, but the Council was dissuaded by Paphnutius of Thebes.
The term "subintroducta" refers to an unmarried woman living in association
with a man in a merely spiritual marriage, a practice that seems to have
existed already in the time of Hermas; in the 4th century such a woman was also
referred to as an "agapeta". Stefan Heid has argued that the pre-Nicaean
acceptance of that arrangement for clerics was an indication that the clergy
were expected to live in continence even with their wives. A leading
participant in the Council, Eusebius of Caesarea, wrote: "It is fitting that
those in the priesthood and occupied in the service of God, should abstain
after ordination from the intercourse of marriage." Similar evidence of the
existence in the 4th-century East, as in the West, of a rule or at least an
ideal of clerical continence that was considered to be canonical is found in
Epiphanius's Panarion, 48, 9 and "Expositio Fidei", 21. Synesius (died c. 414),
who refused to be bound by the obligation, knew that, if made a bishop, he was
expected to live in continence with his wife. One of the accusations against
Antoninus, Bishop of Ephesus, in his trial before John Chrysostom was that
"after separating from his married wife, he had taken her again". In his note
on this phrase, the translator Herbert Moore says: "According to the 'Apostolic
Canons', only the lower orders of clergy were allowed to marry after their
appointment to office; the Council in Trullo ordered that a bishop's wife
should retire to a convent, or become a deaconess; that of Caesarea, that if a
priest marries after ordination he must be degraded. For Antoninus to resume
relations with his wife was equivalent to marriage after ordination. It was
proposed at the Council of Nicaea that married clergy should be compelled to
separate from their wives, but the proposal was rejected; though it was
generally held that the relations of bishops with their wives should be those
of brother and sister." The 4th-century Church Fathers Ambrose and Jerome
pointed out that the passage in 1 Timothy 3:2–4 did not conflict with the
discipline they knew, whereby a married man who became a bishop was to abstain
from sexual relations and not marry again: "He speaks of having children, not
of begetting them, or marrying again"; "He does not say: Let a bishop be chosen
who marries one wife and begets children; but who marries one wife, and has his
children in subjection and well disciplined. You surely admit that he is no
bishop who during his episcopate begets children. The reverse is the case—if
he be discovered, he will not be bound by the ordinary obligations of a
husband, but will be condemned as an adulterer." According to Epiphanius of
Salamis, also of the 4th century, Nicholas, one of the Seven Deacons of ,
noticed others being admired for their celibacy. To avoid seeming immoderately
devoted to his beautiful wife and therefore inferior in his ministry, he
renounced conjugal intercourse forever. While he was able to remain continent
for a while, eventually his burning desire overpowered him. However, he did not
want to be regarded as inconsistent or seen as taking his oath lightly. Instead
of returning to his wife, he engaged in promiscuous sex and what Epiphanius
termed "sex practices against nature". In this way, he started Nicolaism, an
antinomian heresy which believed that as long as they abstained from marriage,
it was not a sin to exercise their sexual desires as they pleased. Revelation
2:6 and 15 expresses hatred for the "works of the Nicolaitans". Fifth to
seventh centuries. In saying that "in certain provinces it is permitted to the
readers and singers to marry", of the Council of Chalcedon (451) suggests that,
in other provinces, not only bishops, priests, deacons and subdeacons, but even
those in the lower orders of readers and singers were at that time not
permitted to marry. Needless to say, the rule or ideal of clerical continence
was not always observed either in the West or in the East, and it was because
of violations that it was from time to time affirmed. Emperor Justinian I (died
565) ordered that the children of priests, deacons and subdeacons who, "in
disregard of the sacred canons, have children by women with whom, according to
sacerdotal regulation, they may not cohabit" be considered illegitimate on the
same level as those "procreated in incest and in nefarious nuptials". As for
bishops, he forbade "any one to be ordained bishop who has children or
grandchildren". The canon mistakenly claims that the canon of the late-4th-
century Council of Carthage quoted above excluded conjugal intercourse by
clergy lower than bishops only in connection with their liturgical service or
in times of fasting. The Council of Carthage excluded such intercourse
perpetually and made no distinction between bishops, priests and deacons. There
have been no changes since then in the discipline of the Eastern Orthodox
Church, which for bishops, priests, deacons, and subdeacons excludes marriage
after ordination, but allows, except for periods before celebrating the Divine
Liturgy, conjugal relations by priests and deacons married before ordination,
and requires celibacy and perpetual continence only of bishops. Eleventh and
twelfth centuries. “Despite six hundred years of decrees, canons, and
increasingly harsh penalties, the Latin clergy still did, more or less
illegally, what their Greek counterparts were encouraged to do by law—they
lived with their wives and raised families. In practice, ordination was not an
impediment to marriage; therefore some priests did marry even after
ordination” “The tenth century is claimed to be the high point of clerical
marriage in the Latin communion. Most rural priests were married and many urban
clergy and bishops had wives and children.” "A terrible picture of the decay
both of clerical morality and of all sense of anything like vocation is drawn
in the writings of St. Peter Damian, particularly in his "Liber Gomorrhianus".
The style, no doubt, is rhetorical and exaggerated, and his authority as an
eyewitness does not extend beyond that district of Northern Italy, in which he
lived, but we have evidence from other sources that the corruption was
widespread… Undoubtedly during this period the traditions of sacerdotal
celibacy in Western Christendom suffered severely but even though a large
number of the clergy, not only priests but bishops, openly took wives and begot
children to whom they transmitted their benefices, the principle of celibacy
was never completely surrendered in the official enactments of the Church." In
888, two local councils, that of Metz and that of Mainz, prohibited
cohabitation even with wives living in continence. This tendency was taken up
by the 11th century Gregorian Reform, which aimed at eliminating what it called
"Nicolaitism", that is clerical marriage, which in spite of being theoretically
excluded was in fact practised, and concubinage. The phrase "contract marriage"
in the first part of canon 21 excludes clerical marriages, and the marriages
that the second part says must be dissolved may possibly be such marriages,
contracted after ordination, not before. Canon 3 makes reference to a rule made
at the First Council of Nicaea (see above), which is understood as not
forbidding a cleric to live in the same house with a wife whom he married
before being ordained. This Council thus declared clerical marriages not only
illicit though valid, as before, but invalid ("we do not regard as matrimony").
The marriages in question are, again, those contracted by men who already are
"bishops, priests, deacons, subdeacons, canons regular, monks and professed
clerics". And later legislation, found especially in the Quinque Compilationes
Antiquae and the Decretals of Gregory IX, continued to deal with questions
concerning married men who were ordained legally. In 1322 Pope John XXII
insisted that no one bound in marriage—even if unconsummated—could be
ordained unless there was full knowledge of the requirements of Church law. If
the free consent of the wife had not been obtained, the husband, even if
already ordained, was to be reunited with his wife, exercise of his ministry
being barred. Accordingly, the assumption that a wife might not want to give up
her marital rights may have been one of the factors contributing to the
eventual universal practice in the Latin Church of ordaining only unmarried
men. However, although the decrees of the Second Council of the Lateran might
still be interpreted in the older sense of prohibiting marriage only after
ordination, they came to be understood as absolute prohibitions, and, while the
fact of being married was formally made a canonical impediment to ordination
only with the 1917 Code of Canon Law, the prohibition of marriage for all
clerics in major orders began to be taken simply for granted. The Second
Lateran Council is thus often cited as having for the first time introduced a
general law of celibacy, requiring ordination only of unmarried men. The New
Catholic Encyclopedia states: "The Second Lateran Council (1139) seems to have
enacted the first written law making sacred orders a diriment impediment to
marriage for the universal Church.". Sixteenth century. While the 11th century
Gregorian Reform's campaign against clerical marriage and concubinage met
strong opposition, by the time of the Second Lateran Council it had won
widespread support from lay and ecclesiastical leaders. New opposition appeared
in connection with the Protestant Reformation, not only on the part of the
Reformers, but also among churchmen and others who remained in union with the
see of Rome. Figures such as Panormitanus, Erasmus, Thomas Cajetan, and the
Holy Roman Emperors Charles V, Ferdinand I and Maximilian II argued against it.
In practice, the discipline of clerical continence meant by then that only
unmarried men were ordained. Thus, in the discussions that took place, no
distinction was made between clerical continence and clerical celibacy. The
Reformers made abolition of clerical continence and celibacy a key element in
their reform. They denounced it as opposed to the New Testament recommendation
that a cleric should be "the husband of one wife" (see on above), the declared
right of the apostles to take around with them a believing Christian as a wife
() and the admonition, "Marriage should be honoured by all" (). They blamed it
for widespread sexual misconduct among the clergy. Against the long-standing
tradition of the Church in the East as well as in the West, which excluded
marriage after ordination, Zwingli married in 1522, Luther in 1525, and Calvin
in 1539. And against what had also become, though seemingly at a later date, a
tradition in both East and West, the married Thomas Cranmer was made Archbishop
of Canterbury in 1533. The Council of Trent considered the matter and at its
twenty-fourth session decreed that marriage after ordination was invalid: "If
any one saith, that clerics constituted in sacred orders, or Regulars, who have
solemnly professed chastity, are able to contract marriage, and that being
contracted it is valid, notwithstanding the ecclesiastical law, or vow; and
that the contrary is no thing else than to condemn marriage; and, that all who
do not feel that they have the gift of chastity, even though they have made a
vow thereof, may contract marriage; let him be anathema: seeing that God
refuses not that gift to those who ask for it rightly, neither does He suffer
us to be tempted above that which we are able" (canon 9). It also decreed,
concerning the relative dignity of marriage and celibacy: "If any one saith,
that the marriage state is to be placed above the state of virginity, or of
celibacy, and that it is not better and more blessed to remain in virginity, or
in celibacy, than to be united in matrimony; let him be anathema." Modern Roman
Catholic Church. Celibacy is represented in the Roman Catholic Church as having
apostolic authority. Theologically, the Church desires to imitate the life of
Jesus with regard to chastity and the sacrifice of married life for the "sake
of the Kingdom" (Luke 18:28–30, Matthew 19:27–30; Mark 10:20–21), and to
follow the example of Jesus Christ in being "married" to the Church, viewed by
Catholicism and many Christian traditions as the "Bride of Christ". Also of
importance are the teachings of St. Paul that chastity is the superior state of
life, and his desire expressed in I Corinthians 7:7–8, "I would that all men
were even as myself —but every one has his proper gift from God; one after
this manner, and another after that. But I say to the unmarried and the widows.
It is good for them if they so continue, even as I." Practically speaking, the
reasons for celibacy are given by the Apostle Paul in I Corinthians 7:7–8;
32–35: "But I would have you to be without solicitude. He that is without a
wife is solicitous for the things that belong to the Lord, how he may please
God. But he that is with a wife, is solicitous for the things of the world, how
he may please his wife: and he is divided. And the unmarried woman and the
virgin thinketh on the things of the Lord, that she may be holy both in body
and spirit. But she that is married thinketh on the things of this world how
she may please her husband. And this I speak for your profit, not to cast a
snare upon you, but for that which is decent and which may give you power to
attend upon the Lord without impediment." I Corinthians 9:5 is sometimes cited
by those opposed to celibacy, as the verse is often rendered as referring to
the Apostles carrying "wives" with them. Even apart from disputes about the
significance of the word translated as "wives", this passage is of doubtful
relevance to the rule of celibacy for priests of the Latin Church, which was
introduced much later and is seen only as a "discipline" within that particular
Church alone, not a "doctrine" binding all: in other words, a church
regulation, but not an integral part of Church teaching. St. Peter, often seen
as the first pope, as well as many subsequent popes, bishops, and priests
during the church's first 270 years were in fact married men, and often fathers
of children. The practice of clerical continence, along with a prohibition of
marriage after ordination as a deacon, priest or bishop, is traceable from the
time of the Council of Elvira. This law was reinforced in the Directa Decretal
(385) and at the Council of Carthage in 390. The tradition of clerical
continence developed into a practice of clerical celibacy (ordaining only
unmarried men) from the 11th century onward among Latin Rite Catholics and
became a formal part of canon law in 1917. This law of clerical celibacy does
not apply to Eastern Catholics. Until recently, the Eastern Catholic bishops of
North America would generally ordain only unmarried men, for fear that married
priests would create scandal. Since Vatican II's call for the restoration of
Eastern Catholic traditions, a number of bishops have returned to the
traditional practice of ordaining married men to the presbyterate. Bishops are
still celibate and normally chosen from the ranks of monks. In the Latin Rite
exceptions are sometimes made. After the Second Vatican Council a general
exception was made for the ordination as deacons of men of at least thirty-five
years of age who are not intended to be ordained later as priests and whose
wives consent to their ordination. Since the time of Pope Pius XII individual
exceptions are sometimes made for former non-Catholic clergymen. Under the
rules proposed for personal ordinariates for former Anglicans, the ordinary may
request the Pope to grant authorization, on a case-by-case basis, for admission
to ordination in the Catholic Church of married former Anglican clergy (see
Personal ordinariate#Married former Anglican clergy and rules on celibacy).
Because the rule of clerical celibacy is a law and not a doctrine, exceptions
can be made, and it can, in principle, be changed at any time by the Pope.
Nonetheless, both the present Pope, Benedict XVI, and his predecessor, spoke
clearly of their understanding that the traditional practice is unlikely to
change.
