Closed communion Closed communion is the practice of restricting the serving of
the elements of Holy Communion (also called Eucharist, The Lord's Supper) to
those who are members of a particular church, denomination, sect, or
congregation. Though the meaning of the term varies slightly in different
Christian theological traditions, it generally means that a church or
denomination limits participation either to members of their own church,
members of their own denomination, or members of some specific class (e.g.,
baptized members of evangelical churches). See also intercommunion. Definition.
A closed-communion Church is one that (perhaps with exceptions in unusual
circumstances) excludes non-members from receiving communion. The Roman
Catholic Church (including all its component particular Churches, whether Latin
or Eastern) practices closed communion. However, provided that "necessity
requires it or true spiritual advantage suggests it" and that the danger of
error or indifferentism is avoided, it allows those of its members who cannot
approach a Catholic minister to receive the Eucharist from ministers of
churches that have a valid Eucharist. It also permits properly disposed members
of the Eastern churches and of churches judged to be in the same situation with
regard to the sacraments to receive the Eucharist from Catholic ministers, if
they seek it of their own accord. The "Directory for the Application of
Principles and Norms on Ecumenism" warns that "due consideration should be
given to the discipline of the Eastern Churches for their own faithful and any
suggestion of proselytism should be avoided." Western Christians who do not
share the Roman Catholic theology of the Eucharist (such as those who follow
Reformed Protestant teaching on the matter) are absolutely excluded. Those who
do personally share Catholic belief in the Eucharist (as the body and blood of
the risen Christ, accompanied by his soul and divinity, under the appearances
of bread and wine) are permitted to receive the sacrament when there is danger
of death or, in the judgement of the diocesan bishop or of the episcopal
conference, some other grave necessity urges it and on condition that "the
person be unable to have recourse for the sacrament to a minister of his or her
own Church or ecclesial Community, ask for the sacrament of his or her own
initiative, manifest Catholic faith in the sacrament and be properly disposed".
The Eastern Orthodox Church, comprising 14 or 15 autocephalous Orthodox
hierarchical churches, is even more strictly a closed-communion Church. Thus, a
member of the Russian Orthodox Church attending the Divine Liturgy in a Greek
Orthodox Church will be allowed to receive communion and "vice versa", but a
Protestant or a Roman Catholic attending an Orthodox Divine Liturgy will be
excluded from communion, although they may otherwise fully participate in the
worship service. In the strictest sense, non-Orthodox may be present at the
Divine Liturgy only up to the exclamation "The doors! The doors!" and ought to
leave the church after that. However, this attitude has been relaxed in most
Orthodox churches; a non-communicant may stay and participate in the Divine
Liturgy but may not partake of the Eucharist. Thus, while in certain conditions
the Roman Catholic Church allows its faithful who cannot approach a Catholic
minister to receive the Eucharist from an Eastern Orthodox priest, the Eastern
Orthodox Church does not admit Roman Catholics to its Mystery of the Eucharist.
At the very end of the Divine Liturgy, all people come up to receive a little
piece of bread, called Antidoron, which is blessed but not consecrated, being
taken from the same loaf as the bread used in the consecration. Non-Orthodox
present at the Liturgy are not only permitted but even encouraged to receive
the Antidoron as an expression of Christian fellowship and love. The Strict
Baptists in the United Kingdom derive their name from the practice of closed
communion. Among some Baptist churches, "closed communion" is the practice of
restricting communion (or The Lord's Supper) to only those who hold membership
in the local church that is observing the ordinance. Thus, members from other
churches, even other Baptist churches, will be excluded from participating in
the communion service. In the United States, this viewpoint is usually, though
not exclusively, associated with Landmark ecclesiology. Among the modern
descendants of the Anabaptists, the Amish, Old Order Mennonites, Conservative
Mennonites all practice what they term "Close communion" which restricts
communion to members of a local congregation only. Most Lutheran churches
practice "closed communion" and require catechetical instruction for all people
before receiving the Eucharist. Failing to do so is condemned by these
Lutherans as the sin of unionism. This teaching comes from 1 Corinthians 10:16-
17 which says, "Is not the cup of thanksgiving for which we give thanks a
participation in the blood of Christ? And is not the bread that we break a
participation in the body of Christ? Because there is one loaf, we, who are
many, are one body, for we all share the one loaf" and Paul's teaching of
fellowship in 1 Corinthians 1:10, "I appeal to you, brothers and sisters, in
the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that all of you agree with one another in
what you say and that there be no divisions among you, but that you be
perfectly united in mind and thought." These Lutherans also take seriously
God's threat in 1 Corinthians 11:27,29 that "Whoever eats the bread or drinks
the cup of the Lord in an unworthy manner will be guilty of sinning against the
body and blood of the Lord. A man ought to examine himself before he eats of
the bread and drinks of this cup. For anyone who eats and drinks without
recognizing the body of the Lord eats and drinks judgment on himself."
Therefore, the belief is that, inviting those forward who have not been first
instructed would be unloving on the church's part, because they would inviting
people forward to sin. This is ascribed as akin to letting someone drink poison
without stopping him The Evangelical Lutheran Church in America (ELCA), the
largest Lutheran Church in America, however, practices their own form of open
communion meaning the Eucharist is offered to adults without receiving the
catechetical instruction, as long as they are a baptized believer in Christ's
presence in the Eucharistic meal. The Apostolic Christian Church, Church of God
in Christ, Exclusive Brethren, some Mennonite, Amish, some churches in the
Reformed tradition and Primitive Baptists also practice closed communion. Other
groups that practice closed communion are Jehovah's Witnesses. "Close
Communion". The term "close communion" normally means the same thing as "closed
communion". However, some make a distinction, so the terms can be a source of
confusion. The most prominent distinction (which in some circles may be called
"cracked communion") is one where a member of a congregation holding the "same
faith and practice" as the hosting congregation (generally meaning being a
member of a congregation in the same or a similar denomination) may participate
in the service, but a member of another denomination may not. For example, a
Southern Baptist congregation practicing close communion might allow a member
of another Southern Baptist congregation to participate, on the premise that
both congregations are of the "same faith and practice" as they are both in the
same denomination. Similarly, the Southern Baptist congregation might allow a
member of an Independent Baptist congregation to participate; though the
congregations are of different denominations the differences between them are
mainly in the area of church organization and not in doctrinal issues, thus
falling under the "same faith and practice" rule. However, the congregation
would thus exclude a Catholic, on the basis that Baptists and Catholics are not
of the "same faith and practice". The Reformed Presbyterian Church of Australia
allows communion to those who can assent to the first three terms of its
Covenant of Church Membership, and discuss this with the elders ahead of time.
They don't appear to distinguish the term "close communion" from "closed
communion", though. The earliest use of "close communion" comes from a
mistranslation of the Lutheran theologian Franz August Otto Pieper's "Christian
Dogmatics". The term has since spread, although both the first edition and
later translations corrected the error to "closed communion." Supporting
belief. Complex reasons underlie the belief. In 1 Corinthians 10, it is
written: "The chalice of benediction which we bless, is it not the communion of
the blood of Christ? And the bread which we break, is it not the partaking of
the body of the Lord? For we, being many, are one bread, one body: all that
partake of one bread." Since all Christians are now no longer of a unity that
would allow common celebration of the Eucharist between them all, the bread
being a visible sign of union, communion is not taken together between
separated Churches and communities. Additionally as described in 1Co 11:29:
"For he that eateth and drinketh unworthily, eateth and drinketh damnation to
himself, not discerning the Lord's body." It is deemed better to prevent
outsiders from taking communion than to risk them taking communion
"unworthily". Catholics thus see the communion as sinful for those who do not
recognise the Real Presence or who are otherwise 'unworthy', i.e. who are not
in the 'right place' to accept the Eucharist (free of mortal sin). Christian
communities that keep close communion often also have accountability within
those members that partake of the communion, so that they do not run afoul of
this problem. Such communities will also delay taking communion until the
members (the church body) can take communion in Christian unity, as required by
1Co 11:33 "Wherefore, my brethren, when ye come together to eat, tarry one for
another." Justin Martyr indicated that the second-century Christian Church had
three requirements for sharing in the Eucharist: identity of belief, Christian
baptism, and moral life. "No one may share in the eucharist except those who
believe in the truth of our teachings and have been washed in the bath which
confers forgiveness of sins and rebirth, and who live according to Christ's
commands" ("First Apology", 66). Corporate responsibility is another argument
often used in favour of closed communion. The Heidelberg Catechism, for
example, says that those who "by confession and life, declare themselves
unbelieving and ungodly" are not to be admitted to the Lord's Supper, for then
"the covenant of God would be profaned, and his wrath kindled against the whole
congregation." Church leaders are obliged to do all they can to ensure that
this does not happen, and hence "exclude such persons... till they show
amendment of life," (Q & A 82). Position of the Roman Catholic Church. The
Roman Catholic Church does not practise open communion, holding that reception
of Holy Communion is reserved for those who are baptized. In general it permits
access to its Eucharistic communion only to those who share its oneness in
faith, worship and ecclesial life. For the same reasons, it also recognizes
that in certain circumstances, by way of exception, and under certain
conditions, access to these sacraments may be permitted for Christians of other
Churches and ecclesial Communities. Thus it permits Eastern Christians who are
not in full communion with the Catholic Church (Eastern Orthodox Church,
Oriental Orthodoxy and Assyrian Church of the East) to receive Communion from
Catholic ministers, if they request it of their own accord and are properly
disposed, and it applies the same rule also to some Western Churches that the
Holy See judges to be in a situation similar to that of Eastern Christians with
regard to the sacraments. For other baptized Christians (Anglicans, Lutherans,
and other Protestants) the conditions are more severe. Only in danger of death
or if, in the judgement of the local bishop, there is a grave and pressing
need, may members of these Churches who cannot approach a minister of their own
Church be admitted to receive the Eucharist, if they spontaneously ask for it,
demonstrate that they have the catholic faith in the Eucharist, and are
properly disposed. The Catholic Church allows its own faithful to receive
Communion from ministers of another Church, only if it recognizes the validity
of the sacraments of that Church, and so it never allows reception of Communion
as administered in Protestant churches, the validity of whose orders it denies.
Other conditions are that it is physically or morally impossible to approach a
Catholic minister, that it is a case of real need or spiritual benefit, and
that the danger of error or indifferentism is avoided. The Roman Catholic
Church thus makes a clear distinction between Churches according as it
recognizes or denies the validity of their celebration of the Eucharist. It
does not allow a Catholic to receive communion in a Protestant church, since it
considers that Protestant ministers are not ordained as priests by a bishop in
a line of valid succession from the apostles. It applies this rule also to the
Anglican Communion, a position that the Church of England disputed in "Saepius
Officio". Fenced table. In Protestant theology, a fenced table is a communion
table which is open only to accredited members of the Christian community.
Fencing the table is thus the opposite of open communion, where the invitation
to the sacrament is extended to "all who love the Lord" and members of any
denomination are welcome at their own discretion. The phrase goes back to early
Scottish Calvinism, where the communion table literally had a fence around it,
with a gate at each end. The members of the congregation were allowed to pass
the gate on showing their communion token, a specially minted coin which served
as an admission ticket and was given only to those who were in good standing
with the local congregation and could pass a test of the catechism. Examples of
this kind of church furnishing are still to be seen in a very few highland
churches. The phrase "fencing the table" is also used metaphorically for other
kinds of group demarcation and restrictive practices. Communion tokens. Many
Scottish Protestant churches used to give tokens to members passing a religious
test prior to the day of communion, then required the token for entry. Some US
and other churches also used communion tokens.
