College of Pontiffs The College of Pontiffs or Collegium Pontificum (see
"collegium") was a body of the ancient Roman state whose members were the
highest-ranking priests of the state religion. The college consisted of the
Pontifex Maximus, the Vestal Virgins, the Rex Sacrorum, and the flamines. The
College of Pontiffs was one of the four major priestly colleges, the others
being of the augurs, the "quindecimviri sacris faciundis" ("fifteen men who
carry out the rites"), and the Epulones. The title "pontifex" comes from the
Latin for "bridge builder", a possible allusion to a very early role in
placating the gods and spirits associated with the Tiber River, for instance.
Also, Varro cites this position as meaning "able to do". The pontifex maximus
was the most important member of the college. Until 104 BC, the pontifex
maximus held the sole power in appointing members to the other priesthoods in
the college. The flamens were priests in charge of fifteen official cults of
Roman religion, each assigned to a particular god. The three major flamens "
(flamines maiores)" were the Flamen Dialis, the high priest of Jupiter; the
Flamen Martialis, who cultivated Mars; and the Flamen Quirinalis, devoted to
Quirinus. The deities cultivated by the twelve "flamines minores" were
Carmenta, Ceres, Falacer, Flora, Furrina, Palatua, Pomona, Portunes, Volcanus
(Vulcan), Volturnus, and two whose names are lost. The Vestal Virgins were the
only female members of the college. They were in charge of guarding Rome's
sacred hearth, keeping the flame burning inside the Temple of Vesta. Around age
6 to 10, girls were chosen for this position and were obligated to perform the
rites and obligations, including remaining chaste, for 30 years. Membership.
Membership in the various colleges of priests, including the College of
Pontiffs, was usually an honor offered to members of politically powerful or
wealthy families. Membership was for life, except for the Vestal Virgins whose
term was 30 years. In the early Republic, only patricians could become priests.
However, the "Lex Ogulnia" in 300 BC opened up college to plebeians. Until the
3rd century BC, the college elected the pontifex maximus from their own number.
The right of the college to elect their own pontifex maximus was returned, but
the circumstances surrounding this are unclear. This changed again after Sulla,
when in response to his reforms, the election of the pontifex maximus was once
again placed in the hands of an assembly of seventeen of the twenty-five
tribes. However, the college still controlled which candidates the assembly
voted on. During the Empire, the office was publicly elected from the
candidates of existing pontiffs, until the Emperors began to automatically
assume the title, following Julius Caesar’s example. The pontifex maximus was
a powerful political position to hold and the candidates for office were often
very active political members of the college. Many, such as Julius Caesar, went
on to hold consulships during their time as pontifex maximus. Role in the Roman
State. During the Regal Period of Roman history, the pontiffs were primarily
concilia (advisers) of the kings, but after the expulsion of the last Roman
King Lucius Tarquinius Superbus in 510 BC, the College of Pontiffs became
religious advisers to the Roman Senate. As the most important of the four
priestly colleges, the college of pontiffs’ duties involved advising the
senate on issues pertaining to the gods, the supervision of the calendar and
thus the supervision of ceremonies with their specific rituals, and the
appeasement of the gods upon the appearance of prodigies. One of their most
important duties was their guardianship of the "libri pontificales", or
pontifical books. Among these were the "acta", "indigitamenta" (lists of
invocations or names of deities), "ritualia", "commentarii", "fasti", and
"annales" (yearly records of magistrates and important events). These items
were under the sole possession of the college of pontiffs and only they were
allowed to consult these items when necessary. The lex Acilia bestowed power on
the college to manage the calendar. Thus, they determined the days which
religious and political meetings could be held, when sacrifices could be
offered, votes cast, and senatorial decisions brought forth. The College of
Pontiffs came to occupy the Regia (the old palace of the kings) during the
early Republican Period. They came to replace the religious authority that was
once held by the king. A position, the Rex Sacrorum, was even created to
replace the king for purposes of religious ceremonies. When Christianity became
the official religion of the Roman Empire, after the decree of Theodosius I in
381, the Bishop of Rome (Pope) became the de facto governor of the city as the
emperors had moved their administration to Constantinople. Around 440, Pope Leo
I began using the title Pontifex Maximus to emphasize the civil authority of
the Pope and the continuity of imperial power. The term "chief priests" in the
New Testament (e.g. Mark 15:11) is translated as "Pontifices" in the Latin
Vulgate and "high priest" as "Pontifex" in Hebrews 2:17, etc.
