College of Cardinals The College of Cardinals is the body of all cardinals of
the Catholic Church. A function of the college is to advise the pope about
church matters when he summons them to an ordinary consistory. It also convenes
on the death or resignation of a pope as a papal conclave to elect a successor.
The college has no ruling power except during the "sede vacante" (papal
vacancy) period, and even then its powers are extremely limited by the terms of
the current law, which is laid down in the Apostolic constitution "Universi
Dominici Gregis" and the Fundamental Law of Vatican City State. Historically,
cardinals were the clergy of the city of Rome, serving the Bishop of Rome as
the Pope, who had clerical duties in parishes of the city. The College has its
origins in the events surrounding the crowning of Henry IV as King of Germany
and Holy Roman Emperor at the age of six, after the unexpected death of Henry
III in 1056. Up until this point secular authorities had significant influence
over who was to be appointed Pope, and the Holy Roman Emperor in particular had
the special ability to appoint him. This was significant as the aims and views
of the Holy Roman Emperor and the Church did not always coincide. Members of
what was to become known as the Gregorian Reform took advantage of the new King
and his lack of power, and in 1059 declared that the election of the Pope was
an affair only for the Church. This was part of a larger power struggle, named
the Investiture Controversy, as the Church attempted to gain more control over
their clergy, and in doing so gain more influence in the lands and governments
they were appointed to. Theological implications aside, its creation
represented a significant shift in the balance of power in the Early Medieval
world. From the beginning of the 12th century, the College of Cardinals started
to meet as a college, when the cardinal bishops, cardinal priests, and cardinal
deacons ceased acting as separate groups. The Dean of the College of Cardinals
and the Sub-Dean are the president and vice-president of the college. Both are
elected by and from the cardinals holding suburbicarian dioceses, but the
election requires Papal confirmation. Except for presiding, the dean has no
power of governance over the cardinals, instead acting as "primus inter pares"
(first among equals). The Secretary of State, the prefects of the Congregations
of the Roman Curia, the Camerlengo of the Holy Roman Church, the Vicar General
of Rome, and the Patriarchs of Venice and Lisbon, are usually Cardinals, with
few, generally temporary, exceptions. The Fundamental Law of Vatican City State
requires that appointees to the state's legislative body, the Pontifical
Commission for Vatican City State, be cardinals. Choosing the Pope. Under the
terms of Pope Paul VI's motu proprio "Ingravescentem Aetatem", cardinals who
had reached the age of 80 before the conclave opened had no vote in papal
elections. The current rules for the election of the Roman Pontiff, those in
Pope John Paul II's "Universi Dominici Gregis" of 22 February 1996, state that
cardinals who have reached the age of 80 before the day the see becomes vacant
do not have a vote. Although the canonical qualifications required of
candidates for episcopacy, indicated in canon 378 of the Code of Canon Law,
leave a broad field open to the cardinals, they have in fact for over six
centuries consistently elected one of their own number to be Bishop of Rome.
The last time they chose someone who was not a cardinal was at the 1378
election of Pope Urban VI. However, the conclave rules specify the procedures
to be followed, should someone residing outside Vatican City or not yet a
bishop be elected. Members of the College of Cardinals. The following is the
list of all living Cardinals as of 25 September 2012. Cardinals are shown in
order of precedence, based on seniority by date of appointment. Paulo Evaristo
Arns is the most senior member of the College by length of service (the
Protopriest); he is the last surviving from the 1973 consistory. Angelo Sodano,
however, has the highest precedence as a Cardinal Bishop as Dean of the College
of Cardinals. Cardinals who have reached the age of 80 are indicated with an
asterisk (*). Renato Martino will be the next Cardinal to lose his right to
participate in the conclave on 23 November 2012. The oldest living Cardinal is
currently Ersilio Tonini. There are now a total of 205 Cardinals, of whom 115
are aged under 80. Of the voting-age cardinals, 54 were appointed by Pope John
Paul II, and 61 by Pope Benedict XVI. All but thirteen of the Cardinals alive
at the death of Pope John Paul II were appointed by him. Three of those
thirteen were under 80 years old as of the day of John Paul II's death. One of
those three, Joseph Ratzinger, was elected Pope in the resulting conclave and
took the name Benedict XVI, another one (Jaime Sin) did not attend that
conclave for health reasons and died shortly afterwards, and the third, William
Wakefield Baum, turned 80 on 21 November 2006. Most of the Cardinals are from
the Latin Church, those who are from the Eastern Catholic Churches have their
church explicitly indicated. Within the College of Cardinals, there are three
categories, ranked Cardinal Bishops, then Cardinal Priests, and finally
Cardinal Deacons, within each category the Cardinals are ranked by seniority of
appointment. Despite these titles, in fact since the pontificate of Pope John
XXIII almost all Cardinals who were not already bishops at the time their
appointment was announced have been ordained bishops prior to the conclusion of
the formal installation, though in the last years the Jesuit priests made
cardinals when they are already over 80 have generally petitioned not to become
bishops and have received permission in this sense. Cardinals of the Order of
Bishops. Titular Bishops of Seven Suburbicarian Sees Patriarchs of Eastern
Catholic Churches Cardinals of the Order of Priests. Appointed by Pope Paul VI.
Consistory of 5 March 1973 Consistory of 24 May 1976 Appointed by Pope John
Paul II. Consistory of 30 June 1979 Consistory of 2 February 1983 Consistory of
25 May 1985 Consistory of 28 June 1988 Consistory of 28 June 1991 Consistory of
26 November 1994 Consistory of 21 February 1998 Consistory of 21 February 2001
Consistory of 21 October 2003 Appointed by Pope Benedict XVI. Consistory of 24
March 2006 Consistory of 24 November 2007 Consistory of 20 November 2010
Consistory of 18 February 2012 Cardinals of the Order of Deacons. Cardinal-
Deacons have the right to apply to become Cardinal-Priests after ten years as a
Cardinal-Deacon. All living eligible Cardinal-Deacons have exercised this
right. Appointed by Pope John Paul II. Consistory of 21 October 2003 Appointed
by Pope Benedict XVI. Consistory of 24 March 2006 Consistory of 24 November
2007 Consistory of 20 November 2010 Consistory of 18 February 2012 Size of the
College of Cardinals. The size of the College of Cardinals at any given moment
has historically been limited by popes, ecumenical councils, and even the
College itself. Over the period from 1099 to 1986, the total number of
cardinals appointed was approximately 2900 (excluding possible undocumented
12th century cardinals, cardinals appointed during the Western Schism by
pontiffs now considered to be antipopes, and subject to some other sources of
uncertainty), nearly half of whom were created after 1655.
