Comparative religion Comparative religion is that branch of the study of
religions concerned with the systematic comparison of the doctrines and
practices of the world's religions. There are many benefits to such a course of
enquiry but in general the comparative study of religion yields a deeper
understanding of the fundamental philosophical concerns of religion such as
ethics, metaphysics and the nature and form of salvation. A person who has
undertaken such a course of study has a much richer and more sophisticated
understanding of human beliefs and practices regarding the sacred, numinous,
spiritual and divine. In the field of comparative religion, the main world
religions are generally classified as Abrahamic, Indian or Taoic. Areas of
study also include creation myths and Humanism. Abrahamic religions. In the
study of comparative religion, the category of Abrahamic religions consists of
the three monotheistic religions, Christianity, Islam and Judaism, which claim
Abraham (Hebrew "Avraham" אַבְרָהָם ; Arabic "Ibrahim" إبراهيم
) as a part of their sacred history. Other religions (such as the Bahá'í
Faith) that fit this description are sometimes included but are often omitted.
The original belief in the One God of Abraham eventually became present-day
Rabbinic Judaism. Christians believe that Christianity is the fulfillment and
continuation of the Jewish Old Testament. Christians believe that Jesus (Hebrew
"Yeshua" יֵשׁוּעַ) is the Messiah (Christ) foretold in the Old
Testament prophecy, and believe in subsequent New Testament revelations based
on the divine authority of Jesus in Christian belief (as the Incarnation of
God). Islam believes the present Christian and Jewish scriptures have been
corrupted over time and are no longer the original divine revelations as given
to Moses, Jesus, and other prophets. For Muslims, the "Qur'an" is the final,
complete revelation from God (Arabic الله "Allah"), who believe it to have
been revealed to Muhammad, who is believed by Muslims to be the final prophet
of Islam. Comparing Abrahamic religions. Christianity and Judaism are two
closely related Abrahamic religions that in some ways parallel each other and
in other ways diverge in theology and practice. The historical interaction of
Islam and Judaism started in the 7th century CE with the origin and spread of
Islam. There are many common aspects between Islam and Judaism, and as Islam
developed, it gradually became the major religion closest to Judaism. As
opposed to Christianity which originated from interaction between ancient Greek
and Hebrew cultures, Judaism is very similar to Islam in its fundamental
religious outlook, structure, jurisprudence and practice. There are many
traditions within Islam originating from traditions within the Hebrew Bible or
from post-biblical Jewish traditions. These practices are known collectively as
the Isra'iliyat. The historical interaction between Christianity and Islam
connects fundamental ideas in Christianity with similar ones in Islam. Islam
and Christianity share their origins in the Abrahamic tradition, although
Christianity predates Islam by centuries. Islam accepts many aspects of
Christianity as part of its faith - with some differences in interpretation -
and rejects other aspects. Islam believes the Qur'an is the final revelation
from God and a completion of all previous revelations, including the Bible.
Indian and Indo-European religions. The term "Indian religions" refers to a
number of religions that have originated on the Indian subcontinent tracing
their origins through Proto-Indo-Iranian religion ultimately to Proto-Indo-
European religion. They encompass Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism, and Sikhism.
Other largely extinct Indo-European religions closely allied to the Indian
religions, sharing a common history, include Zoroastrianism, ancient Greek,
Celtic, Roman, Hittite, Slavic and Norse mythology. Comparing "Dharmic"
religions. Buddhism and modern Hinduism are both post-Vedic religions. Gautama
Buddha is mentioned as an Avatar of Vishnu in the Puranic texts of Hinduism.
Some Hindus believe the Buddha accepted and incorporated many tenets of
Hinduism in his doctrine, however, Buddhists disagree and state there was no
such thing as Hinduism at the time of Buddha and in fact, "Indeed, it absorbed
so many Buddhist traits that it is virtually impossible to distinguish the
latter in medieval and later Hinduism." Prominent Hindu reformers such as
Gandhi and Vivekananda acknowledge Buddhist influence. Gandhi, like Hindus, did
not believe Buddha established a non-Hindu tradition. He writes, "I do not
regard Jainism or Buddhism as separate from Hinduism." Taoic religions. A Taoic
religion is a religion, or religious philosophy, that focuses on the East Asian
concept of "Tao" ("The Way"). This forms a large group of religions including
Taoism, Confucianism, Jeung San Do, Shinto, Yiguandao, Chondogyo, Chen Tao and
Caodaism. In large parts of East Asia, Buddhism has taken on some taoic
features. "Tao" can be roughly stated to be the flow of the universe, or the
force behind the natural order. It is believed to be the influence that keeps
the universe balanced and ordered and is associated with nature, due to a
belief that nature demonstrates the "Tao". The flow of "Ch'i", as the essential
energy of action and existence, is compared to the universal order of "Tao".
Following the "Tao" is also associated with a "proper" attitude, morality and
lifestyle. This is intimately tied to the complex concept of "De", or literally
"virtue" or "power." "De" is the active expression of "Tao". Taoism and Ch'an
Buddhism for centuries had a mutual influence on each other in China, Korea and
Vietnam. These influences were inherited by Zen Buddhism when Ch'an Buddhism
arrived in Japan and adapted as Zen Buddhism. Comparing traditions. Bahá'í
Faith Buddhism Christianity Hinduism Islam Jainism Mormonism Paganism and
Neopaganism Sikhism Taoism Zoroastrianism
