Concordat A concordat is an agreement between the Holy See of the Catholic
Church and a sovereign state on religious matters. Legally, it is an
international treaty. Concordats often include both recognition and privileges
for the Catholic Church in a particular country. Privileges might include
exemptions from certain legal matters and processes, and issues such as
taxation as well as the right of a state to influence the selection of bishops
within its territory. The Council of Constance proclaimed the Concordat to be
the regular form of governing relations between the Papacy and foreign
kingdoms. Although for a time after the Second Vatican Council, which ended in
1965, the term 'concordat' was dropped, it reappeared with the Polish Concordat
of 1993 and the Portuguese Concordat of 2004. A different model of relations
between the Vatican and various states is still evolving (see e.g. Petkoff
2007) in the wake of the Second Vatican Council's Declaration on Religious
Liberty, "Dignitatis Humanae". Criticism. From a Church-State perspective, the
contentions regarding Concordats involves two perspectives. "From a Catholic
perspective", the Church has the moral and theological right to enter into
diplomatic relations with states in order to reach agreements regarding the
care of its members residing there. This is the concept of "libertas
ecclesiastica" (freedom of the Church). However, "from a non-Catholic
perspective" (NOT an anti-Catholic perspective), this poses certain concerns
regarding religious freedom, such as: 1) Concordats give to the Church a
privileged position that other religious groups are denied (European history in
numerous books reveals this fact), 2) Concordats are not "the same as treaties"
because they are entered into by an entity that is BOTH religious and political
in nature, viz., the Catholic Church, whereas any other treaty is between two
sovereign entities on a horizontal level, i.e., purely political in nature, and
3) depending on the negotiations agreed upon in the Concordat, some religious
groups face the threat of being marginalized (example: in Spain, although the
Constitution guarantees religious freedom (theoretically), yet in practice, the
Church is mentioned by name and holds a pre-eminent position among other
religious groups. In recent years, debate has occurred regarding whether the
Spanish government should maintain a concordat with the Vatican. Some
concordats guarantee the Catholic Church the tax-exempt status of a charity,
either stating this explicitly, as in Brazil (2008, Article 15) and Italy
(1984, Article 7.3), or phrasing it indirectly, as in Portugal (2004, art. 12).
When the political will is present, such concordat privileges can be extended
by domestic legislation. In 1992 the tax exemption granted the Church by the
Italian concordat was interpreted by a law which permits the Catholic Church to
avoid paying 90% of what it owes to the state for its commercial activities.
Thus, a small shrine within the walls of a cinema, holiday resort, shop,
restaurant or hotel is sufficient to confer religious exemption. In June 2007
Neelie Kroes, the European Commissioner for Competition announced an
investigation of this. Then, in August, the deputy finance minister in Romano
Prodi’s fragile center-left coalition said the issue needed to be tackled in
the next year's budget. However, after that nothing more about this was heard
from the Barroso Commission and a few months later the Prodi government fell.
Another way to keep Church income untaxed is to keep it secret. The Slovak
concordat (2000, art. 20.2) ensures that church offertories are “not subject
to taxation or to the requirement of public accountability”. This is also the
case in Côte d'Ivoire, where far larger sums are involved. The Basilica at
Yamoussoukro, is estimated to have cost $300 million, and the additional
running expenses for what is the largest church in the world are also shielded
from scrutiny by the 1992 concordat concluded with the Ivorian dictator.
Houphouët-Boigny claimed that these funds came from his private fortune. A
Vatican official is reported to have called it the agreement over the
foundation set up to administer these funds “a delicate matter”. This
spending was heavily criticised, since in Côte d'Ivoire most people die before
they reach the age of 50. Nevertheless, this concordat ensures that the
foundation’s income and assets remain untaxed (art. 9.1), it holds these
funds beyond the reach of both criminal and civil law (art. 7.1), it permits
this money to be sent out of the country (art. 13.2) and it keeps all the
foundation’s documents “inviolable”, in other words, secret (art. 8). In
Colombia there was a crisis between state and church in 1994 when Attroeny-
General Gustavo de Greiff accused several Bishops of having illegal contacts
with the Farc guerrillas. It turned out that under Columbia's concordat with
the Holy See, members of the clergy could only be investigated by
ecclesiastical courts which are ruled by canon law, and that the Bishops were
therefore immune from investigation by the civil authorities on what many in
Columbia considered to be a serious felony. List. "Further information:
Treaties of the Holy See, Multilateral Treaties signed by the Holy See and
Concordats with individual states of Germany" The following is a sortable list
of the concordats and other bilateral agreements concluded by the Holy See.
