Confession (religion) Confession is the acknowledgment of sin (or one's
sinfulness) or wrongs. It is a religious practice in a number of faith
traditions. Christianity. Catholicism. In Catholic teaching, the Sacrament of
Penance is the method of the Church by which individual men and women may
confess sins committed after baptism and have them absolved by a priest.
Although it is not mandatory, the Catholic rite is traditionally conducted
within a confessional box or booth. This sacrament is known by many names,
including penance, reconciliation and confession ("Catechism of the Catholic
Church", Sections 1423-1442). While official Church publications always refer
to the sacrament as "Penance", "Reconciliation" or "Penance and
Reconciliation", many laypeople continue to use the term "Confession" in
reference to the Sacrament. For the Catholic Church, the intent of this
sacrament is to provide healing for the soul as well as to regain the grace of
God, lost by sin. It is the only ordinary way to receive the forgiveness of God
for serious (mortal) sins which if unforgiven condemn a person to Hell. The
Church teaches that Catholic priests have been given the authority by God to
exercise the forgiveness of sins here on earth and it is in God's Name by which
the person confessing is forgiven. In theological terms, the priest acts "in
persona Christi" and receives from the Church the power of jurisdiction over
the penitent. Recently, several electronic applications have been introduced
that can aid a penitent in making a good confession, similar to printed works
known as "examinations of conscience". Such electronic aids, according to
Vatican statements, cannot replace confession direct to a priest, as only a
priest can confer sacramental absolution. As of February 2011, one widely
publicized example was an "app" for the iPhone called "". The Council of Trent
("Session Fourteen, Chapter I") quoted John as the primary Scriptural proof for
the doctrine concerning this sacrament, but Catholics also consider Matthew , 1
Corinthians , and to be among the Scriptural bases for the sacrament. The
Catholic Church teaches that sacramental confession requires three "acts" on
the part of the penitent: contrition (sorrow of the soul for the sins
committed), disclosure of the sins (the 'confession'), and satisfaction (the
'penance', i.e. doing something to make amends for the sins). The basic form of
confession has not changed for centuries, although at one time confessions were
made publicly. Typically, the penitent begins sacramental confession by saying,
"Bless me Father, for I have sinned. It has been period since my last
confession." The penitent must then confess what he/she believes to be grave
and mortal sins, in both kind and number, in order to be reconciled with God
and the Church. The sinner may also confess venial sins; this is especially
recommended if the penitent has no mortal sins to confess. According to the
"Catechism", "without being strictly necessary, confession of everyday faults
(venial sins) is nevertheless strongly recommended by the Church. Indeed the
regular confession of our venial sins helps us form our conscience, fight
against evil tendencies, let ourselves be healed by Christ and progress in the
life of the Spirit. By receiving more frequently through this sacrament the
gift of the Father's Mercy, we are spurred to be merciful as He is merciful".
Eastern Orthodoxy and Eastern Catholicism. Within the Eastern Orthodox and
Eastern Catholic churches, it is understood that the Mystery of confession and
repentance has more to do with the spiritual development of the individual and
much less to do with purification. Sin is not seen as a stain on the soul, but
rather a mistake that needs correction. In general, the Orthodox Christian
chooses an individual to trust as his or her spiritual guide. In most cases
this is the parish priest, but may be a starets (Elder, a monastic who is well
known for his or her advancement in the spiritual life) or any individual, male
or female, who has received permission from a bishop to hear confession. This
person is often referred to as one's "spiritual father" or "spiritual mother".
Once chosen, the individual turns to his spiritual guide for advice on his or
her spiritual development, confessing sins, and asking advice. Orthodox
Christians tend to confess only to this individual and the closeness created by
this bond makes the spiritual guide the most qualified in dealing with the
person, so much so that no one can override what a spiritual guide tells his or
her charges. What is confessed to one's spiritual guide is protected by the
same seal as would be any priest hearing a confession. While one does not have
to be a priest to hear confession, only an ordained priest may pronounce the
absolution. Confession does not take place in a confessional, but normally in
the main part of the church itself, usually before an analogion (lectern) set
up near the iconostasion. On the analogion is placed a Gospel Book and a
blessing cross. The confession often takes place before an icon of Jesus
Christ. Orthodox understand that the confession is not made to the priest, but
to Christ, and the priest stands only as witness and guide. Before confessing,
the penitent venerates the Gospel Book and cross, and places the thumb and
first two fingers of his right hand on the feet of Christ as he is depicted on
the cross. The confessor will often read an admonition warning the penitent to
make a full confession, holding nothing back. In cases of emergency, of course,
confession may be heard anywhere. For this reason, especially in the Russian
Orthodox Church, the pectoral cross that the priest wears at all times will
often have the Icon of Christ "Not Made by Hands" inscribed on it. In general
practice, after one confesses to one's spiritual guide, the parish priest (who
may or may not have heard the confession) covers the head of the person with
his Epitrachelion (Stole) and reads the Prayer of Absolution, asking God to
forgive the transgression of the individual (the specific prayer differs
between Greek and Slavic use). It is not uncommon for a person to confesses his
sins to his spiritual guide on a regular basis but only seek out the priest to
read the prayer before receiving Holy Communion. In the Eastern Churches,
clergy often make their confession in the sanctuary. A bishop, priest, or
deacon will confess at the Holy Table (Altar) where the Gospel Book and
blessing cross are normally kept. He confesses in the same manner as a layman,
except that when a priest hears a bishop's confession, the priest kneels.
Orthodox Christians should go to confession at least four times a year; often
during one of the four fasting periods (Great Lent, Nativity Fast, Apostles'
Fast and Dormition Fast). Many pastors encourage frequent confession and
communion. In some of the monasteries on Mount Athos, the monks will confess
their sins daily. Orthodox Christians will also practice a form of general
confession, referred to as the rite of "Mutual Forgiveness". The rite involves
an exchange between the priest and the congregation (or, in monasteries,
between the superior and the brotherhood). The priest will make a prostration
before all and ask their forgiveness for sins committed in act, word, deed, and
thought. Those present ask that God may forgive him, and then they in turn all
prostrate themselves and ask the priest's forgiveness. The priest then
pronounces a blessing. The rite of Mutual Forgiveness does not replace the
Mystery of Confession and Absolution, but is for the purpose of maintaining
Christian charity and a humble and contrite spirit. This general confession is
practiced in monasteries at the first service on arising (the Midnight Office)
and the last service before retiring to sleep (Compline). Old Believers will
perform the rite regularly before the beginning of the Divine Liturgy. The
best-known asking of mutual forgiveness occurs at Vespers on the Sunday of
Forgiveness, and it is with this act that Great Lent begins. Anglicanism. In
the Anglican tradition, confession and absolution is usually a component part
of corporate worship, particularly at services of the Holy Eucharist. The form
involves an exhortation to repentance by the priest, a period of silent prayer
during which believers may inwardly confess their sins, a form of general
confession said together by all present and the pronouncement of general
absolution by the priest, often accompanied by the sign of the cross. Private
or auricular confession is also practiced by Anglicans and is especially common
among Anglo-Catholics. The venue for confessions is either in the traditional
confessional, which is the common practice among Anglo-Catholics, or in a
private meeting with the priest. Often a priest will sit in the sanctuary, just
inside the communion rail, facing toward the altar and away from the penitent.
Other times he will use a portable screen to divide himself and the penitent.
Following the confession of sins and the assignment of penance, the priest
makes the pronouncement of absolution. The seal of the confessional, as with
Roman Catholicism, is absolute and any confessor who divulges information
revealed in confession is subject to deposition and removal from office.
Historically, the practice of auricular confession was originally a highly
controversial one within Anglicanism. When priests began to hear confessions,
they responded to criticisms by pointing to the fact that such is explicitly
sanctioned in "The Order for the Visitation of the Sick" in the Book of Common
Prayer, which contains the following direction: Here shall the sick person be
moved to make a special Confession of his sins, if he feel his conscience
troubled with any weighty matter. After which Confession, the Priest shall
absolve him (if he humbly and heartily desire it). Auricular confession within
mainstream Anglicanism became accepted in the second half of the 20th century;
the 1979 Book of Common Prayer for the Episcopal Church in the USA provides two
forms for it in the section "The Reconciliation of a Penitent." Private
confession is also envisaged by the canon law of the Church of England, which
contains the following, intended to safeguard the Seal of the Confessional: "
(Proviso to Canon 113 of the Code of 1603, retained in the Supplement to the
present Code)" There is no requirement for private confession, but a common
understanding that it may be desirable depending on individual circumstances.
An Anglican aphorism regarding the practice is "All may; none must; some
should". Protestantism. Most Protestant churches believe that no intermediary
except Christ is necessary between the Christian and God in order to be
absolved from sins. Many mainline Protestant Churches include corporate
confession in regular worship. For instance the Presbyterian Church USA's
Directory of Worship, in directing the components or worship, states, "A prayer
of confession of the reality of sin in personal and common life follows. In a
declaration of pardon, the gospel is proclaimed and forgiveness is declared in
the name of Jesus Christ. God’s redemption and God’s claim upon human life
are remembered." Some Protestants confess their sins in private prayer before
God, believing this suffices to gain God's pardon. However confession to
another is often encouraged and in some sects or denominations required when a
wrong has been done to a person as well as to God. Confession is then made to
the person wronged and also to God, and is part of the reconciliation process.
In cases where sin has resulted in the exclusion of a person from church
membership due to unrepentance, public confession is often a pre-requisite to
readmission. The sinner confesses to the church his or her repentance and is
received back into fellowship. In both cases there is a required manner to the
confessions: for sins between God and Man and for sins between Man and Man.
Lutheranism. Lutherans differ from other Protestants as they practice
"confession and absolution" (in two forms). They, like Roman Catholics and many
Anglicans, see and as biblical evidence for confession. The first form of
confession and absolution is done at the Divine Service with the assembled
congregation (similar to the Anglican tradition). Here, the entire congregation
pauses for a moment of silent confession, recites the "confiteor", and receives
God's forgiveness through the pastor as he says the following (or similar):
"Upon this your confession and in the stead and by the command of my Lord Jesus
Christ, I forgive you all your sins in the name of the Father and of the Son
and of the Holy Spirit." The second form of confession and absolution is known
as "Holy Absolution", which is done privately to the pastor (commonly only upon
request). Here the person confessing (known as the "penitent") confesses
individual their sins and makes an act of contrition as the pastor, acting in
persona Christi, announces this following formula of absolution (or similar):
"In the stead and by the command of my Lord Jesus Christ I forgive you all your
sins in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit." In the
Lutheran Church, the pastor is bound by the Seal of the Confessional (similar
to the Roman Catholic tradition). Luther's Small Catechism says "the pastor is
pledged not to tell anyone else of sins to him in private confession, for those
sins have been removed. In the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, the second
form of confession and absolution fell into disuse; at the present time, it is,
for example, expected before partaking of the Eucharist for the first time.
Mormonism. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints teaches that
"Confession is a necessary requirement for complete forgiveness." The sinner
must confess both to those persons wronged by his sin and to God. Confession
may also be required to an authorized Priesthood leader: "Those transgressions
requiring confession to a bishop are adultery, fornication, other sexual
transgressions and deviancies, and sins of a comparable seriousness." The
priesthood leader may counsel the sinner to submit to the authority of a
disciplinary council, but does not have the authority to forgive sin. However,
the confession must be held in strict confidence unless the sinner grants
permission to disclose it to the disciplinary council. Buddhism. Buddhism has
been from its inception primarily a renunciate and monastic tradition.
Abstaining from sex and other worldly matters is very much a primary practice
compared to Hinduism or the other Abrahamic religions where sex, pleasure and
the accumulation of wealth can be seen in the context of doing God's will.
Within the monastic framework (called the Vinaya) of the sangha regular
confession of wrongdoing to superiors (elders; Pali: Thera) is mandatory. In
the sutras of the Pali Canon Bhikkhus confessed their wrongdoing to the Buddha
himself. That part of the Pali Canon called the Vinaya requires that monks
confess their individual sins before the bi-weekly convening for the recitation
of the Patimokkha . Islam. Declaration of faith ("shahada") is one of the five
pillars of Islam and is recited a minimum of nine times daily as part of each
unit ("raka'ah") of the five daily prayers: a minimum of seventeen "raka'at"
are performed daily, with the "shahadah" recited after every two. The act of
seeking forgiveness from God for sins is called "Istighfar". As in Judaism,
confession of sins is made directly to God and not through man (except in
asking for forgiveness from the victim of the sin). It is taught that sins are
to be kept to oneself to seek individual forgiveness from God. Allah forgives
those who seek his forgiveness and commit to themselves not to repeat the sin,
although some sins in which another person is victimized are not forgiven
unless that person forgives you, so they should also be asked for forgiveness.
Judaism. In Judaism, confession is an important part of attaining forgiveness
for both sins against God and another man. Confessions to God are done
communally in the plural. Jews confess that ""We" have sinned." In matters
involving offenses against a fellow man, private confession to the victim is a
requirement to obtaining forgiveness from the victim, which is generally a
requirement to obtaining forgiveness from God. If the victim refuses to
forgive, the offender confesses publicly, before larger and larger audience.
Confession (viduy) is also performed on one's deathbed, if at all possible.
Alcoholics Anonymous. In the AA Twelve-Step Program, confession is made in Step
5: "Admitted to God, to ourselves, and to another human being the exact nature
of our wrongs." "If we decline to follow through with this step, our un-
confessed sins will haunt us, resulting in the demise of our body and spirit.
We will have to continue paying the penalty of our wrongdoings." "By completing
the Fifth Step, we gain God’s forgiveness, supervision, and strength. We
obtain complete forgiveness..." are from http://aa-history.com/
12stephistory2.html
