Congregational church Congregational churches are Protestant Christian churches
practising Congregationalist church governance, in which each independently and
autonomously runs its own affairs. Many Congregational churches claim their
descent from a family of Protestant denominations formed on a theory of union
published by the theologian Robert Browne in 1592. These arose from the
Nonconformist religious movement during the Puritan reformation of the Church
of England. In Great Britain, the early congregationalists were called
"separatists" or "independents" to distinguish them from the similarly
Calvinistic Presbyterians. Some congregationalists in Britain still call
themselves Independent. Congregational churches were widely established in the
Massachusetts Bay Colony, later New England. The model of Congregational
churches was carried by migrating settlers from New England into New York State
and then into the "Old North West," the North-West Territory, won in the
American Revolution, now the states of Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Ohio, and
Wisconsin (and a small portion of Minnesota). With their insistence on
independent local bodies, they became important in many social reform
movements, including abolitionism, temperance, and women's suffrage. Modern
congregationalism in the U.S. is split into three bodies: the United Church of
Christ, with which most local Congregational churches affiliate; the National
Association of Congregational Christian Churches; and the Conservative
Congregational Christian Conference, an evangelical group. Origins.
Congregationalists sympathetically interpreted various dissident movements
among the western churches, which were suppressed throughout the Middle Ages.
By the 16th century, political and cultural changes had created a climate in
which men such as John Wycliffe, John Hus, Martin Luther and John Calvin sought
change, with new ideas about the relationship of individual men to God. This
influenced what they saw as the power of people without priests to intercede
between them and God, the need for the people to read and interpret the Bible,
and correction of distortions from original Christian thinking, as well as
their protests against church abuses. These reformers advocated a return to the
simplicity and authenticity they believed was described in the New Testament.
Congregationalists believe their model of church governance fulfills the
description of the early church and allows people the most direct relationship
with God. Congregationalism is more easily identified as a movement than a
single denomination, given its distinguishing commitment to the complete
autonomy of the local congregation. The idea that each distinct congregation
fully constitutes the visible Body of the church can, however, be traced to
John Wycliffe and the Lollard movement, which followed Wycliffe's removal from
teaching authority in the Roman Catholic Church. The early Congregationalists
shared with Anabaptist theology the ideal of a pure church. They believed the
adult conversion experience was necessary for an individual to become a full
member in the church, unlike other Reformed churches. As such, the
Congregationalists were a reciprocal influence on the Baptists. They differed
in counting the children of believers in some sense members of the church. On
the other hand, the Baptists required each member to experience conversion,
followed by baptism. In England, the Anglican system of church government was
taken over by the king, Henry VIII. Influenced by movements for reform and by
his desire to legitimize his marriage to Anne Boleyn in 1533 (without the
blessing of the Pope) after divorcing his first wife Catherine of Aragon,
Henry's government influenced Parliament to enact the 1st Act of Supremacy in
1534. It declared the reigning sovereign of England to be 'the only supreme
head on earth of the Church in England.' In the reign of Elizabeth I, this
title was changed to Supreme Governor of the Church of England, an act still in
effect. The Church of England thus replaced Catholicism as the established
state religion. Robert Browne, Henry Barrow, John Greenwood, John Penry,
William Brewster, Thomas Jollie and John Robinson were notable people who
established dissenting churches separate from the Church of England. In 1639
William Wroth, then Rector of the parish church at Llanvaches in Monmouthshire,
established the first Independent Church in Wales "according to the New England
pattern", i.e., Congregational. The Tabernacle United Reformed Church at
Llanvaches survives to this day. With the demise of the monarchy, the
Westminster Confession of Faith (1646) was officially declared the statement of
faith for both the Church of England (Anglican/Episcopal) and Church of
Scotland (Presbyterian). In 1658 the Congregationalists created their own
version of the Westminster Confession, called the Savoy Declaration. The
underground churches in England and exiles from Holland provided about 35 out
of the 102 passengers on the "Mayflower", which sailed from London in July
1620. They became known in history as the Pilgrim Fathers. The early
Congregationalists sought to separate themselves from the Anglican church in
every possible way and even forwent having church buildings. They met in homes
for many years. For a summary of Congregationalism in Scotland see the paper
presented to a joint meeting of the ministers of the United Reformed Church
Synod and the Congregational Federation in Scotland by Rev'd A Paterson follow
the link Congregationalism in Scotland Argentina. The mission to Argentina was
the second foreign field tended by German Congregationalists. The work in South
America began in 1921, when four Argentine churches urgently requested that
denominational recognition be given George Geier, who was serving them. The
Illinois Conference licensed Geier, who worked among Germans from Russia who
were very similar to their kin in the United States and in Canada. The South
American Germans from Russia had learned about Congregationalism in letters
from relatives in the United States. In 1924 general missionary John Hoelzer,
whilst in Argentina for a brief visit, organized six churches. Australia. In
1977, most congregations of the Congregational Union of Australia merged with
all Churches of the Methodist Church of Australasia and a majority of Churches
of the Presbyterian Church of Australia to form the Uniting Church in
Australia. Those congregations that did not join the Uniting Church formed the
Fellowship of Congregational Churches or continued as Presbyterians. Some more
ecumenically minded Congregationalists left the Fellowship of Congregational
Churches in 1995 and formed the Congregational Federation of Australia. Canada.
In Canada, the first foreign field, thirty-one churches that had been
affiliated with the General Conference became part of the United Church of
Canada when that denomination was founded in 1925 by the merger of the Canadian
Congregationalist and Methodist churches, and two-thirds of the congregations
of the Presbyterian Church of Canada. In 1988, a number of UCC congregations
separated from the national church, which they felt was moving away
theologically and in practice from Biblical Christianity. Many of the former
UCC congregations banded together as the new Congregational Christian Churches
in Canada. Congregational Christian Churches in Canada. The Congregational
Christian Churches in Canada (or 4Cs) is an evangelical, Protestant, Christian
denomination, headquartered in Brantford, Ontario, and a member of the World
Evangelical Congregational Fellowship. The name "congregational" generally
describes its preferred organizational style, which promotes local church
autonomy and ownership, while fostering fellowship and accountability between
churches at the National level. Ireland. The Congregational Union of Ireland
was founded in the early 19th century and currently has 29 member churches.
Samoa. The Congregational Christian Church of Samoa is one of the largest group
of churches throughout the Pacific Region. It was founded in 1830 by the London
Missionary Society, missionary - John Williams on the Island of Savaii. As the
church grew it established and continues to support theological colleges in
Samoa and Fiji. There are over 100,000 members attending over 2,000
congregations throughout the world, most of which are located in Samoa,
American Samoa, New Zealand, Australia and America. The Christian
Congregational Church of Jamaica fall under the constitution of the Samoan
Church. Southern Africa. There are many United Congregational Churches in
Southern Africa all independently run, however they all meet together to
discuss challenges. Visit www.uccsa.org.za/ United Kingdom. In 1972, about
three quarters of English Congregational churches merged with the Presbyterian
Church of England to form the United Reformed Church (URC). However, about 600
Congregational churches have continued in their historic independent tradition.
Under the Act of Parliament that dealt with the financial and property issues
arising from the merger between what had become by then the Congregational
Church of England and Wales and the Presbyterian Church of England, certain
assets were divided between the various parties. In England there are three
main groups of continuing Congregationalists. These are the Congregational
Federation, which has offices in Nottingham, the Evangelical Fellowship of
Congregational Churches, and about 100 Congregational churches that are loosely
federated with other congregations in the Fellowship of Independent Evangelical
Churches, or are unaffiliated. In 1981, the United Reformed Church merged with
the Re-formed Association of Churches of Christ and, in 2000, just over half of
the churches in the Congregational Union of Scotland also joined the United
Reformed Church. The remainder of Congregational churches in Scotland joined
the Congregational Federation. Wales traditionally is the part of Europe which
has the largest share of Congregationalists among the population, most
Congregationalists being members of "Undeb yr Annibynwyr Cymraeg" (the Union of
Welsh Independents), which is particularly important in Carmarthenshire and
Brecknockshire. Among its leaders up to the end of the 20th century was R Tudur
Jones. The Congregational Federation, "", and the United Reformed Church enjoy
good relations and share certain aspects of church life together including
their joint involvement in the Council for World Mission. Mission. The London
Missionary Society was effectively the world mission arm of British
Congregationalists – it sponsored missionaries including Eric Liddell and
David Livingstone. As thinking developed, particularly in the context of
decolonisation, and churches wanted to recognise the gifts of people of the
South, the London Missionary Society transformed into the Council for World
Mission – an organisation in which the United Reformed Church is no more
important than the Church of South India (for example) United States. The
Pilgrims sought to establish at Plymouth Colony a Christian fellowship like
that which gathered around Jesus himself. Congregationalists include the
Pilgrims of Plymouth, and the Puritans of the Massachusetts Bay Colony, which
were organized in union by the Cambridge Platform in 1648. These settlers had
John Cotton as their most influential leader, beginning in 1633. Cotton's
writings persuaded the Calvinist theologian John Owen to separate from the
Presbyterian church. He became very influential in the development of
Congregationalist theology and ideas of church government. Jonathan Edwards was
also a Congregationalist. The history of Congregational churches in the United
States is closely intertwined with that of American Presbyterianism, especially
in New England where Congregationalist influence spilled over into Presbyterian
churches farther west. Some of the first colleges and universities in America,
including Harvard, Yale, Dartmouth, Williams, Bowdoin, Middlebury, and Amherst,
all were founded by the Congregationalists, as were later Carleton, Grinnell,
Oberlin, and Pomona. Without higher courts to ensure doctrinal uniformity among
the congregations, Congregationalists have been more diverse than other
Reformed churches. Despite the efforts of Calvinists to maintain the dominance
of their system, some Congregational churches, especially in the older
settlements of New England, gradually developed leanings toward Arminianism,
Unitarianism, Deism, and transcendentalism. By the 1750s, several
Congregational preachers were teaching the possibility of universal salvation,
an issue that caused considerable conflict among its adherents on the one side
and hard-line Calvinists and sympathizers of the First Great Awakening on the
other. In another strain of change, the first church in the United States with
an openly Unitarian theology, the belief in the single personality of God, was
established in Boston, Massachusetts in 1785 (in a former Anglican parish.) By
1800, all but one Congregational church in Boston had Unitarian preachers
teaching the strict unity of God, the subordinate nature of Christ, and
salvation by character. Harvard University, founded by Congregationalists,
became a center of Unitarian training. Prompted by a controversy over an
appointment in the theology school at Harvard, in 1825 the Unitarian churches
separated from Congregationalism. Most of the Unitarian "descendants" hold
membership in the Unitarian Universalist Association, founded in the 1960s by a
merger with the theologically similar Universalists. This group had dissented
from Calvinist orthodoxy on the basis of their belief that all persons could
find salvation (as opposed to the Calvinist idea of double predestination,
excluding some from salvation.) Congregational churches were at the same time
the first example of the American theocratic ideal and also the seedbed from
which American liberal religion and society arose. Many Congregationalists in
the several successor denominations to the original tradition consider
themselves to be Reformed first, whether of traditional or neo-orthodox
persuasion. In 1931 the Congregational Churches and the General Convention of
the Christian Church, a body from the Restoration Movement tradition of the
early 19th century, merged to form the Congregational Christian Churches. The
Congregationalists were used to a more formal, less evangelistic form of
worship than Christian Church members, who mostly came from rural areas of the
South and the Midwest. Both groups, however, held to local autonomy and
eschewed binding creedal authority. In the early 20th century some
Congregational (later Congregational Christian) churches took exception to the
beginnings of a growth of regional or national authority in bodies outside the
local church, such as mission societies, national committees, and state
conferences. Some congregations opposed liberalizing influences that appeared
to mitigate traditional views of sin and corollary doctrines such as the
substitutionary atonement of Jesus. In 1948, some adherents of these two
streams of thought (mainly the latter one) started a new fellowship, the
Conservative Congregational Christian Conference (CCCC). It was the first major
fellowship to organize outside of the mainstream Congregational body since
1825, when the Unitarians formally founded their own body. In 1957, the General
Council of Congregational Christian Churches in the U.S. merged with the
Evangelical and Reformed Church to form the United Church of Christ. About 90%
of the CC congregations affiliated with the General Council joined the United
Church of Christ. Some churches abstained from the merger while others voted it
down. Most of the latter congregations became members of either the CCCC
(mentioned above) or the National Association of Congregational Christian
Churches. The latter was formed by churches and people who objected to the UCC
merger because of concerns that the new national church and its regional bodies
represented extra-congregational authorities that would interfere with a
congregation's right to govern itself. Thus, the NACCC includes congregations
of a variety of theological positions. Still other congregations chose not to
affiliate with any particular association of churches, or only with regional or
local ones..
