Congregation of Christian Brothers The Congregation of Christian Brothers
(officially, in Latin: Congregatio Fratrum Christianorum) is a worldwide
religious community within the Catholic Church, founded by Blessed Edmund Rice.
The Christian Brothers, as they are commonly known, chiefly work for the
evangelisation and education of youth, but are involved in many ministries,
especially with the poor. Their first school was opened in Waterford, Ireland,
in 1802. Br Philip Pinto is the current Congregation Leader of the Christian
Brothers, and head of its Congregational Leadership Team that is based in Rome.
At the time of its foundation, though much relieved from the harshest of the
Penal Laws by the Irish Parliament's Relief Acts, some discrimination against
Catholics remained throughout the newly created United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Ireland pending full Catholic Emancipation in 1829. This congregation is
sometimes confused with the Brothers of the Christian Schools, or "De La Salle
Christian Brothers," founded by Saint Jean-Baptiste de la Salle in France. This
is a completely separate religious institute. Rice's congregation is sometimes
called the Irish Christian Brothers. Formation. At the turn of the eighteenth
century, Waterford merchant Edmund Rice considered travelling to Rome to join a
religious institute, possibly the Augustinians. Instead, with the support of
Dr. Thomas Hussey, Catholic Bishop of the Diocese of Waterford and Lismore, he
decided to found a religious community dedicated to teaching disadvantaged
youth. The first school, on Waterford's New Street, was a converted stable and
opened in 1802, with a second school opening in Stephen Street soon after to
cater for increasing enrolments. Two men from his hometown of Callan, Thomas
Grosvenor and Patrick Finn, soon arrived to aid Rice in his makeshift schools,
with the intention of living the life of lay brothers. In the same year, Rice
used proceeds from the sale of his victualling business to begin building a
community house and school on land provided by the diocese. Bishop Hussey
opened the new complex, christened “Mount Sion” on June 7, 1803, and pupils
were transferred to the new school building the following year. The reputation
of the school spread and across the next few years several men sought to become
“Michaels”. On 15 August 1808, seven men, including Edmund Rice, took
religious promises under Bishop John Power of Waterford. Following the example
of Nano Nagle's Presentation Sisters, they were called "Presentation Brothers".
This was one of the first congregations of men to be founded in Ireland and one
of the few founded in the Church by a layman. Houses were soon opened in
Carrick-on-Suir, Dungarvan, and in 1811, in Cork. In 1812 the Archbishop of
Dublin established a community in the nation's capital and by 1907 there were
ten communities in Dublin, with in excess of 6,000 pupils. The schools included
primary, secondary and technical schools, along with orphanages and a school
for the deaf. A community was founded in Limerick in 1816, followed by
establishments in several of Ireland's principal towns. The Holy See formally
established the congregation in 1820. This, too, was an unusual event, since
the Christian Brothers were the first Irish congregation of men approved by a
charter from Rome. Some brothers in Cork chose to remain under the original
Presentation rule and continued to be known as Presentation Brothers, a
separate congregation but also recognising Edmund Rice as its Founder.
Expansion. The congregation of Irish Christian Brothers spread to Liverpool and
other parts of England. Brother Ambrose Treacy established a strong presence in
Melbourne, Australia in 1868, and in 1875 in Brisbane, Australia and in 1876 a
school was commenced in Dunedin, New Zealand. In 1875 a school was opened in
St. John’s, Newfoundland. In 1878 the Brothers were introduced to the then
Crown colony of Gibraltar. In 1886 the Pope requested that they consider
setting up in India and a province of the congregation was established there.
In 1900 came the invitation to establish houses in Rome and in 1906 schools
were established in New York City. These new ventures were not always
successful. Two brothers had been sent to Gibraltar to establish an institute
in 1835. However, despite initial successes they left in August 1837 on account
of disagreements with the local priests. Similarly, a mission to Sydney,
Australia in 1842 failed within a couple of years. In 1940 Iona College was
founded in New York, as a Higher Education College, facilitating poorer High
School graduates to progress to a College education. In 1955 Stella Maris
College (Montevideo) in Uruguay was established, which became one of the
leading schools in the country, but also became known for the accidental fame
for the Andes Flight Disaster involving its alumni rugby team. The Christian
Brothers teacher training center has become the Marino Institute for Education
which since trains lay teachers since 1972 and since 1974 offers degrees
validated by Trinity College Dublin, in 2012 the University became co-thrustees
with the brothers of the Institute. The Brothers' schools continue to be of
many types, including primary, secondary and technical schools, orphanages and
for the deaf. A number of these technical schools originally taught poor
children trades such as carpentry and building skills for which they could
progress to gain apprenticeships and employment. As the National School system
and vocational schools developed in the Irish Republic, the Irish Christian
Brothers became more concentrated on secondary education. Irish nationalism.
The Irish Christian Brothers are strong supporters of Irish nationalism, the
Irish Language revival and Irish sports. In most of their schools in Ireland
Gaelic football and hurling were encouraged as opposed to other sports and
there were even examples of boys being punished for playing Association
Football. Conor Cruise O'Brien called them "the most indefatigable and explicit
carriers" of the Catholic nation idea. Publications by the Christian Brothers.
In the absence of government devised text books that were inexpensive, the
Christian brothers composed and published a number of text books which were
used by their schools. Many of these were in the Irish language but also dealt
with Mathematics and other subjects. Our Boys. "Our Boys" was a magazine format
publication for boys by Christian Brothers and the Educational Company of
Ireland. It was first published in September 1914, based on British "Boys Own"
adventure comics, its content was cartoons and adventure stories in English and
Irish. It had an overt Catholic and Irish Nationalist outlook, featuring Irish
Legends, GAA figures, the Missions and Catholic juvenile organisations. The
illustrator Gerrit van Gelderen contributed to the magazine. It was published
up until the 1990's. Organisational structure of the Christian Brothers.
Geographically, the Christian Brothers are divided into several provinces that
encompass every inhabited continent. The brothers within each province work
under the direction of a Province Leadership Team. In turn, the entire
Congregation operates under the leadership of a Congregation Leadership Team
that is based in Rome (and led by the Congregation Leader). These provincial
and congregational teams are elected on a 6-year basis at Congregation
chapters. Restructuring has taken place in the congregation to account for the
changing needs, in particular the declining number of brothers in the developed
world. The three provinces of North America (Canada, Eastern American, and
Western American Province) restructured into the Edmund Rice Christian Brothers
North America on 1 July 2005. The provinces that cover Ireland, England and the
Congregational Leadership Team in Rome combined into a single European province
on May 5, 2007, while the five provinces covering Australia, New Zealand and
Papua New Guinea combined into one Oceania province on October 1, 2007, The
English Province is a registered charity. The Dublin Headquarters are in the
grounds of Marino Institute of Education, Claremont, Griffith Avenue, Dublin 9,
Ireland. A special community within this new European province will be based in
Geneva, Switzerland, working to establish an NGO known as Edmund Rice
International. The purpose of such an organisation is to gain what is known as
a "general consultative status" with the United Nations. "This position allows
groups the opportunity to challenge systemic injustice and to engage in
advocacy work with policy makers on behalf of people who are made poor." As
well as including Christian Brothers from provinces all over the world, members
of the Presentation Brothers will also have a presence within this community.
Edmund Rice Development is a faith-based Non-governmental Organisation with
charity status in Ireland. Based in Dublin, Edmund Rice Development was
established in 2009, to formalise the fundraising efforts of the developing
world projects for the Christian Brothers globally and received its charitable
status in 2009. Funding raised by the charity is directed mainly to 9 countries
in Africa, where The Christian Brothers work on mission in development: Ghana,
Kenya, Liberia, Sierra Leone, South Africa, Sudan, Tanzania, Zambia, and
Zimbabwe. Additional funds are also raised for similar work in South America
(Argentina, Bolivia, Paraguay, Peru and Uruguay) and India. Scandals. In the
late 20th and early 21st century the reputation of the congregation suffered
from the exposure of a series of scandals involving emotional, physical and
sexual abuse of Irish children in the congregation's care, stretching back over
a long period of time. Similar abuse emerged also in other countries where the
congregation had had a presence, including Canada, the United States and
Australia. Canada. In 1987, men came forward to say that when they were being
raised in Mount Cashel Orphanage in St. John's Newfoundland, back in the 1950s
all the way up to the 1970s, had suffered unspeakable acts of physical, sexual,
and emotional abuse, and that when the Archdiocese became aware of the abuse,
had quietly removed brothers who were guilty of these acts. Ireland. In Ireland
the Congregation of the Christian Brothers published full-page advertisements
in newspapers in March 1998, apologizing to former pupils who had been ill-
treated whilst in their care. This advertising campaign expressed "deep regret"
on behalf of the Christian Brothers and listed telephone lines which former
pupils could ring if they needed help. In 2003 the Congregation brought a case
against the Commission to Inquire into Child Abuse seeking to prevent the
Commission from naming brothers acccused of child abuse. This case was lost in
the High Court, but the congregation appealed to the Supreme Court. This appeal
was later dropped, when the Commission agreed not to name brothers. In May 2009
a report was issued by an independent government commission on child abuse
committed on thousands of children in residential care institutions run by
various religious institutes for the Irish state. This report found that sexual
abuse of boys in institutions run by the Brothers was common. In response, the
Irish province issued a pledge to pay 161 million euros toward a fund set up to
compensate victims of such abuse in both their institutions and those run by
other religious institutes, both male and female. United States. Such abuse was
not limited to Ireland. According to the Chicago-Sun Times, in 1998 Brother
Robert Brouillette was arrested in Joliet, Illinois, for indecent solicitation
of a child. In 2002, a civil lawsuit was filed in Cook County, Illinois,
against Brother Brouillette for sexual assault against a 21 year old man.
Australia. Australia has also seen such abuse. Details of dozens of offences
committed by Brother Robert Best against young boys have been heard in court
proceedings. Robert Best, 70, taught at Catholic primary and secondary schools
in Ballarat, Box Hill and Geelong (all in Victoria, Australia) between the
1960s and 1980s. He has been convicted by a jury and has pleaded guilty to more
than 40 child sex offences against dozens of students, some as young as eight
years old. Robert Best was sentenced to fourteen years and nine months jail on
August 8, 2011. Many of his victims were in court for the sentencing and
shouted at him as he was led away.
