Congregationalist polity Congregationalist polity, often known as
congregationalism, is a system of church governance in which every local church
congregation is independent, ecclesiastically sovereign, or "autonomous". Among
those major Protestant Christian traditions that employ congregationalism are
those Congregational Churches known by the "Congregationalist" name that
descended from the Anglo-American Puritan movement of the 17th century, the
Baptist churches, and most of the groups brought about by the Anabaptist
movement in Germany that immigrated to the U.S. in the late 18th century. More
recent generations have witnessed also a growing number of non-denominational
churches, which are most often congregationalist in their governance. In
Christianity, congregationalism is distinguished most clearly from episcopal
polity, which is governance by a hierarchy of bishops. But it is also distinct
from presbyterian polity, in which higher assemblies of congregational
representatives can exercise considerable authority over individual
congregations. Congregationalism is not limited only to organization of
Christian congregations; the principles of congregationalism have been
inherited by the Unitarian Universalist Association and the Canadian Unitarian
Council. Jewish synagogues and most Islamic mosques in the U.S. operate under
congregational government, with no hierarchies. Basic form. The term
"congregationalist polity" describes a form of church governance that is based
on the local congregation. Each local congregation is independent and self-
supporting, governed by the own members. Some band into loose voluntary
associations with other congregations that share similar beliefs (e.g., the
Willow Creek Association). Others join "conventions", such as the Southern
Baptist Convention, the National Baptist Convention or the American Baptist
Churches USA (formerly the Northern Baptist Convention). These conventions
generally provide stronger ties between congregations, including some doctrinal
direction and pooling of financial resources. Congregations that belong to
associations and conventions are still independently governed. Most non-
denominational churches are organized along congregationalist lines. Many do
not see these voluntary associations as "denominations", because they "believe
that there is no church other than the local church, and denominations are in
variance to Scripture." Congregational church. The earmarks of
Congregationalism can be traced back to the Pilgrim societies of the United
States in the early 17th century. Congregationalism expressed the viewpoint
that (1) every local church is a full realization in miniature of the entire
Church of Jesus Christ; and (2) the Church, while on earth, besides the local
church, can only be invisible and ideal. While other theories may insist on the
truth of the former, the latter precept of congregationalism gives the entire
theory a unique character among plans of church government. There is no other
reference than the local congregation for the "visible church" in
Congregationalism. And yet, the connection of all Christians is also asserted,
albeit in a way that defenders of this view usually decline, often
intentionally, to elaborate more clearly or consistently. This first,
foundational principle by which congregationalism is guided results in
confining it to operate with the consent of each gathering of believers.
Although "congregational rule" may seem to suggest that pure democracy reigns
in congregational churches, this is seldom the case. It is granted, with few
exceptions (namely in some Anabaptist churches), that God has given the
government of the Church into the hands of an ordained ministry. What makes
congregationalism unique is its system of checks and balances, which constrains
the authority of the minister, the lay officers, and the members. Most
importantly, the boundaries of the powers of the ministers and church officers
are set by clear and constant reminders of the freedoms guaranteed by the
Gospel to the laity, collectively and individually. With that freedom comes the
responsibility upon each member to govern himself or herself under Christ. This
requires lay people to exercise great charity and patience in debating issues
with one another and to seek the glory and service of God as the foremost
consideration in all of their decisions. The authority of all of the people,
including the officers, is limited in the local congregation by a definition of
union, or a covenant, by which the terms of their cooperation together are
spelled out and agreed to. This might be something as minimal as a charter
specifying a handful of doctrines and behavioral expectations, or even a
statement only guaranteeing specific freedoms. Or, it may be a constitution
describing a comprehensive doctrinal system and specifying terms under which
the local church is connected to other local churches, to which participating
congregations give their assent. In congregationalism, rather uniquely, the
church is understood to be a truly voluntary association. Finally, the
congregational theory strictly forbids ministers from ruling their local
churches by themselves. Not only does the minister serve by the approval of the
congregation, but committees further constrain the pastor from exercising power
without consent by either the particular committee, or the entire congregation.
It is a contradiction of the congregational principle if a minister makes
decisions concerning the congregation without the vote of these other officers.
The other officers may be called "deacons", "elders" or "session" (borrowing
Presbyterian terminology), or even "vestry" (borrowing the Anglican term) —
it is not their label that is important to the theory, but rather their lay
status and their equal vote, together with the pastor, in deciding the issues
of the church. While other forms of church government are more likely to define
"tyranny" as "the imposition of unjust rule", a congregationally-governed
church would more likely define tyranny as "transgression of liberty" or
equivalently, "rule by one man". To a congregationalist, no abuse of authority
is worse than the concentration of all decisive power in the hands of one
ruling body, or one person. Following this sentiment, congregationalism has
evolved over time to include even more participation of the congregation, more
kinds of lay committees to whom various tasks are apportioned, and more
decisions subject to the vote of the entire membership. One of the most notable
characteristics of New England (or British)-heritage Congregationalism has been
its consistent leadership role in the formation of "unions" with other
churches. Such sentiments especially grew strong in the late 19th and early
20th centuries, when ecumenism evolved out of a liberal, non-sectarian
perspective on relations to other Christian groups that accompanied the
relaxation of Calvinist stringencies held by earlier generations. The
congregationalist theory of independence within a union has been a cornerstone
of most ecumenical movements since the 18th century. The congregationalist
principles of complete autonomy and strictly voluntary union produce a
practically indescribable diversity of beliefs within the congregational
unions. The United Church of Christ (UCC) is the result of a union constructed
according to congregationalist theory between the Evangelical and Reformed
Church and the Congregational Christian Churches. These uniting congregations
were themselves the result of several previous unions. The General Council of
Congregational Christian Churches was formed from a merger between the National
Council of Congregational Churches and the General Convention of the Christian
Church, also known as Christian Churches or Christian Connection (not to be
confused with, although partially related to, the Disciples of Christ). The
Evangelical and Reformed Church was the result of a partial union of the
Reformed Church in the United States and the Evangelical Synod of North America
(a union of Lutherans and Reformed). The UCC is by far the most diverse of the
Reformed churches in the U.S. In the United Kingdom, the United Reformed Church
was formed in 1972 by the merger of the Presbyterian and the Congregational
churches, on presbyterian principles of union but within a continuing
congregational regard for local diversity. Baptist churches. Most Baptists hold
that no church or ecclesiastical organization has inherent authority over a
Baptist church. Churches can properly relate to each other under this polity
only through voluntary cooperation, never by any sort of coercion. Furthermore,
this Baptist polity calls for freedom from governmental control. Exceptions to
this local form of local governance include a few churches that submit to the
leadership of a body of elders, as well as the Episcopal Baptists that have an
Episcopal system. Independent Baptist churches have no formal organizational
structure above the level of the local congregation. More generally among
Baptists, a variety of parachurch agencies and evangelical educational
institutions may be supported generously or not at all, depending entirely upon
the local congregation's customs and predilections. Usually doctrinal
conformity is held as a first consideration when a church makes a decision to
grant or decline financial contributions to such agencies, which are legally
external and separate from the congregations they serve. These practices also
find currency among non-denominational fundamentalist or charismatic
fellowships, many of which derive from Baptist origins, culturally if not
theologically. Most Southern Baptist and National Baptist congregations, by
contrast, generally relate more closely to external groups such as mission
agencies and educational institutions than do those of independent persuasion.
However, they adhere to a very similar ecclesiology, refusing to permit outside
control or oversight of local affairs. Churches of Christ. Church government is
congregational rather than denominational. Churches of Christ purposefully have
no central headquarters, councils, or other organizational structure above the
local church level. Rather, the independent congregations are a network with
each congregation participating at its own discretion in various means of
service and fellowship with other congregations (see Sponsoring church
(Churches of Christ)). Churches of Christ are linked by their shared commitment
to restoration principles. Congregations are generally overseen by a plurality
of elders (also known in some congregations as shepherds, bishops, or pastors)
who are sometimes assisted in the administration of various works by deacons.
Elders are generally seen as responsible for the spiritual welfare of the
congregation, while deacons are seen as responsible for the non-spiritual needs
of the church. Deacons serve under the supervision of the elders, and are often
assigned to direct specific ministries. Successful service as a deacon is often
seen as preparation for the eldership. Elders and deacons are appointed by the
congregation based on the qualifications found in and . Congregations look for
elders who have a mature enough understanding of scripture to enable them to
supervise the minister and to teach, as well as to perform "governance"
functions. In lieu of willing men who meet these qualifications, congregations
are sometimes overseen by the congregation's men in general. While the early
Restoration Movement had a tradition of itinerant preachers rather than
"located Preachers", during the 20th century a long-term, formally-trained
congregational minister became the norm among Churches of Christ. Ministers are
understood to serve under the oversight of the elders. While the presence of a
long-term professional minister has sometimes created "significant "de facto"
ministerial authority" and led to conflict between the minister and the elders,
the eldership has remained the "ultimate locus of authority in the
congregation". Churches of Christ hold to the priesthood of all believers. No
special titles are used for preachers or ministers that would identify them as
"clergy". Churches of Christ emphasize that there is no distinction between
"clergy" and "laity" and that every member has a gift and a role to play in
accomplishing the work of the church.
