Consecration Consecration is the solemn dedication to a special purpose or
service, usually religious. The word "consecration" literally means "to
associate with the sacred". Persons, places, or things can be consecrated, and
the term is used in various ways by different groups. A synonym for to
consecrate is to sanctify; an antonym is to desecrate. Roman Catholic Church.
"Consecration" is used in the Catholic Church as the setting apart for the
service of God of both persons and objects. Ordination of bishops. The
ordination of a new bishop is also called a consecration. While the term
"episcopal ordination" is now more common, "consecration" was the preferred
term in the centuries immediately preceding the Second Vatican Council (11
October 1962—8 December 1965). The Vatican II document Constitution on the
Sacred Liturgy n. 76 states, The English text of Catechism of the Catholic
Church, Second Edition, 1997, under the heading "Episcopal
ordination—fullness of the sacrament of Holy Orders", uses "episcopal
consecration" as a synonymous term, using "episcopal ordination" and "episcopal
consecration" interchangeably. (CCC nn. 1556-1558) The Code of Canon Law Latin-
English Edition, (1983), under "Title VI—Orders" uses the term "sacrae
ordinationis minister" "minister of sacred ordination" and the term
"consecratione episcopali" "episcopal consecration". (CCL cc. 1012, 1014)
Religious institutes. The life of those who enter religious institutes and
similar institutes is also described as Consecrated Life. A rite of
consecration of virgins can be traced back at least to the fourth century. By
the time of the Second Vatican Council, use of this rite was limited to
cloistered nuns. The Council directed that the then existing rite should be
revised. Two similar versions were prepared, one for women living in monastic
orders, another for consecrated virgins living in the world. An English
translation of the rite for those living in the world is available on the web
site of the United States Association of Consecrated Virgins. Churches, altars,
and other ritual objects. Chrism, used as anointing oil, is (usually scented)
olive oil consecrated by a bishop. Objects such as patens and chalices, used
for the Sacrament of the Eucharist, also used to be consecrated by a bishop,
using chrism. A more solemn rite exists for the consecration of an altar,
either of the altar alone or as the central part of the rite of consecration of
a church. Since it would be contradictory to consecrate to the service of God a
mortgage-burdened building, the rite of consecration or dedication of a church
is carried out only if the building is debt-free. Otherwise, it is only
blessed. Eucharist. A very special act of consecration is that of the bread and
wine used in the Eucharist, which according to Catholic belief involves their
change into the Body and Blood of Christ, a change referred to as
transubstantiation. To consecrate the bread and wine, the priest speaks the
Words of Institution. Eastern churches. In the Eastern Orthodox Churches and
the Eastern Catholic Churches, the term "consecration" can refer to either the
Sacred Mystery (Sacrament) of "Cheirotonea" (Ordination through laying on of
hands) of a Bishop, or the sanctification and solemn dedication of a church
building. It can also (more rarely) be used to describe the change of the bread
and wine into the Body and Blood of Christ at the Divine Liturgy. The Chrism
used at Chrismation and the Antimension placed on the Holy Table are also said
to be consecrated. Various Christian churches. Church buildings, chapels and
altars are consecrated to the purpose of religious worship, baptismal fonts and
vessels are consecrated for the purpose of containing the Eucharistic elements,
the bread and wine/the body and blood of Christ. A person may be consecrated
for a specific role within a religious hierarchy, or a person may consecrate
his or her life in an act of devotion. In particular, the ordination of a
bishop is often called a consecration. In churches that follow the doctrine of
Apostolic Succession (the historical episcopate), the bishops who consecrate a
new bishop are known as the consecrators and form an unbroken line of
succession back to the Apostles. Those who take the vows of religious life are
said to be living a "consecrated life". Among some religious groups there is a
service of "deconsecration", to return a formerly consecrated place to secular
purpose (for instance, if the building is to be sold or demolished). In the
Church of England, an order closing a church may remove the legal effects of
consecration.
