Continuous revelation Continuous revelation or continuing revelation is a
theological belief or position that God continues to reveal divine principles
or commandments to humanity. In Christian traditions, it is most commonly
associated with The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church),
the Religious Society of Friends (Quakers), and with Pentecostal and
Charismatic Christianity, though it is found in some other denominations as
well. Continuous revelation also forms part of the rituals of gatherings in
various chapters of Taoism. In the Baha'i Faith, Progressive revelation is an
important concept that is similar to continuous revelation. A notable factor of
continuous or continuing revelation as a source of divine commandments and
statements is the written recording of such statements in a more open
scriptural canon, as is the case with the Latter-Day Saints; while more
frequent with the Latter-Day Saints, it is less frequent with the Baha'i Faith,
with progressive revelation only being periodically expanded over an extremely-
long period. Baha'i Faith. Progressive revelation is a core teaching in the
Bahá'í Faith that suggests that religious truth is revealed by God
progressively and cyclically over time through a series of divine Messengers,
and that the teachings are tailored to suit the needs of the time and place of
their appearance. Thus, the Bahá'í teachings recognize the divine origin of
several world religions as different stages of in the history of one religion,
while believing that the revelation of Bahá'u'lláh is the most recent (though
not the last—that there will never be a last), and therefore the most
relevant to modern society. Bahá'ís believe God to be generally regular and
periodic in revealing His will to mankind through messengers/prophets, which
are named Manifestations of God. Each messenger in turn establishes a covenant
and founds a religion. This process of revelation, according to the Bahá'í
writings, is also never ceasing. The general theme of the successive and
continuous religions founded by Manifestations of God is that there is an
evolutionary tendency, and that each Manifestation of God brings a larger
measure of revelation (or religion) to humankind than the previous one. The
differences in the revelation brought by the Manifestations of God is stated to
be not inherent in the characteristics of the Manifestation of God, but instead
attributed to the various worldly, societal and human factors; these
differences are in accordance with the "conditions" and "varying requirements
of the age" and the "spiritual capacity" of humanity. Thus religious truth is
seen to be relative to its recipients and not absolute; while the messengers
proclaimed eternal moral and spiritual truths that are renewed by each
messenger, they also changed their message to reflect the particular spiritual
and material evolution of humanity at the time of the appearance of the
messenger. In the Bahá'í view, since humanity's spiritual capacity and
receptivity has increased over time, the extant to which these spiritual truths
are expounded changes. Christianity. Friends (Quakers). In the Religious
Society of Friends (Quakers), "continuing revelation" comes from the Inner
light or the light within. This light has traditionally been identified as the
Spirit of Christ or Christ within, although not all Friends associate the Inner
Light with Christ. It is understood as the presence of God which provides
illumination and guidance to the individual and through individuals to the
group. Some Friends consider the Bible the ultimate authority, but others
consider the Inner Light to be above the Bible. Both groups believe that the
Inner Light speaks to people directly and not just through the text of the
Bible. Because Friends believe that revelation is ongoing, they have no set
creed or dogmas. However, as early Friends listened to the Inner light and
endeavored to live accordingly, a common set of beliefs gradually emerged,
which became known as testimonies. (See Testimonies for a fuller list and
description of them.) Although rooted in the immediate experience of the
community of Friends, these Testimonies are based on what Friends believe are
verified in the Bible, especially as described in the Gospels regarding the
life and teachings of Jesus. The Testimonies are not formal static documents,
but rather a shared collection or view of how Quakers relate to God. They
cannot be taken one at a time, but are interrelated. As a philosophical system,
they are coherent, even outside of Christianity. The list of testimonies that
Quakers follow is also not static. The following is a generally accepted list.
Latter-day Saints. Members of the LDS Church anticipate additions to its canon,
including the translation of the remaining two-thirds of the golden plates
which was the source of the Book of Mormon. The Community of Christ
(Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saint), the second largest
Latter Day Saint denomination, regularly canonizes revelation into the Doctrine
and Covenants. Its Prophet/President present Words of Council to the church
usually before its World Conference. If the conference confirms the Words of
Counsel as prophetic, it is added as a Section in the scripture known as
Doctrine and Covenants. Pentecostal and Charismatic. Pentecostal and
Charismatic Christians generally believe that Christians, especially "Spirit-
filled" Christians can receive revelations from God in the form of dreams,
visions, and audible or inaudible voices. They also believe that certain
individuals are able to transmit revelations from God in the form of prophecy,
words of knowledge, and speaking in tongues and interpretation of tongues.
While most Pentecostals and Charismatics believe the Bible to be the ultimate
authority and would not say that any new revelation can ever contradict the
Bible, they do believe that God continues to speak to people today on extra-
biblical topics as well as to interpret and apply the text of the Bible.
Criticisms. The notion of progressive or continuing revelation is not shared by
the Roman Catholic Church and by Eastern Orthodoxy, who instead favor the idea
of tradition and development of doctrine, while progressivist and
continuationist approaches are specifically condemned in the declaration
Dominus Iesus. Islam. There is no verse of the Qur'an which states that divine
revelation has ended with it. The Islamic prophet Muhammad received scriptural
as well as non-scriptural revelations, some of which were recorded as Hadith
Qudsi. Nor does the Qur'an restrict the sending of divine revelation to
prophets/messengers, for the mother of Moses received revelation (28:7). The
Qur'an refers to the continuity of messengers (7:35) and promises that those
who obey Allah and Muhammad will be favoured with the blessings of prophethood
(4:69) which includes being given knowledge of the unseen through divine
revelation. The verse (5:3) refers to the perfection of religion and not to the
cessation of prophethood or revelation. The verse (33:40) refers to the
excellence and superiority of the prophethood of Muhammad and the continuity of
prophethood amongst his followers, and not to the complete cessation of all
types of prophethoods or revelations. According to a well-known hadith of
Muhammad recorded in Sahih Muslim, the Messiah would received revelation from
Allah during his second advent. Thus, there is no real basis for the common
misconception among some modern day Muslims that all types of divine
revelations and prophethoods have been discontinued. Ahmadiyya. Ahmadi Muslims
believe that while law-bearing revelation has ended with the perfection of
scripture in the form of the Qur'an, non-scriptural revelation to non-prophets
as well as non law-bearing Muslim prophets continues. They cite Qur'anic verses
as well as Ahadith considered by many to be authentic in support of their
belief in continuous revelation. Taoism. In various designated offshoots of
Taoism like the De Schools in Malaysia, Singapore and Hong Kong, and the Dao
Schools in Hong Kong, Taiwan and China, weekly or sometimes monthly gatherings
are held at temples to receive and understand communications from above by way
of two mediums holding rattan sifts writing on sand, who are 'dictated' with
news ranging in contents from current affairs, religion, to arts and morality,
the writings are called Sift Text or '乩文'. Different gods in the Daoist
pantheon are designated for temples which have to go through the rigour of
acceptance before the contents are recognized as authorized communiques from
heaven.
