Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria The Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria
is the official name for the largest Christian church in Egypt and the Middle
East. The Church belongs to the Oriental Orthodox family of churches, which has
been a distinct church body since the Council of Chalcedon in AD 451, when it
took a different position over Christological theology from that of the Eastern
Orthodox Church. The precise differences in theology that caused the split with
the Coptic Christians are still disputed, highly technical and mainly concerned
with the nature of Christ. The foundational roots of the Church are based in
Egypt but it has a worldwide following. The church was established by Saint
Mark, an apostle and evangelist, in the middle of the 1st century
(approximately AD 42). The head of the church and the See of Alexandria is the
Pope of Alexandria and Patriarch of All Africa on the Holy See of Saint Mark.
As of 2012, about 10% of Egyptians belong to the Coptic Orthodox Church of
Alexandria. History. Apostolic foundation. Egypt is identified in the Bible as
the place of refuge that the Holy Family sought in its flight from Judea: "When
he arose, he took the young Child and His mother by night and departed for
Egypt, and was there until the death of Herod the Great, that it might be
fulfilled which was spoken by the Lord through the prophet, saying, "Out of
Egypt I called My Son"" (Matthew 2:12–23). The Egyptian Church, which is now
more than 1,900 years old, regards itself as the subject of many prophecies in
the Old Testament. Isaiah the prophet, in Chapter 19, Verse 19 says "In that
day there will be an altar to the LORD in the midst of the land of Egypt, and a
pillar to the LORD at its border." The first Christians in Egypt were common
people who spoke Egyptian Coptic. There were also Alexandrian Jews such as
Theophilus, whom Saint Luke the Evangelist addresses in the introductory
chapter of his gospel. When the church was founded by Saint Mark during the
reign of the Roman emperor Nero, a great multitude of native Egyptians (as
opposed to Greeks or Jews) embraced the Christian faith. Christianity spread
throughout Egypt within half a century of Saint Mark's arrival in Alexandria,
as is clear from the New Testament writings found in Bahnasa, in Middle Egypt,
which date around the year AD 200, and a fragment of the Gospel of John,
written in Coptic, which was found in Upper Egypt and can be dated to the first
half of the 2nd century. In the 2nd century, Christianity began to spread to
the rural areas, and scriptures were translated into the local language, namely
Coptic. Contributions to Christianity. The Catechetical School of Alexandria.
The Catechetical School of Alexandria is the oldest catechetical school in the
world. St. Jerome records that the Christian School of Alexandria was founded
by Saint Mark himself. Around 190 AD under the leadership of the scholar
Pantanaeus, the school of Alexandria became an important institution of
religious learning, where students were taught by scholars such as Athenagoras,
Clement, Didymus, and the native Egyptian Origen, who was considered the father
of theology and who was also active in the field of commentary and comparative
Biblical studies. Origen wrote over 6,000 commentaries of the Bible in addition
to his famous Hexapla. Many scholars such as Jerome visited the school of
Alexandria to exchange ideas and to communicate directly with its scholars. The
scope of this school was not limited to theological subjects; science,
mathematics and humanities were also taught there. The question-and-answer
method of commentary began there, and 15 centuries before Braille, wood-carving
techniques were in use there by blind scholars to read and write. The
Theological college of the catechetical school was re-established in 1893. The
new school currently has campuses in Ireland, Cairo, New Jersey, and Los
Angeles, where Coptic priests-to-be and other qualified men and women are
taught among other subjects Christian theology, history, the Coptic language
and art – including chanting, music, iconography, and tapestry. The cradle of
monasticism and its missionary work. Many Egyptian Christians went to the
desert during the 3rd century, and remained there to pray and work and dedicate
their lives to seclusion and worship of God. This was the beginning of the
monastic movement, which was organized by Anthony the Great, Saint Paul, the
world's first anchorite, Saint Macarius the Great and Saint Pachomius the
Cenobite in the 4th century. Christian monasticism was born in Egypt and was
instrumental in the formation of the Coptic Orthodox Church character of
submission, simplicity and humility, thanks to the teachings and writings of
the Great Fathers of Egypt's Deserts. By the end of the 5th century, there were
hundreds of monasteries, and thousands of cells and caves scattered throughout
the Egyptian desert. A great number of these monasteries are still flourishing
and have new vocations to this day. All Christian monasticism stems, either
directly or indirectly, from the Egyptian example: Saint Basil the Great
Archbishop of Caesaria of Cappadocia, founder and organizer of the monastic
movement in Asia Minor, visited Egypt around AD 357 and his rule is followed by
the Eastern Orthodox Churches; Saint Jerome who translated the Bible into
Latin, came to Egypt, while en route to Jerusalem, around AD 400 and left
details of his experiences in his letters; Benedict founded the Benedictine
Order in the 6th century on the model of Saint Pachomius, but in a stricter
form. Countless pilgrims have visited the "Desert Fathers" to emulate their
spiritual, disciplined lives. Role and participation in the Ecumenical
Councils. Council of Nicea. In the 4th century, an Alexandrian presbyter named
Arius began a theological dispute about the nature of Christ that spread
throughout the Christian world and is now known as Arianism. The Ecumenical
Council of Nicea AD 325 was convened by Constantine under the presidency of
Saint Hosius of Cordova and Pope Saint Alexander I of Alexandria to resolve the
dispute and eventually led to the formulation of the Symbol of Faith, also
known as the Nicene Creed. The Creed, which is now recited throughout the
Christian world, was based largely on the teaching put forth by a man who
eventually would become Pope Saint Athanasius of Alexandria, the chief opponent
of Arius. Council of Ephesus. Another theological dispute in the 5th century
occurred over the teachings of Nestorius, the Patriarch of Constantinople who
taught that God the Word was not hypostatically joined with human nature, but
rather dwelt in the man Jesus. As a consequence of this, he denied the title
"Mother of God" "(Theotokos)" to the Virgin Mary, declaring her instead to be
"Mother of Christ" "Christotokos". When reports of this reached the Apostolic
Throne of Saint Mark, Pope Saint Cyril I of Alexandria acted quickly to correct
this breach with orthodoxy, requesting that Nestorius repent. When he would
not, the Synod of Alexandria met in an emergency session and a unanimous
agreement was reached. Pope Cyril I of Alexandria, supported by the entire See,
sent a letter to Nestorius known as "The Third Epistle of Saint Cyril to
Nestorius." This epistle drew heavily on the established Patristic
Constitutions and contained the most famous article of Alexandrian Orthodoxy:
"The Twelve Anathemas of Saint Cyril." In these anathemas, Cyril excommunicated
anyone who followed the teachings of Nestorius. For example, "Anyone who dares
to deny the Holy Virgin the title "Theotokos" is Anathema!" Nestorius however,
still would not repent and so this led to the convening of the First Ecumenical
Council of Ephesus (431), over which Cyril presided. Council of Chalcedon. When
in AD 451, Emperor Marcianus attempted to heal divisions in the Church, the
response of Pope Dioscorus – the Pope of Alexandria who was later exiled –
was that the emperor should not intervene in the affairs of the Church. It was
at Chalcedon that the emperor, through the Imperial delegates, enforced harsh
disciplinary measures against Pope Dioscorus in response to his boldness. The
Council of Chalcedon, from the perspective of the Alexandrine Christology, has
deviated from the approved Cyrillian terminology and declared that Christ was
one hypostasis in two natures. However, in the Nicene-Constantinopolitan Creed,
"Christ was conceived of the Holy Spirit and of the Virgin Mary," thus the
foundation of the definition according to the Non-Chalcedonian adherents,
according to the Christology of Cyril of Alexandria is valid. There is a change
in the Non-Chalcedonian definition here, as the Nicene creed clearly uses the
terms "of", rather than "in". In terms of Christology, the Oriental Orthodox
(Non-Chalcedonians) understanding is that Christ is "One Nature--the Logos
Incarnate," "of" the full humanity and full divinity. The Chalcedonians'
understanding is that Christ is "in" two natures, full humanity and full
divinity. Just as humans are of their mothers and fathers and not in their
mothers and fathers, so too is the nature of Christ according to Oriental
Orthodoxy. If Christ is in full humanity and in full divinity, then He is
separate in two persons as the Nestorians teach. This is the doctrinal
perception that makes the apparent difference which separated the Oriental
Orthodox from the Eastern Orthodox. The Council's findings were rejected by
many of the Christians on the fringes of the Byzantine Empire, including
Egyptians, Syrians, Armenians, and others. From that point onward, Alexandria
would have two patriarchs: the non-Chalcedonian native Egyptian one, now known
as the Coptic Pope of Alexandria and Patriarch of All Africa on the Holy
Apostolic See of St. Mark and the "Melkite" or Imperial Patriarch, now known as
the Greek Orthodox Pope of Alexandria and Patriarch of All Africa. Almost the
entire Egyptian population rejected the terms of the Council of Chalcedon and
remained faithful to the native Egyptian Church (now known as the Coptic
Orthodox Church of Alexandria). Those who supported the Chalcedonian definition
remained in communion with the other leading churches of Rome and
Constantinople. The non-Chalcedonian party became what is today called the
Oriental Orthodox Church. The Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria regards
itself as having been misunderstood at the Council of Chalcedon. There was an
opinion in the Church that viewed that perhaps the Council understood the
Church of Alexandria correctly, but wanted to curtail the existing power of the
Alexandrine Hierarch, especially after the events that happened several years
before at Constantinople from Pope Theophilus of Alexandria towards Patriarch
John Chrysostom and the unfortunate turnouts of the Second Council of Ephesus
in AD 449, where Eutichus misled Pope Dioscorus and the Council in confessing
the Orthodox Faith in writing and then renouncing it after the Council, which
in turn, had upset Rome, especially that the Tome which was sent was not read
during the Council sessions. To make things even worse, the Tome of Pope Leo of
Rome was, according to the Alexandria School of Theology, particularly in
regards to the definition of Christology, considered influenced by Nestorian
heretical teachings. So, due to the above mentioned, especially in the
consecutive sequences of events, the Hierarchs of Alexandria were considered
holding too much of power from one hand, and on the other hand, due to the
conflict of the Schools of Theology, there would be an impasse and a scapegoat,
i.e. Pope Dioscorus. The Tome of Leo has been widely criticized (surprisingly
by Roman Catholic and Eastern Orthodox scholars) in the past 50 years as a much
less than perfect orthodox theological doctrine. It is also to be noted that by
anathemizing Pope Leo because of the tone and content of his tome, as per
Alexandrine Theology perception, Pope Dioscorus was found guilty of doing so
without due process; in other words, the Tome of Leo was not a subject of
heresy in the first place, but it was a question of questioning the reasons
behind not having it either acknowledged or read at the Second Council of
Ephesus in AD 449. Pope Dioscorus of Alexandria was never labeled as heretic by
the council's canons. Copts also believe that the Pope of Alexandria was
forcibly prevented from attending the third congregation of the council from
which he was ousted, apparently the result of a conspiracy tailored by the
Roman delegates. Before the current positive era of Eastern and Oriental
Orthodox dialogues, Chalcedonians sometimes used to call the non-Chalcedonians
"monophysites", though the Coptic Orthodox Church in reality regards
monophysitism as a heresy. The Chalcedonian doctrine in turn came to be known
as "dyophysite". A term that comes closer to Coptic Orthodoxy is miaphysite,
which refers to a conjoined nature for Christ, both human and divine, united
indivisibly in the Incarnate Logos. The Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria
believes that Christ is perfect in His divinity, and He is perfect in His
humanity, but His divinity and His humanity were united in one nature called
"the nature of the incarnate word", which was reiterated by Saint Cyril of
Alexandria. Copts, thus, believe in two natures "human" and "divine" that are
united in one hypostasis "without mingling, without confusion, and without
alteration". These two natures "did not separate for a moment or the twinkling
of an eye" (Coptic Liturgy of Saint Basil of Caesarea). From Chalcedon to the
Arab conquest of Egypt. Copts suffered under the rule of the Byzantine Eastern
Roman Empire. The Melkite Patriarchs, appointed by the emperors as both
spiritual leaders and civil governors, massacred the Egyptian population whom
they considered heretics. Many Egyptians were tortured and martyred to accept
the terms of Chalcedon, but Egyptians remained loyal to the faith of their
fathers and to the Cyrillian view of Christology. One of the most renowned
Egyptian saints of that period is Saint Samuel the Confessor. Muslim conquest
of Egypt. The Muslim invasion of Egypt took place in AD 639. Despite the
political upheaval, the Egyptian population remained mainly Christian. However,
the gradual conversions to Islam over the centuries changed Egypt from a
Christian to a largely Muslim country by the end of the 12th century. Egypt's
Umayyad rulers taxed Christians at a higher rate, driving merchants towards
Islam and undermining the economic base of the Coptic Church. Although the
Coptic Church did not disappear, the Umayyad tax policies made it difficult for
the church to retain elites. From the 19th century to the 1952 revolution. The
position of the Copts began to improve early in the 19th century under the
stability and tolerance of the Muhammad Ali Dynasty. The Coptic community
ceased to be regarded by the state as an administrative unit. In 1855 the
"jizya" tax was abolished. Shortly thereafter, the Copts started to serve in
the Egyptian army. Towards the end of the 19th century, the Coptic Church
underwent phases of new development. In 1853, Pope Cyril IV established the
first modern Coptic schools, including the first Egyptian school for girls. He
also founded a printing press, which was the second national press in the
country. Pope Cyril IV established very friendly relations with other
denominations, to the extent that when the Greek Patriarch in Egypt had to
absent himself for a long period of time outside the country, he left his
Church under the guidance of the Coptic Patriarch. The Theological College of
the School of Alexandria was reestablished in 1893. It began its new history
with five students, one of whom was later to become its dean. Today it has
campuses in Alexandria, Cairo, and various dioceses throughout Egypt, as well
as outside Egypt, in New Jersey, Los Angeles, Sydney, Melbourne and London,
where potential clergymen and other qualified men and women are taught many
subjects, among which are theology, church history, missionary studies, and
Coptic language. Present day. On November 4th, 2012, Bishop Tawadros was chosen
as the 118th Pope of Alexandria and the Patriarch of All Africa on the Holy See
of Saint Mark. His predecessor was Pope Shenouda III, who died on March 17,
2012. There are about 18 million Coptic Orthodox Christians in the world.
Between 10 and 14 million of them are found in Egypt under the jurisdiction of
the Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria. There are also significant numbers in
the diaspora in countries such as the United States of America, Canada,
Australia, France, Germany, and Sudan. The number of Coptic Orthodox Christians
in the diaspora is roughly 4 million. In addition, there are between 350,000
and 400,000 native African adherents in East, Central and South Africa.
Although under the jurisdiction of the Coptic Orthodox Church, these adherents
are not considered Copts, since they are not ethnic Egyptians. Some accounts
regard members of the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church (roughly 45 million),
the Eritrean Orthodox Tewahedo Church (roughly 2.5 million), as members of the
Coptic Orthodox Church. This is however a misnomer, since both the Ethiopian
and the Eritrean Churches, although daughter churches of the Church of
Alexandria, are currently autocephalous churches. In 1959, the Ethiopian
Orthodox Tewahedo Church was granted its first own Patriarch by Pope Cyril VI.
Furthermore, the Eritrean Orthodox Tewahedo Church similarly became independent
of the Ethiopian Tewahedo Church in 1994, when four bishops were consecrated by
Pope Shenouda III of Alexandria to form the basis of a local Holy Synod of the
Eritrean Church. In 1998, the Eritrean Church gained its autocephelacy from the
Coptic Orthodox Church when its first Patriarch was enthroned by Pope Shenouda
III of Alexandria. These three churches remain in full communion with each
other and with the other Oriental Orthodox churches. The Ethiopian Orthodox
Tewahedo Church and the Eritrean Orthodox Tewahedo Church do acknowledge the
Honorary Supremacy of the Coptic Orthodox Patriarch of Alexandria, since the
Church of Alexandria is technically their Mother Church. Upon their selection,
both Patriarchs (Ethiopian & Eritrean) must receive the approval and communion
from the Holy Synod of the Apostolic See of Alexandria before their
enthronement. Since the 1980s theologians from the Oriental (non-Chalcedonian)
Orthodox and Eastern (Chalcedonian) Orthodox churches have been meeting in a
bid to resolve theological differences, and have concluded that many of the
differences are caused by the two groups using different terminology to
describe the same thing (see Agreed Official Statements on Christology with the
Eastern Orthodox Churches). In the summer of 2001, the Coptic Orthodox and
Greek Orthodox Patriarchates of Alexandria agreed to mutually recognize
baptisms performed in each other's churches, making re-baptisms unnecessary,
and to recognize the sacrament of marriage as celebrated by the other.
Previously, if a Coptic Orthodox and Greek Orthodox wanted to get married, the
marriage had to be performed twice, once in each church, for it to be
recognized by both. Now it can be done in only one church and be recognized by
both. According to Christian Tradition and Canon Law, the Coptic Orthodox
Church of Alexandria only ordains men to the priesthood and episcopate, and if
they wish to be married, they must be married before they are ordained. In this
respect they follow the same practices as does the Eastern Orthodox Church.
Traditionally, the Coptic language was used in church services, and the
scriptures were written in the Coptic alphabet. However, due to the Arabisation
of Egypt, service in churches started to witness increased use of Arabic, while
preaching is done entirely in Arabic. Native languages are used, in conjunction
with Coptic, during services outside of Egypt. Coptic Orthodox Christians
celebrate Christmas on 7 January (Gregorian Calendar), which coincides with 25
December according to the Julian Calendar. The Coptic Orthodox Church uses the
Julian Calendar as its Ecclesiastical Calendar. It is known as the Coptic
calendar or the Alexandrian Calendar. This calendar is in turn based on the old
Egyptian calendar of Ancient Egypt. The Coptic Orthodox Church is thus
considered an Old Calendrist Church. Christmas according to the Coptic calendar
was adopted as an official national holiday in Egypt since 2002. Current
events. A 2010 New Year's Eve attack by Islamic fundamentalists on the Coptic
Orthodox Church in the city of Alexandria left 21 dead and many more injured.
One week later, thousands of Muslims stood as human shields outside churches as
Coptic Christians attended Christmas Masses on January 6 & 7, 2011. On Jan. 30,
just days after the demonstrations to reform the Egyptian government, Muslims
in southern Egypt broke into two homes belonging to Coptic Christians. The
Muslim assailants murdered 11 people and wounded four others. In Tahrir Square,
Cairo, on Wednesday 2 February 2011, Coptic Christians joined hands to provide
a protective cordon around their Muslim neighbors during salah (prayers) in the
midst of the 2011 Egyptian Revolution. On October 4, 2011, military and police
squads used force late at night to disperse hundreds of angry Coptic
demonstrators and their supporters who were attempting to stage a sit-in
outside the Maspero TV headquarters in downtown Cairo to protest attacks on a
Christian church in Upper Egypt. On March 17, 2012 the Coptic Orthodox Pope,
Pope Shenouda III died leaving many Copts mourning and worrying as tensions
rise with Muslims. Pope Shenouda III constantly met with Muslim leaders in
order to create peace. Many now worry of Muslims controlling Egypt as the
Muslim Brotherhood won 70% of the parliamentary elections. On November 4th,
2012, Bishop Tawadros was chosen as the 118th Pope. In a sumptuous ritual
filled with prayer, chants and incense at Abbasiya cathedral in Cairo, the 60-
year-old bishop's name was picked by a blindfolded child from a glass bowl in
which the names of two other candidates had also been placed. The enthronement
is scheduled for 18th November, 2012 Jurisdiction outside of Egypt. Besides
Egypt, the Church of Alexandria has jurisdiction over Pentapolis, Libya, Nubia,
Sudan, Ethiopia, Eritrea and all Africa. Both the Patriarchate of Addis Ababa
and all Ethiopia, and the Patriarchate of Asmara and all Eritrea do acknowledge
the supremacy of honor and dignity of the Pope and Patriarch of Alexandria on
the basis that both Patriarchates were established by the Throne of Alexandria
and that they have their roots in the Apostolic Church of Alexandria, and
acknowledge that Saint Mark the Apostle is the founder of their Churches
through the heritage and Apostolic evangelization of the Fathers of Alexandria.
In other words, the Patriarchates of Ethiopia and Eritrea are daughter Churches
of the Holy Apostolic Patriarchate of Alexandria. In addition to the above, the
countries of Uganda, Kenya, Tanzania, Zambia, Zimbabwe, the Congo, Cameroon,
Nigeria, Ghana, Botswana, Malawi, Angola, Namibia and South Africa are under
the jurisdiction and the evangelization of the Throne of Alexandria. It is
still expanding in the vast continent of Africa. Daughter churches. Ethiopian
Orthodox Church. Since the Christianization of Ethiopia in the 4th century, the
Church of Ethiopia has come under the dominion of the Church of Alexandria. The
first bishop of Ethiopia, Saint Frumentius, was consecrated as Bishop of Axum
by Pope Athanasius of Alexandria in 328 AD. From then on, until 1959, the Pope
of Alexandria, as Patriarch of All Africa, always named an Egyptian (a Copt) to
be the Archbishop of the Ethiopian Church. On 13 July 1948, the Coptic Church
of Alexandria and the Ethiopian Orthodox Church reached an agreement concerning
the relationship between the two churches. In 1950, the Ethiopian Orthodox
Church was granted autocephaly by Pope Joseph II of Alexandria, head of the
Coptic Orthodox Church. Five Ethiopian bishops were immediately consecrated by
the Pope of Alexandria and Patriarch of All Africa, and were empowered to elect
a new Patriarch for their church. This promotion was completed when Joseph II
consecrated the first Ethiopian-born Archbishop, Abuna Basilios, as head of the
Ethiopian Church on 14 January 1951. In 1959, Pope Cyril VI of Alexandria
crowned Abuna Basilios as the first Patriarch of Ethiopia. Patriarch Basilios
died in 1971, and was succeeded on the same year by Abuna Theophilos. With the
fall of Emperor Haile Selassie I of Ethiopia in 1974, the new Marxist
government arrested Abuna Theophilos and secretly executed him in 1979. The
Ethiopian government then ordered the Ethiopian Church to elect Abuna Takla
Haymanot as Patriarch of Ethiopia. The Coptic Orthodox Church refused to
recognize the election and enthronement of Abuna Takla Haymanot on the grounds
that the Synod of the Ethiopian Church had not removed Abuna Theophilos, and
that the Ethiopian government had not publicly acknowledged his death, and he
was thus still legitimate Patriarch of Ethiopia. Formal relations between the
two churches were halted, although they remained in communion with each other.
After the death of Abuna Takla Haymanot in 1988, Abune Merkorios who had close
ties to the Derg (Communist) government was elected Patriarch of Ethiopia.
Following the fall of the Derg regime in 1991, Abune Merkorios abdicated under
public and governmental pressure and went to exile in the United States. The
newly elected Patriarch, Abune Paulos was officially recognized by the Coptic
Orthodox Church of Alexandria in 1992 as the legitimate Patriarch of Ethiopia.
Formal relations between the Coptic Church of Alexandria and the Ethiopian
Orthodox Church were resumed on July 13, 2007. His Holiness Abune Paulos died
in August 2012 and transitionally a new pope is elected until an election is
made next year. Eritrean Orthodox Tewahedo Church. Following the independence
of Eritrea from Ethiopia in 1993, the newly independent Eritrean government
appealed to Pope Shenouda III of Alexandria for Eritrean Orthodox autocephaly.
In 1994, Shenouda ordained Abune Phillipos as first Archbishop of Eritrea. The
Eritrean Orthodox Tewahedo Church obtained autocephaly on 7 May 1998, and Abune
Phillipos was subsequently consecrated as first Patriarch of Eritrea. The two
churches remain in full communion with each other and with the other Oriental
Orthodox Churches, although the Coptic Orthodox Church does not recognize the
deposition of the third Patriarch of Eritrea, Abune Antonios. Official titles
of the Pope of Alexandria and Patriarch of All Africa. Historical evolution of
the ecclesiastical title. The Bishop of Alexandria was first known just as the
"Bishop of Alexandria". It continued to be so, until the Church grew within and
all over the Egyptian Province, and many Bishops were consecrated for the newly
founded parishes all over the towns and cities. The Bishop of Alexandria, being
the successor of the first Bishop in Egypt consecrated by Saint Mark, was
honored by the other Bishops, as first among equals ""Primus inter Pares,"".
This was in addition to the appropriate honorary dignity, which was due by
virtue of being the Senior Bishop of the main Metropolis of the Province,
Alexandria, which also the Capital and the main Port of the Province. This
honor was bestowed by making the Senior Bishop an "“Archbishop,”" thus
presiding in dignity of honor over all the Alexandrine and Egyptian Bishops.
The appellation of "“Pope”" has been attributed to the Bishop of Alexandria
since the Episcopate of Heraclas, the 13th Bishop of Alexandria. All the clergy
of Alexandria and Lower Egypt honored him with the appellation "“Papas,”"
which means “Our Father,” as the Senior and Elder Bishop among all bishops,
within the Egyptian Province, who are under his jurisdiction. This is because
Alexandria was the Capital of the Province, and the preaching center and the
place of martyrdom of Saint Mark the Evangelist and Apostle. The title
"“Patriarch”" means the Head or the Leader of a Tribe or a Community.
Ecclesiastically it means the Head of the Fathers (Bishops) and their
congregation of faithful. This title is historically known as “Patriarch of
Alexandria and all Africa on the Holy Apostolic Throne of Saint Mark the
Evangelist,” that is “of Alexandria and of all Africa.” The title of
“Patriarch” was first used around the time of the Third Ecumenical Council
of Ephesus, convened in AD 431, and ratified at Chalcedon in AD 451. It is to
be noted that only the Patriarch of Alexandria has the double title of Pope and
Patriarch among the Eastern Orthodox and the Oriental Orthodox Thrones.
Administrative divisions of the Coptic Orthodox Patriarchate of Alexandria. The
Holy Synod of the Coptic Orthodox Patriarchate of Alexandria. The Holy Synod of
the Coptic Orthodox Patriarchate of Alexandria is headed by the Patriarch of
Alexandria and the members are the Metropolitan Archbishops, Metropolitan
Bishops, Diocesan Bishops, Patriarchal Exarchs, Missionary Bishops, Auxiliary
Bishops, Suffragan Bishops, Assistant Bishops, Chorbishops and the Patriarchal
Vicars for the Church of Alexandria. For the list of the members of the Holy
Synod and their official titles see main article The Holy Synod of the Coptic
Orthodox Patriarchate of Alexandria
