Cosmology There are two very different senses in which the term Cosmology is
used. Physical cosmology is the scholarly and academic study that seeks to
understand the origin, evolution, structure, and ultimate fate of the universe
at large, as well as the natural laws that keep it in order. The subject matter
of this field is studied using scholarly methodology, including the scientific
method and reason. It is studied by scientists, such as astronomers, and
theoretical physicists; and academic philosophers, such as metaphysicians,
philosophers of physics, and philosophers of space and time. Modern cosmology
is dominated by the Big Bang theory, which attempts to bring together
observational astronomy and particle physics. In contrast, religious cosmology
(or mythological cosmology) is study in the humanities, of the historical,
mythological, religious, and esoteric literature and theories about eschatology
(i.e. the end of the world), including such theories, as for instance
apocalypticism. Although the word "cosmology" is recent (first used in 1730 in
Christian Wolff's "Cosmologia Generalis"), the study of the universe has a long
history involving science, philosophy, esotericism and religion. Related
studies include cosmogony, which focuses on the origin of the Universe, and
cosmography, which maps the features of the Universe. Cosmology is also
connected to astronomy. However, they are contrasted in that while the former
is concerned with the Universe as a whole, the latter deals with individual
celestial objects. Disciplines. In recent times, physics and astrophysics have
played a central role in shaping the understanding of the universe through
scientific observation and experiment. What is known as physical cosmology
shaped through both mathematics and observation the analysis of the whole
universe. It is generally understood to begin with the Big Bang, followed
almost instantaneously by cosmic inflation - an expansion of space from which
the universe is thought to have emerged ~ (roughly 13.5–13.9 billion) years
ago. Physical cosmologists propose that the history of the universe has been
governed entirely by physical laws. Between the domains of religion and science
stands the philosophical perspective of metaphysical cosmology. This ancient
field of study seeks to draw intuitive conclusions about the nature of the
universe, man, a supernatural creator, and/or their relationships based on the
extension of some set of presumed facts borrowed from spiritual experience and/
or observation. Metaphysical cosmology has also been described as the placing
of man in the universe in relationship to all other entities. This is
exemplified by the observation made by Marcus Aurelius of a man's place in that
relationship: "He who does not know what the world is does not know where he
is, and he who does not know for what purpose the world exists, does not know
who he is, nor what the world is." Cosmology is often an important aspect of
the creation myths of religions that seek to explain the existence and nature
of reality. In some cases, views about the origin (cosmogony) and final
condition (eschatology) of the universe play a central role in shaping a
framework of religious cosmology for understanding humanity's role in the
universe. A more contemporary distinction between religion and philosophy,
esoteric cosmology is distinguished from religion in its less tradition-bound
construction and reliance on modern "intellectual understanding" rather than
faith, and from philosophy in its emphasis on spirituality as a formative
concept. Historical cosmologies. Table notes: the term "static" simply means
not expanding and not contracting. Symbol G represents Newton's gravitational
constant; Λ (Lambda) is the cosmological constant. Physical cosmology.
Physical cosmology is the branch of physics and astrophysics that deals with
the study of the physical origins and evolution of the Universe. It also
includes the study of the nature of the Universe on its very largest scales. In
its earliest form it was what is now known as celestial mechanics, the study of
the heavens. The Greek philosophers Aristarchus of Samos, Aristotle and Ptolemy
proposed different cosmological theories. In particular, the geocentric
Ptolemaic system was the accepted theory to explain the motion of the heavens
until Nicolaus Copernicus, and subsequently Johannes Kepler and Galileo Galilei
proposed a heliocentric system in the 16th century. This is known as one of the
most famous examples of epistemological rupture in physical cosmology. With
Isaac Newton and the 1687 publication of "Principia Mathematica", the problem
of the motion of the heavens was finally solved. Newton provided a physical
mechanism for Kepler's laws and his law of universal gravitation allowed the
anomalies in previous systems, caused by gravitational interaction between the
planets, to be resolved. A fundamental difference between Newton's cosmology
and those preceding it was the Copernican principle that the bodies on earth
obey the same physical laws as all the celestial bodies. This was a crucial
philosophical advance in physical cosmology. Modern scientific cosmology is
usually considered to have begun in 1917 with Albert Einstein's publication of
his final modification of general relativity in the paper "Cosmological
Considerations of the General Theory of Relativity," (although this paper was
not widely available outside of Germany until the end of World War I). General
relativity prompted cosmogonists such as Willem de Sitter, Karl Schwarzschild
and Arthur Eddington to explore the astronomical consequences of the theory,
which enhanced the growing ability of astronomers to study very distant
objects. Prior to this (and for some time afterwards), physicists assumed that
the Universe was static and unchanging. In parallel to this dynamic approach to
cosmology, one long-standing debate about the structure of the cosmos was
coming to a climax. Mount Wilson astronomer Harlow Shapley championed the model
of a cosmos made up of the Milky Way star system only ; while Heber D. Curtis
argued for the idea that spiral nebulae were star systems in their own right
– island universes. This difference of ideas came to a climax with the
organization of the Great Debate at the meeting of the (US) National Academy of
Sciences in Washington on 26 April 1920. The resolution of this debate came
with the detection of novae in the Andromeda galaxy by Edwin Hubble in 1923 and
1924. Their distance established spiral nebulae well beyond the edge of the
Milky Way and has galaxies of their own. Subsequent modeling of the universe
explored the possibility that the cosmological constant introduced by Einstein
in his 1917 paper may result in an expanding universe, depending on its value.
Thus the big bang model was proposed by the Belgian priest Georges Lemaître in
1927 which was subsequently corroborated by Edwin Hubble's discovery of the red
shift in 1929 and later by the discovery of the cosmic microwave background
radiation by Arno Penzias and Robert Woodrow Wilson in 1964. These findings
were a first step to rule out some of many alternative physical cosmologies.
Recent observations made by the COBE and WMAP satellites observing this
background radiation have effectively, in many scientists' eyes, transformed
cosmology from a highly speculative science into a predictive science, as these
observations matched predictions made by a theory called Cosmic inflation,
which is a modification of the standard big bang model. This has led many to
refer to modern times as the "Golden age of cosmology."
