Cotton Mather Cotton Mather, FRS (February 12, 1663 – February 13, 1728; A.B.
1678, Harvard College; A.M. 1681, honorary doctorate 1710, University of
Glasgow) was a socially and politically influential New England Puritan
minister, prolific author and pamphleteer; he is often remembered for his role
in the Salem witch trials. He was the son of Increase Mather, and grandson of
both John Cotton and Richard Mather, all also prominent Puritan ministers.
Biography. Mather was named after his maternal grandfather, John Cotton. He
attended Boston Latin School, where his name was posthumously added to its Hall
of Fame, and graduated from Harvard in 1678 at age 15. After completing his
post-graduate work, he joined his father as assistant pastor of Boston's
original North Church. In 1685 Mather assumed full responsibilities as pastor
at the Church. Cotton Mather wrote more than 450 books and pamphlets, and his
ubiquitous literary works made him one of the most influential religious
leaders in America. Mather set the moral tone in the colonies, and sounded the
call for second- and third-generation Puritans, whose parents had left England
for the New England colonies of North America, to return to the theological
roots of Puritanism. The most important of these, "Magnalia Christi Americana"
(1702), comprises seven distinct books, many of which depict biographical and
historical narratives to which later American writers, such as Nathaniel
Hawthorne, Elizabeth Drew Stoddard, and Harriet Beecher Stowe, would look in
describing the cultural significance of New England for later generations after
the American Revolution. Mather's text thus is one of the more important
documents in American history, because it reflects a particular tradition of
seeing and understanding the significance of place. Mather, as a Puritan
thinker and social conservative, drew on the language of the Bible to speak to
contemporary audiences. In particular, Mather's review of the American
experiment sought to explain signs of his time and the types of individuals
drawn to the colonies as predicting the success of the venture. From his
religious training, Mather viewed the importance of texts for elaborating
meaning and for bridging different moments of history—linking, for instance,
the Biblical stories of Noah and Abraham with the arrival of such eminent
leaders as John Eliot; John Winthrop; and his own father, Increase Mather.
Through his writings the intellectual and physical struggles of first- through
third-generation Puritans created an elevated appraisal in the minds of
Americans about its appointed place among other nations. The unease and self-
deception that characterized that period of colonial history would be revisited
in many forms at political and social moments of crisis (such as the Salem
witch trials, which coincided with frontier warfare and economic competition
among Indians and French and other European settlers) and during lengthy
periods of cultural definition (such as the American Renaissance of the late
18th- and early 19th-century literary, visual, and architectural movements,
which sought to capitalize on unique American identities). Highly influential
because of his prolific writing, Mather was a force to be reckoned with in
secular, as well as in spiritual, matters. After the fall of James II of
England, in 1688, Mather was among the leaders of the successful revolt against
James's governor of the consolidated Dominion of New England, Sir Edmund
Andros. In November 1713, Mather's wife, newborn twins, and two-year-old
daughter all succumbed during a measles epidemic. Of Mather's three wives and
15 children, only his last wife and two children survived him. Mather was
buried on Copp's Hill, near Old North Church. "Few puritans more loudly decried
the bosom serpent of egotism than did Cotton Mather; none more clearly
exemplified it. Explicitly or implicitly, he projects himself everywhere in his
writings. In the most direct compensatory sense, he does so by using literature
as a means of personal redress. He tells us that he composed his discussions of
the family to bless his own, his essays on the riches of Christ to repay his
benefactors, his tracts on morality to convert his enemies, his funeral
discourses to console himself for the loss of a child, wife, or friend" (106).
Boyle's influence on Mather. A huge influence throughout Mather’s career was
Robert Boyle. While coming to terms with who he was, Mather read Robert
Boyle’s book “The Usefulness of Experimental Natural Philosophy.” Mather
read Boyle’s work closely throughout the 1680s and his early works on science
and religion borrowed greatly from it. He even uses almost identical language
to Boyle. Mather's relationship with his father and the aftereffects in
Mather's Works. Cotton Mather's relationship with his well-known father,
Increase Mather, is thought by some to have been a strained and difficult one.
Increase Mather was a pastor of the Old North Church and led an accomplished
life that Cotton was determined to live up to. Despite Cotton Mather's efforts,
he never became quite as well known and successful in politics as his father.
He did surpass his father's talents as a writer, writing over 400 books. One of
the most public displays of their strained relationship appeared during the
Salem Witch Trials. Despite the fact that Increase Mather did not support the
trials, Cotton Mather documented them (Hovey 531-2).And this is how he is
related to the Salem Witch Trials. Smallpox inoculation controversy. The
practice of smallpox inoculation (as opposed to the later practice of
vaccination) was developed possibly in 8th century India or 10th Century China.
Spreading its reach in seventeenth-century Turkey, inoculation or, rather,
variolation, involved infecting a person through a cut in the skin with exudate
from a patient with a relatively mild case of smallpox (variola), in order to
bring about a manageable and recoverable infection that will provide later
immunity. By the beginning of the eighteenth century, the Royal Society in
England was discussing the practice of inoculation, and the smallpox epidemic
in 1713 spurred further interest. It was not until 1721, however, that England
recorded its first case of inoculation. Early New England. Smallpox was a
serious threat in colonial America, most devastating to Native Americans, but
also to Anglo-American settlers. New England suffered smallpox epidemics in
1677, 1689–90, and 1702. It was highly contagious, and mortality could reach
as high as 30 percent or more. Boston had been plagued by smallpox outbreaks in
1690 and 1702. During this era, public authorities in Massachusetts dealt with
the threat primarily by means of quarantine. Incoming ships were quarantined in
Boston harbor, and any smallpox patients in town were held under guard or in a
"pesthouse." In 1706 a slave, Onesimus, explained to Cotton Mather how he had
been inoculated as a child in Africa. Mather was fascinated by the idea. By
July 1716, Mather had read an endorsement of inoculation by Dr. Emanuel
Timonius of Constantinople in the "Philosophical Transactions". Mather then
declared, in a letter to Dr. John Woodward of Gresham College in London, that
he planned to press Boston's doctors to adopt the practice of inoculation
should smallpox reach the colony again. By 1721, a whole generation of young
Bostonians was vulnerable and memories of the last epidemic's horrors had by
and large disappeared. On April 22 of that year, the HMS "Seahorse" arrived
from the West Indies carrying smallpox on board. Despite attempts to protect
the town through quarantine, eight known cases of smallpox appeared in Boston
by May 27, and by mid-June, the disease was spreading at an alarming rate. As a
new wave of smallpox hit the area and continued to spread, many residents fled
to outlying rural settlements. The combination of exodus, quarantine, and
outside traders' fears disrupted business in the capital of the Bay Colony for
weeks. Guards were stationed at the House of Representatives to keep Bostonians
from entering without special permission. The death toll reached 101 in
September, and the Selectmen, powerless to stop it, "severely limited the
length of time funeral bells could toll." As one response, legislators
delegated a thousand pounds from the treasury to help the people who, under
these conditions, could no longer support their families. On June 6, 1721,
Mather sent an abstract of reports on inoculation by Timonius and Jacobus
Pylarinus to local physicians, urging them to consult about the matter. He
received no response. Next, Mather pleaded his case to Dr. Zabdiel Boylston,
who tried the procedure on his only son and two slaves—one grown and one a
boy. All recovered in about a week. Boylston inoculated seven more people by
mid-July. The epidemic peaked in October 1721, with 411 deaths; by February 26,
1722, Boston was, once again, free of smallpox. The total number of cases since
April 1721 came to 5,889, with 844 deaths—more than three-quarters of all the
deaths in Boston during 1721. Meanwhile, Dr. Boylston had inoculated 242
people, with only six resulting in death. Inoculation debate. Boylston and
Mather's inoculation crusade "raised a horrid Clamour" amongst the people of
Boston. Both Boylston and Mather were "Object of their Fury; their furious
Obloquies and Invectives," which Mather acknowledges in his diary. Boston's
Selectmen, consulting a doctor who claimed that the practice caused many deaths
and only spread the infection, forbade Boylston from performing it again. "The
New-England Courant" published writers who opposed the practice. The editorial
stance was that the Boston populace feared that inoculation spread, rather than
prevented, the disease; however, some historians, notably H. W. Brands, have
argued that this position was a result of editor-in-chief James Franklin's
(Benjamin Franklin's brother) contrarian positions. Public discourse ranged in
tone from organized arguments by tobacconist and medical practitioner John
Williams, who posited that "several arguments proving that inoculating the
smallpox is not contained in the law of Physick, either natural or divine, and
therefore unlawful," to more slanderous attacks, such as those put forth in a
pamphlet by Dr. William Douglass of Boston entitled "The Abuses and Scandals of
Some Late Pamphlets in Favour of Inoculation of the Small Pox" (1721), on the
qualifications of inoculation's proponents. (Douglass was exceptional at the
time for holding a medical degree from Europe.) At the extreme, in November
1721, someone hurled a lighted grenade into Cotton Mather's house. Medical
opposition. Several opponents of smallpox inoculation, among them John
Williams, stated that there were only two laws of physick (medicine): sympathy
and antipathy. In his estimation, inoculation was neither a sympathy toward a
wound or a disease, or an antipathy toward one, but the creation of one. For
this reason, its practice violated the natural laws of medicine, transforming
health care practitioners into those who harm rather than heal. As with many
colonists, Williams' Puritan beliefs were enmeshed in every aspect of his life,
and he used the Bible to state his case. He quoted when Jesus said: "It is not
the healthy who need a doctor, but the sick." In contrast, Dr. William Douglass
proposed a more secular argument against inoculation, stressing the importance
of reason over passion and urging the public to be pragmatic in their choices.
In addition, he demanded that ministers leave the practice of medicine to
physicians, and not meddle in areas where they lacked expertise. According to
Douglass, smallpox inoculation was "a medical experiment of consequence," one
not to be undertaken lightly. He believed that not all learned individuals were
qualified to doctor others, and while ministers took on several roles in the
early years of the colony, including that of caring for the sick, they were now
expected to stay out of state and civil affairs. Douglass also felt that
inoculation caused more deaths than it prevented. The only reason Cotton Mather
had success in it, he said, was because Mather had used it on children, who are
naturally more resilient. Douglass vowed to always speak out against "the
wickedness of spreading infection." Speak out he did: "The battle between these
two prestigious adversaries and Mather lasted far longer than the epidemic
itself, and the literature accompanying the controversy was both vast and
venomous." In the end, Douglass grew to accept inoculation, but he stood his
ground on the need for professional standards. Puritan resistance. Generally,
Puritan pastors favored the inoculation experiments. Puritan theology, with God
as Creator and the laws of nature as God's "second causes" encouraged such
experimentation. Therefore, while God's authority was absolute, God was also
authoritative over the laws of nature which were God's "other book."
Nevertheless Williams questioned whether the smallpox "is not one of the
strange works of God; and whether inoculation of it be not a fighting with the
most High." He also asked his readers if the smallpox epidemic may have been
given to them by God as "punishment for sin," and warned that attempting to
shield themselves from God's fury (via inoculation), would only serve to
"provoke him more." The Puritans found meaning in affliction, and they did not
yet know why God was showing them disfavor through smallpox. Not to address
their errant ways before attempting a cure could set them back in their
"errand." Many Puritans believed that creating a wound and inserting poison was
doing violence and therefore was antithetical to the healing art. They grappled
with adhering to the Ten Commandments, with being proper church members and
good caring neighbors. The apparent contradiction between harming or murdering
a neighbor through inoculation and the Sixth Commandment--"thou shalt not
kill"--seemed insoluble and hence stood as one of the main objections against
the procedure.[citation?] Williams maintained that because the subject of
inoculation could not be found in the Bible, it was not the will of God, and
therefore "unlawful." He also explained that inoculation violated The Golden
Rule, because if one neighbor voluntarily infected another with disease, he was
not doing unto others as he would have done to him. With the Bible as the
Puritans’ source for all decision-making, lack of scriptural evidence
concerned many, and Williams vocally scorned Rev. Mather for not being able to
reference an inoculation edict directly from the Bible. Obviously, Mather, the
Puritan pastor, disagreed and most, if not all, Puritan pastors stood with
Mather. Inoculation defended. With the smallpox epidemic catching speed and
racking up a staggering death toll, a solution to the crisis was becoming more
urgently needed by the day. The use of quarantine and various other efforts,
such as balancing the body's humors, did not slow the disease's spread. As news
rolled in from town to town and correspondence arrived from overseas, reports
of horrific stories of suffering and loss due to smallpox stirred mass panic
among the people. "By circa 1700, smallpox had become among the most
devastating of epidemic diseases circulating in the Atlantic world." Cotton
Mather strongly challenged the perception that inoculation was against the will
of God and argued that the procedure was not outside of Puritan principles. He
wrote that "whether a Christian may not employ this Medicine (let the matter of
it be what it will) and humbly give Thanks to God’s good Providence in
discovering of it to a miserable World; and humbly look up to His Good
Providence (as we do in the use of any other Medicine) It may seem strange,
that any wise Christian cannot answer it. And how strangely do Men that call
themselves Physicians betray their Anatomy, and their Philosophy, as well as
their Divinity in their invectives against this Practice?" The Puritan minister
began to embrace the sentiment that smallpox was an inevitability for anyone,
both the good and the wicked, yet God had provided them with the means to save
themselves. Mather reported that, from his view, "none that have used it ever
died of the Small Pox, tho at the same time, it were so malignant, that at
least half the People died, that were infected With it in the Common way."
While Cotton Mather was experimenting with the procedure, prominent Puritan
pastors Benjamin Colman and William Cooper expressed public and theological
support for them. The practice of smallpox inoculation was eventually accepted
by the general population due to first-hand experiences and personal
relationships. Although many were initially wary of the concept, it was because
people were able to witness the procedure's consistently positive results,
within their own community of ordinary citizens, that it became widely utilized
and supported. One important change in the practice after 1721 was regulated
quarantine of inoculees. Inoculation visibly and directly aided man's control
of the disease, the level of infection, mortality rates and the spreading of
the epidemic. Planned inoculation led to better observation of the body's
responses and allowed people the ability to time the onset of the pox and
control the disease's intensity. For example, by inoculating in the months of
milder climate, one had a better chance of fighting the infection and becoming
immune instead of the alternative: natural exposure to the disease during
harsher weather, when the body's defenses were already challenged.
Additionally, by the 1750s, innovations and experience with inoculation focused
on better insertion of pox fluid and preparation of body to withstand the
disease. By controlling the point and time of infection, bodies could be
conditioned to optimal state before contracting smallpox, therefore providing a
better opportunity to fight and achieve immunity. Dependent upon a person's
constitution, by adhering to a specific diet or purging, one could physically
handle the infection more successfully. It was also discovered that inoculation
produced less scarring and physical defects than a common, naturally contracted
case. The aftermath. Although Cotton Mather and Dr. Boylston were able to
demonstrate the efficacy of the practice, the debate over inoculation would
continue even beyond the epidemic of 1721-22. After overcoming considerable
difficulty and achieving notable success, Boylston traveled to London in 1724
where he published his results and was elected to the Royal Society in 1726.
The responses of the Boston clergymen to the reproaches put forth by the anti-
inoculation camp highlighted seminal changes the Puritan church was undergoing
at the time. By prescribing recent advances in medicine, the Boston ministers
modified the doctrine of theological pathogenesis in an attempt to maintain the
old order according to which it was the clergy’s duty and privilege to
interpret illnesses and their cures. However, the contradiction of
simultaneously upholding tradition and embracing innovations was impossible to
resolve and, as a consequence, the clergy continued to lose influence over
secular affairs in eighteenth-century New England. In the end, lives were saved
by inoculation, and the epidemic was halted. Even today, the procedure is
credited with ending the devastation caused by the early epidemics, and
vaccination, in many ways an updated and modernized form of the procedure,
continues to be recommended by the Centers for Disease Control for at-risk
populations, such as potential victims of bioterrorism, and research scientists
who work with surviving strains of the virus. Salem witch trials of 1692, The
Mather Influence. Mather's contemporary critic, Robert Calef, considered him
responsible for laying the very groundwork that inspired the trials at Salem,
pg. 152: The historian Charles Upham, writing in 1869 says that both Mathers
"are answerable... more that almost any other... for the opinions of their
time. It was indeed a superstitious age, but made much more so by their
operations, influence, and writings, beginning with Increase Mather's movement
at the assembly of Ministers in 1681 and ending with Cotton Mather's dealings
with the Goodwin children, and the account thereof which he printed and
circulated far and wide." Upham refers to the afflicted in Salem as the
"imitators" of the Goodwin children. Mather was influential in the construction
of the court for the trials from the beginning. Sir William Phips, governor of
the newly chartered Province of Massachusetts Bay, appointed his lieutenant
governor, William Stoughton, as head of a special witchcraft tribunal and then
as chief justice of the colonial courts, where he presided over the witch
trials. According to Bancroft, Mather had been influential in gaining
politically unpopular Stoughton his appointment as lieutenant governor under
Phips by appealing to his politically powerful father, Increase Mather.
“Intercession had been made by Cotton Mather for the advancement of William
Stoughton, a man of cold affections, proud, self-willed and covetous of
distinction.” Apparently Mather saw in Stoughton an ally for church-related
matters. Bancroft quotes Mather’s reaction to Stoughton's appointment as
follows: Mather claims he did not attend the trials in Salem (though his father
attended the trial of George Burroughs). Two contemporaries -- Thomas Brattle
and Robert Calef—place him at executions (see below). Mather began to
publicize and celebrate the trials well before they were put to an end: "If in
the midst of the many Dissatisfaction among us, the publication of these Trials
may promote such a pious Thankfulness unto God, for Justice being so far
executed among us, I shall Re-joyce that God is Glorified..." " (Wonders of the
Invisible World)." He calls himself a historian not an advocate, but writes in
such a way that clearly presumes the guilt of the accused and adding insults
e.g. calling Martha Carrier a rampant hag (Wonders of the Invisible World). The
Use of Spectral Evidence. Mather's most fatal influence over the trials was in
composing the answer to the question of whether or not to allow Spectral
evidence, that is, allowing the afflicted girls to claim that some invisible
ghost of the defendant was tormenting them, and for this to be considered
evidence of witchcraft by the defendant, even if the defendant denied it and
professed their own strongly held Christian beliefs. An opinion on the matter
was sought from the most esteemed ministers of the area and Cotton Mather took
credit for their response when anonymously celebrating himself years later:
"drawn up at their desire, by Cotton Mather the younger, as I have been
informed." (Book of The Life of Sir William Phips first published anonymously
in London in 1697) And Mather then included the letter, but, for his own
reasons (surely not brevity, Magnalia is huge) left out the first, second, and
eight sections, which would seem most encouraging to the judges to carry-on
with their work. The original full version of the letter, called "Return of the
Several Ministers" dated June 15, 1692, and had already been reprinted in the
fall 1692 in the final two pages of Increase Mather's "Cases of Conscience". It
is a curious document and remains a source of confusion and argument. Calef
calls it "perfectly Ambidexter, giving as great as greater Encouragement to
proceed in those dark methods, then cautions against them... indeed the Advice
then given, looks most like a thing of his Composing, as carrying both Fire to
increase and Water to quench the Conflagration." Regarding his view on Spectral
evidence, Upham concludes that "Cotton Mather never in any public writing
'denounced the admission ' of it, never advised its absolute exclusion; but on
the contrary recognized it as a ground of 'presumption' ...once admitted
nothing could stand against it. Character, reason, common sense, were swept
away." Allowing such evidence resulted in the shrieking circus that the trials
became. The later rejection of Spectral evidence in the trials of January 1693
resulted in no convictions. Bancroft notes that Mather considered witches
"among the poor, and vile, and ragged beggars upon Earth," and Bancroft asserts
that Mather considered the people against the witch trials to be witch
advocates. Post-trial. In the years after the trials, Cotton Mather remained
unrepentant for his role. Of the principal actors in the trial, whose lives are
recorded after, only Cotton Mather and his ally William Stoughton never
admitted any guilt. Indeed, in the years after the trial Mather became an
increasingly vehement defender of the trial. At the request of then Lt.-Gov.
William Stoughton, Mather wrote "Wonders of the Invisible World" written during
the trials and published in 1693. The book contained a few of Mather’s
sermons, the conditions of the colony and a description of witch trials in
Europe. Mather somewhat clarified the contradictory advice he had given in
"Return of the Several Ministers," by defending the use of spectral evidence.
"Wonders of the Invisible World" appeared at the same time as Increase
Mather’s "Cases of Conscience." The last event in Cotton Mather's involvement
with witchcraft was his attempt to cure Mercy Short and Margaret Rule. Boston
merchant Robert Calef began his eight-year campaign against the influential
Mathers. Calef's book was inspired by the fear that Mather would succeed in
once again stirring up new witchcraft trials, and the need to bear witness to
the horrible experiences of New Englanders in 1692. He quotes the public
apologies of the men on the jury and one of the judges. Upon reading Calef's
"More Wonders of the Invisible World," Increase Mather publicly burned the book
in Harvard Yard. 19th Century Revision of Cotton Mather, Poole vs. Upham. Poole
was not a historian, but a famous librarian, and a lover of literature,
including Mather's "Magnalia" "and other books and tracts, numbering nearly 400
were never so prized by collectors as today." Poole announces his intention to
redeem Mather's name, using as a springboard a harsh critique of a recently
published tome by Charles Wentworth Upham called "Salem Witchcraft Volumes I
and II With an Account of Salem Village and a History of Opinions on Witchcraft
and Kindred Subjects." Upham's book runs to almost 1,000 pages and a quick
search of the name Mather (referring to either father, son, or ancestors) shows
that it occurs only 96 times; Poole's critique, in book form, runs less than 70
pages but the name "Mather" occurs many times that. Upham shows a balanced and
complicated view of Cotton Mather such as this first mention: "One of Cotton
Mather's most characteristic productions is the tribute to his venerated
master. It flows from a heart warm with gratitude." Upham's book refers to
Robert Calef 25 times with the majority of these regarding documents compiled
by Calef in the mid-1690s and stating: "Although zealously devoted to the work
of exposing the enormities connected with the witchcraft prosecutions, there is
no ground to dispute the veracity of Calef as to matters of fact." He goes on
to say that Calef's collection of writings "gave a shock to Mather's influence,
from which it never recovered." Thus, Poole's critique might better be
understood as aimed at Calef, Mather's contemporary, who saw fit to ascribe to
him, and his influence, the largest portion of blame. Calef produced only the
one book, he is self-effacing and apologetic for his limitations, and on the
title page his is listed not as author but "collector". Poole, champion of
literature, cannot accept Calef whose "faculties, as indicated by his writings
appear to us to have been of an inferior order;..." and his book "in our
opinon, has a reputation much beyond its merits." Poole refers to Calef as
Mather's "personal enemy" and opens a line, "Without discussing the character
and motives of Calef..." and he does not follow up on this suggestiveness, to
discuss any motive or reason to impune Calef's character. Upham took the bait
and responded to Poole in a book running five times as long and sharing the
same title (referring to Poole as "the Reviewer.") Many of Poole's arguments
were easily attended to, but both authors emphasize the importance of Cotton
Mather's difficult and contradictory view on spectral evidence, as copied in
the final pages of Increase Mather's "Cases of Conscience" called "The Return
of Several Ministers." In 1914, the historian George Lincoln Burr sided with
Upham in a note on Thomas Brattle's letter, "The strange suggestion of W. F.
Poole that Brattle here means Cotton Mather himself, is adequately answered by
Upham..." Burr also reprinted Calef in full and dug deep into the historical
record for information on the man and concludes "...that he had else any
grievance against the Mathers or their colleagues there is no reason to think."
Burr finds that a comparison between Calef's work and original documents in the
historical record collections "testify to the care and exactness..." 20th
Century and Ongoing Revision. Chadwick Hansen’s "Witchcraft at Salem,"
published in 1969, defined Mather as a positive influence on the Salem Trials.
Hansen considered Mather's handling of the Goodwin Children to be sane and
temperate. Hansen also noted that Mather was more concerned with helping the
affected children than witch-hunting. Mather treated the affected children
through prayer and fasting. Before she was executed, Mather tried to convert
the Catholic Goodwife Glover, accused of practicing witchcraft on the Goodwin
children. Hansen claimed Mather acted as a moderating influence in the trials
by opposing the death penalty for those who confessed—or feigned
confession—such as Tituba and Dorcas Good. Most interesting was Mather’s
decision not to tell the community of the others whom Goodwife Clover claimed
practiced witchcraft. This could be seen as either generous discretion or sly
blackmail. Later, with Robert Calef's observation of Mather's dealings with
Margaret Rule, it became seen as the latter, with Mather perceived as drawing
information from her through leading questions, and possibly having a prurient
interest-- "Smutty" in Mather's words—in his intimate dealings with afflicted
young women. Hansen also claims that most negative impressions of Cotton Mather
stem from his defense of the ongoing trials in "Wonders of the Invisible
World." After others had lamented the roles they played in the executions of
nineteen and imprisonment of hundreds, Mather remained the chief defender of
the trials, which diminishes the view of him as a moderate influence. Some
historians who have examined the life of Cotton Mather after Chadwick
Hansen’s book also seem to yearn for a positive view of Cotton Mather.
Bernard Rosenthal laments that Mather is so often portrayed as the rabid witch
hunter. Rosenthal suggests that Mather might have had guilty feelings—feigned
or not—for choosing not to restrain the judges during the trial, though he
was in the best position to do so. Larry Gragg highlights Mather’s cloudy
thinking and confusion between sympathy for the possessed, and the
boundlessness of spectral evidence when Mather stated, “the devil have
sometimes represented the shapes of persons not only innocent, but also the
very virtuous.” And writing in the early 1980s, John Demos seemed to consider
Mather a moderating influence on the trials. Major works. "Boston Ephemeris".
The Boston Ephemeris was an almanac written by Mather in 1686. The content was
similar to what is known today as the Farmer’s Almanac. This was particularly
important because it shows that Cotton Mather had influence in mathematics
during the time of Puritan New England. This almanac contained a significant
amount of astronomy, celestial motions of the sun, planets, and stars, as did
many almanacs of the time. It also included “information such as weather
forecasts, farmers' planting dates, astronomical information, and tide tables,
Astronomical data and various statistics, such as the times of the rising and
setting of the sun and moon, eclipses, hours of full tide, stated festivals of
churches, terms of courts, lists of all types, timelines, and more.” Mather
had within the text of the Almanac the positions and motions of these celestial
bodies, which he must have calculated by hand. "The Biblia Americana". When
Cotton Mather died, he had an abundance of unfinished writings left behind,
including one entitled "The Biblia Americana". Mather believed that "Biblia
Americana" was the best thing he had ever written, believing it to be his
masterwork (Hovey 533). "Biblia Americana" contained Cotton Mather's thoughts
and opinions on the Bible and how he interpreted it. "Biblia Americana" is
incredibly large and Mather worked on it from 1693–1728, when he died. Mather
tried to convince others that philosophy and science could work together with
religion instead of against it. People did not have to choose one or the other
and in "Biblia Americana" Mather looked at the Bible through a scientific
perspective, the complete opposite of when he wrote "The Christian
Philosopher", in which he decided to approach science in a religious manner
(Smolinski 280-281). "Pillars of Salt". The Puritan execution sermon, preached
on the occasion of a public hanging, then quickly printed up in pamphlet form
and sold for a few pence, was an early form of true-crime literature. Mather's
first published sermon, which appeared in 1686, concerned the crime and
punishment of James Morgan, a reprobate who in a drunken rage impaled a man
with an iron spit. Thirteen years later, following the execution of a Boston
woman named Sarah Threeneedles for killing her baby, Mather issued "Pillars of
Salt". This compilation of a dozen accounts (half of which, including the case
of Morgan, had been previously published) stands as a landmark work, a Puritan
precursor of the true-crime miscellanies that, stripped of all religious
intent, would become a staple of the genre in subsequent centuries. In 2008 The
Library of America reprinted the entirety of "Pillars of Salt" in its two-
century retrospective of American True Crime. "Magnalia Christi Americana".
"Magnalia Christi Americana", considered Mather's greatest work, was published
in 1702, when he was 39. The book includes several biographies of saints, and
describes the process of the New England settlement.(Meyers 23-24) It is
composed of seven total books, including Pietas in Patriam: the life of His
Excellency Sir William Phips, originally published anonymously in London in
1697. Despite being one of Mather's most well-known works, many have openly
criticized it, labeling it as hard to follow and understand, and poorly paced
and organized. However, other critics have praised Mather's works, believing it
to be one of the best efforts at properly documenting the establishment of
America and growth of the people (Halttunen 311). "The Christian Philosopher".
In 1721 "The Christian Philosopher" was published. Written by Mather, it was
the first systematic book on science published in America. Mather attempted to
show how Newtonian science and religion were in harmony. It was in part based
on Robert Boyle's "The Christian Virtuoso" (1690). Mather also took inspiration
from "Hayy ibn Yaqdhan", a philosophical novel by Abu Bakr Ibn Tufail (whom he
refers to as "Abubekar"), a 12th-century Islamic philosopher. Despite
condemning the 'Mahometans' as infidels, he viewed the protagonist of the
novel, Hayy, as a model for his ideal Christian philosopher and monotheistic
scientist'. Mather also viewed Hayy as a noble savage and applied this in the
context of attempting to understand the Native American Indians in order to
convert them to Puritan Christianity.
