Counter-Reformation The Counter-Reformation (also the Catholic Revival or
Catholic Reformation) was the period of Catholic revival beginning with the
Council of Trent (1545–1563) and ending at the close of the Thirty Years' War
(1648), which is sometimes considered a response to the Protestant Reformation.
Such reforms included the foundation of seminaries for the proper training of
priests in the spiritual life and the theological traditions of the Church, the
reform of religious life by returning orders to their spiritual foundations,
and new spiritual movements focusing on the devotional life and a personal
relationship with Christ, including the Spanish mystics and the French school
of spirituality. It also involved political activities that included the Roman
Inquisition. Council of Trent. Pope Paul III (1534–1549) initiated the
Council of Trent (1545–1563), a commission of cardinals tasked with
institutional reform, addressing contentious issues such as corrupt bishops and
priests, indulgences, and other financial abuses. Paul had been appointed Pope
as a genuine convert to and lover of Catholicism, in the hope that he would
represent a movement away from what had become a Papal monarchy which had
caused violent struggles for power in the years preceding - epitomised by the
Sack of Rome in 1527. Paul had proposed a general Church council be held as
early as 1536 but was unable to hold it until 1545 due to the vulnerability of
the Papacy. The support of the Holy Roman Emperor, Charles V, was needed for
any such initiative, but he was occupied with the Hapsburg-Valois Conflict in
Milan until the Peace of Crépy in 1544. This fundamental political weakness is
historically considered the reason why the outcome of the Council of Trent was
so conservative - the papacy could not afford to surrender power, and that
power was in part sustained by the very abuses of the Church that the Council
sought to redress. The Council upheld the basic structure of the Medieval
Church, its sacramental system, religious orders, and doctrine. It rejected all
compromise with the Protestants, restating basic tenets of the Roman Catholic
faith. The Council upheld salvation appropriated by grace through faith "and"
works of that faith (not just by faith, as the Protestants insisted) because
"faith without works is dead", as the Epistle of St. James states (1 22:26).
Transubstantiation, during which the consecrated bread and wine were held to be
transformed wholly and substantially into "the body, blood, soul and divinity"
of Christ, was also reaffirmed, along with the other six Sacraments of the
Catholic Church. Other practices that drew the ire of Protestant reformers,
such as pilgrimages, the veneration of saints and relics, and the veneration of
the Virgin Mary were strongly reaffirmed as spiritually commendable practices.
The Council officially accepted the Vulgate listing of the Old Testament Bible
which included the deuterocanonical works (also called the Apocrypha,
especially by Protestants) on a par with the 39 books customarily found in the
Masoretic Text and the Protestant Old Testament. This reaffirmed the previous
Council of Rome and Synods of Carthage (both held in the 4th century, A.D.)
which had affirmed the Deuterocanon as Scripture. The Council also commissioned
the Roman Catechism, which still serves as authoritative Church teaching (the
Catechism of the Catholic Church). While the basic structure of the Church was
reaffirmed, there were noticeable changes to answer complaints that the
Counter-Reformers were, tacitly, willing to admit were legitimate. Among the
conditions to be corrected by Catholic reformers was the growing divide between
the clerics and the laity; many members of the clergy in the rural parishes,
after all, had been poorly educated. Often, these rural priests did not know
Latin and lacked opportunities for proper theological training (addressing the
education of priests had been a fundamental focus of the humanist reformers in
the past). Parish priests were to be better educated in matters of theology and
apologetics, while Papal authorities sought to educate the faithful about the
meaning, nature and value of art and liturgy, particularly in monastic churches
(Protestants had criticised them as "distracting"). Notebooks and handbooks
became more common, describing how to be good priests and confessors. Thus, the
Council of Trent attempted to improve the discipline and administration of the
Church. The worldly excesses of the secular Renaissance Church, epitomized by
the era of Alexander VI (1492–1503), intensified during the Reformation under
Pope Leo X (1513–1522), whose campaign to raise funds in the German states to
rebuild St. Peter's Basilica by supporting use of indulgences served as a key
impetus for Martin Luther's 95 Theses. But the Catholic Church would respond to
these problems by a vigorous campaign of reform, inspired by earlier Catholic
reform movements that predated the Council of Constance (1414–1417):
humanism, devotionalism, legalism and the observantine tradition. The Council,
by virtue of its actions, repudiated the pluralism of the secular Renaissance
which had previously plagued the Church: the organization of religious
institutions was tightened, discipline was improved, and the parish was
emphasized. The appointment of Bishops for political reasons was no longer
tolerated. In the past, the large landholdings forced many bishops to be
"absent bishops" who at times were property managers trained in administration.
Thus, the Council of Trent combated "absenteeism," which was the practice of
bishops living in Rome or on landed estates rather than in their dioceses. The
Council of Trent also gave bishops greater power to supervise all aspects of
religious life. Zealous prelates such as Milan's Archbishop Carlo Borromeo
(1538–1584), later canonized as a saint, set an example by visiting the
remotest parishes and instilling high standards. Religious Orders. New
religious orders were a fundamental part of the reforms. Orders such as the
Capuchins, Ursulines, Theatines, Discalced Carmelites, the Barnabites, and
especially the Jesuits worked in rural parishes, and set examples of Catholic
renewal. The Theatines undertook to check the spread of heresy and contributed
to a regeneration of the clergy. The Capuchins, an offshoot of the Franciscan
order notable for their preaching and for their care for the poor and the sick,
grew rapidly. Capuchin-founded confraternities took special interest in the
poor and lived austerely. Members of orders active in overseas missionary
expansion expressed the view that the rural parishes often needed
Christianizing as much as the heathens of Asia and the Americas. The Ursulines
focused on the special task of educating girls. Devotion to the traditional
works of mercy exemplified the Catholic Reformation's reaffirmation of
salvation through faith and works, and repudiation of the maxim "sola
scriptura" emphasized by Protestants sects. Not only did they make the Church
more effective, but they also reaffirmed fundamental premises of the Medieval
Church. The Jesuits were the most effective of the new Catholic orders. An heir
to the devotional, observantine, and legalist traditions, the Jesuits organized
along military lines. The worldliness of the Renaissance Church had no part in
their new order. Loyola's masterwork "Spiritual Exercises" showed the emphasis
of handbooks characteristic of Catholic reformers before the Reformation,
reminiscent of devotionalism. The Jesuits became preachers, confessors to
monarchs and princes, and humanist educators, and their efforts are largely
credited with stemming Protestantism in Poland, Bohemia, Hungary, southern
Germany, France, and the Spanish Netherlands. Jesuits participated in the
expansion of the Church in the Americas and Asia, by their missionary activity.
Loyola's biography contributed to an emphasis on popular piety that had waned
under political popes such as Alexander VI and Leo X. After recovering from a
serious wound, he took a vow to "serve only God and the Roman pontiff, His
vicar on earth." The emphasis on the Pope is a reaffirmation of the medieval
papalism, while Council of Trent defeated Conciliarism, the belief that general
councils of the church collectively were God's representative on earth, rather
than the Pope. Taking Pope as an absolute ruler, the Jesuits contributed to the
Counter-Reformation Church along a line harmonized to the Vatican. Spiritual
movements. The Catholic Reformation was not only a political and Church policy
oriented movement, it included major figures such as Ignatius of Loyola, Teresa
of Ávila, John of the Cross, Francis de Sales and Philip Neri, who added to
the spirituality of the Catholic Church. Teresa of Avila and John of the Cross
were Spanish mystics and reformers of the Carmelite Order whose ministry
focused on interior conversion to Christ, the deepening of prayer and
commitment to God's will. Teresa was given the task to develop and write about
the way to perfection in her love and unity with Christ. Her publications,
especially her autobiography "The Life of Theresa of Jesus" had multiple
effects. It's to be placed besides the "Confessions of Augustine." Thomas
Merton called John of the Cross the greatest of all mystical theologians. An
important clarification about the word "mystical" is necessary here. When one
considers its definition or the nature of "mysticism," a common
misunderstanding exists that if one is to become a mystic they are required to
seclude themselves physically from the outside world to have this kind of
experience. Although such seclusion can, indeed, be the only apostalate
(vocation) to which some are called to a life of prayer, there are others who
have dual apostalates. In fact, John of the Cross himself served as both
confessor/spiritual director within the confines of the clositered communities
that he and Teresa of Ávila worked vigorously to establish, but he also
literally helped build a number of those convents and monasteries. It is true
that Ignatius of Loyola and Francis de Sales were called to a more active
spirituality or apostalate, but their vocations were not "the opposite" of
Teresa of Jesus and John of the Cross as this article previously indicated.
Returning to Ignatius of Loyola, "to see God in all things" was a typical
expression of Ignatius and a main theme of his Spiritual Exercises. The
spirituality of Filippo Neri, who lived in Rome at the same time as Ignatius,
was practically oriented too, but totally opposed to the Jesuit approach. Said
Filippo: "If I have a real problem, I contemplate what Ignatius would do ...
and then I do the exact opposite". As a recognition of their joint contribution
to the spiritual renewal within the Catholic reformation, Ignatius of Loyola,
Filippo Neri and Teresa of Ávila were canonized on the same day, March 12,
1622. The victory at the Battle of Lepanto in 1571 was accredited to the Virgin
Mary and signified the beginning of a strong resurgence of Marian devotions".
During and after the Catholic Reformation, Marian piety experienced unforeseen
growth with over 500 pages of mariological writings during the 17th century
alone. The Jesuit Francisco Suárez was the first theologian to use the Thomist
method on Marian theology. Other well known contributors to Marian spirituality
are Lawrence of Brindisi, Robert Bellarmine, and Francis of Sales. Decrees on
art. "The Last Judgment", a fresco in the Sistine Chapel by Michelangelo
(1534–41), came under persistent attack in the Counter-Reformation for, among
other things, nudity (later painted over for several centuries), not showing
Christ seated or bearded, and including the pagan figure of Charon. Italian
painting after 1520, with the notable exception of the art of Venice, developed
into Mannerism, a highly sophisticated style, striving for effect, that
concerned many churchmen as lacking appeal for the mass of the population.
Church pressure to restrain religious imagery affected art from the 1530s and
resulted in the decrees of the final session of the Council of Trent in 1563
including short and rather inexplicit passages concerning religious images,
which were to have great impact on the development of Catholic art. Previous
Catholic councils had rarely felt the need to pronounce on these matters,
unlike Orthodox ones which have often ruled on specific types of images. Ten
years after the decree Paolo Veronese was summoned by the Holy Office to
explain why his "Last Supper", a huge canvas for the refectory of a monastery,
contained, in the words of the Holy Office: "buffoons, drunken Germans, dwarfs
and other such scurrilities" as well as extravagant costumes and settings, in
what is indeed a fantasy version of a Venetian patrician feast. Veronese was
told that he must change his painting within a three month period – in fact
he just changed the title to "The Feast in the House of Levi", still an episode
from the Gospels, but a less doctrinally central one, and no more was said. But
the number of such decorative treatments of religious subjects declined
sharply, as did "unbecomingly or confusedly arranged" Mannerist pieces, as a
number of books, notably by the Flemish theologian Molanus, Saint Charles
Borromeo and Cardinal Gabriele Paleotti, and instructions by local bishops,
amplified the decrees, often going into minute detail on what was acceptable.
Much traditional iconography considered without adequate scriptural foundation
was in effect prohibited, as was any inclusion of classical pagan elements in
religious art, and almost all nudity, including that of the infant Jesus.
According to the great medievalist Émile Mâle, this was "the death of
medieval art", but it paled in contrast to the Iconclasm present in some
Protestant circles & did not apply to secular paintings. Some Counter
Reformation painters and sculptors include Pieter Paul Rubens, Guido Reni,
Anthony van Dyck and Bartolome Esteban Murillo. Church music. Reforms before
the Council of Trent. The Council of Trent is believed to be the apex of the
Counter-Reformation’s influence on church music in the 16th century. However,
the council’s pronouncements on music were not the first attempt at reform.
The Catholic Church had spoken out against a perceived abuse of music used in
the mass before the Council of Trent ever convened to discuss music in 1562.
The manipulation of the Credo and using non-liturgical songs was addressed in
1503, and secular singing and the intelligibility of the text in the delivery
of psalmody in 1492. The delegates at the Council were just a link in the long
chain of church clergy who had pushed for a reform of the musical liturgy
reaching back as far as 1322. Probably the most extreme move at reform came
late in 1562 when, instructed by the legates, Egidio Foscarari bishop of Modena
and Gabriele Paleotti began work on reforming cloisters of nuns and their
practices involving the liturgy. In fact, the reforms proscribed to the
cloisters, which included omitting the use of an organ, prohibiting
professional musicians, and banishing polyphonic singing, were much more strict
than any of the Council’s edicts or even those to be found in the Palestrina
legend. Fueling the cry for reform from many ecclesial figures was the
compositional technique popular in the 15th and 16th centuries of using musical
material and even the accompanying texts from other compositions such as
motets, madrigals, and chansons. Several voices singing different texts in
different languages made any of the text difficult to distinguish from the
mixture of words and notes. The parody mass would then contain melodies
(usually the tenor line) and words from songs that could have been, and often
were, on sensual subjects. The musical liturgy of the church was being more and
more influenced by secular tunes and styles. The Council of Paris, which met in
1528, as well as the Council of Trent were making attempts to restore the sense
of sacredness to the church setting and what was appropriate for the mass. The
councils were simply responding to issues of their day. Reforms during the 22nd
session. The Council of Trent met sporadically from December 13, 1545 to
December 4, 1563 to reform many parts of the Catholic Church. The 22nd session
of the council, which met in 1562, dealt with church music in Canon 8 in the
section of “Abuses in the Sacrifice of the Mass” during a meeting of the
council on September 10, 1562. Canon 8 states that "Since the sacred mysteries
should be celebrated with utmost reverence, with both deepest feeling toward
God alone, and with external worship that is truly suitable and becoming, so
that others may be filled with devotion and called to religion: . . .
Everything should be regulated so that the Masses, whether they be celebrated
with the plain voice or in song, with everything clearly and quickly executed,
may reach the ears of the hearers and quietly penetrate their hearts. In those
Masses where measured music and organ are customary, nothing profane should be
intermingled, but only hymns and divine praises. If something from the divine
service is sung with the organ while the service proceeds, let if first be
recited in a simple, clear voice, lest the reading of the sacred words be
imperceptible. But the entire manner of singing in musical modes should be
calculated not to afford vain delight to the ear, but so that the words may be
comprehensible to all; and thus may the hearts of the listeners be caught up
into the desire for celestial harmonies and contemplation of the joys of the
blessed." Canon 8 is often quoted as the Council of Trent’s decree on church
music but that is a glaring misunderstanding of the canon; it was only a
proposed decree. In fact, the delegates at the Council never officially
accepted canon 8 in its popular form but bishops of Granada, Coimbra, and
Segovia pushed for the long statement about music to be attenuated and many
other prelates of the Council joined enthusiastically. The only restrictions
actually given by the 22nd session was to keep secular elements out of the
music making polyphony implicitly allowed. The issue of textual intelligibility
did not make its way into the final edicts of the 22nd session but were only
featured in preliminary debates. The 22nd session only prohibited
“lascivious” and “profane” things to be intermingled with the music but
Paleotti, in his Acts, brings to equal importance the issues of
intelligibility. The idea that the Council called to remove all polyphony from
the church is widespread but there is no documentary evidence to support that
claim. It is possible, however, that some of the Fathers had proposed such a
measure. The emperor Ferdinand I, Holy Roman Emperor has been attributed to be
the “saviour of church music” because he said polyphony ought not to be
driven out of the church. But Ferdinand was most likely an alarmist and read
into the Council the possibility of a total ban on polyphony. The Council of
Trent did not focus on the style of music but on attitudes of worship and
reverence during the mass. The Saviour-Legend. The crises regarding polyphony
and intelligibility of the text and the threat that polyphony was to be removed
completely, which was assumed to be coming from the Council, has a very
dramatic legend of resolution. The legend goes that Giovanni Pierluigi da
Palestrina (ca. 1525/26–1594), a church musician and choirmaster in Rome,
wrote a mass for the Council delegates in order to demonstrate that a
polyphonic composition could set the text in such a way that the words could be
clearly understood and that was still pleasing to the ear. Palestrina’s Missa
Papae Marcelli (Mass for Pope Marcellus) was performed before the Council and
received such a welcoming reception among the delegates that they completely
changed their minds and allowed polyphony to stay in use in the musical
liturgy. Therefore Palestrina came to be named the "saviour of church
polyphony". This legend, though unfounded, has long been a mainstay of
histories of music. The saviour-myth was first spread by an account by
Aggazzari and Banchieri in 1609 who said that Pope Marcellus was trying to
replace all polyphony with plainsong. Palestrina’s “Missa Papae Marcelli”
was, though, in 1564, after the 22nd session, performed for the Pope while
reforms were being considered for the Sistine Choir. On another occasion in
1565, as recorded by the secretary of the Sistine Chapel, Cardinal Vitelli
invited two Eminences to his house where two masses were performed and compared
for textual intelligibility. However, what masses were performed, who composed
them, and how the Eminences reacted has been swallowed up by history. The Pope
Marcellus Mass, in short, was not important in its own day and did not help
save church polyphony. What is undeniable is that despite any solid evidence of
his influence during or after the Council of Trent, no figure is more qualified
to represent the cause of polyphony in the Mass than Palestrina. Pope Pius IV
upon hearing Palestrina’s music would make Palestrina, by Papal Brief, the
model for future generation of Catholic composers of sacred music. Reforms
following the Council of Trent. Like his contemporary Palestrina, the Flemish
composer Jacobus de Kerle (1531/32–1591) was also credited with giving a
model of composition for the Council of Trent. His composition in four-parts,
Preces, marks the "official turning point of the Counter Reformation's a
cappella ideal.” Kerle was the only ranking composer of the Netherlands to
have acted in conformity with the Council. Another musical giant on equal
standing with Palestrina, Orlando di Lasso (1530/32–1594) was an important
figure in music history though less of a purist than Palestrina. He expressed
sympathy for the Council’s concerns but still showed favor for the “Parady
chanson Masses.” Despite the dearth of edicts from the Council regarding
polyphony and textual clarity, the reforms that followed from the 22nd session
filled in the gaps left by the Council in stylistic areas. In the 24th session
the Council gave authority to “Provincial Synods” to discern provisions for
church music. The decision to leave practical application and stylistic matters
to local ecclesiastical leaders was important in shaping the future of Catholic
church music. It was left then, up to the local church leaders and church
musicians to find proper application for the Council’s decrees. Though
originally theological and directed towards the attitudes of the musicians, the
Council’s decrees came to be thought of by church musicians as a
pronouncement on proper musical styles. This understanding was most likely
spread through musicians who sought to implement the Council's declarations but
did not read the official Tridentine pronouncements. Church musicians were
probably influenced by order from their ecclesiastical patrons. Composers who
reference the Council’s reforms in prefaces to their compositions do not
adequately claim a musical basis from the Council but a spiritual and religious
basis of their art. The Cardinal Archbishop of Milan, Charles Borromeo, was a
very important figure in reforming church music after the Council of Trent.
Through Borromeo was an aide to the pope in Rome and was unable to be in Milan,
he eagerly pushed for the decrees of the Council to be quickly put into
practice in Milan. Borromeo kept in contact with his church in Milian through
letters and eagerly encouraged the leaders there to implement the reforms
coming from the Council of Trent. In one of his letters to his vicar in the
Milan diocese, Nicolo Ormaneto of Verona, Borromeo commissioned the master of
the chapel, Vincenzo Ruffo (1508–1587), to write a mass that would make the
words as easy to understand as possible. Borromeo also suggested that if Don
Nicola, a composer of a more chromatic style, was in Milan he too could compose
a mass and the two be compared for textural clarity. Borromeo was likely
involved or heard of the questions regarding textual clarity because of his
request to Ruffo. Ruffo took Borromeo’s commission seriously and set out to
compose in a style that presented the text so that all words would be
intelligible and the textual meaning be the most important part of the
composition. His approach was to move all the voices in a homorhythmic manner
with no complicated rhythms, and to use dissonance very conservatively.
Ruffo’s approach was certainly a success for textual clarity and simplicity,
but if his music was very theoretically pure it was not an artistic success
despite Ruffo’s attempts to bring interest to the monotonous four-part
texture. Ruffo’s compositional style which favored the text was well in line
with the Council’s perceived concern with intelligibility. Thus the belief in
the Council’s strong edicts regarding textual intelligibility became to
characterize the development of sacred church music. The Council of Trent
brought about other changes in music: most notably developing the Missa brevis,
Lauda and "Spiritual Madrigal" (Madrigali Spirituali). Unintentional start of
the Scientific Revolution. James Burke argued that some of the directives
initiated in the Counter-Reformation had consequences that created challenges
to the Catholic Church's authority. Specifically, efforts to reform the Julian
calendar may have led to the Scientific Revolution, and the Church's
confrontation with Galileo Galilei. More celebrations of holidays and similar
events raised a need to have these events followed closely throughout the
dioceses. But there was a problem with the accuracy of the calendar: by the
sixteenth century the Julian calendar was almost ten days out of step with the
seasons and the heavenly bodies. Among the astronomers who were asked to work
on the problem of how the calendar could be reformed was Nicolaus Copernicus, a
canon at Frombork (Frauenburg). In the dedication to "De revolutionibus orbium
coelestium" (1543), Copernicus mentioned the reform of the calendar proposed by
the Fifth Council of the Lateran (1512–1517). As he explains, a proper
measurement of the length of the year was a necessary foundation to calendar
reform. By implication, his work replacing the Ptolemaic system with a
heliocentric model was prompted in part by the need for calendar reform. An
actual new calendar had to wait until the Gregorian calendar in 1582. At the
time of its publication, "De revolutionibus" passed with relatively little
comment: little more than a mathematical convenience that simplified
astronomical references for a more accurate calendar. Physical evidence
suggesting Copernicus's theory regarding the Earth's motion was literally true
promoted the apparent heresy against the religious thought of the time. As a
result, Galileo Galilei was placed under house arrest for publishing heretical
writings and the Pope condemned heliocentric theory and temporarily banned its
teaching in 1633.
