Covenant (religion) The religious concept of a covenant is central to the
Abrahamic religions and derived from the biblical covenants, notably the
Abrahamic covenant. It is a formal alliance or agreement made by God with that
religious community or with humanity in general. Etymology. Covenant is the
customary word used to translate the Hebrew word "berith". It is used in the
Masoretic Text 264 times Judaism. The Mosaic covenant is central to Judaism and
considered as applying only to Jews. For non-Jews, Judaism advocates the pre-
Sinaitic Seven Laws of Noah. "...Judaism does not deny salvation to those
outside of its fold, for, according to Jewish law, all non-Jews who observe the
Noahide laws will participate in salvation and in the rewards of the world to
come". Christianity. Christianity asserts that God made a "New Covenant", which
either replaces or exists alongside the Old Covenant of the Hebrew Bible. In
this "New Covenant" the Crucifixion of Jesus atones for the sins of all who put
their faith in him (Matthew 26:28). Covenant theology, a theological system
within Reformed Christianity, holds that God relates to man primarily through
three covenants: the Covenant of Redemption, the Covenant of Works, and the
Covenant of Grace. In this theological system a covenant may be defined as, "an
unchangeable, divinely imposed legal agreement between God and man that
stipulates the conditions of their relationship." Islam. As an Abrahamic faith,
Islam continues belief in the covenant with Abraham. Circumcision is still
carried out as a symbol of this covenant. Any person confessing to faith can
become a Muslim and partake of this covenant with God: Other religions. A
covenant may also refer to an agreement between members of a congregation to
work together according to the precepts of their religion. In Indo-Iranian
religious tradition, Mithra-Mitra is the hypostasis of covenant, and hence
keeper and protector of moral, social and interpersonal relationships,
including love and friendship. In living Zoroastrianism, which is one of the
two primary developments of Indo-Iranian religious tradition, Mithra is by
extension a judge, protecting agreements by ensuring that individuals who break
one do not enter Heaven.
