Covenanter The Covenanters were a Scottish Presbyterian movement that played an
important part in the history of Scotland, and to a lesser extent that of
England and Ireland, during the 17th century. Presbyterian denominations
tracing their history to the Covenanters and often incorporating the name
continue the ideas and traditions in Scotland and internationally. They derive
their name from the term "covenant" after the covenant sworn by Israel in the
Old Testament. There were two important covenants in Scottish history, the
National Covenant and the Solemn League and Covenant. Beginnings. The
Covenanters are so named because in a series of bands or covenants they bound
themselves to maintain the Presbyterian doctrine and policy as the sole form of
religion of their country. The first "godly band" of the Lords of the
Congregation and their followers is dated December 1557; but more important is
the covenant of 1581, drawn up by John Craig in consequence of the strenuous
efforts Roman Catholics were making to regain their hold upon Scotland, and
called the King's Confession or National Covenant. Based on the Confession of
Faith of 1560, this document denounced the Pope and the doctrines of the Roman
Catholic Church in no measured terms. It was adopted by the General Assembly of
the Church of Scotland, signed by King James VI and his household, and enjoined
on persons of all ranks and classes, and was subscribed to again in 1590 and
1596. Upheaval and the Wars of the Three Kingdoms. In 1637, Scotland was in a
state of turmoil. King Charles I and William Laud, Archbishop of Canterbury,
met with a reverse in their efforts to impose a new liturgy on the Scots. The
new liturgy had been devised by a panel of Scottish bishops, including
Archbishop Spottiswoode of St. Andrews, but a riot against its use was
orchestrated in St. Giles' Cathedral, Edinburgh, ostensibly started by Jenny
Geddes. Fearing further measures on the part of the king, it occurred to
Archibald Johnston (Lord Warriston) to revive the National Covenant of 1581.
Together with the cooperation of Alexander Henderson, a revitalized National
Covenant was finalized in early 1638. Additional matter intended to suit the
document to the special circumstances of the time was added, primarily a
recital of the acts of parliament against "superstitious and papistical rites"
and an elaborate oath to maintain the reformed religion. The covenant was
adopted and signed by a large gathering in the kirkyard of Greyfriars Kirk in
Edinburgh, on 28 February 1638, after which copies were sent throughout the
country for signing. The subscribers engaged by oath to maintain religion in
the form that it existed in 1580, and to reject all innovations introduced
since that time, while also professing loyalty to the King. The year 1638
marked an apex of events for the Covenanters, for it was the time of broad
confrontations with the established church supported by the monarchy.
Confrontations occurred in several parts of Scotland, such as the one with the
Bishops of Aberdeen by a high level assembly of Covenanters staging their
operations from Muchalls Castle. The General Assembly of 1638 was composed of
ardent Covenanters, and in 1640 the covenant was adopted by the Scottish
Parliament, its subscription being made a requirement for all citizens. Before
this date, the Covenanters were usually referred to as Supplicants, but from
about this time the former designation began to prevail. The Covenanters raised
an army to resist Charles I's religious reforms, and defeated him in the
Bishops Wars. The crisis that this caused to the Stuart monarchy helped to
spark off the Wars of the Three Kingdoms, which included the English Civil War,
the Scottish Civil War and Irish Confederate Wars. For the following ten years
of civil war in Britain, the Covenanters were the "de facto" government of
Scotland. In 1642, they sent an army to Ulster in Ireland to protect the
Scottish settlers there from the Irish Catholic rebels who had attacked them in
the Irish Rebellion of 1641. The Scottish army remained in Ireland until the
end of the civil wars, but was confined to its garrison around Carrickfergus
after its defeat at the Battle of Benburb in 1646. A further Covenanter
military intervention began in 1643. The leaders of the English Parliament,
worsted in the English Civil War, implored the aid of the Scots, which was
promised on condition that the Scottish system of church government would be
adopted in England. After some haggling, a document called the ""Solemn League
and Covenant"" was drawn up. This was in effect a treaty between England and
Scotland which called for the preservation of the reformed religion in Scotland
and the reformation of religion in England and Ireland "according to the word
of God and the example of the best reformed churches", and the extirpation of
popery and prelacy. It did not explicitly mention Presbyterianism and included
some ambiguous formulations that left the door open to Independency. It was
subscribed to by many in both kingdoms and also in Ireland, and was approved by
the English Parliament, and with some slight modifications by the Westminster
Assembly of Divines. This agreement meant that the Covenanters sent another
army south to England to fight on the Parliamentarian side in the First English
Civil War. The Scottish armies in England were instrumental in bringing about
the victory of the English Parliament over the King. In turn, this sparked the
outbreak of civil war in Scotland in 1644–47, as Scottish Royalist opponents
of the Covenanters took up arms against them. Royalism was most common among
Scottish Roman Catholics and Episcopalians, who were opposed to the
Covenanters' imposition of their religious settlement on the country. The
Covenanters' enemies, led by James Graham, 1st Marquess of Montrose and aided
by an Irish expeditionary force and Highland clans led by Alasdair MacColla won
a series of victories over hastily raised Covenanter forces in 1644–45.
However, the Scottish Royalists were ultimately defeated in September 1645, at
the Battle of Philiphaugh, near Selkirk. The disaster at Philiphaugh was
largely due to the Royalists' own disunity and the return of the main
Covenanter armies from England. The civil war in Scotland was a bitter episode
which exposed the religious divisions between Presbyterians, Episcopalians and
Catholics, the political divisions between Royalists and Covenanters and the
cultural divisions between the Highlands and Lowlands. The end of the first
civil wars in Scotland and England left the Covenanters hopeful that their
Solemn League and Covenant would be implemented in the Three Kingdoms. However,
Charles I refused to accept it when he surrendered himself to the Scots in
1646. He was taken to Newcastle, where several attempts were made to persuade
him to take the Covenants. When this failed, he was handed over to the
commissioners of Parliament in early 1647. However, many Covenanters, led by
James Hamilton, were suspicious of their English allies' intentions and opened
secret negotiations with Charles I. He made important concessions to them in
the "Engagement" made with the Scots in December 1647. The Engagement was
rejected by the militant Covenanters known as the Kirk Party, who wanted the
King to endorse their agenda explicitly before an alliance could be reached. A
Scottish army invaded England in support of the Engagement, but was routed at
the Battle of Preston, leaving the Kirk Party in the ascendant in Scotland. The
Westminster Confession of Faith, which had been submitted for ratification in
1646, was in part adopted by act of the English Parliament in 1648 as the
Articles of Christian Religion, while in Scotland it was approved with minor
reservations in August 1647 and ratified by the Scottish Parliament in February
1649. The Covenanters' insistence on dictating the future of both Scotland and
England eventually led to all-out war with their erstwhile allies, the English
Parliament, and to the Scots signing an alliance with Charles II known as the
Treaty of Breda. Charles II, before landing in Scotland in June 1650, declared
by a solemn oath his approbation of both covenants, and this was renewed on the
occasion of his coronation at Scone in the following January. However, the
Covenanters were utterly defeated in 1650–52 by the forces of the English
Parliament under Oliver Cromwell. Lowland Scotland was occupied by the New
Model Army and the Covenanters were sidelined. From 1638 to 1651 the
Covenanters, led by Archibald Campbell, 1st Marquess of Argyll, had been the
dominant party in Scotland, directing policy both at home and abroad. Their
power had been seriously weakened, however, by Cromwell's victory at Dunbar in
September 1650 and was practically destroyed after the Battle of Worcester and
the English occupation of Lowland Scotland. Under Cromwell's Commonwealth,
Scotland was forced into a temporary union with England and the General
Assembly of the Kirk lost all civil power. Restoration and "The Killing Time".
Worse was to come for the Covenanters when Charles II was restored nine years
later. Firmly seated upon the throne, Charles renounced the covenants, which in
1662 were declared unlawful oaths to be abjured by all persons holding public
offices. Argyll himself was executed for treason, episcopacy was restored,
James Sharp was appointed Archbishop of St Andrews and Primate of Scotland, the
court of high commission was revived, and ministers who refused to recognize
the authority of the bishops were expelled from their livings. Archbishop Sharp
survived an assassination attempt in 1668 only to be killed by another group of
Covenanters in 1679. Following the restoration of Episcopacy rebel ministers
began to preach at secret open-air meetings in the countryside known as
'conventicles' A period of sustained persecution began. Oppressive measures
against these illegal field assemblies where attendance was made a capital
offence led to an outbreak of armed rebellion in 1666, originating in Galloway.
Advancing from the west towards Edinburgh, a small force of badly armed
Covenanters was defeated at the Battle of Rullion Green in the Pentland Hills,
a location which caused the whole tragic episode to be misleadingly named the
Pentland Rising. To quell unrest in south-west Scotland, the government brought
in 6,000 Highland soldiers, described by its enemies as an "inhumane and
barbarous Highland host" which was quartered on suspected Covenanters and was
accused of committing many atrocities. A further rebellion broke out in 1679,
after the unexpected success of a group of covenanters, armed with pitch forks
and the like, against government forces led by John Graham of Claverhouse at
the Battle of Drumclog. For a time the authorities looked in danger of losing
control of the south west of Scotland, as more and more people joined the rebel
camp at Bothwell near Glasgow; but only a few weeks after Drumclog the rebels
were defeated at the Battle of Bothwell Brig. In the weeks before the battle
the Covenanters spent more time arguing among themselves than preparing for the
inevitable counterstroke, which did much to contribute towards their downfall.
Of 1,200 captured rebels taken to Edinburgh, some 400 were imprisoned in an
area of Greyfriars Kirkyard over the winter months. Inevitably, the government
behaved harshly at first towards some of those caught in arms. On the
initiative of James, Duke of Monmouth, who led the king's army to victory at
Bothwell Brig, a more conciliatory policy was followed for a time, though this
met with limited success. Through the period of repression the Covenanters held
their convictions with a zeal that was only intensified by the persecution. For
them it was a matter of belief. For the government, in contrast, the whole
conventicle movement was seen as a problem of public order, which they
attempted to deal with often using very inadequate resources. However, after
the collapse of the 1679 rebellion a more dangerous element entered into the
whole equation. In 1680 a more extreme mood appeared among sections of the
Covenanter underground, which found expression in a document known as the
"Sanquhar Declaration". This was the manifesto of the followers of the Reverend
Richard Cameron, soon to be known as the Cameronians. Hitherto, many in the
Covenanter underground maintained an outward loyalty to the king, despite their
opposition to the religious policy of his government; but the Cameronians took
matters to a new height, renouncing their allegiance to Charles and denouncing
his brother, James, as a papist. One extreme position inevitably led to
another: the government in attempting to stamp out sedition authorized field
executions without trial. This was the beginning of what Robert Wodrow later
called the Killing Time. Although this period was to become an important part
of Covenanter martyrology, it was far less ferocious than the name implies.
Cameron himself was killed in a clash with government forces at Ayrs Moss in
July 1680, but his followers, now a tiny part of the Covenanter movement,
continued to exist. After the accession of James VII in 1685 the King issued a
series of "Letters of Indulgence" allowing such "ousted ministers as had lived
peaceably and orderly to return to their livings". This succeeded in luring
many ministers away from the struggle, but those remaining became more
determined. When William of Orange summoned a "Convention of the Estates" which
met on 14 March 1689 in Edinburgh to consider whether Scotland should recognise
him or James, forces of Cameronians arrived to bolster William's support. In
the subsequent Jacobite Rising, the Cameronian Guard helped to defeat the
Jacobite Highlanders, particularly at the Battle of Dunkeld. Although the
Cameronians had helped to defend the Revolution, they were disappointed that
their intolerant religious views were not adopted by the new government. The
binding obligation of the National Covenant (1638) and the Solemn League and
Covenant (1643) was passed over since the Acts of Parliament in favour of these
had been rescinded by Charles and were not revived under William and Mary. For
some Covenanters even William of Orange was an "uncovenanted" King since he was
head of the Church of England which was an episcopal church. Perhaps 1000
people in the south west made an issue of the failure to maintain the covenants
and also, with some justification, viewed the new establishment as tainted by
Erastianism. They formed the "United Societies" refusing to recognise the
"usurped" Church of Scotland. Martyrs and memorials. Though the rebellion had
ended and a degree of Presbyterian tolerance for other faiths had been
suggested by thanks given for James's Indulgence of 1687, for allowing all "to
serve God after their own way and manner", memories of 'the Killing Time' were
now kept alive by monuments and tombstones at the many martyr graves across the
south of Scotland, particularly the south west. "For the word of God and
Scotland's work of Reformation. Scotland's heritage comes at a price which
invokes our greatest heart felt thanks for the lives sacrificed on the anvil of
persecution, when innocent blood stained the heather on our moors and ran down
the gutters of our streets with sorrow and sighing beyond contemplation." Tombs
are scattered around the moors and monuments were added later, for "if the
authorities learnt that a murdered Covenanter had been given a decent burial,
their bodies were usually disinterred and buried in places reserved for thieves
and malcontents. Quite often the corpse was hanged or beheaded first", and
burying the body in the kirkyard could result in another punitive death. In
1707 a monument was erected at Greyfriars Kirkyard in Edinburgh, near the open
ground known as the 'Covenanters' Prison', where some twelve-hundred
Covenanters were held captive after Bothwell. It gives a figure of 18,000
killed in the period 1661-1680, quoting an estimate which Daniel Defoe claimed
was "Collected from the Accounts both Publick and Private" for his "Memoirs of
the Church of Scotland" (1717). "The History of the Sufferings of the Church of
Scotland from the Restoration to the Revolution" by Robert Wodrow, published in
1721-1722, produced a detailed record and denounced the persecution of the
Covenanters. This martyrology would be brought forward again when elements in
the Church of Scotland felt it to be suffering state interference, as at the
Disruption of 1843. The "United Societies" continued without preaching,
sacraments, or government until they were joined by one ordained minister in
1706, then in 1743 the "Reformed Presbytery" was organised. Covenanters fleeing
persecution had set up churches in Ireland and North America and several small
denominations were founded, including the Reformed Presbyterian Church
(denominational group). More recently some historians have portrayed the
Covenanters as an early revolutionary movement and the Cameronians as
forerunners of an internationalist radical left-wing tradition. From a
religious perspective, "The king had been defeated in his attempt to dictate
the religion of his subjects; Presbyterianism became the established religion.
But it had been equally proved that the subjugation of the State to the Church,
the supremacy, political as well as ecclesiastical, of the Kirk, was an
impossibility. In this the Covenants had failed." While the exploits and the
sufferings of these martyrs in the cause of religious dissent and scripture as
the sole "infallible rule of faith and practice" are still remembered, often in
a romantic light, their aim of denying the religious freedom they sought for
themselves to other denominations is reflected in the terms of ministerial and
Christian communion of some groups which include "an approbation of the
faithful contendings of the martyrs of Jesus, especially in Scotland, against
Paganism, Popery, Prelacy, Malignancy and Sectarianism."
