Creed A creed is a statement of belief‚Äîusually a statement of faith that
describes the beliefs shared by a religious community‚Äîand is often recited as
part of a religious service. When the statement of faith is longer and
polemical, as well as didactic, it is not called a creed but a confession of
faith. The term "creed" can also refer to a person's political or social
beliefs or is sometimes used to mean religious affiliation. One of the most
widely used creeds in Christianity is the Nicene Creed, first formulated in AD
325 at the First Council of Nicaea. It was based on Christian understanding of
the Canonical Gospels, the letters of the New Testament and to a lesser extent
the Old Testament. Affirmation of this creed, which describes the Trinity, is
generally taken as a fundamental test of orthodoxy for most Christian
denominations. The Apostles' Creed is also broadly accepted. Some Christian
denominations and other groups have rejected the authority of those creeds.
Muslims declare the "shahada", or testimony: "I bear witness that there is no
god but (the One) God "(Allah)", and I bear witness that Muhammad is God's
messenger." Whether Judaism is creedal has been a point of some controversy.
Although some say Judaism is noncreedal in nature, others say it recognizes a
single creed, the "Shema Yisrael", which begins: "Hear, O Israel: the LORD our
God, the LORD is one." Etymology. The word derives from the Latin "credo",
which means "I believe" (because the Latin translation of the Apostles' Creed
and the Nicene Creed both begin with this word) so a creed may also be called a
credo. A creed is sometimes referred to as a symbol signifying a "token" by
which persons of like beliefs might recognize each other. Christian creeds.
Creedal statement in 1 Corinthians 15. 1 Corinthians 15, 3-7 includes an early
creed about Jesus' death and resurrection which was probably received by Paul.
The antiquity of the creed has been located by most biblical scholars to no
more than five years after Jesus' death, probably originating from the
Jerusalem apostolic community. Old Roman Creed. The Old Roman Creed is an
earlier and shorter version of the Apostles' Creed. It was based on the 2nd
century Rules of Faith and the interrogatory declaration of faith for those
receiving baptism, which by the 4th century was everywhere tripartite in
structure, following Matthew 28:19. Nicene Creed. The Nicene Creed reflects the
concerns of the First Council of Nicaea in 325 which had as their chief purpose
to establish what Christians believed. Apostles' Creed. The Apostles' Creed is
widely used by most Christian denominations for both liturgical and
catechetical purposes, most visibly by liturgical Churches of Western
tradition, including the Latin Rite of the Roman Catholic Church, Lutheranism,
the Anglican Communion, and Western Orthodoxy. It is also used by
Presbyterians, Methodists, and Congregationalists. Chalcedonian Creed. The
Chalcedonian Creed was adopted at the Council of Chalcedon in 451 in Asia
Minor. It defines that Christ is 'acknowledged in two natures', which 'come
together into one person and hypostasis'. Athanasian Creed. The Athanasian
Creed (Quicumque vult) is a Christian statement of belief, focusing on
Trinitarian doctrine and Christology. It is the first creed in which the
equality of the three persons of the Trinity is explicitly stated, and differs
from the Nicene and Apostles' Creeds in the inclusion of anathemas, or
condemnations of those who disagree with the Creed. Tridentine Creed. The
Tridentine Creed was initially contained in the papal bull "Iniunctum Nobis",
issued by Pope Pius IV on November 13, 1565. The creed was intended to
summarize the teaching of the Council of Trent (1545‚Äì1563). Masai Creed. The
Maasai Creed is a creed composed in 1960 by the Maasai people of East Africa in
collaboration with missionaries from the Congregation of the Holy Ghost. The
creed attempts to express the essentials of the Christian faith within the
Maasai culture. Credo of the People of God. The Credo of the People of God is a
profession of faith that Pope Paul VI published with the "motu proprio"
"Solemni hac liturgia" of 30 June 1968. Pope Paul VI spoke of it as "a
profession of faith, ... a creed which, without being strictly speaking a
dogmatic definition, repeats in substance, with some developments called for by
the spiritual condition of our time, the creed of Nicea, the creed of the
immortal tradition of the holy Church of God" Christian confessions of faith.
Protestant denominations are usually associated with confessions of faith,
which are similar to creeds but usually longer and polemical, as well as
didactic. Christians without creeds. Some Christian denominations, and
particularly those descending from the Radical Reformation, do not profess a
creed. The Quakers, also known as the Religious Society of Friends, believe
that they have no need for creedal formulations of faith. The Church of the
Brethren also espouses no creed, referring to the New Testament, as their "rule
of faith and practice." Jehovah's Witnesses contrast "memorizing or repeating
creeds" with acting to "do what Jesus said". Unitarian Universalists, who
practice probably the most liberal of all religions, do not share a creed.
Similar reservations about the use of creeds can be found in the Restoration
Movement and its descendants, the Christian Church (Disciples of Christ), the
Churches of Christ, and the Christian churches and churches of Christ. Some
religious leaders in traditional creedal Churches have also come to question
the utility of creeds. Bishop John Shelby Spong, retired Episcopal Bishop of
Newark, has written that dogmas and creeds were merely "a stage in our
development" and "part of our religious childhood." In his book, "Sins of the
Scripture", Spong claims that "Jesus seemed to understand that no one can
finally fit the holy God into his or her creeds or doctrines. That is
idolatry." Jewish creed. Whether Judaism is creedal in character has generated
some controversy. Rabbi Milton Steinberg wrote that "By its nature Judaism is
averse to formal creeds which of necessity limit and restrain thought" and
asserted in his book "Basic Judaism" (1947) that "Judaism has never arrived at
a creed." The 1976 Centenary Platform of the Central Conference of American
Rabbis, an organization of Reform rabbis agrees that "Judaism emphasizes action
rather than creed as the primary expression of a religious live." Others,
however, characterize the Shema Yisrael as a creedal statement in strict
monotheism embodied in a single prayer. "Hear O Israel, the Lord is our God,
the Lord is One" (; transliterated "Shema Yisrael Adonai Eloheinu Adonai
Echad".) It is recited twice daily by all observant Jews, once when waking up,
and once when going to bed. Islamic creed. The Islamic creed is the Shahadah,
the proclamation ŸÑÿß ÿßŸÑŸá ÿßŸÑÿß ÿßŸÑŸÑŸá ŸÖÿ≠ŸÖÿØ ÿ±ÿ≥ŸàŸÑ ÿßŸÑŸÑŸá "(lƒÅ
 æilƒÅha  æill√ -llƒÅh, mu·∏•ammadun ras≈´lu-llƒÅh)" ‚Äì ‚ÄúThere is no god but
Allah; Muhammad is Allah's messenger.‚Äù Taking this creed is one of the five
pillars of Islam. Non-religious creeds. The term "creed" can be used to refer
to a set of non-religious beliefs, like political or social beliefs. Some
examples are the American's Creed and the Social Creed adopted by the Methodist
Church (which contains both religious and social beliefs).
