Crucifixion Crucifixion is an ancient method of deliberately painful execution
in which the condemned person is tied or nailed to a large wooden cross and
left to hang until dead. Crucifixion was in use at a comparatively high rate
among the Seleucids, Carthaginians, and Romans from about the 6th century BC to
the 4th century AD. In the year 337, Emperor Constantine I abolished it in the
Roman Empire out of veneration for Jesus Christ, the most famous victim of
crucifixion. It was also used as a form of execution in Japan for criminals,
inflicted also on some Christians. A crucifix (an image of Christ crucified on
a cross) is the main religious symbol for Catholics and Eastern Orthodox, but
most Oriental Orthodox and Protestant Christians prefer to use a cross without
the figure (the "corpus": Latin for "body") of Christ. Most crucifixes portray
Jesus on a Latin cross, rather than any other shape, such as a Tau cross or a
Greek cross. Etymology. Ancient Greek has two verbs for crucify: "ana-stauro"
(·ºÄŒΩŒ±œÉœÑŒ±œÖœÅœåœâ), from "stauros", "stake", and "apo-tumpanizo"
(·ºÄœÄŒøœÑœÖŒºœÄŒ±ŒΩŒØŒ∂œâ) "crucify on a plank." together with "anaskolopizo"
(·ºÄŒΩŒ±œÉŒ∫ŒøŒªŒøœÄŒØŒ∂œâ "impale"). In earlier pre-Roman Greek texts
"anastauro" usually means "impale." The word "xylon" "piece of wood" was also
used, but for a gallows, not a stake, as in the Aristophanes comedy "The
Frogs"; "if you stumble, at least you'll hang from a respectable tree." The
Latin term "crux" may mean a gallows or a stake. The English term crucifix
derives from the Latin "crucifixus" or "cruci fixus", past participle passive
of "crucifigere" or "cruci figere", meaning "to crucify" or "to fix to a
cross". Details. Crucifixion was often performed to terrorize and dissuade its
witnesses from perpetrating particularly heinous crimes. Victims were left on
display after death as warnings to others who might attempt dissent.
Crucifixion was usually intended to provide a death that was particularly slow,
painful (hence the term "excruciating", literally "out of crucifying"),
gruesome, humiliating, and public, using whatever means were most expedient for
that goal. Crucifixion methods varied considerably with location and time
period. The Greek and Latin words corresponding to "crucifixion" applied to
many different forms of painful execution, from impaling on a stake to affixing
to a tree, to an upright pole (a "crux simplex") or to a combination of an
upright (in Latin, "stipes") and a crossbeam (in Latin, "patibulum"). In some
cases, the condemned was forced to carry the crossbeam on his shoulders to the
place of execution. A whole cross would weigh well over 300 pounds (135¬ kg),
but the crossbeam would not be quite as burdensome, weighing around 75‚Äì125
pounds (35‚Äì60¬ kg). The Roman historian Tacitus records that the city of Rome
had a specific place for carrying out executions, situated outside the
Esquiline Gate, and had a specific area reserved for the execution of slaves by
crucifixion. Upright posts would presumably be fixed permanently in that place,
and the crossbeam, with the condemned person perhaps already nailed to it,
would then be attached to the post. The person executed may have been attached
to the cross by rope, though nails are mentioned in a passage by the Judean
historian Josephus, where he states that at the Siege of Jerusalem (70), "the
soldiers out of rage and hatred, "nailed" those they caught, one after one way,
and another after another, to the crosses, by way of jest." Objects used in the
crucifixion of criminals, such as nails, were sought as amulets with perceived
medicinal qualities. While a crucifixion was an execution, it was also a
humiliation, by making the condemned as vulnerable as possible. Although
artists have depicted the figure on a cross with a loin cloth or a covering of
the genitals, writings by Seneca the Younger suggest that victims were
crucified completely nude. When the victim had to urinate or defecate, they had
to do so in the open, in view of passers-by, resulting in discomfort and the
attraction of insects. Despite its frequent use by the Romans, the horrors of
crucifixion did not escape mention by some of their eminent orators. Cicero for
example, described crucifixion as "a most cruel and disgusting punishment", and
suggested that "the very mention of the cross should be far removed not only
from a Roman citizen‚Äôs body, but from his mind, his eyes, his ears."
Frequently, the legs of the person executed were broken or shattered with an
iron club, an act called "crurifragium", which was also frequently applied
without crucifixion to slaves. This act hastened the death of the person but
was also meant to deter those who observed the crucifixion from committing
offenses. Cross shape. The gibbet on which crucifixion was carried out could be
of many shapes. Josephus describes multiple tortures and positions of
crucifixion during the Siege of Jerusalem as Titus crucified the rebels; and
Seneca the Younger recounts: "I see crosses there, not just of one kind but
made in many different ways: some have their victims with head down to the
ground; some impale their private parts; others stretch out their arms on the
gibbet." At times the gibbet was only one vertical stake, called in Latin "crux
simplex". This was the simplest available construction for torturing and
killing the condemned. Frequently, however, there was a cross-piece attached
either at the top to give the shape of a T ("crux commissa") or just below the
top, as in the form most familiar in Christian symbolism ("crux immissa").
Jehovah's Witnesses argue that Jesus was crucified on a "crux simplex", and
that the "crux immissa" was an invention of Emperor Constantine. Other forms
were in the shape of the letters X and Y. The New Testament writings about the
crucifixion of Jesus do not speak specifically about the shape of that cross,
but the early writings that do speak of its shape, from about the year 100 on,
describe it as shaped like the letter T (the Greek letter tau) Nail placement.
In popular depictions of the crucifixion of Jesus (possibly because in
translations of the wounds are described as being "in his hands"), Jesus is
shown with nails in his hands. But in Greek the word "œáŒµŒØœÅ", usually
translated as "hand", referred to arm and hand together, and to denote the
"hand" as distinct from the "arm" some other word was added, as "·ºÑŒ∫œÅŒ∑ŒΩ
Œø·ΩîœÑŒ±œÉŒµ œáŒµ·øñœÅŒ±" (he wounded the end of the œáŒµŒØœÅ, i.e., he
wounded her hand). A possibility that does not require tying is that the nails
were inserted just above the wrist, between the two bones of the forearm (the
radius and the ulna). An experiment that was the subject of a documentary on
the National Geographic Channel's "Quest For Truth: The Crucifixion", showed
that a person can be suspended by the palm of the hand. Nailing the feet to the
side of the cross relieves strain on the wrists by placing most of the weight
on the lower body. Another possibility, suggested by Frederick Zugibe, is that
the nails may have been driven in at an angle, entering in the palm in the
crease that delineates the bulky region at the base of the thumb, and exiting
in the wrist, passing through the carpal tunnel. A foot-rest ("suppedaneum")
attached to the cross, perhaps for the purpose of taking the person's weight
off the wrists, is sometimes included in representations of the crucifixion of
Jesus, but is not discussed in ancient sources. Some scholars interpret the
Alexamenos graffito, the earliest surviving depiction of the Crucifixion, as
including such a foot-rest. Ancient sources also mention the "sedile", a small
seat attached to the front of the cross, about halfway down, which could have
served a similar purpose. In 1968, archaeologists discovered at Giv'at ha-
Mivtar in northeast Jerusalem the remains of one Jehohanan, who had been
crucified in the 1st century. The remains included a heel bone with a nail
driven through it from the side. The tip of the nail was bent, perhaps because
of striking a knot in the upright beam, which prevented it being extracted from
the foot. A first inaccurate account of the length of the nail led some to
believe that it had been driven through both heels, suggesting that the man had
been placed in a sort of sidesaddle position, but the true length of the nail,
11.5¬ cm (4.53¬ inches), suggests instead that in this case of crucifixion the
heels were nailed to opposite sides of the upright. The skeleton from Giv'at
ha-Mivtar is currently the only recovered example of ancient crucifixion in the
archaeological record. Cause of death. The length of time required to reach
death could range from hours to days depending on method, the victim's health,
and the environment. Death could result from any combination of causes,
including blood loss resulting in hypovolemic shock, sepsis following infection
due to the wounds caused by the nails or by the scourging that sometimes
preceded the crucifixion, or eventual dehydration. A theory attributed to
Pierre Barbet holds that, when the whole body weight was supported by the
stretched arms, the typical cause of death was asphyxiation. He conjectured
that the condemned would have severe difficulty inhaling, due to hyper-
expansion of the chest muscles and lungs. The condemned would therefore have to
draw himself up by his arms, leading to exhaustion, or have his feet supported
by tying or by a wood block. When no longer able to lift himself, the condemned
would die within a few minutes. Experiments by Frederick Zugibe have, however,
revealed that, when suspended with arms at 60¬∞ to 70¬∞ from the vertical, test
subjects had no difficulty breathing. Subjects did suffer rapidly increasing
pain, which is consistent with the Roman use of crucifixion to achieve a
prolonged, agonizing death. Legs were often broken to hasten death through
severe traumatic shock and fat embolism. Survival. Since death does not follow
immediately on crucifixion, survival after a short period of crucifixion is
possible, as in the case of those who choose each year as a devotional practice
to be non-lethally crucified. There is an ancient record of one person who
survived a crucifixion that was intended to be lethal, but that was
interrupted. Josephus recounts: "I saw many captives crucified, and remembered
three of them as my former acquaintance. I was very sorry at this in my mind,
and went with tears in my eyes to Titus, and told him of them; so he
immediately commanded them to be taken down, and to have the greatest care
taken of them, in order to their recovery; yet two of them died under the
physician's hands, while the third recovered." Josephus gives no details of the
method or duration of the crucifixion of his three friends before their
reprieve. Ancient practice. Despite the fact that the ancient Jewish historian
Josephus, as well as other sources, refers to the crucifixion of thousands of
people by the Romans, there is only a single archaeological discovery of a
crucified body dating back to the Roman Empire around the time of Jesus. This
was discovered in Jerusalem in 1968. It is not necessarily surprising that
there is only one such discovery, because a crucified body was usually left to
decay on the cross and therefore would not be preserved. The only reason these
archaeological remains were preserved was because family members gave this
particular individual a customary burial. The remains were found accidentally
in an ossuary with the crucified man‚Äôs name on it, 'Yehohanan, the son of
Hagakol'. Nicu Haas, an anthropologist at the Hebrew University Medical School
in Jerusalem, examined the ossuary and discovered that it contained a heel bone
with a nail driven through its side, indicating that the man had been
crucified. The position of the nail relative to the bone indicates that the
feet had been nailed to the cross from their side, not from their front;
various opinions have been proposed as to whether they were both nailed
together to the front of the cross or one on the left side, one on the right
side. The point of the nail had olive wood fragments on it indicating that he
was crucified on a cross made of olive wood or on an olive tree. Since olive
trees are not very tall, this would suggest that the condemned was crucified at
eye level. Additionally, a piece of acacia wood was located between the bones
and the head of the nail, presumably to keep the condemned from freeing his
foot by sliding it over the nail. His legs were found broken, possibly to
hasten his death as described in . It is thought that because in Roman times
iron was rare, the nails were removed from the dead body to conserve costs.
According to Haas, this fact could help to explain why only one nail has been
found, as the tip of the nail in question was bent in such a way that it could
not be removed. Haas had also identified a scratch on the inner surface of the
right radius bone of the forearm, close to the wrist. He deduced from the form
of the scratch, as well as from the intact wrist bones, that a nail had been
driven into the forearm at that position. However, much of Haas' findings have
been challenged. The scratches in the wrist area were determined to be non-
traumatic and, therefore, not evidence of crucifixion. A later reexamination of
the heel bone revealed that the two heels were not nailed together, but nailed
separately to either side of the upright post of the cross. History and
religious texts. Pre-Roman states. Crucifixion (or impalement), in one form or
another, was used by Persians, Carthaginians, Macedonians, and Romans. Death
was often hastened. "The attending Roman guards could only leave the site after
the victim had died, and were known to precipitate death by means of deliberate
fracturing of the tibia and/or fibula, spear stab wounds into the heart, sharp
blows to the front of the chest, or a smoking fire built at the foot of the
cross to asphyxiate the victim." The Greeks were generally opposed to
performing crucifixions. However, in his "Histories", ix.120‚Äì122, the Greek
writer Herodotus describes the execution of a Persian general at the hands of
Athenians in about 479 BC: "They nailed him to a plank and hung him up ... this
Artayctes who suffered death by crucifixion." The "Commentary on Herodotus" by
How and Wells remarks: "They crucified him with hands and feet stretched out
and nailed to cross-pieces; cf. vii.33. This barbarity, unusual on the part of
Greeks, may be explained by the enormity of the outrage or by Athenian
deference to local feeling." Some Christian theologians, beginning with Paul of
Tarsus writing in Galatians , have interpreted an allusion to crucifixion in
Deuteronomy . This reference is to being hanged from a tree, and may be
associated with lynching or traditional hanging. However, Rabbinic law limited
capital punishment to just 4 methods of execution: stoning, burning,
strangulation, and decapitation, while the passage in Deuteronomy was
interpreted as an obligation to hang the corpse on a tree as a form of
deterrence. The Aramaic Testament of Levi (DSS 4Q541) interprets in column 6:
"God set right errors. will judge revealed sins. Investigate and seek and know
how Jonah wept. Thus, you shall not destroy the weak by wasting away or by Let
not the nail touch him." Alexander the Great is reputed to have crucified 2000
survivors from his siege of the Phoenician city of Tyre, as well as the doctor
who unsuccessfully treated Alexander's friend Hephaestion. Some historians have
also conjectured that Alexander crucified Callisthenes, his official historian
and biographer, for objecting to Alexander's adoption of the Persian ceremony
of royal adoration. In Carthage, crucifixion was an established mode of
execution, which could even be imposed on generals for suffering a major
defeat. The Jewish king Alexander Jannaeus crucified 800 rebels, said to be
Pharisees, in the middle of Jerusalem. Ancient Rome. The hypothesis that the
Ancient Roman custom of crucifixion may have developed out of a primitive
custom of "arbori suspendere"‚Äîhanging on an "arbor infelix" (unfortunate
tree) dedicated to the gods of the nether world‚Äîis rejected by William A.
Oldfather, who shows that this form of execution (the "supplicium more
maiorum", punishment in accordance with the custom of our ancestors) consisted
of suspending someone from a tree, not dedicated to any particular gods, and
flogging him to death. Tertullian mentions a 1st-century AD case in which trees
were used for crucifixion, but Seneca the Younger earlier used the phrase
"infelix lignum" (unfortunate wood) for the transom ("patibulum") or the whole
cross. Plautus and Plutarch are the two main sources for accounts of criminals
carrying their own patibulum to the upright stipes. Crucifixion was used for
slaves, pirates, and enemies of the state. It was considered a most shameful
and disgraceful way to die. Condemned Roman citizens were usually exempt from
crucifixion (like feudal nobles from hanging, dying more honorably by
decapitation) except for major crimes against the state, such as high treason.
Notorious mass crucifixions followed the Third Servile War in 73‚Äì71 BC (the
slave rebellion under Spartacus), other Roman civil wars in the 2nd and 1st
centuries BC, and the Destruction of Jerusalem in 70 AD. To frighten other
slaves from revolting, Crassus crucified 6,000 of Spartacus' men along the
Appian Way from Capua to Rome. Josephus tells a story of the Romans crucifying
people along the walls of Jerusalem. He also says that the Roman soldiers would
amuse themselves by crucifying criminals in different positions. In Roman-style
crucifixion, the condemned could take up to a few days to die. The dead body
was left up for vultures and other birds to consume. Under ancient Roman penal
practice, crucifixion was also a means of exhibiting the criminal‚Äôs low
social status. It was the most dishonourable death imaginable, originally
reserved for slaves, hence still called "supplicium servile" by Seneca, later
extended to provincial freedmen of obscure station ('humiles'). The citizen
class of Roman society were almost never subject to capital punishments;
instead, they were fined or exiled. Josephus mentions Jews of high rank who
were crucified, but this was to point out that their status had been taken away
from them. The Romans often broke the prisoner's legs to hasten death and
usually forbade burial. A cruel prelude was occasionally scourging, which would
cause the condemned to lose a large amount of blood, and approach a state of
shock. The convict then usually had to carry the horizontal beam ("patibulum"
in Latin) to the place of execution, but not necessarily the whole cross.
Crucifixion was typically carried out by specialized teams, consisting of a
commanding centurion and four soldiers. When it was done in an established
place of execution, the vertical beam ("stipes") could even be permanently
embedded in the ground. The condemned was usually stripped naked‚Äîall the New
Testament gospels describe soldiers gambling for the robes of Jesus. The
'nails' were tapered iron spikes approximately long, with a square shaft
across. In some cases, the nails were gathered afterward and used as healing
amulets. Constantine the Great, the first Christian emperor, abolished
crucifixion in the Roman Empire in 337 out of veneration for Jesus Christ, its
most famous victim. In the Qur'an. The Qur'an mentions crucifixion several
times. In Surah 7:124, Firaun (Arabic for Pharaoh) says that he will "crucify"
his chief wizards. Also, Surah 12:41 mentions Prophet Yusuf (Joseph)
prophesying that the king (the current ruler of the land he was stranded in)
would crucify one of his prisoners. In Surah 5:33, The Qur'an mentions
crucifixion as a form of punishment. There are four different punishments for
the different severities of crime. Crucifixion is the punishment for the robber
who kills his victim after robbing him. Japan. Crucifixion was introduced into
Japan during the Sengoku period (1467‚Äì1573), after a 350-year period with no
capital punishment. It is believed to have been suggested to the Japanese by
the introduction of Christianity to the region. Known in Japanese as ,
crucifixion was used in Japan before and during the Tokugawa Shogunate. The
condemned, usually a commoner convicted by the local feudal authorities, was
hoisted upon a T-shaped cross. The executioner finished him off with spear
thrusts from below the ribcage, then the body was left to hang for a time as a
public display before disposal. In 1597, twenty-six Christians were nailed to
crosses at Nagasaki, Japan. Among those executed were Paulo Miki, Philip of
Jesus and Pedro Bautista, a Spanish Franciscan who had worked about ten years
in the Philippines. The executions marked the beginning of a long history of
persecution of Christianity in Japan, which continued until its
decriminalization in 1871. In the Bakumatsu or early Meiji period (c. 1865-8),
the 25 year-old servant Sokichi was executed by crucifixion for the murder of
the son of his employer, a store-owner, during the course of a robbery. He was
affixed to a stake with two cross-pieces by tying, rather than nailing.
Crucifixion was used as a punishment for prisoners of war during World War II.
Ringer Edwards, an Australian prisoner of war, was crucified for killing
cattle, along with two others. He survived 63 hours before being let down.
Europe. During World War I, there were persistent rumors that German soldiers
had crucified a Canadian soldier on a tree or barn door with bayonets or combat
knives. The event was initially reported in 1915 by Private George Barrie of
the 1st Canadian Division. Two investigations, one a post-war official
investigation, and the other an independent investigation by the Canadian
Broadcasting Corporation, concluded that there was no evidence to support the
story. However, British documentary maker Iain Overton in 2001 published an
article claiming that the story was true, identifying the soldier as Harry
Band. Overton's article was the basis for a 2002 episode of the Channel 4
documentary show "Secret History". It has been reported that crucifixion was
used in several cases against the German civil population of East Prussia when
it was occupied by Soviet forces at the end of the Second World War. Present.
Theoretically, crucifixion is still one of the Hadd punishments in the Islamic
Republic of Iran (Iran's Islamic Criminal Law, Article 195), although it is not
actually applied and there is no example of its use. If a crucified person were
to survive three days of crucifixion, that person would be allowed to live.
Execution by hanging is described as follows: "In execution by hanging, the
prisoner will be hung on a hanging truss which should look like a cross, while
his (her) back is toward the cross, and (s)he faces the direction of Mecca
Saudi Arabia, and his (her) legs are vertical and distant from the ground."
Sudan's penal code, based upon the government's interpretation of Shari'a,
includes execution followed by crucifixion as a penalty. When, in 2002, 88
people were sentenced to execution, Amnesty International speculated that they
could be executed by either hanging or crucifixion. The accused were convicted
of crimes relating to murder, armed robbery, and participating in ethnic
clashes in Southern Darfur that killed at least 10 people, but Amnesty
International believes that the convicted were tortured and did not receive
fair trials and adequate legal representation. In the 50th Session of the UN
Commission on Human Rights (1994), local bishops reported several cases of
crucifixion of Christian priests. The human rights group Karen Women
Organization documented a case of Tatmadaw forces crucifying several Karen
villagers in 2000 in the Dooplaya District in Burma's Kayin State. The
crucifixion of a nun in Romania made news in 2005. 23 year-old Maricica Irina
Cornici was believed to be possessed by the devil. Father Daniel, the superior
of the Romanian Orthodox monastery who ordered the crucifixion, did not
understand why journalists were making a fuss over the story, claiming that
"Exorcism is a common practice in the heart of the Romanian Orthodox church and
my methods are not at all unknown to other priests." Father Daniel and four
nuns were charged with imprisonment leading to death. On 23 November 2009 in
Saudi Arabia, a 22-year-old man was sentenced to beheading and posthumous
crucifixion, by having his beheaded body tied to wooden beams to be displayed
to the public after the beheading. The man was convicted of and admitted to
abducting and raping five children, aged between 3 and 7 years, whom he left
out in the desert to die. On 1 May 2011, the Gyeongbuk Provincial Police Agency
investigated a dead taxi driver in his late 50s who was crucified in an
abandoned mine near Mungyeong, Gyeongsangbuk-do, South Korea. As a devotional
practice. Since at least the mid-19th century, a group of Catholic flagellants
in New Mexico called Hermanos de Luz ("Brothers of Light") have annually
conducted reenactments of Jesus Christ's crucifixion during Holy Week, in which
a penitent is tied‚Äîbut not nailed‚Äîto a cross. Some Catholics are
voluntarily, non-lethally crucified for a limited time on Good Friday, to
imitate the suffering of Jesus Christ, although the Church greatly discourages
this practice. A notable example is the ceremonial re-enactment that has been
performed yearly in the town of Iztapalapa, on the outskirts of Mexico City,
since 1833. Devotional crucifixions are also common in the Philippines.
Worshipers drive thin nails through the palm of the hand, a step is used to
stand on, and the period is short, not a full crucifixion. One man named
Rolando del Campo who was a carpenter in Pampanga vowed to be crucified every
Good Friday for 15 years if God would carry his wife through a difficult
childbirth. In San Pedro Cutud, devotee Ruben Enaje has been crucified 21
times, as of 2007, during Passion Week celebrations. Although the country's
dominant Catholic Church disapproves of the ritual, the Filipino government
says it cannot stop the devotees from crucifying and whipping themselves. The
health department insists that those taking part in the rituals should have
tetanus shots and that the nails used to pierce their limbs should be
sterilized. In many cases the person portraying Jesus is first subjected to
flagellation and wears a crown of thorns. Sometimes there is a whole passion
play, sometimes only the mortification of the flesh.
