Cult (religious practice) In traditional usage, the cult of a religion, quite
apart from its sacred writings ("scriptures"), its theology or myths, or the
personal faith of its believers, is the totality of "external" religious
practice and observance, the neglect of which is the definition of impiety.
Cult in this primary sense is literally the "care" (Latin "cultus") owed to the
god and the shrine. In the specific context of Greek hero cult, Carla
Antonaccio has written, "The term "cult" identifies a pattern of ritual
behavior in connection with specific objects, within a framework of spatial and
temporal coordinates. "Ritual" behavior would include (but not necessarilly be
limited to) prayer, sacrifice, votive offerings, competitions, processions and
construction of monuments. Some degree of recurrence in place and repetition
over time of ritual action is necessary for cult to be enacted, to be
practiced" Cult is embodied in ritual and ceremony. Its present or former
presence is made concrete in temples, shrines and churches, and cult images
(denigrated by Christians as "idols") and votive deposits at votive sites.
Etymology. The term "cult" first appeared in English in 1617, derived from the
French "culte", meaning "worship" or "a particular form of worship" which in
turn originated from the Latin word "cultus" meaning "care, cultivation,
worship," originally "tended, cultivated," as in the past participle of
"colere" "to till the soil". In French, for example, sections in newspapers
giving the schedule of worship at Catholic churches are headed "Culte
Catholique"; the section giving the schedule of Protestant churches is headed
"culte réformé". The meaning "devotion to a person or thing" is from 1829.
Starting about 1920, "cult" acquired an additional six or more positive and
negative definitions. Roman Catholic "cultus". In Roman Catholicism, "cultus"
is the technical term for devotions or veneration extended to a particular
saint, not to the worship of God. Catholicism and Eastern Orthodoxy make a
major distinction between worship (, ' [λατρεια]) which is to be offered
to God alone, and veneration (', "" [δουλεια]), which may be offered to
the saints, including the Mary, the mother of Jesus. Cult practice. Among the
observances in the cult are rituals, ceremonies, liturgy or audits, which may
involve spoken or sung words, and often involve personal sacrifice. Other
manifestations of the cult of a deity are the preservation of relics or the
creation of images, such as icons (usually connoting a flat painted image) or
three-dimensional cultic images, denigrated as "idols", and the specification
of sacred places, hilltops and mountains, fissures and caves, springs, pools
and groves, or even individual trees or stones, which may be the seat of an
oracle or the venerated site of a vision, apparition, miracle or other
occurrence commemorated or recreated in cult practices. Sacred places may be
identified and elaborated by construction of shrines and temples, on which are
centered public attention at religious festivals and which may become the
center for pilgrimages.
