Curse A curse (also called a jinx, or execration) is any expressed wish that
some form of adversity or misfortune will befall or attach to some other
entity—one or more persons, a place, or an object. In particular, "curse" may
refer to a wish that harm or hurt will be inflicted by any supernatural powers,
such as a spell, a prayer, an imprecation, an execration, magic, witchcraft,
God, a natural force, or a spirit. In many belief systems, the curse itself (or
accompanying ritual) is considered to have some causative force in the result.
Overview. The word "curse" may also refer to the resulting adversity; for
example, menstruation has been described as the "curse of Eve". The study of
the forms of curses comprise a significant proportion of the study of both folk
religion and folklore. The deliberate attempt to levy curses is often part of
the practice of magic. In Hindu culture the Sage or Rishi is believed to have
the power to bless and curse. Examples include the curse placed by Rishi Bhrigu
on king Nahusha and the one placed by Rishi Devala. Curse to the United States
presidency. Tecumseh's curse was reputed to cause the deaths in office of
Presidents of the United States elected in years divisible by 20, beginning in
1840. This alleged curse appears to have fallen dormant, since Ronald Reagan,
(elected in 1980) survived an assassination attempt and George W. Bush (elected
in 2000) survived his eight-year presidency. Cursed objects. Cursed objects are
generally supposed to have been stolen from their rightful owners or looted
from a sanctuary. The Hope Diamond is supposed to bear such a curse, and bring
misfortune to its owner. The stories behind why these items are cursed vary,
but they usually are said to bring bad luck or to manifest unusual phenomena
related to their presence. Busby's stoop chair was reportedly cursed by the
murderer Thomas Busby shortly before his execution so that everyone who would
sit in it would die. Egyptian curses and mummies. There is a broad popular
belief in curses being associated with the violation of the tombs of mummified
corpses, or of the mummies themselves. The idea became so widespread as to
become a pop-culture mainstay, especially in horror films (though originally
the curse was invisible, a series of mysterious deaths, rather than the
walking-dead mummies of later fiction). The "Curse of the Pharaohs" is supposed
to have haunted the archeologists who excavated the tomb of Pharaoh
Tutankhamun, whereby an imprecation was supposedly pronounced from the grave by
the ancient Egyptian priests, on anyone who violated its precincts. Similar
dubious suspicions have surrounded the excavation and examination of the
(natural, not embalmed) Alpine mummy, "Ötzi the Iceman". While such curses are
generally considered to have been popularized and sensationalized by British
journalists of the 19th century, ancient Egyptians were in fact known to place
curse inscriptions on markers protecting temple or tomb goods or property.
Curses in politics. In Israel. In modern Israel, the Pulsa diNura (a
controversial Kabbalistic prayer taken to request God to block any further
forgiveness of sin for an individual, causing death or some long-term
misfortune to shut the individual out from functioning in society) has
allegedly been used against politicians by religious conservative opponents:
one was claimed to have been used against Yitzhak Rabin one month prior to his
1995 assassination, and another was reportedly performed against Ariel Sharon
six months prior to a catastrophic 2006 stroke that placed him into a
persistent vegetative state. In the United States. In the United States,
California Baptist pastor Wiley Drake achieved notoriety for boasting that he
had prayed for the death of current president Barack Obama; he had previously
used such prayers against employees of the Internal Revenue Service, Americans
United for Separation of Church and State, and George Tiller; while serving as
a party for the plaintiff in a 2009 case regarding Obama's citizenship, he
later retracted his prayer, and called for other Christians to abstain from
similar action "until Obama can be tried for treason". Similar prayers
requesting a divinely sanctioned death for Obama were publicly pronounced by
Tempe, Arizona pastor Steven L. Anderson and Laporte, Colorado Church of Christ
pastor Pete Peters. Biblical curses. According to the Catholic Encyclopedia
article on "Cursing", the Bible depicts God cursing the serpent, the earth and
Cain (, , ). Similarly Noah curses Canaan (), and Joshua curses the man who
should build the city of Jericho (). In various books of the Old Testament
there are long lists of curses against transgressors of the Law (, , etc.). So,
too, in the New Testament, Christ curses the barren fig-tree (), pronounces his
denunciation of woe against the incredulous cities (), against the rich, the
worldling, the scribes and the Pharisees, and foretells the awful malediction
that is to come upon the damned (). The word curse is also applied to the
victim of expiation for sin (), to sins temporal and eternal (; )."
