Masih ad-Dajjal al-Masih ad-Dajjal ( "", Arabic for "the false messiah"), is an
evil figure in Islamic eschatology. He is to appear pretending to be "Masih"
(i.e. the Messiah) at a time in the future, before "Yawm al-Qiyamah" (Day of
Resurrection), directly comparable to the figures of the Antichrist and Armilus
in Christian and Jewish eschatology. Name. ' is a common Arabic word (دجال)
with the meaning "deceiving" or "the Placebo" or "impostor" ', with the
definite article al- ("the"), refers to "the deceiving Messiah", a specific
end-of times deceiver. Hadith. According to "hadith", Muhammad is said to have
prophesied that the Masih ad-Dajjal would be the last of a series of thirty
"Dajjal" or "deceivers" (false prophets). Signs of his coming. "Hadith"
attributed to Muhammad give many signs of the appearance of the "Dajjal", and
exhorted his followers to recite the first and last ten verses of Sura Al-Kahf,
as protection from the trials and mischief of the "Dajjal". Eschatology. The
"Dajjal" will appear somewhere between Iran and syria needed and will travel
the whole world preaching his falsehood, but will be unable to enter Mecca or
Medina. Isa (Jesus) will return and the "Dajjal" will gather an army of 70,000
people, of those he has deceived and lead them in a war against Jesus, who
shall be accompanied by an army of the righteous. Differing views. Sunni
beliefs. Sunni Muslims believe that Isa (the name of Jesus in the Quran) will
descend on Mount Afeeq, on the white Eastern Minaret of Damascus. He will
descend from the heavens with his hands resting on the shoulders of two angels.
His cheeks will be flat and his hair straight. When he lowers his head it will
seem as if water is flowing from his hair, when he raises his head, it will
appear as though his hair is beaded with silvery pearls. He will descend during
"fajr" (morning prayer) and the leader of the Muslims will address him thus,
"O' Prophet of God, lead the prayer." Isa will decline with the words, "The
virtue of this nation that follows Islam is that they lead each other."
Implying that he will pray behind the imam (the man that leads the prayings) as
the word of God was completed after revelation of Qur'an and Muhammad being the
last prophet of God. After the prayer, Isa will prepare himself to do battle
and shall take up a sword. An army shall return from a campaign launched before
the arrival of Isa. Isa shall set out in pursuit of Dajjal. All those who
embraced the evil of Dajjal shall perish even as the breath of Isa touches
them. The breath of Isa shall precede him as far as the eye can see. Dajjal
will be captured at Lod. Dajjal shall begin to melt, as salt dissolves in
water. The spear of Isa shall plunge into Dajjal’s chest, ending his dreaded
reign. The followers of Dajjal will be rooted out, for even the trees and rocks
will speak out against them. Isa will break the cross and kill the pig (the
animal). Then all battles shall cease and the world will know an age of peace.
The rule of Isa will be just and all shall flock to him to enter the folds of
the one true religion, Islam. Shīa beliefs. Shias believe that Dajjal will be
killed by Muhammad al-Mahdi. Ahmadiyya beliefs. The Ahmadiyya teachings
interpret the prophecies regarding the appearance of the "Dajjal" (Anti-Christ)
and Gog and Magog in Islamic eschatology as foretelling the emergence of two
branches or aspects of the same turmoil and trial that was to be faced by Islam
in the latter days and that both emerged from Christianity or Christian
nations. Its Dajjal aspect relates to deception and perversion of religious
belief while its aspect to do with disturbance in the realm of politics and the
shattering of world peace has been called Gog and Magog. Thus Ahmadis consider
the widespread Christian missionary activity that was 'aggressively' active in
the 18th and 19th centuries as being part of the prophesied Dajjal (Antichrist)
and Gog and Magog emerging in modern times. The emergence of the Soviet Union
and the USA as superpowers and the conflict between the two nations (i.e., the
rivalry between communism and capitalism) are seen as having occurred in
accordance with certain prophecies regarding Gog and Magog. Thus, Ahmadis
believe that prophecies and sayings about the Antichrist are not to be
interpreted literally. They have deeper meanings. Masih ad-Dajjal is then a
name given to latter day Christianity and the west. Thus essentially the,
"Dajjal" is not believed to be a physical person or an individual as mentioned
in the hadith but as representing a collectivity of people who would pose a
great challenge to Islam, it is essentially, a name given to the European
nations of the latter days. The purpose of Jesus coming means that a man from
among Muslims shall appear who will establish the truth of Islam to the world
as against western scientific and philosophical ideals. Thus Ahmadis believe
the founder of the movement Mirza Ghulam Ahmad to have fulfilled this who by
representing Islam in its pristine form.
