Deacon Deacon is a ministry in the Christian Church that is generally
associated with service of some kind, but which varies among theological and
denominational traditions. In many traditions the "diaconate", the term for a
deacon's office, is a clerical office; in others it is for laity. The word
"deacon" is derived from the Greek word "diakonos" (διάκονος), which is
a standard ancient Greek word meaning "servant", "waiting-man", "minister" or
"messenger". One commonly promulgated speculation as to its etymology is that
it literally means 'through the dust', referring to the dust raised by the busy
servant or messenger. It is generally believed that the office of deacon
originated in the selection of seven men, among them Stephen, to assist with
the charitable work of the early church as recorded in . Female deacons are
mentioned by Pliny the Younger in a letter to Trajan dated "c". 112. The exact
relationship between male and female Deacons varies. In some traditions a
female deacon is simply a member of the order of deacons; in others,
deaconesses constitute a separate order; in others, the title "deaconess" is
given to the wife of a deacon. A biblical description of the qualities required
of a deacon, and of their household, can be found in . Among the more prominent
deacons in history are Phoebe, the only person actually called "deacon" in
Scripture; Stephen, the first Christian martyr (the "protomartyr"); Philip,
whose baptism of the Ethiopian eunuch is recounted in ; Saint Lawrence, an
early Roman martyr; Saint Vincent of Saragossa, protomartyr of Spain; Saint
Francis of Assisi, founder of the mendicant Franciscans; Saint Ephrem the
Syrian and Saint Romanos the Melodist, a prominent early hymnographer.
Prominent historical figures who played major roles as deacons and went on to
higher office include Saint Athanasius of Alexandria, Thomas Becket and
Reginald Pole. The title is also used for the president, chairperson, or head
of a trades guild in Scotland; and likewise to two officers of a Masonic Lodge.
Catholicism, Orthodoxy, Anglicanism. The diaconate is one of the major orders
in the Catholic, Anglican, Eastern Orthodox, and Oriental Orthodox churches.
The other major orders are those of bishop and presbyter (priest). While the
diaconate as a permanent order was maintained from earliest Apostolic times to
the present in the Eastern churches (Orthodox and Catholic), it mostly
disappeared in the Western church (with a few notable exceptions such as St
Francis of Assisi) during the first millennium, with Western churches retaining
deacons attached to diocesan cathedrals. The diaconate continued in a vestigial
form as a temporary, final step along the course to ordination to the Roman
Catholic priesthood. In the 20th century, the diaconate was restored as a
permanent order in many Western churches, most notably in the Latin Rite of the
Catholic Church, the Anglican Communion, and The United Methodist Church. In
Catholic, Orthodox, and Anglican churches, deacons assist priests in their
pastoral and administrative duties, but often report directly to the bishop.
They have a distinctive role in the liturgy, their main tasks being to proclaim
the Gospel, preach, assist in the administration of the Eucharist and to serve
the poor and outcast. Roman Catholicism. In the years just prior to the Second
Vatican Council, the only men ordained as deacons were seminarians who were
completing the last year or so of graduate theological training, who received
the order several months before priestly ordination. Following the
recommendations of the council (in "Lumen Gentium" 29), in 1967 Pope Paul VI
issued the motu proprio "Sacrum Diaconatus Ordinem", restoring the ancient
practice of ordaining to the diaconate men who were not candidates for priestly
ordination. These men are known as "permanent deacons" in contrast to those
completing their training, who were then called "transitional deacons". There
is no sacramental difference between the two, however, as there is only one
order of deacons. The permanent diaconate formation period in the Roman
Catholic Church entails a year of prayerful preparation, a four- or five-year
training period that resembles a collegiate course of study, and a year of
post-ordination formation as well as the need for lifelong continuing education
credits. Diaconal candidates receive instruction in philosophy, theology, study
of the Holy Scriptures (the Bible), homiletics, sacramental studies,
evangelization, ecclesiology, counseling, and pastoral care and ministry before
ordination. Although they are assigned to work in a parish by the diocesan
bishop, once assigned, deacons are under the supervision of the parish pastor.
Unlike most clerics, permanent deacons who also have a secular profession have
no right to receive a salary for their ministry, but many dioceses opt to
remunerate them anyway. The ministry of the deacon in the Roman Catholic Church
is described as one of service in three areas: the Word, the Liturgy and
Charity. The deacon's ministry of the Word includes proclaiming the Gospel
during the Mass, preaching and teaching. The deacon's liturgical ministry
includes various parts of the Mass proper to the deacon, including being an
ordinary minister of Holy Communion and the proper minister of the chalice when
Holy Communion is administered under both kinds. The ministry of charity
involves service to the poor and marginalized and working with parishioners to
help them become more involved in such ministry. As clerics, deacons are
required to recite the Liturgy of the Hours. Deacons, like priests and bishops,
are ordinary ministers of the sacrament of Baptism and can serve as the
church's witness at the sacrament of Holy Matrimony, which the bride and groom
administer to each other (though if the exchange of vows takes place in a
wedding Mass, or Nuptial Mass, the Mass is celebrated by the priest and the
deacon acts as another witness). Deacons may preside at funeral rites not
involving a Mass (e.g., the final commendation at the gravesite or the
reception of the body at a service in the funeral home), and may assist the
priest at the Requiem Mass. They can preside over various services such as
Benediction of the Blessed Sacrament, and they may give certain blessings. They
cannot hear confession and give absolution, anoint the sick, or celebrate Mass.
At Mass, the deacon is the ordinary minister of the proclamation of the Gospel
(in fact, a priest, bishop, or even the Pope should not proclaim the Gospel if
a deacon is present) and of Holy Communion (primarily, of the Precious Blood).
As ordained clerics, and if granted faculties by their bishops, deacons may
preach the homily at a public Mass, unless the priest celebrant retains that
ministry to himself at a given Mass. The vestments most particularly associated
with the Western Rite Catholic deacon are the alb, stole and dalmatic. Deacons,
like priests and bishops, must wear their albs and stoles; deacons place the
stole over their left shoulder and it hangs across to their right side, while
priests and bishops wear it around their necks. The dalmatic, a vestment
especially associated with the deacon, is worn during the celebration of the
Mass and other liturgical functions; its use is more liberally applied than the
corresponding vestment of the priest, the chasuble. At certain major
celebrations, such as ordinations, the diocesan bishop wears a dalmatic under
his chasuble. Permanent deacons often serve in parish or other ministry as
their time permits, since they typically have other full-time employment. They
may also act as parish administrators (C. 217 of the Code of Canon Law). With
the passage of time, more and more deacons are serving in full-time ministries
in parishes, hospitals, prisons, and in diocesan positions. Deacons often work
directly in ministry to the marginalized inside and outside the church: the
poor, the sick, the hungry, the imprisoned. The permanent diaconate can be
conferred on single men 25 or older, and on married men 35 or older, but an
older age can be required by the episcopal conference. If a married deacon is
widowed, he must maintain the celibate state. Under some very rare
circumstances, however, deacons who have been widowed can receive permission to
remarry. This is most commonly done when the deacon is left as a single father.
In some cases, a widowed deacon will seek priestly ordination, especially if
his children are grown. ("See also clerical celibacy.") The wife of a permanent
deacon may be sometimes considered a partner in his ordained ministry. In many
dioceses, the wife of the diaconal candidate undertakes the same education and
training her husband does. A permanent deacon is not styled "Father" as a
priest would be, but as "Deacon", abbreviated variously as "Dn." or "Dcn." This
preferred method of address is stated in the 2005 document of the United States
Conference of Catholic Bishops, National Directory for the Formation, Ministry
and Life of Permanent Deacons in the United States. The proper address in
written correspondence for all Deacons of the Latin (Roman Rite) Catholic
Church is "Rev. Mr.". "Rev. Mr.", however, is more often used to indicate a
transitional deacon (i.e., preparing for ordination to the priesthood) or one
who belongs to a religious institute, while "Deacon" is used as the honorific
for permanent deacons (e.g. Deacon John Smith, or Deacon Smith). The decision
as to whether deacons wear the Roman collar as street attire is left to the
discretion of each bishop for his own diocese. Where clerical garb is approved
by the bishop, the deacon can choose to wear or not wear the "collar". Where it
is not permitted, the deacon must wear secular clothing. It is becoming more
common to see deacons wearing a clerical suit. Deacons, like seminarians,
religious, and the two other orders, Bishops and priests, recite the Liturgy of
the Hours; however, deacons, if they are obliged to do so, are usually only
required to participate in Morning and Evening Prayer. In solemn Masses today
and moreso in older Rites of the Mass, one deacon will serve as the Deacon of
the Word (proclaiming the Gospel and the Kyrie, and some other parts such as
the Invitation to the Sign of Peace), and the Deacon of the Eucharist, who
assists the priest during the Liturgy of the Eucharist. Eastern Orthodoxy and
Eastern Catholicism. In addition to reading the Gospel and assisting in the
administration of Holy Communion, the deacon censes the icons and people, calls
the people to prayer, leads the litanies, and has a role in the dialogue of the
Anaphora. In keeping with Eastern tradition he is not permitted to perform any
Sacred Mysteries (sacraments) on his own, except for Baptism "in extremis" (in
danger of death), conditions under which anyone, including the laity, may
baptize. When assisting at a normal baptism, it is often the deacon who goes
down into the water with the one being baptized (). In contrast to the Roman
Catholic Church, deacons in the Eastern Churches may not preside at the
celebration of marriages, as in Eastern theology the sacrament is conferred by
the nuptial blessing of a priest. Diaconal vestments are the sticharion
(dalmatic), the orarion (deacon's stole), and the epimanikia (cuffs). The last
are worn under his sticharion, not over it as does a priest or bishop. The
deacon usually wears a simple orarion which is only draped over the left
shoulder but, if elevated to the rank or archdeacon, he wears the "doubled-
orarion", meaning it is passed over the left shoulder, under the right arm, and
then crossed over the left shoulder (see photograph, right). In modern Greek
practice, a deacon wears this doubled orarion from the time of his ordination.
Also, in the Greek practice, he wears the clerical kamilavka (cylindrical head
covering) with a rim at the top. In Slavic practice, a hierodeacon (monastic
deacon) wears the simple black kamilavka of a monk (without the rim), but he
removes the monastic veil (see klobuk) when he is vested; a married deacon
would not wear a kamilavka unless it is given to him by the bishop as an
ecclesiastical award; the honorary kamilavka is purple in colour, and may be
awarded to either married or monastic clergy. As far as street clothing is
concerned, immediately following his ordination the deacon receives a blessing
to wear the "Exorasson" (Arabic: "Jib'be", Slavonic: "Riassa"), an outer
cassock with wide sleeves, in addition to the "Anterion" (Slavonic:
"Podraznik"), the inner cassock worn by all orders of clergy. In the Slavic
practice, married clergy may wear any of a number of colours, but most often
grey, while monastic clergy always wear black. In certain jurisdtictions in
North America and Western Europe, a Roman collar is often worn, although this
is not a traditional or widespread practice. A "protodeacon" (Greek:
πρωτοδιάκονος: "protodiakonos", "first deacon") is a distinction
of honor awarded to senior deacons, usually serving on the staff of the
diocesan bishop. An "archdeacon" is similar, but is among the monastic clergy.
Protodeacons and archdeacons use a double-length orarion even if it is not the
local tradition for all deacons to use it. In the Slavic tradition a deacon may
be awarded the doubled-orarion even if he is not a protodeacon or archdeacon.
According to the practice of the Greek Orthodox Church of America, in keeping
with the tradition of the Ecumenical Patriarchate, the most common way to
address a deacon is "Father". Depending on local tradition, deacons are
addressed as either "Father", "Father Deacon", "Deacon Father", or, if
addressed by a Bishop, simply as "Deacon". The tradition of kissing the hands
of ordained clergymen extends to the diaconate as well. This practice is rooted
in the Holy Eucharist and is in acknowledgement and respect of the Eucharistic
role members of the clergy play in preparing, handling and disbursing the
divine and lifegiving body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ during the Divine
Liturgy, and in building and serving the Body of Christ, His Church. Anciently,
the Eastern Churches consecrated deaconesses. This practice fell into desuetude
in the second millennium, but has been revived in some churches. Saint
Nectarios of Pentapolis consecrated a number of nuns as deaconesses in
convents. Deaconesses would assist in anointing and baptising women, and in
ministering to the spiritual needs of the women of the community, but would not
serve within the Holy Altar. As churches discontinued consecrating women as
deaconesses, these duties largely fell to the nuns and to the priests' wives.
Anglicanism. In Anglican churches, deacons often work directly in ministry to
the marginalized inside and outside the church: the poor, the sick, the hungry,
the imprisoned. Unlike Orthodox and Catholic deacons who may be married only
before ordination, Anglican deacons are permitted to marry freely both before
and after ordination, as are Anglican priests. Most deacons are preparing for
priesthood and are usually ordained as priests about a year after their
diaconal ordination. However, there are some deacons who do not go on to
receive priestly ordination. Many provinces of the Anglican Communion ordain
both women and men as deacons. Many of those provinces that ordain women to the
priesthood previously allowed them to be ordained only to the diaconate. The
effect of this was the creation of a large and overwhelmingly female diaconate
for a time, as most men proceeded to be ordained priests after a short time as
a deacon. Anglican deacons may baptize and in some dioceses are granted
licences to solemnize matrimony, usually under the instruction of their parish
priest and bishop. They commonly officiate at Benediction of the Blessed
Sacrament. Deacons are not able to preside at the eucharist (but can lead
worship with the distribution of already-consecrated communion elements where
this is permitted), nor can they pronounce God's absolution of sin or pronounce
the Trinitiarian blessing. In most cases, deacons minister alongside other
clergy. An Anglican deacon wears an identical choir dress to an Anglican
priest: cassock, surplice, tippet and academic hood. However, liturgically,
deacons usually wear a stole over their left shoulder and fastened on the right
side of their waist. This is worn both over the surplice and the alb. A deacon
might also wear a dalmatic. Deaconesses. The title "women deacon" or
"deaconess" appears in many documents from the early Church period,
particularly in the East. Their duties were often different from that of male
deacons; women deacons prepared adult women for baptism and they had a general
Apostolate to female Christians and catechumens. Women appear to have been
ordained as deacons to serve the larger community until about the 6th century
in the West and in the East until modern times. Liturgies for the ordination of
women deacons are quite similar to those for male Deacons and the ancient
ordination rites have been noted by groups like Womenpriests. Although it is
sometimes argued that women deacons of history were sacramentally not
"ordained" in the full sense used in the present day in Canons 1008 and 1009 of
the Code of Canon Law, some modern scholars argue that the ordination of women
deacons might have been equally sacramental to that of male deacons. Currently,
the Catholic Church has not restored women to the diaconate, although Vatican
statements have declined to state that this is not possible, as they have in
the case of priestly ordination. The Russian Orthodox Church had a female
diaconate into the 20th century. The Holy Synod of the Orthodox Church of
Greece restored a monastic female "diaconate" in 2004. The Armenian Church has
a long history of women deacons, to the present. Lutheran churches. Missouri
Synod (USA). The Lutheran Church - Missouri Synod (LC-MS) in the United States
has special training and certification programs for deaconesses. LC-MS
deaconesses are trained at Concordia University - Chicago or one of their two
seminaries (St. Louis, MO or Fort Wayne, IN). Internet based classes are also
available through the Mission Training Center (MTC). Deaconesses assist pastors
in human care ministry and other roles with the goals of caring for those in
need and freeing pastors to focus on word and sacrament ministry. Acts chapter
6, verse 2 describes the function of deacons (servants) then and now, "So the
Twelve gathered all the disciples together and said, 'It would not be right for
us to neglect the ministry of the word of God in order to wait on tables.'"
Deaconesses are installed, not ordained, and remain lay persons. The word
"ordain" is to be reserved for the pastoral office. A professional Deaconess
(trained at the seminaries or Concordia University-Chicago) does not ordinarily
preach and only ordained pastors may administer the sacraments; although she
may perform baptism in cases of emergency. The Atlantic District of the
Lutheran Church-Missouri Synod has a Deacon Training program that prepares men
and women for ministries of Word and Service in the local congregation.
Students take the following courses of study at the Large Catechism level over
the course of two years: Christian Doctrine Summary; Interpreting the Bible in
Translation; Lutheran Worship I; OT Bible; Fundamental Pastoral Care; Basic
Preaching; NT Bible; Teaching the Faith; Mission Outreach in Context; and
Church History I (Christ to 1500 A.D.). Atlantic District deacon students (male
and female) who wish to seek commissioning as a Deacon in a local congregation
must complete a pre-internship interview, 200 intern hours and their status as
Deacon is under the authority of the local Pastoral Office. and a post-
internship interview. Students are commissioned for the local congregation
According to guidelines, Deacons shall be reviewed tri-annually by the Pastoral
Office and the congregational President of the local congregation where the
Deacon serves. Other Districts also train laymen and laywomen for service but
the nomenclature varies by District. Deacons, both the professional Deaconesses
and the congregational and District trained Deacons (male and female) are
considered to hold ministries of Word and Service (as opposed to Word and
Sacrament). Some with the nomenclature of "Deacon" are those training for
ordination, although the terms "seminarian" or "vicar" are preferred. Special
exceptions may be made for these Deacons who are vicars (training to become
pastors) but must be given by the appropriate District president in writing. (A
vicar in the LC-MS is a third year seminarian who is doing an internship under
a pastor. It should not be confused with the same term in Anglican and other
church traditions.) Evangelical Lutheran Church in America. Deaconess Community
(ELCA/ELCIC). The Deaconess Community, a community of women serving in the
Evangelical Lutheran Church in America (ELCA) and the Evangelical Lutheran
Church in Canada (ELCIC) was formed in 1884. These women, who bear the title of
'Sister', proclaim the gospel through ministries of mercy and servant
leadership on behalf of both churches for the sake of the world. Since the
1970s the sisters have been allowed to marry. Diaconal Ministers/Associates in
Ministry (ELCA/ELCIC). The diaconate was recognized and rostered by the ELCA in
1993, creating a fourth 'roster' of recognized ministers (the other three being
ordained, associates in ministry, and deaconess) in the churchwide body. The
community is still young and as such is still being formed as to what styles
and forms of ministry a diaconal minister pursues, as well as practices and
traditions of the same. As in the Anglican Communion, Lutheran diaconal
ministers are allowed to wear a stole draped sideways from one shoulder and
tied off at the waist, usually with some material left hanging below. Diaconal
ministers (the term "deacon" is used occasionally but not officially) are
involved in preaching, assisting in worship, leading worship in lieu of an
ordained pastor and other congregational duties; they are, however, primarily
called to service outside the church, in fields such as campus ministry,
chaplaincy, congregational ministry, counseling, social service agency work,
spiritual direction, parish and community nursing and a range of other avenues.
A diaconal minister is "consecrated", rather than "ordained". This ceremony is
usually presided over by a bishop. Also of note are the 'associates in ministry
(AIM), a rostered position within the ELCA consisting of laypersons
commissioned into positions of service within the church, most often as
educators, musicians, and worship leaders. While there is a trend towards
combining the diaconal and associate ministries, the 'AIM' program continues in
its own right, and associates are spread across the entirety of the churchwide
body. AIMs are "commissioned" in the church and the hierarchy for service.
"Porvoo" Lutheran churches. The "Porvoo Communion" is a formally constituted
union between the Anglican churches of Ireland and Great Britain and the
Lutheran churches of most of the Scandinavian and Baltic states. These Lutheran
churches administer holy orders in the same threefold ministry as the Anglican
Communion, with deacons ordained to their ministry. As a result the Porvoo
agreement allows for a complete freedom of exchange of ministries (of bishops
and priests as well as deacons) between the Anglican and Lutheran churches who
are signatories. Methodist churches. Methodist Church of Great Britain.
Methodist Church of Great Britain has a Permanent Diaconate, based on an
understanding of the New Testament that Deacons have an equal, but distinct
ministry from Presbyters. The original Wesleyan Deaconess Order was founded by
Rev Thomas Bowman Stephenson in 1890, following observation of new ministries
in urban areas in the previous years. The order continued as the Wesley
Deaconess Order following Methodist Union in 1932, but, following the admission
of women to "The Ministry" (as presbyteral ministry is commonly termed in the
Methodist Church), a number of Deaconesses transferred and recruitment for the
WDO ceased from 1978. The 1986 Methodist Conference re-opened The Order to both
men and women and the first Ordinations to the renewed order occurred during
the 1990 Conference in Cardiff, which coincided with celebrations of 100 years
of diaconal service in British Methodism; deaconesses had previously been
ordained at their annual convocation. The United Methodist Church. In U.S.
Methodism, the deacon began as a transitional order before a clergy person was
ordained elder. In 1996, The United Methodist Church ended the transitional
deacon and established a new Order of Deacons to be equal in status with the
Order of Elders. Both men and women may be ordained as deacons. Deacons serve
in a variety of specialized ministries including, but not limited to, Christian
education, music, communications and ministries of justice and advocacy. Unlike
United Methodist elders, deacons must find their own place of service.
Nevertheless, the bishop does officially approve and appoint deacons to their
selected ministry. Deacons may assist the elder in the administration of
Sacraments, but must receive special approval from a bishop before presiding
over Baptism and Holy Communion. Other traditions. Deacons are also appointed
or elected in other Protestant denominations, though this is less commonly seen
as a step towards the clerical ministry. The role of deacon in these
denominations varies greatly from denomination to denomination; often, there
will be more emphasis on administrative duties than on pastoral or liturgical
duties. In some denominations, deacons' duties are only financial management
and practical aid and relief. Elders handle pastoral and other administrative
duties. Amish. The Amish have deacons, but they are elected by a council and
receive no formal training. Baptists. Baptists have traditionally followed the
principle of the autonomy of the local church congregation, giving each church
the ability to discern for themselves the interpretation of scripture. Thus,
the views among Baptist churches as to who becomes a deacon and when, as well
as what they do and how they go about doing it, vary greatly. Baptists
recognize two ordained positions in the church as Elders (Pastors) and Deacons,
as per 1 Timothy, third chapter. There are Baptist churches where the deacons
decide many of the church affairs. There are churches where deacons serve in a
family ministry only. There are Baptist churches (especially in the United
Kingdom, but also in the U.S. and elsewhere) where women are allowed to be
deacons; while many Baptist churches would never consider allowing a woman to
serve as a deacon. One example would be the General Association of Regular
Baptist Churches, where deacons can be any adult male member of the
congregation that is in good standing. Many African American Missionary or
National Baptist Convention, USA, Inc. affiliated churches have male and female
deacons serving as one board and others have two separate boards of deacons and
deaconesses. Most often the deacon or deacon candidate is a long-standing
member of the church, being middle aged, but younger deacons are often members
of a family that has had several generations in the same church. They are
elected by quorum vote annually. Their roles are semi-pastoral in that they
fill in for the pastor on occasion, or lead a prayer service. Their main roles
are to accompany the pastor during Communion to hand out the remembrances of
bread and wine (or grape juice) and to set a good example for others to follow.
Administrative duties sometimes include oversight of the treasury, Sunday
school curriculum, transportation, and various outreach ministries. See Baptist
Distinctives for a more accurate treatment of Deacons in churches in other
Associations, particularly the UK. Church of Scotland. There are two distinct
offices of Deacon in the Church of Scotland. The best known form of diaconate
are trained, paid pastoral workers, often working in parishes with considerable
social and economic deprivation. The permanent diaconate was formerly
exclusively female, and it was in the centenary year of the Diaconate (1988)
that men were admitted to the office of Deacon. Women could not be ordained as
Ministers until 1968. The offices of Deacon and Minister are now both open to
both women and men; Deacons are now ordained (they were previously
"commissioned"). The other office of Deacon can be found in congregations
formerly belonging to the pre-1900 Free Church of Scotland, with a "Deacons'
Court" having responsibility for financial and administrative oversight of
congregations. Only a few congregations still retain this constitutional model,
with most having since adopted the Church of Scotland's "Model Constitution"
(with a Kirk Session and Congregational Board) or "Unitary Congregation" (with
just a Kirk Session). Most of the Free Church congregations united with the
United Presbyterian Church of Scotland in 1900 creating the United Free Church
of Scotland, which itself united with the Church of Scotland in 1929. The
congregations of the Free Church of Scotland (post 1900) which did not join the
UF Church in 1900 continue to have Deacons. Uniting Church in Australia. In the
Uniting Church in Australia, the diaconate is one of two offices of ordained
ministry. The other is Minister of the Word. Deacons in the Uniting Church are
called to minister to those on the fringes of the church and be involved in
ministry in the community. A deacon is a pathfinder. They go where others have
not gone before and light the way for the church to respond to where people in
the community are hurting, disadvantaged and oppressed. A deacon is a community
builder. Not always having congregation, they begin with scattered people and
shape them into a community. A deacon is an evangelist. They share the good
news of the gospel with people in the community. Due to shortages in diaconal
placements in the Uniting Church, deacons are often serving in similar or exact
placements to ministers of the Word. It is also acknowledged that both the
"Ministry of the Word" and the "Ministry of Deacon" have a number of overlaps
and not one particular ministry is restricted to any particular ordination. In
the Uniting Church both ministers of the word and deacons are styled "The
Reverend". Presbyterian Church (USA). Individual congregations of this church
denomination also ordain deacons, along with elders. However, in many churches
the property-functions of the diaconate and session of elders is commended to
an independent board of trustees. John Calvin's legacy of restoring a servant-
ministry diaconate lives on in the Presbyterian churches. Deacons are specially
charged with ministries of mercy, especially toward the sick and the poor.
Church of Christ. The role of deacons in this church is also widely varied.
Generally they are put in control of various programs of a congregation. They
are servants, as the etymology indicates, of the church. They are under the
subjection of the elders, as is the rest of the congregation. Their
qualifications are found in the New Testament, in 1 Timothy 3:8-13 (Waddey,
John; et al. 1981). New Apostolic Church. In the New Apostolic Church, the
deacon ministry is a local ministry. A deacon mostly works in his home
congregation to support the priests. If a priest is unavailable, a deacon will
hold a divine service, without the act of communion (Only Priests and up can
consecrate Holy Communion). Jehovah's Witnesses. Deacons among Jehovah's
Witnesses are referred to as ministerial servants, claiming it preferable to
translate the descriptive Greek term used in the Bible rather than merely
transliterate it as though it were a title. Appointed ministerial servants aid
elders in congregational duties. Like the elders, they are adult baptized males
and serve voluntarily. Cognates. The Greek word "diakonos" (διάκονος)
gave rise to the following terms from the history of Russia, not to be confused
with each other: ""dyak"", ""podyachy"", ""dyachok"", in addition to "deacon"
and "protodeacon". Scots usage. In Scots language, the title "deacon" is used
for a head-workman, a master or chairman of a trade guild, or one who is adept,
expert and proficient. The term "deaconry" refers to the office of a "deacon"
or the trade guild under a "deacon. The most famous holder of this title was
Deacon Brodie who was a cabinet-maker and president of the Incorporation of
Wrights and Masons as well as being a Burgh councillor of Edinburgh, but at
night led a double life as a burglar. He is thought to have inspired the story
of "The Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde".
