List of death deities Naraka (Hinduism) Deities associated with death take many
different forms, depending on the specific culture and religion being
referenced. Psychopomps, deities of the underworld, and resurrection deities
are commonly called death deities in comparative religions texts. The term
colloquially refers to deities that either collect or rule over the dead,
rather than those deities who determine the time of death. However, all these
types will be included in this article. Many have incorporated a god of death
into their mythology or religion. As death, along with birth, is among the
major parts of human life, these deities may often be one of the most important
deities of a religion. In some religions with a single powerful deity as the
source of worship, the death deity is an antagonistic deity against which the
primary deity struggles. The related term death worship has most often been
used as a derogatory term to accuse certain groups of morally abhorrent
practices which set no value on human life, or which seem to glorify death as
something positive in itself. Occurrence. In polytheistic religions or
mythologies which have a complex system of deities governing various natural
phenomena and aspects of human life, it is common to have a deity who is
assigned the function of presiding over death. The inclusion of such a
"departmental" deity of death in a religion's pantheon is not necessarily the
same thing as the glorification of death which is commonly condemned by the use
of the term "death-worship" in modern political rhetoric. In the theology of
monotheistic religion, the one god governs both life and death. However in
practice this manifests in different rituals and traditions and varies
according to a number of factors including geography, politics, traditions and
the influence of other religions. In fiction. In the universe of George
Orwell's novel "1984", "Death Worship" was the common propagandistic English-
language translation of the name of the governing philosophy of Eastasia (more
accurately translated as "Obliteration of Self"). This ideology presumably made
some allusion to Buddhist cultural concepts, but was functionally
indistinguishable from the totalitarian "oligarchical collectivist" ideologies
of the other two superpowers (Ingsoc in Oceania and "Neo-Bolshevism" in
Eurasia). Death is the protagonist in the science fantasy novel "On a Pale
Horse", book one in a series of 8 books, the "Incarnations of Immortality".
Death is the name of a deity in "The Sandman (Vertigo)."
