Demigod A demigod (or demi-god), meaning half-god, is a originally Greek
mythological figure whose one parent was a god and whose other parent was
human; as such, demigods are human-god hybrids. In some mythologies it also
describes humans who became gods, minor deities, or simply extremely powerful
figures whose powers approach those of the gods even though they are not gods
themselves. Examples of well-known demigods include Greek hero Heracles (Roman
Hercules), the Celtic hero Cuchulain, the Sumerian king Gilgamesh (who
supposedly was actually two thirds god), and the ancient Germanic woodsman
Ansel, . Greek demigods. Part of the dual nature of Greek heroes that gave rise
to the modern demigod conception of them is that one parent is a mortal, and
another is a god. This scenario is also occasionally embellished with the theme
of double paternity: the hero's mother lying with king and god in the same
night (the mother of Theseus, for example) or to be visited secretly by the god
(like Danaë, mother of Perseus), and the seed of the two fathers is mixed in
her womb. Thus the heroes have liminal qualities that enable them to have great
strength, to cross the threshold between the worlds of the living and the dead
yet return safely, and to mediate long after their death between human and
divine. The fact that male deities of Greek myth had far more notable children
with mortals than the female goddesses can be attributable to the Greek male-
dominated society being reflected in their religion. Zeus, primarily, and also
Poseidon, both had a multitude of affairs with mortal women, with Zeus having
to shield them from his wife Hera after she was alerted to the infidelity. The
females were expected to remain loyal to their husbands, while the males were
almost expected to take multiple lovers, meaning that far more of the demigods
in Greek myths were born on earth to human mothers than on Olympus to divine
mothers. These hybrids were stronger, braver, and quicker than other mortals,
accomplishing super-human feats only possible because of their divine parent.
They would go out of their way to prove their valor, often engaging monsters or
beasts far too powerful for any normal human to defeat, for the sole purpose of
spreading their name. Others, such as Heracles, fought to reclaim lost honor.
Theseus fought to save his homeland, killing the Minotaur to stop the flow of
sacrifices that were taken from Athens on a yearly basis to feed the beast.
Zeus became the father of many heroes as a result of his dalliances, and after
death they were accorded honors, especially among those Greeks who claimed to
be their descendants and to have claims on the protection and patronage of a
god. The veneration of heroes was part of chthonic rites in the religion of
Greece. Such demigods were always mortal, but were preeminent among humans, and
some had unusual powers. An exception was Heracles, who was accepted in the
passage of time among the Twelve Olympians. Structurally, mythic narratives of
such heroic figures falls into the genre of Romance, as Northrop Frye defined
and described it. Alexander the Great encouraged the myth makers in his retinue
to spread the legend of his "secret" Olympian paternity. His legend survived
the end of Antiquity; a cycle of medieval romances developed around his legend.
In modern popular culture, Greek demigods appear in the series Percy Jackson &
the Olympians by Rick Riordan. In a tie-in series by the same author, Greek
demigods, sired from humans and gods in their Roman aspects, also appear.
Indian demigods. In the Hindu religion, demigod is used to refer to deities who
were once human and later became "devas" (gods) and are worshiped as such.
Worship of the demigods is often different from worship of the regular gods
such as Lord Ganesha and Lord Shiva. There are two notable demigods in Hindu
mythology, Hanuman and Garuda, the divine steed of Vishnu. Examples of demigods
worshiped in South India are Madurai Veeran and Karuppu Sami. The heroes of the
Hindu epic Mahabharata, the five Pandava brothers, fit the Western definition
of demigods, but are generally not referred to as such. Queen Kunti, the wife
of King Pandu, was given a mantra that, when recited, meant that one of the
Gods would give her his child. When her husband was cursed to die if he ever
engaged in sexual relations, Kunti used this mantra to provide her husband with
children, Yudishtira (father Yama), Bhima (father Vayu) and Arjuna (father
Indra). She taught this mantra to Madri, King Pandu's other wife, and she
conceived twin boys, Nakula and Sahadeva (fathers the Asvins). Queen Kunti had
previously conceived another son, Karna, when she had tested the mantra
out—despite her protests, Surya the sun god was compelled by the mantra to
impregnate her. The Vaishnavites (who often translate deva as "demigod") cite
various verses that speak of the devas' subordinate status. For example, the
Rig Veda (1.22.20) states, oṃ tad viṣṇoḥ paramam padam sadā paśyanti
sūrayaḥ: "All the suras (i.e., the devas) look always toward the feet of
Lord Vishnu." Similarly, in the Vishnu Sahasranama the concluding verses state:
"The Rishis (great sages), the ancestors, the devas, the great elements, in
fact all things moving and unmoving constituting this universe, have originated
from Narayana," (i.e., Vishnu). Thus the Devas are stated to be subordinate to
Vishnu, or God. A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, the founder of the
International Society for Krishna Consciousness (ISKCON) translated the
Sanskrit word "deva" as "demigod" in his literature when the term referred to a
God other than the Supreme Lord. This is because the ISKCON tradition teaches
that there is only one Supreme Lord and that all others are but His servants.
In order to emphasize their subservience, Prabhupada used the word "demigod" as
a translation of "deva". However, there are at least three occurrences in the
eleventh chapter of Bhagavad-Gita where the word "deva" is used to refer to
Lord Krishna; here Prabhupada translates it as "Lord". The word "deva" can be
used to refer to the Supreme Lord, celestial beings and saintly souls depending
on the context. This is similar to the word "Bhagavan" which is translated
according to different contexts. In the Bhagavad Gita Krishna himself states
that worshipers of deities other than the Supreme Lord, Vishnu, are incorrect
(Gita 9.23) as such worship leads only to temporal benefits, rather than to the
Lord Himself (Gita 7.23). Krishna also says: "Whatever deity or form a devotee
worships, I make his faith steady. However, their wishes are granted only by
Me." (Gita: 7:21-22) Elsewhere in the Gita Lord Krishna states: "O Arjuna, even
those devotees who worship other lesser deities (e.g., devas, for example) with
faith, they also worship Me, but in an improper way because I am the Supreme
Being. I alone am the enjoyer of all sacrificial services (Seva, Yajna) and
Lord of the universe." (Gita: 9:23)
