Demonology Demonology is the systematic study of demons or beliefs about
demons. It is the branch of theology relating to superhuman beings who are not
gods. It deals both with benevolent beings that have no circle of worshippers
or so limited a circle as to be below the rank of gods, and with malevolent
beings of all kinds. The original sense of "demon", from the time of Homer
onward, was a benevolent being, but in English the name now holds connotations
of malevolence. (In order to keep the distinction, when referring to the word
in its original Greek meaning English uses the spelling "Daemon" or "Daimon".)
Demons, when regarded as spirits, may belong to either of the classes of
spirits recognized by primitive animism; that is to say, they may be human, or
non-human, separable souls, or discarnate spirits which have never inhabited a
body. A sharp distinction is often drawn between these two classes, notably by
the Melanesians, several African groups, and others; the Arab jinn, for
example, are not reducible to modified human souls; at the same time these
classes are frequently conceived as producing identical results, e.g. diseases.
The word ' is from Greek , "daimōn", "divinity, divine power, god"; and , '.
Prevalence of demons. According to some societies, all the affairs of life are
supposed to be under the control of spirits, each ruling a certain "element" or
even object, and themselves in subjection to a greater spirit. For example, the
Inuit are said to believe in spirits of the sea, earth and sky, the winds, the
clouds and everything in nature. Every cove of the seashore, every point, every
island and prominent rock has its guardian spirit. All are potentially of the
malignant type, to be propitiated by an appeal to knowledge of the
supernatural. Traditional Korean belief posits that countless demons inhabit
the natural world; they fill household objects and are present in all
locations. By the thousands they accompany travelers, seeking them out from
their places in the elements. In ancient Babylon, demonology had an influence
on even the most mundane elements of life, from petty annoyances to the
emotions of love and hatred. The numerous demonic spirits were given charge
over various parts of the human body, one for the head, one for the neck, and
so on. Greek philosophers such as Porphyry, who claimed influence from
Platonism, and the fathers of the Christian Church, held that the world was
pervaded with spirits, the latter of whom advanced the belief that demons
received the worship directed at pagan gods. Many religions and cultures
believe, or once believed, that what is now known as sleep paralysis, was a
form of physical contact with demons. Character of the spiritual world. The
ascription of malevolence to the world of spirits is by no means universal. In
Central Africa, the Mpongwe believe in local spirits, just as do the Inuit; but
they are regarded as inoffensive in the main. Passers-by must make some
trifling offering as they near the spirits' place of abode; but it is only
occasionally that mischievous acts, such as the throwing down of a tree on a
passer-by, are, in the view of the natives, perpetuated by the class of spirits
known as "Ombuiri". So too, many of the spirits especially concerned with the
operations of nature are conceived as neutral or even benevolent; the European
peasant fears the corn-spirit only when he irritates him by trenching on his
domain and taking his property by cutting the corn; similarly, there is no
reason why the more insignificant personages of the pantheon should be
conceived as malevolent, and we find that the Petara of the Dyaks are far from
indiscriminating and malignant, being viewed as invisible guardians of mankind.
Types. Excluded are souls conceived as inhabiting another world. Yet just as
gods are not necessarily spiritual, demons may also be regarded as corporeal;
vampires for example are sometimes described as human heads with appended
entrails, which issue from the tomb to attack the living during the night
watches. The so-called Spectre Huntsman of the Malay Peninsula is said to be a
man who scours the firmament with his dogs, vainly seeking for what he could
not find on Earth -a buck mouse-deer pregnant with male offspring; but he seems
to be a living man; there is no statement that he ever died, nor yet that he is
a spirit. The incubi and Succubi of the Middle Ages are sometimes regarded as
spiritual beings; but they were held to give proof of their bodily existence,
such as offspring (though often deformed). Belief in demons goes back many
millennia. The Zoroastrian faith teaches that there are 3,333 Demons, some with
specific dark responsibilities such as war, starvation, sickness, etc. Ancient
Near East. In Babylonian mythology, the seven evil deities were known as
"shedu", or "storm-demons". They were represented in winged bull form, derived
from the colossal bulls used as protective genii of royal palaces, the name
"shed" assumed also the meaning of a propitious genius in Babylonian magic
literature. It was from Chaldea that the name "shedu" came to the Israelites,
and so the writers of the Tanach applied the word Shedim to certain Canaanite
deities. They also spoke of "the destroyer" (Exodus xii. 23) as a Lord who will
"strike down the Egyptians." In II Samuel xxiv; 16 and II Chronicles xxi. 15
the pestilence-dealing angel, that is spirit, called "the destroying angel"
(compare "the angel of the Lord" in II Kings xix. 35; Isaiah xxxvii. 36).
Judaism. Some scholars suggest that the origins of early Jewish demonology can
be traced to two distinctive and often competing mythologies of evil — Adamic
and Enochic, one of which was tied to the mishap of Adam and Eve in the Garden
of Eden and the other to the fall of angels in the antediluvian period. Thus,
Adamic story traces the source of evil to Satan’s transgression and the fall
of Adam and Eve in Eden, a trend reflected in the Books of Adam and Eve that
explains the reason for Satan’s demotion by his refusal to obey God’s
command to venerate newly created Adam. In contrast, the early Enochic
tradition bases its understanding of the origin of demons on the story of the
fallen Watchers led by Azazel. Scholars believe that these two enigmatic
figures - Azazel and Satan exercised formative influence on early Jewish
demonology. While in the beginning of their conceptual journeys Azazel and
Satan are posited as representatives of two distinctive and often rival trends
tied to the distinctive etiologies of corruption, in later Jewish and Christian
demonological lore both antagonists are able to enter each other’s respective
stories in new conceptual capacities. In these later traditions Satanael is
often depicted as the leader of the fallen angels while his conceptual rival
Azazel is portrayed as a seducer of Adam and Eve. While historical Judaism
never "officially" recognized a rigid set of doctrines about demons, many
scholars believe that its post-exilic concepts of eschatology, angelology, and
demonology were influenced by Zoroastrianism. Some, however, believe that these
concepts were received as part of the Kabbalistic tradition passed down from
Adam, Noah, and the Hebrew patriarchs. See Sefer Yetzirah. The Talmud declares
that there are 7,405,926 demons, divided in 72 companies. While many people
believe today that "Lucifer" and "Satan" are different names for the same
being, not all scholars subscribe to this view. Use of the name "Lucifer" for
the devil stems from a particular interpretation of , a passage that does not
speak of any fallen angel but of the defeat of a particular Babylonian King, to
whom it gives a title that refers to what in English is called the Day Star or
Morning Star (in Latin, lucifer, meaning "light-bearer", from the words lucem
ferre). In and elsewhere, the same Latin word lucifer is used to refer to the
Morning Star, with no relation to the devil. It is only in post-New Testament
times that the Latin word Lucifer was used as a name for the devil, both in
religious writing and in fiction, especially when referring to him prior to his
fall from Heaven. There is more than one instance where demons are said to have
come to be, as seen by the sins of the Watchers and the Grigori, of Lilith
leaving Adam, of demons such as vampires, impure spirits in Jewish folklore
such as the dybbuk, and of wicked humans that have become demons as well.
Christianity. Christian demonology is the study of demons from a Christian
point of view. It is primarily based on the Bible (Old Testament and New
Testament), the exegesis of these scriptures, the scriptures of early Christian
philosophers and hermits, tradition, and legends incorporated from other
beliefs. A number of authors throughout Christian history have written about
demons for a variety of purposes. Theologians like Thomas Aquinas wrote
concerning the behaviors Christians should be aware of, while witchhunters like
Heinrich Kramer wrote about how to find and what to do with people they
believed were involved with demons. Some texts are written with instructions on
how to summon demons in the name of God and often were claimed to have been
written by individuals respected within the Church, such as the Lesser Key of
Solomon or The Grimoire of Pope Honorius (although these the earliest
manuscripts were from well after these individuals had died). These latter
texts were usually more detailed, giving names, ranks, and descriptions of
demons individually and categorically. Most Christians commonly reject these
texts as either diabolical or fictitious. In modern times, some demonological
texts have been written by Christians, usually in a similar vein of Thomas
Aquinas, explaining their effects in the world and how faith may lessen or
eliminate damage by them. A few Christian authors, such as Jack Chick and John
Todd, write with intentions similar to Kramer, proclaiming that demons and
their human agents are active in the world. These claims can stray from
mainstream ideology, and may include such beliefs as that Christian rock is a
means through which demons influence people. Not all Christians believe that
demons exist in the literal sense. There is the view that the language of
exorcism in the New Testament is an example of what was once employed to
describe the healings of what would be classified in modern days as epilepsy,
mental illness etc. Islam. In Islam, the devil Iblis or Shaytan was a Jinn
(humans are created from Earth, Angels from light, and jinn from 'smokeless
fire'). The jinn, though, are not necessarily evil; they could be good-doers or
sinners just like humans. Since the jinn and humans are the only kinds of
creation who have the will to choose, the followers of Iblis could be jinn or
human. The angels, on the other hand, are sinless and only obey the will of
God. In the Qur'an, when God Ordered those witnessing the creation of Adam to
prostrate before him (Adam), Iblis refused to do so and was therefore damned
for refusal to obey God's Will. Buddhism. Traditionally, Buddhism affirms the
existence of hells peopled by demons who torment sinners and tempt mortals to
sin, or who seek to thwart their enlightenment, with a demon named Mara as
chief tempter, "prince of darkness," or "Evil One" in Sanskrit sources. The
followers of Mara were also called "mara", the devils, and are frequently cited
as a cause of disease or representations of mental obstructions. The "mara"
became fully assimilated into the Chinese worldview, and were called "mo". The
idea of the imminent decline and collapse of the Buddhist religion amid a
"great cacophony of demonic influences" was already a significant component of
Buddhism when it reached China in the first century CE, according to Michel
Strickmann. Demonic forces had attained enormous power in the world. For some
writers of the time this state of affairs had been ordained to serve the higher
purpose of effecting a "preliminary cleansing" that would purge and purify
humanity in preparation for an ultimate, messianic renewal. Medieval Chinese
Buddhist demonology was heavily influenced by Indian Buddhism. Indian
demonology is also fully and systematically described in written sources,
though during Buddhism's millennium of direct influence in China, "Chinese
demonology was whipped into respectable shape," with a number of Indian demons
finding permanent niches even in Taoist ritual texts. Hinduism. Hindu mythology
include a range of spirits (Vetalas, Yakshas, Bhutas and Pishachas) that might
be classified as demons. These spirits are souls of beings that have committed
certain specific sins. As a purging punishment, they are condemned to roam
without a physical form for a length of time, until a rebirth. Beings that died
with unfulfilled desires or anger are also said to "linger" until such issues
are resolved. Hindu text Atharvaveda gives an account of nature and habitats of
such spirits including how to persuade/control them. There are occult
traditions in Hinduism that seeks to control such spirits to do their bidding.
Hindu text Garuda Purana details other kinds of punishments and judgments given
out in Hell; this also given an account of how the spirit travels to nether
world. Occult. Practitioners of ceremonial magic sometimes attempt to constrain
and command demons to do their bidding, using methods such as the Goetia and
The Book of Abramelin. The demons are often those mentioned in Christian
demonology. These practitioners do not necessarily worship demons, but seek to
deploy them to obtain their goals. Other followers of the occult do worship
demons, and some refer to their religion as "demonolatry." Demonolators
consider methods such as the Goetia very disrespectful towards the demons, and
possibly dangerous for the operator. They instead use forms of prayer, magic,
and ritual which petition the demons, asking for their aid rather than
commanding them. Demonolators are not identical to practitioners of Theistic
Satanism. They worship other demons (such as Belial and Leviathan) either
alongside, or instead of Satan. Some demonolators say that their form of
demonolatry is a tradition, often familial, that is not related to the modern
religious and philosophical movements collectively referred to as Satanism. Not
all of the occultists who worship demons use the word "demonolator" to describe
themselves, nor do all belong to the specific group mentioned above.
Zoroastrianism. In the Zoroastrian tradition, Ahura Mazda, as the force of good
Spenta Mainyu, will eventually be victorious in a cosmic battle with an evil
force known as Angra Mainyu or Ahriman. Satanism. Satanism is a name for a
diverse group of religions which regard demons in general and Satan in
particular as positive entities, either as real entities to be worshipped
(Theistic Satanism), or using Satan and other demons as symbols (LaVeyan
Satanism). Some of them borrow concepts of the nature of demons from
established religions such as Christianity, Judaism or Islam while reversing
these religions' negative value judgement in the matter, while others elaborate
original concepts of their own about demons' character and abilities.
