Demon A demon is a supernatural, often malevolent being prevalent in religion,
occultism, literature, and folklore. The original Greek word "daimon" does not
carry the negative connotation initially understood by implementation of the
Koine δαιμόνιον (daimonion), and later ascribed to any cognate words
sharing the root. In Ancient Near Eastern religions as well as in the Abrahamic
traditions, including ancient and medieval Christian demonology, a demon is
considered an unclean spirit, more specifically an evil angel, which may cause
demonic possession, calling for an exorcism. In Western occultism and
Renaissance magic, which grew out of an amalgamation of Greco-Roman magic,
Jewish demonology, and Christian tradition, a demon is a spiritual entity that
may be conjured and controlled. Terminology. The Ancient Greek word "daimōn"
denotes a spirit or divine power, much like the Latin "genius" or "numen".
"Daimōn" most likely came from the Greek verb "daiesthai" (to divide,
distribute). The Greek conception of a "daimōns" notably appears in the works
of Plato, where it describes the divine inspiration of Socrates. To distinguish
the classical Greek concept from its later Christian interpretation, the former
is anglicized as either "daemon" or "daimon" rather than "demon". The Greek
term does not have any connotations of evil or malevolence. In fact,
εὐδαιμονία "eudaimonia", (lit. good-spiritedness) means happiness.
The term first acquired its negative connotations in the Septuagint translation
of the Hebrew Bible, which drew on the mythology of ancient Semitic religions.
This was then inherited by the Koine text of the New Testament. The Western
medieval and neo-medieval conception of a "demon" (see the Medieval grimoire
called the "Ars Goetia") derives seamlessly from the ambient popular culture of
Late (Roman) Antiquity. The Hellenistic "daemon" eventually came to include
many Semitic and Near Eastern gods as evaluated by Christianity. The supposed
existence of demons is an important concept in many modern religions and
occultist traditions. Demons are still feared as a popular superstition,
largely due to their alleged power to possess living creatures. In the
contemporary Western occultist tradition (perhaps epitomized by the work of
Aleister Crowley), a demon (such as Choronzon, the Demon of the Abyss) is a
useful metaphor for certain inner psychological processes (inner demons),
though some may also regard it as an objectively real phenomenon. Some scholars
believe that large portions of the demonology (see Asmodai) of Judaism, a key
influence on Christianity and Islam, originated from a later form of
Zoroastrianism, and were transferred to Judaism during the Persian era.
Psychological archetype. Psychologist Wilhelm Wundt remarked that "among the
activities attributed by myths all over the world to demons, the harmful
predominate, so that in popular belief bad demons are clearly older than good
ones." Sigmund Freud developed this idea and claimed that the concept of demons
was derived from the important relation of the living to the dead: "The fact
that demons are always regarded as the spirits of those who have died
"recently" shows better than anything the influence of mourning on the origin
of the belief in demons." M. Scott Peck, an American psychiatrist, wrote two
books on the subject, "People of the Lie: The Hope For Healing Human Evil" and
"Glimpses of the Devil: A Psychiatrist's Personal Accounts of Possession,
Exorcism, and Redemption". Peck describes in some detail several cases
involving his patients. In "People of the Lie" he provides identifying
characteristics of an evil person, whom he classified as having a character
disorder. In "Glimpses of the Devil" Peck goes into significant detail
describing how he became interested in exorcism in order to debunk the "myth"
of possession by evil spirits – only to be convinced otherwise after
encountering two cases which did not fit into any category known to psychology
or psychiatry. Peck came to the conclusion that possession was a rare
phenomenon related to evil, and that possessed people are not actually evil;
rather, they are doing battle with the forces of evil. Although Peck's earlier
work was met with widespread popular acceptance, his work on the topics of evil
and possession has generated significant debate and derision. Much was made of
his association with (and admiration for) the controversial Malachi Martin, a
Roman Catholic priest and a former Jesuit, despite the fact that Peck
consistently called Martin a liar and manipulator. Richard Woods, a Roman
Catholic priest and theologian, has claimed that Dr. Peck misdiagnosed patients
based upon a lack of knowledge regarding dissociative identity disorder
(formerly known as multiple personality disorder), and had apparently
transgressed the boundaries of professional ethics by attempting to persuade
his patients into accepting Christianity. Father Woods admitted that he has
never witnessed a genuine case of demonic possession in all his years. By
tradition. Ancient Near East. Mesopotamia. According to the 1906 Jewish
Encyclopedia, "In Chaldean mythology the seven evil deities were known as
"shedu", storm-demons, represented in ox-like form." They were represented as
winged bulls, derived from the colossal bulls used as protective jinns of royal
palaces. From Chaldea, the term "shedu" traveled to the Israelites. The writers
of the Tanach applied the word as a dialogism to Canaanite deities. There are
indications that demons in popular Hebrew mythology were believed to come from
the nether world. Various diseases and ailments were ascribed to them,
particularly those affecting the brain and those of internal nature. Examples
include the catalepsy, headache, epilepsy, and nightmares. There also existed a
demon of blindness, "Shabriri" (lit. "dazzling glare") who rested on uncovered
water at night and blinded those who drank from it. Demons supposedly entered
the body and caused the disease while overwhelming or "seizing" the victim. To
cure such diseases, it was necessary to draw out the evil demons by certain
incantations and talismanic performances, which the Essenes excelled at.
Josephus, who spoke of demons as "spirits of the wicked which enter into men
that are alive and kill them", but which could be driven out by a certain root,
witnessed such a performance in the presence of the Emperor Vespasian and
ascribed its origin to King Solomon. In mythology, there were few defences
against Babylonian demons. The mythical mace Sharur had the power to slay
demons such as Asag, a legendary gallu or edimmu of hideous strength. Ancient
Arabia. Pre-Islamic mythology did not differentiate between gods and demons.
Jinns were considered divinities of inferior rank and had many human abilities,
such as eating, drinking, and procreating. While most jinn were considered
peaceful and well-disposed towards humans, there also existed evil jinns who
contrived to injure people. Hebrew Bible. Demons in the Hebrew Bible are of two
classes: the "se'irim" ("hairy beings") and the "shedim". The "se'irim", to
which some Israelites offered sacrifices in the open fields, were satyr-like
creatures, described as dancing in the wilderness (, ). "The Israelites also
offered sacrifices to the shedim (Deut. xxxii. 17; Ps. cvi. 37)". Some
benevolent "shedim" were used in kabbalistic ceremonies (as with the "golem" of
Rabbi Yehuda Loevy), and malevolent "shedim" ("mazikin", from the root meaning
"to damage") were often credited with possession. Similarly, a "shed" might
inhabit an otherwise inanimate statue. Judaism. According to some rabbinic
sources, demons were believed to be under the dominion of a king or chief,
either Asmodai or, in the older Haggadah, Samael ("the angel of death", also
called the "chief of the devils"), who killed via poison. Occasionally a demon
was called "satan": "Stand not in the way of an ox when coming from the
pasture, for Satan dances between his horns". Demonology never became an
essential feature of Jewish theology. However, the existence of demons was
never questioned by the Talmudists and late rabbis, nor did most of the
medieval thinkers question their reality. Only rationalists like Maimonides and
Abraham ibn Ezra explicitly denied their existence. Their point of view
eventually became mainstream Jewish understanding. Rabbinical demonology has
three classes of demons, though they are scarcely separable one from another.
There were the "shedim", the ("harmers"), and the ' ("spirits"). There were
also "lilin" ("night spirits"), ' ("shade", or "evening spirits"), ' ("midday
spirits"), and ' ("morning spirits"), as well as the "demons that bring famine"
and "such as cause storm and earthquake". Christian demonology. In the Gospels,
particularly the "Gospel of Mark", Jesus cast out many demons or evil angels
from those afflicted with various ailments. He also lent this power to some of
his disciples (). The demons were cast out by the utterance of a name,
according to , with some groups insisting the original pronunciation of the
name "Jesus" be used. The demons or unclean spirits themselves were said to
often recognize Jesus as the Messiah. In , Jesus taught that when demons were
driven from a human, they went through dry places as disembodied spirits
seeking respite, although on some occasion he would send them into a herd of
swine. Through all accounts, Jesus had never failed in his exorcism of a demon.
By way of contrast, in Acts, a group of Judaistic exorcists known as the sons
of Sceva attempted to cast out a powerful spirit without belief in Jesus, but
failed with disastrous consequences. The contemporary Roman Catholic Church
unequivocally teaches that angels and demons are real beings rather than just
symbolic devices. The Catholic Church has a cadre of officially sanctioned
exorcists which perform many exorcisms each year. The exorcists of the Catholic
Church teach that demons attack humans continually but that afflicted persons
can be effectively healed and protected either by the formal rite of exorcism,
authorized to be performed only by bishops and those they designate, or by
prayers of deliverance, which any Christian can offer for themselves or others.
Building upon the few references to "daemons" in the New Testament, especially
the poetry of the Book of Revelation, Christian writers of apocrypha from the
2nd century onwards created a more complicated tapestry of beliefs about
"demons" that was largely independent of Christian scripture. At various times
in Christian history, attempts have been made to classify demons according to
various proposed demonic hierarchies. According to Christian demonology, demons
will be eternally punished and never will reconcile with God. Other theories
postulate a universal reconciliation, in which Satan, the fallen angels, and
the souls of the dead that were condemned to Hell reconcile with God. This
doctrine is today often associated with the Unification Church. Origen, Jerome,
and Gregory of Nyssa also mentioned this possibility. Wicca. In Wicca there is
an act of summoning called Goetic Magick which can include various entities
including demons, angels and elementals. The purpose of Goetic Magick summoning
varies by the entity being summoned. Demons are however never worshipped,
however their existence is acknowledged as powerful yet dangerous. Demons can
be controlled by knowledgable Wiccans. Islam. Islam recognizes the existence of
jinn, which are sentient beings with free will that can co-exist with humans
(though not the genies of modern lore). In Islam, evil jinns are referred to as
the "shayātīn", or devils, with Iblis (Satan) as their chief. Iblis was one
of the first jinn; he disobeyed God and did not bow down before Adam refusing
to acknowledge a creature made of "clay". Thus, Iblis was condemned to hell. He
asked for respite until the Last day (Judgement Day), when he vowed to make
mankind fall and deny the existence of their creator, to which God replied that
Iblis would only be able to mislead those who were not righteous believers,
warning that Iblis and all who followed him in evil would be punished in Hell.
Hinduism. Hinduism includes numerous varieties of spirits that might be
classified as demons, including Vetalas, Bhutas and Pishachas. Rakshasas and
Asuras are often also taken as demons. Asuras. Originally, "Asura", in the
earliest hymns of the Rig Veda, meant any supernatural spirit, either good or
bad. Since the /s/ of the Indic linguistic branch is cognate with the /h/ of
the Early Iranian languages, the word "Asura", representing a category of
celestial beings, became the word "Ahura" (Mazda), the Supreme God of the
monotheistic Zoroastrians. Ancient Hinduism tells that Devas (also called
"suras") and Asuras are half-brothers, sons of the same father Kasyapa;
although some of the Devas, such as Varuna, are also called Asuras. Later,
during Puranic age, Asura and Rakshasa came to exclusively mean any of a race
of anthropomorphic, powerful, possibly evil beings. Daitya (lit. sons of the
mother "Diti"), Rakshasa (lit. from "harm to be guarded against"), and Asura
are incorrectly translated into English as "demon". In Hindu mythology, pious,
highly enlightened Asuras, such as Prahlada and Vibheeshana, are not uncommon.
The Asura are not fundamentally against the gods, nor do they tempt humans to
fall. This is markedly different from the traditional Western notions of demons
as a rival army of God but comparable with the concept of the jinns in Islam.
Many people metaphorically interpret the Asura as manifestations of the ignoble
passions in the human mind and as a symbolic devices. There were also cases of
power-hungry Asuras challenging various aspects of the Gods, but only to be
defeated eventually and seek forgiveness—see Surapadman and Narakasura. Evil
spirits. Hinduism advocates the reincarnation and transmigration of souls
according to one's karma. Souls (Atman) of the dead are adjudged by the Yama
and are accorded various purging punishments before being reborn. Humans that
have committed extraordinary wrongs are condemned to roam as lonely, often
evil, spirits for a length of time before being reborn. Many kinds of such
spirits (Vetalas, Pishachas, Bhūta) are recognized in the later Hindu texts.
These beings, in a limited sense, can be called demons. Bahá'í Faith. In the
Bahá'í Faith, demons are not regarded as independent evil spirits as they are
in some faiths. Rather, evil spirits described in various faiths' traditions,
such as Satan, fallen angels, demons, and jinns, are metaphors for the base
character traits a human being may acquire and manifest when he turns away from
God and follows his lower nature. Belief in the existence of ghosts and
earthbound spirits is rejected and considered to be the product of
superstition.
