Deuterocanonical books Deuterocanonical books is a term used since the
sixteenth century in the Catholic Church and Eastern Christianity to describe
certain books and passages of the Christian Old Testament that are not part of
the Hebrew Bible. The term is used in contrast to the protocanonical books,
which are contained in the Hebrew Bible. This distinction had previously
contributed to debate in the early Church about whether they should be read in
the churches and thus be classified as canonical texts. The term is used as a
matter of convenience by the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church and other
Churches to refer to books of their Old Testament which are not part of the
Masoretic Text. The Deuterocanonical books are considered canonical by
Catholics and Eastern Orthodox, but are considered non-canonical by most
Protestants. The word "deuterocanonical" comes from the Greek meaning
'belonging to the second canon'. The original usage of the term distinguished
these scriptures both from those considered "non-canonical" and from those
considered "protocanonical". However, some editions of the Bible include text
from both deuterocanonical and non-canonical scriptures in a single section
designated "Apocrypha". This arrangement can lead to conflation between the
otherwise distinct terms "deuterocanonical" and "apocryphal". History.
Deuterocanonical is a term coined in 1566 by the theologian Sixtus of Siena,
who had converted to Catholicism from Judaism, to describe scriptural texts of
the Old Testament considered canonical by the Catholic Church, but which are
not present in the Hebrew Bible, and which had been omitted by some early canon
lists, especially in the East. Their acceptance among early Christians was
widespread, though not universal, and the Bible of the early Church always
included, with varying degrees of recognition, books now called
"deuterocanonical". Some say that their canonicity seems not to have been
doubted in the Church until it was challenged by Jews after AD 100, sometimes
postulating a hypothetical Council of Jamnia. Regional councils in the West
published official canons that included these books as early as the fourth and
fifth centuries. Dead Sea scrolls. Fragments of three deuterocanonical books
have been found among the Dead Sea scrolls found at Qumran. Sirach, whose
Hebrew text was already known from the Cairo Geniza, has been found in two
scrolls (2QSir or 2Q18, 11QPs_a or 11Q5) in Hebrew. Another Hebrew scroll of
Sirach has been found in Masada (MasSir). The Book of Tobit has been found in
Qumran in four scrolls written in Aramaic and in one written in Hebrew. The
Letter of Jeremiah (or Baruch chapter 6) has been found in cave 7 (7Q5) in
Greek. It has been theorized by recent scholars that the Qumran library was not
entirely produced at Qumran, but may have included part of the library of the
Jerusalem Temple, that may have been hidden in the caves for safekeeping at the
time the Temple was destroyed by Romans in 70 AD. Influence of the Septuagint.
The large majority of Old Testament references in the New Testament are taken
from the Greek Septuagint (LXX)—which includes the deuterocanonical books, as
well as apocrypha —both of which are called collectively
αναγιγνοσκόμενα "anagignoskomena" (things that are read or
"profitable reading"). Several appear to have been written originally in
Hebrew, but the original text has long been lost. Archaeological finds,
however, discovered some original texts among the Dead Sea scrolls. The
Septuagint was widely accepted and used by Greek-speaking Jews in the first
century, even in the region of Roman Judea, and therefore naturally became the
text most widely used by early Christians, who were predominantly Greek
speaking. In the New Testament, Hebrews 11:35 refers to an event that was
recorded in one of the deuterocanonical books (2 Maccabees It is also a
reference to 1 Kings17:22-23 7). Other New Testament authors also quote period
literature which was familiar to the audience but that was not included in the
Old Testament or the deuterocanonical books. For instance, Paul cites Greek
writers and philosophers, and the author of Hebrews references oral tradition
which spoke of an Old Testament prophet who was sawn in half in Hebrews 11:37,
two verses after the 2nd Maccabees reference. The Jewish historian Josephus
speaks of there being 22 books in the canon of the Hebrew Bible, a Jewish
tradition reported also by the Christian bishop Athanasius. However, included
in Athanasius's list of 22 Old Testament books are Baruch and the Letter of
Jeremiah. At the same time, he mentioned that certain other books, including
five deuterocanonical books but also the Didache and the Shepherd of Hermas,
while not being part of the canon, "were appointed by the Fathers to be read".
He excluded what he called "apocryphal writings" entirely. In the Catholic
Church. In the Catholic Church, "the first infallible and effectually
promulgated pronouncement on the Canon" was that defined by the Council of
Trent. Among the minority, in Trent, that showed opposition to these books'
inclusion were Cardinals Seripando and Cajetan, the latter an opponent of
Luther at Augsburg. However, Trent confirmed the statements of earlier and less
authoritative regional councils which included also the deuterocanonical books,
such as the Synod of Hippo (393), and the Councils of Carthage of 397. Much
later (15th century), the Council of Florence taught the divine inspiration of
these books, but "did not formally pass on their canonicity. In the canonical
debate between Catholics and Protestants controversy remains as to the
significance of Trent's omission of the Septuagint version of 1 Esdras which
Carthage may have ratified. However, there is ambiguity over the naming of the
books of Esdras. The "Canon of Carthage" lists two books of Esdras. This could
mean 1 Esdras and Ezra-Nehemiah as in the Septuagint or Ezra and Nehemiah as in
the Vulgate. Influence of the Vulgate. Thus Jerome acknowledged the principle
by which the canon was settled —the judgment of the Church, rather than his
own judgment or the judgment of Jews, though he wondered why one would sanction
the version of a heretic and judaizer. The Vulgate is also important as the
touchstone of the canon concerning which parts of books are canonical. When the
Council of Trent listed the books included in the canon, it qualified the books
as being "entire with all their parts, as they have been used to be read in the
Catholic Church, and as they are contained in the old Latin vulgate edition".
This decree was clarified somewhat by Pope Pius XI on June 2, 1927, who allowed
that the Comma Johanneum was open to dispute, and it was further explicated by
Pope Pius XII's Divino Afflante Spiritu. Reception in Orthodox Christianity and
other churches. Outside of the Roman Catholic Church, the term deuterocanonical
is sometimes used, by way of analogy, to describe books that Eastern Orthodoxy,
and Oriental Orthodoxy included in the Old Testament that are not part of the
Jewish Tanakh, nor the Protestant Old Testament. Among Orthodox, the term is
understood to mean that they were compiled separately from the primary canon,
as explained in 2 Esdras, where Esdras is instructed to keep certain books
separate and hidden. Eastern Orthodoxy. The Eastern Orthodox Churches have
traditionally included all the books of the Septuagint in their Old Testaments.
The Greeks use the word "Anagignoskomena" (Ἀναγιγνωσκόμενα
"readable, worthy to be read") to describe the books of the Greek Septuagint
that are not present in the Hebrew Tanakh. When Orthodox theologians use the
term "deuterocanonical," it is important to note that the meaning is not
identical to the Roman Catholic usage. In Orthodox Christianity,
deuterocanonical means that a book is part of the corpus of the Old Testament
(i.e. is read during the services) but has secondary authority. In other words,
deutero (second) applies to authority or witnessing power, whereas in Roman
Catholicism, deutero applies to chronology (the fact that these books were
confirmed later), not to authority. The Eastern Orthodox books included in the
Old Testament are the seven deuterocanonical books listed above, plus 3
Maccabees and 1 Esdras (also included in the Clementine Vulgate), while Baruch
is divided from the Epistle of Jeremiah, making a total of 49 Old Testament
books in contrast with the Protestant 39-book canon. Like the Roman Catholic
deuterocanonical books, these texts are integrated with the rest of the Old
Testament, not printed in a separate section. Other texts printed in Orthodox
Bibles are considered of some value (like the additional Psalm 151, and the
Prayer of Manasses) or are included as an appendix (like the Greek 4 Maccabees,
and the Slavonic 2 Esdras). Ethiopian Orthodoxy. In the Amharic Bible used by
the Ethiopian Orthodox Church (an Oriental Orthodox Church), those books of the
Old Testament that are still counted as canonical, but not by all other
Churches, are often set in a separate section titled ""Deeyutrokanoneekal""
(ዲዩትሮካኖኒካል), which is the same word. The Ethiopian Orthodox
Deuterocanon, in addition to the standard set listed above, along with the
books of Esdras and "Prayer of Minasse", also includes some books that are
still held canonical by only the Ethiopian Church, including Enoch or "Henok"
(I Enoch), "Kufale" (Jubilees) and 1, 2 and 3 Meqabyan (which are sometimes
wrongly confused with the "Books of Maccabees"). Jewish position. Judaism and
most Protestant versions of the Bible exclude these books. It is commonly said
that Judaism officially excluded the deuterocanonicals and the additional Greek
texts listed here from their Scripture in the Council of Jamnia (c.70-90 AD),
but this claim is also disputed. Reception in Christian churches having their
origins in the Reformation. Anglicanism. These books make up the Apocrypha
section of the Clementine Vulgate: 3 Esdras (1 Esdras); 4 Esdras (2 Esdras);
and The Prayer of Manasseh, where they are specifically described as "outside
of the series of the canon". The 1609 Douai Bible includes them in an appendix,
but they have been dropped from recent Catholic translations into English. They
are found, along with the deuterocanonical books, in the Apocrypha section of
Protestant bibles. Using the word apocrypha (Greek: hidden away) to describe
texts, although not necessarily pejorative, implies to some people that the
writings in question should not be included in the canon of the Bible. This
classification commingles them with certain non-canonical gospels and New
Testament Apocrypha. The "Style Manual for the Society of Biblical Literature"
recommends the use of the term "deuterocanonical literature" instead of
"Apocrypha" in academic writing. The Thirty-Nine Articles of Religion of the
Church of England lists the deuterocanonical books as suitable to be read for
"example of life and instruction of manners, but yet doth not apply them to
establish any doctrine." The early lectionaries of the Anglican Church (as
included in the Book of Common Prayer of 1662) included the deuterocanonical
books amongst the cycle of readings, and passages from them were used in the
services (such as the Benedicite) Readings from the deuterocanonical books are
now included in most, if not all, of the modern lectionaries in the Anglican
Communion, based on the Revised Common Lectionary (in turn based on the post-
conciliar Roman Catholic lectionary). Presbyterianism. The Westminster
Confession of Faith, a Calvinist document that serves as a systematic summary
of doctrine for the Church of Scotland and Presbyterian churches worldwide,
recognizes only the sixty-six books of the Protestant canon as authentic
Scripture. Chapter 1, Article 3 of the Confession reads: "The books commonly
called Apocrypha, not being of divine inspiration, are no part of the Canon of
Scripture; and therefore are of no authority in the Church of God, nor to be
any otherwise approved, or made use of, than other human writings." Reformed
churches. The Belgic Confession, used in Reformed churches, devotes a section
(Article 6) to "The difference between the canonical and apocryphal books" and
asserts that "All which the Church may read and take instruction from, so far
as they agree with the canonical books; but they are far from having such power
and efficacy as that we may from their testimony confirm any point of faith or
of the Christian religion; much less to detract from the authority of the other
sacred books."
