Dharma Dharma (, ; lit. "that which upholds, supports or maintains the
regulatory order of the universe") means "Law" or "Natural Law" and is a
concept of central importance in Indian philosophy and religion. As well as
referring to Law in the universal or abstract sense "dharma" designates those
behaviours considered necessary for the maintenance of the natural order of
things. Therefore "dharma" may encompass ideas such as duty, vocation, religion
and everything that is considered correct, proper or decent behaviour. The idea
of "dharma" as duty or propriety derives from an idea found in India's ancient
legal and religious texts that there is a divinely instituted natural order of
things "(rta)" and justice, social harmony and human happiness require that
human beings discern and live in a manner appropriate to the requirements of
that order. Dharma states that there are guidelines or rules that must be
obeyed varying from place to place. The source of any individual dharma lies in
the nature of each individual and is part of their customs and practices.
According to the various Indian religions, such as Hinduism, Jainism, Buddhism,
and Sikhism, beings that live in accordance with "dharma" proceed more quickly
toward "dharma yukam", "moksha" or "nirvana" (personal liberation). The antonym
of dharma is "adharma", meaning unnatural or immoral. In traditional Hindu
society, "dharma" has historically denoted a variety of ideas, such as Vedic
ritual, ethical conduct, caste rules, and civil and criminal law. Its most
common meaning, however, pertains to two principal ideals; that social life
should be structured through well-defined and well-regulated classes ("varna"),
and that an individual's life within a class should be organized into defined
stages ("ashrama", "see" "dharmasastra"). A Hindu's "dharma" is affected by the
person's age, caste, class, occupation, and gender. In modern Indian languages
it can refer simply to a person's religion, depending on the context. Dharma
also refers to the teachings and doctrines of the founders of Buddhism and
Jainism, the Buddha and Mahavira. In Buddhist philosophy, "dhamma/dharma" is
also the term for "phenomenon". In recent years, "dharma" has evolved from an
older, Bråhmanical dharma (which the king's support was required both
financially and in protecting the earth), to a newer dharma called nåstika
dharma. Nåstika dharma draws upon the principles and disciplines of yoga to
encourage not dominance, as would be seen in the prior dharma, but equality and
harmony among people, which in the end encourages selfless behavior. Etymology.
In the Rigveda, the word appears as an "n"-stem, ', with a range of meanings
encompassing "something established or firm" (in the literal sense of prods or
poles), figuratively "sustainer, supporter" (of deities), and semantically
similar to the Greek "ethos" ("fixed decree, statute, law"). In Classical
Sanskrit, the noun becomes thematic, '. It is a derivation from Proto-Indo-
Iranian root "*dhar-" ("to fasten, to support, to hold"), in turn reflecting
Proto-Indo-European root "*dʰer-" ("to hold"), which in Sanskrit is reflected
as class-1 root . Etymologically it is related to Avestan √dar- ("to hold"),
Old Persian ' ("to hold, have"), Latin ' ("rein, horse tack"), Lithuanian ("to
be suited, fit"), Lithuanian dermė (agreement), darna ("harmony") and Old
Church Slavonic ' ("to hold, possess"). Classical Sanskrit word "dharmas" would
formally match with Latin o-stem ' < *Proto-Indo-European *dʰer-mo-
s "holding", were it not for its historical development from earlier Rigvedic
n-stem. From the Atharvaveda and in Classical Sanskrit, the stem is thematic,
"" (Devanāgarī: धर्म), and in Pāli, it takes the form "dhamma". It
is also often rendered "dharam" in contemporary Indian languages and dialects.
It is used in most or all philosophies and religions of Indian
origin—sometimes summarized under the umbrella term of "Dharmic
faiths"—including Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism, and Sikhism. It is difficult
to provide a single concise definition for "dharma", as the word has a long and
varied history and straddles a complex set of meanings and interpretations.
Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism, and Sikhism are called "Hindu Dharma", "Buddha-
Dharma", "Jain-Dharma" and "Sikh dharma", respectively. Hinduism. Development.
In the Rig Veda, the belief (or observation) that a natural justice and harmony
pervades the natural world becomes manifest in the concept of "rta", which is
both 'nature's way' and the order implicit in nature. Thus "rta" bears a
resemblance to the ancient Chinese concept of "tao" and the Heraclitan, Stoic
or Christian conceptions of the "logos". In the Mahabharata, Krishna defines
dharma as, i.e., Purusartha. Through the four "ashramas", or stages of life
(Brahmacharya, Grihastha, Vaanprastha, Sanyaasa), a person also seeks to
fulfill the four essentials ("puruṣārtha") of "kama" (sensual pleasures),
"artha" (worldly gain), dharma, and "moksha" (liberation from reincarnation or
rebirth). Moksha, although the ultimate goal, is emphasized more in the last
two stages of life, while artha and kama are considered primary only during
Grihastha. Dharma, however is essential in all four stages. As a puruṣārtha
(human goal), dharma can also be considered to be a lens through which humans
plan and perform their interactions with the world. Through the dharmic lens,
one focuses on doing what is right and avoiding what is wrong, while the kama
perspective focuses on doing what is pleasurable to our higher nature (not
referring to sex) and avoiding pain, and the artha perspective focuses on doing
what is profitable for our higher nature (not referring to material goods or
money) and avoiding loss. Deity. Dharma is also the name of a deity or "Deva"
in charge of dharma. Mythologically, he is said to have been born from the
right breast of Brahma, is married to 13 daughters of Daksha and fathers Shama,
Kama and Harahsa. He is also the father of the celebrated Rishis Hari, Krishna,
Nara-Narayana. In the epic Mahabharata, he is incarnate as Vidura. Also, Dharma
is invoked by Kunti and she begets her eldest son Yudhisthira from him. As
such, Yudhisthira is known as Dharmaputra. There is also an assimilation of the
god Dharma and Yama, the god responsible for the dead. Technical literature. In
technical literature, e.g., in Sanskrit grammar, "dharma" also means "property"
and "dharmin" means "property-bearer". In a Sanskrit sentence like ', "sound is
impermanent", "sound" is the bearer of the property "impermanence". Likewise,
in the sentence ', "here, there is a pot", "here" is the bearer of the property
"pot-existence" – this shows that the categories of property and property-
bearer are closer to those of a logical predicate and its subject-term, and not
to a grammatical predicate and subject. Buddhism. For many Buddhists, the
Dharma most often means the body of teachings expounded by the Buddha. The word
is also used in Buddhist phenomenology as a term roughly equivalent to
phenomenon, a basic unit of existence and/or experience. In East Asia, the
translation for dharma is , pronounced "fǎ" in Mandarin, "beop" in Korean,
"hō" in Japanese, and "pháp" in Vietnamese. However, the term dharma can also
be transliterated from its original form. Buddha's teachings. For practicing
Buddhists, references to "dharma" ("dhamma" in Pali) particularly as "the
Dharma", generally means the teachings of the Buddha, commonly known throughout
the East as Buddha-Dharma. The status of Dharma is regarded variably by
different Buddhist traditions. Some regard it as an ultimate truth, or as the
fount of all things which lies beyond the "three realms" (Sanskrit: "tridhatu")
and the "wheel of becoming" (Sanskrit: "bhavacakra"), somewhat like the pagan
Greek and Christian logos: this is known as "Dharmakaya" (Sanskrit). Others,
who regard the Buddha as simply an enlightened human being, see the Dharma as
the essence of the "84,000 different aspects of the teaching" (Tibetan: "chos-
sgo brgyad-khri bzhi strong") that the Buddha gave to various types of people,
based upon their individual propensities and capabilities. Dharma refers not
only to the sayings of the Buddha, but also to the later traditions of
interpretation and addition that the various schools of Buddhism have developed
to help explain and to expand upon the Buddha's teachings. For others still,
they see the Dharma as referring to the "truth," or the ultimate reality of
"the way that things really are" (Tib. Cho). The Dharma is one of the Three
Jewels of Buddhism in which practitioners of Buddhism seek refuge, or that upon
which one relies for his or her lasting happiness. The Three Jewels of Buddhism
are the Buddha, meaning the mind's perfection of enlightenment, the Dharma,
meaning the teachings and the methods of the Buddha, and the Sangha, meaning
those awakened beings who provide guidance and support to followers of the
Buddha. Qualities of Buddha Dharma. Knowing these attributes, Buddhists hold
that they will attain the greatest peace and happiness through the practice of
Dharma. Each person is therefore fully responsible to engage in their own
practice and commitment. A type of secular Buddhism has arisen in the west that
proposes a lived universal dharma, a transformation that can emerge from
mindfulness-based clinical programs. There is concern that western schools of
medicine, psychology, neuroscience, healthcare, education, and business
leadership have appropriated (possibly misappropriated) the techniques of
meditative practices denatured from their cultural and philosophical roots.
Proponents argue that the deep and lasting truths of the dharma become
implicitly present to those who practice mindfulness, truths that lead
practitioners to experience changes that astonish and humble all involved.
Buddhist phenomenology. Other uses include dharma, normally spelled with a
small "d" (to differentiate), which refers to a "phenomenon" or "constituent
factor" of human experience. This was gradually expanded into a classification
of constituents of the entire material and mental world. Rejecting the
substantial existence of permanent entities which are qualified by possibly
changing qualities, Buddhist Abhidharma philosophers enumerated lists of
dharmas which varied by school. They came to propound that these "constituent
factors" are the only type of entity that truly exists (and only some thinkers
gave dharmas this kind of existence). This notion is of particular importance
for the analysis of human experience: Rather than assuming that mental states
inhere in a cognizing subject, or a soul-substance, Buddhist philosophers
largely propose that mental states alone exist as "momentary elements of
consciousness" and that a subjective perceiver is assumed. One of the central
tenets of Buddhism, is the denial of a separate permanent "I", and is outlined
in the three marks of existence. At the heart of Buddhism is the understanding
of all phenomena as dependently originated. When all dharmas are empty, what is
endless? What has an end? What is endless and with an end? What is not endless
and not with an end? What is "it"? What is "other"? What is permanent? What is
impermanent? What is impermanent and permanent? What is neither? Auspicious is
the pacification of phenomenal metastasis, the pacification of all
apprehending; There is no dharma whatsoever taught by the Buddha to whomever,
whenever, wherever. --Mūlamadhyamakakārikā, , 25:22–24 Righteousness.
According to S. N. Goenka, a teacher of Vipassana meditation, the original
meaning of dhamma is ""dharayati iti dharmaH"", or "one that contains, supports
or upholds" and dharma in the Buddhist scriptures has a variety of meanings,
including "phenomenon" and "nature" or "characteristic". Dharma also means
"mental contents," and is paired with "citta", which means heart-mind. The
pairing is paralleled with the combining of "shareera" (body) and "vedana"
(feelings or sensations which arise within the body but are experienced through
the mind) in major "sutras" such as the Mahasatipatthana sutra. Dharma is also
used to refer to the direct teachings of the Buddha, especially the discourses
on the fundamental principles (such as the Four Noble Truths and the Noble
Eightfold Path), as opposed to the parables and to the poems. Ch'an. Dharma is
employed in Ch'an in a specific context in relation to transmission of
authentic doctrine, understanding and bodhi; recognized in Dharma transmission.
Jainism. In Jainism, dharma is natural. Acharya Samantabhadra writes, "Vatthu
sahavo dhammo": "the dharma is the nature of an object". It is the nature of
the soul to be free, thus for the soul, the dharma is "paralaukika", beyond
worldly. However the nature of the body is to seek self-preservation and be
engaged in pleasures. Thus there are two dharmas. Two Dharmas. Because of the
difference in practice, dharma is of two kinds, for the householders and for
the monks. Of the householder's dharma, there are two kinds, "ordinary" and
"special" The ordinary dharma of the householder should be carried out
according to tradition, such that it is not objectionable, according to ones
abilities such as wealth, in accordance with nyaya (everyone treated fairly and
according to laws). A householder follows both laukika and the paralaukika
dharmas at the same time. Sikhism. For Sikhs, the word "Dharm" means the "path
of righteousness". What is the "righteous path"? That is the question that the
Sikh scriptures attempt to answer. The main holy scriptures of the Sikhs is
called the Guru Granth Sahib. It is considered to be more than a holy book of
the Sikhs. The Sikhs treat this Granth ("holy book") as a living Guru. The holy
text spans 1430 pages and contains the actual words spoken by the Sikh Gurus
and various other Saints from other religions including Hinduism and Islam.
Sikh Dharma is a distinct religion revealed through the teachings of ten Gurus
who are accepted by the followers as if they were spiritually the same. The
Gurus are considered "the divine light" and they conveyed "Gurbani" (the word
of God) in the form of the Guru Granth Sahib to the world. In this faith, God
is described as both "Nirgun" (transcendent) and "Sargun" (immanent). Further,
God pervades in His creation and is omnipresent, but cannot be incarnate. The
principal Sikh belief lays stress on one's actions and deeds rather than
religious labels, rituals or outward appearance or signs. Background. The
primary object of a Sikh's life is to seek union with God and hence, liberation
from the cycle of births and deaths (cycle of re-incarnation) which is dictated
by a person's thought, deeds and actions in this life. Liberation can be
achieved through meditating on God, truthful living and sharing ones wealth in
the context of a normal family life and through divine grace. Amrit Pahul –
Sikh baptism for both men and women – was instituted in 1699 by Guru Gobind
Singh, the tenth Guru. All Sikhs, on taking Amrit, are enjoined to lead a
disciplined life by following a code of ethics leading to a "Saint-Soldier" way
of life. In 1708, Guru Gobind Singh vested spiritual authority in the Guru
Granth Sahib (the Sikh scriptures) as the eternal Guru and hence Sikh Dharma
acknowledges the end of human Guruship. At the same time, the temporal
authority was vested in the "Khalsa Panth" (a community of Sikhs who have taken
Amrit). Other important aspects of a Sikh's life include "Sewa" (dedication to
the service of God's creation) where the emphasis is often upon manual work,
undertaking of goodwill towards other faiths and their followers, to defend for
justice and assistance of the oppressed. In contrast to many other faiths,
Sikhs believe that when all other means to achieve justice are exhausted, then
it is just to wield the sword. Scriptures and dharma. The Guru Granth Sahib
lays down the foundation of this "righteous path" and various salient points
are found. Zoroastrianism. Daena. "Daena" ("din" in modern Persian) is the
eternal Law, whose order was revealed to humanity through the "Mathra-Spenta"
("Holy Words"). "Daena" has been used to mean religion, faith, law, even
worship as a translation for the Hindu and Buddhist term Dharma, often
interpreted as "duty" or social order, right conduct, or virtue. The metaphor
of the 'path' of "Daena" is represented in Zoroastrianism by the muslin
undershirt "Sudra", the 'Good/Holy Path', and the 72-thread "Kushti" girdle,
the "Pathfinder". Asha. "Daena" should not be confused with the fundamental
principle asha (Vedic "rta"), the equitable law of the universe, which governed
the life of the ancient Indo-Iranians. For these, "asha" was the course of
everything observable, the motion of the planets and astral bodies, the
progression of the seasons, the pattern of daily nomadic herdsman life,
governed by regular metronomic events such as sunrise and sunset. All physical
creation ("geti") was thus determined to run according to a master plan —
inherent to Ahura Mazda — and violations of the order ("druj") were
violations against creation, and thus violations against Ahura Mazda. This
concept of "asha" versus the "druj" should not be confused with the good-
versus-evil battle evident in western religions, for although both forms of
opposition express moral conflict, the "asha" versus "druj" concept is more
systemic and less personal, representing, for instance, chaos (that opposes
order); or "uncreation", evident as natural decay (that opposes creation); or
more simply "the lie" (that opposes truth, righteousness). Moreover, in his
role as the one uncreated creator of all, Ahura Mazda is not the creator of
"druj" which is "nothing", anti-creation, and thus (likewise) uncreated. Thus,
in Zoroaster's revelation, Ahura Mazda was perceived to be the creator of only
the good (Yasna 31.4), the "supreme benevolent providence" (Yasna 43.11), that
will ultimately triumph (Yasna 48.1). In this schema of "asha" versus "druj",
mortal beings (humans and animals both) play a critical role, for they too are
created. Here, in their lives, they are active participants in the conflict and
it is their "duty" to defend order, which would decay without counter"action".
Throughout the Gathas, Zoroaster emphasizes deeds and actions, and accordingly
asceticism is frowned upon in Zoroastrianism. In later Zoroastrianism this was
explained as fleeing from the experiences of life, which was the very purpose
that the "urvan" (most commonly translated as the 'soul') was sent into the
mortal world to collect. The avoidance of any aspect of life, which includes
the avoidance of the pleasures of life, is a shirking of the responsibility and
duty to oneself, one's "urvan", and one's family and social obligations. Thus,
central to Zoroastrianism is the emphasis on moral choice, to choose between
the responsibility and duty for which one is in the mortal world, or to give up
this duty and so facilitate the work of "druj". Similarly, predestination is
rejected in Zoroastrian teaching. Humans bear responsibility for all situations
they are in, and in the way they act to one another. Reward, punishment,
happiness and grief all depend on how individuals live their life. In
Zoroastrianism, good transpires for those who do righteous deeds. Those who do
evil have themselves to blame for their ruin. Zoroastrian morality is then to
be summed up in the simple phrase, "good thoughts, good words, good deeds"
("Humata", "Hukhta", "Hvarshta" in Avestan), for it is through these that
"asha" is maintained and "druj" is kept in check. Through accumulation several
other beliefs were introduced to the religion that in some instances supersede
those expressed in the Gathas. In the late 19th century the moral and immoral
forces came to be represented by "Spenta Mainyu" and its Satanic antithesis
Angra Mainyu, the 'good spirit' and 'evil spirit' emanations of Ahura Mazda
respectively. Although the names are old, this opposition is a modern western-
influenced development popularized by Martin Haug in the 1880s, and was in
effect a realignment of the precepts of Zurvanism (Zurvanite Zoroastrianism),
which had invented a "third" deity, "Zurvan", in order to explain a mention of
twinship ("Yasna" 30.3) between the moral and immoral. Although Zurvanism had
died out by the 10th century the critical question of the "twin brothers"
mentioned in "Yasna" 30.3 remained, and Haug's explanation provided a
convenient defence against Christian missionaries who disparaged the Parsis
(Indian Zoroastrians) for their 'dualism'. Haug's concept was subsequently
disseminated as a Parsi interpretation, thus corroborating Haug's theory and
the idea became so popular that it is now almost universally accepted as
doctrine. Achaemenid Era. Achaemenid era (648–330 BCE) Zoroastrianism
developed the abstract concepts of heaven, hell, personal and final judgement,
all of which are only alluded to in the Gathas. "Yasna" 19 (which has only
survived in a Sassanid era (226–650 CE) "Zend" commentary on the "Ahuna
Vairya" invocation), prescribes a Path to Judgement known as the "Chinvat
Peretum" or "Chinvat bridge" ("cf:" As-Sirāt in Islam), which all souls had to
cross, and judgement (over thoughts, words, deeds performed during a lifetime)
was passed as they were doing so. However, the Zoroastrian personal judgement
is not final. At the end of time, when evil is finally defeated, all souls will
be ultimately reunited with their Fravashi. Thus, Zoroastrianism can be said to
be a universalist religion with respect to salvation. In addition, and strongly
influenced by Babylonian and Akkadian practices, the Achaemenids popularized
shrines and temples, hitherto alien forms of worship. In the wake of Achaemenid
expansion shrines were constructed throughout the empire and particularly
influenced the role of Mithra, Aredvi Sura Anahita, Verethregna and Tishtrya,
all of which, in addition to their original (proto-)Indo-Iranian functions, now
also received Perso-Babylonian functions. Although the worship of images would
eventually fall out of favour (and be replaced by the iconoclastic fire
temples), the lasting legacy of the Achaemenids was a vast, complex hierarchy
of "Yazatas" (modern Zoroastrianism's Angels) that were now not just evident in
the religion, but firmly established, not least because the divinities received
dedications in the Zoroastrian calendar, thus ensuring that they were
frequently invoked. Additionally, the Amesha Spenta, the six originally
abstract terms that were regarded as direct emanations or aspects or "divine
sparks" of Ahura Mazda, came to be personified as an archangel retinue.
