Dies Irae "Dies Irae" (Day of Wrath) is a thirteenth century Latin hymn thought
to be written by Thomas of Celano (1200 – c. 1265). It is a medieval Latin
poem characterized by its accentual stress and its rhymed lines. The metre is
trochaic. The poem describes the day of judgment, the last trumpet summoning
souls before the throne of God, where the saved will be delivered and the
unsaved cast into eternal flames. The hymn is best known from its use as a
sequence in the Roman Catholic Requiem mass. It was removed from the ordinary
form of the Roman Rite mass in the liturgical reform of 1969–1970, but was
retained as a hymn of the Divine Office. It can still be heard in the 1962 form
of the mass. An English version is found in various Anglican Communion missals.
Use in the Roman liturgy. Those familiar with musical settings of the Requiem
Mass—such as those by Mozart or Verdi—will be aware of the important place
"Dies Iræ" held in the liturgy. Having remained as the sequence for the
Requiem Mass in the Roman Missal of 1962 -- the last edition before revisions
from the Second Vatican Council were implemented) --- it is still heard in
churches where the Tridentine Latin liturgy is celebrated. The "Dies Irae" was
retained only in part by the "Consilium for the Implementation of the
Constitution on the Liturgy" – the Vatican body charged with drafting and
implementing reforms to the Catholic liturgy ordered by the Second Vatican
Council. It is given as the hymn in the Liturgy of the Hours during the last
week before Advent for the Office of Readings, Lauds and Vespers (divided into
three parts). Text. The Latin text below is taken from the Requiem Mass in the
1962 Roman Missal. The first English version below, translated by William
Josiah Irons in 1849, albeit from a slightly different Latin text, replicates
the rhyme and metre of the original. The translation, edited for more
conformance to the official Latin, is approved by the Catholic Church for use
as the funeral mass sequence in the liturgy of the Anglican ordinariate. The
second English version is a more formal equivalence. Because the last two
stanzas differ markedly in structure from the preceding stanzas, some scholars
consider them to be an addition made in order to suit the great poem for
liturgical use. The penultimate stanza "Lacrimosa" discards the consistent
scheme of rhyming triplets in favor of a pair of rhyming couplets. The last
stanza "Pie Jesu" abandons rhyme for assonance, and, moreover, its lines are
catalectic. Inspiration and other translations. Other images come from (the
book from which the world will be judged), (sheep and goats, right hand,
contrast between the blessed and the accursed doomed to flames), (trumpet),
(heaven and earth burnt by fire), ("men fainting with fear ... they will see
the Son of Man coming"), etc. From the Jewish liturgy, the prayer Unetanneh
Tokef also appears to have been a source: "We shall ascribe holiness to this
day, For it is awesome and terrible"; "the great trumpet is sounded", etc. Jan
Kasprowicz, a Polish poet, wrote a hymn entitled "Dies irae" which describes
the Judgment day. The first six lines (two stanzas) follow the original hymn's
metre and rhyme structure, and the first stanza translates to "The trumpet will
cast a wondrous sound". Rev. Bernard Callan (1750–1804), an Irish priest and
poet, translated it into Gaelic around 1800. His version is included in the
Gaelic prayer book, "The Spiritual Rose". Manuscript sources. The text of the
sequence is found, with slight verbal variations, in a 13th century manuscript
in the Biblioteca Nazionale at Naples. It is a Franciscan calendar missal that
must date between 1253 and 1255 for it does not contain the name of Clare of
Assisi, who was canonized in 1255, and whose name would have been inserted if
the manuscript were of later date. Musical settings. The words of "Dies Irae"
have often been set to music as part of the Requiem service, originally as a
sombre plainchant. It also formed part of the traditional Catholic liturgy of
All Souls' Day. The earliest surviving polyphonic setting of the Requiem by
Ockeghem does not include a Dies Irae, after this the first polyphonic settings
to include the Dies Irae are by Engarandus Juvenis (c.1490) and Antoine Brumel
(1516) to be followed by many composers of the renaissance. Later many notable
choral and orchestral settings of the Requiem Mass, including Dies Irae, were
made by composers including Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, Hector Berlioz, Giuseppe
Verdi, and Igor Stravinsky. Musical quotations.
