Diocese A diocese is the district or see under the supervision of a bishop. It
is divided into parishes. An archdiocese is more significant than a diocese. An
archdiocese is presided over by an archbishop whose see may have or had
importance due to size or historical significance. The archbishop may have
metropolitan authority over any other (then 'suffragan') bishops and their
dioceses within his ecclesiastical province. This structure of church
governance is known as episcopal polity. A diocese also may be referred to as a
bishopric or "episcopal see", though strictly the term "episcopal see" refers
to the domain of ecclesiastical authority officially held by the bishop, and
the term "bishopric" to the post of being bishop. Catholic Church. Eastern
Catholic churches. In the Eastern Catholic Churches (which recognize papal
authority and are a part of the larger Catholic Church), the equivalent unit is
called an eparchy. Eastern Orthodox Church. The Eastern Orthodox Church calls
dioceses metropoleis in the Greek tradition or eparchies in the Slavic
tradition. Church of England and Anglican Communion. After the Reformation, the
Church of England retained the existing diocesan structure which remains
throughout the Anglican Communion. Lutheranism. Poland, Germany, Denmark,
Norway, Iceland, Sweden, Finland. Certain Lutheran denominations such as the
Church of Sweden do have individual dioceses similar to Roman Catholics. These
dioceses and archdioceses are under the government of a bishop (see Archbishop
of Uppsala). Other Lutheran bodies and synods that have dioceses and bishops
include the Church of Denmark, the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland, the
Evangelical Church in Germany (partially), and the Church of Norway.
Lutheranism in USA. Some American Lutheran synods such as the Evangelical
Lutheran Church in America do have a bishop acting as the head of the synod,
but the synod does not have dioceses and archdioceses as the churches listed
above. Rather, it is divided into a middle judicatory. The Lutheran Church-
International, based in Springfield, Illinois, presently uses a traditional
diocesan structure, with four dioceses in North America. Its current president
is Archbishop Robert W. Hotes. Churches That Have Bishops, But Not Dioceses.
Methodism. In the British Methodist Church and Irish Methodist Church, churches
are grouped together in sections. Sections are grouped together to form
Circuits. Circuits are grouped together to form Districts. All of these,
combined with the local membership of the Church, are referred to as the
'Connexion'. This 18th-century term, endorsed by John Wesley who remained
within the Church of England, describes how people serving in different
geographical centres are 'connected' to each other. The Methodist Church has an
annual president. Each District is headed by a 'Chair' who oversees its
functioning. Each Circuit is governed by a superintendent minister. The
geographical regions covered by circuits and dioceses rarely overlap. In the
United Methodist Church (the United States and some other countries), a bishop
is given oversight over a geographical area called an Episcopal Area. Each
episcopal area contains one or more annual conferences, which is how the
churches and clergy under the bishop's supervision are organized. Thus, the use
of the term "diocese" referring to geography is the most equivalent in the
United Methodist Church, whereas each annual conference is part of one
episcopal area (though that area may contain more than one conference). The
African Methodist Episcopal Church has a similar structure to the United
Methodist Church, also using the Episcopal Area. Churches That Have Neither
Bishops Nor Dioceses. Baptists. Most Baptists hold that no church or
ecclesiastical organization has inherent authority over a Baptist church.
Churches can properly relate to each other under this polity only through
voluntary cooperation, never by any sort of coercion. Furthermore, this Baptist
polity calls for freedom from governmental control. Most Baptists believe in
"Two offices of the church"—pastor-elder and deacon—based on certain
scriptures (; ). Exceptions to this local form of local governance include a
few churches that submit to the leadership of a body of elders, as well as the
Episcopal Baptists that have an Episcopal system. History. In the later
organization of the Roman Empire, the increasingly subdivided provinces were
administratively associated in a larger unit, the diocese (Latin "dioecesis",
from the Greek term "διοίκησις", meaning "administration"). With the
adoption of Christianity as the Empire's official religion in the 4th century,
the clergy assumed official positions of authority alongside the civil
governors. A formal church hierarchy was set up, parallel to the civil
administration, whose areas of responsibility often coincided. With the
collapse of the Western Empire in the 5th century, the bishops in Western
Europe assumed a large part of the role of the former Roman governors. A
similar, though less pronounced, development occurred in the East, where the
Roman administrative apparatus was largely retained by the Byzantine Empire. In
modern times, many diocese, though later subdivided, have preserved the
boundaries of a long-vanished Roman administrative division. For Gaul, Bruce
Eagles has observed that "it has long been an academic commonplace in France
that the medieval dioceses, and their constituent "pagi", were the direct
territorial successors of the Roman "civitates". Modern usage of 'diocese'
tends to refer to the sphere of a bishop's jurisdiction. This became
commonplace during the self-conscious "classicizing" structural evolution of
the Carolingian empire in the 9th century, but this usage had itself been
evolving from the much earlier "parochia" ("parish"), dating from the
increasingly formalised Christian authority structure in the 4th century (see
"EB" 1911).
