Discordianism Discordianism is a religion and parody religion based on the
worship of Eris (also known as Discordia), the Greco-Roman goddess of chaos. It
was founded circa 1958–1959 after the publication of its (first) holy book
the Principia Discordia, written by Malaclypse the Younger and Omar Khayyam
Ravenhurst after a series of shared hallucinations at a bowling alley. The
religion has been likened to Zen, based on similarities with absurdist
interpretations of the Rinzai school, as well as Taoist philosophy.
Discordianism is centered on the idea that both order and disorder are
illusions imposed on the universe by the human nervous system, and that neither
of these illusions of apparent order and disorder is any more accurate or
objectively true than the other. There is some division as to whether it should
be regarded as a parody religion, and if so to what degree. Discordians use
humor to spread their philosophy and to prevent their beliefs from becoming
dogmatic. It is difficult to estimate the number of Discordians because they
are not required to hold Discordianism as their only belief system, and because
there is an encouragement to form schisms and cabals. Founding. The
foundational document of Discordianism is the "Principia Discordia", fourth
edition, written by Malaclypse the Younger, an alias of Greg Hill. This book
contains many references to an earlier source, "The Honest Book of Truth"
(HBT). From the quotations, the HBT seems to be arranged like the Bible,
consisting of verses grouped into chapters grouped into books grouped into the
HBT itself. The "Principia" includes a large portion of (or possibly all of) a
chapter of "The Book of Explanations" which recounts how the HBT was revealed
to Lord Omar Khayyam Ravenhurst. The tale of the discovery of the HBT contains
many similarities to the tale of the discovery of the Book of Mormon, and that
Ravenhurst had been a Mormon. It also includes part of the next chapter,
telling how the HBT was taken by a garbage collector, who refused to return it.
Discordianism can be interpreted as a belief that disharmony and chaos are
equally valid aspects of reality. The "Principia Discordia" often hints that
Discordianism was founded as a dialectic antithesis to more popular religions
based on order, although the rhetoric throughout the book describes chaos as a
much more underlying impulse of the universe. This may have been done with the
intention of merely "balancing out" the creative forces of order and disorder,
but the focus is on the more disorderly aspects of the world — at times the
forces of order are even . There are other religions that revere the principles
of harmony and order in the Universe. Organization. The very idea of a
Discordian organization is something of a paradox. Nevertheless, some structure
is indicated in "Principia Discordia". The most general group, presumably
including all Discordians (and potentially others), is The Discordian Society,
whose definition is “The Discordian Society has no definition”. Within the
society are sects of Discordianism, each under the direction of an
“Episkopos” ("overseer" or "bishop" in Koine Greek, the same word used in
the New Testament for Christian Bishops.) POEE. The sect of Discordianism
founded by Malaclypse the Younger and Omar Khayyam Ravenhurst is known as the
"Paratheo-Anametamystikhood Of Eris Esoteric" (POEE), a non-prophet irreligious
disorganisation, and the "Principia Discordia" tells about POEE in particular,
as well as Discordianism in general. According to the "Principia Discordia",
POEE is “a tribe of philosophers, theologians, magicians, scientists,
artists, clowns, and similar maniacs who are intrigued by Eris goddess of
confusion and her doings.” Furthermore it states that “POEE subscribes to
the Law Of Fives of Omar's sect” and “POEE also recognizes the Holy 23.”
Paratheo-Anametamystikhood can be taken to mean "equivalent deity, reversing
beyond-mystique". Loosely interpreted, it basically states that "all deities
are equivalent, there is no great mystery about that". Episkopos. Episkoposes
are the Overseers of sects of Discordianism, who have presumably created their
own sect of Discordianism. They speak to Eris through the use of their pineal
gland. It is said in the "Principia Discordia" that Eris says different things
to each listener. She may even say radically different things to each Episkopos
but, all of what she says is equally her word (even if it contradicts another
iteration of her word). Most Episkoposes have an assumed name and/or title of
bizarre nature and self-proclaimed 'mystic import', such as Malaclypse the
Younger, Omnibenevolent Polyfather of Virginity in Gold; Lord Omar Khayyam
Ravenhurst, Bull Goose of Limbo; Professor Mu-Chao; and Kassil the Erratic.
Some Discordians choose their entire title by themselves, some turn to random
generators, others assimilate things from other people, and a few never really
offer any explanation. Popes. According to the "Principia Discordia", “every
single man, woman, and child on this Earth” is a pope. Included in the
"Principia Discordia" is an official Pope card that may be reproduced and
distributed freely to anyone and everyone. Papacy is not granted through
possession of this card; it merely informs people that they are “a genuine
and authorized Pope” of Discordia. The third right (requiring permission from
the deceased in cases of burying or marriage, but not baptism) may be a
reference to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints practice of
baptism for the dead, or it may just be a witty conflation of marriage and
death. This understanding of the notion of Pope has far reaching consequences
in Discordianism. For example, the introduction to "Principia Discordia" says,
“Only a Pope may canonize a Saint. ... So you can ordain yourself—and
anyone or anything else—a Saint.” The last enumerated right of a Pope may
be an allusion to the Necessary and Proper Clause. In most of his public
presentations and lectures, Robert Anton Wilson's first gesture when taking the
stage would be to declare everyone within the audience to be ordained
Discordian Popes. A female version, with the word "Mome" substituted for Pope,
has also been promulgated. Philosophy. Chao. Chao (pronounced "cow") is a
neologism for a single unit of chaos. In Discordianism, the chao is a symbol of
the 'pataphysical nature of reality. The word is a pun, enabling this quatrain
from the "Principia Discordia": Sacred Chao. The choice of the pentagon as a
symbol of the Aneristic Principle is partly related to The Pentagon in Virginia
near Washington, D.C., partly a nod to the Law of Fives, partially for the
Golden Ratio references associated with the pentagon/apple allegory, and wholly
for the five-sided pentagon from the "Starbuck's Pebbles" story in the
"Discordia". The Golden Apple of Discordia is the one from the story of The
Original Snub (below). Law of Fives. Like most of Discordianism, the Law of
Fives appears on the surface to be either some sort of weird joke, or bizarre
supernaturalism; but under this, it may help clarify the Discordian view of how
the human mind works. Lord Omar is quoted later on the same page as having
written, "I find the Law of Fives to be more and more manifest the harder I
look." Appendix Beth of Robert Shea's and Robert Anton Wilson's "The
Illuminatus! Trilogy" considers some of the numerology of Discordianism, and
the question of what would happen to the Law of Fives if everyone had six
fingers on each hand. The authors assert that the real Law of Fives is
realizing that everything can be related to the number five "if you try hard
enough". Sometimes the steps required may be highly convoluted. Incidentally,
the number five appears five times within the quote describing the Law of
Fives, which is stated in 23 words, and 2 plus 3 is 5. Another way of looking
at the Law of Fives is as a symbol for the observation of reality changing that
which is being observed in the observer's mind. Just as how when one looks for
fives in reality, one finds them, so will one find conspiracies, ways to
determine when the apocalypse will come, and so on and so forth when one
decides to look for them. It cannot be proven wrong, because it proves itself
reflexively when looked at through this lens. At its basic level, the Law of
Fives is a practical demonstration that perception is "intent-sensitive"; that
is, the perceiver's intentions inform the perception. To whatever extent one
considers that perception is identical with reality, then, it has the corollary
that reality is intent-sensitive. The Law of Fives is related to the
significance of the number 23 and the 23 Enigma in the Illuminatus!-trilogy, as
2 plus 3 equals 5. Original Snub. The Original Snub is the Discordian name for
the events preceding the Judgment of Paris, although more focus is put on the
actions of Eris. Zeus believes that Eris is a troublemaker, so he does not
invite her to Peleus and Thetis's wedding. This is “The Doctrine of the
Original Snub”. Having been snubbed, Eris creates a golden apple with the
word "kallisti" (Ancient Greek: "καλλίστῃ", to the prettiest one)
inscribed in it. This, the Apple of Discord, is a notable symbol in
Discordianism for its inclusion in the Holy Chao. The apple is traditionally
described as being made of gold, but the "Principia Discordia" notes a debate
over whether the “gold” described was “metallic gold or Acapulco.” The
story also relates that the first thing Eris did after throwing the Apple of
Discord into the wedding was to joyously partake of a hot dog (thus "a
Discordian is to partake of No Hot Dog Buns"). When the female wedding guests
disagree about who the apple is meant for, Zeus decides to leave the decision
to Paris of Troy. Aphrodite bribes Paris, leading to the Trojan War, which
“is said to be The First War among men.” Some recent interpretations of the
Original Snub place Eris as being not at all mischievous with her delivery of
the apple, but instead suggest that Eris was simply bringing the apple as a
wedding present for Thetis. This interpretation would see Eris as innocent and
her causing of chaos as a by-product of the other wedding guests' reaction upon
seeing her at the wedding. Curse of Greyface. One of the most important parts
of Discordianism, The Curse of Greyface features prominently on several pages
of the "Principia Discordia". According to claims made in the "Principia",
Greyface was a man who lived in the year 1166 BCE and taught that life is
serious and play is sin. The curse is the psychological and spiritual imbalance
that results from these beliefs, both individually and within groups, nations,
and civilizations. According to the "Principia", Greyface existed and had
followers who he encouraged to "Look at all the order around you" ("Principia
Discordia" page 00042), and he somehow convinced mankind to agree with his
ideas about Serious Order. The "Principia" notes that it is something of a
mystery why Greyface gained so many followers when anyone could have looked at
all of the "disorder" in the world. According to the "Principia", by accepting
that life is a serious, orderly matter, the followers of Greyface end up
viewing things as either "orderly" or "disorderly". In this system, order is
preferred to disorder at all costs. An alternative is to view disorder as
preferable at all costs. To quote: "To choose order over disorder, or disorder
over order, is to accept a trip composed of both the creative and the
destructive. But to choose the creative over the destructive is an all-creative
trip composed of both order and disorder" – Malaclypse the Younger, K.S.C. In
addition to the generic advice of cultivating your natural love of chaos and
playing with Her, the "Principia Discordia" provides "The Turkey Curse Revealed
by the Apostle Dr. Van Van Mojo" to counteract The Curse of Greyface. The
Turkey Curse is designed to counteract destructive order. It derives its name
from the fact that the incantation resembles the sounds of a turkey. Law of
Eristic Escalation. The "Principia Discordia" contains the Law of Eristic
Escalation. This law states that "Imposition of Order = Escalation of Chaos".
It elaborates on this point by saying that the more order is imposed the longer
it takes for the chaos to arise and the greater the chaos that arises. The idea
is not new; it is mentioned in the : "the more laws and orders are written, the
more thieves there are". This can be read as an argument against zero tolerance
and hard security, or just a statement about the world and human nature. It can
also be seen as a parallel to the second law of thermodynamics which states
that entropy (the number of states a given system can occupy) never decreases
over time. It is also reminiscent of Newton's Third Law, where every action has
an equal and opposite reaction. Incidentally, if you add those Laws together
you get the Law of Five, as discussed earlier. Pentabarf. The Pentabarf is the
most fundamental of all Discordian catmas. ("Catma" is a general term for
Discordian teachings, sayings, quotations, explanations, jokes and
illustrations, as distinguished from Discordian "dogma", which consists of
certain specific passages from "The Honest Book of Truth", cited in
"Principia".) The 5th law mirrors both the nature of Taoist sayings ("the Tao
that can be named is not the true Tao") and Zen kōans ("If you meet the Buddha
on your path, kill him"). It is also similar to the Epimenides paradox ("All
Cretans are liars"), and several other paradoxes. Five tons of Flax. In the
Principia Discordia, "Five tons of flax" is given as the answer to the
question, "Is there an essential meaning behind POEE?" (This is a reference to
a Zen story about "Three pounds of flax".) Discordians have taken "Five tons of
flax" as a slogan or as a universal answer to philosophical questions. In the
"Illuminatus! Trilogy" by Robert Shea and Robert Anton Wilson, which draws
heavily upon Discordianism, "Flaxscrip" is depicted as a genuine form of scrip,
serving to avoid the use of government-issued currency. Pineal gland. "Consult
your pineal gland" is a common saying in Discordianism. Although it has never
been proven, the pineal gland is believed by some, such as Rick Strassman, to
produce trace amounts of DMT (dimethyltryptamine), a psychedelic chemical which
is believed to play a role in dreaming and other mystical states. The pineal
gland was also used in Descartes's explanation of Cartesian Dualism as the
"seat of the soul" and the connection between the material and immaterial
world. In some cases it is referred to as "the atrophied third eye". It has
also been suggested that the third eye ("Ajna") physically resides at this
location between the two hemispheres of the brain. Discordian calendar. The
Discordian or Erisian calendar is an alternative calendar used by some
Discordians. It is specified on page 00034 of the Principia Discordia. The
Discordian year 1 YOLD is 1166 BC. Elsewhere in the "Principia Discordia", it
is mentioned that the Curse of Greyface occurred in 1166 BC, so this is
presumably the start-date of the calendar. As a reference, AD is (Which also
corresponds with the Law of 5, 3+1=4, 7-4=3, and 8-3=5)YOLD (Year of Our Lady
of Discord). While the abbreviation "YOLD" isn't used in the Principia, and the
phrase "Year of Our Lady of Discord" is only mentioned once, it is a Discordian
tradition to use that designation. Most common Linux operating system-
distributions have the command "ddate" to show the current Discordian date.
