Divine providence In theology, divine providence, or providence, is God's
intervention in the world. "Divine Providence" (usually capitalized) is also
used as a title of God. A distinction is usually made between "general
providence", which refers to God's continuous upholding the existence and
natural order of the universe, and "special providence", which refers to God's
extraordinary intervention in the life of people. Etymology. The word comes
from Latin "providentia" "foresight, prudence", from "pro-" "ahead" + "videre"
"to see". The current meaning of the word derives from the sense "knowledge of
the future" or omniscience, which Christians believe is an attribute of God.
Catholic theology. Augustine of Hippo is perhaps most famously associated with
the doctrine of Divine Providence in the Latin West. However, Christian
teaching on providence in the high Middle Ages was most fully developed by
Thomas Aquinas in the "Summa Theologica". The concept of providence as care
exercised by God over the universe, his foresight and care for its future is
extensively developed and explained both by Aquinas himself and modern
Thomists. One of the foremost modern Thomists, Dominican father Reginald
Garrigou-Lagrange, wrote a study of providence entitled "Providence: God's
loving care for man and the need for confidence in Almighty God." In it, he
presents and solves, according to Catholic doctrine, the most difficult issues
as related to providence. Reformed theology. This term is an integral part of
John Calvin's theological framework known as Calvinism, which emphasizes the
total depravity of man and the complete sovereignty of God. God's plan for the
world and every soul that he has created is guided by his will, or providence.
According to Calvin, the idea that man has free will and is able to make
choices independently of what God has already determined is based on our
limited understanding of God's perfection and the delusion that God's purposes
can be circumvented. In this mode of thought, providence is related to
predestination. This concept remains prominent among many Protestant
denominations that identify with Calvinism, the Reformed churches. Lutheran
theology. In Lutheran theology, divine providence refers to God's preservation
of creation, his cooperation with everything that happens, and his guiding of
the universe. While God cooperates with both good and evil deeds, with the evil
deeds he does so only inasmuch as they are deeds, not with the evil in them.
God concurs with an act's effect, but he does not cooperate in the corruption
of an act or the evil of its effect. Lutherans believe everything exists for
the sake of the Christian Church, and that God guides everything for its
welfare and growth. According to Martin Luther, divine providence began when
God created the world with everything needed for human life, including both
physical things and natural laws. In Luther's Small Catechism, the explanation
of the first article of the Apostles' Creed declares that everything people
have that is good is given and preserved by God, either directly or through
other people or things. Of the services others provide us through family,
government, and work, he writes, "we receive these blessings not from them,
but, through them, from God." Since God uses everyone's useful tasks for good,
people should look not down upon some useful vocations as being less worthy
than others. Instead people should honor others, no matter how lowly, as being
the means God uses to work in the world. Swedenborgian theology. "Divine
Providence" is a book published by Emanuel Swedenborg in 1764 which describes
his systematic theology regarding providence, free will, theodicy, and other
related topics. Both meanings of providence are applicable in Swedenborg's
theology, in that providence encompasses understanding, intent and action.
Divine providence relative to man is 'foresight', and relative to the Lord is
'providence'. Swedenborg proposes that one law of divine providence is that man
should act from freedom according to reason, and that man is regenerated
according to the faculties of rationality and liberty. In Jewish thought.
Divine providence (Hebrew השגחה פרטית "Hashgochoh Protis" /
"Hashgachah Pratit" lit. supervision of the individual) is discussed throughout
Rabbinic literature, and in particular by the classical Jewish philosophers.
These writings maintain that Divine Providence means that God is directing (or
even recreating) every minute detail of creation. This analysis thus underpins
much of Orthodox Judaism's world view, particularly as regards questions of
interaction with the natural world. Specific examples. The text of Scripture.
Those who believe in the inerrancy of the original biblical manuscripts, often
accompany this belief with a statement about how the biblical text has been
preserved so that what we have today is at least substantially similar to what
was written. That is, just as God "divinely inspired the text," so he has also
"divinely preserved it throughout the centuries." The Westminster Confession of
Faith states that the Scriptures, "being immediately inspired by God, and by
his singular care and providence kept pure in all ages, are therefore
authentical." This is an important argument in the King James Only debates:
Edward F. Hills argues that the principle of providentially preserved
transmission guarantees that the printed Textus Receptus must be the closest
text to the Greek autographs. External links. Jewish material. See under Divine
providence (Judaism)
