Divination Divination (from Latin "divinare" "to foresee, to be inspired by a
god", related to "divinus", divine) is the attempt to gain insight into a
question or situation by way of an occultic, standardized process or ritual.
Used in various forms throughout history, diviners ascertain their
interpretations of how a querent should proceed by reading signs, events, or
omens, or through alleged contact with a supernatural agency. Divination can be
seen as a systematic method with which to organize what appear to be
disjointed, random facets of existence such that they provide insight into a
problem at hand. If a distinction is to be made between divination and fortune-
telling, divination has a more formal or ritualistic element and often contains
a more social character, usually in a religious context, as seen in traditional
African medicine. Fortune-telling, on the other hand, is a more everyday
practice for personal purposes. Particular divination methods vary by culture
and religion. Divination is often dismissed by sceptics, including the
scientific community, as being mere superstition. In the 2nd century, Lucian
devoted a witty essay to the career of a charlatan, "Alexander the false
prophet," trained by "one of those who advertise enchantments, miraculous
incantations, charms for your love-affairs, visitations for your enemies,
disclosures of buried treasure, and successions to estates", even though most
Romans believed in prophetic dreams and charms. Divination is considered a sin
in Islam, Judaism, as well as most Christian denominations; although some
methods, especially dream interpretation, do appear in Scripture. Ancient
Greece. Both oracles and seers in ancient Greece practiced divination. Oracles
were the conduits for the gods on earth; their prophecies were understood to be
the will of the gods verbatim. Because of the high demand for oracle
consultations and the oracles’ limited work schedule, they were not the main
source of divination for the ancient Greeks. That role fell to the seers
("μαντείς" in Greek). Seers were not in direct contact with the gods;
instead, they were interpreters of signs provided by the gods. Seers used many
methods to explicate the will of the gods including extispicy, bird signs, etc.
They were more numerous than the oracles and did not keep a limited schedule;
thus, they were highly valued by all Greeks, not just those with the capacity
to travel to Delphi or other such distant sites. The disadvantage to seers was
that only direct yes-or-no questions could be answered. Oracles could answer
more generalized questions, and seers often had to perform several sacrifices
in order to get the most consistent answer. For example, if a general wanted to
know if the omens were proper for him to advance on the enemy, he would ask his
seer both that question and if it were better for him to remain on the
defensive. If the seer gave consistent answers, the advice was considered
valid. At battle, generals would frequently ask seers at both the campground (a
process called the "hiera") and at the battlefield (called the "sphagia"). The
hiera entailed the seer slaughtering a sheep and examining its liver for
answers regarding a more generic question; the sphagia involved killing a young
female goat by slitting its throat and noting the animal’s last movements and
blood flow. The battlefield sacrifice only occurred when two armies prepared
for battle against each other. Neither force would advance until the seer
revealed appropriate omens. Because the seers had such power over influential
individuals in ancient Greece, many were skeptical of the accuracy and honesty
of the seers. Of course the degree to which seers were honest depends entirely
on the individual seers. Despite the doubt surrounding individual seers, the
craft as a whole was well regarded and trusted by the Greeks. Christianity and
Western society. Divination was considered a pagan practice in the early
Christian church. Later the Catholic Church would pass canon laws forbidding
the practice of divination. In 692 the Quinisext Council, also known as the
"Council in Trullo" in the Eastern Orthodox Church, passed canons to eliminate
pagan and divination practices. Soothsaying and forms of divination were
widespread through the Middle Ages. In the constitution of 1572 and public
regulations of 1661 of Kur-Saxony, capital punishment was used on those
predicting the future. Laws forbidding divination practice continue to this
day. Mesoamerica. Divination was a central component of ancient Mesoamerican
religious life. Many Aztec gods, including central creator gods, were described
as diviners and were closely associated with sorcery. Tezcatlipoca is the
patron of sorcerers and practitioners of magic. His name means "smoking
mirror", a reference to a device used for divinatory scrying. In the Mayan
"Popol Vuh", the creator gods Xmucane and Xpiacoc perform divinatory hand
casting during the creation of people. Every civilization that developed in
Ancient Mexico, from the Olmecs to the Aztecs, practiced divination in daily
life, both public and private. Scrying through the use of reflective water
surfaces, mirrors, or the casting of lots were among the most widespread forms
of divinatory practice. Visions derived from hallucinogens were another
important form of divination, and are still widely used among contemporary
diviners of Mexico. Among the more common hallucinogenic plants used in
divination are morning glory, jimson weed, and peyote. Serer religion.
Divination is one of the tenets of Serer religion. However, only those who have
been initiated as Saltigues (the Serer high priests and priestesses) can divine
the future. These are the "hereditary rain priests" whose role is both
religious and medicinal.
