Divine Liturgy Divine Liturgy (, , , , , , ) is the common term for the
Eucharistic service of the Byzantine tradition of Christian liturgy. As such,
it is used in the Eastern Orthodox and Eastern Catholic Churches. Armenian
Christians, both of the Armenian Apostolic Church and of the Armenian Catholic
Church, use the same term. Some Oriental Orthodox employ the term "holy
offering" (Syriac: "qurbana qadisha ", Armenian: "surb patarag") for their
Eucharistic liturgies instead. The term is sometimes applied also to Latin Rite
Eucharistic liturgies, though the term "Mass" is more commonly used there. In
Eastern traditions, especially that of the Eastern Orthodox Churches, the
Divine Liturgy is seen as transcending time, and the world. All believers are
believed to be united in worship in the Kingdom of God along with departed
Saints and the celestial Angels. To this end, everything in the Liturgy is seen
as symbolic, yet also not just merely symbolic, but making the unseen reality
manifest. According to Eastern tradition and belief, the Liturgy's roots go
back to Jewish worship and the adaptation of Jewish worship by Early
Christians. This can be seen in the first parts of the Liturgy that is termed,
the "Liturgy of the Word" that includes reading of scriptures and the Sermon/
Homily. The latter half was believed to be added based on the Last Supper and
the first Eucharistic celebrations by Early Christians. Eastern Christians
participating in the Liturgy also traditionally believe that the Eucharist is
the central part of the service, as they believe it truly becomes the real Body
and Blood of Christ, and through their partaking of it, they see themselves as
together becoming the Body of Christ (that is, the Church). Each Liturgy has
its differences from others, but most are very similar to each other with
adaptations based on tradition, purpose, culture and theology. Byzantine Rite.
Additionally, the Liturgy of the Presanctified Gifts (6th century A.D.), is
used on Wednesdays and Fridays during Great Lent and on the first three days of
Holy Week. It is essentially the office of vespers with a communion service
added, the Holy Gifts having been consecrated and reserved the previous Sunday.
It is traditionally attributed to St. Gregory the Dialogist. The Divine Liturgy
of St. Mark was also observed in the Orthodox (Chalcedonian) Patriarchate of
Alexandria on at least that Saint's day until fairly recent times. The
Hierarchical Liturgy. As numbers in a diocese increased dramatically the bishop
as presiding over the Eucharistic assembly appointed presbyters as celebrant in
the local community (the parish). Still, the Church is understood in Eastern
Orthodoxy not in terms of the presbyter, but the diocesan bishop. When the
latter is present, he is chief celebrant. Phrases and hymns are also added. The
hierarch commemorates his hierarch demonstrating unity with the greater
Orthodox community. Structure. The format of Divine Liturgy is fixed, although
the specific readings and hymns vary with season and feast. Liturgy of
Preparation. "This part of the Liturgy is private, said only by the priest and
deacon. It symbolizes the hidden years of Christ's earthly life." Liturgy of
the Catechumens. with the Refrain (in the Greek rubrics) "Through the Prayers
of the Theotokos, O Savior Save us." with the Refrain (in the Greek rubrics) on
Sundays: "Save us O Son of God who art Risen from the dead, Save us who sing
unto you, Alleluia" and on Weekdays: "Save us O son of God who art Wondrous in
your Saints..."° with the Refrain (in the Greek rubrics) on Weekdays: O Son of
God who art wonderful in Thy saints, Save us who sing to thee, alleluia. On
Sundays: the Troparion of the Day, Saint or Sunday Resurrection Liturgy of the
Faithful. In the early Church, only Baptised members in good standing were
allowed to attend this portion of the Liturgy. Today, catechumens are still
dismissed but visitors are usually permitted to stay. Some jurisdictions also
permit the catechumens to remain. Parts marked ° indicate portions that can
change according to the day or liturgical season of the year. Some parts change
at every Divine Liturgy, some parts only change at Pascha (Easter). Note that
almost all texts are chanted throughout the Divine Liturgy, not only hymns but
litanies, prayers, creed confession and even readings from the Bible. The sole
exception is the sermon. Oriental Orthodoxy. The Oriental Orthodox Churches use
the term "Divine Liturgy" for their Eucharistic services, even if also other
names such as "Holy Qurbana" and "Badarak" are usual in some Oriental Orthodox
traditions. Oriental Orthodoxy owns a richness of different liturgies, which
are named after the anaphora included. The Liturgy of St. Basil is celebrated
on most Sundays and contains the shortest anaphora. The Liturgy of St. Gregory
is usually used during the feasts of the Church but not exclusively. In
addition the clergy performing the Liturgy can combine extracts of The
Liturgies of St. Cyril and St. Gregory to the more frequently used St. Basil at
the discretion of the Priest or Bishop. External links. Eastern Orthodox
Christian Spanish translations Oriental Orthodox Christian Byzantine Catholic
Armenian Catholic Contemporary Commentary in English on the Armenian Liturgy
(Badarak)] Liturgy (Badarak)] Text
