Divine simplicity In theology, the doctrine of divine simplicity says that God
is without parts. The general idea of divine simplicity can be stated in this
way: the being of God is identical to the "attributes" of God. In other words,
such characteristics as omnipresence, goodness, truth, eternity, etc. are
identical to God's being, not qualities that make up that being, nor abstract
entities inhering in God as in a substance. Varieties of the doctrine may be
found in Jewish, Christian, and Muslim philosophical theologians, especially
during the heyday of scholasticism, though the doctrine's origins may be traced
back to ancient Greek thought, finding apotheosis in Plotinus' Enneads as the
Simplex. In Christian thought. In Christian theism (to be accurate "Classical
theism"), God is "simple", not "composite", not "made up of thing upon thing".
In other words, the characteristics of God are not parts of God that together
make up God. Because God is simple, God is those characteristics; for example,
God does not "have goodness", but simply "is goodness". For typical Christian
theologians, divine simplicity does not entail that the attributes of God are
indistinguishable to thought. It is no contradiction of the doctrine to say,
for example, that God is both just and merciful. Thomas Aquinas, for instance,
in whose system of thought the idea of divine simplicity is central, wrote in
"Summa Theologica" that because God is "infinitely simple", God can only appear
to the finite mind as infinitely complex. Theologians holding the doctrine of
simplicity tend to distinguish various modes of the simple being of God by
negating any notion of composition from the meaning of terms used to describe
it. Thus, in quantitative or spatial terms, God is simple as opposed to being
made up of pieces, present in entirety everywhere, if in fact present anywhere.
In terms of essences, God is simple as opposed to being made up of form and
matter, or body and soul, or mind and act, and so on: if distinctions are made
when speaking of God's attributes, they are distinctions of the "modes" of
God's being, rather than "real" or "essential" divisions. And so, in terms of
subjects and accidents, as in the phrase "goodness of God", divine simplicity
allows that there is a conceptual distinction between the person of God and the
personal attribute of goodness, but the doctrine disallows that God's identity
or "character" is dependent upon goodness, and at the same time the doctrine
dictates that it is impossible to consider the goodness in which God
participates separately from the goodness which God is. Furthermore, according
to some, if as creatures our concepts are all drawn from the creation, it
follows from this and divine simplicity that God's attributes can only be
spoken of by analogy — since it is not true of any created thing that its
properties are identical to its being. Consequently, when Christian Scripture
is interpreted according to the guide of divine simplicity, when it says that
God is good for example, it should be taken to speak of a likeness to goodness
as found in humanity and referred to in human speech. Since God's essence is
inexpressible; this likeness is nevertheless truly comparable to God who simply
"is" goodness, because humanity is a complex being composed by God "in the
image and likeness of God". The doctrine aides, then, in interpreting the
Scriptures so as to avoid paradox—as when Scripture says, for example, that
the creation is "very good", and also that "none is good but God alone"—since
only God is goodness, while nevertheless humanity is created in the likeness of
goodness (and the likeness is necessarily imperfect in humanity, unless that
person is also God). This doctrine also helps keep trinitarianism from drifting
into tritheism, which is the belief in three different gods: the persons of God
are not parts or essential differences, but are rather the way in which the one
God exists personally. The doctrine has been criticized by some Christian
theologians, including Alvin Plantinga, who in his essay "Does God Have a
Nature?" calls it "a dark saying indeed." Plantinga's criticism is based on his
interpretation of Aquinas's discussion of it, from which he concludes that if
God is identical with properties of God such as goodness etc., then God is a
property; and a property is not a person. Plantinga concludes that divine
simplicity does not do justice to the personal nature of the Christian God. In
Jewish thought. In Jewish philosophy and in Jewish mysticism Divine Simplicity
is addressed via discussion of the attributes (תארים) of God, particularly
by Jewish philosophers within the Muslim sphere of influence such as Saadia
Gaon, Bahya ibn Paquda, Yehuda Halevi, and Maimonides, as well by Raabad III in
Provence. Some identify Divine simplicity as a corollary of Divine Creation:
"In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth" (Genesis 1:1). God, as
creator is by definition separate from the universe and thus free of any
property (and hence an absolute unity); see Negative theology. For others,
conversely, the axiom of Divine Unity (see "Shema Yisrael") informs the
understanding of Divine Simplicity. Bahya ibn Paquda ("Duties of the Heart" 1:
8) points out that God's Oneness is "true oneness" (האחד האמת) as
opposed to merely "circumstantial oneness" (האחד המקרי). He develops
this idea to show that an entity which is truly one must be free of properties
and thus indescribable - and unlike anything else. (Additionally such an entity
would be absolutely unsubject to change, as well as utterly independent and the
root of everything.) [http://www.torah.org/learning/spiritual-excellence/
classes/doh-1-8.html] The implication - of either approach - is so strong that
the two concepts are often presented as synonymous: "God is not two or more
entities, but a single entity of a oneness even more single and unique than any
single thing in creation… He cannot be sub-divided into different parts —
therefore, it is impossible for Him to be anything other than one. It is a
positive commandment to know this, for it is written (Deuteronomy 6:4) '…the
Lord is our God, the Lord is one'." (Maimonides, "Mishneh Torah", "Mada" 1:7.)
Despite its apparent simplicity, this concept is recognised as raising many
difficulties. In particular, insofar as God's simplicity does not allow for any
structure — even conceptually — Divine simplicity appears to entail the
following dichotomy. The Kabbalists address this paradox by explaining that
“God created a spiritual dimension… which God interacts with the
Universe... It is this dimension which makes it possible for us to speak of
God’s multifaceted relationship to the universe without violating the basic
principle of His unity and simplicity” (Aryeh Kaplan, "Innerspace"). The
Kabbalistic approach is explained in various Chassidic writings; see for
example, "Shaar Hayichud", below, for a detailed discussion.
