Doctor of the Church Doctor of the Church (Latin "doctor", teacher, from Latin
"docere", to teach) is a title given by a variety of Christian churches to
individuals whom they recognize as having been of particular importance,
particularly regarding their contribution to theology or doctrine. Catholic
Church. In the Catholic Church, this title is given to a saint from whose
writings the whole Church is held to have derived great advantage and to whom
"eminent learning" and "great sanctity" have been attributed by a proclamation
of a pope or of an ecumenical council. This honour is given rarely, and only
after canonization. No ecumenical council has yet exercised the prerogative of
proclaiming a Doctor of the Church. Saint Ambrose, Saint Augustine, Saint
Jerome, and Pope Gregory I were the original Doctors of the Church and were
named in 1298. They are known collectively as the Great Doctors of the Western
Church. The four Great Doctors of the Eastern Church, John Chrysostom, Basil
the Great, Gregory of Nazianzus, and Athanasius of Alexandria were recognized
in 1568 by Pope St. Pius V. The Doctors' works vary greatly in subject and
form. Some, such as Pope Gregory I and Ambrose were prominent writers of
letters and short treatises. Catherine of Siena and John of the Cross wrote
mystical theology. Augustine and Bellarmine defended the Church against heresy
(Bellarmine condemned Giordano Bruno to death). Bede's "Ecclesiastical History
of the English People" provides the best information on England in the early
Middle Ages. Systematic theologians include the Scholastic philosophers Anselm,
Albertus Magnus, and Thomas Aquinas. Until 1970, no woman had been named a
doctor in the church, but since then four additions to the list have been
women: Saints Teresa of Ávila (St. Teresa of Jesus), Catherine of Siena by
Pope Paul VI, Thérèse de Lisieux (St. Therese of the Child Jesus and of the
Holy Face), "the Little Flower" by Pope John Paul II, and Hildegard of Bingen
by Benedict XVI. Saints Teresa and Therese were both Discalced Carmelites.
Traditionally, in the Liturgy, the Office of Doctors was distinguished from
that of Confessors by two changes: the Gospel reading "Vos estis sal terrae"
("You are the salt of the earth"), Matthew 5:13–19, and the eighth Respond at
Matins, from Ecclesiasticus 15:5, "In medio Ecclesiae aperuit os ejus, * Et
implevit eum Deus spiritu sapientiae et intellectus. * Jucunditatem et
exsultationem thesaurizavit super eum." ("In the midst of the Church he opened
his mouth, * And God filled him with the spirit of wisdom and understanding. *
He heaped upon him a treasure of joy and gladness.") The Nicene Creed was also
recited at Mass, which is normally not said except on Sundays and the highest-
ranking feast days. The 1962 revisions to the Missal dropped the Creed from
feasts of Doctors. As of 2012, the Catholic Church has named 35 Doctors of the
Church. Of these, the 18 who died before the Great Schism of 1054 (marked * in
the list below) are also venerated by the Eastern Orthodox Church. Among these
35 are 26 from the West and 9 from the East; 4 women; 18 bishops, 12 priests, 1
deacon, 3 nuns, 1 consecrated virgin; 26 from Europe, 3 from Africa, 6 from
Asia. More Doctors (12) lived during the 4th century than any other, while the
2nd, 9th, 10th, and 20th centuries possessed no Doctors at all. New Doctors. On
20 August 2011, Pope Benedict XVI announced that he would soon declare St. John
of Ávila a Doctor of the Church. Although no official announcement was given,
it was reported in December 2011 that Pope Benedict intended to declare
Hildegard of Bingen as a Doctor of the Church despite her not yet having been
officially canonised. The liturgical cult of St. Hildegard of Bingen was
officially extended to the universal Church by Pope Benedict XVI on 10 May
2012, clearing the way for her to be named a Doctor of the Church. Pope
Benedict formally declared SS John of Ávila and Hildegard of Bingen to be
Doctors of the Church on 7 October 2012. List of Doctors of the Catholic
Church. "(For earlier authorities on Christian doctrine, see Church Fathers and
Ante-Nicene Fathers)" Other recognised Doctors. In addition, parts of the Roman
Catholic Church have recognised other individuals with this title. In Spain,
Fulgentius of Cartagena, Ildephonsus of Toledo and Leander of Seville have been
recognized with this title. Though not named Doctors of the Church or even
canonized, Bl. John Duns Scotus has been called "Doctor subtilis" (Subtle
Doctor), and the priest and professor Francisco Suárez "Doctor eximius"
(Exceptional Doctor). The Syro-Malabar Catholic Church recognises Ambrose,
Jerome, Gregory, Augustine, Athanasius, Basil, Gregory of Nazianzus, and John
Chrysostom, as well as Ephrem the Syrian, Isaac the Elder, Pope Leo I, John of
Damascus, Cyril of Alexandria, Cyril of Jerusalem, Epiphanius of Salamis, and
Gregory of Nyssa. The Chaldean Catholic Church honours as doctor Polycarp,
Eustathius of Antioch, Meletius, Alexander of Jerusalem, Athanasius, Basil,
Cyril of Alexandria, Gregory Nazianzus, Gregory of Nyssa, John Chrysostom,
Fravitta of Constantinople, Ephrem the Syrian, Jacob of Nisibis, James of
Serug, Isaac of Armenia, Isaac of Nineveh, and Maruthas. Eastern Orthodox
Church. The Eastern Orthodox church honors many of the pre-schism saints as
well, but the application of the term "Doctor of the Church" is, in effect,
unnecessary within the overall praxis of Eastern Orthodox theology, thus
omitting the need to look for lists of officially recognized "Doctors". The
more usual term used is "Father". An Eastern Orthodox understanding of such
notables includes saints such as Photios I of Constantinople ("see Photian
schism"), Gregory Palamas and Nicodemus the Hagiorite. One consistent use of
the category is the trio of Basil the Great, Gregory of Nazianzus and John
Chrysostom, recognized as universal teachers and known as the Three Holy
Hierarchs, representing the Christianization of the Hellenic tradition and
education. In addition, besides St John the Evangelist, two other saints bear
the title 'Theologian': they are St. Gregory of Nazianzus and St. Symeon the
New Theologian. Armenian Church. The Armenian Church recognizes as Doctors of
the Church Hierotheus the Thesmothete, Dionysius the Areopagite, Pope Sylvester
I, Athanasius of Alexandria, Cyril of Alexandria, Ephrem the Syrian, Basil the
Great, Gregory Nazianzus, Gregory of Nyssa, Epiphanius of Salamis, John
Chrysostom, Cyril of Jerusalem, and their own saints Mesrob, Eliseus the
historiographer, Moses of Chorene, David the philosopher, Gregory of Narek,
Nerses III the Builder, and Nerses of Lambron. (See also Vardapet) Assyrian
Church of the East. The Assyrian Church of the East recognizes as Doctors of
the Church Eliseus, Diodore of Tarsus, Theodore of Mopsuestia, and Nestorius.
Anglicanism. Since all of the above appear in the calendar at the level of
Lesser Festival or Commemoration, their celebration is optional. Similarly,
because "In the Calendar of the Saints, diocesan and other local provision may
be made to supplement the national Calendar", those Doctors of the Church
recognized by Rome may also be celebrated in the Church of England.
Lutheranism. The Lutheran calendar of saints does not use the term "Doctor of
the Church." The calendar of the Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod refers to
Martin Luther by the title of "Doctor" in recognition of his academic degree,
Doctor of Theology from the University of Wittenberg in 1512.
