Doctrine and Covenants The Doctrine and Covenants (sometimes abbreviated and
cited as D&C or D. and C.) is a part of the open scriptural canon of several
denominations of the Latter Day Saint movement. Originally published in 1835 as
Doctrine and Covenants of the Church of the Latter Day Saints: Carefully
Selected from the Revelations of God, editions of the book continue to be
printed mainly by The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church)
and the Community of Christ (formerly the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter Day Saints (RLDS Church)). The book originally contained two parts: a
sequence of lectures setting forth basic church doctrine, followed by a
compilation of important revelations, or "covenants" of the church: thus the
name "Doctrine and Covenants". The "doctrine" portion of the book, however, has
been removed by both the LDS Church and the Community of Christ. The remaining
portion of the book contains many revelations on numerous topics, most of which
were dictated by the movement's founder Joseph Smith, Jr., supplemented by
materials periodically added by each denomination. Controversy has existed
between the two largest denominations of the Latter Day Saint movement over
some sections added to the 1876 LDS edition, attributed to founder Smith.
Whereas the LDS Church believes these sections to have been revelations to
Smith, the RLDS Church traditionally disputed their authenticity. History. The
Doctrine and Covenants was first published in 1835 as a later version of the
Book of Commandments, which had been partially printed in 1833. This earlier
book contained 65 early revelations to church leaders including Joseph Smith,
Jr. and Oliver Cowdery. Before many copies of the book could be printed,
however, the printing press and most of the printed copies were destroyed by a
mob in Missouri. On September 24, 1834 a committee was appointed by the general
assembly of the church to organize a new volume containing the most significant
Latter Day Saint revelations. This committee of Presiding Elders, consisting of
Joseph Smith, Jr., Oliver Cowdery, Sidney Rigdon, and Frederick G. Williams,
began to review and revise numerous revelations for inclusion in the new work.
The committee eventually organized the book into two parts: a "Doctrine" part
followed by a "Covenants" part. The "Doctrine" part of the book consisted of a
theological course now called the "Lectures on Faith". The Lectures were a
series of doctrinal courses used in the School of the Prophets which had
recently been completed in Kirtland, Ohio. According to the committee, these
Lectures were included in the compilation "in consequence of their embracing
the important doctrine of salvation." The "Covenants" part of the book, labeled
"Covenants and Commandments of the Lord, to his servants of the church of the
Latter Day Saints", contained a total of 103 revelations on church governance.
These 103 revelations were said to "contain items or principles for the
regulation of the church, as taken from the revelations which have been given
since its organization, as well as from former ones." Each of the 103
revelations was assigned a "section number"; however, section 66 was used
twice. Thus, the sections of the original work numbered only to 102. On
February 17, 1835, after the committee had selected the book's contents, the
committee wrote that the resulting work represents "our belief, and when we say
this, humbly trust, the faith and principles of this society as a body." The
book was first introduced to the church body in a general conference on August
17, 1835. Joseph Smith, Jr. and Frederick G. Williams, two of the Presiding
Elders on the committee, were absent, but Oliver Cowdery and Sidney Rigdon were
present. The church membership at the time had not yet seen the "Doctrine and
Covenants" manuscript as it had been compiled and revised solely by the
committee; however, various church members who were familiar with the work
"bore record" of the book's truth. At the end of the conference, the church "by
a unanimous vote" agreed to accept the compilation as "the doctrine and
covenants of their faith" and to make arrangements for its printing. In 1835,
the book was printed and published under the title "Doctrine and Covenants of
the Church of the Latter Day Saints: Carefully Selected from the Revelations of
God". The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints editions. In The Church
of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church), The Doctrine and Covenants
of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints stands alongside the Bible,
the Book of Mormon, and The Pearl of Great Price as holy scripture. Together
they are referred to as the "Standard Works". The LDS Church's version of the
Doctrine and Covenants is officially described by the church as "containing
revelations given to Joseph Smith, the Prophet, with some additions by his
successors in the Presidency of the Church." Sections added to LDS edition. The
following sections are not revelations, but letters, reports, statements, and
so forth: 102, 123, 127–131, 134, and 135 In 1844, the church added eight
sections not included in the 1835 edition. In the current edition, these added
sections are numbered 103, 105, 112, 119, 124, 127, 128, and 135. In 1876, a
new LDS Church edition renumbered most of the sections in a roughly
chronological order instead of the earlier topical order, and included 26
revelations not included in previous editions, now numbered as Sections 2, 13,
77, 85, 87, 108–111, 113–118, 120–123, 125, 126, 129–132, and 136.
Previous editions had been divided into verses, however, the early
versifications generally followed the paragraph structure of the original text.
It was with the 1876 edition that the currently used versification was first
employed. During the 1880s, five foreign editions contained two revelations to
John Taylor that were received in 1882 and 1883; these revelations "set in
order" the priesthood, gave more clarification about the roles of priesthood
offices—especially the Seventy—and required Priesthood leaders to live
plural marriage in order to qualify to hold their church positions. Probably
due to the LDS Church's change in attitude to polygamy in 1890, these sections
were not included in future English editions of the Doctrine and Covenants. In
1930, a small volume edited by Apostle James E. Talmage titled "Latter-day
Revelations" was published, which was a highly edited selective version of the
Doctrine and Covenants. Some believe it was intended to replace the Doctrine
and Covenants, but that due to the controversy that arose this plan was
dropped. Talmage's work did not contain the section on plural marriage.
Sections 137 and 138 were added to the LDS Church's 1981 edition of the
Doctrine and Covenants, which is the edition currently in use by the church.
These were accounts of two visions, one from Joseph Smith and the other from
his nephew, Joseph F. Smith in 1918. The revelations were earlier accepted as
scripture when added to The Pearl of Great Price in April 1976. No new
revelatory sections have been added since 1981. The LDS Church's 1981 edition
also contains two "Official Declarations" at the book's conclusion, the first
renouncing polygamy in 1890, and the second in 1978 announcing the opening of
priesthood ordination to all worthy male members including previously
restricted members of African descent. These two "Official Declarations" are
not revelations, but they serve as the formal announcements that a revelation
was received. In neither case is the entire revelation included in the Doctrine
and Covenants. The text of Official Declaration—1 has been included in every
LDS Church printing of the Doctrine and Covenants since 1908. Portions removed
from the LDS edition. In 1876, Section 101 from the 1835 Edition (and
subsequent printings) was removed. Section 101 was a "Statement on Marriage" as
adopted by a conference of the church, and contained the following text: It was
superseded by section 132 of the modern LDS edition, which contains a
revelation received by Joseph Smith on eternal marriage and teaches the
doctrine of plural marriage. In 1921, the LDS Church removed the "Lectures on
Faith" portion of the book, with an explanation that the Lectures "were never
presented to nor accepted by the Church as being otherwise than theological
lectures or lessons". The Lectures contain theology concerning the Godhead and
emphasize the importance of faith and works. Until 1981, editions of the book
used code names for certain people and places in those sections that dealt with
the United Order. The 1981 LDS edition replaced these with the real names,
relegating the code names to footnotes. The Community of Christ edition still
uses the code names. Community of Christ editions. Officials of Community of
Christ (formerly known as the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day
Saints) first published an edition of the Doctrine and Covenants in 1864, based
on the previous 1844 edition. A General Conference of the church in 1878
approved a resolution that declared that the revelations of the
Prophet–President Joseph Smith III had equal standing to those previously
included in the work. Since that time, the church has continually added
sections to its edition of the Doctrine and Covenants, containing the
revelations of succeeding Prophet-Presidents. The most recent addition was
formally authorized on April 14, 2010, after being presented to the church for
informal consideration on January 17, 2010. The numbers of the sections and
versification differ from the edition published by The Church of Jesus Christ
of Latter-day Saints and both modern editions differ from the original 1835
edition numeration. Sections added to Community of Christ edition. The
following sections are not revelations, but letters, reports, statements, and
so forth: 99, 108A, 109–113, and 123. Portions removed from the Community of
Christ edition. Community of Christ removed the "Lectures on Faith" ("Doctrine"
portion of the work) in 1897. The 1970 World Conference concluded that several
sections that had been added between the 1835 and 1844 editions—mainly
dealing with the subjects of temple worship and baptism for the dead—had been
published without proper approval of a church conference. The World Conference
removed Sections 107, 109, 110, 113 and 123 to a historical appendix (which
also included documents that were never published as sections). Of these, only
Section 107 was a revelation. The World Conference of 1990 subsequently removed
the entire appendix from the Doctrine and Covenants. Section 108A contained the
minutes of a business meeting, which, because of its historical nature, was
moved to the Introduction in the 1970s. After 1990, the Introduction was
updated, and what was section 108A was removed entirely. Doctrinal developments
in the Community of Christ edition. The ongoing additions to the Community of
Christ edition provide a record of the leadership changes and doctrinal
developments within the denomination. When W. Grant McMurray became
Prophet–President, he declared that instruction specific to leadership
changes would no longer be included, so that the focus of the work could be
more doctrinal in nature, and less administrative. The record of these
leadership changes are still maintained in the form of published "letters of
counsel." Prophet–President Stephen M. Veazey has conformed to this pattern.
Although these letters are not formally published in the Doctrine and
Covenants, they are still deemed to be inspired, and are dealt with in the same
manner that revelations are (that is, they must be deliberated and approved by
the voting members of a World Conference). A modern revelation that resulted in
some "disaffection" and "led to intense conflict in scattered areas of the RLDS
Church" is contained in the Community of Christ version's Section 156,
presented by Prophet-President Wallace B. Smith and added in 1984, which called
for construction of the Independence Temple and the ordination of women to the
priesthood, among other changes. A resulting schism over the legitimacy of
these changes led to the formation of the Restoration Branches movement, the
Restoration Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints and the Remnant Church
of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints. While some of the prose in the new
revelations seems designed to guide the denomination on matters of church
governance and doctrine, others are seen as inspirational. One such example can
be cited from Section 161, presented as counsel to the church by W. Grant
McMurray in 1996: "Become a people of the Temple—those who see violence but
proclaim peace, who feel conflict yet extend the hand of reconciliation, who
encounter broken spirits and find pathways for healing." Editions used by other
denominations. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints (Strangite) uses
the 1846 edition that was published in Nauvoo, Illinois; this version is
virtually identical to the 1844 edition. Most recently a facsimile reprint was
produced for the church at Voree, Wisconsin by Richard Drew in 1993. The Church
of Christ (Temple Lot) contends that the thousands of changes made to the
original revelations as published in the Book of Commandments (including the
change of the church's name) are not doctrinal and result from Joseph Smith's
fall from his original calling. As a result, the Church of Christ (Temple Lot)
prefers to use reprints of the Book of Commandments text. The Restoration
Branches generally use the older RLDS Church Doctrine and Covenants, typically
sections 1–144. The Remnant Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints also
uses the older RLDS Church version of the Doctrine and Covenants up to section
144, and also contains new revelations from their prophet–president Frederick
Niels Larsen. These new sections are R 145–R 153. Chart comparison of
editions. The following chart compares the current editions of the Doctrine and
Covenants used by The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS ed.) and
the Community of Christ (CofC ed.) with the 1833 Book of Commandments (BofC),
the 1835 edition published in Kirtland, and the 1844 edition published in
Nauvoo. Unless otherwise specified, the document is styled a "revelation" of
the person delivering it.
