Doctrine Doctrine (from ) is a codification of beliefs or a body of teachings
or instructions, taught principles or positions, as the body of teachings in a
branch of knowledge or belief system. The Greek analogue is the etymology of
catechism. Often doctrine specifically connotes a of religious dogma as it is
promulgated by a church, but not necessarily: doctrine is also used to refer to
a principle of law, in the common law traditions, established through a history
of past decisions, such as the doctrine of self-defense, or the principle of
fair use, or the more narrowly applicable first-sale doctrine. In some
organizations, doctrine is simply defined as "that which is taught", in other
words the basis for institutional teaching of its personnel internal ways of
doing business. Religious usage. One department of the Roman Curia is called
the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith. Also shows other doctrines
involved in the shape of government and politics. Military usage. The term also
applies to the concept of an established procedure to a complex operation in
warfare. The typical example is tactical doctrine in which a standard set of
maneuvers, kinds of troops and weapons are employed as a default approach to a
kind of attack. Almost every military organization has its own doctrine,
sometimes written, sometimes unwritten. Some military doctrines are transmitted
through training programs. More recently, in modern peacekeeping operations,
which involve both civilian and military operations, more comprehensive (not
just military) doctrines are now emerging such as the 2008 United Nations
peacekeeping operations' "Capstone Doctrine" which speaks to integrated
civilian and military operations. Political. A policy, position or principle
advocated, taught or put into effect concerning the acquisition and exercise of
the power to govern or administrate in society. Legal usage. A legal doctrine
is a body of inter-related rules (usually of common law and built over a long
period of time) associated with a legal concept or principle. For example the
doctrine of frustration of purpose now has many tests and rules applicable with
regards to each other and can be contained within a "bubble" of "frustration".
In a court session a defendant may refer to the doctrine of justification. It
can be seen that a branch of law contains various doctrines, which in turn
contain various "rules" or "tests". The test of "non-occurrence of crucial
event" is part of the doctrine of "frustration" which is part of contract law.
Doctrines can grow into a branch of law; restitution is now considered a branch
of law separate to contract and tort. Indoctrination. The term indoctrination
came to have awkward connotations during the 20th century, but it is necessary
to retain it, in order to distinguish it from education. In education one is
asked to stand as much as possible outside the body of accumulated knowledge
and analyze it oneself. In indoctrination on the other hand, one stands within
the body of knowledge and absorbs its teachings without critical thought.
