Dominion Theology Dominion Theology is a grouping of theological systems with
the common belief that society should be governed exclusively by the law of
God, as codified in the Bible. The two main streams of Dominion Theology are
Christian Reconstructionism and Kingdom Now Theology. Though these two differ
greatly in their general theological orientation (the first is strongly
Reformed and Neo-Calvinistic, the second is Charismatic), they share a
postmillennial vision in which the Kingdom of God will be established on Earth
through political and (in some cases) military means. Dominion Theology is seen
by some as a subset of Dominionism, a term used by some social scientists and
journalists to describe a theological form of political ideology, which they
claim has broadly influenced the Christian Right in the United States, Canada,
and Europe, within Protestant Christian evangelicalism and fundamentalism.
Etymology. The name "Dominion Theology" is derived from Genesis , where God
grants humanity "dominion" over the Earth., and God said unto them, "Be
fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it: and have
dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over every
living thing that moveth upon the earth."" Christians typically interpret this
passage as meaning that God gave humankind responsibility over the Earth, but
Dominion Theology infers a mandate for Christian stewardship in civil affairs,
no less than in other human matters. History. Contemporary Dominion Theology
arose in the 1970s in religious movements reasserting aspects of Christian
nationalism; however, the Dominion concept has existed within mainstream
Christianity since the Third Century. Ideas for how to accomplish this vary.
Very doctrinaire versions of Dominion Theology are sometimes called "Hard
Dominionism" or "Theocratic Dominionism," because they seek relatively
authoritarian theocratic or theonomic forms of government. Christian
Reconstructionism. An example of Dominionism in reformed theology is Christian
Reconstructionism, which originated with the teachings of R. J. Rushdoony in
the 1960s and 1970s. Rushdoony's theology focuses on theonomy (the rule of the
Law of God), a belief that all of society should be ordered according to the
laws that governed the Israelites in the Old Testament. His system is strongly
Calvinistic, emphasizing the sovereignty of God over human freedom and action,
and denying the operation of charismatic gifts in the present day
(cessationism); both of these aspects are in direct opposition to Kingdom Now
Theology. While acknowledging the small number of actual adherents, authors
such as Sara Diamond and Frederick Clarkson have argued that postmillennial
Christian Reconstructionism played a major role in pushing the primarily
premillennial Christian Right to adopt a more aggressive dominionist stance.
[http://www.publiceye.org/magazine/v08n1/chrisre1.html. According to Diamond,
"Reconstructionism is the most intellectually grounded, though esoteric, brand
of dominion theology."[http://zena.secureforum.com/Znet/zmag/articles/
feb95diamond.htm] The specific meanings are different in important ways,
although the terms have been used in a variety of conflicting ways in popular
articles, especially on the Internet. Kingdom Now Theology. Kingdom Now
Theology is a branch of Dominion Theology which has had a following within
Pentecostalism. It attracted attention in the late 1980s. Kingdom Now Theology
states that although Satan has been in control of the world since the Fall, God
is looking for people who will help him take back dominion. Those who yield
themselves to the authority of God's apostles and prophets will take control of
the kingdoms of this world, being defined as all social institutions, the
"kingdom" of education, the "kingdom" of science, the "kingdom" of the arts,
etc. Kingdom Now Theology is influenced by the Latter Rain movement, and
critics have connected it to the New Apostolic Reformation, "Spiritual Warfare
Christianity", and Fivefold ministry thinking. Kingdom Now theology should not
be confused with Kingdom theology, which is related to inaugurated eschatology.
Criticism. Hal Lindsey criticized Dominion Theology in his 1989 book, "The Road
to Holocaust".
