Douay–Rheims Bible The Douay–Rheims Bible (pronounced or ) (also known as
the Rheims–Douai Bible or Douai Bible, and abbreviated as D–R and DV) is a
translation of the Bible from the Latin Vulgate into English made by members of
the English College, Douai, in the service of the Catholic Church. The New
Testament portion was published in Reims, France, in 1582, in one volume with
extensive commentary and notes. The Old Testament portion was published in two
volumes thirty years later by the University of Douai. The first volume,
covering Genesis through Job, was published in 1609; the second, covering
Psalms to 2 Machabees plus the apocrypha of the Clementine Vulgate was
published in 1610. Marginal notes took up the bulk of the volumes and had a
strong polemical and patristic character. They also offered insights on issues
of translation, and on the Hebrew and Greek source texts of the Vulgate. The
purpose of the version, both the text and notes, was to uphold Catholic
tradition in the face of the Protestant Reformation which up till then had
ovewhelmingly dominated Elizabethan religion and academic debate. As such it
was an impressive effort by English Catholics to support the Counter-
Reformation. The New Testament was reprinted in 1600, 1621 and 1633, while both
the Old Testament volumes were reprinted in 1635, but neither thereafter for
another hundred years. In 1589, William Fulke produced a refutation of the
Rheims New Testament, setting out the complete Rheims text and notes in
parallel columns with those of the Bishops' Bible. This work sold widely in
England, being re-issued in three further editions to 1633; and it was
predominantly through Fulke's editions that the Rheims New Testament came to
exercise a significant influence on the development of 17th Century English.
Much of the text of the 1582/1610 bible, however, employed a densely latinate
vocabulary, to the extent of being in places unreadable; and consequently this
translation was replaced by a revision undertaken by bishop Richard Challoner;
the New Testament in three editions 1749, 1750, and 1752; the Old Testament
(minus the Vulgate apocrypha), in 1750. Although retaining the title
"Douay–Rheims Bible", the Challoner revision was in fact a new version,
tending to take as its base text the King James Bible rigorously checked and
extensively adjusted for improved readability and consistency with the
Clementine edition of the Vulgate. Subsequent editions of the Challoner
revision, of which there have been very many, reproduce his Old Testament of
1750 with very few changes. Challoner's New Testament was, however, extensively
revised by Bernard MacMahon in a series of Dublin editions from 1783 to 1810;
and these various Dublin versions are the source of some Challoner bibles
printed in the United States in the 19th Century. Subsequent editions of the
Challoner bible printed in England most often follow Challoner's earlier New
Testament texts of 1749 and 1750; as do most 20th-century printings, and on-
line versions of the Douay–Rheims bible circulating on the internet. Although
the Jerusalem Bible, New American Bible/New American Bible Revised Edition (in
the United States), the Revised Standard Version, the New Revised Standard
Version and the New Jerusalem Bible are the most commonly used in English-
speaking Catholic churches, the Challoner revision of the Douay–Rheims is
still often the Bible of choice of more traditional English-speaking Catholics.
Origin. The English exiles for religious causes, or recusants, were not all
Catholic. There were Catholic refugees on the European mainland as well as
Puritan, and from the one, as from the other, there proceeded an English
version of the Bible. The center of English Catholicism was the English College
at Douai (University of Douai, France) founded in 1568 by William Allen,
formerly of Queen's College, Oxford, and Canon of York, and subsequently
cardinal, for the purpose of training priests to convert the English again to
Catholicism. And it was here where the Catholic translation of the Bible into
English was produced. A run of a few hundred or more of the New Testament, in
quarto form (not large folio), was published in the last months of 1582
(Herbert #177), during a temporary migration of the college to Rheims;
consequently, it has been commonly known as the Rheims New Testament. Though he
died in the same year as its publication, this translation was principally the
work of Gregory Martin, formerly Fellow of St. John's College, Oxford, close
friend of Saint Edmund Campion. He was assisted by others at Douai, notably
Allen himself, Richard Bristow, and Thomas Worthington, who proofed and
provided notes and annotations. The Old Testament is stated to have been ready
at the same time, but for want of funds it could not be printed until later,
after the college had returned to Douai; it is commonly known as the Douay Old
Testament. It was issued as two quarto volumes dated 1609 and 1610 (Herbert
#300). Surprisingly these first New Testament and Old Testament editions
followed the Geneva Bible not only in their quarto format but also in the use
of Roman type. As a recent translation, the Rheims New Testament had an
influence on the translators of the King James Version (see below). Afterwards
it ceased to be of interest in the Anglican church. The city is now spelled
Douai, but the Bible continues to be published as the "Douay–Rheims Bible",
and has formed the basis of some later Catholic Bibles in English. The title
page runs: "The Holy Bible, faithfully translated into English out of the
authentic Latin. Diligently conferred with the Hebrew, Greek and other
Editions." The cause of the delay was "our poor state of banishment", but there
was also the matter of reconciling the Latin to the other editions. William
Allen went to Rome and worked, with others, on the revision of the Vulgate. The
Sixtine Vulgate edition was published in 1590. The definitive Clementine text
followed in 1592. These revisions of the Vulgate allowed Dr Worthington, in the
preface, to say: "we have again conferred this English translation and
conformed it to the most perfect Latin Edition." Douay–Rheims Bible style.
Elsewhere, however, the English wording of the Rheims New Testament follows
more or less closely the Protestant version first produced by William Tyndale
in 1525; though the base text for the Rheims translators appears to be the
revision of Tyndale found in an English and Latin diglot New Testament,
published by Miles Coverdale in Paris in 1538. Furthermore, the translators are
especially accurate in their rendition of the definite article from Greek to
English, and in their recognition of subtle distinctions of the Greek past
tense, neither of which are capable of being represented in Latin.
Consequently, the Rheims New Testament is much less of a new version, and owes
rather more to the original languages, than the translators admit in their
preface. Where the Rheims translators depart from the Coverdale text, they
frequently adopt readings found in the Wycliff bible; as this version had been
translated from the Vulgate; and had been widely used by English Catholic
churchmen unaware of its Lollard origins. Nevertheless, it was a translation of
a translation of the Bible. Many highly regarded translations of the Bible
still use the Vulgate for consultation, especially in certain difficult Old
Testament passages, but nearly all modern Bible versions go directly to the
Hebrew, Aramaic, and Greek biblical texts for translation, and not to a
secondary version like the Vulgate. (The reason that the translators preferred
the Vulgate, in many cases, was explained in their Preface, pointing to
assorted corruptions of various 'original' texts available in that era, to
assertions that St. Jerome had access to manuscripts that were later destroyed,
and to the Council of Trent’s decree that the Vulgate was free of doctrinal
error.) This adds to More and Gardiner the opposite argument, that previous
versions in standard English had improperly imputed clear meanings for obscure
passages in the Greek source text; where the Latin Vulgate had often tended to
rather render the Greek literally, even to the extent of generating improper
Latin constructions. In effect the Rheims translators argue, that where the
source text is ambiguous or obscure, then a faithful English translation should
also be ambiguous or obscure, with the various options for understanding the
text discussed in a marginal note. The translation was prepared with a definite
polemical purpose in opposition to Protestant translations (which also had
polemical motives). The notes and annotations reflected Catholic positions. The
Tridentine–Florentine Biblical canon was naturally used, with the
Deuterocanonical books incorporated into the Douay–Rheims Old Testament, and
only 3 Esdras, 4 Esdras and the Prayer of Manasses in the Apocrypha section.
Influence. The Douay Old Testament was reprinted once in the course of a
century, and the Rheims New Testament a few times in the next century. In
England, the Douay–Rheims Bible was ironically popularized by the action of a
vehement adversary, William Fulke, who, in order to expose its perceived
errors, in 1589 (Herbert #202) printed the Rheims New Testament in parallel
columns with the Protestant Bishops' version of 1572, and the Rheims
annotations with his own refutations of them; and this work had a considerable
vogue among Protestant Reformers. Further editions of Fulke's work continued
until 1633 (Herbert #480). It deserves mention in the history of the English
Bible because the Rheims New Testament was one of the versions consulted by the
translators of the King James Version (the Authorized Version). The Authorized
Version is distinguished from previous English Protestant versions by a greater
tendency to employ Latinate vocabulary, and the translators were able to find
many such terms (for example: "emulation" Romans 11:14) in the Rheims New
Testament. Consequently, a number of the latinisms of the Douay–Rheims,
through their use in the King James Bible, have entered standard literary
English. The translators of the Rheims New Testament appended a list of
neologisms in their work; including many latinate terms that have since become
assimilated into standard English. Examples include, "acquisition",
"adulterate", "advent", "allegory", "verity", "calumniate", "character",
"cooperate", "prescience", "resuscitate", "victim", and "evangelise"; and,
while such English may also have been generated through independent creation,
nevertheless the totality demonstrates a lasting influence on the development
of English vocabulary. In addition the editors chose to transliterate rather
than translate a number of technical Greek or Hebrew terms, such as "azymes"
for unleavened bread, and "pasch" for Passover. Few of these have been
assimilated into standard English; but one that has is "holocaust" for burnt
offering. Challoner Revision of the Douay–Rheims Bible. Translation. The
Douay–Rheims Bible, however, achieved little currency, even among English-
speaking Catholics, until it was substantially revised between 1749 and 1752 by
Richard Challoner, an English bishop, formally appointed to the deserted see of
Debra. Challoner's revisions borrowed heavily from the King James Version
(himself being a convert from Protestantism to Catholicism, and thus familiar
with its style) whose translators had themselves borrowed from the original
Rheims NT of 1582. The use of the Rheims New Testament by the translators of
the King James Bible is discussed below. Challoner not only addressed the odd
prose and much of the Latinisms, but produced a version which, while still
called the Douay–Rheims, was little like it. At the same time he aimed for
improved readability and comprehensibility, rephrasing obscure and obsolete
terms and construction; and in the process, consistently removing ambiguities
of meaning that the original Rheims–Douay version had striven to retain.
Publication. Challoner issued a New Testament edition in 1749, and followed
this with an edition of the whole bible in 1750, making some 200 further
changes to the New Testament. He issued a further version of the New Testament
in 1752, in which differed in about 2,000 readings from the 1750 edition, and
which remained the base text for further editions of the bible in Challoner's
lifetime. In all three editions the extensive notes and commentary of the 1582/
1610 original were drastically reduced, resulting in a compact one-volume
edition of the Bible, which contributed greatly to its popularity. Gone also
was the longer paragraph formatting of the text; instead, the text was broken
up so that each verse was its own paragraph. The three apocrypha, which had
been placed in an appendix to the second volume of the Old Testament, were
dropped. Subsequent editions of the Challoner revision, of which there have
been very many, reproduce his Old Testament of 1750 with very few changes.
Challoner's 1752 New Testament was, however, extensively further revised by
Bernard MacMahon in a series of Dublin editions from 1783 to 1810, for the most
part adjusting the text away from agreement with that of the King James Bible;
and these various Dublin versions are the source of many, but not all,
Challoner versions printed in the United States in the 19th Century. Editions
of the Challoner Bible printed in England sometimes follow one or another of
the revised Dublin New Testament texts; but more often tend to follow
Challoner's earlier editions of 1749 and 1750 (as do most 20th-century
printings, and on-line versions of the Douay–Rheims bible circulating on the
internet). This Challoner version, officially approved by the Church, remained
the Bible of the majority of English-speaking Catholics well into the 20th
century. It was first published in America in 1790 by Mathew Carey of
Philadelphia. Several American editions followed in the nineteenth and early
twentieth centuries, prominently among them an edition published in 1899 by the
John Murphy Company of Baltimore. In 1941 the New Testament and Psalms of the
Douay–Rheims Bible were again heavily revised to produce the New Testament
(and in some editions, the Psalms) of the Confraternity Bible, however so
extensive were these changes, that it was no longer identified as the
Douay–Rheims. Names of books. The names, numbers, and chapters of the
Douay–Rheims Bible and the Challoner revision follow that of the Vulgate and
therefore differ from those of the King James Version and its modern
successors, making direct comparison of versions tricky in some places. For
instance, the books called Ezra and Nehemiah in the King James Version are
called 1 and 2 Esdras in the Douay–Rheims Bible. The books called 1 and 2
Esdras in the KJV are called 3 and 4 Esdras in the Douay, and were classed as
apocrypha. A table illustrating the differences can be found here. The names,
numbers, and order of the books in the Douay–Rheims Bible follow those of the
Vulgate except that the three apocryphal books are placed after the Old
Testament in the Douay–Rheims Bible; in the Clementine Vulgate they come
after the New Testament. These three apocrypha are omitted entirely in the
Challoner revision. The Douay–Rheims’ Version’s influence on the King
James Bible. The Old Testament “Douay” translation of the Latin Vulgate
arrived too late on the scene to have played any part in influencing the King
James Bible. The Rheims New Testament had, however, been available for twenty
years; and in the form of William Fulke's parallel version, was readily
accessible. Nevertheless, the official instructions to the King James Bible
translators excluded the Rheims version from the list of previous English
translations that should be consulted, probably deliberately. The degree to
which the King James Bible drew on the Rheims version has, therefore, been the
subject of considerable debate; with James G Carleton in his book “The Part
of the Rheims in the making of the English Bible” arguing for a very
extensive influence, while Charles C Butterworth proposed that the actual
influence was small, relative to those of the Bishops' Bible and the Geneva
Bible. Fortunately, much of this debate was resolved in 1969, when Ward Allen
published a partial transcript of the minutes made by John Bois of the
proceedings of the General Committee of Review for the King James Bible (i.e.
the supervisory committee which met in 1610 to review the work of each of the
separate translation 'companies'). Bois records the policy of the review
committee in relation to a discussion of 1 Peter 1:7 "we have not thought the
indefinite sense ought to be defined"; which reflects the strictures expressed
by the Rheims translators against concealing ambiguities in the original text.
Allen shows that in several places, notably in the reading "manner of time" at
Revelation 13:8, the reviewers incorporated a reading from the Rheims text
specifically in accordance with this principle. More usually, however, the King
James Version handles obscurity in the source text by supplementing their
preferred clear English formulation with a literal translation as a marginal
note. Bois shows that many of these marginal translations are derived, more or
less modified, from the text or notes of the Rheims New Testament; indeed
Rheims is explicitly stated as the source for the marginal reading at
Colossians 2:18. Otherwise the English text of the King James New Testament can
often be demonstrated as adopting latinate terminology also found in the Rheims
version of the same text. In the majority of cases, these latinisms could also
have been derived directly from the versions of Miles Coverdale or the Wyclif
Bible (i.e. the source texts for the Rheims translators), but they would have
been most readily accessible to the King James translators in Fulke's parallel
editions. This also explains the incorporation into the King James Bible from
the Rheims New Testament of a number of striking English phrases, such as
"publish and blaze abroad" at Mark 1:45.
