Depiction of Jesus The depiction of Christ in pictorial form was controversial
in the early church. The depiction of Jesus in art took several centuries to
reach a conventional standardized form for his physical appearance, which has
subsequently remained largely stable since that time. Most images of Jesus have
in common a number of traits which are now almost universally associated with
Jesus, although variants are seen. The image of a fully bearded Jesus with long
hair did not become established until the 6th century in Eastern Christianity,
and much later in the West. Earlier images were much more varied. Images of
Jesus tend to show ethnic characteristics similar to those of the culture in
which the image has been created. Beliefs that certain images are historically
authentic, or have acquired an authoritative status from Church tradition,
remain powerful among some of the faithful, in both Eastern Orthodoxy,
Anglicanism, and Roman Catholicism. The Shroud of Turin is now the best-known
example, though the Image of Edessa and the Veil of Veronica were better known
in medieval times . Early Christianity. Before Constantine. No physical
description of Jesus is contained in any of the canonical Gospels. In the Acts
of the Apostles, Jesus is said to have manifested as a "light from heaven" that
temporarily blinded the Apostle Paul. The Book of Revelation makes a reference
to a vision the author had of Jesus: "among the lampstands was someone like a
Son of Man, dressed in a robe reaching down to his feet and with a golden sash
around his chest. His head and hair were white like wool, as white as snow, and
his eyes were like blazing fire. His feet were like bronze glowing in a
furnace, and his voice was like the sound of rushing waters. In his right hand
he held seven stars, and out of his mouth came a sharp double-edged sword. His
face was like the sun shining in all its brilliance." (Revelation 1:12–16,
NIV). Use in art of the Revelation description of Jesus has generally been
restricted to illustrations of the book itself. During the persecution of
Christians under the Roman Empire, Christian art was necessarily furtive and
ambiguous, and there was hostility to idols in a group still with a large
component of members with Jewish origins, surrounded by, and polemicising
against, sophisticated pagan images of gods. Irenaeus (d. c.202), Clement of
Alexandria (d. 215), Lactantius (ca. 240 – ca. 320) and Eusebius of Caesarea
(d. ca. 339) disapproved of portrayals in images of Jesus. The 36th canon of
the Synod of Elvira in 306 A.D. reads, 'It has been decreed that no pictures be
had in the churches, and that which is worshipped or adored be not painted on
the walls', which has been interpreted by Calvin and other Protestants as an
interdiction of the making of images of Christ. The issue remained the subject
of controversy until the end of the 4th century. The earliest surviving
Christian art comes from the late 2nd to early 4th centuries on the walls of
tombs belonging, most likely, to wealthy Christians in the catacombs of Rome,
although from literary evidence there may well have been panel icons which,
like almost all classical painting, have disappeared. Initially Jesus was
represented indirectly by pictogram symbols such as the Ichthys (fish), the
peacock, or an anchor (the Labarum or Chi-Rho was a later development). Later
personified symbols were used, including Jonah, whose three days in the belly
of the whale pre-figured the interval between Christ's death and Resurrection;
Daniel in the lion's den; or Orpheus charming the animals. The Tomb of the
Julii has a famous but unique mosaic of Christ as Sol Invictus, a sun-god. The
image of "The Good Shepherd", a beardless youth in pastoral scenes collecting
sheep, was the most common of these images, and was probably not understood as
a portrait of the historical Jesus at this period. It continues the classical
Kriophoros, and in some cases may also represent the Shepherd of Hermas, a
popular Christian literary work of the 2nd century. Among the earliest
depictions clearly intended to directly represent Jesus himself are many
showing him as a baby, usually held by his mother, especially in the "Adoration
of the Magi", seen as the first theophany, or display of the incarnate Christ
to the world at large. The oldest known portrait of Jesus, found in Syria and
dated to about 235, shows him as a beardless young man of authoritative and
dignified bearing. He is depicted dressed in the style of a young philosopher,
with close-cropped hair and wearing a tunic and pallium – signs of good
breeding in Greco-Roman society. From this, it is evident that some early
Christians paid no heed to the historical context of Jesus being a Jew and
visualised him solely in terms of their own social context, as a quasi-heroic
figure, without supernatural attributes such as a halo (a fourth-century
innovation). The appearance of Jesus had some theological implications. While
some Christians thought Jesus should have the beautiful appearance of a young
classical hero, and the Gnostics tended to think he could change his appearance
at will, for which they cited the Meeting at Emmaus as evidence, others
including the Church Fathers Justin (d.165) and Tertullian (d.220) believed,
following Isaiah:53:2, that Christ's appearance was unremarkable: "he had no
form nor comeliness, that we should look upon him, nor beauty that we should
delight in him." But when the pagan Celsus ridiculed the Christian religion for
having an ugly God in about 180, Origen (d. 248) cited Psalm 45:3: "Gird thy
sword upon thy thigh, mighty one, with thy beauty and fairness" Later the
emphasis of leading Christian thinkers changed; Jerome (d.420) and Augustine of
Hippo (d. 430) argued that Jesus must have been ideally beautiful in face and
body. For Augustine he was "beautiful as a child, beautiful on earth, beautiful
in heaven." After Constantine. From the 3rd century onwards, the first
narrative scenes from the "Life of Christ" to be clearly seen are the "Baptism
of Christ", painted in a catacomb in about 200, and the miracle of the "Raising
of Lazarus", both of which can be clearly identified by the inclusion of the
dove of the Holy Spirit in "Baptisms", and the vertical, shroud-wrapped body of
Lazarus. Other scenes remain ambiguous – an "agape feast" may be intended as
a "Last Supper", but before the development of a recognised physical appearance
for Christ, and attributes such as the halo, it is impossible to tell, as
"tituli" or captions are rarely used. There are some surviving scenes from
Christ's "Works" of about 235 from the "baptistery" at Dura Europos on the
Persian frontier of the Empire. During the 4th century a much greater number of
scenes came to be depicted, usually showing Christ as youthful, beardless and
with short hair that does not reach his shoulders, although there is
considerable variance. Jesus is sometimes shown performing miracles by means of
a wand, as on the doors of Santa Sabina in Rome (430–32). He uses the wand to
change water to wine, multiply the bread and fishes, and raise Lazarus. When
pictured healing, he only lays on hands. The wand is thought to be a symbol of
power. The bare-faced youth with the wand may indicate that Jesus was thought
of as a user of magic or wonder worker by some of the early Christians. No art
has been found picturing Jesus with a wand before the 2nd century. Some
scholars suggest that the Gospel of Mark, The Secret Gospel of Mark and the
Gospel of John, (the so-called Signs Gospel), portray such a wonder worker,
user of magic, a magician or a Divine man. Only the Apostle Peter is also
depicted in ancient art with a wand. Another depiction, seen from the late 3rd
century or early 4th century onwards, showed Jesus with a beard, and within a
few decades can be very close to the conventional type that later emerged. This
depiction has been said to draw variously on Imperial imagery, the type of the
classical philosopher, and that of Zeus, leader of the Greek gods, or Jupiter,
his Roman equivalent, and the protector of Rome. According to art historian
Paul Zanker, the bearded type has long hair from the start, and a relatively
long beard (contrasting with the short "classical" beard and hair always given
to St Peter, and most other apostles); this depiction is specifically
associated with "Charismatic" philosophers like Euphrates the Stoic, Dio of
Prusa and Apollonius of Tyana, some of whom were claimed to perform miracles.
After the very earliest examples of c. 300, this depiction is mostly used for
hieratic images of Jesus, and scenes from his life are more likely to use a
beardless, youthful type. The tendency of older scholars such as Talbot Rice to
see the beardless Jesus as associated with a "classical" artistic style and the
bearded one as representing an "Eastern" one drawing from ancient Syria,
Mesopotamia and Persia seems impossible to sustain, and does not feature in
more recent analyses. Equally attempts to relate on a consistent basis the
explanation for the type chosen in a particular work to the differing
theological views of the time have been unsuccessful. From the 3rd century on,
some Christian leaders, such as Clement of Alexandria had recommended the
wearing of beards by Christian men. The centre parting was also seen from early
on, and was also associated with long-haired philosophers. From the middle of
the 4th century, after Christianity was legalized by the Edict of Milan in 313,
and gained Imperial favour, there was a new range of images of Christ the King,
using either of the two physical types described above, but adopting the
costume and often the poses of Imperial iconography. These developed into the
various forms of Christ in Majesty. Some scholars reject the connection between
the political events and developments in iconography, seeing the change as a
purely theological one, resulting from the shift of the concept and title of
Pantocrator ("Ruler of all") from God the Father (still not portrayed in art)
to Christ, which was a development of the same period, perhaps led by
Athanasius of Alexandria (d. 373). Another depiction drew from classical images
of philosophers, often shown as a youthful "intellectual wunderkind" in Roman
sarcophagii; the "Traditio Legis" image initially uses this type. Gradually
Jesus became shown as older, and during the 5th century the image with a beard
and long hair, now with a cruciform halo, came to dominate, especially in the
Eastern Empire. In the earliest large New Testament mosaic cycle, in
Sant'Apollinare Nuovo, Ravenna (ca. 520), Jesus is beardless though the period
of his ministry until the scenes of the Passion, after which he is shown with a
beard. The Good Shepherd, now clearly identified as Christ, with halo and often
rich robes, is still depicted, as on the apse mosaic in the church of Santi
Cosma e Damiano in Rome, where the twelve apostles are depicted as twelve sheep
below the imperial Jesus, or in the Mausoleum of Galla Placidia at Ravenna.
Once the bearded, long-haired Jesus became the conventional representation of
Jesus, his facial features slowly began to be standardised, although this
process took until at least the 6th century in the Eastern Church, and much
longer in the West, where clean-shaven Jesuses are common until the 12th
century, despite the influence of Byzantine art. French scholar Paul Vignon has
listed fifteen similarities ("marks", like tilaka) between most of the icons of
Jesus after this point, particularly in the icons of "Christ Pantocrator" ("The
all-powerful Messiah"). He claims that these are due to the availability of the
Image of Edessa (which he claims to be identical to the Shroud of Turin, via
Constantinople) to the artists. Certainly images believed to have miraculous
origins, or the Hodegetria, believed to be a portrait of Mary from the life by
Saint Luke, were widely regarded as authoritative by the Early Medieval period
and greatly influenced depictions. In Eastern Orthodoxy the form of images was,
and largely is, regarded as revealed truth, with a status almost equal to
scripture, and the aim of artists is to copy earlier images without
originality, although the style and content of images does in fact change
slightly over time. As to the historical appearance of Jesus, in one possible
translation of the apostle Paul's First Epistle to the Corinthians, Paul urges
Christian men of first-century Corinth not to have long hair. An early
commentary by Pelagius (ca. AD 354 – ca. AD 420/440) says, "Paul was
complaining because men were fussing about their hair and women were flaunting
their locks in church. Not only was this dishonoring to them, but it was also
an incitement to fornication." Interestingly, some have speculated that Paul
was a Nazirite who kept his hair long. Jesus was a practicing Jew so presumably
had a beard. Alexamenos graffito. A very early image generally thought to be a
representation of Jesus is the Alexamenos graffito, a unique piece of wall
graffiti near the Palatine hill in Rome. The inscription has been ascribed
dates ranging from the 1st to the 3rd centuries AD. It was apparently drawn by
a Roman soldier to mock another soldier who was a Christian. The caption reads,
in Greek, "Alexamenos worships God", while the image shows a man raising his
hand toward a crucified figure with a donkey's head. The head of the donkey
seems to refer to a Roman misconception about Jewish religion, so that the
image would be at once antisemitic and anti-Christian. A small minority of
scholars dispute whether this image depicts Jesus, proposing that this image
may be a reference to another deity. Range of depictions. Certain local
traditions have maintained different depictions, sometimes reflecting local
racial characteristics, as do the Catholic and Orthodox depictions. The Coptic
Church of Egypt separated in the 5th century, and has a distinctive depiction
of Jesus, consistent with Coptic art. The Ethiopian Church, also Coptic,
developed on Coptic traditions, but shows Jesus and all Biblical figures with
the Ethiopian appearance of its members. Other traditions in Asia and elsewhere
also show the race of Jesus as that of the local population (see Chinese
picture in the gallery below). In modern times such variation has become more
common, but images following the traditional depiction in both physical
appearance and clothing are still dominant, perhaps surprisingly so. In Europe,
local ethnic tendencies in depictions of Jesus can be seen, for example in
Spanish, German, or Early Netherlandish painting, but almost always surrounding
figures are still more strongly characterised. For example, the Virgin Mary,
after the vision reported by Bridget of Sweden, was often shown with blonde
hair, but Christ's is very rarely paler than a light brown. Some medieval
Western depictions, usually of the Meeting at Emmaus, where his disciples do
not recognise him at first (Luke.24.13–32), showed Jesus wearing a Jewish
hat. In 2001, the television series "Son of God" used one of three first-
century Jewish skulls from a leading department of forensic science in Israel
to depict Jesus in a new way. A face was constructed using forensic
anthropology by Richard Neave, a retired medical artist from the Unit of Art in
Medicine at the University of Manchester. The face that Neave constructed
suggested that Jesus would have had a broad face and large nose, and differed
significantly from the traditional depictions of Jesus in renaissance art.
Additional information about Jesus's skin color and hair was provided by Mark
Goodacre, a senior lecturer at the Department of Theology and Religion at the
University of Birmingham. Using third-century images from a synagogue—the
earliest pictures of Jewish people—Goodacre proposed that Jesus's skin color
would have been darker and swarthier than his traditional Western image. He
also suggested that he would have had short, curly hair and a short cropped
beard. This is also confirmed in the First Epistle to the Corinthians, where
Paul the Apostle states that it is "disgraceful" for a man to have long hair.
As Paul knew many of the disciples and members of Jesus's family, it is
unlikely that he would have written such a thing had Jesus had long hair.
Although not literally the face of Jesus, the result of the study determined
that Jesus's skin would have been more olive-colored than white, and that he
would have looked like a typical Galilean Semite. Among the points made was
that the Bible records that Jesus's disciple Judas had to point him out to
those arresting him. The implied argument is that if Jesus's physical
appearance had differed markedly from his disciples, then he would have been
relatively easy to identify. Miraculous images. There are, however, some images
which have been claimed to realistically show how Jesus looked. One early
tradition, recorded by Eusebius of Caesarea, says that Jesus once washed his
face with water and then dried it with a cloth, leaving an image of his face
imprinted on the cloth. This was sent by him to King Abgarus of Edessa, who had
sent a messenger asking Jesus to come and heal him of his disease. This image,
called the "Mandylion" or Image of Edessa, appears in history in around 525.
Numerous replicas of this "image not made by human hands" remain in
circulation. There are also icon compositions of Jesus and Mary that are
traditionally believed by many Orthodox to have originated in paintings by Luke
the Evangelist. A currently familiar depiction is that on the Shroud of Turin,
whose records go back to 1353. Controversy surrounds the Shroud of Turin and
its exact origin remains subject to debate. One of the Catholic devotions
approved by the Holy See, that to the Holy Face of Jesus, now uses the image of
the face on the Shroud of Turin as it appeared in the negative of the
photograph taken by amateur photographer Secondo Pia in 1898. The image cannot
be clearly seen on the Shroud of Turin itself with the naked eye, and it
surprised Pia to the extent that he said he almost dropped and broke the
photographic plate when he first saw the developed negative image on it in the
evening of 28 May 1898. Before 1898, devotion to the Holy Face of Jesus used an
image based on the Veil of Veronica, where legend recounts that Veronica from
Jerusalem encountered Jesus along the Via Dolorosa on the way to Calvary. When
she paused to wipe the sweat from Jesus's face with her veil, the image was
imprinted on the cloth. The establishment of these images as Catholic devotions
traces back to Sister Marie of St Peter and the Venerable Leo Dupont who
started and promoted them from 1844 to 1874 in Tours France, and Sister Maria
Pierina De Micheli who associated the image from the Shroud of Turin with the
devotion in 1936 in Milan Italy. A very popular 20th century depiction among
Roman Catholics is the Divine Mercy image, following its approval by Pope John
Paul II in April 2000. The Divine Mercy depiction is formally used in
celebrations of Divine Mercy Sunday and is venerated by over 100 million
Catholics who follow the devotion. The image is not part of Acheiropoieta in
that it has been depicted by modern artists, but the pattern of the image is
said to have been miraculously shown to Saint Faustina Kowalska in a vision of
Jesus in 1931 in Płock, Poland. Faustina wrote in her diary that that Jesus
appeared to her and asked her to "Paint an image according to the pattern you
see". Faustina eventually found an artist (Eugene Kazimierowski) to depict the
Divine Mercy image of Jesus with his right hand raised in a sign of blessing
and the left hand touching the garment near his breast, with two large rays,
one red, the other white emanating from near his heart. After Faustina's death,
a number of other artists painted the image, with the depiction by Adolf Hyla
being among the most reproduced.
