Neo-Druidism Neo-Druidism or Neo-Druidry, commonly referred to as Druidry by
its adherents, is a form of modern spirituality or religion that generally
promotes harmony and worship of nature, and respect for all beings, including
the environment. Many forms of modern Druidry are Neopagan religions, whereas
some are instead seen as philosophies that are not necessarily religious in
nature. Originating in Britain during the 18th century, it was originally a
cultural movement, only gaining religious or spiritual connotations in the 19th
century. The core principle of Druidry is respect and veneration of nature, and
as such it often involves participation in the environmental movement. Another
prominent belief amongst modern Druids is the veneration of ancestors,
particularly those who belonged to prehistoric societies. Arising from the 18th
century Romanticist movement in Britain, which glorified the ancient "Celtic"
peoples of the Iron Age, the early Druids aimed to imitate the Iron Age priests
who were also known as druids. At the time, little accurate information was
known about these ancient priests, and the modern Druidic movement has no
direct connection to them, despite contrary claims made by some modern Druids.
In the first half of the twentieth century, modern Druids developed fraternal
organizations modeled on Freemasonry that employed the romantic figure of the
British Druids and Bards as symbols of indigenous British spirituality. Some of
these groups were purely fraternal and cultural, creating traditions from the
national imagination of Britain. Others merged with contemporary movements such
as the physical culture movement and naturism. Since the 1980s some modern
druid groups have adopted similar methodologies to those of Celtic
Reconstructionist Paganism in an effort to create a more historically accurate
practice. However, there is still controversy over how much resemblance modern
Druidism may or may not have to the Iron Age druids. Beliefs. Beliefs vary
widely, and there is no set dogma or belief system which all adherents follow.
Indeed, it is a key component of many Druidic groups that there should not be
strict dogmas. There is no central authority over the entire movement, nor any
central religious text or religious leader. Core ideas shared by many Druids,
according to Emma Restall Orr, the founder of The Druid Network, include
"honouring of the ancestors and honouring of the land". Orr also commented that
"Druidry connects with all the other Earth-ancestor traditions around the
globe, such as the Native American, the Maori and Huna, the Aboriginal, the
Romany and the indigenous spiritualities of Africa and Asia", a view supported
by leading British Druid Philip Carr-Gomm. Nature-centered spirituality.
Druidry largely revolves around the veneration of nature. Phil Ryder stated
that "within Druidry, Nature is considered to be unconditionally sacred and an
expression or manifestation of deity and divinity". Many Druids are animists.
Most Druids see the aspects of nature as imbued with spirit or soul, whether
literally or metaphorically. Some Druids consider animals and plants to be
members, like the deities of the Celts, of a túath, or tribe and therefore
honored. Celtic author J.A. MacCulloch wrote of this in depth in a book
published in 1911 entitled Religion of the Ancient Celts. Because they view the
natural world as sacred, many Druids are involved in environmentalism, thereby
acting to protect areas of the natural landscape that are under threat from
development or pollution. Theology. The theology of the modern Druidic movement
is inherently nature-based, equating divinity with the natural world. However,
the specifics of Druidry has changed over the centuries, from a God-centred
monotheistic tradition to a Goddess-centred polytheistic tradition. Monotheism.
When modern Druidry developed into a religion in Britain during the 18th
century, the island was almost entirely Christian, with most of the populace
believing in a monotheistic God. This idea was adopted by several of the
pioneering modern Druids, like the Welshman Iolo Morganwg. By the end of the
19th century, Druidry was still a "monotheistic philosophical tradition".
Neopagan theology and the Goddess. Some Druids, such as members of Ár
nDraíocht Féin, are polytheists, worshipping various gods and goddesses, who
"are worthy of respect, love and worship". These deities are commonly taken
from historical Celtic polytheism, though can also come from other sources,
such as Christianity. The Goddess Danu gives her name to the family of Irish
deities, which in the Gaelic is the Tuatha Dé Danann. The hierarchical concept
of worship involving submission and obedience by us as lesser beings is not a
concept compatible with Druidry, despite frequent misunderstanding based on the
Judeo-Christian hierarchical concept of worship. With the increase in Neopagan
Druidry, and the widespread acceptance of Goddess worship, "The Druid's
Prayer", which had been originally written in the 18th century by Druid Iolo
Morganwg, had the word "God" replaced with "Goddess" in common usage. Ancestor
Veneration. Respect for the ancestors is another core belief for some Druids.
This idea of respect for ancestors, or ancestor worship, is common in pagan
folk religions. Revivalists and Reconstructionists agree that knowing as much
as possible about the lives of our ancestors and preserving national or tribal
heritage is important and good. Archaeological evidence does suggest that the
ancient peoples of Britain, Ireland, and other parts of Europe practiced burial
customs from which we infer particular respect for ancestors and probably a
belief in life after death in some form. The Druids' ancestor veneration
generally focuses on the Iron Age "Celtic" peoples of western Europe, because
these were the peoples amongst whom the ancient druids lived. This offers a
connection to the Celts through a "blood link to a modern Celtic land or merely
a soul allegiance". Some Druids, however — particularly those with no ethnic
connection — do not emphasise such a Celtic link, and focus instead on other
historical peoples, such as the Anglo-Saxons or the Norse. Ancestor veneration
leads many to object to the archaeological excavation of human remains and
their subsequent display in museums. Many have organised campaigns for their
reburial. For instance, in 2006, a neo-Druid called Paul Davies requested that
the Alexander Keiller Museum in Avebury, Wiltshire rebury their human remains,
and that storing and displaying them was "immoral and disrespectful". Criticism
of this view has come from the archaeological community, with statements like
"no single modern ethnic group or cult should be allowed to appropriate our
ancestors for their own agendas. It is for the international scientific
community to curate such remains." Afterlife. Emma Restall Orr stated that
"there is a general acceptance" of reincarnation amongst Druids, and that a
soul can reincarnate into any species. However, Orr's claim that this is nearly
universal among Druids is not supported; there is no discussion of the
afterlife or reincarnation, for example, in the writings of the Reformed Druids
of North America. Practices. Ceremonies. The practices of modern Druids
typically take place outside, in the daylight, in what is described as "the eye
of the sun". In some cases, they instead perform their rites indoors, or during
the night. Most Druids perform ceremonies within a circle around an altar or
central fire. Neo-druids often meet and practice in groups called variously
"groves" or "henges." Sometimes they meet at stone circles and other megaliths
which are pre-Celtic, but which since the romantic revival have been associated
in the popular imagination with the ancient druids. At the Summer solstice, a
Neo-druidic ritual is notably held at Stonehenge in England. Another
particularly sacred place is Glastonbury in southern England. In parts of the
world beyond the range of the original Celtic tribes in Europe and the pre-
Celtic megalithic cultures, modern Druids seek an understanding of the sacred
qualities of landscape and place. When performing rituals, some modern Druids
wear ceremonial cloaks and robes, which in some cases imitate the Iron Age
style of the Celts. In some orders, robes or tabards of different colors are
used to indicate the grade of the druid within the order. In the case of the
Order of Bards, Ovates and Druids, the colors blue, green, and white are
respectively assigned to these grades. Some modern Druids also use ritual , a
symbolic magical instrument long associated with both Druids and wizards
generally. Many modern Druids do not adopt any ceremonial garb. In the 1990s
and early 2000s, the use of sweat lodges became increasingly popular amongst
Druids. Originally a practice performed by members of certain Native North
American groups, it was adopted into Druidry as a part of a widespread
perception that in order to learn about ancient European culture and religion,
Druids would have to draw from indigenous cultures and religions from across
the globe that were more in touch with the natural landscape. Within Druidry,
sweat lodges are considered as "initiatory and regenerative opportunities to
rededicate oneself to honouring the Earth and the community of life." Arts and
poetry. In Druidry, a specific ceremony takes place known as an "Eisteddfod"
which is dedicated to the recitation of poetry and musical performances. Within
the Druidic community, practitioners who are particularly skilled in their
recitation of poetry or their performance of music are referred to as Bards, a
term based upon the word "bardoi", which the ancient Greek historian Strabo
claimed was the term for poets in Iron Age Gaul. Bards perform at "Eisteddfod"
at various occasions, from formal rituals to pub get-togethers and summer camps
and environmental protests. Instruments commonly used by Druidic Bards include
acoustic stringed instruments like the guitar and the clarsach, as well as the
bodhran, bagpipe, rattle, flute and whistle. Academic Graham Harvey believed
that these specific instruments were preferred by modern Druids because many of
them were Irish in origin, and therefore gave a "Celtic flavour, seemingly
invoking the Iron Age", the period during which the ancient druids lived.
Inspiration for poetry and other arts is known as Awen, and is believed to be a
"flowing spirit" given by the Goddess which can be invoked by the Druid. In
many Druidic rituals, Awen is invoked by either chanting the word "Awen" or "A-
I-O" three times, in order to shift the consciousness of the participants
involved. Druids have participated in other musical genres and with more
technological instruments, including the blues and rave music, and one British
club, Megatripolis, opened with the performance of a Druidic ritual. Tree lore.
Amongst many Druids, there is a system of tree lore, through which different
associations are attributed to different species of tree, including particular
moods, actions, phases of life, deities and ancestors. Festivals. Certain
modern Druidic groups attempt to revive folkloric European festivals and their
accompanying traditions. Many Druids follow eight festivals a year, which are
collectively known as the Wheel of the Year. Four of these are solar festivals,
being positioned at the solstices and equinoxes. The other four are the
"Celtic" festivals of ancient Ireland. The idea of the Wheel of the Year was
introduced into Druidry by Ross Nichols, who founded the Order of Bards, Ovates
and Druids in 1964, and he had gained this idea from his friend Gerald Gardner,
who had implemented it in his Bricket Wood coven of Gardnerian Witches in 1958.
History. Origins. The Druidic movement originated amongst the Romanticist ideas
of the ancient druids that had begun to be developed in the 17th and 18th
centuries. Whilst many Early Mediaeval writers, particularly in Ireland, had
demonised the ancient druids as barbarians who had practiced human sacrifice
and tried to suppress the coming of Christianity, certain Late Mediaeval
writers had begun to extol what they believed were the virtues of the druids,
and reinvented them as national heroes, particularly in Germany, France and
Scotland. It was also during this period that Conrad Celtis had begun to
propagate the image of the druids as having been bearded, wise old men wearing
white robes, something that would prove highly influential in future centuries.
The image of the Iron Age druids as national heroes would later begin to emerge
in England during the Early Modern period, with the antiquarian and Anglican
vicar William Stukeley (1687–1765) proclaiming himself to be a "druid" and
writing a number of popular books in which he claimed that prehistoric
megaliths like Stonehenge and Avebury were temples built by the druids,
something now known to be incorrect. Stukeley himself, being a devout but
unorthodox Christian, felt that the ancient druids had been followers of a
monotheistic faith very similar to Christianity, at one point even stating that
ancient druidry was "so extremely like Christianity, that in effect, it
differed from it only in this; they believe in a Messiah who was to come into
the world, as we believe in him that is come". Soon after the publication and
spread of Stukeley's writings, other people also began to self-describe
themselves as "druids" and form societies: the earliest of these was the
Druidic Society, founded on the Welsh island of Anglesey in 1772. Largely
revolving around ensuring the continued financial success of business on the
island, it attracted many of Anglesey's wealthy inhabitants into it, and
donated much of its proceeds to charity, but was disbanded in 1844. A similar
Welsh group was the Society of the Druids of Cardigan, founded circa 1779,
largely by a group of friends who wished to attend "literary picnics" together.
The third British group to call itself Druidic was English rather than Welsh,
and was known as the Ancient Order of Druids. Founded in 1781 and influenced by
Freemasonry, its origins have remained somewhat unknown, but it subsequently
spread in popularity from its base in London across much of Britain and even
abroad, with new lodges being founded, all of which were under the control of
the central Grand Lodge in London. The Order was not religious in structure,
and instead acted as somewhat of a social club, particularly for men with a
common interest in music. In 1833 it suffered a schism, as a large number of
dissenting lodges, unhappy at the management of the Order, formed their own
United Ancient Order of Druids, and both groups would go on to grow in
popularity throughout the rest of the century. Development of religious
Druidry. None of the earliest modern Druidic groups had been religious in
structure; however, this was to change in the late 18th century, primarily
because of the work of a Welshman who took the name of Iolo Morganwg
(1747–1826). Born as Edward Williams, he would take up the cause of Welsh
nationalism, and was deeply opposed to the British monarchy, supporting many of
the ideals of the French revolution which had occurred in 1789. Eventually
moving to London, he began perpetuating the claim that he was actually one of
the last initiates of a surviving group of druids who were descended from those
found in the Iron Age, centred around his home county of Glamorgan. He
subsequently organised the performing of Neo-druidic rituals on Primrose Hill
with some of his followers, whom he categorised as either Bards or Ovates, with
he himself being the only one actually categorised as a Druid. He himself
practiced a form of religion which he believed the ancient druids had, which
involved the worship of a singular monotheistic deity as well as the acceptance
of reincarnation. Morganwg's example was taken up by other Welshmen in the 19th
century, who continued to promote religious forms of Druidry. The most
prominent figure in this was William Price (1800–1893), a doctor who held to
several radical ideas at the time, such as vegetarianism and the political
Chartist movement. His promotion of cremation and open practice of it led to
his arrest and trial, but he was acquitted, achieving a level of fame
throughout Britain. He would declare himself to be a Druid, and would do much
to promote the return of what he believed was an ancient religion in his
country. In 1874, Robert Wentworth Little, a Freemason who achieved notoriety
as the first Supreme Magus of the occult Societas Rosicruciana, allegedly
founded the Ancient and Archaeological Order of Druids, which, like the
Societas Rosicruciana, was an esoteric organisation. Meanwhile, at the start of
the 20th century, Druidic groups began holding their ceremonies at the great
megalithic monument of Stonehenge in Wiltshire, England: the historian Ronald
Hutton would later remark that "it was a great, and potentially uncomfortable,
irony that modern Druids had arrived at Stonehenge just as archaeologists were
evicting the ancient Druids from it" as they realised that the structure dated
from the Neolithic and early Bronze Age, millennia before the Iron Age, when
the druids first appear in the historical record. Neopagan Druidry in Britain.
The most important figure for the rise of Neopagan Druidry in Britain was Ross
Nichols. A member of The Druid Order, in 1964 he split off to found the Order
of Bards, Ovates and Druids (OBOD). In 1988 Philip Carr-Gomm was asked to lead
the Order. Another significant figure in the British Neopagan Druidic movement
is Emma Restall Orr (1965-), who was a senior member of OBOD. In 1993 she
became joint chief of the British Druid Order (BDO) staying until 2002.
Together with the Order founder Philip Shallcrass, she developed the BDO into
one of the largest and most influential of its time. Feeling the system of
Orders too limiting, in 2002 she created The Druid Network, which was
officially launched at Imbolc 2003. Druidry in North America. While modern
Druidism came to North America first in the form of fraternal Druidic
organizations in the nineteenth century and orders such as the Ancient Order of
Druids in America were founded as distinct American groups as early as 1912,
the Neopagan branch of Druidism can be traced to one particular root in the
Reformed Druids of North America, which was founded by protesting college
students. In 1963, the Reformed Druids of North America (RDNA) was founded by
students at Carleton College, Northfield, Minnesota, a liberal arts college
that required its members to attend some form of religious services. As a form
of humorous protest against this rule, a group of students, who contained
Christians, Jews and agnostics within their ranks, decided to create their own,
non-serious religious group. Their protest was successful, and the requirement
was scrapped in 1964. Nonetheless, the group continued holding services, which
were not considered Neopagan by most members, but instead thought of an inter-
religious nature. From its beginning, the RDNA revolved around the veneration
of the natural world, personified as Mother Earth, holding that religious truth
could be found through nature. They had also adopted other elements of
Neopaganism into their practices, for instance celebrating the festivals of the
Wheel of the Year, which they had borrowed from the Neopagan religion of Wicca.
Whilst the RDNA had become a success, with new branches or "groves" being
founded around the United States, the many Neopagan elements of the RDNA
eventually rose to prominence, leading several groves to actively describe
themselves as Neopagan. This was opposed by several of the group's founders,
who wanted it to retain its inter-religious origins, and certain groves
actually emphasized their connection to other religions: there was a group of
Zen Druids in Olympia and Hassidic Druids in St. Louis for instance. Amongst
those largely responsible for this transition towards Neopaganism within the
organisation were Isaac Bonewits and Robert Larson, who worked in a grove
located in Berkeley, California. Believing that the Reformed Druidic movement
would have to accept that it was essentially Neopagan in nature, Bonewits
decided to found a split-off group known as the New Reformed Druids of North
America (NRDNA), which he defined as an "Eclectic Reconstructionist Neo-Pagan
Priestcraft, based primarily upon Gaulish and Celtic sources". Bonewits still
felt that many in the RDNA were hostile towards him, believing that he had
infiltrated their group, and so in 1985 he founded a new, explicitly Neopagan
Druidic group, Ár nDraíocht Féin (Our Own Druidism; a.k.a. ADF) and began
publishing a journal, "The Druid's Progress". Arguing that it should draw from
pan-European sources, rather than just those that were considered "Celtic", he
placed an emphasis on academic and scholarly accuracy, taking a stand against
what he perceived as the prevalent pseudo-historical ideas of many Neopagans
and Druids. In 1986, several members of Ár nDraíocht Féin openly criticized
Bonewits for his pan-European approach, wishing modern Druidism to be inspired
purely by Celtic sources, and so they splintered off to form a group called the
Henge of Keltria. Demographics. According to the American Religious
Identification Survey (ARIS), there are approximately 30,000 Druids in the
United States. There are approximately 50,000 Druids worldwide. On November 1,
1980, Gwenc’hlan Le Scouëzec became the "Grand Druid of Brittany", at the
head of Goursez Breizh, the "Fraternity of Druids, Bards and Ovates of
Brittany", founded in 1908. Gwenc'hlan is sometimes also considered the "Grand
Druid" of France. The Italian Druid Order founded in 2009 and affiliated to the
English Order Of Bards Ovates and Druids In September 2010, the Charity
Commission for England and Wales agreed to register The Druid Network as a
charity, effectively giving it official recognition as a religion.
