Islamic philosophy Islamic philosophy is a branch of Islamic studies on the
Quran. It is the continuous search for Hikma (), meaning wisdom, in the light
of the Islamic view of life, the universe, ethics, society, and so on. Islamic
philosophy, understood as a "project of independent philosophical inquiry"
began in Baghdad in the middle of the eighth century. Introduction. Islamic
philosophy refers to philosophy produced in an Islamic society. It is not
necessarily concerned with religious issues, nor exclusively produced by
Muslims. Leaman, Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy Formative influences.
Islamic philosophy as the name implies refers to philosophical activity within
the Islamic milieu. The main sources of classical or early Islamic philosophy
are the religion of Islam itself (especially ideas derived and interpreted from
the Quran), Greek philosophy which the early Muslims inherited as a result of
conquests when Alexandria, Syria and Jundishapur came under Muslim rule, along
with pre-Islamic Indian philosophy and Iranian philosophy. Many of the early
philosophical debates centered around reconciling religion and reason, the
latter exemplified by Greek philosophy. One aspect which stands out in Islamic
philosophy is that, the philosophy in Islam travels wide but comes back to
conform it with the Quran and Sunna. Early Islamic philosophy. In early Islamic
thought, which refers to philosophy during the "Islamic Golden Age",
traditionally dated between the 8th and 12th centuries, two main currents may
be distinguished. The first is Kalam, that mainly dealt with Islamic
theological questions, and the other is Falsafa, that was founded on
interpretations of Aristotelianism and Neoplatonism. There were attempts by
later philosopher-theologians at harmonizing both trends, notably by Ibn Sina
(Avicenna) who founded the school of Avicennism, Ibn Rushd (Averro√´s) who
founded the school of Averroism, and others such as Ibn al-Haytham (Alhacen)
and Ab≈´ RayhƒÅn al-Bƒ´r≈´nƒ´, Kalam. KalƒÅm () is the philosophy that seeks
Islamic theological principles through dialectic. In Arabic the word literally
means "speech". One of first debates was that between partisan of the "Qadar"
(, to have power), who affirmed free will, and the "Jabarites" (jabar, force,
constraint), who believed in fatalism. At the second century of the Hijra, a
new movement arose in the theological school of Basra, Iraq. A pupil, Wasil ibn
Ata, who was expelled from the school because his answers were contrary to then
Sunni tradition and became leader of a new school, and systematized the radical
opinions of preceding sects, particularly those of the Qadarites and Jabarites.
This new school was called "Mutazilite" (from i'tazala, to separate oneself).
The Mutazilites, compelled to defend their principles against the Sunni Islam
of their day, looked for support in philosophy, and are one of the first to
pursue a rational theology called "Ilm-al-Kalam" (Scholastic theology); those
professing it were called "Mutakallamin". This appellation became the common
name for all seeking philosophical demonstration in confirmation of religious
principles. But subsequent generations were to large extent critical towards
the Mutazilite school, especially after formation of the Asharite concepts.
More simply put "Kalam" means "duties of the heart" as opposed to (or in
conjunction with) "fikh" "duties of the body". Theology verses jurisprudence.
Falsafa. "Falsafa" is a Greek loanword meaning "philosophy" (the Greek
pronunciation "philosophia" became "falsafa"). Divisions of the philosophic
sciences. (1) Mathematics (2) Logic (3) Physics (The object of this science is
the study of the bodies which compose the universe: the sky and the stars, and,
here below, simple elements such as air, earth, water, fire, and compound
bodies animals, plants, and minerals; the reasons of their changes,
developments, and intermixture.) also includes medicine. (4) Metaphysics (5)
Politics From the ninth century onward, owing to Caliph al-Ma'mun and his
successor, Greek philosophy was introduced among the Arabs, and the Peripatetic
school began to find able representatives among them; such were Al-Kindi, Al-
Farabi, Ibn Sina (Avicenna), and Ibn Rushd (Averro√´s), all of whose
fundamental principles were considered as criticized by the Mutakallamin.
Another trend, represented by the Brethren of Purity, used Aristotelian
language to expound a fundamentally Neoplatonic and Neopythagorean world view.
During the Abbasid caliphate a number of thinkers and scientists, some of them
heterodox Muslims or non-Muslims, played a role in transmitting Greek, Hindu,
and other pre-Islamic knowledge to the Christian West. They contributed to
making Aristotle known in Christian Europe. Three speculative thinkers, al-
Farabi, Ibn Sina (Avicenna) and al-Kindi, combined Aristotelianism and
Neoplatonism with other ideas introduced through Islam. From Spain Arabic
philosophic literature was translated into Hebrew and Latin, contributing to
the development of modern European philosophy. Some differences between "Kalam"
and "Falsafa". Aristotle attempted to demonstrate the unity of God, but from
the view which he maintained, that matter was eternal, it followed that God
could not be the Creator of the world. According to Aristotelianism, the human
soul is simply man's substantial form, the set of properties that make matter
into a living human body. This seems to imply that the human soul cannot exist
apart from the body. Indeed, Aristotle writes, "It is clear that the soul, or
at least some parts of it (if it is divisible), cannot be separated from the
body. [...] And thus, those have the right idea who think that the soul does
not exist without the body." In Aristotelianism, at least one psychological
force, the active intellect, can exist apart from the body. However, according
to many interpretations, the active intellect is a superhuman entity emanating
from God and enlightening the human mind, not a part of any individual human
soul. Thus, Aristotle's theories seem to deny the immortality of the individual
human soul. Wherefore the Mutakallamin had, before anything else, to establish
a system of philosophy to demonstrate the creation of matter, and they adopted
to that end the theory of atoms as enunciated by Democritus. They taught that
atoms possess neither quantity nor extension. Originally atoms were created by
God, and are created now as occasion seems to require. Bodies come into
existence or die, through the aggregation or the sunderance of these atoms. But
this theory did not remove the objections of philosophy to a creation of
matter. For, indeed, if it be supposed that God commenced His work at a certain
definite time by His "will," and for a certain definite object, it must be
admitted that He was imperfect before accomplishing His will, or before
attaining His object. In order to obviate this difficulty, the Motekallamin
extended their theory of the atoms to Time, and claimed that just as Space is
constituted of atoms and vacuum, Time, likewise, is constituted of small
indivisible moments. The creation of the world once established, it was an easy
matter for them to demonstrate the existence of a Creator, and that God is
unique, omnipotent, and omniscient. Main protagonists of Falsafa and their
critics. The twelfth century saw the apotheosis of pure philosophy and the
decline of the Kalam, which latter, being attacked by both the philosophers and
the orthodox, perished for lack of champions. This supreme exaltation of
philosophy may be attributed, in great measure, to Al-Ghazali (1058‚Äì1111)
among the Persians, and to Judah ha-Levi (1140) among the Jews. It can be
argued that the attacks directed against the philosophers by Ghazali in his
work, "Tahafut al-Falasifa" (The Incoherence of the Philosophers), not only
produced, by reaction, a current favorable to philosophy, but induced the
philosophers themselves to profit by his criticism. They thereafter made their
theories clearer and their logic closer. The influence of this reaction brought
forth the two greatest philosophers that the Islamic Peripatetic school ever
produced, namely, Ibn Bajjah (Avempace) and Ibn Rushd (Averro√´s). Since no
idea and no literary or philosophical movement ever germinated on Persian or
Arabian soil without leaving its impress on the Jews, the Persian Ghazali found
an imitator in the person of Judah ha-Levi. This poet also took upon himself to
free his religion from what he saw as the shackles of speculative philosophy,
and to this end wrote the "Kuzari," in which he sought to discredit all schools
of philosophy alike. He passes severe censure upon the Mutakallamin for seeking
to support religion by philosophy. He says, "I consider him to have attained
the highest degree of perfection who is convinced of religious truths without
having scrutinized them and reasoned over them" ("Kuzari," v.). Then he reduced
the chief propositions of the Mutakallamin, to prove the unity of God, to ten
in number, describing them at length, and concluding in these terms: "Does the
Kalam give us more information concerning God and His attributes than the
prophet did?" (Ib. iii. and iv.) Aristotelianism finds no favor in Judah ha-
Levi's eyes, for it is no less given to details and criticism; Neoplatonism
alone suited him somewhat, owing to its appeal to his poetic temperament. Ibn
Rushd or Ibn Roshd (Averro√´s), the contemporary of Maimonides, was one of the
last of the Islamic Peripatetics. The theories of Ibn Rushd do not differ
fundamentally from those of Ibn Bajjah and Ibn Tufail, who only follow the
teachings of Ibn Sina (Avicenna) and Al-Farabi. Like all Islamic Peripatetics,
Ibn Rushd admits the hypothesis of the intelligence of the spheres and the
hypothesis of universal emanation, through which motion is communicated from
place to place to all parts of the universe as far as the supreme
world‚Äîhypotheses which, in the mind of the Arabic philosophers, did away with
the dualism involved in Aristotle's doctrine of pure energy and eternal matter.
But while Al-Farabi, Ibn Sina (Avicenna), and other Persian and Muslim
philosophers hurried, so to speak, over subjects that trenched on traditional
beliefs, Ibn Rushd delighted in dwelling upon them with full particularity and
stress. Thus he says, "Not only is matter eternal, but form is potentially
inherent in matter; otherwise, it were a creation "ex nihilo"" (Munk,
"M√©langes," p.¬ 444). According to this theory, therefore, the existence of
this world is not only a possibility, as Ibn Sina (Avicenna) declared, but also
a necessity. Islamic philosophy found an audience with the Jews, to whom
belongs the honor of having transmitted it to the Christian world. A series of
eminent men‚Äîsuch as the Ibn Tibbons, Narboni, Gersonides‚Äîjoined in
translating the Arabic philosophical works into Hebrew and commenting upon
them. The works of Ibn Rushd especially became the subject of their study, due
in great measure to Maimonides, who, in a letter addressed to his pupil Joseph
ben Judah, spoke in the highest terms of Ibn Rushd's commentary. It should be
mentioned that this depiction of intellectual tradition in Islamic Lands is
mainly dependent upon what West could understand and received (or was willing
to understand) from this long era. In contrast, there are some historians and
philosophers who do not agree with this account and describe this era in a
completely different way. Their main point of dispute is on the influence of
different philosophers on Islamic Philosophy, especially the comparative
importance of eastern intellectuals such as Ibn Sina (Avicenna) and of western
thinkers such as Ibn Rushd. (For more discussion, refer to the "History of
Islamic Philosophy" by Henry Corbin.) Judeo-Islamic philosophies. The oldest
Jewish religio-philosophical work preserved in Arabic is that of Saadia Gaon
(892-942), "Emunot ve-Deot", "The Book of Beliefs and Opinions". In this work
Saadia treats the questions that interested the Mutakallamin, such as the
creation of matter, the unity of God, the divine attributes, the soul, etc.
Saadia criticizes other philosophers severely. For Saadia there was no problem
as to creation: God created the world "ex nihilo", just as the Bible attests;
and he contests the theory of the Mutakallamin in reference to atoms, which
theory, he declares, is just as contrary to reason and religion as the theory
of the philosophers professing the eternity of matter. To prove the unity of
God, Saadia uses the demonstrations of the Mutakallamin. Only the attributes of
essence ("sifat al-dhatia") can be ascribed to God, but not the attributes of
action ("sifat-al-fi'aliya"). The soul is a substance more delicate even than
that of the celestial spheres. Here Saadia controverts the Mutakallamin, who
considered the soul an "accident" "'arad" (compare Guide for the Perplexed i.
74), and employs the following one of their premises to justify his position:
"Only a substance can be the substratum of an accident" (that is, of a non-
essential property of things). Saadia argues: "If the soul be an accident only,
it can itself have no such accidents as wisdom, joy, love," etc. Saadia was
thus in every way a supporter of the Kalam; and if at times he deviated from
its doctrines, it was owing to his religious views. From the ninth century
onward, owing to Caliph al-Ma'mun and his successor, Greek philosophy was
introduced among the Persians and Arabs, and the Peripatetic school began to
find able representatives among them; such were Al-Kindi, Farabi, Ibn Sina
(Avicenna), and Ibn Rushd (Averro√´s), all of whose fundamental principles were
considered as criticized by the Mutakallamin. Another trend, represented by the
Brethren of Purity, used Aristotelian language to expound a fundamentally
Neoplatonic and Neopythagorean world view. During the Abbasid caliphate a
number of thinkers and scientists, some of them heterodox Muslims or non-
Muslims, played a role in transmitting Greek, Hindu, and other pre-Islamic
knowledge to the Christian West. They contributed to making Aristotle known in
Christian Europe. Three speculative thinkers, al-Farabi, Ibn Sina (Avicenna)
and al-Kindi, combined Aristotelianism and Neoplatonism with other ideas
introduced through Islam. From Spain Arabic philosophic literature was
translated into Hebrew and Latin, contributing to the development of modern
European philosophy. Later Islamic philosophy. The death of Ibn Rushd
(Averro√´s) effectively marks the end of a particular discipline of Islamic
philosophy usually called the "Peripatetic Arabic School", and philosophical
activity declined significantly in western Islamic countries, namely in Islamic
Spain and North Africa, though it persisted for much longer in the Eastern
countries, in particular Iran and India. Contrary to the traditional view,
Dimitri Gutas and the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy consider the period
between the 11th and 14th centuries to be the true "Golden Age" of Arabic and
Islamic philosophy, initiated by Al-Ghazali's successful integration of logic
into the Madrasah curriculum and the subsequent rise of Avicennism. Since the
political power shift in Western Europe (Spain and Portugal) from Muslim to
Christian control, the Muslims naturally did not practice philosophy in Western
Europe. This also led to some loss of contact between the 'west' and the 'east'
of the Islamic world. Muslims in the 'east' continued to do philosophy, as is
evident from the works of Ottoman scholars and especially those living in
Muslim kingdoms within the territories of present day Iran and India, such as
Shah Waliullah and Ahmad Sirhindi. This fact has escaped most pre-modern
historians of Islamic (or Arabic) philosophy. In addition, logic has continued
to be taught in religious seminaries up to modern times. Illuminationist
school. Illuminationist philosophy was a school of Islamic philosophy founded
by Shahab al-Din Suhrawardi in the 12th century. This school is a combination
of Avicenna's philosophy and ancient Iranian philosophy, with many new
innovative ideas of Suhrawardi. It is often described as having been influenced
by Neoplatonism. In logic in Islamic philosophy, systematic refutations of
Greek logic were written by the Illuminationist school, founded by Shahab al-
Din Suhrawardi (1155-1191), who developed the idea of "decisive necessity", an
important innovation in the history of logical philosophical speculation.
Transcendent school. Transcendent Theosophy is the school of Islamic philosophy
founded by Mulla Sadra in the 17th century. His philosophy and ontology is
considered to be just as important to Islamic philosophy as Martin Heidegger's
philosophy later was to Western philosophy in the 20th century. Mulla Sadra
bought "a new philosophical insight in dealing with the nature of reality" and
created "a major transition from essentialism to existentialism" in Islamic
philosophy, several centuries before this occurred in Western philosophy. The
idea of "essence precedes existence" is a concept which dates back to Ibn Sina
(Avicenna) and his school of Avicennism as well as Shahab al-Din Suhrawardi and
his Illuminationist philosophy. The opposite idea of "Existence precedes
essence" was thus developed in the works of Averroes and Mulla Sadra as a
reaction to this idea and is a key foundational concept of existentialism. More
careful approaches are needed in terms of thinking about philosophers (and
theologians) in Islam in terms of phenomenological methods of investigation in
ontology (or onto-theology), or by way of comparisons that are made with
Heidegger's thought and his critique of the history of metaphysics. Logic. Al-
Ghazali's successful integration of logic into the Madrasah curriculum in the
11th century led to increased activity in logic, mainly focusing on Avicennian
logic. Ibn Hazm (994-1064) wrote the "Scope of Logic", in which he stressed on
the importance of sense perception as a source of knowledge. Al-Ghazali
(Algazel) (1058‚Äì1111) had an important influence on the use of logic in
theology, making use of Avicennian logic in Kalam. Fakhr al Din al Razi Amoli
(b. 1149) criticised Aristotle's "first figure" and developed a form of
inductive logic, foreshadowing the system of inductive logic developed by John
Stuart Mill (1806‚Äì1873). Systematic refutations of Greek logic were written
by the Illuminationist school, founded by Shahab al-Din Suhrawardi
(1155‚Äì1191), who developed the idea of "decisive necessity", an important
innovation in the history of logical philosophical speculation. Another
systematic refutation of Greek logic was written by Ibn Taymiyyah
(1263‚Äì1328), the "Ar-Radd 'ala al-Mantiqiyyin" ("Refutation of Greek
Logicians"), where he argued against the usefulness, though not the validity,
of the syllogism and in favour of inductive reasoning. Philosophy of history.
The first detailed studies on the subject of historiography and the first
critiques on historical methods appeared in the works of the Arab Ash'ari
polymath Ibn Khaldun (1332‚Äì1406), who is regarded as the father of
historiography, cultural history, and the philosophy of history, especially for
his historiographical writings in the "Muqaddimah" (Latinized as "Prolegomena")
and "Kitab al-Ibar" ("Book of Advice"). His "Muqaddimah" also laid the
groundwork for the observation of the role of state, communication, propaganda
and systematic bias in history, and he discussed the rise and fall of
civilizations. Social philosophy. The most famous social philosopher was the
Ash'ari polymath Ibn Khaldun (1332‚Äì1406), who was the last major Islamic
philosopher from North Africa. In his "Muqaddimah", he developed the earliest
theories on social philosophy, in formulating theories of social cohesion and
social conflict. His "Muqaddimah" was also the introduction to a seven volume
analysis of universal history. He is considered the "father of sociology",
"father of historiography", and "father of the philosophy of history", for
being the first to discuss the topics of sociology, historiography and the
philosophy of history in detail. Contemporary Islamic philosophy. The tradition
of Islamic Philosophy is still very much alive today despite the belief in many
Western circles that this tradition ceased after the golden ages of
Suhrawardi's "Hikmat al-Ishraq" (Illumination Philosophy) or, at the latest,
Mulla Sadra's "Hikmat-e-Mota'aliye" or Transcendent (Exalted) Philosophy.
Another unavoidable name is Allama Muhammad Iqbal who reshaped and revitalized
Islamic philosophy amongst the Muslims of the Indian sub-continent in the early
20th century Beside his Urdu and Persian poetical work, The Reconstruction of
Religious Thought in Islam [http://www.allamaiqbal.com/works/prose/english/
reconstruction/ is a milestone in the modern political philosophy of Islam. In
contemporary Islamic Lands, the teaching of "hikmat" or "hikmah" has continued
and flourished. Criticism. Philosophy as such has not been without criticism
amongst Muslims, both contemporary and past. The imam Hanbali, for whom the
Hanbali school of thought is named, rebuked philosophical discussion, once
telling proponents of it that he was secure in his religion, but that they were
"in doubt, so go to a doubter and argue with him (instead)." Today, Islamic
philosophical thought has also been criticized by scholars of the modern Salafi
movement. There would be many Islamic thinkers who were not as enthusiastic
about its potential. But it would be incorrect to assume that they opposed
philosophy simply because it was a "foreign science". Oliver Leaman, an expert
on Islamic philosophy, points out that the objections of notable theologians
are rarely directed at philosophy itself, but rather at the conclusions the
philosophers arrived at. Even al-Ghazali, who is famous for his critique of the
philosophers, was himself an expert in philosophy and logic. And his criticism
was that they arrived at theologically erroneous conclusions. The three most
serious of these, in his view, were believing in the co-eternity of the
universe with God, denying the bodily resurrection, and asserting that God only
has knowledge of abstract universals, not of particular things (but it should
be noted that not all philosophers subscribed to these same views). In recent
studies by "Muslim contemporary thinkers" that aim at 'renewing the impetus of
philosophical thinking in Islam', Nader El-Bizri offers a critical analysis of
the conventions of methodology and historiography that dominate the mainstream
academic and epistemic approaches in studying 'Islamic philosophy' from
'archival' standpoints, within Oriental and Mediaevalist Studies, which fail to
recognize the fact that 'philosophy in Islam' can still be a living
intellectual tradition, and that its renewal requires a radical reform in
ontology and epistemology within Islamic thought.
