East‚ÄìWest Schism The East‚ÄìWest Schism, sometimes known as the Great Schism,
is the medieval division of Chalcedonian Christianity into Eastern (Greek) and
Western (Latin) branches, which later became known as the Eastern Orthodox
Church and the Roman Catholic Church, respectively. Relations between East and
West had long been embittered by political and ecclesiastical differences and
theological disputes. Prominent among these were the issues of "filioque",
whether leavened or unleavened bread should be used in the Eucharist, the
Pope's claim to universal jurisdiction, and the place of Constantinople in
relation to the Pentarchy. Pope Leo IX and Patriarch of Constantinople Michael
Cerularius heightened the conflict by suppressing Greek and Latin in their
respective domains. In 1054, Roman legates traveled to Cerularius to deny him
the title Ecumenical Patriarch and to insist that he recognize the Church of
Rome's claim to be the head and mother of the churches. Cerularius refused. The
leader of the Latin contingent, Cardinal Humbert, excommunicated Cerularius,
while Cerularius in return excommunicated Cardinal Humbert and other legates.
This was only the first act in a centuries-long process that eventually became
a complete schism. The validity of the Western legates' act is doubtful, since
Pope Leo had died, while Cerularius's excommunication applied only to the
legates personally. Still, the Church split along doctrinal, theological,
linguistic, political, and geographical lines, and the fundamental breach has
never been healed, with each side accusing the other of having fallen into
heresy and of having initiated the division. The Crusades, the Massacre of the
Latins in 1182, the capture and sack of Constantinople in 1204, and the
imposition of the Latin Patriarch of Jerusalem and the Latin Patriarchs made
reconciliation more difficult. This included the taking of many precious
religious artifacts and the destruction of the Library of Constantinople.
According to Catholic historians, what gave concrete reality and permanence to
the schism was the setting up of Latin hierarchies in the Crusader states
controlled by Westerners, especially Normans, more particularly for the
patriarchal sees of Antioch, Constantinople and Jerusalem. Efforts were made to
reunite the two churches in 1274 (by the Second Council of Lyon) and in 1439
(by the Council of Florence). Despite acceptance by the participating eastern
delegations, no effective reconciliation was realized, since the Orthodox
believe that the acts of councils must be ratified by the wider Church and the
acts of these councils never attained widespread acceptance among Orthodox
churches. In 1484, 31 years after the Fall of Constantinople to the Ottoman
Turks, a Synod of Constantinople repudiated the Union of Florence, making
official the position that had already been taken by Orthodox in general. In
1965, the Pope Paul VI and the Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople
Athenagoras I nullified the anathemas of 1054, although this nullification of
measures taken against a few individuals was essentially a goodwill gesture and
did not constitute any sort of reunion between churches. Contacts between the
two sides continue: Every year a delegation from each joins in the other's
celebration of its patronal feast, Saints Peter and Paul (29 June) for Rome and
Saint Andrew (30 November) for Constantinople, and there have been a number of
visits by the head of each to the other. The efforts of the Ecumenical
Patriarchs towards reconciliation with the Catholic Church have often been the
target of sharp criticism from some fellow Orthodox. Origins and causes. Eric
Plumer writes that "(t)he divergence of the Eastern and Western churches,
leading ultimately to the East-West Schism, was a process of many centuries,
influenced by a host of political, cultural and theological factors. Similarly,
Roger Haight asserts that, "The Schism should not be understood to have
occurred in the mutual excommunications 1054" because those excommunications
were "only one factor in a much longer and larger story involving cultural,
political and theological factors." Because so many factors contributed to the
ever-widening separation between East and West, it is difficult to point to a
specific date when it began or even identify a single primary cause of the
schism. While most sources agree that the separation between East and West is
clearly evident by the Photian schism in the ninth century, some point to
tensions going back as far as the fourth century as the early signs of the
separation between East and West. History. The ecclesiological dimension of the
East-West schism revolves around the authority of bishops within their dioceses
and the lines of authority between bishops of different dioceses. The
organizational structure of bishops and dioceses is only one of the three major
forms of ecclesiology employed by Christian churches but it is, at a first
approximation, shared between the Catholic, Orthodox and Anglican churches.
However, although both East and West came to adopt the Ignatian tri-partite
structure of bishops, elders and deacons, their definition of the authority of
bishops evolved in different ways. In particular, these churches differ sharply
in their understanding of the authority of the Bishop of Rome. As a
consequence, the history of the schism is based substantially on the history of
ecclesiological development in the Christian churches of the first millennium.
Governance in the early Christian church. Rodney Stark estimates that the
number of Christians grew by approximately 40% a decade during the first and
second centuries. This phenomenal growth rate forced Christian communities to
evolve in order to adapt to their changes in the nature of their communities as
well as their relationship with their political and socioeconomic environment.
As the number of Christians grew, the Christian communities became larger, more
numerous and farther apart geographically. The passage of time also moved some
Christians farther from the original teachings of the apostles giving rise to
teachings that were considered heterodox and sowing controversy and
divisiveness within churches and between churches. Robert Haight posits the
development of ecclesiology in the form of "Early Catholicism" as one response
to the problem of church unity. Thus, the solution to division arising from
heterodox teaching was the development of "tighter and more standardized
structures of ministry. One of these structures is the tri-partite form of
church leadership consisting of bishops, elders and deacons that Ignatius of
Antioch urged churches to adopt, writing that "You cannot have a church without
these." Over the course of the second century, this organizational structure
became universal and continues to be used in the Catholic, Orthodox and
Anglican churches as well as in some Protestant denominations. Despite its
mention of bishops, there is no clear evidence in the New Testament that
supports the concepts of dioceses and monepiscopacy (i.e. the rule that all the
churches in a geographic area should be ruled by a single bishop). Scholars
point to evidence that Christian communities such as Rome had many bishops and
that the concept of monepiscopacy was still emerging when Ignatius was urging
his tri-partite structure on other churches. Robert Williams posits that the
"origin and earliest development of episcopacy and monepiscopacy and the
ecclesiastical concept of (apostolic) succession were associated with crisis
situations in the early church." Early assertions of the primacy of Rome. The
Primacy of the Bishop of Rome together with the Filioque controversy, remains
one of the primary causes of the continuing schism between the Catholic and
Orthodox churches. Underlying the issue of papal primacy is the interpretation
of the role that bishops and patriarchs can legitimately exercise within their
own realm of influence and what that realm of influence should be. Over the
course of history, tensions have arisen when church leaders have been perceived
to have overstepped their bounds. The church at Rome claimed a special
authority over the other churches due, in part, to being the successors of the
apostles Peter and Paul. In the first three centuries, Rome gained increasing
recognition as one of the centers of Christianity. However, the extant
documents of that era yield "no clear-cut claims to, or recognition, of papal
primacy." Although Catholic apologists have typically pointed to the 7th
century controversy over the Filioque and the 9th century schism of Photios as
the earliest signs of the growing schism, Orthodox apologists point to
incidents as early as the 2nd century as examples of claims by Rome to papal
primacy and rejection by Eastern Churches thereof. An even 1st-century example
occurred in the year 90, when a group of Corinthian clerics, who had been
removed from their positions, petitioned the Bishop of Rome Pope Clement at the
time for help. Towards the end of the 2nd century, Victor, the Bishop of Rome,
attempted to resolve the Quartodeciman controversy by excommunicating churches
in the Roman province of Asia. This incident is cited by some Orthodox
Christians as the first example of overreaching by the Bishop of Rome and
resistance of such by Eastern churches. Laurent Cleenewerck suggests that this
could be argued to be the first fissure between the Eastern and Western
churches. The Quartodeciman controversy arose because Christians in the Roman
province of Asia (Western Anatolia) celebrated Easter at the spring full moon,
like the Jewish Passover, while the churches in the rest of the world observed
the practice of celebrating it on the following Sunday ("the day of the
resurrection of our Saviour") In 155, Anicetus, Bishop of Rome presided over a
church council at Rome that was attended by a number of bishops including
Polycarp, Bishop of Smyrna. Although the council failed to reach agreement on
the issue, ecclesiastical communion was preserved. A generation later, synods
of bishops in Palestine, Pontus(Northern Anatolia) and Osrhoene in the east,
and in Rome and Gaul in the west, unanimously declared that the celebration
should be exclusively on Sunday. In 193, Pope Victor I presided over a council
in Rome and subsequently sent a letter about the matter to Polycrates of
Ephesus and the churches of the Roman province of Asia. In the same year,
Polycrates presided over a council at Ephesus attended by several bishops
throughout that province, which rejected Victor's authority and kept the
province's paschal tradition. Thereupon, Victor attempted to cut off Polycrates
and the others who took this stance from the common unity, but later reversed
his decision after bishops that included Saint Irenaeus, Bishop of Lugdunum in
Gaul, interceded, recommending that Victor adopt the more tolerant stance of
his predecessor, Anicetus. Despite Victor's failure to carry out his intent to
excommunicate the Asian churches, many Catholic apologists point to this
episode as evidence of papal primacy and authority in the early Church, citing
the fact that none of the bishops challenged his right to excommunicate but
rather questioned the wisdom and charity of doing so. Orthodox apologists argue
that Victor had to relent in the end and note that the Eastern Churches never
granted Victor presidency over anything other than the Church of Rome.
Cleenewerck points out that Eusebius of Caesarea simply refers to Victor one of
the "rulers of the Churches", not the ruler of a yet unknown or unformed
'universal Church.' Ultimately, the Quartodeciman controversy not resolved by
papal authority; it was only finally resolved by an ecumenical council, the
First Council of Nicaea The rejection of Bishop Anicetus' position on the
Quartodeciman, by Polycarp and later Polycrates' letter to Pope Victor I has
been used by Orthodox theologians as proof against the argument that the
Churches in Asia Minor accepted the Primacy of the Bishop of Rome and or the
teaching of Papal supremacy. Centers of Christianity. John Binns specifically
writes that, after the fall and destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans, the
natural learning centers of the Church were Antioch and Alexandria.
Constantinople was not founded (that is, renamed from "Byzantium") until after
the First Council of Nicaea (325). The historian Will Durant writes that, after
Jerusalem, the church of Rome naturally became the primary church, the capital
of Christianity. Rome had an early and significant Christian population. It was
closely identified with Paul the Apostle, who preached and was martyred there,
and the Apostle Peter, who was a martyr there as well; Peter was also
considered chief among all the Apostles and the first Bishop of Rome. While the
Eastern cities of Alexandria and Antioch produced theological works, the
bishops of Rome focused on what Romans admittedly did best¬ ‚Äî administration.
In the early church, up until the ecumenical councils, Rome was regarded as an
important center of Christianity, especially since it was the capital of the
Roman Empire. Bishops of churches in the eastern and southern Mediterranean
generally recognized the persuasive leadership and authority of the Bishop of
Rome. But these bishops did not acknowledge any juridical authority of Rome. In
the fourth century, when the Roman emperors (reigning in Constantinople) were
trying to control the Church, theological questions ran rampant throughout the
Roman Empire. The influence of Greek speculative thought on Christian thinking
led to all sorts of divergent and conflicting opinions. Theology was also used
as a weapon against opponent bishops, because being branded a heretic was the
only sure way for a bishop to be removed by other bishops‚Äîincompetence was
not sufficient grounds for removal. Growth in power of the see of
Constantinople. The bishop of Byzantium was under the authority of the
metropolitan of Heraclea when in 330 Roman Emperor Constantine I moved his
residence to this town, which, rebuilt on a larger scale, became known as
Constantinople. Thereafter, the bishop's connection with the imperial court
meant that he was able to free himself from ecclesiastical dependency on
Heraclea and in little more than half a century to obtain recognition of next-
after-Rome ranking from the first Council held within the walls of the new
capital. The First Council of Constantinople (381), in which the Western
bishops took no part and which the Latin Church recognized as ecumenical only
in the mid-6th century, decreed: "The Bishop of Constantinople, however, shall
have the prerogative of honour after the Bishop of Rome; because Constantinople
is New Rome", thus raising it above the sees of Alexandria and Antioch.
Alexandria's objections to Constantinople's promotion, which led to a constant
struggle between the two sees in the first half of the 5th century, were
supported by Rome, which proposed the theory that the most important sees were
the three Petrine ones, with Rome in first place. However, after the Council of
Chalcedon (451), the position of the Patriarchate of Alexandria was weakened by
a division in which the great majority of its Christian population followed the
form of Christianity that its opponents called Monophysitism. Emperor
Theodosius I, who called the Council of 381, divided the eastern Roman Empire
into five "dioceses": Egypt (under Alexandria), the East (under Antioch), Asia
(under Ephesus), Pontus (under Caesarea Cappadociae), and Thrace (originally
under Heraclea, later under Constantinople); and the Council also decreed: "The
bishops are not to go beyond their dioceses to churches lying outside of their
bounds, nor bring confusion on the churches; but let the Bishop of Alexandria,
according to the canons, alone administer the affairs of Egypt; and let the
bishops of the East manage the East alone, the privileges of the Church in
Antioch, which are mentioned in the canons of Nice, being preserved; and let
the bishops of the Asian Diocese administer the Asian affairs only; and the
Pontic bishops only Pontic matters; and the Thracian bishops only Thracian
affairs." The Council of Chalcedon (451), which marked a serious defeat of
Alexandria, gave recognition, in a canon of disputed validity, to an extension
of Constantinople's power over Pontus and Asia in addition to Thrace. The
Council justified this decision on the grounds that "the Fathers rightly
granted privileges to the throne of old Rome, because it was the royal city",
and that the First Council of Constantinople, "actuated by the same
consideration, gave equal privileges to the most holy throne of New Rome,
justly judging that the city which is honoured with the Sovereignty and the
Senate, and enjoys equal privileges with the old imperial Rome, should in
ecclesiastical matters also be magnified as she is, and rank next after her".
It thus attributed to the Council of 381 a grant to Constantinople of "equal
privileges" to those enjoyed by "Old Rome". Although Pope Leo I, whose
delegates were absent when this resolution was passed, recognized the council
as ecumenical and confirmed its doctrinal decrees, he rejected its canon 28 on
the ground that it contravened the sixth canon of Nicaea and infringed the
rights of Alexandria and Antioch. However, by that time Constantinople, the
permanent residence of the emperor, had in reality enormous influence, and had
it not been for the opposition of Rome, its bishop could easily have been given
first place among all the bishops. In its disputed 28th canon, the Council also
recognized an authority of Constantinople over bishops of dioceses "among the
barbarians", which has been variously interpreted as referring either to all
areas outside the Byzantine Empire or only to those in the vicinity of Pontus,
Asia and Thrace or to non-Greeks within the empire. This canon would remain a
constant source of friction between East and West until the mutual
excommunications of 1054 made it irrelevant in that regard; but controversy
about its applicability to the authority it accorded to the patriarchate of
Constantinople still continues. Canon 9 of the Council also declared: "If a
bishop or clergyman should have a difference with the metropolitan of the
province, let him have recourse to the Exarch of the Diocese, or to the throne
of the Imperial City of Constantinople, and there let it be tried." This has
been interpreted as conferring on the see of Constantinople a greater privilege
than what any council ever gave Rome (Johnson, quoted by Schaff) or as of much
lesser significance than that (Hefele, quoted by Schaff). The patriarch of the
imperial capital became in fact the leading bishop in the Byzantine Empire and
"headed a vast curia and other bishops who resided in Constantinople and
constituted a permanent synod, which became the real governing body of the
church". Patriarch John IV of Constantinople, who died in 595, assumed the
title of "Ecumenical Patriarch". By 661, Muslim Arabs had taken over the
territories assigned to the patriarchates of Alexandria, Antioch and Jerusalem,
which thereafter were never more than partially and temporarily recovered. In
732, Leo III the Isaurian, in revenge for the opposition of Pope Gregory III to
the emperor's iconoclast policies, transferred Sicily, Calabria and Illyria
from the patriarchate of Rome (whose jurisdiction until then extended as far
east as Thessalonica) to that of Constantinople. The Constantinople
patriarchate, after expanding eastward at the time of the Council of Chalcedon
to take in Pontus and the Roman province of Asia, which at that time were still
under the emperor's control, thus expanded equally to the west, and was
practically coextensive with the Byzantine Empire. The idea that with the
transfer of the imperial capital from Rome to Constantinople primacy in the
Church was also transferred is found in undeveloped form as early as John
Philoponus (c. 490‚Äìc. 570); it was enunciated in its most advanced form by
Photios I of Constantinople (c. 810‚Äìc. 893). Constantinople, as the seat of
the ruler of the empire and therefore of the world, was the highest among the
patriarchates and, like the emperor, had the right to govern them. Constantine.
When the Roman Emperor Constantine the Great legalized Christianity, he
summoned the First Ecumenical Council at Nicaea in 325 to resolve a number of
issues which troubled the Church. The bishops at the council confirmed the
position of the metropolitan sees of Rome and Alexandria as having authority
outside their own province, and also the existing privileges of the churches in
Antioch and the other provinces. Later, these sees were called Patriarchates
and were given an order of precedence: Rome, though it was no longer capital of
the empire, was given first place, then came Alexandria and Antioch. In a
separate canon, the Council also approved the special honor given to Jerusalem
over other sees subject to the same metropolitan. Soon, Constantine erected a
new capital at Byzantium, a strategically placed city on the Bosporus.
Constantine named it "Nova Roma Constantinopolitana" ("New Rome City of
Constantine"). at the time occupied the bishops seat before the New Capital was
established. Constantinople is often described as 'New Rome', because it
imitated Rome in many ways and became the new capital of the empire. The Second
Ecumenical Council, held at the new capital in 381, elevated the see of
Constantinople to a position ahead of the other chief metropolitan sees, except
that of Rome, which was stated to have the greatest honor. Mentioning in
particular the provinces of Asia, Pontus and Thrace, it decreed that the synod
of each province should manage the ecclesiastical affairs of that province
alone, except for the privileges already recognized for Alexandria and Antioch.
In the Council of Chalcedon, held 70 years later, Constantinople was given
power over Pontus and Thrace. Council of Chalcedon. The Fourth Ecumenical
Council at Chalcedon in 451 confirmed the authority already held by
Constantinople. There were now five patriarchs presiding over the Church within
the Byzantine Empire, in the following order of precedence: the Patriarch of
Rome, the Patriarch of Constantinople, the Patriarch of Alexandria, the
Patriarch of Antioch and the Patriarch of Jerusalem (see Pentarchy). Council in
Trullo. The West's rejection of the Quinisext Council of 692 also led to
pressure from the Eastern Empire on the West to reject many Latin customs as
non-Orthodox. The Latin practices that had got the attention of the other
Patriarchates and that had been condemned by this Council included the practice
of celebrating Mass on weekdays in Lent (rather than having Pre-Sanctified
Liturgies); fasting on Saturdays throughout the year; omitting the "Alleluia"
in Lent; depicting Christ as a lamb; using unleavened bread. Larger disputes
were revealed regarding Eastern and Western attitudes toward celibacy for
priests and deacons, with the Council affirming the right of married men to
become priests (though forbidding priests to marry and forbidding bishops to
live with their wives) and prescribing deposition for anyone who attempted to
separate a clergyman other than a bishop from his wife, or for any cleric other
than a bishop who dismissed his wife. Pope Sergius I, who was of Syrian origin,
rejected the council, preferring, he said, "to die rather than consent to
erroneous novelties". Though a loyal subject of the Empire, he would not be
"its captive in matters of religion" and refused to sign the canons. Emperor
Justinian II ordered his arrest and abduction to Constantinople by the
notoriously violent "protospatharios" Zacharias. However, the militia of the
exarchate of Ravenna frustrated the attempt. Zacharias nearly lost his life in
his attempt to arrest Sergius I. Meanwhile, in Visigothic Spain, the council
was ratified by the Eighteenth Council of Toledo at the urging of the king,
Wittiza, who was vilified by later chroniclers for his decision. Fruela I of
Asturias reversed the decision of Toledo sometime during his reign (757‚Äì768).
The Eastern Orthodox churches hold this council be part of the Fifth and Sixth
Ecumenical Councils, adding its canons thereto. Political division between East
and West. Disunion and territorial loss in the Roman Empire contributed to
disunion in the Church. Emperor Diocletian divided the administration of the
eastern and western portions of the Empire in the early 4th century, though
subsequent leaders (including Constantine) within the same century aspired to
and sometimes gained control of both regions. Theodosius the Great, who
established Nicene Christianity as the official religion of the Roman Empire
(see Edict of Thessalonica), was the last Emperor to rule over a united Roman
Empire. Following his death in 395, the division into western and eastern
halves, each for a few decades still under its own Emperor, was never undone,
for the Western Roman Empire soon ceased to exist. In the early fifth century,
its whole territory was overrun by Germanic tribes, and the year 476 saw the
end even of the pretence of a Western Roman Emperor, when Odoacer forced
Romulus Augustus to abdicate. The Eastern Roman Empire (known also as the
Byzantine Empire) continued to thrive and in the 6th century recovered Italy
and other sections of the western Mediterranean shore; but it soon lost most of
these gains, although it held Rome, as part of the Exarchate of Ravenna, until
751. Thus, the political unity of what had been the Roman Empire fell. In the
west, Christianity became mostly subject to the laws and customs of nations
that owed no allegiance to the emperor. These Germanic peoples, particularly
the Franks, influenced and changed the Latin Church. On the contrary, "in the
East Roman or Byzantine view, when the Roman Empire became Christian, the
perfect world order willed by God had been achieved: one universal empire was
sovereign, and coterminous with it was the one universal church"; and,
according to the author of the "Encyclopedia of World Religions", the Empire's
state church came, by the time of the demise of the Empire in 1453, to merge
psychologically with it to the extent that its bishops had difficulty in
thinking of Christianity without an Emperor. In the West, as a practical
matter, the collapse of civil government left the Church in charge in many
areas, and bishops took to administering secular cities and domains. When royal
and imperial rule reestablished itself, it had to contend with power wielded
independently by the Church. In the East, however, imperial and, later, Islamic
rule dominated the Eastern bishops. Political and cultural separation.
Following the Sack of Rome by invading European Goths, Rome became increasingly
isolated from the churches in the eastern and southern Mediterranean. This was
a situation which suited and pleased many of the patriarchs and bishops of
those churches. According to John Romanides, the rise of the Frankish Empire
after the Goths and the fall of the Western Roman Empire saw the establishment
of a papacy beholden to the Franks from 752 to 844. These Frankish Popes were
military leaders according to Saint Boniface known to "shed the blood of
Christians like that of the pagans." The Eastern Orthodox theologian Romanides
states that it was not until the rise of Charlemagne and his successors, and
the influence of the Palatine School established by the Englishman Alcuin
(735‚Äì804), that the Church of Rome became almost exclusively committed to
Augustinian theology. Papal supremacy and pentarchy. In 342 Pope Julius I
wrote: "The custom has been for word first to us the case of bishops under
accusation, and notably in apostolic churches, and then for a just sentence to
be passed from this place". In 382 a synod in Rome under Pope Damasus I that
protested against the raising of Constantinople to a position above that of
Alexandria, spoke of Rome as "the apostolic see". Pope Siricius (384-399)
claimed for papal decretals the same binding force as decisions of synods, Pope
Innocent I (401-417) said that all major judicial cases should be reserved for
the see of Rome, and Pope Boniface I (418-422) declared that the church of Rome
stands to "the churches throughout the world as the head to its members" and
that bishops everywhere, while holding the one same episcopal office, must
"recognise those to whom, for the sake of ecclesiastical discipline, they
should be subject". Pope Celestine I (422-432) considered that the condemnation
of Nestorius by his own Roman synod in 430 was sufficient, but consented to the
general council as "of benefit in manifesting the faith" Pope Leo I and his
successors rejected canon 28 of the Council of Chalcedon, as a result of which
it was not officially recorded even in the East until the 6th century. The
Acacian schism (484-519), when, "for the first time, West lines up against East
in a clear-cut fashion", ended with acceptance of a declaration insisted on by
Pope Hormisdas (514-523) that "I hope I shall remain in communion with the
apostolic see in which is found the whole, true, and perfect stability of the
Christian religion". Earlier, in 494, Pope Gelasius I (492-496) wrote to
Byzantine Emperor Anastasius, distinguishing the power of civil rulers from
that of the bishops (called "priests" in the document), with the latter supreme
in religious matters; he ended his letter with: "And if it is fitting that the
hearts of the faithful should submit to all priests in general who properly
administer divine affairs, how much the more is obedience due to the bishop of
that see which the Most High ordained to be above all others, and which is
consequently dutifully honoured by the devotion of the whole Church." Pope
Nicholas I (858-867) made it clear that he believed the power of the papacy
extended "over all the earth, that is, over every church". Eastern Orthodox
state that the 28th Canon of the Council of Chalcedon explicitly proclaimed the
equality of the Bishops of Rome and Constantinople, and that it established the
highest court of ecclesiastical appeal in Constantinople. Eastern Orthodox
argue that the seventh canon of the Council of Ephesus explicitly prohibited
modification of the Nicene Creed by any man (not by Ecumenical church council)
drawn up by the first Ecumenical Council in 325. The Council made this
prohibition in light of the fact that the earlier second Ecumenical Council,
had already modified the Creed adopted at Nicaea, making additions such as "who
proceeds from the Father". Eastern Orthodox theologians state this change of
the wording of the churches' original creed, was done to address various
teachings outside of the church in specific the Macedonius I of Constantinople
teaching which the council claimed was a distortion of the church's teaching on
the Holy Spirit. This was not a change of the orthodoxy of the churches'
original creed. There were other less significant catalysts for the Schism
however, including variance over liturgical practices. In Eastern Christendom
the teaching of Papal Supremacy is called False Isidorean Decretals as it is
based on the false documents of Christian canon law under the name Pseudo-
Isidore. The Orthodox East contests the teaching that Peter was the Patriarch
of Rome as St. Irenaeus says that Pope Linus was the first bishop of Rome and
Pope Cletus the second. It is generally conceded that St. Peter was bishop of
Antioch who was then succeeded by Evodius and Ignatius. The Eastern Orthodox do
not hold the primacy of the Pope of Rome over the Eastern church; they teach
that the Pope of Rome is the first among equals. The Seven Ecumenical Councils
were held in the East and called by the Eastern Emperors, Roman pontiffs never
presided over any of them. Council of Constantinople in 867. At least three
councils (867, 869, 879) were held in Constantinople over the deposition of
Ignatius by Emperor Michael III and the replacing of him by Photius. The Pope
in disagreement in 863 then held a synod at the Lateran that reversed the
Eastern Churches and the Emperor's action, and this was taken by the East as an
unacceptable intervention of the Pope of Rome. The use of the Filioque was also
condemned. Due to various conflicts arising during the replacement of Patriarch
Ignatius of Constantinople by Photius, the Council of Constantinople (867) was
convened via Photius, to address the question of Papal Supremacy over all of
the churches and their patriarchs and the use of the Filioque. Pope Nicholas I
was intervening in the appointing of Patriarchs in jurisdictions other than his
own, (Patriarchs that were supposed to be equal to him) and in their
confirmation process. At the time of the early church and these councils there
were no other Patriarchs in the West other than Rome, whereas there were the
four other Patriarchs of the East. Pope Nicholas had attempted to remove
Photius and reappoint Ignatius as the Patriarch of Constantinople by his own
authority and decree. Thus the Pope was intervening in the matters of Imperial
authority as well as the other churches of the East and their own internal
councils and authorities, which they understood to be outside the Pope's own
jurisdiction of Rome. The council of 867 was followed by the Council of
Constantinople 869. The Council of Constantinople in 879 then restored the
conclusions of the Council of 867. The Roman Catholic Church rejects the
councils of 867 and 879 but accepts the council of 869. Pope Nicholas I was
deposed and the teaching of the Filioque was condemned in the council in 867.
The Council at Constantinople in 867 excommunicated Pope Nicholas I, who was
then replaced by Pope Adrian II (due to the death of Nicholas I), and rejected
Nicholas' claims of primacy, his efforts to convert Bulgaria, and the addition
of the Filioque in parts of the Latin Church. Mutual excommunication of 1054.
Most of the direct causes of the Great Schism, however, are far less grandiose
than the "Filioque". The relations between the papacy and the Byzantine court
were good in the years leading up to 1054. The emperor Constantine IX and the
Pope Leo IX were allied through the mediation of the Lombard catepan of Italy,
Argyrus, who had spent years in Constantinople, originally as a political
prisoner. Patriarch Michael I ordered a letter to be written to the bishop of
Trani in which he attacked the "Judaistic" practices of the West, namely, the
use of unleavened bread. The letter was to be sent by John to all the bishops
of the West, including the Pope. John promptly complied, and the letter was
passed to Humbert of Mourmoutiers, the cardinal-bishop of Silva Candida, who
translated the letter into Latin and brought it to the Pope, who ordered a
reply to be made to each charge and a defense of papal supremacy to be laid out
in a response. In 1054, Pope Leo IX sent a letter to Michael C√¶rularius,
Patriarch of Constantinople, that cited a large portion of the forgery called
the Donation of Constantine, believing it genuine. The official status of this
letter is acknowledged in the 1913 "Catholic Encyclopedia", Volume 5, entry on
Donation of Constantine. Leo IX assured the Patriarch that the donation was
completely genuine, not a fable or old wives' tale, so only the apostolic
successor to Peter possessed that primacy and was the rightful head of all the
Church. The Patriarch rejected the claims of papal primacy. Michael was
convinced to cool the debate and thus attempt to prevent the impending breach.
However, Humbert and the Pope made no concessions, and Humbert was sent with
legatine powers to the imperial capital to resolve the questions raised, once
and for all. Humbert, Frederick of Lorraine, and Peter, Archbishop of Amalfi,
arrived in April 1054 and were met with a hostile reception; they stormed out
of the palace, leaving the papal response with Michael, who in turn was even
more angered by their actions. The patriarch refused to recognize their
authority or, practically, their existence. When Pope Leo died on 19 April
1054, the legates' authority legally ceased, but they effectively ignored this
technicality. In response to Michael's refusal to address the issues at hand,
the legatine mission took the extreme measure of entering the church of the
Hagia Sophia during the Divine Liturgy and placing a bull of excommunication on
the altar. The consummation of the East‚ÄìWest Schism is thus generally dated
from the year 1054, when this sequence of events took place. However, these
events only triggered the beginning of the schism, and it was not actually
consummated by the seemingly mutual excommunications. The New Catholic
Encyclopedia reports that the legates had been careful not to intimate that the
bull of excommunication implied a general excommunication of the Byzantine
Church. The bull excommunicated only Patriarch Michael I, Leo of Achrida, and
their adherents. Thus, the New Catholic Encyclopedia argues that the dispute
need not have produced a permanent schism any more than excommunication of any
"contumacious bishop." The schism began to develop when all the other Eastern
patriarchs supported Michael I. According to the New Catholic Encyclopedia, it
was the support of Emperor Michael VI Stratiotikos that impelled them to
support Michael I. Some have questioned the validity of the bull on the grounds
that Pope Leo IX had died at that time and so the authority of the legates to
issue such a bull is unclear. The legates left for Rome two days after issuing
the bull of excommunication, leaving behind a city near riot. The patriarch had
the immense support of the people against the emperor, who had supported the
legates to his own detriment. To assuage popular anger, the bull was burnt, and
the legates were anathematized. Only the legates were anathematized and, in
this case too, there was no explicit indication that the entire Western church
was being anathematized. The bull of excommunication issued against Patriarch
Michael by the papal legates made 11 accusations against Michael and "the
backers of his foolishness", beginning with that of promoting to the episcopacy
men who have been castrated and of rebaptizing those already baptized in the
name of the Trinity, and ending with the accusation of refusing communion and
baptism to menstruating women and of refusing to be in communion with those who
tonsure their heads and shave their beards. Denial of the procession of the
Holy Spirit from the Son (with no mention of the Nicene Creed) is given seventh
place in this list of eleven. Aftermath of the mutual excommunications. At the
time of the excommunications, many contemporary historians, including Byzantine
chroniclers, did not consider the event significant. Francis Dvornik stated:
"In spite of what happened in 1054, the faithful of both church remained long
unaware of any change in their relations and acts of intercommunion were so
numerous that 1054 as the date of the schism becomes inadmissible." Kallistos
Ware agrees: "Even after 1054 friendly relations between East and West
continued. The two parts of Christendom were not yet conscious of a great gulf
of separation between them. ‚Ä¶ The dispute remained something of which
ordinary Christians in the East and West were largely unaware." The Russian
Church felt so little separated from the Western that it instituted a
liturgical feast to commemorate the largely violent transfer of the relics of
Saint Nicholas of Myra from Asia to Bari in Italy in 1089. This fluidity
explains in part the different interpretations of the geographical line of
division in the two maps given here, one drawn up in the West, the other in a
country where Eastern Orthodoxy predominates. Areas such as the extreme south
of Italy are interpreted variously as adhering to either East or West. And even
in areas whose rulers took one position, there were some who gave their
allegiance to the other side. An example is Kingdom of Hungary, where the Roman
Catholic Church was upheld by the crown from the time of Stephen I, but
"monasteries and convents belonging to the Byzantine Church were founded
sporadically in the eleventh century. Efforts were made in subsequent centuries
by Popes and Patriarchs to heal the rift between the churches. However, a
number of factors and historical events worked to widen the separation over
time. Fourth Crusade and other military conflicts. The participants (crusaders
and Venetians) in the Fourth Crusade captured and sacked Constantinople in
1204, looting The Church of Holy Wisdom and various other Orthodox holy sites,
and converting them to Latin Catholic worship. Various holy artifacts from
these Orthodox holy places were then taken to the West. The victors set up in
what had been the empire's territory a number of feudal crusader states, of
which the most important was the Latin Empire of Constantinople, thus
initiating the period of Greek history known as Frangokratia (dominion by the
Franks). The break-up of the Byzantine Empire is seen as a factor that led to
its conquest by Islam. The crusaders also appointed a Latin Patriarch of
Constantinople. An attempt by the Latin Empire to capture the city of
Adrianople, then a Bulgarian possession, was defeated in the Battle of
Adrianople (1205). In northern Europe, the Teutonic Knights, after their
successes in the northern crusades, attempted to conquer also the Orthodox
Russian Republics of Pskov and Novgorod, an enterprise endorsed by Pope Gregory
IX. One of the major defeats they suffered was the Battle of the Ice in 1242.
Sweden also undertook several campaigns against Orthodox Novgorod. There were
also conflicts between Catholic Poland and Orthodox Russia. Such conflicts
solidified the schism between East and West. Reunion attempts. The Second
Council of Lyon was convoked to act on a pledge by Byzantine emperor Michael
VIII to reunite the Western and Eastern churches. Wishing to end the Great
Schism that divided Rome and Constantinople, Gregory X had sent an embassy to
Michael VIII Palaeologus. On 29 June 1274, Gregory X celebrated a Mass in St
John's Church, where both sides took part. The council declared that the Roman
church possessed ‚Äúthe supreme and full primacy and authority over the
universal Catholic Church.‚Äù The council was seemingly a success, but did not
provide a lasting solution to the schism; the Emperor was anxious to heal the
schism, but the Eastern clergy proved to be obstinate. Michael VII's son and
successor Andronicus II repudiated the union. In the 15th century, the eastern
emperor John VIII Palaeologus, pressed hard by the Ottoman Turks, was keen to
ally himself with the West, and to do so he arranged with Pope Eugene IV for
discussions about reunion to be held again, this time at the Council of
Ferrara-Florence. After several long discussions, the emperor managed to
convince the Eastern representatives to accept the Western doctrines of
Filioque, Purgatory and the supremacy of the Papacy. On 6 June 1439 an
agreement was signed by all the Eastern bishops present but one, Mark of
Ephesus, who held that Rome continued in both heresy and schism. It seemed that
the Great Schism had been ended. However, upon their return, the Eastern
bishops found their agreement with the West broadly rejected by the populace
and by civil authorities (with the notable exception of the Emperors of the
East who remained committed to union until the Fall of Constantinople two
decades later). The union signed at Florence has never been accepted by the
Eastern churches. Fall of Constantinople. In 1453, the Eastern Roman Empire
fell to the Ottoman Empire. But Orthodoxy was still very strong in Russia which
became autocephalous (since 1448, although this was not officially accepted by
Constantinople until 1589); and thus Moscow called itself the Third Rome, as
the cultural heir of Constantinople. Eastern Christians expressed a belief that
the Fall of Constantinople was God's punishment for the Emperor and clergy
accepting the West's doctrines of Filioque, Purgatory, and the supremacy of the
Papacy. The West did not fulfill its promise to the Eastern Emperor of troops
and support if he agreed to the reconciliation. The Sack of Constantinople is
still considered proof by the East that the West ultimately succeeded in its
endeavor to destroy the East. Under Ottoman rule, the Orthodox Church acquired
power as an autonomous millet. The ecumenical patriarch was the religious and
administrative ruler of the entire Rum Millet (Ottoman administrative unit),
which encompassed all the Eastern Orthodox subjects of the Empire. Those
appointed to the role were chosen by the Muslim State. In fact, Mehmed II when
he conquered the City formally assumed the legal function of the Byzantine
Emperors, and the appointment of the patriarch Gennadius II. Mehmed and his
agents did all they could to stamp out pro-Roman parties among the Greek
Christians, and to that end Mehmed enormously strengthened the Greek church, as
this helped to protect the Ottoman Sultunate from any united Christian foe. As
a result of the Ottoman conquest, the entire Orthodox communion of the Balkans
and the Near East became suddenly isolated from the West. For the next four
hundred years, it would be confined within the Islamic world, with which it had
little in common religiously or culturally. The Russian Orthodox Church and the
Orthodox Churches from Wallachia and Moldavia were the only part of the
Orthodox communion that remained outside the control of the Ottoman Empire.
Rise of the Church of Moscow. The growing might of the Moscow contributed also
to the growing authority of the Autocephalous Russian Church. In 1589,
Metropolitan Job of Moscow became the first Patriarch of Moscow and All Rus';
making the Russian Church one of the five honorable Patriarchates. However, in
1721 Tsar Peter I abolished completely the patriarchate and so the Church
effectively became a department of the government, ruled by a Most Holy Synod
composed of senior bishops and lay bureaucrats appointed by the Tsar himself.
An independent (from the state) patriarchate was reestablished in 1917, but
after the death in 1925 of Patriarch Tikhon of Moscow, who had been persecuted
by the Soviet authorities, the patriarchate remained vacant until 1943, when,
during the Second World War, the Soviet government allowed somewhat greater
freedom to the Church. Eastern Catholicism. The Eastern Catholic Churches
consider themselves to have reconciled the East and West Schism by keeping
their prayers and rituals similar to those of Eastern Orthodoxy, while also
accepting the primacy of the Bishop of Rome. Some Eastern Orthodox charge that
joining in this unity comes at the expense of ignoring critical doctrinal
differences and past atrocities. Since the beginnings of the Uniate movement,
there have been periodic conflicts between the Orthodox and Uniate in Ukraine
and Belarus, then under Polish rule, and later also in Transylvania (see the
Romanian Church United with Rome). During Russia's Time of Troubles there was a
plan by the conquering Polish monarchy (of Latin Rite, not Uniate) to convert
all of Russia to Roman Catholicism. The Russian national holiday, Unity Day,
was established due to this conflict. Patriarch Hermogenes was martyred by the
Poles and their supporters during this period (see also Polish-Lithuanian-
Muscovite Commonwealth). Similar pressure was also used by the Orthodox against
Eastern Catholic Churches such as the Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church. At a
meeting in Balamand, Lebanon in June 1993, the Joint International Commission
for the Theological Dialogue between the Roman Catholic Church and the Orthodox
Church the delegates of the Eastern Orthodox Churches declared "...and that
what has been called 'uniatism' "can no longer be accepted either as a method
to be followed nor as a model of the unity our Churches are seeking"" (section
12 of the document). First Vatican Council. The doctrine of papal primacy was
further developed in 1870 at the First Vatican Council which declared that "in
the disposition of God the Roman church holds the preeminence of ordinary power
over all the other churches". This council also affirmed the dogma of papal
infallibility, declaring that the infallibility of the Christian community
extends to the pope himself, when he defines a doctrine concerning faith or
morals to be held by the whole Church. Prospects for reconciliation. Despite
efforts on the part of Catholic Popes and Orthodox Patriarchs to heal the
schism, only limited progress towards reconciliation has been made over the
last half century. One stumbling block is the fact that the Orthodox and the
Catholics have different perceptions of the nature of the divide. The official
Catholic teaching is that the Orthodox are schismatic meaning that there is
nothing heretical about their theology, only their unwillingness to accept the
supremacy of the Pope which is presented in Catholic teaching as an
ecclesiological issue, not a theological one. With respect to Primacy of the
Pope, the two churches agree that the Pope, as Bishop of Rome, has primacy
although they continue to have different interpretations of what that primacy
entails. The Roman Catholic Church's attitude was expressed by Pope John Paul
II in the image of the Church "breathing with her two lungs". He meant that
there should be a combination of the more rational, juridical, organisation-
minded "Latin" temperament with the intuitive, mystical and contemplative
spirit found in the east. Ecclesiological reconciliation. The Eastern Orthodox
insist that the primacy is largely one of honor, the Pope being "first among
equals" "primus inter pares". The Catholic Church, on the other hand, insists
on the doctrine of Supremacy. It is widely understood that, if there is to be
reconciliation, both sides will have to compromise on this doctrine. Although
some commentators have proposed ways in which such compromise can be achieved,
there is no official indication that such compromise is being contemplated. In
his book "Principles of Catholic Theology", Pope Benedict XVI (then Cardinal
Ratzinger) assessed the range of "possibilities that are open to Christian
ecumenism." He characterized the "maximum demand" of the West as the
recognition by the East of and submission to the "primacy of the bishop of Rome
in the full scope of the definition of 1870..." The "maximum demand" of the
East was described as a declaration by the West of the 1870 doctrine of papal
primacy as erroneous along with the "removal of the Filioque from the Creed and
including the Marian dogmas of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries."
Ratzinger asserted that "(n)one of the maximum solutions offers any real hope
of unity." Ratzinger wrote that, "Rome must not require more from the East than
had been formulated and what was lived in the first millenium." He concluded
that, " Reunion could take place in this context if, on the one hand, the East
would cease to oppose as heretical the developments that took place in the West
in the second millennium and would accept the Catholic Church as legitimate and
orthodox in the form she had acquired in the course of that development, while
on the other hand, the West would recognize the Church of the East as orthodox
in the form she has always had." The declaration of Ravenna in 2007 re-asserted
the belief that the bishop of Rome is indeed the "protos", although future
discussions are to be held on the concrete ecclesiological exercise of papal
primacy. Theological reconciliation. Jeffrey D. Finch asserts that "the future
of East-West rapprochement appears to be overcoming the modern polemics of neo-
scholasticism and neo-Palamism". The Eastern Orthodox reject the rational and
philosophical foundations of Western Christianity as pagan and heretical and
assert that until the Western Church learns to see God and know God as the
Eastern Church does, there cannot be even the remotest possibility of
reconciliation. These doctrinal issues center around the Orthodox perception
that the Catholic theologians lack the actual experience of God called theoria
and thereby fail to understand the importance of the Heart as Noetic or
Intuitive faculty. It is what they consider to be the Catholic Church's
reliance on pagan metaphysical philosophy and rational methods such as
scholasticism rather than on intuitive experience of God (theoria) that causes
Orthodox to consider the Catholic Church heretical. Other points of doctrinal
difference include a difference regarding human nature as well as a difference
regardingoriginal sin, purgatory and the nature of Hell. The most frequently
discussed point of theological difference is embodied in the dispute regarding
the inclusion of the Filioque in the Nicene Creed. In the view of the Roman
Catholic Church, what it calls the legitimate complementarity of the
expressions "from the Father" and "from the Father and the Son" does not,
provided it does not become rigid, affect the identity of faith in the reality
of the same mystery confessed. The Orthodox, on the other hand, view inclusion
of the phrase to be almost heretical (see also the Trinity section). More
importantly, the Orthodox see the Filioque as just the tip of the iceberg and
really just a symptom of a much more deeply rooted problem of theology, one so
deeply rooted that they consider it to be heretical and even, by some
characterizations, an inability to "see God" and know God. This heresy is
allegedly rooted in Frankish paganism, Arianism, Platonist and Aristotelian
philosophy and Thomist rational and objectiveScholasticism. In opposition to
what they characterize as pagan, heretical and "godless" foundations, the
Orthodox rely on an intuitive and mystical knowledge and vision of God
(Theoria) based on Hesychasm and noesis. While Catholics accept the Eastern
Orthodox intuitive and mystical understanding of God as valid, they consider it
to be complementary to the rational and philosophical Scholasticism of Thomas
Aquinas. Sacraments. Most Orthodox Churches through economy do not require
Baptism in the Orthodox Church for one who has been previously baptized in the
Roman Catholic Church. Most Orthodox jurisdictions, based on that same
principle of economy, allow a sacramental marriage between an Orthodox
Christian and some non-Orthodox Christians. The Catholic Church allows its
clergy to administer the sacraments of Penance, the Eucharist and Anointing of
the Sick to members of the Eastern Orthodox Church, if these spontaneously ask
for the sacraments and are properly disposed. It also allows Catholics who
cannot approach a Catholic minister to receive these three sacraments from
clergy of the Eastern Orthodox Church, whenever necessity requires or a genuine
spiritual advantage commends it, and provided the danger of error or
indifferentism is avoided. Catholic canon law allows marriage between a
Catholic and an Orthodox. The Orthodox Church will only administer the
sacraments to Christians who aren't Orthodox if there is an emergency. The Code
of Canons of the Eastern Churches authorizes the local Catholic bishop to
permit a Catholic priest, of whatever rite, to bless the marriage of Orthodox
faithful who being unable without great difficulty to approach a priest of
their own Church, ask for this spontaneously. In exceptional circumstances
Catholics may, in the absence of an authorized priest, marry before witnesses.
If a priest who is not authorized for the celebration of the marriage is
available, he should be called in, although the marriage is valid even without
his presence. The Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches specifies that, in
those exceptional circumstances, even a "non-Catholic" priest (and so not
necessarily one belonging to an Eastern Church) may be called in. Recent
efforts at reconciliation. Patriarchs of the Eastern Orthodox Church have shown
a willingness to work with successive Popes of the Catholic Church in joint
ecumenical efforts. A Joint Theological Commission meets regularly to identify
areas where progress is needed in order to achieve reconciliation. Second
Vatican Council. A major event of the Second Vatican Council, known as Vatican
II, was the issuance by Pope Paul VI and Orthodox Patriarch Athenagoras of a
joint expression of regret for many of the past actions that had led up to the
Great Schism between the Western and Eastern churches, expressed as the
Catholic-Orthodox Joint Declaration of 1965. At the same time, they lifted the
mutual excommunications dating from the eleventh century. Joint Theological
Commission. The Joint International Commission for Theological Dialogue Between
the Catholic Church and the Orthodox Church first met in Rhodes in 1980. Other
moves toward reconciliation. On a number of occasions, Pope John Paul II
recited the Nicene Creed several times with patriarchs of the Eastern Orthodox
Church in Greek according to the original text. Both he and his successor, Pope
Benedict XVI, have recited the Nicene Creed jointly with Patriarchs Demetrius I
and Bartholomew I in Greek without the "Filioque" clause. In June 1995,
Patriarch Bartholomew I, who was elected as the 273rd Ecumenical Patriarch of
Constantinople in October 1991, visited the Vatican for the first time, when he
joined in the historic inter-religious day of prayer for peace at Assisi. Pope
John Paul II and the Patriarch explicitly stated their mutual "desire to
relegate the excommunications of the past to oblivion and to set out on the way
to re-establishing full communion." In May 1999, John Paul II was the first
pope since the Great Schism to visit an Eastern Orthodox country: Romania. Upon
greeting John Paul II, the Romanian Patriarch Teoctist stated: "The second
millennium of Christian history began with a painful wounding of the unity of
the Church; the end of this millennium has seen a real commitment to restoring
Christian unity." Pope John Paul II visited other heavily Orthodox areas such
as Ukraine, despite lack of welcome at times, and he said that healing the
divisions between Western and Eastern Christianity was one of his fondest
wishes. In June 2004, the Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew I's visit to Rome
for the Feast of Saints Peter and Paul (29 June) afforded him the opportunity
for another personal meeting with Pope John Paul II, for conversations with the
Pontifical Council for Promoting Christian Unity and for taking part in the
celebration for the feast day in St. Peter's Basilica. The Patriarch's partial
participation in the Eucharistic liturgy at which the Pope presided followed
the program of the past visits of Patriarch Dimitrios (1987) and Patriarch
Bartholomew I himself: full participation in the Liturgy of the Word, joint
proclamation by the Pope and by the Patriarch of the profession of faith
according to the Nicene-Constantinopolitan Creed in Greek and as the
conclusion, the final Blessing imparted by both the Pope and the Patriarch at
the Altar of the Confessio. The Patriarch did not fully participate in the
Liturgy of the Eucharist involving the consecration and distribution of the
Eucharist itself. In accordance with the Roman Catholic Church's practice of
including the clause when reciting the Creed in Latin, but not when reciting
the Creed in Greek, Popes John Paul II and Benedict XVI have recited the Nicene
Creed jointly with Patriarchs Demetrius I and Bartholomew I in Greek without
the "Filioque" clause. Criticism of reconciliation efforts. The efforts of
Orthodox patriarchs towards reconciliation with the Catholic Church has been
strongly criticized by some elements of Eastern Orthodoxy, such as the
Metropolitan of Kalavryta, Greece, in November 2008. In 2010, Patriarch
Bartholomew I issued an encyclical lauding the ongoing dialogue between the
Orthodox Church and other Christian churches and criticizing those who are
‚Äúunacceptably fanatical‚Äù in challenging such dialogue. The encyclical
lamented that the dialogues between the two churches were being criticized in
‚Äúan unacceptably fanatical way‚Äù by some who claim to be defenders of
Orthodoxy despite the fact that these dialogues are being conducted ‚Äúwith the
mutual agreement and participation of all local Orthodox Churches‚Äù. The
Patriarch warned that "such opponents raise themselves above episcopal synods
and risk creating schisms". He further accused some critics of distorting
reality to ‚Äúdeceive and arouse the faithful‚Äù and of depicting theological
dialogue not as a pan-Orthodox effort, but an effort of the Ecumenical
Patriarchate alone. As an example, he pointed to "false rumors that union
between the Roman Catholic and Orthodox Churches is imminent" claiming that the
disseminators of such rumors were fully aware that "the differences discussed
in these theological dialogues remain numerous and require lengthy debate". The
Patriarch re-emphasized that "union is not decided by theological commissions
but by Church Synods". Differences underlying the schism. Jaroslav Pelikan
emphasizes that "while the East-West schism stemmed largely from political and
ecclesiastical discord, this discord also reflected basic theological
differences". Pelikan further argues that the antagonists in the 11th century
inappropriately exaggerated their theological differences whereas modern
historians tend to minimize them. Pelikan asserts that the documents from that
era evidence the "depths of intellectual alienation that had developed between
the two sections of Christendom." While the two sides were technically more
guilty of schism than heresy, they often charged each other with allegations of
heresy. Pelikan describes much of the dispute as dealing with "regional
differences in usages and customs" some of which were adiaphorus (i.e. neither
right nor wrong). However, he goes on to say that while it was easy in
principle to accept the existence of adiaphora, it was difficult in actual
practice to distinguish customs which were innocuously adiaphoric from those
that had doctrinal implications. It is the position of Orthodox Christianity
that Roman Catholic arguments in support of its teachings have relied on proofs
from Fathers that have either been misinterpreted or so taken out of context as
to misrepresent their true intent. It is the position of Orthodox Christianity
that a closer examination of those supposed supports would have the effect of
either not supporting the argument or have the opposite effect of supporting
the counter-argument. Cultural differences. The dominant language of the West
was Latin, whilst that of the East was Greek. Soon after the fall of the
Western Empire, the number of individuals who spoke both Latin and Greek began
to dwindle, andcommunication between East and West grew much more difficult.
With linguistic unity gone, cultural unity began to crumble as well. The two
halves of the Church were naturally divided along similar lines; they developed
different rites and had different approaches to religious doctrines. Although
the Great Schism was still centuries away, its outlines were already
perceptible. Ecclesiological disputes. Philip Sherrard, an Orthodox theologian
asserts that the underlying cause of the East- West schism was and continues to
be "the clash of these two fundamentally irreconcilable ecclesiologies." While
some Catholics have adopted this view of papal primacy, it is more common for
Catholics to insist on the primacy of Roman and papal authority based on
patristic writings and conciliar documents. Roger Haight characterizes the
question of episcopal authority in the Church as "acute" with the "relative
standings of Rome and Constantinople a recurrent source of tension." Haight
characterizes the difference in ecclesiologies as "the contrast between a pope
with universal jurisdiction and a combination of patriarchal superstructure
with an episcopal and synodal communion ecclesiology analogous to that found in
Cyprian." However, Nicholas Afansiev has criticized both the Catholic and
Orthodox churches for "subscribing to the universal ecclesiology of St. Cyprian
of Carthage according to which only one true and universal church can exist."
Ecclesiological structure. Haight characterizes the difference in
ecclesiologies as "the contrast between a pope with universal jurisdiction and
a combination of patriarchal superstructure with an episcopal and synodal
communion ecclesiology analogous to that found in Cyprian." The Eastern
Churches maintained the idea that every local city-church with its bishop,
presbyters, deacons and people celebrating the Eucharist constituted the whole
Church. In this view called Eucharistic ecclesiology (or more recently
holographic ecclesiology), every bishop is Saint Peter's successor in his
church ("the Church") and the churches form what Eusebius called a common union
of churches. This implied that all bishops were ontologically equal, although
functionally particular bishops could be granted special privileges by other
bishops and serve as metropolitans, archbishops or patriarchs. Early on, the
ecclesiology of the Roman Church was universal in nature, with the idea that
the Church was a worldwide organism with a divinely (not functionally)
appointed center: the Church/Bishop of Rome. "The Orthodox Church does not
accept the doctrine of Papal authority set forth in the Vatican Council of
1870, and taught today in the Roman Catholic Church." The Orthodox Church has
always maintained the original position of collegiality of the bishops
resulting in the structure of the church being closer to a confederacy in
structure. The Orthodox have synods where the highest authorities in each
Church community are brought together, but unlike Roman Catholicism no central
individual or figure has the absolute and infallible last word on church
doctrine. In practice, this has sometimes led to divisions among Greek,
Russian, Bulgarian and Ukrainian Orthodox churches, as no central authority can
serve as a rallying point for various internal disputes. The Second Vatican
Council has re-asserted the importance of collegiality to a degree that appears
satisfying to most if not all ecclesial parties. Papal privilege and authority.
The Roman Catholic Church's current official teachings about papal privilege
and power that are unacceptable to the Eastern Orthodox churches are the dogma
of the pope's infallibility when speaking officially "from the chair of Peter
(ex cathedra Petri)" on matters of faith and morals to be held by the whole
Church, so that such definitions are irreformable "of themselves, and not by
the consent of the Church" ("ex sese et non ex consensu ecclesiae") and have a
binding character for all (Catholic) Christians in the world; the pope's direct
episcopal jurisdiction over all (Catholic) Christians in the world; the pope's
authority to appoint (and so also to depose) the bishops of all (Catholic)
Christian churches except in the territory of a patriarchate; and the
affirmation that the legitimacy and authority of all (Catholic) Christian
bishops in the world derive from their union with the Roman see and its bishop,
the Supreme Pontiff, the unique Successor of Peter and Vicar of Christ on
earth. Principal among the ecclesiastical issues that separate the two churches
is the meaning of papal primacy within any future unified church. The Orthodox
insist that it should be a "primacy of honor", as in the ancient church and not
a "primacy of authority", whereas the Catholics see the pontiff's role as
requiring for its exercise power and authority the exact form of which is open
to discussion with other Christians. According to Orthodox belief, the test of
catholicity is adherence to the authority of "Scripture" and then by the "Holy
Tradition" of the church. It is not defined by adherence to any particular See.
It is the position of the Orthodox Church that it has never accepted the pope
as "de jure" leader of the entire church. All bishops are equal 'as Peter'
therefore every church under every bishop (consecrated in apostolic succession)
is fully complete (the original meaning of "catholic"). Referring to Ignatius
of AntiochCarlton says The church is in the image of the Trinity and reflects
the reality of the incarnation. Any changes to the understanding of the church
would reflect a change in the understanding of the Trinity. Theological issues.
From the perspective of the Catholic Church, the ecclesiological issues are the
central issue which is why they characterize the split between the two churches
as a schism. In their view, the Eastern Orthodox are very close to them in
theology and the Catholic Church does not consider the Orthodox beliefs to be
heretical. However, from the perspective of Orthodox theologians, there are
theological issues that run much deeper than just the theology around the
primacy and/or supremacy of the Pope. In fact, unlike the Catholics who do not
generally consider the Orthodox heretical, and speak instead about the Eastern
"schism", some prominent Orthodox theologians do consider the Catholic Church
to be heretical on fundamental doctrinal issues of theology, such as the
"Filioque". These issues have a long history as can be seen in the 11th Century
works of Orthodox theologian and saint Nikitas Stithatos. "Unitatis
Redintegratio" 17 Trinity. Although the Western churches do not consider the
Eastern and Western understanding of the Trinity to be radically different, the
Eastern Orthodox believe that the Western understanding is fatally flawed. The
influence of St Augustine and, by extension, that of Thomas Aquinas in the
western Mediterranean on this issue are not generally accepted in the Orthodox
Church. Various Orthodox theologians argue that the "Filioque" clause is
symptomatic of this difference. "Filioque", Latin for "and (from) the Son", was
added in Western Christianity to the Latin text of the Nicene-
Constantinopolitan Creed, which also varies from the original Greek text in
having the additional phrase "Deum de Deo" (God from God) and in using the
singular "I believe" (Latin, "Credo", Greek Œ ŒπœÉœÑŒµœçœâ) instead of the
original "We believe" (Greek Œ ŒπœÉœÑŒµœçŒøŒºŒµŒΩ), which Oriental Orthodoxy
preserves. The Assyrian Church of the East, which is in communion neither with
the Eastern Orthodox Church nor with Oriental Orthodoxy also uses "We believe".
"Filioque" states that the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Son as well as from
the Father, a doctrine accepted by the Catholic Church, by Anglicanism and by
Protestant churches in general. Christians of these groups generally include it
when reciting the Nicene Creed. Nonetheless, these groups recognize that
"Filioque" is not part of the original text established at the First Council of
Constantinople in 381 and they do not demand that others too should use it when
saying the Creed. Indeed, the Roman Catholic Church does not add the phrase
corresponding to "Filioque" (Œ∫Œ±·Ω∂ œÑŒø·ø¶ Œ•·º±Œø·ø¶) to the Greek text of
the Creed, even in the liturgy for Latin Rite Catholics. At the 879‚Äì880
Council of Constantinople the Eastern Orthodox Church anathematized the
"Filioque" phrase, "as a novelty and augmentation of the Creed", and in their
1848 encyclical the Eastern Patriarchs spoke of it as a heresy. It was
qualified as such by some of the Eastern Orthodox Church's saints, including
Photios I of Constantinople, Mark of Ephesus, Gregory Palamas, who have been
called the Three Pillars of Orthodoxy. The Eastern church believes by the
Western church inserting the Filioque unilaterally (without consulting or
holding council with the East) into the Creed that the Western church broke
communion with the East. Orthodox theologians such as Vladimir Lossky criticize
the focus of Western theology of God in 'God in uncreated essence' as
misguided, which he alleges is a modalistic and therefore a speculative
expression of God that is indicative of the Sabellian heresy. Orthodox
theologian Michael Pomazansky argues that, in order for the Holy Spirit to
proceed from the Father and the Son in the Creed, there would have to be two
sources in the deity (double procession), whereas in the one God there can only
be one source of divinity, which is the Father hypostasis of the Trinity, not
God's essence per se. In contrast, Bishop Kallistos Ware suggests that the
problem is more one of semantics than of basic doctrinal differences.
Experience of God (Theoria) vs Scholasticism. Vladimir Lossky, a noted modern
Eastern Orthodox theologian, argues the difference in East and West is due to
the Roman Catholic Church's use of pagan metaphysical philosophy (and
scholasticism) rather than actual experience of God called theoria, to validate
the theological dogmas of Roman Catholic Christianity. For this reason, Lossky
argues that Eastern Orthodox and Roman Catholics have become "different men".
Other Eastern Orthodox theologians such as John Romanides and Metropolitan
Hierotheos of Nafpaktos have made similar pronouncements. According to the
Orthodox teachings, Theoria can be achieved through ascetic practices like
hesychasm (see St John Climacus), which was condemned as a heresy by Barlaam of
Seminara. The heart reconciled with the mind higher than reason alone. Orthodox
theologians charge that, in contrast to Orthodox theology, western theology is
based on philosophical discourse which reduces humanity and nature to cold
mechanical concepts. Orthodox theologians argue that the mind (reason,
rationality) is the focus of Western theology, whereas in Eastern theology, the
mind must be put in the heart, so they are united into what is called nous,
this unity as heart is the focus of Eastern Orthodox Christianity involving the
unceasing Prayer of the heart. Theological consequences of the division East
and West. In Orthodox theology, in the Eastern ascetic traditions one of the
goals of ascetic practice is to obtain sobriety of consciousness, awakeness
(nepsis). For humankind this is reached in the healing of whole person called
the soul, heart. When a person's heart is reconciled with their mind, this is
referred to as a healing of the nous or the "eye, focus of the heart or soul".
Part of this process is the healing and or reconciliation of humankind's reason
being called "logos" or "dianoia" with the heart, soul. While mankind's spirit
and body are energies vivified by the soul, Orthodoxy teaches man's sin,
suffering, sorrow is caused by his heart and mind being a duality and in
conflict. According to Orthodox theology, lack of noetic understanding
(sickness) can be neither circumvented nor satisfied by rational or discursive
thought (i.e. systematization), and denying the needs of the human heart (a
more Western expression would be the needs of the soul) causes various negative
or destructive manifestations such as addiction, atheism and evil thoughts etc.
A cleaned, healed or restored Nous creates the condition of sobriety or nepsis
of the mind. The uncreated light. Orthodox theologians assert that the
theological division of East and West culminated into a direct theological
conflict known as the Hesychasm controversy during several councils at
Constantinople New Rome, between the years 1341‚Äì1351. They argue that this
controversy highlighted the sharp contrast between what is embraced by the
Roman Catholic Church as proper (or orthodox) theological dogma and how
theology is validated and what is considered valid theology by the Eastern
Orthodox. The essence of the disagreement is that in the East one cannot be a
genuine true theologian or teach knowledge of God, without having experienced
God, as is defined as the vision of God (theoria). At the heart of the issue
was the teaching of the Essence-Energies distinctions (which states that while
creation can never know God's uncreated essence, it can know His uncreated
energies) by Gregory Palamas. Original sin, free will and the Immaculate
Conception. Augustine's doctrine of original sin. The Eastern Orthodox do not
accept Augustine's teaching of original sin. His interpretation of ancestral
sin is rejected in the East as well. Nor is Augustine's teaching accepted in
its totality in the West. The Roman Catholic Church rejects traducianism and
affirms creationism. Its teaching on original sin is largely based on but not
identical with that of Augustine, and is opposed to the interpretation of
Augustine advanced by Martin Luther and John Calvin. Its teaching departs from
Augustine's ideas in some respects. The Eastern Church makes no use at all of
Augustine. Another Orthodox view is expressed by Christos Yannaras, who
described Augustine as "the fount of every distortion and alteration in the
Church's truth in the West". Church teachings on original sin. What the Eastern
Orthodox accepts is that ancestral sin corrupted their existence (their bodies
and environment) that each person is born into and thus we are born into a
corrupted existence (by the ancestral sin of Adam and Eve) and that "original
sin is hereditary. It did not remain only Adam and Eve's. As life passes from
them to all of their descendants, so does original sin. We all of us
participate in original sin because we are all descended from the same
forefather, Adam." Both East and West hold that each person is not called to
atone for the actual sin committed by Adam and Eve. Rather each person is
called to overcome the corrupted world they are born into and seek salvation by
way of the community established by God. By attaining the Holy Spirit which
validates this community (church). Here the two churches greatly differ, as to
the meaning of attaining the Holy Spirit, both having radically different
meanings East and West. The teaching of the Roman Catholic Church about
original sin is that all people inherit the sin of Adam, and the teaching of
the Eastern Orthodox Church is that, as a result of Adam's sin, "hereditary sin
flowed to his posterity; so that everyone who is born after the flesh bears
this burden, and experiences the fruits of it in this present world." According
to the Western Church, "original sin does not have the character of a personal
fault in any of Adam's descendants", and the Eastern Church teaches that "by
these fruits and this burden we do not understand sin". The Orthodox and the
Catholics believe that people inherit only the spiritual sickness (in which all
suffer and sin) of Adam and Eve, caused by their ancestral sin (what has flowed
to them), a sickness leaving them weakened in their powers, subject to
ignorance, suffering and the domination of death, and inclined to sin. Synergy
and free will. The Eastern Orthodox Church teaches that each individual must
choose God by their own free will and rejected Augustine's teaching of
predestination, interpreted as conflicting with free will, in which
interpretation it is rejected also by the Roman Catholic Church. Similarly, the
Roman Catholic Church teaches that, even after the Fall, man remains free, and
that freedom in man is an "outstanding manifestation of the divine image". The
view that the first steps of salvation are in the power of the individual
without any need of divine grace, a view expounded by John Cassian and Faustus
of Riez, was condemned by the Latin church in the local Council of Orange in
529. The doctrine upheld by the Eastern Orthodox Church, is that salvation
involves man freely giving the assent of faith to the Word of God and
cooperating with the prompting of the Holy Spirit preceding and preserving his
assent and also man sometimes by his own volition seeking salvation. This
doctrine of synergy is comparable to saving a drowning man by throwing a rope
to him, which he must choose whether or not to grab in order to receive the
help offered. Semipelagianism is a set of doctrines according to which, while
admitting the need of divine grace forsalvation, the first steps sometimes are
in the power of the individual, without the need for grace, which intervenes
only later. Cassian endeavored in his thirteenth chapter of Conferences section
eleven to demonstrate from Biblical examples that God frequently awaits the
good impulses of the natural will, before coming to its assistance with His
supernatural grace. While the grace often preceded the will, as in the case of
Matthew and Peter, he said, on the other hand the will frequently preceded the
grace, as in the case of Zacch√¶us and the Good Thief on the Cross. Cassian's
position has been described as a "middle way" between Pelagianism, which taught
that the will alone was sufficient to live a sinless life, and the view of
Augustine of Hippo, that emphasizes the absolute need for grace. Cassian's
doctrine was against Augustine doctrine of predestination as well Calvinism's
predestination, which Calvin stated he based on Augustine's. Immaculate
Conception rejected by the East. Some Orthodox theologians also express the
belief that the doctrine of Original Sin has led western theology to develop
the doctrine about the "Immaculate Conception of the Virgin Mary" (which was
defined by Pope Pius IX in 1854). Eastern theologians consider this doctrine to
be wrong, since it claims that God Himself protected the Virgin Mary from the
sickness of sin, so that she could give birth to Christ, while they believe
that the Virgin Mary was chosen to give birth to Christ, because of her own
desire to love God and follow God's will. Sin, Purgatory and Hell. Purgatory.
Another point of theological contention between the western and eastern
churches, is the doctrine of purgatory (as it was shown at the Second Council
of Lyons and the Council of Ferrara-Florence). It was developed in time in
western theology, according to which, "all who die in God's grace and
friendship, but still imperfectly purified, are indeed assured of their eternal
salvation; but after death they undergo purification, so as to achieve the
holiness necessary to enter the joy of heaven." However, some eastern
theologians, while agreeing that there is beyond death a state in which
believers continue to be perfected and led to full divinization, consider that
it is a state not of punishment but of growth; hold that suffering cannot
purify sin, since they have a different view of sin and consider suffering as a
result of a spiritual sickness. Western theology usually considers sin not only
as a sickness that weakens and impedes, but also as something that merits
punishment. Bosom of Abraham. The Eastern Orthodox Church holds that "there is
a state beyond death where believers continue to be perfected and led to full
divinization". Although some Orthodox have described this intermediate state as
"purgatory", others distinguish it from aspects associated with it in the West:
at the Council of Ferrara-Florence, the Orthodox Bishop and Saint Mark of
Ephesus argued that there are in it no purifying fires. This also involves,
according to Eastern theologians, differences about the way Heaven and Hell are
taught and experienced. neither is there a heaven up in the sky. Heaven, the
Kingdom of God and eternal Damnation are both, being with and in the presence
of God. Damnation. Eastern Orthodox consider the teaching of punishment in the
after life by Western Christianity a corruption of the original teaching of the
eternal fire. The traditional Orthodox teaching is that "those who reject
Christ will face punishment. According to the Confession of Dositheus, persons
go immediately to joy in Christ or to the torments of punishment". " This is
different from the West's teaching of Damnation. In Orthodox doctrine there is
no place without God. In eternity there is no hiding from God. In Catholic
theology, God is present everywhere not only by his power but in himself. Hell
is a state of self-selected separation from God. In Orthodoxy torment for the
damned is not some created place called Hell, where people are without God. As
the English word Hell is not in the Greek bible, although the Greek word
Œ∫œåŒªŒ±œÉŒπœÇ, which now means "the situation of spiritual punishment after
the last judgement of those who died without repenting of their sins" is found
in the Greek Bible. The word Hades is not expressed as a place strictly of
eternal damnation in the Greek bible either. It as the bosom of Abraham is
where both Lazarus and the rich men existed; neither was in a separate place
from God or one another. While eastern theology considers the desire to sin, as
the result of a spiritual sickness (caused by Adam and Eve's pride), which
needs to be cured. One such theologian gives his interpretation of Western
theology as follows: "According to the holy Fathers of the Church, there is not
an uncreated Paradise and a created Hell, as the Franco-Latin tradition
teaches". The eastern Church, believes that hell or eternal damnation and
heaven exist and are the same place, which is being with God, and that the very
same Divine love (God's uncreated energies) which is a source of bliss and
consolation for the righteous (because they love God, His love is Heaven for
them), is also a source of torment (or a "Lake of Fire") for sinners (because
they don't love God, they will feel His love this way). The Western Church
speaks of heaven and hell as states of existence rather than as places. Whereas
in Eastern Orthodoxy there is no Hell per se, there is damnation or punishment
in eternity for the rejection of God's grace.
