Orthodox Church organization This article covers the organization of the
Eastern Orthodox Churches rather than the doctrines, traditions, practices, or
other aspects of Eastern Orthodoxy. Like the Roman Catholic Church, the
Orthodox Church claims to be the One Holy, Catholic and Apostolic Church. The
term Western Orthodoxy is sometimes used to denominate what is technically a
Vicariate within the Antiochian Orthodox Church and thus a part of the Eastern
Orthodox Church as that term is defined here. The term "Western Orthodox
Church" is disfavored by members of that Vicariate. In the 5th century,
Oriental Orthodoxy separated from Chalcedonian Christianity (and is therefore
separate from both the Eastern Orthodox and Roman Catholic churches), well
before the 11th century Great Schism. It should not be confused with Eastern
Orthodoxy. Eastern Orthodoxy. The Orthodox Church is a communion comprising the
fifteen separate autocephalous hierarchical churches that recognize each other
as "canonical" Orthodox Christian churches. There is an essentially political
disagreement over the autocephaly of one of the churches—the Orthodox Church
in America. There is no single earthly head of all the Orthodox Churches
comparable to the Pope of Rome. The highest-ranking bishop of the communion is
the Patriarch of Constantinople, who is also primate of one of the
autocephalous churches. These organizations are in full communion with each
other, so any priest of any of those churches may lawfully minister to any
member of any of them, and no member of any is excluded from any form of
worship in any of the others, including reception of the Eucharist. Each local
or national Orthodox Church is a portion of the Orthodox Church as a whole. In
the early Middle Ages, the One Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church was ruled by
five patriarchs: the bishops of Rome, Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch, and
Jerusalem; these were collectively referred to as the Pentarchy. Each patriarch
had jurisdiction over bishops in a specified geographic region. This continued
until 927, when the autonomous Bulgarian Archbishopric became the first newly-
promoted patriarchate to join the original five. The patriarch of Rome was
"first in place of honor" among the five patriarchs. Disagreement about the
limits of his authority was one of the causes of the Great Schism,
conventionally dated to the year 1054, which split the church into the Catholic
Church in the West, headed by the Bishop of Rome, and the Orthodox Church, led
by the four eastern patriarchs. After the schism this honorary primacy shifted
to the Patriarch of Constantinople, who had previously been accorded the
second-place rank at the First Council of Constantinople. Jurisdictions.
Autocephalous Orthodox churches. Ranked in order of seniority, with the year of
independence (autocephaly) given in the parenthesis. Autocephalous
Archbishoprics. The four ancient patriarchates are most senior, followed by the
five junior patriarchates. Autocephalous archbishoprics follow the
patriarchates in seniority, with the Church of Cyprus being the only ancient
one (AD 431). It should be noted that in the diptychs of the Russian Orthodox
Church and some of its daughter churches (e.g., the Orthodox Church in
America), the ranking of four of the patriarchal churches is different.
Following the Russian Church in rank is Georgian, followed by Serbian,
Romanian, and then Bulgarian Church. The ranking of the archbishoprics is the
same. Churches in resistance. Due to what these churches perceive as the errors
of modernism and ecumenism in mainstream Orthodoxy, they refrain from
concelebration of the Divine Liturgy with them while maintaining that they
remain fully within the canonical boundaries of the Church: i.e., professing
Orthodox belief, retaining legitimate episcopal succession, and existing in
communities with historical continuity. With the exception of the Orthodox
Church of Greece (Holy Synod in Resistance), they will commune the faithful
from all the canonical jurisdictions and are recognized by and in communion
with the Russian Orthodox Church Outside Russia. Due in part to the re-
establishment of official ties between the Russian Orthodox Church Outside
Russia and the Moscow Patriarchate, the Orthodox Church of Greece (Holy Synod
in Resistance) has broken ecclesial communion with ROCOR, but the converse has
not happened. Where the Old Calendar Romanian and Bulgarian churches stand on
the matter is as yet unclear. Churches that have voluntarily "walled themselves
off". These Churches do not practice Communion with any other Orthodox
jurisdictions nor do they tend to recognize each other. Yet, like the "Churches
in Resistance" above they remain fully within the canonical boundaries of the
Church: i.e., professing Orthodox belief, retaining what they believe to be
legitimate episcopal succession, and existing in communities with historical
continuity. Nevertheless, their relationship with all other Orthodox Churches
remains unclear, as 'Orthodox' Churches normally recognize and are recognized
by others.
