Eastern Christianity Eastern Christianity comprises the Christian traditions
and churches that developed in the Balkans, Eastern Europe, Asia Minor, the
Middle East, Horn of Africa, India and parts of the Far East over several
centuries of religious antiquity. The term is generally used in Western
Christianity to describe all Christian traditions that did not develop in
Western Europe. As such the term does not describe any single communion or
common religious tradition and in fact some "Eastern" churches have more in
common historically and theologically with "Western" Christianity than with one
another. The terms "Eastern" and "Western" in this regard originated with
divisions in the church mirroring the cultural divide between the Hellenistic
east and Latinate west and the political divide between the weak Western and
strong Eastern Roman empires. Because the most powerful church in the East was
what has become known as the Eastern Orthodox church, the term "Orthodox" is
often used in a similarly loose fashion as "Eastern", although strictly
speaking most churches consider themselves part of an Orthodox and Catholic
communion. Families of churches. Eastern Christians do not have shared
religious traditions but many of these groups have shared cultural traditions.
Christianity divided itself in the East during its early centuries both within
and outside of the Roman Empire in disputes about christology and fundamental
theology, as well as national divisions (Roman, Persian, etc.). It would be
many centuries later that Western Christianity fully split from these
traditions as its own communion. Today there are four main branches or families
of Eastern Christianity, each of which has distinct theology and dogma. In many
Eastern churches, some parish priests administer the sacrament of chrismation
to infants after baptism, and priests are allowed to marry before ordination.
While all the Eastern Catholic Churches recognize the authority of the Pope,
some of them who having originally been part of the Orthodox Church or Oriental
Orthodox Church closely follow the traditions of Orthodoxy or Oriental
Orthodoxy, including the tradition of allowing married men to become priests.
The Eastern churches' differences from Western Christianity have as much, if
not more, to do with culture, language, and politics, as theology. For the non-
Catholic Eastern churches, a definitive date for the commencement of schism
cannot usually be given (see East-West Schism). The Church of the East declared
independence from the churches of the Roman Empire at its general council in
424, which was before the Council of Ephesus in 431, and so had nothing to do
with the theology declared at that Council. Oriental Orthodoxy separated after
the Council of Chalcedon in 451. Since the time of the historian Edward Gibbon,
the split between the Church of Rome and the Orthodox Church has been
conveniently dated to 1054,though the reality is more complex. This split is
sometimes referred to as the "Great Schism", but now more usually referred to
as the East-West Schism. This final schism reflected a larger cultural and
political division which had developed in Europe and southwest Asia during the
Middle Ages and coincided with Western Europe's re-emergence from the collapse
of the Western Roman Empire. Eastern Orthodox Churches. The Orthodox Church is
a Christian body whose adherents are largely based in Russia, Greece, Eastern
Europe and the Middle East, with a growing presence in the western world. Most
Orthodox Christians accept the First seven Ecumenical Councils. Orthodox
Christianity identifies itself as the original Christian church (see early
centers of Christianity) founded by Christ and the Apostles, and traces its
lineage back to the early church through the process of Apostolic Succession
and unchanged theology and practice. Orthodox distinctives (shared with some of
the Eastern Catholic Churches) include the Divine Liturgy, Mysteries or
Sacraments, and an emphasis on the preservation of Tradition, which it holds to
be Apostolic in nature. Orthodox Churches are also distinctive in that they are
organized into self-governing jurisdictions along national, ethnic, and/or
linguistic lines. Orthodoxy is thus made up of 15 or 16 national autocephalous
bodies. Smaller churches are and each have a mother church that is
autocephalous. Most Orthodox are united in communion with each other, though
unlike the Roman Catholic Church, this is a looser connection rather than a
top-down hierarchy (see primus inter pares). It may also be noted that the
Church of Rome was once in communion with the Orthodox Church, but the two were
split after the East-West Schism and thus it is no longer in communion with the
Orthodox Church. It is estimated that there are approximately 240 million
Orthodox Christians in the world. Today, many adherents shun the term "Eastern"
as denying the church's universal character. They refer to Eastern Orthodoxy
simply as the "Orthodox Church". Oriental Orthodox Churches. Oriental Orthodoxy
refers to the churches of Eastern Christian tradition that keep the faith of
the first three Ecumenical Councils of the undivided Church: the First Council
of Nicaea (AD 325), the First Council of Constantinople (381) and the Council
of Ephesus (431), and rejected the dogmatic definitions of the Council of
Chalcedon (451). Hence, these churches are also called "Old Oriental Churches".
Oriental Orthodoxy developed in reaction to Chalcedon on the eastern limit of
the Byzantine Empire and in Egypt and Syria. In those locations, there are now
also Orthodox Patriarchs, but the rivalry between the two has largely vanished
in the centuries since schism. Church of the East. Historically, the Church of
the East was the widest reaching branch of Eastern Christianity, at its height
spreading from its heartland in Persian ruled Mesopotamia to the Mediterranean,
India, and China. Originally the church of Sassanid Persia, the Church of the
East declared itself independent of other churches in 424 and over the next
century became affiliated with Nestorianism, a Christological doctrine advanced
by Nestorius, Patriarch of Constantinople from 428 to 431, which had been
declared heretical in the Roman Empire. Thereafter it was often known as the
Nestorian Church in the West. Surviving a period of persecution within Persia,
the Church of the East flourished under the caliphate and branched out,
establishing dioceses throughout Asia. After a period of expansion under the
Mongol Empire, the church went into decline through the 14th century, and was
eventually confined largely to its heartland in what is now Iraq, northeastern
Syria,southeastern Turkey, northwestern Iran and to the Malabar Coast of India.
In the 16th century dynastic struggles sent the church into schism, resulting
in the formation of two rival churches. Two modern churches developed from the
schism, the Chaldean Church, which entered into communion with Rome as an
Eastern Catholic Church, and the Assyrian Church of the East,the followers of
these two churches are almost exclusively ethnic Assyrians. In India, the local
Church of the East community, known as the Saint Thomas Christians, experienced
its own rifts as a result of Portuguese influence. Assyrian Church of the East.
The Assyrian Church of the East emerged from the historical Church of the East,
which was centered in Mesopotamia/Assyria, then part of the Persian Empire and
spread widely throughout Asia. The modern Assyrian Church of the East emerged
in the 16th century following a split with the Chaldean Church, which later
entered into communion with Rome as an Eastern Catholic Church. The Church of
the East was associated with the doctrine of Nestorianism, advanced by
Nestorius, Patriarch of Constantinople from 428 – 431, which emphasized the
disunion between the human and divine natures of Jesus. Nestorius and his
doctrine were condemned at the First Council of Ephesus in 431, leading to the
Nestorian Schism in which churches supporting Nestorius split from the rest of
Christianity. Many followers relocated to Persia and became affiliated with the
local Christian community there; this adopted an increasingly Nestorian
theology and was thereafter often known as the Nestorian Church. As such, the
Church of the East accepts only the first two Ecumenical Councils of the
undivided Church — the First Council of Nicaea and the First Council of
Constantinople — as defining its faith tradition, and rapidly took a
different course from other Eastern Christians. The Church of the East spread
widely through Persia and into Asia, being introduced to India by the 6th
century and to the Mongols and China in the 7th century. It experienced
periodic expansion until the 14th century, when the church was nearly destroyed
by the collapse of the Mongol Empire and the conquests of Timur. By the 16th
century it was largely confined to Iraq, northeast Syria, southeast Turkey,
northwest Iran and the Malabar Coast of India (Kerala). The split of the 15th
century, which saw the emergence of separate Assyrian and Chaldean Churches,
left only the former as an independent sect. Further splits into the 20th
century further affected the history of the Assyrian Church of the East.
Eastern Catholic Churches. The twenty-two Eastern Catholic churches are all in
communion with the Holy See at the Vatican, but are rooted in the theological
and liturgical traditions of Eastern Christianity. Many of these churches were
originally part of one of the above families and so are closely related to them
by way of ethos and liturgical practice. As in the other Eastern churches,
married men may become priests, and parish priests administer the mystery of
confirmation to newborn infants immediately after baptism, via the rite of
chrismation; the infants are then administered Holy Communion. Other Christians
of Kerala, who were originally of the same East-Syrian tradition, passed
instead to the West-Syrian tradition and now form part of Oriental Orthodoxy
(some from the Oriental Orthodox in India united with the Catholic Church in
1930 and became the Syro-Malankara Catholic Church). The Maronite Church also
claims never to have been separated from Rome, and has no counterpart Orthodox
Church out of communion with the Pope. It is therefore inaccurate to refer to
it as a "Uniate" Church. The Italo-Albanian Catholic Church has also never been
out of communion with Rome, but, unlike the Maronite Church, it resembles
Orthodox Church's liturgical rite. Rejection of uniatism. At a meeting in
Balamand, Lebanon in June 1993, the Joint International Commission for the
Theological Dialogue between the Catholic Church and the Orthodox Church
declared that these initiatives that "led to the union of certain communities
with the See of Rome and brought with them, as a consequence, the breaking of
communion with their Mother Churches of the East … took place not without the
interference of extra-ecclesial interests"; and that what has been called
"uniatism" "can no longer be accepted either as a method to be followed nor as
a model of the unity our Churches are seeking" (section 12). Saint Thomas
Christians. The Saint Thomas Christians are an ancient body of Christians on
the southwest coast of India who trace their origins to the evangelical
activity of Thomas the Apostle in the 1st century. By the 5th century the Saint
Thomas Christians were part of the Church of the East, or Nestorian Church.
Until the middle of the 17th century and the arrival of the Portuguese, the
Thomas Christians were all one in faith and rite. Thereafter, divisions arose
among them, and consequently they are today of several different rites.
Catholic–Orthodox ecumenism. Ecumenical dialogue over the past 43 years since
Paul VI's meeting with the Orthodox Patriarch Athenagoras I has awoken the
nearly 1000-year hopes for Christian unity. Since the lifting of
excommunications during the Paul VI and Athenagoras I meeting in Jerusalem
there have been other significant meetings between Popes and Ecumenical
Patriarchs of Constantinople. The most recent meeting was between Benedict XVI
and Bartholomew I, who signed the "Common Declaration". It states that "We give
thanks to the Author of all that is good, who allows us once again, in prayer
and in dialogue, to express the joy we feel as brothers and to renew "our
commitment to move towards full communion"".[http://www.ecupatriarchate.org/
] Dissenting movements. In addition to these four mainstream branches, there
are a number of much smaller groups which, like Protestants, originated from
disputes with the dominant tradition of their original areas, but are usually
not referred to as Protestants because they lack historical ties to the
Reformation, and usually lack a classically Protestant theology. Most of these
are either part of the more traditional Old Believer movement, which arose from
a schism within Russian Orthodoxy, or the more radical "Spiritual Christianity"
movement. The latter includes a number of diverse "low-church" groups, from the
Bible-centered Molokans to the anarchic Doukhobors to the self-mutilating
Skoptsy. None of these groups are in communion with the mainstream churches
listed above, aside from a few Old Believer parishes in communion with the
Russian Orthodox Church Outside Russia. There are national dissidents, where
ethnic groups want their own nation-church like with the Macedonian Orthodox
Church and Montenegrin Orthodox Church; both domiciles of the Serbian Orthodox
Church. However, it should be noted that in Macedonia, the influence of the
Serbian Orthodox Church is minimal, due to Macedonia's efforts to create an
autocephalous Macedonian primacy in the Orthodox Church. The vast majority of
Orthodox ethnic Macedonians view the Serbian Orthodox Church as hostile to
Macedonian history, national interests, and self-determination. A little known
movement of "reformers" in the Greek Orthodox Church traces its history to the
18th century. The leaders of this "schism" within the Orthodox Christian
churches were called by a Greek word meaning 'unstable' ("astateos"). The
children of these leaders left the East toward Western Europe, mainly Spain. In
Ibero America these families are known by the derivative name 'Astacios' or
'Astacio.' One of their descendants was one of the first converts to the
Pentecostal movement in 1916, Petra Astacio, of Montellano (Ponce, Puerto
Rico). The Astacios have intermarried with native people of the Americas as
well as with Spanish Jews (Sephardim) and Afro-Caribbeans. Immigration trends.
The basic trend among Eastern Christians in the 20th-century was immigration
from the near east to the West. One thousand years ago Christians were the
majority population in today's Turkey, Iraq, Syria, Lebanon, Jordan, Palestine
and Egypt. In 1914 they numbered 25% of the population in the Ottoman Empire.
Christians in the beginning of the 21st century constitute a mere 6–7 percent
of this region’s inhabitants: less than 1% in Turkey, 3% in Iraq. 12% in
Syria, 39% in Lebanon, 6% in Jordan, 2.5% in Israel/Palestine and 15–20% in
Egypt. See also. For other definitions and meaning for the word "orthodox", see
"Orthodoxy".
