Ecclesiology Ecclesiology usually refers to the theological study of the
Christian Church. However, when the word was coined in England in the late
1830s, it was defined as the science of the building and decoration of church
buildings and it is still, though rarely, used in this sense. In its
theological sense, ecclesiology deals with the church's origin, its
relationship to Jesus, its role in salvation, its discipline, its destiny, and
its leadership. Since different ecclesiologies give shape to very different
institutions, the word may also refer to a particular church or
denomination’s character, self-described or otherwise – hence phrases such
as "Roman Catholic ecclesiology", "Lutheran ecclesiology", and "ecumenical
ecclesiology". Etymology. The roots of the word "ecclesiology" come from the
Greek , "ekklēsiā" (Latin ecclesia) meaning ", church"; and , "-logia",
meaning "words", "knowledge", or "logic", a combining term used in the names of
sciences or bodies of knowledge. Its first appearance in print, as
"ecclesialogy", was in the quarterly journal "The British Critic" in 1837, in
an article written by an anonymous contributor who defined it thus: However in
volume 4 of the Cambridge Camden Society's journal "The Ecclesiologist",
published in January 1845 that society (the CCS) claimed that they had invented
the word "ecclesiology": "The Ecclesiologist" was first published in October
1841 and dealt with the study of the building and decoration of churches. It
particularly encouraged the restoration of Anglican churches back to their
supposed Gothic splendour and it was at the centre of the wave of Victorian
restoration that spread across England and Wales in the second half of the 19th
century. Its successor "Ecclesiology Today" is still, as of 2011, being
published by The Ecclesiological Society (successor to the CCS, now a
registered charity). The situation regarding the etymology has been summed up
by Alister McGrath: "'Ecclesiology' is a term that has changed its meaning in
recent theology. Formerly the science of the building and decoration of
churches, promoted by the Cambridge Camden Society, the Ecclesiological Society
and the journal The Ecclesiologist, ecclesiology now stands for the study of
the nature of the Christian church." Roman Catholic ecclesiology. Roman
Catholic ecclesiology today has a plurality of models and views, as with all
Roman Catholic Theology since the acceptance of scholarly Biblical criticism
that began in the early to mid 20th century. This shift is most clearly marked
by the encyclical Divino Afflante Spiritu in 1943. Cardinal Avery Dulles, S.J.
contributed greatly to the use of models in understanding ecclesiology. In his
work Models of the Church, he defines four basic models of Church that have
been prevalent throughout the history of the Catholic Church. These include
models of the Church as institution, as mystical communion, as herald, and as
servant. The ecclesiological model of Church as an Institution holds that the
Catholic Church alone is the "one, holy, catholic and apostolic Church", and is
the only Church of divine and apostolic origin. This view of the Church is
dogmatically defined Catholic doctrine, and is therefore de fide. In this view,
the Catholic Church— composed of all baptized, professing Catholics, both
clergy and laity— is the unified, visible society founded by Christ himself,
and its hierarchy derives its spiritual authority through the centuries, via
apostolic succession of its bishops, most especially through the bishop of Rome
(the Pope) whose successorship comes from St. Peter the Apostle, whom Christ
gave "the keys to the Kingdom of Heaven". Thus, the Popes, in the Catholic
view, have a God-ordained universal jurisdiction over the whole Church on
earth. The Catholic Church is considered Christ's mystical body, and the
universal sacrament of salvation, whereby Christ enables men to receive
sanctifying grace. The model of Church as Mystical Communion draws on two major
Biblical images, the first of the "Mystical Body of Christ" (as developed in
Paul's Epistles) and the second of the "People of God." This ecclesiological
model draws upon sociology and articulations of two types of social
relationships: a formally organized or structured society (Gesellschaft) and an
informal or interpersonal community (Gemeinschaft). The Roman Catholic
theologian Arnold Rademacher maintained that the Church in its inner core is
community (Gemeinschaft) and in its outer core society (Gesellschaft). Here,
the interpersonal aspect of the Church is given primacy and that the structured
Church is the result of a real community of believers. Similarly, Yves Congar
argued that the ultimate reality of the Church is a fellowship of persons. This
ecclesiology opens itself to ecumenism and was the prevailing model used by the
Second Vatican Council (itself considered by Roman Catholics an ecumenical
council). The Council, using this model, recognized in its document Lumen
Gentium that the Body of Christ subsists in a visible society governed by the
Successor of Peter and by the Bishops in communion with him, although many
elements of sanctification and of truth are found outside of its visible
structure. Eastern Orthodox ecclesiology. From the Orthodox perspective, the
Church is one, even though She is manifested in many places. Orthodox
ecclesiology operates with a plurality in unity and a unity in plurality. For
Orthodoxy there is no ‘either / or’ between the one and the many. No
attempt is made, or should be made, to subordinate the many to the one (the
Roman Catholic model), nor the one to the many (the Protestant model). It is
both canonically and theologically correct to speak of the Church and the
churches, and vice versa. Protestant ecclesiology. Magisterial Reformation
ecclesiology. Martin Luther argued that because the Catholic Church had "lost
sight of the doctrine of grace", it had "lost its claim to be considered as the
authentic Christian church." ; this argument was open to the counter-criticism
from Catholics that he was thus guilty of schism and the heresy of Donatism,
and in both cases therefore opposing central teachings of the early Church and
most especially the Church father St. Augustine of Hippo. It also challenged
the Catholic doctrine that the Catholic Church was indefectible and infallible
in its dogmatic teachings. Radical Reformation ecclesiology. There is no single
"Radical Reformation Ecclesiology". A variety of views is expressed among the
various "Radical Reformation" participants. This was in direct contrast to the
hierarchical, sacramental ecclesiology that characterised the incumbent Roman
Catholic tradition as well as the new Lutheran and other prominent Protestant
movements of the Reformation. Some other Radical Reformation ecclesiology holds
that "the true church in heaven, and no institution of any kind on earth merit
[s the name 'church of God.'"
