Eckankar Eckankar is a new religious movement founded in the United States in
1965. It focuses on spiritual exercises claimed to enable practitioners to
experience what its followers call "the Light and Sound of God." The personal
experience of this spiritual Light and Sound is a primary goal of the teaching.
It claims to provide a personal, unique and individual spiritual inner path to
understanding of self as soul, and development of higher awareness
"consciousness" and God. An adherent of the religion is an "Eckist". According
to the Eckankar glossary, the term "Eckankar" means "Co-Worker with God".
Eckankar is described as "Religion of the Light and Sound of God". Eckankar has
also been described as "The Ancient Science of Soul Travel," "The Science of
Total Awareness," and "A Way of Life". ECK is another word for the Holy Spirit,
also known as the Audible Life Current, Life Force, or Light and Sound of God.
Linguistically, however, "Eckankar" derives from "Ekankār" or "Ik Oankār"
(Sanskrit "Eka Omkāra"), a name for God given by Guru Nānak and the very
first word of the Mūl Mantra (recited everyday by Sikhs), the Japjī Sahib,
and the Sri Guru Granth Sahib (Sikh holy scriptures). The word "ek" or "ik" is
the number "one" in Hindī, Urdu, and Pañjabī (from the Sanskrit "eka").
"Ekankar", when written in the Gurmukhī alphabet, is one of the two symbols of
the Sikh faith (the other being the khanda) and can be found written or drawn
on Sikh items, motor vehicles, and in all Sikh edifices and Gurdwāra (temple).
Eckankar's headquarters are in Chanhassen, Minnesota, southwest of Minneapolis.
The Eckankar Temple, an outdoor chapel, an administrative building, and the ECK
Spiritual Campus are located at this site. History. The leader of Eckankar is
known as the Mahanta, the Living ECK Master. According to Eckankar doctrine,
the Living ECK Master is respected, but not worshipped, by followers of
Eckankar and is seen as a spiritual guide for their own spiritual progress.
Paul Twitchell founded Eckankar in 1965 as the Mahanta, the Living ECK Master
and led it until his death in 1971. Darwin Gross (spiritual name: Dap Ren) then
became the Mahanta serving until 1981. On October 23, 1981, Harold Klemp became
the Mahanta and is the current spiritual leader of Eckankar. Teachings. One of
the basic tenets is that Soul (the true self) can leave the body in full
consciousness and travel freely in other planes of reality. Eckankar emphasizes
personal spiritual experiences as the most natural way back to God. These are
attained via "Soul Travel", shifting the awareness from the body to the inner
planes of existence. Certain mantras or chants are used to facilitate spiritual
growth. One important spiritual exercise of Eckankar is the singing or chanting
of "HU". The "HU" has been used in the Sufi and other mystical traditions, and
is viewed in Eckankar as a "love song to God". In American English, it is
pronounced like the word "hue" in a long, drawn-out breath, and is sung for
about 20 minutes. ECKists sing it alone or in groups. ECKists believe this
practice allows the student to step back from the overwhelming input of the
physical senses and emotions and regain Soul's spiritually higher viewpoint.
Dreams are regarded as important teaching tools, and members often keep dream
journals to facilitate study. According to followers of Eckankar, dream travel
often serves as the gateway to Soul Travel or the shifting of one's
consciousness to ever-higher states of being. Eckankar teaches that "spiritual
liberation" in one's lifetime is available to all and that it is possible to
achieve Self-Realization (the realization of oneself as Soul) and God-
Realization (the realization of oneself as a spark of God) in one's lifetime.
The membership card for Eckankar states: "The aim and purpose of Eckankar has
always been to take Soul by Its own path back to Its divine source." The
"Shariyat-Ki-Sugmad", which means "Way of the Eternal", is the holy scripture
of Eckankar. The "Shariyat", as ECKists call it, is a set of two books that
tell of spiritual meaning and purpose as written by the Mahanta, the current
head of Eckankar. Some of the key beliefs taught in the "Shariyat-Ki-Sugmad"
include Soul Travel, karma, reincarnation, love, Light and Sound, and many
other spiritual topics. ECKists believe Sugmad is the endless source from which
all forms were created, and that the ECK, the Sound Current, flows out of
Sugmad and into lower dimensions. The "Shariyat-Ki-Sugmad" is a set of two
books and may now be considered scripture of Eckankar, however there are also a
series of Satsang writings, that are available with yearly membership in
Eckankar. There are Satsang classes available to study discourses with others,
as well as individually. Worship. Eckankar emphasizes personal spiritual
experiences as the most natural way back to God. These are attained via the
Spiritual Exercises of ECK. Just as physical exercise helps one build physical
vitality, Eckists use the spiritual exercises of ECK to help build spiritual
vitality. There are many forms of spiritual exercise. Eckankar offers a
Spiritual Exercise of the Week on it's website. One important spiritual
exercise of Eckankar is the singing or chanting of HU. "HU" is an ancient name
for God that has been used in many historical cultures including ancient Egypt
and the Sufi tradition. HU is viewed in Eckankar as a "love song to God". In
American English, it is pronounced like the word "hue" in a long, drawn-out
breath, and is sung for about 20 minutes. ECKists sing it alone or in groups.
ECKists believe that singing HU draws one closer in state of consciousness to
the Divine Being and that it can expand awareness, help one experience divine
love, heal broken hears, offer solace in times of grief, and bring peace and
calm. Eckankar hosts community HU Songs in most major cities and many local
areas around the world. The Community HU Song is presented as a service to the
local area and is open to people of all faiths. It consists of a 20 minute
singing of the HU followed by a five minute contemplation. Attendees are
invited to join in or merely observe silently. The Community HU Song is
followed by a period of fellowship and refreshments. Eckankar holds ECK Worship
Services in most major cities and many local areas around the world. An ECK
Worship service generally includes a HU Song and contemplation, a talk or panel
discussion from members of the Eckankar Clergy, and often includes creative
arts and group discussion. Eckankar hosts a Worldwide Seminar in October and a
Springtime Seminar every year. Eckankar also hosts annual seminars in many
areas around the world. ECK seminars include speakers, creative arts,
workshops, discussion groups and other activities. Spiritual leader. Harold
Klemp. Sri Harold Klemp is currently the "Mahanta", the Living ECK Master. His
spiritual name is Wah Z. Eckankar always has a living master. Harold Klemp has
authored numerous books, articles and discourses about the teachings of ECK.
Audio and video recordings are available of his talks. He grew up on a
Wisconsin farm, attended divinity school, and was a member of the Rosicrucian
Order. In the 1960s he began studying the teachings of ECK. After years of
rigorous spiritual training he became the Mahanta, the Living ECK Master in
1981. "He has the ability to act as both the Inner and Outer Master for
students of Eckankar." Eckankar claims that "many students of Eckankar report
uplifting and life changing encounters with the inner Master, Wah Z, through
dreams, spiritual exercises, soul travel experiences, and other means". Klemp
claims that "his teachings lift people and help them understand their own
experiences in the Light and Sound of God". "As the Living ECK Master, Harold
Klemp is responsible for the continued evolution of the Eckankar teachings."
Origins. Although Twitchell founded Eckankar in 1965, ECKists claim that the
basis for the Eckankar teachings dates back to the beginning of human life.
Eckankar's headquarters was originally in Las Vegas, Nevada. Under the
leadership of Darwin Gross, the organization was moved to Menlo Park,
California in 1975. In 1986, Harold Klemp moved the base of operations to
Minnesota, where it remains today. Eckankar is accepted as a religion by the
U.S. Army. Beliefs. Primary to the teaching is the belief that soul can leave
the body. Also, the concepts of karma and reincarnation help to explain
situations in life as the playing out of past causes. The beliefs that
individuals are responsible for their own destiny and that their decisions
determine their future are important concepts to Eckankar. Eckankar students
meet in open public services and classes to discuss personal experiences,
topics, books and discourses. According to the U.S. Department of State
(International Religious Freedom Report for Côte d'Ivoire 2008), the current
Nigerian branch of Eckankar describes its beliefs as "a syncretistic religion
founded in 1965 in Nigeria that sees human passion as an obstacle to uniting a
person's divine qualities". Current status. Eckankar's main "Temple of ECK" was
dedicated in Chanhassen, Minnesota on October 22, 1990. As of late 2007, the
largest capacity Eckankar Temple was in Port Harcourt, Rivers State, Nigeria,
with a total capacity of 10,000. The Eckankar "EK" symbol appears on the list
of Available Emblems of Belief for Placement on Government Headstones and
Markers by the United States Department of Veterans Affairs. Estimates on the
number of Eckists worldwid ranges from 50,000 to 500,000. Ceremonies and rites.
There are few personal requirements to be an ECKist; however, certain spiritual
practices are recommended. Chief among these is daily practice of the
"Spiritual Exercises of ECK" for 15–20 minutes. The most basic ECK spiritual
exercise is singing the word "HU", an ancient name for God, for upliftment and
spiritual experiences. A wide variety of spiritual exercises are offered, and
members are encouraged to create their own. There are no dietary requirements,
taboos, or enforced ascetic practices. Eckankar does not require potential
members to leave their current faith to join. There are a number of ceremonies
an ECKist can experience as part of the teaching: In Eckankar's original form,
the Consecration Ceremony, Rite of Passage, and Memorial Service did not exist.
Sri Harold Klemp, the Living ECK Master, added them later. ECKists celebrate a
spiritual new year on October 22. There is no organizational celebration of
personal anniversaries, such as birthdays of the leaders. ECK Masters. ECKists
believe contact with Divine Spirit, which they call the "ECK", can be made via
the spiritual exercises of ECK and the guidance of the living ECK Master. It is
held that the ECK Masters are here to serve all life irrespective of religious
belief. The main Eckankar website offers this list of Masters: Official
Eckankar Masters List Related groups. Several groups claimed to carry on the
original teachings of Paul Twitchell and Eckankar. Sri Darwin Gross (now
deceased) used the name Ancient Teaching of the Masters (ATOM), after being
precluded from using the Eck terminology, Sri Paul Marché claims to carry on
for his Master, Sri Darwin Gross using the name Dhunami after being precluded
from using the ATOM terminology. Other claimants include AKATHA [http://
akatha.com/—and Sri Timothy Arnold / Sri Kahtifji (The Mahaji) respectively.
John-Roger's Movement of Spiritual Inner Awareness appears to have split from
the main body of Eckankar, though Gross, Marché and Sri Kahtifji claim to be
preserving the originality of the teachings. John-Roger / Roger Delano Hinkins
(2nd initiate) denies any connection to Eckankar beyond having once been a
student of Paul Twitchell. More recently, former ECKist Ford Johnson formed a
spiritual organization based on the idea that one does not need a master or
spiritual guru to achieve spiritual enlightenment. Other former ECKists and
their groups, like Sri Michael Owens's "The Way of Truth: Path to God
Realization"; Sri Michael Turner's "Yahoo group"; Sri Gary Olsen's
"MasterPath"; ex-6th initiate Jerry "Sur Toma" Mulvin's THE DIVINE SCIENCE OF
LIGHT AND SOUND; and Evan Pritchard (author, "From the Temple Within") could be
seen as individuals and organizations that maintain Eckankar-like cosmogonies.
All these groups along with Eckankar were founded in the United States in the
twentieth century. David C. Lane, a philosophy professor, discusses the
phenomenon of those American teachers. Lane suggests these might be seen more
traditionally as an organic continuum or an historical school of "American
Shabd" teachings, rather than a "splintering" of any movement. Lane is already
distinguished in this particular subject for his research from the late 1990s
concerning perceptions of distortions, plagiarism and concealment involving
author Paul Twitchell during the first three decades of Eckankar's existence.
The current leader of Eckankar has stated that members should feel free to
leave Eckankar unbounded by guilt or fear. Criticism. Internet communities of
current members, ex-members and critics, such as the Usenet newsgroup
alt.religion.eckankar, include discussion dating back more than ten years.
Eckankar has been labeled a cult by some, including both former members and
conservative Christian writers. After Twitchell's death in 1971, David C. Lane
published a book that claimed some of Twitchell's Eckankar books contained
passages from other authors' books without proper citation. Lane claims
Twitchell's "The Far Country" contains plagiarism (of "With a Great Master in
India" and "The Path of the Masters" by Julian Johnson of the Radha Soami
Satsang Beas). Eckankar states that Twitchell's role was that of "master
compiler", saying; Master Compiler [http://www.eckankar.org/Masters/Peddar/
writings.html] Paul gathered up the whole teaching and took the best. Though it
may be a strange thing to say, in this sense I see him as a master compiler. He
gathered the golden teachings that were scattered around the world and made
them readily available to us. So now we don't have to feel that we must spend
ten or fifteen years in an ashram in India, sitting around in the dust with the
flies, or locked in a walled-up little cell to keep our attention from the
outside world, in order to live the spiritual life. In 2007, Doug Marman, an
Eckankar High Initiate, published "The Whole Truth", a biography of Paul
Twitchell, refuting these claims made by Lane. The information is highly
detailed and examines the criticisms point by point through verifiable
historical references. Marman also examines the rarity of respectful dialog in
an age of criticism. In relation to this book, Twitchell's widow, Gail
Twitchell, has written "...finally, someone got the whole thing right ...
Paul's work in in the proper perspective." Twitchell biographer and paranormal
researcher Brad Steiger has also written and commended this work as the most
researched and authoritative to date on Paul Twitchell. Lane has published
commentary on Marman's book, reaffirming his view that Twitchell tried to cover
up his past associations and plagiarized several authors. However Harold Klemp
has been criticized by several groups including AKATHA. and ATOM for losing
sight of Paul Twitchell’s original teachings and creating a Religion and
Cosmic consciousness path instead of a direct path back to Self-Realization,
God-Realization and Eck Mastership as these groups claim Paul Twitchell clearly
stated in his writings until his death in 1971. The emphasis has shifted away
from out-of-body experiences to expansion of awareness through experiencing
God's love in everyday matters. The final spiritual goal of all ECKists is to
become conscious "Co-workers" with God.
