Economy (religion) In the Eastern Orthodox, Greek-Catholic Churches, Latin
Catholic Church, and in the teaching of the Church Fathers which undergirds the
theology of those Churches, economy or oeconomy (Greek: οἰκονομία,
"oikonomia") has several meanings. The basic meaning of the word is "handling"
or "disposition" or "management" or more literally "housekeeping" of a thing,
usually assuming or implying "good" or "prudent" handling (as opposed to "poor"
handling) of the matter at hand. In short, "economia" is discretionary
deviation from the letter of the law in order to adhere to the spirit of the
law and charity. This is in contrast to legalism, or "akribia" (Greek:
ακριβεια)—strict adherence to the letter of the law of the church. As
such, the word "economy", and the concept attaching to it, are utilized
especially with regard to two types of "handling": (a) "divine economy", that
is, God's "handling" or "management" of the fallen state of the world and of
mankind — the arrangements he made in order to bring about man's salvation
after the Fall; and (b) what might be termed "pastoral economy" (or)
"ecclesiastical economy", that is, the Church's "handling" or "management" of
various pastoral and disciplinary questions, problems, and issues that have
arisen through the centuries of Church history. Divine economy. The divine
economy, in the broadest sense, not only refers to God's actions to bring about
the world's salvation and redemption, but to "all" of God's dealings with, and
interactions with, the world, including the Creation. In this sense, "economy",
as used in classical Orthodox doctrinal terminology, constituted the second
broad division of all Christian doctrinal teaching. The first division was
called "theology" (literally, "words about God" or "teaching about God") and
was concerned with all that pertains to God alone, in himself — the teaching
on the Trinity, the divine attributes, and so on, but not with anything
pertaining to the creation or the redemption. "...The distinction between
οικονομια and θεολογια ... remains common to most of the Greek
Fathers and to all of the Byzantine tradition. θεολογια ... means, in
the fourth century, everything which can be said of God considered in Himself,
outside of His creative and redemptive economy. To reach this 'theology'
properly so-called, one therefore must go beyond ... God as Creator of the
universe, in order to be able to extricate the notion of the Trinity from the
cosmological implications proper to the 'economy.'" Ecclesiastical economy. As
noted earlier, "economy" also refers to the Church's "handling" or "management"
or "disposition" of various pastoral and disciplinary questions, problems, and
issues. Here again, "economy" is used in several ways. In one sense, it refers
to the discretionary power given to the Church by Christ himself to manage and
govern the Church. Christ referred to this when he gave the apostles the
authority to "bind and to loose" (Matthew 16:19, 18:18). This authority was
transmitted to the bishops who came after the apostles. In this sense "economy"
means, as already noted, "handling", "management", "disposition". In general
then, "economy" refers to pastoral handling or discretion or management in a
neutral sense. An example in the New Testament of the application of lenient
economy, or "economy according to leniency", is found in Acts chapter 15, where
the Apostles decided to limit the number and degree of Jewish observances that
would be required of Gentile converts. An example in the New Testament of the
application of strict economy, or "economy according to exactness (or,
strictness, preciseness) ["akribeia"]", may be seen in Acts 16:3, when St. Paul
set aside the usual rule to circumcise Timothy, whose father was a gentile, to
placate certain Jewish Christians. In both instances, economy was exercised to
facilitate the salvation of some of the parties involved. In Orthodox Church
history, examples and instances of economy abound. Since ancient times,
converts to the Church who were coming from certain heretical groups were not
required to be baptized, even though the normal path of entrance to the Church
was through baptism. Thus the Church, guided by the Holy Spirit, decided that
under specific conditions, the application of economy (i.e. according to
leniency) would be the norm in this matter. But since the usual rule is
baptism, such leniency can easily be, and sometimes has been, suspended
(usually in periods when the heretical groups in question were actively
opposing the Church). In these cases, the Church returned to her customary
usual rule of "exactness," not applying economy (or not applying economy
according to lenience). In calling for the reception of converts into Orthodoxy
through means other than baptism in certain cases, the Ecumenical Councils made
no determination regarding the existence of sacraments outside of Orthodoxy,
but only addressed the situation of the convert to Orthodoxy. Divine Economics
It is the study of economics and religion in each other's perspective using
scientific process. Although formally modelled by Dr Hamdani in 1999 as his PhD
dissertation, the work gradually emerged as a sub-discipline in economics.
