Ecumenical council An ecumenical council (or oecumenical council; also general
council) is a conference of ecclesiastical dignitaries and theological experts
convened to discuss and settle matters of Church doctrine and practice. The
word "ecumenical" derives from the Greek language "", which literally means
"the inhabited world", – a reference to the Roman Empire that later was
extended to apply to the world in general. Due to schisms, only the two
earliest councils can be considered to have included bishops of the entire
Christian Church, as it existed before those schisms. Later councils included
bishops of only parts of the Church as previously constituted, leading the
Christians who do not belong to those parts to reject the actions of those
councils. Acceptance of these councils thus varies between different branches
of Christianity. Disputes over christological questions have led certain
branches to reject some of the councils that others accept. Acceptance of
councils by denomination. The Church of the East (accused by others of adhering
to Nestorianism) accepts as ecumenical only the first two councils. Oriental
Orthodox Churches accept the first three. Both the Eastern Orthodox Church and
Roman Catholic Church recognise as ecumenical the first seven councils, held
from the 4th to the 9th century; but while the Eastern Orthodox Church accepts
no later council or synod as ecumenical, the Roman Catholic Church continues to
hold general councils of the bishops in full communion with the Pope, reckoning
them as ecumenical, and counting in all, including the seven recognized by the
Eastern Orthodox Church, twenty-one to date. Anglicans and confessional
Protestants, accept either the first seven or the first four as Ecumenical
councils. Infallibility of ecumenical councils. The doctrine of the
"infallibility of ecumenical councils" states that solemn definitions of
ecumenical councils, approved by the Pope, which concern faith or morals, and
to which the whole Church must adhere are infallible. Such decrees are often
labeled as 'Canons' and they often have an attached anathema, a penalty of
excommunication, against those who refuse to believe the teaching. The doctrine
does not claim that every aspect of every ecumenical council is infallible. The
Roman Catholic Church holds this doctrine, as do most or all Eastern Orthodox
theologians. However, the Orthodox churches accept only the first seven general
councils as genuinely ecumenical, while Roman Catholics accept twenty-one. Only
a very few Protestants believe in the infallibility of ecumenical councils, but
they usually restrict this infallibility to the Christological statements of
the first seven councils. Lutheran Christians recognize the first four
councils, whereas most High Church Anglicans accept all seven as persuasive but
not infallible. While the Russian Orthodox Church does recognize the first
seven ecumenical councils as valid, some Russian Orthodox theologians believe
that the infallibility of these councils' statements derived from their
acceptance by the faithful (and thus from the infallibility of all believers),
and not from the acts of the councils themselves. This differs from the Greek
Orthodox view, which accepts that an ecumenical council is itself infallible
when pronouncing on a specific matter. However this is not inflexible as the
iconoclasm controversy was instigated by order of an ecumenical council
(Council of Hieria), which took another ecumenical council (Second Council of
Nicaea 787) to reverse. Council documents. Church councils were, from the
beginning, bureaucratic exercises. Written documents were circulated, speeches
made and responded to, votes taken, and final documents published and
distributed. A large part of what is known about the beliefs of heresies comes
from the documents quoted in councils in order to be refuted, or indeed only
from the deductions based on the refutations. Most councils dealt not only with
doctrinal but also with disciplinary matters, which were decided in "canons"
("laws"). In some cases other survives as well. Study of the canons of church
councils is the foundation of the development of canon law, especially the
reconciling of seemingly contradictory canons or the determination of priority
between them. Canons consist of doctrinal statements and disciplinary measures
– most Church councils and local synods dealt with immediate disciplinary
concerns as well as major difficulties of doctrine. Eastern Orthodoxy typically
views the purely doctrinal canons as dogmatic and applicable to the entire
church at all times, while the disciplinary canons apply to a particular time
and place and may or may not be applicable in other situations. Circumstances
of the first ecumenical councils. Of the seven councils recognized in whole or
in part by both the Roman Catholic and the Eastern Orthodox Church as
ecumenical, all were called by the Roman Emperor, not by the Pope. The emperor
gave them legal status within the entire Roman Empire. All were held in the
eastern part of the Roman Empire. The Pope did not attend, although he sent
legates to some of them. The ecumenical councils are seen as traditional and as
a continuation of previous councils or synods, which had already been held in
the Empire before Christianity was made legal. Pre-ecumenical councils (also
known as synods) include the Council of Jerusalem (c. 50), the Council of Rome
(155 AD), the Second Council of Rome (193 AD), the Council of Ephesus (193 AD),
the Council of Carthage (251 AD), the Council of Iconium (258 AD), the Council
of Antioch (264 AD), the Councils of Arabia (246–247 AD), the Council of
Elvira (306 AD), the Council of Carthage (311 AD), the Synod of Neo-Caesarea
(c. 314 AD), the Council of Ancyra (314 AD) and the Council of Arles (314 AD).
The first seven councils recognized in both East and West as ecumenical and
several others to which such recognition is refused were called by the
Byzantine emperors. In the first millennium, various theological and political
differences such as Nestorianism or Dyophysitism caused parts of the Church to
separate after councils such as those of Ephesus and Chalcedon, but councils
recognized as ecumenical continued to be held. Roman Catholic views on those
circumstances. The Roman Catholic Church does not consider the validity of an
ecumenical council's teaching to be in any way dependent on where it is held or
on the granting or withholding of prior authorization or legal status by any
state, in line with the attitude of the 5th-century bishops who "saw the
definition of the church's faith and canons as supremely their affair, with or
without the leave of the Emperor" and who "needed no one to remind them that
Synodical process pre-dated the Christianisation of the royal court by several
centuries". The Roman Catholic Church recognizes as ecumenical various councils
held later than the First Council of Ephesus (after which churches out of
communion with the Holy See because of the Nestorian Schism did not
participate), later than the Council of Chalcedon (after which there was no
participation by churches that rejected Dyophysitism), later than the Second
Council of Nicaea (after which there was no participation by the Eastern
Orthodox Church), and later than the Fifth Council of the Lateran (after which
groups that adhered to Protestantism did not participate). Of the twenty-one
ecumenical councils recognized by the Roman Catholic Church, some gained
recognition as ecumenical only later. Thus the Eastern First Council of
Constantinople became ecumenical only when its decrees were accepted in the
West also. List of ecumenical councils. Council of Jerusalem. The Acts of the
Apostles records the Council of Jerusalem, which addressed the question of
observation of biblical law in the early Christian community which included
Gentile converts. Although its decisions are accepted by all Christians, and
still observed in full by the Greek Orthodox, and later definitions of an
ecumenical council appear to conform to this sole biblical Council, no
Christian church calls it a mere "ecumenical council", instead it is called the
"Apostolic Council" or "Council of Jerusalem". First seven ecumenical councils.
In the history of Christianity, the First seven Ecumenical Councils, from the
First Council of Nicaea (325) to the Second Council of Nicaea (787), represent
an attempt to reach an orthodox consensus and to unify Christendom. All of the
original Seven Ecumenical Councils as recognized in whole or in part were
called by an emperor of the Eastern Roman Empire and all were held in the
Eastern Roman Empire, a recognition denied to other councils similarly called
by an Eastern Roman emperor and held in his territory, in particular the Second
Council of Ephesus (449) and the Council of Hieria (754), which saw themselves
as ecumenical. It is unlikely that formal recognition as ecumenical will be
granted to these three councils, despite the acknowledged orthodoxy of their
decisions, so that only seven are universally recognized among the Eastern
Orthodox as ecumenical. The Pan-Orthodox Council now being prepared has
sometimes been referred to as an "Eighth Ecumenical Council". Acceptance of the
councils. Although some Protestants reject the concept of an ecumenical council
establishing doctrine for the entire Christian faith, Roman Catholics,
Anglicans, Eastern Orthodox and Oriental Orthodox all accept the authority of
ecumenical councils in principle. Where they differ is in which councils they
accept and what the conditions are for a council to be considered "ecumenical".
The relationship of the Papacy to the validity of ecumenical councils is a
ground of controversy between Roman Catholicism and the Eastern Orthodox
Churches. The Roman Catholic Church holds that recognition by the Pope is an
essential element in qualifying a council as ecumenical; Eastern Orthodox view
approval by the Pope of Rome as being roughly equivalent to that of other
patriarchs. Some have held that a council is ecumenical only when all five
patriarchs of the Pentarchy are represented at it. Others reject this theory in
part because there were no patriarchs of Constantinople and Jerusalem at the
time of the first ecumenical council. Church of the East. The Church of the
East only accepts the First Council of Nicaea and the First Council of
Constantinople. It was the formulation of Mary as the Theotokos which caused a
schism with the Church of the East, now divided between the Assyrian Church of
the East and the Ancient Church of the East, while the Chaldean Catholic Church
entered into full communion with Rome in the 16th century. Meetings between
Pope John Paul II and the Assyrian Patriarch Mar Dinkha IV led to a common
Christological declaration on 11 November 1994 that "the humanity to which the
Blessed Virgin Mary gave birth always was that of the Son of God himself". Both
sides recognised the legitimacy and rightness, as expressions of the same
faith, of the Assyrian Church's liturgical invocation of Mary as "the Mother of
Christ our God and Saviour" and the Catholic Church's use of "the Mother of
God" and also as "the Mother of Christ". Oriental Orthodoxy. Oriental Orthodoxy
only accepts Nicaea I, Constantinople I and Ephesus I. The formulation of the
Chalcedonian Creed caused a schism in the Alexandrian and Syriac churches.
Reconciliatory efforts between Oriental Orthodox with the Eastern Orthodox and
the Catholic Church in the mid- and late-20th century have led to common
Christological declarations. The Oriental and Eastern Churches have also been
working toward reconciliation as a consequence of the ecumenical movement.
Eastern Orthodox Church. The Eastern Orthodox Church accepts the first seven
ecumenical councils, with the Council in Trullo considered a continuation of
the sixth. To be considered Ecumenical Orthodox accept a Council that meets the
condition that it was accepted by the whole church. That it was called together
legally is also important a factor. A case in point is the Third Ecumenical
Council where two groups met as duly called for by the emperor, each claiming
to be the legitimate council. The Emperor had called for bishops to assemble in
the city of Ephesus. Theodosius did not attend but sent his representative
Candidian to preside. However, Cyril managed to open the council over
Candidian's insistent demands that the bishops disperse until the delegation
from Syria could arrive. Cyril was able to completely control the proceedings,
completely neutralizing Candidian who favored Cyril's antagonist, Nestorius.
When the pro-Nestorius Antiochene delegation finally arrived, they decided to
convene their own council over which Candidian presided. The proceedings of
both councils were reported to the emperor who decided ultimately to depose
Cyril, Memnon and Nestorius. Nonetheless, the Orthodox accept Cyril's group as
being the legitimate council because it maintained the same teaching that the
church has always taught. Paraphrasing a rule by St Vincent of Lérins Hasler
states Orthodox believe that councils could over-rule or even depose popes. At
the Sixth Ecumenical Council Pope Honorius and Patriarch Sergius were declared
heretics. The council anathematized them and declared them tools of the devil
and cast them out of the church It is their position that since the Seventh
Ecumenical Council, there has been no synod or council of the same scope. Local
meetings of hierarchs have been called "pan-Orthodox", but these have
invariably been simply meetings of local hierarchs of whatever Eastern Orthodox
jurisdictions are party to a specific local matter. From this point of view,
there has been no fully "pan-Orthodox" (Ecumenical) council since 787.
Unfortunately, the use of the term "pan-Orthodox" is confusing to those not
within Eastern Orthodoxy, and it leads to mistaken impressions that these are
"ersatz" ecumenical councils rather than purely local councils to which nearby
Orthodox hierarchs, regardless of jurisdiction, are invited. Others, including
20th century theologians Metropolitan Hierotheos (Vlachos) of Naupactus, Fr.
John S. Romanides, and Fr. George Metallinos (all of whom refer repeatedly to
the "Eighth and Ninth Ecumenical Councils"), Fr. George Dragas, and the 1848
Encyclical of the Eastern Patriarchs (which refers explicitly to the "Eighth
Ecumenical Council" and was signed by the patriarchs of Constantinople,
Jerusalem, Antioch, and Alexandria as well as the Holy Synods of the first
three), regard other synods beyond the Seventh Ecumenical Council as being
ecumenical. From the Eastern Orthodox perspective, a council is accepted as
being ecumenical if it is accepted by the Eastern Orthodox church at large –
clergy, monks and assembly of believers. Teachings from councils that purport
to be ecumenical, but which lack this acceptance by the church at large, are,
therefore, not considered ecumenical. Furthermore Orthodox understand councils
were called for in reaction to crises within the church over matters of dogma.
For Orthodox no further council would therefore be needed until such time as a
major crises arose within the church. Roman Catholic Church. Both the Roman
Catholic and Eastern Orthodox churches recognize seven councils in the early
centuries of the church, but Roman Catholics also recognize fourteen councils
in later times called or confirmed by the Pope. (The Council of Constance was
called by the German King and later Holy Roman Emperor Sigismund and only
obtained papal confirmation later.) The Council of Florence is an example of a
council accepted as ecumenical in spite of being rejected by the East, as the
Councils of Ephesus and Chalcedon were rejected by those whom the church
considered to have thereby ceased to belong to the church. The remaining church
at large – clergy, monks and assembly of believers – accepted the council
in spite of its failure to heal the rift of the Great Schism. The first seven
councils were called by the Byzantine Emperors and the sixteenth by the future
Holy Roman Emperor Sigismund. Most historians agree that the emperors called
the councils to force the Christian bishops to resolve divisive issues and
reach consensus. One motivation for convening councils was the hope that
maintaining unity in the Church would help maintain unity in the empires. The
Roman Catholic Church teaches that an ecumenical council is a gathering of the
College of Bishops (of which the Bishop of Rome is an essential part) to
exercise in a solemn manner its supreme and full power over the whole Church.
It holds that "there never is an ecumenical council which is not confirmed or
at least recognized as such by Peter's successor". Its present canon law
requires that an ecumenical council be convoked and presided over, either
personally or through a delegate, by the Pope, who is also to decide the
agenda; but the church makes no claim that all past ecumenical councils
observed these present rules, declaring only that the Pope's confirmation or at
least recognition has always been required, and saying that the version of the
Nicene Creed adopted at the First Council of Constantinople (381) was accepted
by the Church of Rome only seventy years later, in 451. One writer has even
claimed that this council was summoned without the knowledge of the pope.
Anglican Communion. While the Councils are part of the "historic formularies"
of Anglican tradition, it is difficult to locate an explicit reference in
Anglicanism to the unconditional acceptance of all Seven Ecumenical Councils.
There is little evidence of dogmatic or canonical acceptance beyond the
statements of individual Anglican theologians and bishops. Article XXI teaches:
"General Councils ... when they be gathered together, forasmuch as they be an
assembly of men, whereof all be not governed with the Spirit and word of God,
they may err and sometime have erred, even in things pertaining to God.
Wherefore things ordained by them as necessary to salvation have neither
strength nor authority, unless it may be declared that they be taken out of
Holy Scripture." Lutheran and Methodist churches. Many Protestants (especially
those belonging to the magisterial traditions, such as Lutherans, or those such
as Methodists, that broke away from the Anglican Communion) accept the
teachings of the first seven councils but do not ascribe to the councils
themselves the same authority as Roman Catholics and the Eastern Orthodox do.
The Lutheran World Federation, in ecumenical dialogues with the Ecumenical
Patriarch of Constantinople has affirmed all of the first seven councils as
ecumenical and authoritative. Other Protestant churches. Some, including some
fundamentalist Christians, condemn the ecumenical councils for other reasons.
Independency or congregationalist polity among Protestants may involve the
rejection of any governmental structure or binding authority above local
congregations; conformity to the decisions of these councils is therefore
considered purely voluntary and the councils are to be considered binding only
insofar as those doctrines are derived from the Scriptures. Many of these
churches reject the idea that anyone other than the authors of Scripture can
directly lead other Christians by original divine authority; after the New
Testament, they assert, the doors of revelation were closed and councils can
only give advice or guidance, but have no authority. They consider new
doctrines not derived from the sealed canon of Scripture to be both impossible
and unnecessary whether proposed by church councils or by more recent prophets
(even though the canon itself was fixed by these councils). Nontrinitarian
churches. Ecumenical councils are not recognised by nontrinitarian churches
such as The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (and other
denominations within Mormonism), Jehovah's Witnesses, and Unitarians. In the
case of the former two religions, their leadership each claims direct, special,
ongoing revelation from God to establish accepted beliefs. They view the
ecumenical councils as misguided human attempts to establish doctrine, and as
attempts to divine dogmas by debate rather than by revelation.
