Ecumenism Ecumenism mainly refers to initiatives aimed at greater Christian
unity or cooperation. It is used predominantly by and with reference to
Christian denominations and Christian Churches separated by doctrine, history,
and practice. Within this particular context, the term "ecumenism" refers to
the idea of a Christian unity in the literal meaning: that there should be a
single Christian Church. Not to be confused with Nondenominational
Christianity. The word contrasts with interfaith dialogue or interfaith
pluralism aimed at unity or cooperation among diverse religions and referring
to a worldwide 'religious unity' by the advocacy of a greater sense of shared
spirituality. The word is derived from Greek ("oikoumene"), which means "the
whole inhabited world", and was historically used with specific reference to
the Roman Empire. The ecumenical vision comprises both the search for the
visible unity of the Church (Ephesians 4.3) and the 'whole inhabited earth'
(Matthew 24.14) as the concern of all Christians. In Christianity the
qualification ecumenical is originally (and still) used in terms such as
"Ecumenical council" and "Ecumenical patriarch" in the meaning of pertaining to
the totality of the larger Church (such as the Catholic Church or the Orthodox
Church) rather than being restricted to one of its constituent churches or
dioceses. Used in this original sense, the term carries no connotation of re-
uniting the historically separated Christian denominations. Christian ecumenism
and interfaith pluralism. Ecumenism is the movement within Christianity that
aims at "the recovery in thought, in action, and in organization, of the true
unity between the Church's mission to the world (its apostolate) and the
Church's obligation to be one." Thus, ecumenism is the promotion of unity or
cooperation between distinct religious groups or denominations of Christianity.
Ecumenism is distinguished from and should not be misused to mean interfaith
pluralism. The interfaith movement strives for greater mutual respect,
toleration, and co-operation among the world religions. Interfaith dialogue
between representatives of diverse faiths, does not necessarily intend
reconciling their adherents into full, organic unity with one another but
simply to promote better relations. For some Catholics it may, but not always,
have the goal of reconciling all who profess Christian faith to bring them into
a single, visible organization, i.e. through union with the Roman Catholic
Church. For some Protestants spiritual unity, and often unity on the church's
teachings on central issues, suffices. According to Lutheran theologian Edmund
Schlink, most important in Christian ecumenism is that people focus primarily
on Christ, not on separate church organizations. In Schlink's book
"Ökumenische Dogmatik" (1983), he says Christians who see the risen Christ at
work in the lives of various Christians or in diverse churches, realize that
the unity of Christ's church has never been lost, but has instead been
distorted and obscured by different historical experiences and by spiritual
myopia. Both are overcome in renewed faith in Christ. Included in that is
responding to his admonition (John 17; also Philippians 2) to be one in him and
love one another as a witness to the world. The result of mutual recognition
would be a discernible worldwide fellowship, organized in a historically new
way. Standing against the modern ecumenist movement is the traditional Orthodox
Church which staunchly maintains there is but one Church, and Orthodoxy is the
Church. Thus, theories like "sister church" or "two lungs" are generally
rejected, because in its view the Church is theologically indivisible. Leading
the anti ecumenical movement in the 1980s was Fr. John Boylan of the OCA. An
example of ecumenism is the invention of and growing usage of the Christian
Flag, which was designed to represent all of Christendom. The flag has a white
field, with a red Latin cross inside a blue canton. Ecumenical movement. The
general understanding of the ecumenical movement is that it came from the Roman
Catholic Church's attempts to reconcile with Christians who had become
separated over theological issues. After World War I the Catholic Church was
not the only church which began to make changes within the denomination. The
world war had brought much devastation to many people. The church became a
source of hope to those in need. In 1948 the first meeting of the World Council
of Churches took place. Despite the fact that the meeting had been postponed
due to World War 2, the council took place in Amsterdam with the theme of
“Man’s Disorder and God’s Design”. The focus of the church and the
council following the gathering was on the damage created by the 2nd World War.
The council and the movement went forward to continue the efforts of unity the
church globally around the idea of helping all those in need whether it be a
physical, emotional, or spiritual need. The movement led to an understanding
amongst the churches that despite difference they could join together to be an
element of great change in the world. To be an agent of hope and peace amongst
the chaos and destruction that humans seem to create. More importantly the
council and the movement lead to not only ecumenism but to the forming of
councils amongst the denominations that connected churches across continental
lines. and dialogue is the heart of ecumenical cooperation. Three approaches to
Christian unity. For a significant part of the Christian world, one of the
highest aims is the reconciliation of the various denominations by overcoming
the historical divisions within Christianity. Still, approaches to ecumenism
varies, i.e. while generally Protestants see it as agreements on teachings
about central issues of faith, an organizational unity with mutual
accountability between the parts, for Catholics and Orthodox the Christendom
unity is approached within their more concrete understanding of the Body of
Christ metaphor, this ecclesiological matter being closely linked to key
theological issues (i.e. the Eucharist), demanding full dogmatic agreement
before full communion. Thus, there are different answers even to the question
"What is the Church?", which finally is the goal of the ecumenist movement
itself. However, the desire of unity is expressed by many denominations of
Christendom, generally that all who profess faith in Christ in sincerity, would
be more fully cooperative and supportive of one another. For the Catholic and
Orthodox churches, the process of approaching one another is formally split in
two successive stages: the "dialogue of love" and the "dialogue of truth." To
the former belong the mutual revocation in 1965 of the anathemas of 1054 (see
below Contemporary developments), returning the relics of Sabbas the Sanctified
(a common saint) to Mar Saba in the same year, and the first visit of a Pope to
an Orthodox country in a millennium (Pope John Paul II accepting the invitation
of the Patriarch of the Romanian Orthodox Church, Teoctist, in 1999), among
others. The later one, involving effective theological talks on matters of
dogma, has yet to happen. Christian ecumenism can be described in terms of the
three largest divisions of Christianity: Roman Catholic, Eastern Orthodox, and
Protestant. While this underemphasizes the complexity of these divisions, it is
a useful model. Catholicism. The Catholic Church has always considered it a
duty of the highest rank to seek full unity with estranged communions of
fellow-Christians, and at the same time to reject what it saw as promiscuous
and false union that would mean being unfaithful to or glossing over the
teaching of Sacred Scripture and Tradition. The 1983 Code of Canon Law has no
corresponding canon. It absolutely forbids Catholic priests to concelebrate the
Eucharist with members of communities not in full communion with the Catholic
Church (canon 908), but allows, in certain circumstances and under certain
conditions, other sharing in the sacraments. And the "Directory for the
Application of Principles and Norms on Ecumenism", 102 states: "Christians may
be encouraged to share in spiritual activities and resources, i.e., to share
that spiritual heritage they have in common in a manner and to a degree
appropriate to their present divided state." Pope John XXIII, who convoked the
Council that brought this change of emphasis about, said that the Council's aim
was to seek renewal of the Church itself, which would serve, for those
separated from the See of Rome, as a "gentle invitation to seek and find that
unity for which Jesus Christ prayed so ardently to his heavenly Father." Some
elements of the Roman Catholic perspective on ecumenism are illustrated in the
following quotations from the Council's decree on ecumenism, "Unitatis
Redintegratio" of 21 November 1964, and Pope John Paul II's encyclical, "Ut
Unum Sint" of 25 May 1995. While some Eastern Orthodox Churches commonly
baptize converts from the Catholic Church, thereby refusing to recognize the
baptism that the converts have previously received, the Catholic Church has
always accepted the validity of all the sacraments administered by the Eastern
Orthodox and Oriental Orthodox Churches. The Catholic Church likewise has never
applied the terms "heterodox" or "heretic" to the Eastern Orthodox Church or
its members. Even the term "schism", as defined in canon 751 of its Code of
Canon Law ("the "withdrawal" of submission to the Supreme Pontiff or from
communion with the members of the Church subject to him"), does not, strictly
speaking, apply to the situation of the concrete individual members of the
Eastern Orthodox Church today as viewed by the Catholic Church. Eastern
Orthodoxy. The Oriental Orthodox and Eastern Orthodox churches are two distinct
bodies of local churches. The churches within each body share full communion,
although there is not official communion between the two bodies. Both consider
themselves to be the original church, from which the West was divided in the
5th and 11th centuries, respectively (after the 3rd and 7th Ecumenical
councils). Many theologians of the Eastern and Oriental Orthodoxies engage in
theological dialogue with each other and with some of the Western churches,
though short of full communion. The Eastern Orthodox have participated in the
interfaith movement, with students active in the World Student Christian
Federation since the late 19th century and some Orthodox patriarchs enlisting
their communions as charter members of the World Council of Churches.
Nevertheless, the Orthodox have not been willing to participate in any
redefinition of the Christian faith toward a reduced, minimal, anti-dogmatic
and anti-traditional Christianity. Christianity for the Eastern Orthodox is the
Church; and the Church is Orthodoxy—nothing less and nothing else. Therefore,
while Orthodox ecumenism is "open to dialogue with the devil himself", the
Orthodox have defined their position in the ecumenical movement as being
"witnesses to the truth", the goal being to reconcile the heterodox (i.e., non-
Orthodox) back into Orthodoxy. Also Protestants and Roman Catholics are often
referred to as "heterodox", which simply means "other believing", rather than
as heretics, implying that they did not willfully reject the Church.
Anglicanism and Protestantism. The members of the Anglican Communion have
generally embraced the Ecumenical Movement, actively participating in such
organizations as the World Council of Churches and the NCCC. Most provinces
holding membership in the Anglican Communion have special departments devoted
to ecumenical relations; however, the influence of Liberal Christianity has in
recent years caused tension within the communion, causing some to question the
direction ecumenism has taken them. Each member church of the Anglican
Communion makes its own decisions with regard to intercommunion. Many of them
are currently out of communion with other provinces of the Anglican Communion.
The 1958 Lambeth Conference recommended "that where between two Churches not of
the same denominational or confessional family, there is unrestricted "communio
in sacris", including mutual recognition and acceptance of ministries, the
appropriate term to use is 'full communion,' and that where varying degrees of
relation other than 'full communion' are established by agreement between two
such churches the appropriate term is 'intercommunion.' Worldwide, an estimated
forty million Anglicans belong to churches that do not participate in the
Anglican Communion, a particular organization limited to one province per
country. In these Anglican churches, there is strong opposition to the
ecumenical movement and to membership in such bodies as the World and National
Councils of Churches. Most of these churches are associated with the Continuing
Anglican movement or the movement for Anglican realignment. While ecumenicalism
in general is opposed, certain Anglican church bodies that are not members of
the Anglican Communion--the Free Church of England and the Church of England in
South Africa, for example--have fostered close and cooperative relations with
other evangelical (if non-Anglican) churches, on an individual basis. Nicolaus
Ludwig, Count von Zinzendorf, (1700–1760) the renewer of the Unitas Fratrum/
Moravian Church in the 18th Century, was the first person to use the word
"ecumenical" in this sense. His pioneering efforts to unite all Christians,
regardless of denominational labels, into a "Church of God in the Spirit"---
notably among German immigrants in Pennsylvania—were misunderstood by his
contemporaries and 200 years before the world was ready for them. The
contemporary ecumenical movement for Protestants is often said to have started
with the 1910 Edinburgh Missionary Conference. However this conference would
not have been possible without the pioneering ecumenical work of the Christian
youth movements: the Young Men's Christian Association (founded 1844), the
Young Women's Christian Association (founded 1855), the World Student Christian
Federation (founded 1895), and the Federal Council of Churches (founded 1908),
predecessor to today's National Council of Churches USA. Led by Methodist
layman John R. Mott (former YMCA staff and in 1910 the General Secretary of
WSCF), the World Mission conference marked the largest Protestant gathering to
that time, with the express purposes of working across denominational lines for
the sake of world missions. After the First World War further developments were
the "Faith and Order" movement led by Charles Henry Brent, and the "Life and
Work" movement led by Nathan Soderblom. In the 1930s, the tradition of an
annual World Communion Sunday to celebrate ecumenical ties was established in
the Presbyterian Church and was subsequently adopted by several other
denominations. Eventually, formal organizations were formed, including the
World Council of Churches in 1948, the National Council of Churches in the USA
in 1950, and Churches Uniting in Christ in 2002. These groups are moderate to
liberal, theologically speaking, as Protestants are generally more liberal and
less traditional than Anglicans, Orthodox, and Roman Catholics. Protestants are
now involved in a variety of ecumenical groups, working in some cases toward
organic denominational unity and in other cases for cooperative purposes alone.
Because of the wide spectrum of Protestant denominations and perspectives, full
cooperation has been difficult at times. Edmund Schlink's "Ökumenische
Dogmatik" 1983, 1997 proposes a way through these problems to mutual
recognition and renewed church unity. In 1999, the representatives of Lutheran
World Federation and Roman Catholic Church signed The Joint Declaration on the
Doctrine of Justification, resolving the conflict over the nature of
Justification which was at the root of the Protestant Reformation, although
some conservative Lutherans did not agree to this resolution. On July 18, 2006
Delegates to the World Methodist Conference voted unanimously to adopt the
Joint Declaration. [http://www.catholicnews.com/data/stories/cns/0604186.htm
Contemporary developments. Catholic-Orthodox dialogue. The mutual anathemas
(excommunications) of 1054, marking the Great Schism between Western (Catholic)
and Eastern (Orthodox) branches of Christianity, a process spanning several
centuries, were revoked in 1965 by the Pope and the Ecumenical Patriarch of
Constantinople. It is to be noted that the Canon Law of the Catholic Church
states: "An apostate from the faith, a heretic or a schismatic incurs a latae
sententiae excommunication, without prejudice to the provision of Can. 194 §1,
n. 2; a cleric, moreover, may be punished with the penalties mentioned in Can.
1336 §1, nn. 1, 2 and 3." This penalty would include the Eastern Orthodox and
other non-Catholic sects. Also, similar provisions exist in the Canon Law
followed by the Eastern Orthodox. The year 2006 saw a resumption of the series
of meetings for theological dialogue between representatives of the Roman
Catholic and the Eastern Orthodox Churches, suspended because of failure to
reach agreement on the question of the Eastern Catholic Churches, a question
exacerbated by disputes over churches and other property that the Communist
authorities once assigned to the Orthodox Church but whose restoration these
Churches have obtained from the present authorities. Catholic and Orthodox
bishops in North America are engaged in an ongoing dialogue. They are meeting
together periodically as the "North American Orthodox-Catholic Theological
Consultation". It has been meeting semi-annually since it was founded in 1965
under the auspices of the U.S. Bishops' Committee for Ecumenical and
Interreligious Affairs of the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops and
the Standing Conference of Canonical Orthodox Bishops in the Americas (SCOBA).
The Canadian Conference of Catholic Bishops officially joined the Consultation
as a sponsor in 1997. The Consultation works in tandem with the Joint Committee
of Orthodox and Catholic Bishops which has been meeting annually since 1981.
Since 1999 the Consultation has been discussing the Filioque clause, with the
hope of eventually reaching an agreed joint statement. Similar dialogues at
both international and national level continue between, for instance, Roman
Catholics and Anglicans. Issues within Protestantism. Contemporary developments
in mainline Protestant churches have dealt a serious blow to ecumenism. The
decision by the U.S. Episcopal Church to ordain Gene Robinson, an openly gay,
non-celibate priest who advocates same-sex blessings, as bishop led the Russian
Orthodox Church to suspend its cooperation with the Episcopal Church. Likewise,
when the Church of Sweden decided to bless same-sex marriages, the Russian
Patriarchate severed all relations with the Church, noting that "Approving the
shameful practice of same-sex marriages is a serious blow to the entire system
of European spiritual and moral values influenced by Christianity." Bishop
Hilarion Alfeyev commented that the inter-Christian community is "bursting at
the seams." He sees the great dividing line - or "abyss" - not so much between
old churches and church families as between "traditionalists" and "liberals",
the latter now dominating Protestantism, and predicted that other Northern
Protestant Churches will follow suit and this means that the “ecumenical
ship” will sink, for with the liberalism that is materializing in European
Protestant churches, there is no longer anything to talk about. Organizations
such as the World Council of Churches, the National Council of Churches USA,
Churches Uniting in Christ, Pentecostal Charismatic Peace Fellowship and
Christian Churches Together continue to encourage ecumenical cooperation among
Protestants, Eastern Orthodox, and, at times, Roman Catholics. There are
universities such as the University of Bonn in Germany that offer degree
courses in "Ecumenical Studies" in which theologians of various denominations
teach their respective traditions and, at the same time, seek for common ground
between these traditions. Influenced by the ecumenical movement, the "scandal
of separation" and local developments, a number of United and uniting churches
have formed; there are also a range of mutual recognition strategies being
practiced where formal union is not feasible. An increasing trend has been the
sharing of church buildings by two or more denominations, either holding
separate services or a single service with elements of all traditions.
Opposition. Opposition from some Methodist Christians. There are some in The
United Methodist Church who oppose the forms of ecumenism which are "not
grounded in the doctrines of the Church" due to the fear of compromisation. For
example, an article published in "Catalyst Online: Contemporary Evangelical
Perspectives for United Methodist Seminarians" stated that false ecumenism
might result in the "blurring of theological and confessional differences in
the interests of unity." Opposition from some Orthodox Christians. Despite many
disagreements over ecumenism and how to approach interfaith dialog, there
exists a sizable group of Orthodox Christians who are vehemently opposed to any
kind of interfaith dialog, whether with other Christian denominations or
religions outside Christianity. They view ecumenism and interfaith dialog as
being potentially pernicious to Orthodox Church Tradition; a "weakening" of
Orthodoxy itself. In the Eastern Orthodox world, the monastic community of
Mount Athos, arguably the most important center of Orthodox spirituality, has
voiced its concerns regarding the ecumenist movement and opposition to the
participation of the Orthodox Church. They regard modern ecumenism as
compromising essential doctrinal stands in order to accommodate other
Christians, and object to the emphasis on dialogue leading to intercommunion
rather than conversion on the part of participants in ecumenical initiatives.
Greek Old Calendarists also claim that the teachings of the Seven Ecumenical
Councils forbid changing the church calendar through abandonment of the Julian
calendar. The Inter-Orthodox Theological Conference entitled "Ecumenism:
Origins, Expectations, Disenchantment", organized in September 2004 by the
Aristotelian University of Thessaloniki has drawn negative conclusions on
ecumenism. Popular culture. The word "ecumenical" arises in the "Father Ted"
episode Tentacles of Doom, in which Father Ted sets out to train Father Jack to
say two all-encompassing phrases in response to questions from three visiting
bishops, namely "Yes" and "that would be an ecumenical matter". In the strategy
game Europa Universalis III, the player can select 'Ecumenism' as a National
Idea. This increases tolerance of "heretical religions" (i.e. religions that
are related to but not part of the state's religion) within the player's
country.
