Edgardo Mortara Edgardo Levi Mortara (Bologna, Papal States, August 27, 1851
– Liège, Belgium, March 11, 1940) was an Italian boy who became the center
of an international controversy when he was removed from his Jewish parents by
authorities of the Papal States and raised as a Catholic. Mortara was born and
raised Jewish during the first six years of his life, until he was taken from
his family by Church authorities who took custody of the boy after receiving a
report that he had been given emergency baptism by a domestic servant during a
serious infantile illness. The rationale for this action was that in the Papal
States, it was against the law for non-Catholics to raise Catholic children.
Mortara was adopted by Pope Pius IX and entered the seminary in his teens. The
Mortara case. Removal from parents. On 23 June 1858, in Bologna, in the Papal
States, police arrived at the home of a Jewish couple, Salomone ("Momolo") and
Marianna Padovani Mortara, to take one of their eight children, six-year-old
Edgardo, and transport him to Rome to be raised as a ward of the state. The
police had orders from Holy Office, authorized by Pope Pius IX This was done
because Edgardo had been secretly baptised Catholic as an infant. Under
Catholic doctrine, "emergency" baptism may be performed by anyone, man or
woman, even if non-Christian, and was considered a valid type of baptism, as
long as the individual who baptizes is in accord with Catholic tradition.
Originally intended as a relief for Catholic families suffering high infant
mortality rates, it had not been intended to be used for Jewish families. This
rule allowed anyone to perform emergency baptism so the infant would not die
unbaptised. Its use in the case of very ill Jewish children was accepted by the
Christian population. After the baptism of Edgardo, which was attested to by
the servant girl who had performed it, Edgardo was a Catholic in accordance
with Catholic law. According to canon law, which was also the law in the Papal
States, non-Christians could not raise a Christian child, even if the child was
their own. In 1912, in his testimony in favour of the beatification of Pope
Pius IX, Edgardo himself noted that the laws of the Papal States did not allow
Catholics to work in the homes of Jewish families (one reason being to prevent
this very situation from happening). David Kertzer has questioned whether the
baptism, which had no witnesses, actually took place. In his 1997 book "The
Kidnapping of Edgardo Mortara", Kertzer investigates the story and quotes from
contemporary testimony. It appears that Morisi told the local priests her story
at a time when she was seeking to obtain a dowry from the Church, and
investigations on behalf of the Mortaras revealed that she was reputed to be a
thief. It was reported that Edgardo's illness had not been life-threatening,
thus not requiring an emergency baptism. On the other hand, other testimony was
consistent with Morisi's story, and the Church authorities were evidently
persuaded that she was telling the truth. Edgardo was taken to a house for
Roman converts (a "House of Catechumens") in Rome, maintained at state expense.
His parents were not allowed to see him for several weeks, and after this
period were not allowed to see him unsupervised. Pius IX took a personal
interest in the case (Kertzer confirms that the pope helped raise Edgardo), and
all appeals to the Church were rebuffed. Church authorities told the Mortaras
that they could have Edgardo back if they would convert to Catholicism, but
they refused. According to Kertzer, the Mortaras had several audiences with the
pope regarding the matter. Reaction and opposition. The incident soon received
extensive publicity both in Italy and internationally. In the Kingdom of
Sardinia, the largest independent state in Italy and the centre of the liberal
nationalist movement for Italian unification, both the government and the press
used the case to reinforce their claims that the Papal States were ruled by
medieval obscurantists and should be liberated from Papal rule. Protests were
lodged by both Jewish organizations and prominent political and intellectual
figures in Britain, the United States, Germany, Austria, and France. Soon the
governments of these countries added to calls for Edgardo to be returned to his
parents. The French Emperor Napoleon III, whose troops garrisoned Rome to
protect the Pope against the Italian anti-clerical unificationists, also
protested. When a delegation of prominent Jews saw the Pope in 1859, he told
them, "I couldn't care less what the world thinks." At another meeting, he
brought Edgardo with him to show that the boy was happy in his care. In 1865 he
said: "I had the right and the duty to do what I did for this boy, and if I had
to, I would do it again." In a speech in 1871 defending his decision against
his detractors, Pius said: "Of these dogs, there are too many of them at
present in Rome, and we hear them howling in the streets, and they are
disturbing us in all places." The Mortara Incident may have helped persuade
opinion that the Papal States should be conquered. When the French garrison was
withdrawn in 1870, and the Italian army assaulted the city, Rome too was
annexed by the newly unified, liberal Kingdom of Italy. The Mortara affair
resulted in the origin of the Alliance Israelite Universelle in 1860. Adolphe
Cremieux and other French-Jewish leaders formed the Alliance to advocate for
all Jews who faced such circumstances. Ordination and later life. In 1859,
after Bologna had been annexed to Piedmont, the Mortara parents made another
effort to recover their son, but he had been taken to Rome. In 1870, when Rome
was captured from the Pope, they tried again, but Edgardo was then 19 and
therefore legally an adult, and had declared his firm intention of remaining a
Roman Catholic. In that year, he was assigned to France. The following year,
his father died. In France, he entered the Augustinian order, being ordained a
priest at the age of 23, and adopted the spiritual name "Pius". Fr. Edgardo
Mortara was sent as a missionary to cities such as Munich, Mainz and Breslau to
preach to the Jews there. He became fluent in a variety of languages. As he
traveled widely, his effort to convince Jews to convert was mostly
unsuccessful. During a public-speaking engagement in Italy he reestablished
communications with his mother and siblings. In 1895, he attended his mother's
funeral, led by the rabbi of Bologna. His nieces and nephews, as adults,
recalled the frequent visits from him. In 1897, he preached in St. Patrick's
Cathedral, New York, but Michael Corrigan, the Archbishop of New York, told the
Vatican that he opposed Mortara's efforts to evangelise Jews on the grounds
that such efforts might embarrass the Church in the eyes of the United States
government. Father Mortara asked Bishop Corrigan for financial support. The
archbishop refused. Mortara died in 1940 at the abbey of Bouhay in Bressoux,
near Liège in Belgium, having spent his last years there. He was 88 years old.
Pope Pius IX's relationship with Jews. Civil law in the Papal States did not
permit baptized Christians to be raised by non-Christians. Pope Pius IX, who
had partially emancipated the Jews living in the Papal States, found himself in
a quandary. The Mortara case was the catalyst for far-reaching political
changes; its repercussions are still being felt within the Catholic Church and
in relations between the Church and some Jewish organizations. The incident, in
its briefest outline: Mortara was taken from his home, raised a Catholic,
ordained a priest, and remained a priest for the rest of his life. In §1672 of
his testimony for the beatification of Pius IX, Mortara stated "I greatly
desire the beatification and canonization of the Servant of God (Pius IX)." The
Mortara affair increased discontent with the temporal power of the papacy
within Italy and produced calls from around the world, including Emperor Franz
Josef and Napoleon III, for Mortara to be returned to his parents, including 20
editorials in "The New York Times". The Mortara case attracted new attention
around the turn of the 21st century because of the campaign to secure
canonisation for Blessed Pius IX. Jewish groups and others, led by several
descendants of the Mortara family, protested the Vatican's beatification of
Pius in 2000. In 1997 David Kertzer published "The Kidnapping of Edgardo
Mortara", which brought the case back to public attention. The story became the
subject of a play, "Edgardo Mine" by Alfred Uhry, and an opera, "Il Caso
Mortara" by Francesco Cilluffo, premiered February 25, 2010, by Dicapo Opera in
New York City. An Irish film titled "Edgardo Mortara", based on the play and
Kertzer's book, was planned to begin production via Miramax in October 2002 but
the project was halted for lack of funds.
