Ellen G. White Ellen Gould White ("born" Harmon) (November 26, 1827 – July
16, 1915) was a prolific author and an American Christian pioneer. She, along
with other Sabbatarian Adventist leaders, such as Joseph Bates and her husband
James White, formed what is now known as the Seventh-day Adventist Church.
Ellen White reported to her fellow believers her visionary experiences. James
White, and others of the Adventist pioneers, viewed these experiences as the
Biblical gift of prophecy as outlined in Revelation 12:17 and 19:10 which
describe the testimony of Jesus as the "spirit of prophecy". Her "Conflict of
the Ages" series of writings endeavor to showcase the hand of God in Biblical
and Christian church history. This cosmic conflict, referred to as the "Great
Controversy theme", is foundational to the development of Seventh-day Adventist
theology. White was considered a somewhat controversial figure. Her reports of
visionary experiences and use of other sources in her writings comprise much of
the controversy. She received her first vision soon after the Millerite Great
Disappointment. Historian Randall Balmer has described her as "one of the more
important and colorful figures in the history of American religion". Walter
Martin described her as "one of the most fascinating and controversial
personages ever to appear upon the horizon of religious history." Arthur L.
White, her grandson and biographer, writes that Ellen G. White is the most
translated female non-fiction author in the history of literature, as well as
the most translated American non-fiction author of either gender. Her writings
covered creationism, agriculture, theology, evangelism, Christian lifestyle,
education and health. She advocated vegetarianism. She promoted the
establishment of schools and medical centers. During her lifetime she wrote
more than 5,000 periodical articles and 40 books. Today, including compilations
from her 100,000 pages of manuscript, more than 100 titles are available in
English. Some of her most famous books include "The Desire of Ages", "The Great
Controversy" and "Steps to Christ". Her work on successful Christian living,
"Steps to Christ", has been published in more than 140 languages. Personal
life. Early life. Ellen and her twin sister Elizabeth, were born November 26,
1827, to Robert and Eunice Harmon. Robert was a farmer who made hats also, and
the whole family helped with the hatmaking. With eight children in the family,
home was a busy place. The family lived on a small farm near the village of
Gorham, Maine. However, a few years after the birth of the twins, Robert Harmon
gave up farming, and, with his family, moved into the city of Portland, about
twelve miles east. Ancestry. In 1999, Charles E. Dudley, Sr., published a book
entitled, "The Genealogy of Ellen Gould Harmon White: The Prophetess of the
Seventh-day Adventist Church, and the Story of the Growth and Development of
the Seventh-day Adventist Denomination As It Relates to African-Americans." In
his book, Charles Dudley claims that Ellen White had an African-American
ancestry. In March 2000, the Ellen G. White Estate commissioned Roger D.
Joslyn, a professional genealogist, to research Ellen G. White's ancestry.
Joslyn concluded that she was of Anglo-Saxon origin. Joslyn found that that
Ellen's mother, Eunice (Gould) Harmon was the daughter of Joseph Goold/Gould,
an American Revolutionary soldier. After the war, he moved from Kittery to
Portland, Maine. His father was Joseph Gould of Kittery. His father, Ellen's
great grandfather, was also named Joseph Gould. He settled in Kittery in the
first decade of the 1700s and was probably from Taunton, Massachusetts. His
father was John Gould of Taunton and probably the one born in Hingham,
Massachusetts Bay Colony, son of Jarvis Gould, a 1635 immigrant from England.
See her ancestral chart Head injury. At the age of nine, Ellen was struck with
a rock thrown by a fellow student. The injury severely disfigured her nose, and
left her in a coma for three weeks. Shortly after her injury, Ellen, with her
parents, attended a Methodist camp meeting at Buxton, Maine, and there, at the
age of 12, she was converted. Two years later, on June 26, 1842, at her request
she was baptized in the ocean by immersion. Millerite movement. In 1840, at age
12, her family became involved with the Millerite movement. As she attended
William Miller's lectures, Ellen felt guilty for her sins, and she was filled
with terror about being eternally lost. She describes herself as spending
nights in tears and prayer, and being in this condition for several months. She
was baptized by John Hobart in Casco Bay in Portland, Maine, and eagerly
awaited Jesus to come again. In her later years, she referred to this as the
happiest time of her life. Her family's involvement with Millerism caused their
disfellowship by the local Methodist church. Marriage and family. Life
Sketches, 1880 edition, 126, 127. James and Ellen had four sons: Henry Nichols,
James Edson (known as Edson), William Clarence (known as Willie or W. C.), and
John Herbert. Only Edson and William lived to adulthood. John Herbert died of
erysipelas at the age of three months, and Henry died of pneumonia at the age
of 17 in 1863. Final years and death. Ellen White spent the final years of her
life in Elmshaven, her home in Saint Helena, California after the death of her
husband James White in 1881. During her final years she would travel less
frequently as she concentrated upon writing her last works for the church.
Ellen G. White died July 16, 1915, at her home in Elmshaven, which is now an
Adventist Historical Site. Ministry. Visions. First reported vision. In 1844,
Ellen White reported her first encounter with having visions. Ellen G. White,
"A Sketch of the Christian Experience and Views of Ellen G. White (1851) In
this vision she reportedly saw the "Advent people" traveling a high and
dangerous path towards the city of New Jerusalem . Their path was lit from
behind by "a bright (light)...which an angel told me was the midnight cry."
According to her vision, some of the travelers grew weary and were encouraged
by Jesus; others denied the light, the light behind them went out, and they
fell "off the path into the dark and wicked world below." The vision continued
with a portrayal of Christ’s second coming, following which the Advent people
entered the New Jerusalem; and ended with her returning to earth feeling
lonely, desolate and longing for that "better world." As Godfrey T. Anderson
points out, "In effect, the vision assured the Advent believers of eventual
triumph despite the immediate despair into which they had plunged." Second and
third visions. In February 1845, White claimed to receive a second vision which
became known as the "Bridegroom" vision in Exeter, Maine. Together with a third
vision where White reportedly saw the new earth, these visions "gave continued
meaning to the October 1844 experience and supported the developing sanctuary
rationale. Additionally they played an important role in countering the
spiritualizing views of many fanatical Adventists by portraying the Father and
Jesus as literal beings and heaven as a physical place." Public testimony.
Ellen G. White, "Spiritual Gifts" vol. 2, (1860), 37. Soon Ellen was giving her
testimony in public meetings — some of which she arranged herself — and in
her regular Methodist class meetings in private homes. Ellen G. White,
"Testimonies for the Church Vol.1", (1855-1868) News of her visions spread and
White was soon traveling and speaking to groups of Millerite followers in Maine
and the surrounding area. Her visions were not publicized further afield until
January 24, 1846, when her account of the first vision: "Letter From Sister
Harmon" was published in the "Day Star", a Millerite paper published in
Cincinnati, Ohio by Enoch Jacobs. White had written to Jacobs to encourage him
and although she stated the letter was not written for publication, Jacobs
printed it anyway. Through the next few years it was republished in various
forms and is included as part of her first book, "Christian Experience and
Views", published in 1851. Two Millerites claimed to have had visions prior to
Ellen White – William Ellis Foy (1818–1893), and Hazen Foss (1818?–1893),
Ellen White's brother-in-law. Adventists believe the prophetic gift offered to
these two men was passed on to White when they rejected it. Middle life. Ellen
White described the vision experience as involving a bright light which would
surround her and she felt herself in the presence of Jesus or angels who would
show her events (historical and future) and places (on earth, in heaven, or
other planets). The transcriptions of White's visions generally contain
theology, prophecy, or personal counsels to individuals or to Adventist
leaders. One of the best examples of her personal counsels is found in a 9-
volume series of books entitled "Testimonies for the Church", that contains
edited testimonies published for the general edification of the church. The
spoken and written versions of her visions played a significant part in
establishing and shaping the organizational structure of the emerging Adventist
Church. Her visions and writings continue to be used by church leaders in
developing the church's policies and for devotional reading. On March 14, 1858,
at Lovett's Grove, near Bowling Green, Ohio, White received a vision while
attending a funeral service. On that day James White wrote that "God manifested
His power in a wonderful manner" adding that "several had decided to keep the
Lord's Sabbath and go with the people of God." In writing about the vision, she
stated that she received practical instruction for church members, and more
significantly, a cosmic sweep of the conflict "between Christ and His angels,
and Satan and his angels." Ellen White would expand upon this great controversy
theme which would eventually culminate in the "Conflict of the Ages" series.
From 1861 to 1881 Ellen White's prophetic ministry became increasingly
recognized among Sabbatarian Adventists. Her frequent articles in the "Review
and Herald" (now the "Adventist Review") and other church publications were a
unifying influence to the beginning church. She supported her husband in the
church's need for formal organization. The result was the organization of the
Seventh-day Adventist Church in 1863. During the 1860s and 1870s the Whites
participated in the founding of the denomination's first medical institution
(1866) and school (1874). Later ministry. After 1882 Ellen White was assisted
by a close circle of friends and associates. She employed a number of literary
assistants who would help her in preparing her writings for publications. She
also carried on an extensive correspondence with church leaders. She traveled
to Europe on her first international trip. Upon her return she promoted the
message of righteousness by faith presented by young ministers E. J. Waggoner
and A. T. Jones, leading to a more Christ-centered theology for the church.
When church leaders resisted her counsel on this and various other matters, she
was sent to Australia as a missionary. There she lived first in Melbourne and
later moved to Cooranbong, New South Wales; co-founding Avondale College. After
almost 9 years she returned to the US. Final years. When Ellen White returned
to the US in 1900, she thought her stay would be temporary, and she called for
church re-organization at the pivotal 1901 General Conference Session. During
her later years she wrote extensively for church publications and wrote her
final books. During her final years she would travel less frequently as she
concentrated upon writing her last works for the church. Ellen G. White died
July 16, 1915, at her home in Elmshaven, which is now an Adventist Historical
Site. Personality and public persona. White was a powerful and sought after
preacher. While she has been perceived as having a strict and serious
personality, perhaps due to her lifestyle standards, numerous sources describe
her as a friendly person. Major teachings. Health reform. Ellen White expounded
greatly on the subject of health and nutrition, as well as healthy eating and a
balanced diet. At her behest, the Seventh-day Adventist Church first
established the Western Health Reform Institute in Battle Creek, Michigan in
1866 to care for the sick as well as to disseminate health instruction. Over
the years, other Adventist sanitariums were established around the country.
These sanitariums became hospitals, forming the backbone of the Adventists'
medical network and, in 1972, forming the Adventist Health System. The
beginnings of this health ministry are found in a vision that White had in
1863. The vision was said to have occurred during a visit by James and Ellen
White to Otsego, Michigan to encourage the evangelistic workers there. As the
group bowed in prayer at the beginning of Sabbath, Ellen White reportedly had a
vision of the relation of physical health to spirituality, of the importance of
following right principles in diet and in the care of the body, and of the
benefits of nature's remedies—clean air, sunshine, exercise and pure water.
Previous to this vision, little thought or time had been given to health
matters in the church, and several of the overtaxed ministers had been forced
to become inactive because of sickness. This revelation on June 6, 1863
impressed upon the leaders in the newly organized church the importance of
health reform. In the months that followed, as the health message was seen to
be a part of the message of Seventh-day Adventists, a health educational
program was inaugurated. An introductory step in this effort was the publishing
of six pamphlets of 64 pages each, entitled, "Health", or "How to Live",
compiled by James and Ellen White. An article from White was included in each
of the pamphlets. The importance of health reform was greatly impressed upon
the early leaders of the church through the untimely death of Henry White at
the age of 16, the severe illness of Elder James White, which forced him to
cease work for three years, and through the sufferings of several other
ministers. Early in 1866, responding to the instruction given to Ellen White on
Christmas Day in 1865 that Seventh-day Adventists should establish a health
institute for the care of the sick and the imparting of health instruction,
plans were laid for the Western Health Reform Institute, which opened in
September, 1866. While the Whites were in and out of Battle Creek from 1865 to
1868, James White's poor physical condition led them to move to a small farm
near Greenville, Michigan. White's idea of health reform included vegetarianism
in a day and age where "meat and two vegetables" was the standard meal for a
typical North American. Her health message inspired a health food revolution
starting with John Harvey Kellogg in his creation of Corn Flakes. The
Sanitarium Health Food Company as it is now known was also started by this
health principle. Adhering to the principles outlined in the health reform,
John Harvey Kellogg differed from his brother's views on the sugar content of
their Corn Flake breakfast cereal. The latter started Kellogg Company. White
championed a vegetarianism that was intended to be not only physically, but
also spiritually helpful to humans, and also to treat God's creatures with love
and respect. Her views are expressed in many of her writings such as "Important
Facts Of Faith: Laws Of Health, And Testimonies, Nos. 1–10" (1864),
"Healthful Living" (1897, 1898), "The Ministry of Healing" (1905), "The Health
Food Ministry" (1970), and "Counsels on Diet and Foods" (1938). Education.
Ellen White's earliest essays on Education appeared in the 1872 autumn editions
of the Health Reformer. In her first essay, she stated that working with
youthful minds was the most delicate of tasks. The manner of instruction should
be varied. This would make it possible for the "high and noble powers of the
mind" to have a chance to develop. To be qualified to educate the youth,
parents and teachers must have self-control, gentleness and love. Ellen White's
idea of creating a Christian educational system and its importance in society
is detailed in her writings "Christian Education" (1893, 1894) and "Education"
(1903). Theology. Jerry Moon argues that White taught Assurance of salvation.
Arthur Patrick believes that White was evangelical, in that she had high regard
for the Bible, saw the cross as central, supported righteousness by faith,
believed in Christian activism, and sought to restore New Testament
Christianity. Major writings. "Conflict of the Ages" book series.  Additional
authors have stated "Ellen G. White has undoubtedly been the most influential
Seventh-day Adventist in the history of the church." Ellen G. White Estate. The
Ellen G. White Estate, Inc., was formed as a result of Ellen G. White's will.
It consists of a self-perpetuating board and a staff which includes a secretary
(now known as the director), several associates, and a support staff. The main
headquarters is at the Seventh-day Adventist General Conference headquarters in
Silver Spring, Maryland. Branch Offices are located at Andrews University, Loma
Linda University, and Oakwood College. There are 15 additional research centers
located throughout the 13 remaining divisions of the world church. The mission
of the White Estate is to circulate Ellen White's writings, translate them, and
provide resources for helping to better understand her life and ministry. At
the Toronto General Conference Session (2000) the world church expanded the
mission of the White Estate to include a responsibility for promoting Adventist
history for the entire denomination. Adventist historic sites. Several of Ellen
G. White's homes are historic sites. The first home that she and her husband
owned is now part of the Historic Adventist Village in Battle Creek, Michigan.
Her other homes are privately owned with the exception of her home in
Cooranbong, Australia, which she named "Sunnyside," and her last home in Saint
Helena, California, which she named "Elmshaven". These latter two homes are
owned by the Seventh-day Adventist Church and the "Elmshaven" home is also a
National Historic Landmark. Avondale College. Ellen G. White inspired and
guided the foundation of Avondale College, Cooranbong, leaving an educational
legacy from her time in Australia. Avondale College is the main Seventh-day
Adventist tertiary institution in the South-Pacific Division. Biographical
writings. The most comprehensive biography of Ellen G. White is an extensive
six-volume work called "Ellen G. White: A Biography" written by her grandson,
Arthur L. White. Thousands of articles and books have been written about
various aspects of Ellen G. White's life and ministry. A large number of these
can be found in the libraries at Loma Linda University and Andrews University,
the two primary Seventh-day Adventist institutions with major research
collections about Adventism. An "Encyclopedia of Ellen G. White" is being
produced by two faculty at Andrews University: Jerry Moon, chair of the church
history department, and Denis Fortin, dean of the Seventh-day Adventist
Theological Seminary. Theatre. "Red Books: Our Search for Ellen White" is a
play about White, a co-founder of the Seventh-day Adventist Church, and the
various perceptions of her throughout the history of the church. It was
produced by the Dramatic Arts Society of Pacific Union College in California.
It was based on interviews collected from over 200 individuals. The title
derives from White's books, which were traditionally bound with a red cover.
Debate regarding the prophetic value of her writings. Most Adventists believe
her writings are inspired and continue to have relevance for the church today.
Seventh-day Adventists began to discuss her writings at the 1919 Bible
Conference, soon after her death. During the 1920s the church adopted a
Fundamentalist stance toward inspiration. Because of criticism from the
evangelical community, in the 1940s and 1950s church leaders such as LeRoy
Edwin Froom and Roy Allan Anderson attempted to help evangelicals understand
Seventh-day Adventists better by engaging in extended dialogue that resulted in
the publication of "Questions on Doctrine" (1956) that explained Adventist
beliefs in evangelical language. Evangelical Walter Martin of the countercult
Christian Research Institute "rejected White’s prophetic claims", yet saw her
"as a genuine Christian believer", unlike her contemporaries Joseph Smith, Jr.,
Mary Baker Eddy, and Charles Taze Russell. Kenneth Samples, a successor of
Martin in his interaction with Adventism, also denies White's prophetic claims
yet "believeshe, at minimum, had some good biblical and theological instincts."
Adventist statement of belief about the "Spirit of Prophecy". Ellen White's
writings are sometimes referred to as the "Spirit of Prophecy" by Adventists.
The term is dually applied to the Holy Spirit which inspired her writings.
Criticism. Plagiarism. Many critics have accused Ellen White of extensive
plagiarism. One such was Walter T. Rea, who argued against the "original"
nature of her supposed revelations in his book "The White Lie." Another critic
Ronald Numbers argues that her understanding of health reform was simply
plagiarized from other health reformers and therefore did not come from divine
revelation. Denial of the Trinity. Some critics, as well as some non-
Trinitarian Adventists, have asserted that in her early writings Ellen White
did not openly support the teaching of the Trinity Some critics have
characterized her descriptions of the Godhead as Tritheistic. Church historians
have pointed out that early Seventh-day Adventists came from a wide assortment
of nineteenth-century American Protestant churches, and typical among early
Adventists, two of the church's principal founders, James White and Joseph
Bates, had a background in the Restorationist Christian Connection church,
which rejected the Trinitarian conception of God as held by the mainline
churches. Some early Adventists joined the church believing and advocating
semi-Arianism, i.e. the view that Jesus is a separate, lesser being than God
the Father. However, church historians point out that the teachings and
writings of Ellen White, who was raised in a Methodist family, ultimately
proved influential in shifting the church from largely semi-Arian roots towards
Trinitarianism. Some critics disagree and point to one study that White's views
reflected the materialist theology of early Adventism and argue over how much
her writings shifted the church towards Trinitarianism. Views on masturbation.
Critics cite a modern study which seems to show that having lots of orgasms can
help protect men against heart disease. Thomas Szasz states the shift in
scientific consensus as "Masturbation: the primary sexual activity of mankind.
In the nineteenth century it was a disease; in the twentieth, it's a cure."
Many other medical researchers and state medical education boards support his
conclusion. Racism. Ellen White not only abhorred slavery as a demonic
invention, but preached full equality of all races, something that was still
not widely accepted even much later during Martin Luther King's time. However,
a couple years later she wrote, And, in 1896 she wrote, Dr. Samuel Pipim writes
of an incident illustrating this point Some critics claim that Ellen White also
wrote racist statements in her book "Spiritual Gifts." She could be referring
to bestiality, genetic splicing/modification or head/organ transplants (since
there is some evidence that people in ancient times were experimenting in these
areas) or possibly something else. She is not specifically pointing out any
particular race as being the result of this. Responses to criticism. Critics
have especially targeted Ellen White's book "The Great Controversy" arguing it
contains plagiarized material. However in her introduction she wrote... Ellen
White also stated that the Holy Spirit was divine. Also, Ellen White stated the
following near the end of the 19th century Besides her strong stance against
slavery and racism, Adventist scholars have noted that there is not one
instance where her writings hint to a half-man/half-animal race of people.
Instead, her amalgamation statements may have been a reference to Leviticus 19:
19, 2Corinthians 6:14 and Genesis 6:1–5.
