Emanationism Emanationism is an idea in the cosmology or cosmogony of certain
religious or philosophical systems. Emanation, from the Latin "emanare" meaning
"to flow from" or "to pour forth or out of", is the mode by which all things
are derived from the First Reality, or Principle. All things are derived from
the first reality or perfect God by steps of degradation to lesser degrees of
the first reality or God, and at every step the emanating beings are less pure,
less perfect, less divine. Emanationism is a transcendent principle from which
everything is derived, and is opposed to both Creationism (wherein the universe
is created by a sentient God who is separate from creation) and materialism
(which posits no underlying subjective and/or ontological nature behind
phenomena being immanent). Origins. Emanationism is a cosmological theory which
asserts that all things "flow" from an underlying principle or reality, usually
called the Absolute or Godhead. Any teachings which involve emanation are
usually in opposition to creation ex nihilo as emanation advocates that
everything has always existed and has not been "created" from nothing. Robert
Kleinman, Four Faces of the Universe: An Integrated View of the Cosmos, 2007,
p. 186 The primary classical exponent of emanationism was Plotinus, wherein his
work, the "Enneads", all things phenomenal and otherwise were an emanation from
the One (Hen). In Ennead 5.1.6, emanationism is compared to a diffusion from
the One, of which there are three primary hypostases, the One (hen), the
Intellect/will (nous), and the Soul (psyche tou pantos). For Plotinus,
emanation, or the "soul's descent", is a result of the Indefinite Dyad, the
primordial agnosis inherent to and within the Absolute, the Godhead. Another
advocate of emanationism was Michael Servetus who was burned at the stake for
his nontrinitarian cosmology. Occultism. Owen. A, "The place of enchantment:
British occultism and the culture of the modern" 2005, p. 26 Theosophy teaches
that human beings and all organisms including animals and all matter "flow"
from a pure spiritual formation in the absolute to a material one over time to
become materialised but later will return to the absolute after the cosmic
cycle of life. As Morgan summarises: "The Secret Doctrine laid out an
emanationist view of the development of the physical universe, a process of ebb
and flow in which spirit gradually unfolded itself in matter, attaining
consciousness, and returning to spirit in a higher and more realised form."
According to the emanationist cosmology of Madame Blavatsky all monads emerge
from divine unity at the beginning of a cosmic cycle and return to this source
at its close. Blavatsky in her book "The Key to Theosophy" (1889) wrote that:
"We believe in a universal divine principle, the root of all, from which all
proceeds, and within which all shall be at the end of the great cycle of
being." Samael Aun Weor had taught emanationism from his studies with the
Kabbalah and Gnosticism. He mapped out a complex esoteric cosmology with matter
flowing from different planes of existence all existing in the absolute. As
(Dawson, 2007) comments: Andrew Dawson, New era, new religions: religious
transformation in contemporary Brazil, 2007, p. 100
