Emergency baptism An emergency baptism is a baptism administered to a person in
imminent danger of death. This can be done by a person not normally authorized
to administer the sacrament. Church laws. Latin Rite. In the Latin Rite
Catholic Church, the ordinary minister of baptism is a bishop, priest or deacon
(canon 861 §1 of the Code of Canon Law), but in normal circumstances, only the
Parish Priest of the person to be baptized, or someone authorized by the Parish
Priest may do so licitly (canon 530). "If the ordinary minister is absent or
impeded, a catechist or some other person deputed to this office by the local
Ordinary, may lawfully confer baptism; indeed, in a case of necessity, any
person who has the requisite intention may do so (canon 861 §2). By "a case of
necessity" is principally meant imminent danger of death because of either
illness or an external threat. "The requisite intention" is, at the minimum
level, the intention "to do what the Church does" through the rite of baptism.
Eastern Churches. In the Eastern Catholic Churches, a deacon is not considered
an ordinary minister. Administration of the sacrament is reserved, as in the
Latin Rite, to the Parish Priest. But, "in case of necessity, baptism can be
administered by a deacon or, in his absence or if he is impeded, by another
cleric, a member of an institute of consecrated life, or by any other Christian
faithful; even by the mother or father, if another person is not available who
knows how to baptize" (canon 677 of the Code of Canons of the Eastern
Churches.) The discipline of the Eastern Orthodox Church, Oriental Orthodoxy
and the Assyrian Church of the East is similar to that of the Eastern Catholic
Churches. They require the baptizer, even in cases of necessity, to be of their
own faith, on the grounds that a person cannot convey what he himself does not
possess, in this case membership in the Church. The Latin Rite Catholic Church
does not insist on this condition, considering that the effect of the sacrament
is not produced by the person who baptizes, but by the Holy Spirit. Episcopal
Church and others. ""In case of emergency, any baptized person may administer
Baptism according to the following form. Using the given name of the one
baptized (if known), pour water on him or her, saying" "I baptize you in the
Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. "The Lord's Prayer
is then said. ""Other prayers, such as the following, may be added" "Heavenly
Father, we thank you that by water and the Holy Spirit you have bestowed on
upon this your servant the forgiveness of sin and have raised him to the new
life of grace. Strengthen him, O Lord, with your presence, enfold him in the
arms of your mercy, and keep him safe forever. ""The person who administers
emergency Baptism should inform the priest of the appropriate parish, so that
the fact can be properly recorded." ""If the baptized person recovers, the
Baptism should be recognized at a public celebration of the Sacrament with a
bishop or priest presiding, and the person baptized under emergency conditions,
together with the sponsors or godparents, taking part in everything except the
administration of the water."" Similar provisions exist throughout the
constituent churches of the Anglican Communion, of which the Episcopal Church
in the United States of America is one. For Methodists and many other
Protestant denominations, too, the ordinary minister of baptism is a duly
ordained or appointed minister of religion. Infants, babies and fetuses. The
Roman Ritual declares that a child is not to be baptized while still enclosed
(clausus) in its mother's womb, it supposes that the baptismal water cannot
reach the body of the child. When, however, this seems possible, even with the
aid of an instrument, Benedict XIV declares that midwives should be instructed
to confer conditional baptism. The Ritual further says that when the water can
flow upon the head of the infant the sacrament is to be administered
absolutely; but if it can be poured only on some other part of the body,
baptism is indeed to be conferred, but it must be conditionally repeated in
case the child survives its birth, It is to be noted that in these last two
cases, the rubric of the Ritual supposes that the infant has partly emerged
from the womb. For if the fetus was entirely enclosed, baptism is to be
repeated conditionally in all cases . In case of the death of the mother, the
fetus is to be immediately extracted and baptized, should there be any life in
it. Infants have been taken alive from the womb well after the mother's death.
After the Cæsarean incision has been performed, the fetus may be conditionally
baptized before extraction if possible; if the sacrament is administered after
its removal from the womb the baptism is to be absolute, provided it is certain
that life remains. If after extraction it is doubtful whether it be still
alive, it is to be baptized under the condition: "If thou art alive".
Physicians, mothers, and midwives ought to be reminded of the grave obligation
of administering baptism under these circumstances. According to Catholic
beliefs, the fetus is animated by a human soul from the very beginning of its
conception. In cases of delivery where the issue is a mass that is not
certainly animated by human life, it is to be baptized conditionally: "If thou
art a man." Controversial baptisms of Jews. In 1858, Edgardo Mortara, then six
years old, was taken from his Jewish parents by the police of the Papal States.
He had reportedly been baptized by a Roman Catholic servant girl of the family
while he was ill, because she feared that otherwise he would not be saved if he
died. The Jewish orphans controversy is a legal dispute that occurred after the
Second World War when the Holy See under Pope Pius XII issued instructions that
Catholic institutions and families should keep baptized Jewish children in
their ranks after they had been rescued from a likely deportation to Auschwitz.
Elderly people. A deathbed conversion is the adoption of a particular religious
faith shortly before dying. Making a conversion on one's deathbed may reflect
an immediate change of belief, a desire to formalize longer-term beliefs, or to
complete a process of conversion already underway.
