Emerging church The emerging church, is a Christian movement of the late 20th
and early 21st centuries that crosses a number of theological boundaries:
participants can be described as Protestant, post-Protestant, Catholic,
evangelical, post-evangelical, liberal, post-liberal, conservative, post-
conservative, anabaptist, adventist, reformed, charismatic, neocharismatic, and
post-charismatic. Emerging churches can be found throughout the globe,
predominantly in North America, Western Europe, Australia, New Zealand, and
Africa. Some attend local independent churches or house churches while others
worship in traditional Christian denominations. Proponents believe the movement
transcends such "modernist" labels of "conservative" and "liberal," calling the
movement a "conversation" to emphasize its developing and decentralized nature,
its vast range of standpoints, and its commitment to dialogue. Participants
seek to live their faith in what they believe to be a "postmodern" society.
What those involved in the conversation mostly agree on is their
disillusionment with the organized and institutional church and their support
for the deconstruction of modern Christian worship, modern evangelism, and the
nature of modern Christian community. Definitions. Terminology. Emerging
churches are fluid, hard to define, and varied; they contrast themselves with
what has gone before by using the term "inherited church." Key themes of the
emerging church are couched in the language of reform, Praxis-oriented
lifestyles, Post-evangelical thought, and incorporation or acknowledgment of
political and Postmodern elements. Terminological confusion has occurred
because of the use of words with similar etymology. When used as descriptors
"emerging" and "emergent" can be interchangeable. However, when used as names,
they are different. In this case "Emerging" refers to the whole informal,
church-based, global movement, whilst "Emergent" to a formal, organisational
subset associated with Brian McLaren: the "Emergent stream." Variety and
debate. Driscoll and Stetzer note three categories within the movement:
"Relevants", "Reconstructionists" and "Revisionists." "Relevants" are
theological conservatives who are interested in updating to current culture.
They look to people like Dan Kimball, Donald Miller, and Rob Bell.
"Reconstructionists" are generally theologically evangelical, and speak of new
forms of church that result in transformed lives. They look to Neil Cole and
Australians Michael Frost and Alan Hirsch. "Revisionists" are theologically
liberal, and openly question whether evangelical doctrine is appropriate for
the postmodern world. They look to leaders such as Brian McLaren and Doug
Pagitt. Mark Driscoll and Scot McKnight have now voiced concerns over Brian
McLaren and the "emergent thread." Some evangelical leaders such as Shane
Claiborne have also sought to distance themselves from the emerging church
movement, its labels and the "emergent brand." History. According to Mobsby the
term "emerging church" was first used in 1970, when Larson and Osborne
predicted a movement characterised by: contextual and experimental mission; new
forms of church; the removal of barriers and division; a blend of evangelism
and social action; attention to both experience and tradition; the breakdown of
clergy/laity distinctions. The term "emergent church" was was also used in 1981
by Catholic political theologian, Johann Baptist Metz for use in a different
context. Marcus Borg says "The emerging paradigm has been visible for well over
a hundred years. In the last twenty to thirty years, it has become a major
grassroots movement among both laity and clergy in "mainline" or "old mainline"
Protestant denominations." He describes it as: "a way of seeing the Bible (and
the Christian tradition as a whole) as "historical", "metaphorical", and
"sacramental", a way of seeing the Christian life as "relational" and
"transformational". There has been a strong bias in the US to ignore a history
to the emerging church that preceded the US Emergent organization. This began
with Mike Riddell and Mark Pierson in New Zealand from 1989, and with a number
of practitioners in the UK including Jonny Baker, Ian Mobsby, Kevin, Ana and
Brian Draper, and Sue Wallace amongst others, from around 1992. The influence
of the Nine O'Clock Service has been ignored also, owing to its notoriety, yet
much that was practised there was influential on early proponents of
alternative worship. What is common to the identity of many of these emerging
church projects that began in Australia, New Zealand and the United Kingdom, is
that they developed with very little central planning on behalf of the
established denominations. They occurred as the initiative of particular groups
wanting to start new contextual church experiments, and are therefore very
'bottom up'. Murray says that these churches began in a spontaneous way, with
informal relationships formed between otherwise independent groups and that
many became churches as a development from their initial more modest
beginnings. Values and characteristics. Trinitarian based values. Ian Mobsby
also suggests that the Emerging Church is centred on a combination of models of
Church and of Contextual Theology that draw on this Trinitarian base: the
Mystical Communion and Sacramental models of Church, and the Synthetic and
Transcendent models of Contextual Theology. According to Ian Mobsby, the
Emerging Church has reacted to the missional needs of postmodern culture and
re-acquired a Trinitarian basis to its understanding of Church as Worship,
Mission and Community. He argues this movement is over and against some forms
of conservative evangelicalism and other reformed ecclesiologies since the
enlightenment that have neglected the Trinity, which has caused problems with
certainty, judgementalism and fundamentalism and the increasing gap between the
Church and contemporary culture. Post-Christendom mission and evangelism.
Members of the movement often place a high value on good works or social
activism, including missional living. According to Stuart Murray, Christendom
is the creation and maintenance of a Christian nation by ensuring a close
relationship of power between the Christian Church and its host culture. Today,
churches may still attempt to use this power in mission and evangelism. The
emerging church considers this to be unhelpful. Murray summarizes Christendom
values as: a commitment to hierarchy and the status quo; the loss of lay
involvement; institutional values rather than community focus; church at the
centre of society rather than the margins; the use of political power to bring
in the Kingdom; religious compulsion; punitive rather than restorative justice;
marginalisation of women, the poor, and dissident movements; inattentiveness to
the criticisms of those outraged by the historic association of Christianity
with patriarchy, warfare, injustice and patronage; partiality for
respectability and top-down mission; attractional evangelism; assuming the
Christian story is known; and a preoccupation with the rich and powerful. The
emerging church seeks a post-Christendom approach to being church and mission
through: renouncing imperialistic approaches to language and cultural
imposition; making 'truth claims' with humility and respect; overcoming the
public/private dichotomy; moving church from the center to the margins; moving
from a place of privilege in society to one voice amongst many; a transition
from control to witness, maintenance to mission and institution to movement. In
the face of criticism, some in the emerging church respond that this it is
important to attempt a "both and" approach to redemptive and incarnational
theologies. Some Evangelicals and Fundamentalists are perceived as "overly
redemptive" and therefore in danger of condemning people by communicating the
Good News in aggressive and angry ways. A more loving and affirming approach is
proposed in the context of post-modernity where distrust may occur in response
to power claims. It is suggested that this can form the basis of a constructive
engagement with 21st-century post-industrial western cultures. According to Ian
Mobsby, the suggestion that the emerging church is mainly focused on
deconstruction and the rejection of current forms of church should itself be
rejected. Postmodern worldview and hermeneutics. The emerging church is a
response to the perceived influence of modernism in Western Christianity. As
some sociologists commented on a cultural shift that they believed to
correspond to postmodern ways of perceiving reality in the late 20th century,
some Christians began to advocate changes within the church in response. These
Christians saw the contemporary church as being culturally bound to modernism.
They changed their practices to relate to the new cultural situation. Emerging
Christians began to challenge the modern church on issues such as:
institutional structures, systematic theology, propositional teaching methods,
a perceived preoccupation with buildings, an attractional understanding of
mission, professional clergy, and a perceived preoccupation with the political
process and unhelpful jargon ("Christian-ese"). As a result, some in the
emerging church believe it is necessary to deconstruct modern Christian dogma.
One way this happens is by engaging in dialogue, rather than proclaiming a
predigested message, believing that this leads people to Jesus through the Holy
Spirit on their own terms. Many in the movement embrace the missiology that
drives the movement in an effort to be like Christ and make disciples by being
a good example. The emerging church movement contains a great diversity in
beliefs and practices, although some have adopted a preoccupation with sacred
rituals, good works, and political and social activism. Much of the Emerging
Church movement has also adopted the approach to evangelism which stressed
peer-to-peer dialogue rather than dogmatic proclamation and proselytizing. A
plurality of Scriptural interpretations is acknowledged in the emerging church
movement. Participants in the movement exhibit a particular concern for the
effect of the modern "reader's" cultural context on the act of interpretation
echoing the ideas of postmodern thinkers such as Jacques Derrida and Stanley
Fish. Therefore a narrative approach to Scripture, and history are emphasized
in some emerging churches over exegetical and dogmatic approaches (such as that
found in systematic theology and systematic exegesis), which are often viewed
as reductionist. Others embrace a multiplicity of approaches. Generous
orthodoxy. Some emerging church leaders see interfaith dialogue a means to
share their narratives as they learn from the narratives of others. Some
Emerging Church Christians believe there are radically diverse perspectives
within Christianity that are valuable for humanity to progress toward truth and
a better resulting relationship with God, and that these different perspectives
deserve Christian charity rather than condemnation. Reformed and evangelical
opponents, like John MacArthur, do not believe that such generosity is
appropriate, citing the movement's shift away from traditional evangelical
beliefs such as eternal punishment and penal substitution towards a
reintroduction of, for example, elements of ancient mysticism. Centered set.
The movement appropriates set theory as a means of understanding a basic change
in the way the Christian church thinks about itself as a group. "Set theory" is
a concept in mathematics that allows an understanding of what numbers belong to
a group, or set. A bounded set would describe a group with clear "in" and "out"
definitions of membership. The Christian church has largely organized itself as
a bounded set, those who share the same beliefs and values are in the set and
those who disagree are outside. The centered set does not limit membership to
pre-conceived boundaries. Instead a centered set is conditioned on a centered
point. Membership is contingent on those who are moving toward that point.
Elements moving toward a particular point are part of the set, but elements
moving away from that point are not. As a centered-set Christian membership
would be dependent on moving toward the central point of Jesus. A Christian is
then defined by their focus and movement toward Christ rather than a limited
set of shared beliefs and values. John Wimber utilized the centered set
understanding of membership in his Vineyard Churches. The centered set theory
of Christian Churches came largely from missional anthropologist Paul Hiebert.
The centered set understanding of membership allows for a clear vision of the
focal point, the ability to move toward that point without being tied down to
smaller diversions, a sense of total egalitarianism with respect for differing
opinions, and an authority moved from individual members to the existing
center. Authenticity and conversation. The movement favors the sharing of
experiences via testimonies, prayer, group recitation, sharing meals and other
communal practices, which they believe are more personal and sincere than
propositional presentations of the Gospel. Teachers in the Emerging Church tend
to view the Bible and its stories through a lens which they believe finds
significance and meaning for their community's social and personal stories
rather than for the purpose of finding cross-cultural, propositional absolutes
regarding salvation and conduct. Those in the movement do not engage in
aggressive apologetics or confrontational evangelism in the traditional sense,
preferring to encourage the freedom to discover truth through conversation and
relationships with the Christian community. Missional living. While some
Evangelicals emphasize eternal salvation, many in the emerging church emphasize
the here and now. Participants in this movement assert that the incarnation of
Christ informs their theology. They believe that as God entered the world in
human form, adherents enter (individually and communally) into the context
around them and aim to transform that culture through local involvement. This
holistic involvement may take many forms, including social activism,
hospitality and acts of kindness. This beneficent involvement in culture is
part of what is called missional living. Missional living leads to a focus on
temporal and social issues, in contrast with a perceived evangelical
overemphasis on salvation. Drawing on research and models of contextual
theology, Mobsby asserts that the emerging church is using different models of
contextual theology than conservative evangelicals, who tend to use a
"translation" model of contextual theology (which has been criticized for being
colonialist and condescending toward other cultures); the emerging church tends
to use a "synthetic" or "transcendent" model of contextual theology. The
emerging church has charged many conservative evangelical churches with
withdrawal from involvement in contextual mission and seeking the
contextualization of the gospel. Many emerging churches have put a strong
emphasis on contextualization and, therefore, contextual theology. Contextual
theology has been defined as "A way of doing theology in which one takes into
account: the spirit and message of the gospel; the tradition of the Christian
people; the culture in which one is theologising; and social change in that
culture." Emerging churches, drawing on this synthetic (or transcendent) model
of contextual theology, seek to have a high view towards the Bible, the
Christian people, culture, humanity and justice. It is this "both...and"
approach that distinguishes contextual theology. Emerging communities
participate in social action, community involvement, global justice and
sacrificial hospitality in an effort to know and share God's grace. At a
conference entitled "The Emerging Church Forum" in 2006, John Franke said
“The Church of Jesus Christ is not the goal of the Gospel, just the
instrument of the extension of God’s mission.” “The Church has been slow
to recognize that missions isn’t (sic) a program the Church administers, it
is the very core of the Church’s reason for being.” This focus on missional
living and practicing radical hospitality has led many emerging churches to
deepen what they are doing by developing a rhythm of life, and a vision of
missional loving engagement with the world. Communitarian or egalitarian
ecclesiology. Proponents of the movement communicate and interact through fluid
and open networks because the movement is decentralized with little
institutional coordination. Because of the participation values named earlier,
being community through participation affects the governance of most Emerging
Churches. Participants avoid power relationships, attempting to gather in ways
specific to their local context. In this way some in the movement share with
the house church movements a willingness to challenge traditional church
structures/organizations though they also respect the different expressions of
traditional Christian denominations. International research suggests that some
Emerging Churches are utilizing a Trinitarian basis to being church through
what Avery Dulles calls 'The Mystical Communion Model of Church'. Creative and
rediscovered spirituality. This can involve everything from expressive,
neocharismatic style of worship and the use of contemporary music and films to
more ancient liturgical customs and eclectic expressions of spirituality, with
the goal of making the church gathering reflect the local community's tastes.
Emerging church practitioners are happy to take elements of worship from a wide
variety of historic traditions, including traditions of the Catholic Church,
the Anglican churches, the Orthodox churches, and Celtic Christianity. From
these and other religious traditions emerging church groups take, adapt and
blend various historic church practices including liturgy, prayer beads, icons,
spiritual direction, the labyrinth, and lectio divina. The Emerging Church is
also sometimes called the "Ancient-Future" church. One of the key social drives
in Western Post-industrialised countries, is the rise in new/old forms of
mysticism. This rise in spirituality appears to be driven by the effects of
consumerism, globalisation and advances in information technology. Therefore,
the Emerging Church is operating in a new context of postmodern spirituality,
as a new form of mysticism. This capitalizes on the social shift in starting
assumptions from the situation that most are regarded as materialist/atheist
(the modern position), to the fact that many people now believe in and are
searching for something more spiritual (postmodern view). This has been
characterised as a major shift from religion to spirituality. So, in the new
world of 'spiritual tourism', the Emerging Church Movement is seeking to
missionally assist people to shift from being spiritual tourists to Christian
pilgrims. Many are drawing on ancient Christian resources recontextualised into
the contemporary such as contemplation and contemplative forms of prayer,
symbolic multi-sensory worship, story telling and many others. This again has
required a change in focus as the majority of unchurched and dechurched people
are seeking 'something that works' rather than something that is 'true'. Use of
new technologies. Emerging-church groups use the Internet as a medium of
decentralized communication. Church websites are used as announcement boards
for community activity, and they are generally a hub for more participation
based new technologies such as blogs, Facebook groups, Twitter accounts, etc.
The use of the blog is an especially popular and appropriate means of
communication within the Emerging church. Through blogs, members converse about
theology, philosophy, art, culture, politics, and social justice, both among
their local congregations and across the broader Emerging community. These
blogs can be seen to embrace both sacred and secular culture side-by-side as an
excellent example of the church's focus on contextual theology. Morality and
justice. Drawing on a more 'Missional Morality' that again turns to the
synoptic gospels of Christ, many emerging-church groups draw on an
understanding of God seeking to restore all things back into restored
relationship. This emphasises God's graceful love approach to discipleship, in
following Christ who identified with the socially excluded and ill, in
opposition to the Pharisees and Sadducees and their purity rules. Under this
movement, traditional Christians' emphasis on either individual salvation, end-
times theology or the prosperity gospel have been challenged. Many people in
the movement express concern for what they consider to be the practical
manifestation of God's kingdom on earth, by which they mean social justice.
This concern manifests itself in a variety of ways depending on the local
community and in ways they believe transcend "modernist" labels of
"conservative" and "liberal." This concern for justice is expressed in such
things as feeding the poor, visiting the sick and prisoners, stopping
contemporary slavery, critiquing systemic and coercive power structures with
"postcolonial hermeneutics," and working for environmental causes.
