Eschatology Eschatology (from the Greek ", eschatos/eschatē/eschaton" meaning
"last" and "-logy" meaning "the study of", first used in English around 1550)
is a part of theology, philosophy, and futurology concerned with what are
believed to be the final events of history, the ultimate destiny of humanity
— commonly referred to as the "end of the world" or "end time". The Oxford
English Dictionary defines eschatology as "The department of theological
science concerned with ‘the four last things: death, judgement, heaven, and
hell’." In the context of mysticism, the phrase refers metaphorically to the
end of ordinary reality and reunion with the Divine. In many religions it is
taught as an existing future event prophesied in sacred texts or folklore. More
broadly, eschatology may encompass related concepts such as the Messiah or
Messianic Age, the end time, and the end of days. History is often divided into
"ages" (Gk. aeons), an age being a period when certain realities are present.
One age comes to an end and a new age, where different realities are present,
begins. When such transitions from one age to another are the subject of
eschatological discussion, the phrase, "end of the world", is replaced by "end
of the age", "end of an era", or "end of life as we know it". Much apocalyptic
fiction does not deal with the "end of time" but rather with the end of a
certain period of time, the end of life as it is now, and the beginning of a
new period of time. It is usually a crisis that brings an end to current
reality and ushers in a new way of living / thinking / being. This crisis may
take the form of the intervention of a deity in history, a war, a change in the
environment or the reaching of a new level of consciousness. Most modern
eschatology and apocalypticism, both religious and secular, involves the
violent disruption or destruction of the world, whereas Christian and Jewish
eschatologies view the end times as the consummation or perfection of God's
creation of the world. For example, according to ancient Hebrew belief, life
takes a linear (and not cyclical) path; the world began with God and is
constantly headed toward God’s final goal for creation. Eschatologies vary as
to their degree of optimism or pessimism about the future (and in some
eschatologies, conditions are better for some and worse for others, e.g.
"heaven and hell"). In philosophy. Eschatology has also been a study shared and
theorized on by philosophers. Saint Augustine stressed the allegorical method
of interpretation. He was greatly influenced by Origen. He was followed by Ibn
al-Nafis and Hegel with their philosophy of history, and, some such as the
author Albert Camus in 'The Rebel' and J.G. Merquior, have argued, Karl Marx.
Eschatology in religions. Bahá'í eschatology. In Bahá'í belief, creation
has neither a beginning nor an end. Instead the eschatology of other religions
is viewed as symbolic. In Bahá'í belief, human time is marked by a series of
progressive revelations in which successive messengers or prophets come from
God. The coming of each of these messengers is seen as the day of judgement to
the adherents of the previous religion, who may choose to accept the new
messenger and enter the 'heaven' of belief, or denounce the new messenger and
enter the 'hell' of denial. In this view the terms heaven and hell are seen as
symbolic terms for the person's spiritual progress and their nearness to or
distance from God. In Bahá'í belief, the coming of Bahá'u'lláh, the founder
of the Bahá'í Faith, signals the fulfilment of previous eschatological
expectations of Islam, Christianity and other major religions. Buddhist
eschatology. Some forms of Buddhism hold belief in cycles in which life span of
human beings changes according to human nature. In Cakkavati sutta the Buddha
explained the relationship between life span of human being and behaviour. As
per this sutta, in the past unskillful behavior was unknown among the human
race. As a result, people lived for an immensely long time — 80,000 years —
endowed with great beauty, wealth, pleasure, and strength. Over the course of
time, though, they began behaving in various unskillful ways. This caused the
human life span gradually to shorten, to the point where it now stands at 100
years, with human beauty, wealth, pleasure, and strength decreasing
proportionately. In the future, as morality continues to degenerate, human life
will continue to shorten to the point where the normal life span is 10 years,
with people reaching sexual maturity at five Ultimately, conditions will
deteriorate to the point of a "sword-interval," in which swords appear in the
hands of all human beings, and they hunt one another like game. A few people,
however, will take shelter in the wilderness to escape the carnage, and when
the slaughter is over, they will come out of hiding and resolve to take up a
life of skillful and virtuous action again. With the recovery of virtue, the
human life span will gradually increase again until it reaches 80,000 years,
with people attaining sexual maturity at 500. According to Tibetan Buddhist
literature, the age of first Buddha was 1,000,000 years and height was 100
cubits while 28th Buddha, Siddhartha Gautama (563BC–483BC) lived 80 years and
his height was 20 cubits. Christian eschatology. Christian eschatology is
concerned with death, an intermediate state, Heaven, hell, the return of Jesus,
the resurrection of the dead, for several evangelical denominations, a rapture,
a great tribulation, the Millennium, end of the world, the last judgment, a new
heaven and a new earth (the World to Come), and the ultimate consummation of
all of God's purposes. Eschatological passages are found in many places, esp.
"Isaiah", "Daniel", "Matthew 24", "The Sheep and the Goats", and the "Book of
Revelation", but "Revelation" often occupies a central place in Christian
eschatology. The Second Coming of Christ is the central event in Christian
eschatology. Most Christians believe that death and suffering will continue to
exist until Christ's return. There are, however, various views concerning the
order and significance of other eschatological events. The book of "Revelation"
is at the core of Christian eschatology. The study of "Revelation" is usually
divided into four approaches. In the Futurist approach, "Revelation" is chiefly
seen as referring to events which as yet have not come to pass, but which will
come to pass at the end of the age, and the end of the world. This is the
approach which most applies to eschatological studies. In the Preterist
approach, "Revelation" chiefly refers to the events of the first century, such
as the struggle of Christianity to survive the persecutions of the Roman
Empire, the fall of Jerusalem in 70 AD, and the desecration of the temple in
the same year. In the Historicist approach, "Revelation" provides a broad view
of history, and passages in "Revelation" are identified with major historical
people and events. In the Idealist (or Spiritualist or Symbolic) approach, the
events of "Revelation" are neither past nor future, but are purely symbolic,
dealing with the ongoing struggle and ultimate triumph of good over evil. Hindu
eschatology. Contemporary Hindu eschatology is linked in the Vaishnavite
tradition to the figure of Kalki, or the tenth and last avatar of Vishnu before
the age draws to a close, and Shiva simultaneously dissolves and regenerates
the universe. Most Hindus believe that the current period is the Kali Yuga, the
last of four periods ("Yuga") that make up the current age. Each period has
seen a successive degeneration in the moral order and character of human
beings, to the point that in the Kali Yuga quarrel and hypocrisy are prevalent.
Often, the invocation of Kali Yuga denotes a certain helplessness in the face
of the horrors and suffering of the human condition and a nostalgia for a
golden past or a future salvation. However, Hindu conceptions of time, like
those found in other non-Western traditions, are cyclical in that one age may
end but another will always begin. As such, the cycle of birth, growth, decay,
death, and renewal at the individual level finds its echo in the cosmic order
of all things, yet affected by the vagaries of the comings and goings of divine
interventions in the Vaishnavite belief. Most Hindus believe that Shiva will
destroy the world at the end of the kalpa. Some Shaivites hold the view that he
is incessantly destroying and creating the world. Islamic eschatology.
Regarding the Major Signs, a Companion of the Prophet narrated: "Once we were
sitting together and talking amongst ourselves when the Prophet appeared. He
asked us what it was we were discussing. We said it was the Day of Judgment. He
said: 'It will not be called until ten signs have appeared: Smoke, Dajjal
Antichrist, the creature (that will wound the people), the rising of the sun in
the West, the Second Coming of Jesus, the emergence of Gog and Magog, and three
sinkings (or cavings in of the earth): one in the East, another in the West and
a third in the Arabian Peninsula.'" (note: the previous events were not listed
in the chronological order of appearance) Jewish eschatology. Judaism addresses
the end times in the Book of Daniel and numerous other prophetic passages in
the Hebrew scriptures, and also in the Talmud, particularly Tractate Avodah
Zarah.
