Epiclesis The epiclesis (also spelled epiklesis; from "invocation" or "calling
down from on high") is that part of the Anaphora (Eucharistic Prayer) by which
the priest invokes the Holy Spirit (or the power of His blessing) upon the
Eucharistic bread and wine in some Christian churches. In most Eastern
Christian traditions, the Epiclesis comes after the Anamnesis (remembrance of
Jesus' words and deeds); in the Western Rite it usually precedes. Eastern
churches. The Epiclesis is considered to be essential to the validity of the
Sacred Mystery (sacrament), and in the 20th century, when Western Rite Orthodox
parishes began to be established, it was necessary to add an Epiclesis to their
Eucharistic rites, if one was not already there (for instance, those parishes
which desired to use the Anglican Missal.) East Syrian. In its pure form, the
ancient anaphora of the Divine Liturgy of Addai and Mari does include an
epiclesis. It does not use the Words of Institution, although they appear
directly and indirectly in other parts of the rite (and is therefore considered
to be implicit). Roman Rite. Implicit epiclesis. The Roman Canon mentions the
Holy Spirit explicitly only once, in the final doxology: "Through him , and
with him, and in him, O God, almighty Father, in the unity of the Holy Spirit,
all glory and honour is yours, for ever and ever." Although according to the
Council of Trent transubstantiation occurs at the Words of Institution, the
Catechism of the Catholic Church considers an at least implicit epiclesis to be
a vital part of the sacrament: "At the heart of the Eucharistic celebration are
the bread and wine that, by the words of Christ and the invocation of the Holy
Spirit, become Christ's Body and Blood." Some groups of Traditionalist
Catholics who joined a canonical Orthodox jurisdiction with permission to
celebrate the Tridentine liturgy have been required to interpolate the
epiclesis of the Liturgy of St John Chrysostom into the Tridentine Mass in
order to correct the perceived defect of an insufficiently strong epiclesis
(see Western Rite Orthodoxy). Explicit epicleses. The additional Eucharistic
Prayers introduced into the Roman Rite in the 1969 revision have both a pre-
consecration and a post-consecration epiclesis. Use in other sacraments. A
similar invocation of the Holy Spirit by the priest in some other high church
sacraments, such as matrimony, is also called an epiclesis. The Eastern
Orthodox Church holds that such an epiclesis is necessary for the validity of
the Holy Mystery (sacrament) of marriage; the Roman Catholic Church holds that
it is not, since for them the bride and groom are the ministers of that
sacrament. An Epiclesis also appears in the Orthodox Rite of Baptism and the
Great Blessing of Waters. Protestantism. Anglicanism and Lutheranism. Lutheran
and Anglican divines have also argued that in earlier liturgies of theirs in
which an Epiclesis and unity with the one sacrifice of Christ may not have
seemed explicit, it was stated as the point of the consecration in other parts
of the rite, notably in required exhortations. Methodism. According to a 2003
report of the British Methodist Church, "His Presence Makes The Feast: Holy
Communion in the Methodist Church": "The one Spirit by whom we are all baptised
into the one body (1 Corinthians 12:13) is the same Spirit who unites us in and
with the body of Christ in Holy Communion. The Holy Spirit at work in the
Church of the Acts of the Apostles brings into effect a witnessing and
preaching community in which there is apostolic teaching, fellowship, prayer
and the breaking of the bread (Acts 2:42)." The epiclesis of the Methodist
liturgy draws from both the Anglican tradition, such as the 1549 Prayer Book,
and the liturgical renewal movement of the 20th century that focused upon
liturgies of the ancient church, such as the early rite of Hippolytus. From
these traditions, John Wesley, the founder of Methodism, inherited the notion
that the Holy Spirit was to be invoked to make real and true all that God had
promised to bestow on the faithful through Holy Communion. This theology of
epiclesis is evidenced in several Methodist hymns written by Charles Wesley,
the brother of John Wesley. The epiclesis used in The United Methodist Church
is as follows: Another epiclesis used in the Methodist Church in Great Britain
is as follows:
