Episcopal Church (United States) The Episcopal Church (also officially known as
the Protestant Episcopal Church in the United States of America) is a mainline
Anglican Christian church found mainly in the United States, as well as in
Honduras, Taiwan, Colombia, Ecuador, Haiti, the Dominican Republic, Venezuela,
the British Virgin Islands and parts of Europe. The Episcopal Church is the
Province of the Anglican Communion in the United States and many other
territories where it has a presence (excluding Europe). The Episcopal Church
describes itself as being "Protestant, yet Catholic." In 2010, the Episcopal
Church had a baptized membership of 2,125,012 both inside and outside the
United States. In the U.S., it had a baptized membership of 1,951,907, making
it the nation's 14th largest denomination. The Church was organized shortly
after the American Revolution when it was forced to separate from the Church of
England, as Church of England clergy were required to swear allegiance to the
British monarch, who is the Supreme Governor of the Church of England. It
became, in the words of the 1990 report of the Archbishop of Canterbury's Group
on the Episcopate, "the first Anglican Province outside the British Isles." Now
it is divided into nine provinces and has dioceses outside the U.S. in Taiwan,
Central and South America, and the Caribbean. The Episcopal Diocese of the
Virgin Islands encompasses both American and British territory. In Europe, the
Church's Convocation of Episcopal Churches in Europe co-exists with the Church
of England's Diocese of Gibraltar in Europe and with the Reformed Episcopal
Church of Spain. The Episcopal Church was active in the Social Gospel movement
of the late 19th and early 20th centuries. Since the 1960s and 1970s, it has
opposed the death penalty and supported the civil rights movement and
affirmative action. Some of its leaders and priests marched with civil rights
demonstrators. Today the Church calls for the full civil equality of gay men
and lesbians, and the Church's General Convention has passed resolutions that
allow for gay and lesbian marriages in states where it is legal. The Convention
also approved an official liturgy to bless such unions. On the question of
abortion, the Church has adopted a nuanced position. About all these issues,
individual members and clergy can and do frequently disagree with the stated
position of the Church. The Episcopal Church ordains women to the priesthood as
well as the diaconate and the episcopate. The current Presiding Bishop of the
Episcopal Church is Katharine Jefferts Schori, the first female Primate in the
Anglican Communion. Official names. There are two official names of the
Episcopal Church specified in its constitution: "The Episcopal Church" and the
"Protestant Episcopal Church in the United States of America". "The Episcopal
Church" is the more commonly used name. The 66th General Convention voted in
1979 to use the name "Episcopal Church" (dropping the adjective "Protestant")
in the Oath of Conformity of the Declaration for Ordination. The evolution of
the name can be seen in the Episcopal Church's "Book of Common Prayer" (BCP).
In the 1928 BCP, the title page said, "According to the use of the Protestant
Episcopal Church in the United States of America". In contrast, the change in
self-identity can be seen in the title page of the 1979 "Book of Common
Prayer", which states, "'According to the use of The Episcopal Church". The
alternate name "Episcopal Church in the United States of America" is commonly
seen but has never been the official name of the Episcopal Church. Because it
contains integral jurisdictions in many other countries, it was thought that a
name was needed which is not directly tied to the United States. But since
several other churches in the Anglican Communion also use the name "Episcopal",
the phrase "in the United States of America" is often added, for example by the
Anglican Communion's official website and by Anglicans Online. The Episcopal
Church worships in Spanish, French and Chinese, as well as English, because it
has dioceses in Asia, the Caribbean, Central and South America and Europe. In
Spanish the church is called "La Iglesia Episcopal Protestante de los Estados
Unidos de América" or "La Iglesia Episcopal" and in French "L'Église
protestante épiscopale dans les États unis d'Amérique" or "L'Église
épiscopale". A common mistake by non-Episcopalians is over the use of the
words "Episcopal" and "Episcopalians". An Episcopalian is a member of the
Episcopal Church but it is not the Episcopalian Church. Likewise, a member is
not called an Episcopal, like a Methodist is a member of the Methodist Church.
Episcopalian is a noun; Episcopal is an adjective. The full legal name of the
national church corporate body is the "Domestic and Foreign Missionary Society
of the Protestant Episcopal Church in the United States of America", which was
incorporated by the legislature of New York and established in 1821. The
membership of the corporation "shall be considered as comprehending all persons
who are members of the Church". This, however, should not be confused with the
name of the Church itself, as it is a distinct body relating to Church
governance. History. Colonial era and the American Revolution (1604–1783).
The Episcopal Church has its origins in the Church of England in the American
colonies, and it stresses its continuity with the early universal Western
church and maintains apostolic succession. The first parish was founded in
Jamestown, Virginia, in 1607 under the charter of the Virginia Company of
London. Although there was no American bishop in the colonial era, the Church
of England had an official status in several colonies, which meant that tax
money was paid to the local parish by the local government, and the parish
handled some civic functions. The Church of England was designated the
established church in Virginia in 1609, in New York in 1693, in Maryland in
1702, in South Carolina in 1706, in North Carolina in 1730, and in Georgia in
1758. From 1635, the vestries and the clergy were loosely under the diocesan
authority of the Bishop of London. After 1702, the Society for the Propagation
of the Gospel in Foreign Parts (SPG) began missionary activity throughout the
colonies. On the eve of Revolution about 400 independent congregations were
reported throughout the colonies. Embracing the symbols of the British presence
in the American colonies, such as the monarchy, the episcopate, and even the
language of the "Book of Common Prayer", the Church of England almost drove
itself to extinction during the upheaval of the American Revolution. More than
any other denomination, the War of Independence internally divided both clergy
and laity of the Church of England in America, and opinions covered a wide
spectrum of political views: patriots, conciliators, and loyalists. While many
Patriots were suspicious of Loyalism in the Church, about three-quarters of the
signers of the Declaration of Independence were nominally Anglican laymen,
including Thomas Jefferson, William Paca, and George Wythe. Of the
approximately three hundred clergy in the Church of England in America between
1776 and 1783, over 80 percent in New England, New York, and New Jersey were
loyalists. This is in contrast to the less than 23 percent loyalist clergy in
the four southern colonies. Many Church of England clergy remained loyalists as
they took their two ordination oaths very seriously. Anglican clergy were
obliged to swear allegiance to the king as well as to pray for the king, the
royal family, and the British Parliament. In general, loyalist clergy stayed by
their oaths and prayed for the king or else suspended services. By the end of
1776, some Anglican churches were closing. Anglican priests held services in
private homes or lay readers who were not bound by the oaths held morning and
evening prayer. During 1775 and 1776, the Continental Congress had issued
decrees ordering churches to fast and pray on behalf of the patriots. Starting
July 4, 1776, Congress and several states passed laws making prayers for the
king and British Parliament acts of treason. The patriot clergy in the South
were quick to find reasons to transfer their oaths to the American cause and
prayed for the success of the Revolution. One precedent was the transfer of
oaths during the Glorious Revolution in England. Most of the patriot clergy in
the south were able to keep their churches open and services continued. Early
nation: 1783–1800. In the wake of the Revolution, American Episcopalians
faced the task of preserving a hierarchical church structure in a society
infused with republican values. By 1786, the church had succeeded in
translating episcopacy to America and in revising the "Book of Common Prayer"
to reflect American political realities. Later, through the efforts of Bishop
Philander Chase (1775–1852) of Ohio, Americans successfully sought material
assistance from England for the purpose of training Episcopal clergy. The
development of the Protestant Episcopal Church provides an example of how
Americans in the early republic maintained important cultural ties with
England. When the clergy of Connecticut elected Samuel Seabury as their bishop
in 1783, he sought consecration in England. The Oath of Supremacy prevented
Seabury's consecration in England, so he went to Scotland; the non-juring
Scottish bishops there consecrated him in Aberdeen on November 14, 1784, making
him, in the words of scholar Arthur Carl Piepkorn, "the first Anglican bishop
appointed to minister outside the British Isles". On August 3, 1785, the first
ordinations on American soil took place there at Christ Church in Middletown.
In 1787, two priests – William White of Pennsylvania and Samuel Provoost of
New York – were consecrated as bishops by the Archbishop of Canterbury, the
Archbishop of York, and the Bishop of Bath and Wells, the legal obstacles
having been removed by the passage through Parliament of the Consecration of
Bishops Abroad Act 1786. Thus there are two branches of Apostolic succession
for the American bishops: through the non-juring bishops of Scotland that
consecrated Samuel Seabury and through the English church that consecrated
William White and Samuel Provoost. All bishops in the American Church are
ordained by at least three bishops. One can trace the succession of each back
to Seabury, White and Provoost. ("See Succession of Bishops of the Episcopal
Church.") In 1789, representative clergy from nine dioceses met in Philadelphia
to ratify the Church's initial constitution. The Episcopal Church was formally
separated from the Church of England in 1789 so that clergy would not be
required to accept the supremacy of the British monarch. A revised version of
the "Book of Common Prayer" was written for the new church that same year. The
fourth bishop of the Episcopal Church was James Madison, the first bishop of
Virginia. Madison was consecrated in 1790 by the Archbishop of Canterbury and
two other Church of England bishops. This third American bishop consecrated
within the English line of succession occurred because of continuing unease
within the Church of England over Seabury's nonjuring Scottish orders.
1801–1975. In 1856 the first society for African Americans in the Episcopal
Church was founded by James Theodore Holly. Named "The Protestant Episcopal
Society for Promoting The Extension of The Church Among Colored People", the
society argued that blacks should be allowed to participate in seminaries and
diocesan conventions. The group lost its focus when Holly emigrated to Haiti,
but other groups followed after the Civil War. The current Union of Black
Episcopalians traces its history to the society. Holly went on to found the
Anglican Church in Haiti, where he became the first African-American bishop on
November 8, 1874. As Bishop of Haiti, Holly was the first African American to
attend the Lambeth Conference. However, he was consecrated by the American
Church Missionary Society, an Evangelical Episcopal branch of the Church. When
the American Civil War began in 1861, Episcopalians in the South formed their
own Protestant Episcopal Church. However, in the North the separation was never
officially recognized. By May 16, 1866, the southern dioceses had rejoined the
national church. By the middle of the 19th century, evangelical Episcopalians
disturbed by High Church Tractarianism, while continuing to work in
interdenominational agencies, formed their own voluntary societies, and
eventually, in 1874, a faction objecting to the revival of ritual practices
established the Reformed Episcopal Church. Samuel David Ferguson was the first
black bishop consecrated by the Episcopal Church, the first to practice in the
U.S. and the first black person to sit in the House of Bishops. Bishop Ferguson
was consecrated on June 24, 1885, with the then-Presiding Bishop of the
Episcopal Church acting as a consecrator. During the Gilded Age, highly
prominent laity such as banker J. P. Morgan, industrialist Henry Ford, and art
collector Isabella Stewart Gardner played a central role in shaping a
distinctive upper class Episcopalian ethos, especially with regard to
preserving the arts and history. These philanthropists propelled the Episcopal
Church into a quasi-national position of importance while at the same time
giving the church a central role in the cultural transformation of the country.
Another mark of influence is the fact that more than a quarter of all
presidents of the United States have been Episcopalians (see religious
affiliations of Presidents of the United States). It was during this period
that the "Book of Common Prayer" was revised, first in 1892 and later in 1928.
The first women were admitted as delegates to General Convention in 1970. In
1975, Vaughan Booker, who confessed to the murder of his wife and was sentenced
to life in prison, was ordained to the diaconate in Graterford State Prison's
chapel in Pennsylvania, after having repented of his sins, becoming a symbol of
redemption and atonement. Recent history (1976 to the present). In 1976, the
General Convention adopted a new prayerbook, which was a substantial revision
and modernization of the previous 1928 edition. It incorporated many principles
of the Roman Catholic Church's liturgical movement, which had been discussed at
Vatican II. This version was adopted as the official prayerbook in 1979 after
an initial three-year trial use. Several conservative parishes, however,
continued to use the 1928 version. The 1976 General Convention also passed a
resolution calling for an end to apartheid in South Africa and in 1985 called
for "dioceses, institutions, and agencies" to create equal opportunity
employment and affirmative action policies to address any potential "racial
inequities" in clergy placement. In 1991 the General Convention declared "the
practice of racism is sin" and in 2006 a unanimous House of Bishops endorsed
Resolution A123 apologizing for complicity in the institution of slavery and
silence over "Jim Crow" laws, segregation, and racial discrimination. The
General Convention permitted the ordination of women in 1976. The first women
were canonically ordained to the priesthood in 1977. The first female bishop,
Barbara Harris, was consecrated on February 11, 1989. At the time of the
formation of ACNA, three U.S. dioceses did not ordain women at all. All
dioceses of TEC now ordain women. The 2006 election of Jefferts Schori as the
Church's 26th presiding bishop was controversial in the wider Anglican
Communion because she is a woman, and the full communion does not recognize the
ordination of women. She is the only national leader of a church in the
Anglican Communion who is a woman. In addition, eight American dioceses have
rejected her authority and have asked the Archbishop of Canterbury, Rowan
Williams, to assign them another national leader. The Episcopal Church affirmed
at the 1976 General Convention that homosexuals are "children of God" who
deserve acceptance and pastoral care from the church and equal protection under
the law. Despite the affirmation of gay rights, the General Convention affirmed
in 1991 that "physical sexual expression" is only appropriate within the
monogamous, lifelong "union of husband and wife." The first openly homosexual
priest, Ellen Barrett, was ordained in 1977. The first openly homosexual
bishop, Gene Robinson, was elected in June 2003. Robinson's election caused a
crisis in both the American church and the wider Anglican Communion. In October
2003, an emergency meeting of the Anglican primates (the heads of the Anglican
Communion's 38 member churches) was convened. The meeting's final communiqué
included the warning that if Robinson's consecration proceeded, it would "tear
the fabric of the communion at its deepest level." In recent decades, the
Episcopal Church, like other mainline churches, has experienced a decline in
membership. There has also been internal controversy, mainly over women's
ordination and the place of homosexuals in the church. In response to what they
perceived as a liberal theological agenda, several percent of the most
conservative Episcopalians joined the churches of the Continuing Anglican
movement or advocated Anglican realignment where the members of individual
congregations and, in four cases, dioceses left the Episcopal Church, claiming
alignment with overseas Anglican provinces including the Anglican Province of
the Southern Cone of America and the Church of Nigeria. The phenomena of
Continuing Anglicanism and Anglican Realignment have led to the development of
the Anglican Church in North America, which claims over 800 parishes, as well
as to litigation over church property. In 2009, the General Convention charged
the Standing Commission on Liturgy and Music to develop theological and
liturgical resources for same-sex blessings and report back to the General
Convention in 2012. It also gave bishops an option to provide "generous
pastoral support" especially where civil authorities have legalized same-gender
marriage, civil unions, or domestic partnerships. On July 14, 2009, the
Episcopal Church's House of Bishops voted that "any ordained ministry" is open
to gay men and lesbians. "The New York Times" said the move was "likely to send
shockwaves through the Anglican Communion." This vote ended a moratorium on
ordaining gay bishops passed in 2006 and passed in spite of Archbishop Rowan
Williams's personal call at the start of the convention that, "I hope and pray
that there won't be decisions in the coming days that will push us further
apart." Those interested in the history might wish to visit the Historical
Society of the Episcopal Church or National Episcopal Historians and Archivists
(NEHA). Membership. As of 2010, the Episcopal Church reports 2,125,012 baptized
members. The majority of members are in the United States, where the Church has
1,951,907 members, a decrease of 54,436 persons (-2.7 percent) from 2009.
Outside of the U.S. the Church has 173,105 members, an increase of 3,700
persons (2.2 percent) from 2009. Total average Sunday attendance (ASA) for 2010
was 697,880 a decrease of 3.7 percent from 2009. ASA in the U.S. was 657,831
and outside the U.S. was 40,049. According to data collected in 2000, the
District of Columbia, Rhode Island, Connecticut, and Virginia have the highest
rates of adherents per capita, and states along the East Coast generally have a
higher number of adherents per capita than in other parts of the country. New
York was the state with the largest total number of adherents, over 200,000. In
2010, the Episcopal Diocese of Haiti was the largest single diocese, with
86,760 members baptized members. This diocese accounts for slightly over half
of non-domestic diocesan membership. The Episcopal Church also has the highest
number of graduate and post-graduate degrees per capita of any other Christian
denomination in the United States. The Episcopal Church experienced notable
growth in the first half of the 20th century, but like many mainline churches,
it has had a decline in membership in more recent decades. Membership grew from
1.1 million members in 1925 to a peak of over 3.4 million members in the mid-
1960s. Between 1970 and 1990, membership declined from about 3.2 million to
about 2.4 million. Once changes in how membership is counted are taken into
consideration, the Episcopal Church's membership numbers were broadly flat
throughout the 1990s, with a slight growth in the first years of the 21st
century. A loss of 115,000 members was reported for the years 2003–05, which
has been attributed in part to controversy concerning ordination of homosexuals
to the priesthood and the election of Gene Robinson as Bishop of New Hampshire,
but is a similar rate of loss to that which prevailed in the period from
1967–69, when the church lost 113,000 members, which has been attributed in
part to liberal policies in an age of racial tension. Other theories about the
decline in membership include a failure to sufficiently reach beyond ethnic
barriers in an increasingly diverse society, and the low fertility rates
prevailing among the predominant ethnic groups traditionally belonging to the
church. In 1965, there were 880,000 children in Episcopal Sunday School
programs, by 2001 the number had declined to 297,000. Structure. As its name
suggests, the Episcopal Church, as are other Anglican churches, is governed
according to episcopal polity with its own system of canon law. This means that
the church is organized into dioceses led by bishops in consultation with
representative bodies. It is a unitary body, in that the power of the General
Convention is not limited by the individual dioceses. The church has, however,
a highly decentralized structure and characteristics of a confederation.
Parishes and dioceses. At the local level, there are over 7,000 Episcopal
congregations, each of which elects a vestry or bishop's committee. Subject to
the approval of its diocesan bishop, the vestry of each parish elects a priest,
called the rector, who has spiritual jurisdiction in the parish and selects
assistant clergy, both deacons and priests. (There is a difference between
vestry and clergy elections – clergy are ordained members usually selected
from outside the parish, whereas any member in good standing of a parish is
eligible to serve on the vestry.) The diocesan bishop, however, appoints the
clergy for all missions and may choose to do so for non-self-supporting
parishes. The middle judicatory consists of a diocese headed by a bishop who is
assisted by a standing committee. The bishop and standing committee are elected
by the diocesan convention whose members are selected by the congregations. The
election of a bishop requires the consent of a majority of standing committees
and diocesan bishops. Conventions meet annually to consider legislation (such
as revisions to the diocesan constitution and canons) and speak for the
diocese. Dioceses are organized into nine provinces. Each province has a synod
and a mission budget, but it has no authority over its member dioceses. There
are 110 dioceses in the United States, Colombia, the Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Haiti, Honduras, Puerto Rico, Taiwan, Venezuela and the Virgin
Islands. The Convocation of Episcopal Churches in Europe and the Navajoland
Area Mission are jurisdictions similar to a diocese. The Presiding Bishop is
one of three Anglican primates who together exercise metropolitan jurisdiction
over the Episcopal Church of Cuba, which is an extraprovincial diocese in the
Anglican Communion. National church. The highest legislative body of the
Episcopal Church is the triennial General Convention, consisting of the House
of Deputies and the House of Bishops. All active (includes diocesan, coadjutor,
suffragan, and assistant bishops) and retired bishops make up the over 300
members of the House of Bishops. Diocesan conventions elect over 800
representatives (each diocese elects four laity and four clergy) to the House
of Deputies. The House of Deputies elects a president and vice-president to
preside at meetings. General Convention enacts two types of legislation. The
first type is the rules by which the church is governed as contained in the
Constitution and Canons; the second type are broad guidelines on church policy
called resolutions. Either house may propose legislation. The House of Deputies
only meets as a full body once every three years; however, the House of Bishops
meets regularly throughout the triennium between conventions. The real work of
General Convention is done by interim bodies, the most powerful being the
Executive Council, which oversees the work of the national church during the
triennium. The council has 40 members; 20 are directly elected by the General
Convention, 18 are elected by the nine provinces, and the Presiding Bishop and
President of the House of Deputies are ex officio members. Other interim bodies
include a number of standing commissions which study and draft policy proposals
for consideration and report back to General Convention. Each standing
commission consists of three bishops, three priests or deacons, and six
laypersons. Bishops are appointed by the Presiding Bishop while the other
clergy and laypersons are appointed by the president of the House of Deputies.
The Presiding Bishop is elected from and by the House of Bishops and confirmed
by the House of Deputies for a nine year term. The Presiding Bishop is the
chief pastor and primate of the Episcopal Church and is charged with providing
leadership in the development of the Church's program as well as speaking on
behalf of the Church. The Presiding Bishop does not possess a territorial see;
since the 1970s, however, the Presiding Bishop has enjoyed extraordinary
jurisdiction (metropolitical authority) and has authority to visit dioceses for
sacramental and preaching ministry, for consulting bishops, and for related
purposes. The Presiding Bishop chairs the House of Bishops as well as the
Executive Council of the General Convention. In addition, the Presiding Bishop
directs the Episcopal Church Center, the national administrative headquarters
of the denomination. Located at 815 Second Avenue, New York City, New York, the
center is often referred to by Episcopalians simply as "815". A system of
ecclesiastical courts is provided for under Title IV of the canons of General
Convention. These courts are empowered to discipline and depose deacons,
priests, and bishops. Worship and liturgy. Varying degrees of liturgical
practice prevail within the church, and one finds a variety of worship styles:
traditional hymns and anthems, more modern religious music, Anglican chant,
liturgical dance, charismatic prayer, and vested clergy of varying degrees. As
varied as services can be, the central binding aspect is the Book of Common
Prayer or supplemental liturgies. A majority of Episcopal services could be
considered to be "High Church" while still falling somewhat short of a typical
Anglo-Catholic "very" high church service. In contrast, "Low Church" services
are somewhat rarer. However, while some Episcopalians refer to their churches
by these labels, often there is overlapping, and the basic rites do not greatly
differ. There are also variations that blend elements of all three and have
their own unique features, such as New England Episcopal churches, which have
elements drawn from Puritan practices, combining the traditions of "high
church" with the simplicity of "low church". Typical parish worship features
Bible readings from the Old Testament as well as from both the Epistles and the
Gospels of the New Testament. Some latitude in selecting Bible readings is
allowed, but every service includes at least a passage from one of the Gospels,
as well as the praying of the Lord's Prayer. In the Eucharist or Holy Communion
service, the Book of Common Prayer specifies that bread and wine are
consecrated for consumption by the people. Those wishing for whatever reason to
avoid alcohol are free to decline the cup. A Eucharist can be part of a wedding
to celebrate a sacramental marriage and of a funeral as a thank offering
(sacrifice) to God and for the comfort of the mourners. The veneration of
saints in the Episcopal Church is a continuation of an ancient tradition from
the early Church which honors important people of the Christian faith. The
usage of the term "saint" is similar to Catholic and Orthodox traditions. Those
inclined to the Anglo-Catholic traditions may explicitly invoke saints as
intercessors in prayer. Book of Common Prayer. The Episcopal Church publishes
its own Book of Common Prayer (BCP) (similar to other Anglican prayerbooks),
containing most of the worship services (or liturgies) used in the Episcopal
Church. Because of its widespread use in the church, the BCP is both a
reflection of and a source of theology for Episcopalians. The full name of the
BCP is: "The Book of Common Prayer and Administration of the Sacraments and
Other Rites and Ceremonies of the Church Together with The Psalter or Psalms of
David According to the use of The Episcopal Church". Previous American BCPs
were issued in 1789, 1892, and 1928. (A proposed BCP was issued in 1786 but not
adopted.) The BCP is in the public domain; however, any new revisions of the
BCP are copyrighted until they are approved by the General Convention. After
this happens, the BCP is placed into the public domain. The current edition
dates from 1979 and was marked by a linguistic modernization and, in returning
to ancient Christian tradition, it restored the Eucharist as the central
liturgy of the church. The 1979 version reflects the theological and worship
changes of the ecumenical reforms of the 1960s and 1970s. On the whole, it
changed the theological emphasis of the church to be more Catholic in nature.
In 1979, the Convention adopted the revision as the "official" BCP and required
churches using the old (1928) prayer book to also use the 1979 revision. There
was enough strife in implementing and adopting the 1979 BCP that an apology was
issued at the 2000 General Convention for any who were "offended or alienated
during the time of liturgical transition to the 1979 Book of Common Prayer".
The 2000 General Convention also authorized the occasional use of some parts of
the 1928 book, under the direction of the bishop. The 1979 edition contains a
provision for the use of "traditional" (Elizabethan) language under various
circumstances not directly provided for in the book, and the Anglican Service
Book was produced accordingly, as "a traditional language adaptation of the
1979 Book of Common Prayer together with the Psalter or Psalms of David and
Additional Devotions." Doctrine and practice. The full catechism is included in
the Book of Common Prayer and is posted on the Episcopal website. The threefold
sources of authority in Anglicanism are scripture, tradition, and reason. These
three sources uphold and critique each other in a dynamic way. The Episcopal
Church follows the "via media" or "middle way" between Protestant and Roman
Catholic doctrine and practices: that is both Catholic and Reformed. Although
many Episcopalians identify with this concept, those whose convictions lean
toward either evangelicalism or Anglo-Catholicism may not. A broad spectrum of
thological views is represented within the Episcopal Church. Some Episcopal
theologians hold evangelical positions, affirming the authority of scripture
over all. The Episcopal Church website glossary defines the sources of
authority as a balance between scripture, tradition, and reason. These three
are characterized as a "three-legged stool" which will topple if any one
overbalances the other. It also notes This balance of scripture, tradition and
reason is traced to the work of Richard Hooker, a 16th century apologist. In
Hooker's model, scripture is the primary means of arriving at doctrine and
things stated plainly in scripture are accepted as true. Issues that are
ambiguous are determined by tradition, which is checked by reason. Noting the
role of personal experience in Christian life, some Episcopalians have
advocated following the example of the Wesleyan Quadrilateral of Methodist
theology by thinking in terms of a "Fourth Leg" of "experience." This
understanding is highly dependent on the work of Friedrich Schleiermacher. A
public example of this struggle between different Christian positions in the
church has been the 2003 consecration of the Right Reverend Gene Robinson, an
openly gay man living with a long-term partner. The acceptance/rejection of his
consecration is motivated by different views on the authority of and
understanding of scripture. This struggle has some members concerned that the
church may not continue its relationship with the larger Anglican Church.
Others, however, view this pluralism as an asset, allowing a place for both
sides to balance each other. Comedian and Episcopalian Robin Williams once
described the Episcopal faith (and, in a performance in London, specifically
the Church of England) as "Catholic Lite – same rituals, half the guilt."
Social issues. The preparation materials for delegates to the 2006 General
Convention highlighted areas of "Social Teaching/Contentious Resolutions" made
by the General Convention in the previous 30 years including race, economic
justice, ordination of women, and inclusion. In some areas, such as race, the
church has maintained a consistent theme. In other areas, such as human
sexuality, the church has faced larger struggles. Ordination of women. The
first woman ordained to the priesthood in the Anglican Communion was Florence
Li Tim-Oi, who was ordained on 25 January 1944 by Ronald Hall, Bishop of
Victoria, Hong Kong in response to the crisis among Anglican Christians in
China caused by the Japanese invasion. To avoid controversy, she resigned her
licence (though not her priestly orders) after the end of the war. The three
"noncompliant" dioceses were San Joaquin, Quincy, and Fort Worth. The 2006
directory of the North American Association for the Diaconate lists three women
deacons in Quincy, 15 in San Joaquin, and 8 in Fort Worth. Fort Worth also
allows parishes that wish to call a woman priest to transfer to the
jurisdiction of the Diocese of Dallas. Slavery. In 1861, a pamphlet titled A
Scriptural, Ecclesiastical, and Historical View of Slavery written by John
Henry Hopkins attempted to justify slavery based on the New Testament and gave
a clear insight into the Episcopal Church's involvement in slavery. "Bishop
Hopkins Letter on Slavery Ripped Up and his Misuse of the Sacred Scriptures
Exposed", written by an anonymous cleric in 1863, opposed the points mentioned
in Hopkins' pamphlet and revealed a startling divide in the Episcopal Church
over the issue of slavery. Charitable works. Episcopal Relief and Development.
Episcopal Relief and Development is the international relief and development
agency of the Episcopal Church of the United States. It helps to rebuild after
disasters and aims to empower people by offering lasting solutions that fight
poverty, hunger and disease. Episcopal Relief and Development programs focus on
alleviating hunger, improving food supply, creating economic opportunities,
strengthening communities, promoting health, fighting disease, responding to
disasters, and rebuilding communities. Scholarships. There are about 60 trust
funds administered by the Episcopal church which offer scholarships to young
people affiliated with the church. Qualifying considerations often relate to
historical missionary work of the church among American Indians and African-
Americans, as well as work in China and other foreign missions. There are
special programs for both American Indians and African-Americans interested in
training for the ministry. Ecumenical relations. Like the other churches of the
Anglican Communion, the Episcopal Church has entered into full communion with
the Old Catholic Churches of the Union of Utrecht, the Philippine Independent
Church, and the Mar Thoma Syrian Church of Malabar. The Episcopal Church is
also in a relationship of full communion with the Evangelical Lutheran Church
in America and the Northern and Southern Provinces of the Moravian Church in
America. The Episcopal Church itself maintains ecumenical dialogs with the
United Methodist Church and the Moravian Church in America, and participates in
pan-Anglican dialogs with the Oriental Orthodox Churches, the World Alliance of
Reformed Churches, and the Roman Catholic Church. In 2006 a relation of interim
Eucharistic sharing was inaugurated with the United Methodist Church, a step
that may ultimately lead to full communion. Historically Anglican churches have
had strong ecumenical ties with the Eastern Orthodox Churches, and the
Episcopal Church particularly with the Russian Orthodox Church, but relations
in more recent years have been strained, following the ordination of women and
the ordination of Gene Robinson to the episcopate. A former relation of full
communion with the Polish National Catholic Church (itself once a part of the
Union of Utrecht) was broken off by the PNCC in 1976 over the ordination of
women. The Episcopal Church was a founding member of the Consultation on Church
Union and participates in its successor, Churches Uniting in Christ. The
Episcopal Church is a founding member of the National Council of Churches, the
World Council of Churches, and the new Christian Churches Together in the USA.
Dioceses and parishes are frequently members of local ecumenical councils as
well. Further reading. Chronological order of publication (oldest first)
