Episcopal Church in Jerusalem and the Middle East Each diocese is headed by a
bishop. The President Bishop is chosen from among the diocesan bishops, and
retains diocesan responsibility. The current President Bishop also serves as
Bishop of Egypt and North Africa. The province estimates that it has around
35,000 baptized members in 55 congregations. The province has around 40
educational or medical establishments and 90 clergy. Today, in Jerusalem,
Anglicans constitute a large portion of the Christian community. History.
Origins. The Episcopal Church in Jerusalem and the Middle East began as a
number of missionary posts of the Church Mission Society (CMS) in Cyprus, the
Middle East and the Persian Gulf. The Church Mission Society continues to
provide the province with lay mission partners and ordained chaplains, but now
the majority of its ministry is drawn from local congregations. During the
1820s, CMS began to prepare for permanent missionary stations in the region. In
1833, a missionary station was established in Jerusalem with the support of the
"London Society for Promoting Christianity Amongst the Jews" (a Jewish
Christian missionary society now known as the Church's Ministry Among Jewish
People or CMJ). In 1839, the building of the Church of Saint Mark, Alexandria
was begun. In 1841, Michael Solomon Alexander, a converted rabbi, arrived in
Jerusalem as bishop. His diocese originally covered the mission stations in the
Middle East and Egypt, and was a joint venture with the Evangelical Church in
Prussia (the so-called "Anglo-Prussian Union"), serving Lutherans and
Anglicans. In 1849, Christ Church, Jerusalem, became the first Anglican church
in Jerusalem. In 1881, the Anglo-Prussian Union ceased to function, and it was
formally dissolved in 1887. From that time, the diocese became solely Anglican.
Saint George's Cathedral was built in 1898 in Jerusalem as a central focus for
the diocese. Later history. Although the diocese of Jerusalem began as a
foreign missionary organisation, it quickly established itself as part of the
Palestinian community. In 1905, the Palestinian Native Church Council was
established to give Palestinians more say in the running of the church. This
led to an increase in the number of Palestinian and Arab clergy serving the
diocese. In 1920, the Diocese of Egypt and the Sudan was formed, separate from
the Diocese of Jerusalem, with Llewelyn Gwynne as its first bishop. In the
1920s the Bishop founded St. George's College as a seminary for local clergy-
in-training. Bishop Gwynne established the second cathedral of All Saints',
Cairo (the present cathedral is the third building) in 1938. In 1945, Sudan
became a separate diocese from Egypt (see Episcopal Church of the Sudan for its
history). In 1957, the Diocese of Jerusalem was elevated to the rank of an
archdiocese (its bishop being an archbishop) under the authority of the
Archbishop of Canterbury. The Archbishop in Jerusalem had metropolitan
oversight of the entire area of the current province with the addition of the
Sudan (five dioceses in all). In that same year, Najib Cubain was consecrated
Bishop of Jordan, Lebanon and Syria, the first Arab bishop, assistant to the
Archbishop in Jerusalem. During the 1950s, political unrest in Egypt left the
diocese in the care of four Egyptian clergy under the oversight of the
Archbishop in Jerusalem. An Anglican Bishop of Egypt was appointed in 1968,
and, in 1974, the first Egyptian bishop, Ishaq Musaad, was consecrated. In
1976, Faik Hadad became the first Palestinian Anglican bishop in Jerusalem.
Current position. In 1976, the structure of the Anglican church in the region
was overhauled. Jerusalem became an ordinary bishopric, and the four dioceses
had equal status in the Province of Jerusalem and the Middle East. The
Archbishop of Canterbury relinquished his metropolitan authority to a Presiding
Bishop and the Central Synod, with the four dioceses rotating the
responsibility of the Bishop President and Synodical Leadership. The Central
synod includes the four dioceses of the Province of Jerusalem and the Middle
East. When a Bishop reaches the age of 68, a coadjutor Bishop should be elected
to work alongside the Bishop for two years.[http://www.comeandsee.com/
modules.php?name=News&file=article&sid=659] The Diocese of Egypt was expanded
to take in the chaplaincies of Ethiopia, Somalia, Libya, Tunisia and Algeria.
The Sudan became a fully separate and independent province. In 1970, the
Cathedral of All Saints' in Cairo was demolished to make way for a new Nile
bridge. In 1977, work on a new building on Zamalek was begun, and completed in
1988. Dioceses. Diocese of Cyprus and the Gulf. Main Article Anglican Diocese
of Cyprus and the Gulf Diocesan seats are St Paul's Cathedral, Nicosia, Cyprus
and St Christopher's Cathedral, Manama, Bahrain. The current bishop is Michael
Lewis. The diocese is divided into two archdeaconries: one for Cyprus and one
for the Persian Gulf. Diocese of Egypt with North Africa and the Horn of
Africa. The diocesan seat is All Saints' Cathedral, Zamalek, Cairo, Egypt The
current bishops include: Most Revd Mouneer Hanna Anis, diocesan Bishop of Egypt
(Presiding Bishop of the Church in Jerusalem); the Rt Revd Bill Musk, Area
Bishop for North Africa. 80% of the communicants of this diocese are refugees,
owing to the civil war in Sudan. The churches of Holy Trinity, Algiers, and
Christ Church, Mogadishu, are currently without chaplains due to local unrest.
Diocese of Iran. The Diocese of Iran was first established in 1912 as the
Diocese of Persia and was incorporated into the Jerusalem Archbishopric in
1957. The current bishop is the Rt Rev Azad Marshall. The diocesan seat is
Saint Luke's Church, Isfahan, Iran. Diocese of Jerusalem. The current Anglican
Bishop of Jerusalem is Suheil Dawani, who was installed on April 15, 2007. The
Diocese of Jerusalem covering Israel, Palestinian territories, Jordan, Syria
and Lebanon. The diocesan seat is Cathedral Church of St George the Martyr,
Jerusalem.
