Eritrean Orthodox Tewahedo Church The Eritrean Orthodox Tewahedo Church is an
Oriental Orthodox church. Its autocephaly was recognised by Pope Shenouda III
after Eritrea gained its independence in 1993. Origins. "Tewahdo" (Te-wa-hido)
(Ge'ez ተዋሕዶ "tawāhidō") is a Ge'ez word meaning "being made one".
According to the Catholic Encyclopedia (1917 edition) article on the Henoticon:
the Patriarchs of Alexandria, Antioch, and Jerusalem, and many others, all
refused to accept the "two natures" doctrine decreed by the Byzantine Emperor
Marcian's Council of Chalcedon in 451, thus separating them from the Catholic
and Eastern Orthodox. The Oriental Orthodox Churches, which today include the
Coptic Orthodox Church, the Armenian Apostolic Church, the Syriac Orthodox
Church, the Malankara Orthodox Church of India, the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo
Church, and the Eritrean Orthodox Tewahedo Church, are referred to as "Non-
Chalcedonian", and, sometimes by outsiders as "monophysite" (meaning "One
Nature", in reference to Christ; a rough translation of the name "Tewahido").
However, these Churches themselves describe their Christology as miaphysite.
Tewahdo (Te-wa-hido) is a major ethnoreligious group in Eritrea and the largest
Christian group there. Christianity has been the majority religion since the
4th centuries AD and remains still the largest population. Historically they
spoke the Ge'ez language, a Semitic family, but it has been near-extinct and
mostly limited to liturgical use since the 10th century. They now speak
Tigrigna. Most Tewahdo adhere to the Tewahdo Orthodox Church. Tewahdo is an
identity and a religion as well for the adherent of Eritrean Tewahdos. The
Eritrean Orthodox Church claims its origins from Philip the Evangelist (Acts of
the Apostles, Chapter 8). It became the established church of the Axumite
Kingdom under king Ezana in the 4th century through the efforts of a Syrian
Greek named Frumentius, known in the church as "Abba Selama, Kesaté Birhan"
("Father of Peace, Revealer of Light"). As a boy, Frumentius had been
shipwrecked with his brother Aedesius on the Eritrean coast. The brothers
managed to be brought to the royal court, where they rose to positions of
influence and converted Emperor Ezana to Christianity, causing him to be
baptised. Ezana sent Frumentius to Alexandria to ask the Patriarch, St.
Athanasius, to appoint a bishop for Axum. Athanasius appointed Frumentius
himself, who returned to Axum as Bishop with the name of "Abune Selama". For
fifteen centuries afterward, the Pope of the Coptic Orthodox Church of
Alexandria always named a Copt ("an Egyptian") to be "Abuna" or Metropolitan
Archbishop of the Ethiopian Church. Jesuit interim. Little else is known of
church history down to the period of Jesuit influence, which broke the
connection with Egypt. Union with the Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria
continued after Arab conquests in Egypt. Abu Saleh records in the 12th century
that the patriarch sent letters twice a year to the kings of Abyssinia
(Ethiopia) and Nubia, until Al Hakim stopped the practice. Cyril, 67th
patriarch, sent Severus as bishop, with orders to put down the practice of
polygamy and to enforce observance of canonical consecration for all churches.
These examples show the close relations of the two churches concurrent with the
Middle Ages. Early in the 16th century the church was brought under the
influence of a Portuguese mission. In 1439, in the reign of Zara Yaqob, a
religious discussion between Abba Giorgis and a French visitor had led to the
dispatch of an embassy from Ethiopia to the Vatican; but the initiative in the
Catholic missions to Ethiopia was taken, not by the Holy See, but by the church
in Portugal, as an incident in the struggle with the Muslim Ottoman Empire and
Sultanate of Adal for the command of the trade route to India by the Red Sea.
In 1507 Matthew (or Matheus) an Armenian, had been sent as Ethiopian envoy to
Portugal to ask aid against Adal. In 1520 an embassy under Dom Rodrigo de Lima
landed in Ethiopia (by which time Adal had been remobilized under Ahmad ibn
Ibrihim al-Ghazi). An account of the Portuguese mission, which remained for
several years, was written by the chaplain, Francisco Álvares. Later, Saint
Ignatius Loyola wished to essay the task of conversion, but this did not
happen. Instead, the pope sent out Joao Nunez Barreto as Patriarch of the East
Indies, with Andre de Oviedo as bishop; and from Goa envoys (followed by
Oviedo) went to Ethiopia. After repeated failures, some measure of success was
achieved under Emperor Susenyos, but not until 1624 did the Emperor make a
formal declaration of communion with the then pope, Urban VIII. Susenyos made
Catholicism the official state religion but was met with heavy resistance and,
in 1632 had to abdicate in favour of his son, Fasilides, who promptly returned
Ethiopian Orthodox Christianity as the official religion of the country. He
then expelled the Jesuits in 1633, and in 1665 Fasilides ordered all Jesuit
books (the Books of the Franks) be burned. Colonial years. In the 1920s the
Italian colonial power in Eritrea started the first attempts to found a
separate Eritrean Orthodox Church. Until then the Orthodox Church in Eritrea
was practically part of the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church, with a strong
link to Aksum in Tigray as the traditional centre of the Church structure. This
was, however, against the interest of the colonizer: Eritrea as a separate
colony was supposed to have a church independent from the neighbor's influence,
in order to be fully integrated into the colonial system. The separate Eritrean
Church was short-lived. When it was still not fully established, the Italians
invaded Ethiopia in 1935, and then formed a unified territory called Africa
Orientale Italiana, encompassing Eritrea, Ethiopia and Italian Somalia. Eritrea
was unified with the northern Ethiopian province of Tigray, and both Orthodox
Churches unified. This unification remained valid even after the defeat of the
Italians and their loss of the whole territory in 1941. The Ethiopian Orthodox
Tewahedo Church was granted autocephaly by Pope Joseph II of Alexandria, head
of the Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria in 1950. At that time Eritrea was a
separate colonial territory under British administration, but nevertheless the
Orthodox Church in Eritrea was simply made a division of the Ethiopian Orthodox
Tewahedo Church, as the British had no interest to strongly separate the
Eritrean highlands from the Ethiopian highlands, corresponding to their
politics of unification of the highlands (with the option of separation of the
Muslim lowlands of Eritrea and their inclusion into the British Sudan).
Autocephaly after independence of Eritrea. Following the independence of
Eritrea from Ethiopia in 1993, the newly independent Eritrean government
appealed to Pope Shenouda III of the Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria for
Eritrean Orthodox autocephaly. Tensions were high between the Ethiopian
Orthodox Tewahedo Church and the Eritrean Orthodox Tewahedo Church, and no
representative from the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church attended the
official recognition of the newly autocephalous body. However, the Ethiopian
Church has recognized the Autocephalous status of the Church of Eritrea
although it objected to the method in which the Coptic Church went about
granting it. Eritrea's first two Patriarchs were originally Archbishops of the
Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church, and the first Patriarch, Abune Phillipos
did visit Addis Ababa during joint efforts by the two Churches to explore a
possible resolution to a border conflict that had broken out between the two
countries in 1998. The two churches, remain in full communion with each other
and with the other Churches of Oriental Orthodoxy, although the Ethiopian
Church, along with the Coptic Orthodox Church have not recognized the
deposition of the third Patriarch of Eritrea, and the enthronement of the
fourth Patriarch, Abune Dioskoros. The first Patriarch of Eritrea was Abune
Phillipos who died in 2004 and was succeeded by Abune Yacob. The reign of Abune
Yacob as Patriarch of Eritrea was very brief as he died not long after his
enthronement, and he was succeeded by Abune Antonios as 3rd Patriarch of
Eritrea. Abune Antonios was elected on 5 March 2004, and enthroned as the third
Patriarch of Orthodox Tewahedo Church of Eritrea on 24 April 2004. Pope
Shenouda III presided at the ceremony in Asmara, together with the Holy Synod
of the Eritrean Orthodox Church and a Coptic Orthodox Church delegation. In
August 2005, the Patriarch of Orthodox Tewahedo Church of Eritrea, Abune
Antonios, was confined to a strictly ceremonial role. In a letter dated 13
January 2006, Patriarch Abune Antonios was informed that following several
sessions of the church's Holy Synod, he had been formally deposed. In a written
response that was widely published the Patriarch rejected the grounds of his
dismissal, questioned the legitimacy of the synod, and excommunicated two
signatories to the 13 January 2006 letter, including Yoftahe Dimetros, whom the
Patriarch identified as being responsible for the church's recent upheavals.
Patriarch Antonios also appealed his case to the Council of the Monasteries of
the Eritrean Orthodox Church and to the Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria.
Abune Antonios was deposed by the Eritrean Holy Synod supposedly under pressure
from the Eritrean government; as of 2008 he is under house arrest. Many believe
that Abune Antonios was wrongly deposed and still consider him Patriarch. Many
Eritrean Orthodox followers disagree with the Eritrean government making
decisions in religious matters. Sacramental beliefs. In common with all Eastern
Orthodox, Oriental Orthodox churches, the Catholic Church and the Old Catholic
churches of the Union of Utrecht, the Eritrean Orthodox Tewahedo Church
professes belief in the seven sacraments of baptism, confirmation, eucharist,
confession, the anointing of the sick, matrimony or holy orders. It regards the
first four as being "necessary for every believer" As is the tradition of the
East, non-episcopal clergy may be married at the time of ordination, which is
reserved for adult males. In order to clearly demonstrate that a bishop is a
member of a synod, there must be at least three bishops taking part in any
episcopal ordination. The Church holds fast to the ancient Christian belief in
the Real Presence of Christ in the Eucharist stating that ""The consecrated
bread and wine are the body and blood of Christ. Jesus Christ is truly, really
and substantially present in the consecrated elements. In the Eucharist we eat
the blessed flesh of our Lord and drink His precious blood under the form of
bread and wine."" Ceremonies are elaborate by western standards. The practice
of reconciliation in the sacrament of penance is regarded as strictly personal,
and members of the Church are encouraged to select a confessor (also referred
to as a 'soul father') who is well known to them and with whom they are
comfortable. As in other Eastern Christian traditions, the bond of marriage is
able to be dissolved, but only on the grounds of adultery. To safeguard the
practice of the faith, Church members are discouraged from marrying people
outside of the Orthodox communion. Church members who undergo a purely civil
ceremony are not regarded as sacramentally married. Distinctive traits.
Biblical canon. The Tewahedo Church Biblical Canon contains 81 books, all of
which are accepted by other Orthodox and Oriental Christians. There have been
no printings of the Broader Canon since the beginning of the twentieth century.
The "Haile Selassie Version of the Bible", which was published in 1962,
contains the Narrower Canon. Language. The Divine Liturgy and other religious
services of the Eritrean Church are celebrated in the Ge'ez language, which has
been the language of the Church at least since the arrival of the Nine Saints
(Abba Pantelewon, Abba Gerima (Isaac, or Yeshaq), Abba Aftse, Abba Guba, Abba
Alef, Abba Yem’ata, Abba Liqanos, and Abba Sehma), who fled persecution by
the Byzantine Emperor after the Council of Chalcedon (451). The Septuagint
version was translated into Ge'ez. Sermons are delivered in the local language.
Patriarchs and bishops of Eritrea. After declaration of autocephaly of the
Eritrean Orthodox Tewahedo Church was recognised by the Coptic Orthodox Church
of Alexandria in 1994, the newly-established patriarchal seat of Eritrea
remained vacant until 1998 when Philipos was elected Abune Phillipos and first
patriarch of Eritrea (1998–2001). He was succeeded by Abune Yacob in 2002 and
Abune Antonios in 2004. After fierce disagreements with the Eritrean government
and internal strife in the church, Abune Antonios was deposed by the Holy Synod
and put under house arrest by the government since January 2006, although he
kept the title of Patriarch until 2007. In April 2007, the Holy Synod elected a
new patriarch, namely Abune Dioskoros who is the incumbent Patriarch of Eritrea
although his reign is disputed by followers of Abune Antonios who endorse the
latter as a continuing legitimate Patriarch of the church, The Eritrean
Orthodox Tewahedo Church also has the rank of bishops for various communities
in Eritrea and the diaspora. Among the members of the Eritrean Holy Synod of
Bishops, there are two members who are also members of the Coptic Holy Synod,
namely Macarius, Bishop of the Eritrean Church in the USA and Markos (Mark),
Bishop of the Eritrean Orthodox Church in the UK.
