Esoteric cosmology Esoteric cosmology is cosmology that is an intrinsic part of
an esoteric or occult system of thought. Esoteric cosmology maps out the
universe with planes of existence and consciousness according to a specific
worldview usually from a doctrine. Overview. Esoteric cosmology almost always
deals with at least some of the following themes: emanation, involution,
spiritual evolution, epigenesis, planes of existence or higher worlds (and
their emanation and the connections between them), hierarchies of spiritual
beings, cosmic cycles (e.g., cosmic year, Yuga), yogic or spiritual disciplines
and techniques of self-transformation, and references to mystical and altered
states of consciousness. Such cosmologies cover many of the same concerns also
addressed by religious cosmology and philosophical cosmology, such as the
origin, purpose, and destiny of the universe and of consciousness and the
nature of existence. For this reason it is sometimes difficult to distinguish
where religion or philosophy end and esotericism or occultism begins. However,
esoteric cosmology is distinguished from religion in its more sophisticated
construction and reliance on intellectual understanding rather than faith, and
from philosophy in its emphasis on techniques of psycho-spiritual
transformation. Examples of esoteric cosmologies can be found in Gnosticism,
Neoplatonism, Nagualism, Nagualism (Carlos Castaneda), Tantra (especially
Kashmir Shaivism), Kabbalah, Sufism, the teachings of Jacob Boehme, The Urantia
Book, the Sant Mat/Surat Shabda Yoga tradition, Theosophy, Anthroposophy, The
Cosmic Tradition of Max Theon and his wife, Max Heindel ("The Rosicrucian
Cosmo-Conception"), elements of the teachings of Sri Aurobindo, Meher Baba, the
Fourth Way propounded by Gurdjieff and Ouspensky, PaGaian Cosmology and many
current New Age teachings, to give only a few examples. Gnosticism. Gnostic
teachings were contemporary with those of Neoplatonism. Gnosticism is an
imprecise label, covering monistic as well as dualistic conceptions. Usually
the higher worlds of Light, called the Pleroma or "fullness", are radically
distinct from the lower world of Matter. The emanation of the Pleroma and its
godheads (called "Aeons") is described in detail in the various Gnostic tracts,
as is the pre-creation crisis (a cosmic equivalent to the "fall" in Christian
thought) from which the material world comes about, and the way that the divine
spark can attain salvation. Kabbalah. Kabbalah combines orthodox Judaic,
Neoplatonic, Gnostic, and philosophical (e.g. Aristotlean) themes, to develop
an elaborate and highly symbolic cosmology in which God, who is ineffable and
unknowable, manifests as ten archetypal sephirot, each with its own Divine
attributes, and arranged in a configuration of interrelated paths called the
Tree of Life. The original Tree gives rise to further trees, until there are
four or (in Lurianic Kabbalah) five worlds or universes (Trees) in all, with
the lowest sephira of the lowest world constituting the material cosmos. This
cosmology proved highly popular with occultists, and formed the basis of
Western hermetic thought (e.g. the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn and
subsequent organisations), where it is associated with a form of astral travel
called "pathworking". Neoplatonism. Although under Plotinus, Neoplatonism began
as a school of philosophy, the teachings of later Neoplatonists such as
Iamblichus and Proclus incorporate additional details of the emanation process
in terms of the dialectical action of the hypostases and further subdivisions
from Plotinus' original three hypostases. Each higher hypostasis constitutes a
more sublime deific state of existence. There is also a tendency in later
neoplatonic thought towards increasing transcendentalism and dualism. Although
Plotinus saw spiritual ascent as leading ultimately to the One (The Absolute),
in later Neoplatonism the best one can hope for is irridation of the Soul by
the Nous above. Neoplatonic ideas were later taken up by Gnosticism, Kabbalah,
Christianity (Pseudo-Dionysius), and, in the 19th century, Theosophy.
Rosicrucian Cosmo-Conception. Max Heindel presents in his "The Rosicrucian
Cosmo-Conception" (1909) an evolutionary process of man and the universe,
correlating science with religion. This work of esoteric knowledge contains the
fundamentals of the Rosicrucian Philosophy and also deals, among other topics,
metaphysics and cosmology. The second part of the book contains the scheme of
Evolution in general and the Evolution of the Solar System and the Earth in
particular, according to Heindel. In the field of cosmology (Cosmogenisis and
Anthropogenesis) it teaches about the Worlds, Globes and Periods, Revolutions
and Cosmic Nights related to life waves and human development and also the
constitution of our solar system and of the Universe: The Supreme Being, the
Cosmic Planes and God. Theosophy & Anthroposophy. H.P. Blavatsky in her
Theosophical writings presented a complex cosmology, in terms of a sevenfold
series of cosmic planes and subplanes, and a detailed sevenfold system of
cycles and sub-cycles of existence. These ideas were adapted by later
esotericists like Rudolf Steiner (Anthroposophy), Max Heindel, Alice Bailey,
and Ann Ree Colton, and some of these ideas were included in New Age thought.
Max Theon and the "Cosmic Philosophy". The occultist Max Theon developed a
sophisticated cosmology, incorporating Lurianic Kabbalistic and other themes.
This describes a number of divine and material worlds, and four or eight
"states" (equivalent to the Theosophical Planes), each divided into degrees,
each of which are in turn subdivided into sub-degrees. The details of these
various occult worlds, their beings, recognisable colours, and so on, were all
laid out, but very little of this material has yet been published.
