Eternity Eternity (or forever) is endless time. It is often referenced in the
context of religion, in the concept of immortality, whereby death is conquered,
and people may live for an unlimited amount of time (cf. Heaven). The existence
of gods or God is said to endure eternally and sometimes also the natural
cosmos, in respect to both past and future. By contrast, the concept of a
mathematically infinite duration, is called sempiternity or everlasting.
Whereas the eternal is said to be unchanging and outside time; a potentially
sempiternal span of time can never come to pass in actuality. Aristotle argued
that the cosmos has no beginning. The idea of eternity. The metaphysics of
eternity studies that which necessarily exists "outside" or independently of
space and time. Another important question is whether "information" or Form is
separable from mind and matter. God and eternity. Theists say that God is
"eternally existent". How this is understood depends on which definition of
eternity is used. On one hand, God may exist "in" eternity, a "timeless"
existence where categories of past, present, and future just do not apply. On
the other hand, God will exist "for" or "through" eternity, or at "all times",
having already existed for an infinite amount of time and continuing to exist
for an infinite amount of time. One other definition states that God exists
outside the human concept of time, but also inside of time. The reasoning for
this definition is that if God did not exist both outside time and inside time,
God would not be able to interact with humans. Aristotle established a
distinction between actual infinity and a potentially infinite count, for
example, instead of saying that there are an infinity of primes, Euclid prefers
instead to say that there are more prime numbers than contained in any given
collection of prime numbers. According to Aristotle, a future span of time must
be a potential infinity, because another element can always be added to a
series that is inexhaustible: "For generally the infinite has this mode of
existence: one thing is always being taken after another, and each thing that
is taken is always finite, but always different". See all the biblical passage
2Pe:3:8: “But, beloved, be not ignorant of this one thing, that one day is
with the Lord as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day.”
Symbolism. Eternity is often symbolized by the image of a snake swallowing its
own tail, known as Ouroboros (or Uroboros), though the symbol can also carry a
number of other connotations. The circle is also commonly used as a symbol for
eternity. The related concept, infinity, is symbolized by formula_1, which may
be based on the Ouroboros.
