Celestial marriage Celestial marriage (also called the New and Everlasting
Covenant of Marriage, Eternal Marriage, Temple Marriage or The Principle) is a
doctrine of Mormonism, particularly The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
Saints (LDS Church) and branches of Mormon fundamentalism. Within Mormonism,
celestial marriage is an ordinance associated with a covenant that always takes
place inside temples by those authorized to hold the sealing power. The only
people allowed to enter the temple, be married there, or simply attend these
weddings are those who hold an official temple recommend. Obtaining a temple
recommend requires one to abide by LDS doctrine and be interviewed and
considered worthy by their bishop and Stake President. A prerequisite to
contracting a celestial marriage, in addition to obtaining a temple recommend,
involves undergoing the temple endowment, which involves making of certain
covenants with God. In particular, one is expected to promise to be obedient to
all the Lord's commandments including living a clean chaste life, abstaining
oneself from any impure thing, willing to sacrifice and consecrate all that one
has for the Lord. In the marriage ceremony a man and a woman make covenants to
God and to each other and are said to be sealed as husband and wife for time
and all eternity. Mormonism distinguishes itself on this point, citing and ,
from some other religious traditions by emphasizing that marriage relationships
and covenants made in this life in the Temple will continue to be valid in the
next life if they abide by these covenants. In the 19th century the term
"celestial marriage" referred more to the practice of plural marriage, a
practice which the LDS Church abandoned in 1890. The term is still used in this
sense by Mormon fundamentalists not affiliated with the mainstream LDS Church.
In the current LDS Church, both men and women may enter a celestial marriage
with only one partner at a time. A man may be sealed to more than one woman. If
his wife dies, he may enter another celestial marriage, and be sealed to both
his living wife and deceased wife or wives. Many Mormons believe that all these
marriages will be valid in the eternities and the husband will live together in
the Celestial Kingdom as a family with all to whom he was sealed. In the 1998
edition of the "Church Handbook of Instructions", the LDS Church clarified that
a woman may also be sealed to more than one man. A woman, however, may not be
sealed to more than one man at a time while she is alive. She may only be
sealed to subsequent partners after she has died. Proxy sealings, like proxy
baptisms, are merely "offered" to the person in the afterlife, indicating that
the purpose is to allow the woman to choose the right man to be sealed to, as
LDS doctrine forbids polyandry. According to LDS belief, the celestial marriage
covenant, as with other covenants, requires the continued righteousness of the
couple to remain in effect after this life. If only one remains righteous that
person is promised a righteous eternal companion in eternity. Sealing.
Celestial marriage is an instance of the LDS doctrine of sealing. Following a
celestial marriage, not only are the couple sealed as husband and wife, but
children born into the marriage are also sealed to that family. In cases where
the husband and wife have been previously married civilly and there are already
children from their union, the children accompany their parents to the temple
and are sealed to their parents following the marriage ceremony. Mormons
believe that through this sealing, man, wife and child will live together
forever, if obedient to God's commandments. Relationship to plural marriage.
There is substantial doctrinal dispute between the LDS Church and its offshoots
as to whether celestial marriage is plural or monogamous. Sealings for "time
and eternity" (i.e. Celestial marriages) were being performed for monogamous
couples long before 1890. The great majority of temple sealings were between
one man and one wife throughout all time periods of the LDS Church's history.
"...it is borne in mind that at this time the new law of marriage for the
Church — marriage for eternity, "including plurality of wives under some
circumstances"— was being introduced by the Prophet, it is very likely that
the following article was written with a view of applying the principles here
expounded to the conditions created by introducing said marriage system." "He
knew the voice of God—he knew the commandment of the Almighty to him was to
go forward—to set the example, and establish Celestial plural marriage. He
knew that he had not only his own prejudices and pre-possessions to combat and
to overcome, but those of the whole Christian world…; but God...had given the
commandment". Nevertheless, it is correct and can be demonstrated that
"celestial marriage" was often used to refer to plural marriage. Mormon
fundamentalists cleave to the view that there is no celestial marriage that is
not plural, while the LDS Church says otherwise. As viewed by the LDS Church,
plural marriages in the early church, when properly authorized and conducted,
were, in fact, celestial marriages; but celestial marriages need not be plural
marriages. In addition, since celestial marriages must be performed by someone
with proper priesthood authority, and since plural marriage is no longer
authorized by the LDS Church, no authorized celestial, plural marriages can be
performed today. Mormon fundamentalists argue, in return, that they hold the
priesthood authority to perform these marriages. However, while plural marriage
is eschewed by the LDS Church today, it continued to be practiced, even after
The Manifesto (the 1890 Official Declaration by then LDS President Wilford
Woodruff, by which he counseled the Saints to discontinue plural marriage). The
practice continued to be passively sanctioned until 1904 and the issuance of
the Second Manifesto under Joseph F. Smith. Marriage between man and wife is
viewed by the Church to be ordained by God and essential for his plan. Plural
marriage was discontinued by President Woodruff in 1890. If members continue to
practice plural marriage, they lose their church membership. Swedenborg. A
concept of celestial marriage was described by Emanuel Swedenborg as early as
1749. Swedenborg's Latin term "conjugium coeleste" was translated as "celestial
marriage" by John Clowes in 1782. Two more recent translators have preferred
the term "heavenly marriage." In all his authoritative writing, Swedenborg only
mentions the term "celestial marriage" twice. Swedenborg defined the celestial
marriage or heavenly marriage as the marriage of love with wisdom or of
goodness with truth. He wrote, "Truth and good joined together is what is
called the celestial marriage, which constitutes heaven itself with a person."
Swedenborg does not use "celestial marriage" to refer to the marriage of
husband and wife, although he says that the marriage of husband and wife has
its origin in the heavenly or celestial marriage of goodness and truth.
According to Swedenborg, true married love forms an eternal bond, an actual
joining together of minds, so that married partners who truly love each other
are not separated by death but continue to be married to eternity. He writes
that this love is "celestial, spiritual, holy pure and clean above every love
which exists from the Lord with angels of heaven and people in the church."
None can come into this love, he says, but those who are monogamous and "who go
to the Lord and love the truths of the church and do the good things it
teaches." Craig Miller has investigated the possibility that Swedenborg
influenced Joseph Smith, as there are similarities between some of their
teachings. He concludes that Smith may have learned something about Swedenborg
through third parties, but was unlikely to have read much if any of
Swedenborg's works for himself. Among Smith's connections was Sarah Cleveland,
who was married to a Swedenborgian at the time of her plural marriage to Smith
in 1842. It was shortly afterwards, in July 1843, that Smith recorded receiving
a revelation regarding eternal marriage in Doctrine and Covenants 132.
