Eucharist The Eucharist (), also called Holy Communion, the Sacrament of the
Altar, the Blessed Sacrament, the Lord's Supper, and other names, is a
Christian sacrament or ordinance. It is reenacted in accordance with Jesus'
instruction at the Last Supper as recorded in several books of the New
Testament, that his followers do in remembrance of Him as when he gave his
disciples bread, saying, "This is my body", and gave them wine, saying: "This
is my blood." There are different interpretations of the significance of the
Eucharist, but according to the "Encyclopædia Britannica" "there is more of a
consensus among Christians about the meaning of the Eucharist than would appear
from the confessional debates over the sacramental presence, the effects of the
Eucharist, and the proper auspices under which it may be celebrated." The word
"Eucharist" may refer not only to the rite but also to the consecrated bread
(leavened or unleavened) and wine (or unfermented grape juice in some
Protestant denominations, water in the LDS Church's sacrament), used in the
rite. In this sense, communicants (that is, those who partake of the communion
elements) may speak of "receiving the Eucharist", as well as "celebrating the
Eucharist". Names. For I received from the Lord what I also delivered to you,
that the Lord Jesus on the night when he was betrayed took bread, and when he
had given thanks, he broke it, and said, "This is my body which is for you. Do
this in remembrance of me." () It is the term by which the rite is referred to
by the Didache (late 1st or early 2nd century), Ignatius of Antioch (who died
between 98 and 117) and Justin Martyr (writing between 147 and 167). the
Didache also uses εὐχαριστίζω (to "eucharistize"), a verbal form of
εὐχαριστία, and, again in relation to the rite, Justin Martyr uses
another verbal form: εὐχαριστῶ ("to thank"), --> Today, "the
Eucharist" is the name still used by the Eastern Orthodox, the Oriental
Orthodox, Roman Catholics, Anglicans, Reformed/Presbyterian, United Methodists,
and Lutherans. Other Protestant traditions rarely use this term, preferring
either "Communion", "the Lord's Supper", or "the Breaking of Bread". The Lord's
Supper (Κυριακὸν δεῖπνον) is a name used in the early 50s of
the first century as witnessed by the First Epistle to the Corinthians (): When
you come together, it is not the Lord's Supper you eat, for as you eat, each of
you goes ahead without waiting for anybody else. One remains hungry, another
gets drunk. Most denominations use the term, but generally not as their basic,
routine term. The use is predominant among Baptist groups, who generally avoid
using the term "Communion", due to its use (though in a more limited sense) by
the Roman Catholic Church. Many evangelical Anglicans often use this term
(which is the primary name used in the 1662 rite) rather than "Eucharist".
Communion or Holy Communion, Derived from (from Latin "communio," "sharing in
common") which translates the Greek κοινωνία ("koinōnía") in : The
cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the "communion" of the blood of
Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the "communion" of the body of
Christ?. It is used especially by groups that originated in the Protestant
Reformation of the Eucharistic rite as a whole. Others use it of the act of to
the partaking of the consecrated bread and wine. In this latter understanding,
it is possible to participate in the celebration of the Eucharistic rite
without necessarily "receiving Holy Communion". The Breaking of Bread, The
phrase appears four times in the New Testament (; , , ) in contexts in which,
according to some, refer to celebration of the Eucharist. It is the term used
by the Plymouth Brethren. Mass This is used in the Latin Rite Roman Catholic
Church, some Anglicans (Anglo-Catholicism), the Church of Sweden, the Church of
Norway and some other forms of Western Christianity. Among the many other terms
used in the Roman Catholic Church are "Holy Mass", "the Memorial of the
Passion, Death and Resurrection of the Lord", the "Holy Sacrifice of the Mass",
and the "Holy Mysteries". Sacrament: In The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-
day Saints the term "The Sacrament" is used of the rite. The Divine Liturgy:
This is used in Byzantine Rite traditions, whether in the Eastern Orthodox
Church or among the Eastern Catholic Churches. These also speak of "the Divine
Mysteries", especially in reference to the consecrated elements, which they
also call "the Holy Gifts". The Divine Service: This is the title for the
liturgy in Lutheran churches and is used by most conservative Lutheran churches
to refer to the Eucharist. History. Biblical basis. The Last Supper appears in
all three Synoptic Gospels: Matthew, Mark, and Luke; and in the First Epistle
to the Corinthians, while the last-named of these also indicates something of
how early Christians celebrated what Paul the Apostle called the Lord's Supper.
As well as the Eucharistic dialogue in John chapter 6. Paul the Apostle and the
Lord's Supper. In his First Epistle to the Corinthians ("c" 54-55), Paul the
Apostle gives the earliest recorded description of Jesus' Last Supper: "The
Lord Jesus on the night when he was betrayed took bread, and when he had given
thanks, he broke it, and said, 'This is my body which is for you. Do this in
remembrance of me.' In the same way also the cup, after supper, saying, 'This
cup is the new covenant in my blood. Do this, as often as you drink it, in
remembrance of me'." Gospels. The synoptic gospels, , , , depict Jesus as
presiding over the Last Supper. References to Jesus' body and blood foreshadow
his crucifixion, and he identifies them as a new covenant. In the gospel of
John, the account of the Last Supper has no mention of Jesus taking bread and
wine and speaking of them as his body and blood; instead it recounts his humble
act of washing the disciples' feet, the prophecy of the betrayal, which set in
motion the events that would lead to the cross, and his long discourse in
response to some questions posed by his followers, in which he went on to speak
of the importance of the unity of the disciples with him and each other. In ,
the evangelist attributes a long discourse to Jesus which deals with the
subject of the living bread and in contains echoes of eucharistic language. The
interpretation of the whole passage has been extensively debated. Hoskyns notes
three main schools of thought: (a) the language is metaphorical and verse 63:
"It is the Spirit that quickeneth; the flesh profiteth nothing: the words I
have spoken unto you are spirit, and are life" gives the author's precise
meaning; (b) vv 51-58 are a later interpolation which cannot be harmonised with
the context; (c) The discourse is homogeneous, sacrificial and sacramental and
can be harmonised though not all attempts are satisfactory. Agape feast. The
expression "The Lord's Supper", derived from St. Paul's usage in , may have
originally referred to the Agape feast, the shared communal meal with which the
Eucharist was originally associated. The Agape feast is mentioned in . But "The
Lord's Supper" is now commonly used in reference to a celebration involving no
food other than the sacramental bread and wine. Early Christian sources. The
Didache (Greek: teaching) is an early Church treatise that includes
instructions for Baptism and the Eucharist. Most scholars date it to the early
2nd century, and distinguish in it two separate Eucharistic traditions, the
earlier tradition in chapter 10 and the later one preceding it in chapter 9.
The Eucharist is mentioned again in chapter 14. Ignatius of Antioch (ca. 35 or
50-between 98 and 117), one of the Apostolic Fathers, mentions the Eucharist as
"the flesh of our Saviour Jesus Christ", and Justin Martyr speaks of it as more
than a meal: "the food over which the prayer of thanksgiving, the word received
from Christ, has been said ... is the flesh and blood of this Jesus who became
flesh ... and the deacons carry some to those who are absent." Eucharistic
theology. Many Christian denominations classify the Eucharist as a sacrament.
Some Protestants prefer to call it an "ordinance", viewing it not as a specific
channel of divine grace but as an expression of faith and of obedience to
Christ. Most Christians, even those who deny that there is any real change in
the elements used, recognize a special presence of Christ in this rite. But
Christians differ about exactly how, where and how long Christ is present in
it. Roman Catholicism, Eastern Orthodoxy, Oriental Orthodoxy, and the Church of
the East teach that the reality (the "substance") of the elements of bread and
wine is wholly changed into the literal body and blood of Jesus Christ, while
the appearances (the "species") remain. Transubstantiation is the term used by
Roman Catholics to denote "what" is changed, not to explain "how" the
transformation occurs, since the Catholic Church teaches that "the signs of
bread and wine become, "in a way surpassing understanding", the Body and Blood
of Christ". Lutherans believe that the body and blood of Jesus are present "in,
with and under" the forms of bread and wine, a concept known as the sacramental
union. The Reformed churches, following the teachings of John Calvin, believe
in an immaterial, spiritual (or "pneumatic") presence of Christ by the power of
the Holy Spirit and received by faith. Anglicans adhere to a range of views
although the teaching on the matter in the Articles of Religion holds that the
presence is real only in a heavenly and spiritual sense. Some Christians reject
the concept of the real presence, believing that the Eucharist is only a
memorial of the death of Christ. The "Baptism, Eucharist and Ministry" document
of the World Council of Churches, attempting to present the common
understanding of the Eucharist on the part of the generality of Christians,
describes it as "essentially the sacrament of the gift which God makes to us in
Christ through the power of the Holy Spirit", "Thanksgiving to the Father",
"Anamnesis or Memorial of Christ", "the sacrament of the unique sacrifice of
Christ, who ever lives to make intercession for us", "the sacrament of the body
and blood of Christ, the sacrament of his real presence", "Invocation of the
Spirit", "Communion of the Faithful", and "Meal of the Kingdom". Ritual and
liturgy. Catholic. The Catholic Church teaches that once consecrated in the
Eucharist, the elements cease to be bread and wine and become the body and
blood of Christ, each of which is accompanied by the other and by Christ's soul
and divinity. The empirical appearance and physical properties are not changed,
but for Catholics, the reality is. The consecration of the bread (known as the
host) and wine represents the separation of Jesus' body from his blood at
Calvary. However, since he has risen, the Church teaches that his body and
blood can no longer be truly separated. Where one is, the other must be.
Therefore, although the priest (or minister) says, "The body of Christ", when
administering the host, and, "The blood of Christ", when presenting the
chalice, the communicant who receives either one receives Christ, whole and
entire. The Catholic Church sees as the main basis for this belief the words of
Jesus himself at his Last Supper: the Synoptic Gospels (; ; ) and Saint Paul's
recount that in that context Jesus said of what to all appearances were bread
and wine: "This is my body … this is my blood." The Roman Catholic
understanding of these words, from the Patristic authors onward, has emphasized
their roots in the covenantal history of the Old Testament. The interpretation
of Christ's words against this Old Testament background coheres with and
supports belief in the Real Presence. In 1551 the Council of Trent definitively
declared: "Because Christ our Redeemer said that it was truly his body that he
was offering under the species of bread 6:51, it has always been the conviction
of the Church of God, and this holy Council now declares again, that by the
consecration of the bread and wine there takes place a change of the whole
substance of the bread into the substance of the body of Christ our Lord and of
the whole substance of the wine into the substance of his blood. This change
the holy Catholic Church has fittingly and properly called transubstantiation."
The Fourth Council of the Lateran in 1215 had spoken of "Jesus Christ, whose
body and blood are truly contained in the sacrament of the altar under the
forms of bread and wine; the bread being changed ("transsubstantiatis") by
divine power into the body, and the wine into the blood." The attempt by some
twentieth-century Catholic theologians to present the Eucharistic change as an
alteration of significance (transignification rather than transubstantiation)
was rejected by Pope Paul VI in his 1965 encyclical letter "Mysterium fidei" In
his 1968 "Credo of the People of God", he reiterated that any theological
explanation of the doctrine must hold to the twofold claim that, after the
consecration, 1) Christ's body and blood are really present; and 2) bread and
wine are really absent; and this presence and absence is "real" and not merely
something in the mind of the believer. On entering a church, Roman Catholics
genuflect to the consecrated host in the tabernacle that holds the consecrated
host, in order to acknowledge respectfully the presence of Jesus in the Blessed
Sacrament, a presence to which a red votive candle or sanctuary lamp kept
burning close to such a tabernacle draws attention. Orthodox. Among Eastern
Christians, the Eucharistic service is called the "Divine Liturgy" (Eastern
Orthodox) or similar names (Oriental Orthodox). It comprises two main
divisions: the first is the "Liturgy of the Catechumens" which consists of
introductory litanies, antiphons and scripture readings, culminating in a
reading from one of the Gospels and, often, a homily; the second is the
"Liturgy of the Faithful" in which the Eucharist is offered, consecrated, and
received as Holy Communion. Within the latter, the actual Eucharistic prayer is
called the "anaphora," literally: "offering" or "carrying up" (). In the Rite
of Constantinople, two different anaphoras are currently used: one is
attributed to Saint John Chrysostom, the other to Saint Basil the Great. Among
the Oriental Orthodox, a variety of anaphoras are used, but all are similar in
structure to those of the Constantinopolitan Rite, in which the Anaphora of
Saint John Chrysostom is used most days of the year; Saint Basil's is offered
on the Sundays of Great Lent, the eves of Christmas and Theophany, Holy
Thursday, Holy Saturday, and upon his feast day (1 January). At the conclusion
of the Anaphora the bread and wine are held to be the Body and Blood of Christ.
Unlike the Church of Rome, the Eastern Orthodox Church uses leavened bread,
with the leaven symbolizing the presence of the Holy Spirit. The Armenian
Apostolic Church, like the Roman Catholic, uses unleavened bread.
Conventionally this change in the elements is understood to be accomplished at
the "Epiclesis" (Greek: "invocation") by which the Holy Spirit is invoked and
the consecration of the bread and wine as the Body and Blood of Christ is
specifically requested, but since the anaphora as a whole is considered a
unitary (albeit lengthy) prayer, no one moment within it can be readily singled
out. Syriac. Holy Qurbana or Qurbana Qadisha, the "Holy Offering" or "Holy
Sacrifice", refers to the Eucharist as celebrated according to the East Syrian
and West Syrian traditions of Syriac Christianity. The main Anaphora of the
East Syrian tradition is the Holy Qurbana of Addai and Mari, while that of the
West Syrian tradition is the Liturgy of Saint James. Both are extremely old,
going back at least to the third century, and are the oldest extant liturgies
continually in use. Other churches. Anglican. In most churches of the Anglican
Communion, the Eucharist is celebrated every Sunday, having replaced Morning
Prayer as the principal service. The rites for the Eucharist are found in the
various prayer books of Anglican churches. Wine and unleavened wafers or
leavened bread is used. Daily celebrations are the norm in many cathedrals and
parish churches typically offer one or more Eucharists during the week. Only a
small minority of parishes with a priest do not celebrate the Eucharist at
least once each Sunday. The nature of the ceremony, however, varies according
to the orientation of the priest, parish, diocese or regional church. Baptist.
The bread and "fruit of the vine" indicated in Matthew, Mark and Luke as the
elements of the "Lord's Supper" are interpreted by many Baptists as unleavened
bread (although leavened bread is often used) and, in line with the historical
stance of some Baptist groups (since the mid-19th century) against partaking of
alcoholic beverages, grape juice, which they commonly refer to simply as "the
Cup". The unleavened bread, or matzoh, also underscores the symbolic belief
attributed to Christ's breaking the matzoh and saying that it was his body. A
soda cracker is often used. This view is prevalent amongst Reformed Baptists,
those in the Founders movement (a Calvinistic movement within the Southern
Baptist Convention), some Primitive Baptists, Strict Baptists, and several
individuals in other Baptist associations. As in many churches, Communion
practices and frequency vary among congregations. A typical practice is to have
small cups of juice and plates of broken bread distributed to the seated
congregation by a group of deacons, elders, or ushers. In others congregations,
communicants may proceed to the altar to receive the elements, then return to
their seats. A widely accepted practice is for all to receive and hold the
elements until everyone is served, then consume the bread and cup in unison.
Usually, music is performed and Scripture is read during the receiving of the
elements. Some Baptist churches are closed-Communionists (even requiring full
membership in the church before partaking), with others being partially or
fully open-Communionists. It is rare to find a Baptist church where The Lord's
Supper is observed every Sunday; most observe monthly or quarterly, with some
holding Communion only during a designated Communion service or following a
worship service. Lutheran. Lutherans believe that the body and blood of Christ
are "truly and substantially present in, with, and under the forms" of the
consecrated bread and wine (the elements), so that communicants eat and drink
the body and blood of Christ himself as well as the bread and wine in this
sacrament. The Lutheran doctrine of the Real Presence is more accurately and
formally known as the "sacramental union". It has been inaccurately called
"consubstantiation". This term is specifically rejected by Lutheran churches
and theologians since it creates confusion about the actual doctrine and
subjects the doctrine to the control of a non-biblical philosophical concept in
the same manner as, in their view, does the term "transubstantiation". While an
official movement exists in Lutheran congregations celebrate Eucharist weekly,
using formal rites very similar to the Roman Catholic and "high" Anglican
services, it was historically common for congregations to celebrate monthly or
even quarterly. Even in congregations where Eucharist is offered weekly, there
is not a requirement that every church service be a Eucharistic service, nor
that all members of a congregation must receive it weekly. Brethren and
Mennonites/Anabaptists. Traditional Mennonite and German Baptist Brethren
Churches such as the Church of the Brethren churches and congregations have the
Agape Meal, footwashing and the serving of the bread and wine two parts to the
Communion service in the Lovefeast. In the more modern groups, Communion is
only the serving of the Lord’s Supper. In the communion meal, the members of
the Mennonite churches renew their covenant with God and with each other.
Plymouth Brethren. Among Open assemblies, also termed Plymouth Brethren, the
Eucharist is more commonly called the Breaking of Bread or the Lord's Supper.
It is seen as a symbolic memorial and entirely non-sacramental, and central to
the worship of both individual and assembly. In principle the service is open
to all baptised Christians, however an individuals eligibility to participate
depends on the views of each particular assembly. The service takes the form of
non-liturgical, open worship with all male participants allowed to pray audibly
and select hymns or readings. The breaking of bread itself typically consists
of one leavened loaf which is prayed over and broken by a participant in the
meeting, and then shared around. The wine is poured from a single container
into one or several vessels, and these are again shared around. Exclusive
Brethren. The Exclusive Brethren follow a similar practice to the Open
Brethren. The Eucharist they also call the Breaking of Bread or the Lord's
Supper. Reformed/Presbyterian. In the Reformed Churches the Eucharist is
variously administered. The Calvinist view of the Sacrament sees a "real
presence" of Christ in the supper; not the physical presence of the Catholic
and Lutheran views, but more than the mere memorialism of the Zwinglians and
their successors. Christ is present spiritually, and the believer feeds upon
His body and blood in a spiritual, but real way. There is no standard
frequency; John Calvin desired weekly communion, but the city council only
approved monthly, and monthly celebration has become the most common practice
in Reformed churches today. Many, on the other hand, follow John Knox in
celebration of the Lord's supper on a quarterly basis, to give proper time for
reflection and inward consideration of one's own state and sin. Recently,
Presbyterian and Reformed Churches have been considering whether to restore
more frequent communion, including weekly communion in more churches,
considering that infrequent communion was derived from a memorialist view of
the Lord's Supper, rather than Calvin's view of the sacrament as a means of
grace. Some churches use bread without any raising agent (whether leaven or
yeast), in view of the use of unleavened bread at Jewish Passover meals, while
others use any bread available. The Presbyterian Church (USA), for instance,
prescribes "bread common to the culture". Harking back to the regulative
principle of worship, the Reformed tradition had long eschewed coming forward
to receive communion, preferring to have the elements distributed throughout
the congregation by the presbyters (elders) more in the style of a shared meal.
Wine and grape juice are both used, depending on the congregation. Many
Presbyterian Churches, influenced by Philip Schaff's Mercersburg Theology, have
adopted a High Church liturgy. Openness ranges between open communion (any
believer may participate, e.g. the PCUSA) to closed (only members of the
denomination may partake). Most Reformed churches would practice a balance
between these, i.e., all believers who are united to a church of like faith and
practice, and who are not living in sin, would be allowed to join in the
Sacrament, sometimes with a requirement of pastoral or elder approval. United
Methodist. United Methodists in the United States are encouraged to celebrate
the Eucharist every Sunday, though it is typically celebrated on the first
Sunday of each month, while a few go as long as celebrating quarterly (a
tradition dating back to the days of circuit riders that served multiple
churches). In the United Methodist church grape juice is used instead of wine.
The current Book of Worship of the United Methodist church says that "the pure
unfermented juice of the grape, or an equivalent, shall be used during the
service of Holy Communion." The elements may be distributed in various ways.
Communicants may receive standing, kneeling, or while seated. Gaining more wide
acceptance is the practice of receiving by intinction (receiving a piece of
consecrated bread or wafer, dipping it in the blessed wine, and consuming it).
The most common alternative to intinction is for the communicants to receive
the consecrated juice using small, individual, specially made glass or plastic
cups known as communion cups. United Methodists practice open communion,
inviting "all who intend a Christian life, together with their children" to
receive Communion. Undergoing Baptism is not a prerequisite for receiving
Communion, but if unbaptized people "regularly participate in Holy Communion,
it is appropriate for pastors to talk with these people" about the possibility
of them being baptized. The standard liturgies for the Eucharist (as well as
other services) are found in "The United Methodist Hymnal" and "The United
Methodist Book of Worship." The standard Service of Word and Table is set in a
fourfold movement of Entrance, Proclamation and Response, Thanksgiving and
Communion, and Sending Forth. The Eucharistic Prayer, as found in the
Thanksgiving and Response section, is prayed by an authorized minister as set
forth in "The Book of Discipline." Generally speaking, the ministry of
presiding at the Eucharist is given by the church to the Elders (presbyters,
priests, or pastors in other traditions). The Eucharistic Prayer of the United
Methodist Church takes on an ancient pattern that begins with the "Dialogue"
(The Lord be with you/and also with you) and Sursum Corda (Lift up your
hearts). Following is a Preface that gives thanks to the Father and ends
leading into the "Sanctus et Benedictus" (Holy, holy, holy Lord...Blessed is he
who comes...). Then there is a "Post-Sanctus" Prayer which praises the Father
for the gift and ministry of Jesus Christ which leads into the Words of
Institution (the recalling of the Last Supper). The anamnesis follows, leading
into the Memorial Acclamation (Christ has died; Christ is risen; Christ will
come again). The presiding minister then prays the epiclesis (pour out your
Holy Spirit...) and closes with a Trinitarian doxology. The congregation joins
in a final "Amen" and recites the Lord's Prayer. Different proper prefaces are
provided in the Book of Worship that are appropriate for Holy Days and Seasons
of the Church Year. Variations of the Eucharistic Prayer are provided for
various occasions, including communion of the sick and brief forms for
occasions that call for greater brevity. Though the ritual is standardized,
there is great variation amongst United Methodist churches, from typically
high-church to low-church, in the enactment and style of celebration. United
Methodist clergy are not required to be vested when celebrating the Eucharist,
though it is most often the case that they are vested either in a Geneva gown
and stole or an alb and stole. Other groups. Jehovah's Witnesses. Jehovah's
Witnesses commemorate Christ's death as a ransom or propitiatory sacrifice by
observing The Lord's Evening Meal, or Memorial, each year on the evening that
corresponds to the Passover, Nisan 14, according to the ancient Jewish
calendar. They believe that this is the only annual religious observance
commanded for Christians in the Bible. Of those who attend the Memorial a small
minority worldwide will partake of the eating of the unleavened bread and the
drinking of the wine. Jehovah's Witnesses believe that only 144,000 people will
receive heavenly salvation and thus spend eternity with God in heaven, as
underpriests and co-rulers under Christ. Paralleling the anointing of kings and
priests, they are referred to as the "anointed" class and are the only ones who
should partake of the bread and wine. The celebration of the Memorial of
Christ's Death proceeds as follows: In advance of the Memorial, Jehovah's
Witnesses, in addition to their regular offer of in-home Bible studies also
invite anyone that may be interested to attend this special night. The week of
the Memorial is generally filled with special activity in the ministry, such as
door-to-door work. A suitable hall, for example a Kingdom Hall, is prepared for
the occasion. The Memorial begins with a song and a prayer. The prayer is
followed by a discourse on the importance of the evening. A table is set with
unadulterated red wine and unleavened bread. Jehovah's Witnesses believe the
bread represents Jesus Christ's body which he gave on behalf of mankind, and
that the wine represents his blood which redeems from sin. They do not believe
in transubstantiation or consubstantiation. Hence, the wine and the bread are
merely symbols (sometimes referred to as "emblems"), but they have a profound
meaning for Jehovah's Witnesses. A prayer is offered and the bread is
circulated among the audience. Then another prayer is offered, and the wine is
circulated in the same manner. After that, the evening concludes with a final
song and prayer. Only those who are anointed partake as the emblems are passed
around the room to all who are present. This does not minimize the importance
of the Memorial event as far as the rest in attendance are concerned. All
present view this as an opportunity to show that they accept the belief that
Jesus Christ is the one who sacrificed himself in behalf of redemption for all
mankind, becoming the only mediator between Jehovah God and mankind (John 3:
16). At the same time, it is an opportunity to publicly show thanks for that
worldwide redemption. Latter-day Saints. In The Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints (LDS church), the "Holy Sacrament of the Lord's Supper", more
simply referred to as the Sacrament, is administered every Sunday (except
General Conference or other special Sunday meeting) in each LDS Ward or branch
worldwide at the beginning of Sacrament meeting. The Sacrament, both bread and
water, is prepared by priesthood holders prior to the beginning of the meeting.
At the beginning of the Sacrament, priests say specific prayers to bless the
bread and water. The bread is passed first after the priests have broken slices
of bread into small pieces. All in attendance are provided an opportunity to
partake of the Sacrament as it is passed row-by-row to the congregation by
priesthood holders (typically deacons). The bread is then returned to the
priests, who then replace the bread trays and cover them, while uncovering the
water which is held in trays in small individual cups. In a manner similar to
the bread, the priests say the second prayer and the water is then passed to
the congregation. Seventh-day Adventists. In the Seventh-day Adventist Church
the Holy Communion service customarily is celebrated once per quarter. The
service includes the ordinance of footwashing and the Lord’s Supper.
Unleavened bread and unfermented (non-alcoholic) grape juice is used. Open
communion is practised: all who have committed their lives to the Saviour may
participate. Children learn the significance of the service by observing others
participating. After receiving formal instruction in baptismal classes and
making their commitment to Jesus in baptism, they are thereby prepared to
partake in the service themselves. Seventh-day Adventist Church holds opinion
that "Christ’s example forbids exclusiveness at the Lord’s Supper. It is
true that open sin excludes the guilty. This the Holy Spirit plainly teaches. 1
Cor. 5:11. But beyond this none are to pass judgment." The communion service
must be conducted by an ordained pastor, minister or church elder. Open and
closed communion. Christian denominations differ in their understanding of
whether they may receive the Eucharist with those with whom they are not in
full communion. The famed apologist St. Justin Martyr (c. 150) wrote: "No one
else is permitted to partake of it, except one who believes our teaching to be
true..." For the first several hundred years, non-members were forbidden even
to be present at the sacramental ritual; visitors and catechumens (those still
undergoing instruction) were dismissed halfway through the Liturgy, after the
Bible readings and sermon but before the Eucharistic rite. The Divine Liturgy
of St. John Chrysostom, used in the Byzantine Churches, still has a formula of
dismissal of catechumens (not usually followed by any action) at this point.
The ancient Churches, such as the Roman Catholic and the Eastern Orthodox
exclude non-members from Communion under normal circumstances, though the
Catholics may allow exceptions, e.g., for non-members in danger of death who
share their faith in the reality of the Eucharist and who are unable to have
access to a minister of their own community. Some Protestant communities
including most Lutheran churches practice closed communion and require
catechetical instruction for all people before receiving the Eucharist. Many of
the stricter communities of the Reformed and Presbyterian denominations
practice a form of restricted Communion, which they designate Close Communion
(to distinguish it from the closed communion system mentioned above). Believing
it is the elders' responsibility to ensure that participants do not "eat and
drink judgment to themselves" (as mentioned in I Corinthians 11:27-34) they
require those who would participate to make themselves known to the Kirk
Session before the service begins. When it comes time to issue the invitation
to come to the table the warning from I Corinthians 11:27-29 is read which is
referred to as "fencing the table." Thereafter, when the elements are
distributed they are passed to those who are known to the Kirk Session as
members of the Congregation, members of sister Churches and those who have
already met with the elders. The elements are not passed to others. Most
Protestant communities, including Reformed, Evangelical, Methodist, the Church
of Sweden, and Anglicans practice open communion in the sense of not limiting
it to members of their own Church alone, but some of them require that the
communicant be a baptized person or a member of a partner church. Some
Progressive Christian congregations offer communion to any individual who
wishes to commemorate the life and teachings of Christ, regardless of religious
affiliation. Most churches in the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, the
largest Lutheran denomination in the United States, also practice their own
form of open communion, provided those who receive are baptized and believe in
the Real Presence. In the Episcopal Church (United States), those who do not
receive Holy Communion may enter the communion line with their arms crossed
over their chest, in order to receive a blessing from the priest, instead of
receiving Holy Communion. Other issues. Preparation. The Roman Catholic Church
requires its members to receive the sacrament of Penance or Reconciliation
before taking Communion, if they are aware of having committed a grave sin, and
to prepare by fasting, prayer and other works of piety. Many Protestant
congregations generally reserve a period of time for self-examination and
private, silent confession just before partaking in the Lord's Supper.
Footwashing. Seventh Day Adventists, Mennonites, and some other groups
participate in "foot washing" (cf. John 13:3-17) as a preparation for partaking
in the Lord's Supper. At that time they are to individually examine themselves,
and confess any sins they may have between one and another. Health issues.
Gluten. The gluten in wheat bread may be dangerous to people with celiac
disease. For the Roman Catholic Church, this issue was addressed in the 24 July
2003 letter of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith, which summarized
and clarified earlier declarations. The Roman Catholic Church believes that the
matter for the Eucharist must be wheaten bread and fermented wine from grapes:
it holds that, if the gluten has been entirely removed, the result is not true
wheaten bread, For celiacs, but not generally, it allows low-gluten bread. It
also permits Holy Communion to be received under the form of either bread or
wine alone, except by a priest who is celebrating Mass without other priests or
as principal celebrant. Many mainline Protestant churches offer communicants
gluten-free alternatives to wheaten bread, usually in the form of a rice-based
cracker or gluten-free bread. Alcohol. The alcohol in wine may be inappropriate
for alcoholics. The Roman Catholic Church believes that grape juice that has
not begun even minimally to ferment cannot be accepted as wine, which it sees
as essential for celebration of the Eucharist. For alcoholics, but not
generally, it allows the use of mustum (grape juice in which fermentation has
begun but has been suspended without altering the nature of the juice), and it
holds that, "since Christ is sacramentally present under each of the species,
communion under the species of bread alone makes it possible to receive all the
fruit of Eucharistic grace. For pastoral reasons this manner of receiving
communion has been legitimately established as the most common form in the
Latin rite." As already indicated, the one exception is in the case of a priest
celebrating Mass without other priests or as principal celebrant. The water
that in the Latin Church is prescribed to be mixed with the wine must be only a
relatively small quantity. The practice of the Coptic Church is that the
mixture should be two parts wine to one part water. Many Protestant churches
allow clergy and communicants to take mustum instead of wine. In addition to,
or in replacement of wine, some churches offer grape juice which has been
pasteurized to stop the fermentation process the juice naturally undergoes; de-
alcoholized wine from which most of the alcohol has been removed (between 0.5%
and 2% remains); or water. Exclusive use of unfermented grape juice is common
in the Churches of Christ, Baptist churches, and other independent Protestant
churches. Fear of transmission of diseases. In influenza epidemics, some
churches suspend the giving of communion under the form of wine, for fear of
spreading the disease. This is in full accord with Roman Catholic Church belief
that communion under the form of bread alone makes it possible to receive all
the fruit of Eucharistic grace. However, the same measure has been taken also
by churches that normally insist on the importance of receiving communion under
both forms. This was done in 2009 by the Church of England. Some fear contagion
through the handling involved in distributing the hosts to the communicants,
even if they are placed on the hand rather than on the tongue. Accordingly,
some churches use mechanical wafer dispensers or "pillow packs" (communion
wafers with wine inside them). While these methods of distributing communion
are not accepted in Roman Catholic churches, one such church provides a
mechanical dispenser to allow those intending to communicate to place in a
bowl, without touching them by hand, the hosts for use in the celebration.
