Excommunication Excommunication is a religious censure used to deprive,
suspend, or limit membership in a religious community or (as in the case of the
Catholic Church) to restrict certain rights within it. Some groups use the term
"disfellowship" instead. The word "excommunication" means putting out of
communion. In some religions, excommunication includes spiritual condemnation
of the member or group. Excommunication may involve banishment, shunning, and
shaming, depending on the religion, the offense that caused excommunication, or
the rules or norms of the religious community. Christianity. In , a man is
excommunicated by the church at Corinth for sexual immorality (incest). In ,
the man, having repented and suffered the punishment "inflicted of many," is
restored to the church. Fornication is not the only ground for excommunication,
according to the apostle: in , Paul says, "I am writing to you not to associate
with anyone who bears the name of brother if he is guilty of sexual immorality
or greed, or is an idolater, reviler, drunkard, or swindler - not even to eat
with such a one." In , Paul writes to "mark those who cause divisions contrary
to the doctrine which ye have learned and avoid them." Also, in , the writer
advises believers that "whosoever transgresseth, and abideth not in the
doctrine of Christ, hath not God. He that abideth in the doctrine of Christ, he
hath both the Father and the Son. If there come any unto you, and bring not
this doctrine, receive him not into "your" house [οἰκίαν, residence or
abode, or "inmates of the house" (family)], neither bid him God speed: for he
that biddeth him God speed is partaker of his evil deeds." Roman Catholic
Church. In Roman Catholic canon law, excommunication is a censure and thus a
"medicinal penalty" intended to invite the person to change behavior or
attitude, repent, and return to full communion. It is not an "expiatory
penalty" designed to make satisfaction for the wrong done, much less a
"vindictive penalty" designed solely to punish. Excommunication can be either
"latae sententiae" (automatic, incurred at the moment of committing the offense
for which canon law imposes that penalty) or "ferendae sententiae" (incurred
only when imposed by a legitimate superior or declared as the sentence of an
ecclesiastical court). Excommunicated Catholics are still Catholics and remain
bound by obligations such as attending Mass, even though they are barred from
receiving the Eucharist and from taking an active part in the liturgy (reading,
bringing the offerings, etc.). However, their communion with the Church is
considered gravely impaired. In spite of that, they are urged to retain a
relationship with the Church, as the goal is to encourage them to repent and
return to active participation in its life. Excommunicated persons are barred
from participating in the liturgy in a ministerial capacity (e.g., as a reader
if a layperson or as a deacon or priest if a clergyman) and from receiving the
Eucharist or other Sacraments, but they are not barred from attending these
(e.g., an excommunicated person may not receive the Eucharist but is not barred
from attending Mass). They are also forbidden to exercise any ecclesiastical
office or the like. These are the only effects for those who have incurred a
"latae sententiae" excommunication. For instance, a priest may not refuse
Communion publicly to those who are under merely automatic excommunication,
even if he knows that they have incurred this kind of excommunication. However,
if the excommunication has been imposed or declared, stricter effects follow,
such as (1) the obligation on others to prevent the excommunicated person from
acting in a ministerial capacity in the liturgy or, if this proves impossible,
to suspend the liturgical service and (2) the invalidity of acts of
ecclesiastical governance by the excommunicated person. Those affected by this
kind of excommunication are not to be admitted to Holy Communion (see canon
915). In the Catholic Church, excommunication is normally resolved by a
declaration of repentance, profession of the Creed (if the offense involved
heresy), or renewal of obedience (if that was a relevant part of the offending
act) by the excommunicated person and the lifting of the censure (absolution)
by a priest or bishop empowered to do this. "The absolution can be in the
internal (private) forum only, or also in the external (public) forum,
depending on whether scandal would be given if a person were privately absolved
and yet publicly considered unrepentant." Since excommunication excludes from
reception of the sacraments, absolution from excommunication is required before
absolution can be given from the sin that led to the censure. In many cases,
the whole process takes place on a single occasion in the privacy of the
confessional. For some more serious wrongdoings, absolution from
excommunication is reserved to a bishop, another ordinary, or even the Pope.
These can delegate a priest to act on their behalf. Before the 1983 Code of
Canon Law, there were two degrees of excommunication: The excommunicate was
either a "vitandus" (shunned, literally "to be avoided" by other Catholics), or
a "toleratus" (tolerated, allowing Catholics to continue to have business and
social relationships with the excommunicated person). This distinction no
longer applies. In the Middle Ages, formal acts of public excommunication were
sometimes accompanied by a ceremony wherein a bell was tolled (as for the
dead), the Book of the Gospels was closed, and a candle snuffed out — hence
the idiom "to condemn with bell, book, and candle." Such ceremonies are not
held today, but the effect is the same. Interdict is a censure similar to
excommunication. It too excludes from ministerial functions in public worship
and from reception of the sacraments, but not from the exercise of governance.
Eastern Orthodox churches. In the Eastern Orthodox churches, excommunication is
the exclusion of a member from the Eucharist. It is not expulsion from the
churches. This can happen for such reasons as not having confessed within that
year; excommunication can also be imposed as part of a penitential period. It
is generally done with the goal of restoring the member to full communion. The
Orthodox churches do have a means of expulsion, by pronouncing anathema, but
this is reserved only for acts of serious and unrepentant heresy. The Moscow
Patriarchate declared Sergius Bulgakov a heretic in this fashion because of his
pronouncements on Sancta Sofia being something like a fourth dimension to the
Trinity. Lutheranism. Beyond this, there is little agreement. Many Lutheran
denominations operate under the premise that the entire congregation (as
opposed to the pastor alone) must take appropriate steps for excommunication,
and there are not always precise rules, to the point where individual
congregations often set out rules for excommunicating laymen (as opposed to
clergy). For example, churches may sometimes require that a vote must be taken
at Sunday services; some congregations require that this vote be unanimous. The
Lutheran process, though rarely used, has created unusual situations in recent
years due to its somewhat democratic excommunication process. One example was
an effort to get serial killer Dennis Rader excommunicated from his
denomination (the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America) by individuals who
tried to "lobby" Rader's fellow church members into voting for his
excommunication. Anglican Communion. Church of England. The Church of England
does not have any specific canons regarding how or why a member can be
excommunicated, although it has a canon according to which ecclesiastical
burial may be refused to someone "declared excommunicate for some grievous and
notorious crime and no man to testify to his repentance". Episcopal Church of
the United States of America. The ECUSA is in the Anglican Communion, and
shares many canons with the Church of England which would determine its policy
on excommunication. Reformed view. In the Reformed churches, excommunication
has generally been seen as the culmination of church discipline, which is one
of the three marks of the Church. The Westminster Confession of Faith sees it
as the third step after "admonition" and "suspension from the sacrament of the
Lord's Supper for a season." Yet, John Calvin argues in his "Institutes of the
Christian Religion" that church censures do not "consign those who are
excommunicated to perpetual ruin and damnation," but are designed to induce
repentance, reconciliation and restoration to communion. Calvin notes, "though
ecclesiastical discipline does not allow us to be on familiar and intimate
terms with excommunicated persons, still we ought to strive by all possible
means to bring them to a better mind, and recover them to the fellowship and
unity of the Church." At least one modern Reformed theologian argues that
excommunication is not the final step in the disciplinary process. Jay E. Adams
argues that in excommunication, the offender is still seen as a brother, but in
the final step they become "as the heathen and tax collector" (Matthew 18:17).
Adams writes, "Nowhere in the Bible is excommunication (removal from the
fellowship of the Lord's Table, according to Adams) equated with what happens
in step 5; rather, step 5 is called "removing from the midst, handing over to
Satan," and the like." Former Yale president and theologian, Jonathan Edwards,
addresses the notion of excommunication as "removal from the fellowship of the
Lord's Table" in his treatise entitled "The Nature and End of Excommunication".
Edwards argues that "Particularly, we are forbidden such a degree of
associating ourselves with (excommunicants), as there is in making them our
guests at our tables, or in being their guests at their tables; as is manifest
in the text, where we are commanded to have no company with them, no not to
eat". Edwards insists, "That this respects not eating with them at the Lord’s
supper, but a common eating, is evident by the words, that the eating here
forbidden, is one of the lowest degrees of keeping company, which are
forbidden. Keep no company with such a one, saith the apostle, no not to eat
— as much as to say, no not in so low a degree as to eat with him. But eating
with him at the Lord’s supper, is the very highest degree of visible
Christian communion. Who can suppose that the apostle meant this: Take heed and
have no company with a man, no not so much as in the highest degree of
communion that you can have? Besides, the apostle mentions this eating as a way
of keeping company which, however, they might hold with the heathen. He tells
them, not to keep company with fornicators. Then he informs them, he means not
with fornicators of this world, that is, the heathens; but, saith he, “if any
man that is called a brother be a fornicator, etc. with such a one keep no
company, no not to eat.” This makes it most apparent, that the apostle doth
not mean eating at the Lord’s table; for so, they might not keep company with
the heathens, any more than with an excommunicated person." Anabaptist
tradition. When believers were baptized and taken into membership of the church
by Anabaptists, it was not only done as symbol of cleansing of sin but was also
done as a public commitment to identify with Jesus Christ and to conform one's
life to the teaching and example of Jesus as understood by the church.
Practically, that meant membership in the church entailed a commitment to try
to live according to norms of Christian behavior widely held by the Anabaptist
tradition. In the ideal, discipline in the Anabaptist tradition requires the
church to confront a notoriously erring and unrepentant church member, first
directly in a very small circle and, if no resolution is forthcoming, expanding
the circle in steps eventually to include the entire church congregation. If
the errant member persists without repentance and rejects even the admonition
of the congregation, that person is excommunicated or excluded from church
membership. Exclusion from the church is recognition by the congregation that
this person has separated himself or herself from the church by way of his or
her visible and unrepentant sin. This is done ostensibly as a final resort to
protect the integrity of the church. When this occurs, the church is expected
to continue to pray for the excluded member and to seek to restore him or her
to its fellowship. There was originally no "inherent" expectation to shun
(completely sever all ties with) an excluded member, however differences
regarding this very issue led to early schisms between different Anabaptist
leaders and those who followed them. Amish. Jakob Ammann, founder of the Amish
sect, believed that the shunning of those under the ban should be
systematically practiced among the Swiss Anabaptists as it was in the north and
as was outlined in the Dordrecht Confession. Ammann's uncompromising zeal
regarding this practice was one of the main disputes that led to the schism
between the Anabaptist groups that became the Amish and those that eventually
would be called Mennonite. Recently more moderate Amish groups have become less
strict in their application of excommunication as a discipline. This has led to
splits in several communities, an example of which is the Swartzetruber Amish
who split from the main body of Old Order Amish because of the latter's
practice of lifting the ban from members who later join other churches. In
general, the Amish will excommunicate baptized members for failure to abide by
their Ordnung (church rules) as it is interpreted by the local Bishop if
certain repeat violations of the Ordnung occur. Excommunication among the Old
Order Amish results in shunning or "the Meidung", the severity of which depends
on many factors, such as the family, the local community as well as the type of
Amish. Some Amish communities cease shunning after one year if the person joins
another church later on, especially if it is another Mennonite church. At the
most severe, other members of the congregation are prohibited almost all
contact with an excommunicated member including social and business ties
between the excommunicant and the congregation, sometimes even marital contact
between the excommunicant and spouse remaining in the congregation or family
contact between adult children and parents. Mennonites. In the Mennonite Church
excommunication is rare and is carried out only after many attempts at
reconciliation and on someone who is flagrantly and repeatedly violating
standards of behavior that the church expects. Occasionally excommunication is
also carried against those who repeatedly question the church's behavior and/or
who genuinely differ with the church's theology as well, although in almost all
cases the dissenter will leave the church before any discipline need be
invoked. In either case, the church will attempt reconciliation with the member
in private, first one on one and then with a few church leaders. Only if the
church's reconciliation attempts are unsuccessful, the congregation formally
revokes church membership. Members of the church generally pray for the
excluded member. Some regional conferences (the Mennonite counterpart to
dioceses of other denominations) of the Mennonite Church have acted to expel
member congregations that have openly welcomed non-celibate homosexuals as
members. This internal conflict regarding homosexuality has also been an issue
for other moderate denominations, such as the American Baptists and Methodists.
The practice among Old Order Mennonite congregations is more along the lines of
Amish, but perhaps less severe typically. An Old Order member who disobeys the
"Ordnung" (church regulations) must meet with the leaders of the church. If a
church regulation is broken a second time there is a confession in the church.
Those who refuse to confess are excommunicated. However upon later confession,
the church member will be reinstated. An excommunicated member is placed under
the ban. This person is not banned from eating with their own family.
Excommunicated persons can still have business dealings with church members and
can maintain marital relations with a marriage partner, who remains a church
member. Hutterites. The separatist, communal, and self-contained Hutterites
also use excommunication and shunning as form of church discipline. Since
Hutterites have communal ownership of goods, the effects of excommunication
could impose a hardship upon the excluded member and family leaving them
without employment income and material assets such as a home. However, often
arrangements are made to provide material benefits to the family leaving the
colony such as an automobile and some transition funds for rent, etc. One
Hutterite colony in Manitoba (Canada) had a protracted dispute when leaders
attempted to force the departure of a group that had been excommunicated but
would not leave. About a dozen lawsuits in both Canada and the United States
were filed between the various Hutterite factions and colonies concerning
excommunication, shunning, the legitimacy of leadership, communal property
rights, and fair division of communal property when factions have separated.
The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints ("LDS Church"; see also Mormonism) practices excommunication
(as well as the lesser sanctions of private counsel and caution, informal
probation, formal probation, and disfellowshipment) as penalties for those who
commit serious sins, those that significantly impair the name or moral
influence of the church and those who are a threat to other members. According
to the "Church Handbook of Instructions", the purposes of church discipline are
(1) to save the souls of transgressors, (2) to protect the innocent, and (3) to
safeguard the purity, integrity, and good name of the church. Excommunication
is generally reserved for what are seen as the most serious sins, including
committing serious crimes like murder or child abuse and incest; committing
adultery, polygamy, or homosexual conduct; apostasy, abortion, teaching false
doctrines, or openly criticizing LDS leaders. A 2006 revision to the "Church
Handbook of Instructions" states that joining another church is also an
excommunicable offense, however merely attending another church does not
constitute apostasy. As a lesser penalty, Latter-day Saints may be
disfellowshipped, which does not include a loss of church membership. Once
disfellowshipped, persons may not take the sacrament or enter LDS temples, nor
may they give prayers or sermons in church meetings, though disfellowshipped
persons may attend most LDS functions and are permitted to wear temple
garments, pay tithes and offerings, and participate in church classes if their
conduct is orderly. For lesser sins, or in cases where the sinner appears truly
repentant, individuals may be put on probation for a time, during which further
sin will result in disfellowshipment or excommunication. The decision to
excommunicate a Melchizedek Priesthood holder is generally the province of the
leadership of a stake, which consists of several local wards. Excommunications
occur only after a formal "church disciplinary council." Formerly called a
"church court," the councils were renamed to avoid talking about guilt and
instead to focus on repentance. In the disciplinary council, the stake
presidency and Stake High Council preside. Up to six of the twelve members of
the high council are assigned to split in half between representing the member
in question and the Church as a whole to "prevent insult or injustice." The
member is invited to attend, but the council can go forward without him. Again,
the members of the high council consult with the stake president, but the
decision about which discipline is necessary is the stake president's alone. It
is possible to appeal this decision to the Church's world leaders. For females,
and for male members not initiated into the Melchizedek Priesthood (typically
adolescents), the bishop (leader of the ward) determines whether
excommunication or a lesser sanction is warranted. He does this in consultation
with his two counselors, the bishop makes the determination in a spirit of
prayer and his counselors ratify the decision. The bishop's decision can be
appealed to stake leadership. The following list of variables serves as a
general set of guidelines for when excommunication or lesser action may be
warranted, beginning with those more likely to result in severe sanction. Those
who are excommunicated lose their church membership and the right to partake of
the sacrament. Notices of excommunication may be made public—especially in
cases of apostasy, where members could be misled—but the specific reasons for
individual excommunications are typically kept confidential and are seldom made
public. Persons who have been excommunicated are usually allowed to attend
church meetings but participation is limited. They cannot offer prayers for the
congregation, give talks, etc., cannot enter LDS temples, or wear temple
garments, or pay tithes. Excommunicated members may be re-baptized after a
waiting period and sincere repentance, as judged by a series of interviews with
church leaders. Some critics have charged that LDS leaders have used the threat
of excommunication to silence or punish LDS members and researchers who
disagree with established policy and doctrine, or who study or discuss
controversial subjects, or who may be involved in disputes with local, stake
leaders or general authorities. A notable case regarding researchers is the
church's excommunication of five (and disfellowshipping of one) outspoken
Mormon intellectuals. in 1993. See the September Six. However, LDS policy
dictates that local leaders are responsible for excommunication, without
influence from General Church leadership, arguing this policy is evidence
against systematic persecution of scholars. Jehovah's Witnesses. Jehovah's
Witnesses practice something similar to excommunication, using the term
"disfellowshipping", in cases where, it is believed, a member has unrepentantly
committed one or more of several documented "serious sins". The verses of
Scripture that Witnesses appeal to for expelling unrepentant believers is 1
Corinthians 5:11-13 and 2 John 10, where it says "quit mixing in company with
anyone called a brother that is a fornicator or greedy person or an idolater or
a reviler or a drunkard or an extortioner, not even eating with such a
man...remove the wicked man from your midst" and "never receive him in your
home or say a greeting to him." They interpret this to mean that any baptized
believer who engages in "gross sins", mentioned in the Bible is, to be expelled
from the congregation and shunned. When a member confesses to or is accused of
a "serious sin", a "judicial committee" of at least three elders is formed.
This committee investigates the case and determines the magnitude of the sin
committed. If the person is deemed guilty of a disfellowshipping offence, the
committee then decides, on the basis of the person's attitude and "works
befitting repentance" (), whether the person is to be considered repentant. The
"works" may include trying to correct the wrong, making apologies to any
offended individuals, and compliance with earlier counsel. If deemed guilty but
repentant, the person is not disfellowshipped but is formally "reproved" and
has "restrictions" imposed, which preclude the individual from various
activities such as presenting talks, offering public prayers or making comments
at meetings. If the person is deemed guilty and unrepentant, he or she will be
disfellowshipped. Unless an appeal is made within seven days, the
disfellowshipping is made formal by an announcement at the congregation's next
Service Meeting. Appeals are granted to determine if procedural errors are felt
to have occurred that may have affected the outcome. Disfellowshipping is a
severing of friendly relationships between all Jehovah's Witnesses and the one
disfellowshipped. Interaction with extended family is typically restricted to a
minimum, such as presence at the reading of wills and providing essential care
for the elderly. Within a household, family contact and marital intimacies may
continue, but without spiritual fellowship such as family Bible study and
religious discussions. Parents of disfellowshipped minors living in the family
may continue to attempt to convince the child of the value of the religion's
ways. Jehovah's Witnesses believe that this form of discipline encourages the
disfellowshipped individual to conform to biblical standards and prevents the
person from influencing other members of the congregation. Disassociation is a
form of disfellowshipping where a member expresses verbally or in writing that
they do not wish to be associated with Jehovah's Witnesses, or that they are
considered to have done so by their actions. An example of this would be
joining another religion or military organization. Individuals who are deemed
by the elders to have disassociated are given no right of appeal. Disassociated
members are viewed the same as disfellowshipped individuals. Each year,
congregation elders are instructed to consider meeting with disfellowshipped
individuals to determine changed circumstances and encourage them to pursue
reinstatement. Reinstatement is not automatic after a certain time period, nor
is there a minimum duration; disfellowshipped persons may talk to elders at any
time but must apply in writing to be considered for reinstatement into the
congregation. Elders consider each case individually, and are instructed to
ensure "that sufficient time has passed for the disfellowshipped person to
prove that his profession of repentance is genuine." A judicial committee meets
with the individual to determine their repentance, and if this is established,
the person is reinstated into the congregation and may participate with the
congregation in their formal ministry (such as house to house preaching), but
is prohibited from commenting at meetings or holding any privileges for a
period set by the judicial committee. If possible, the same judicial committee
members who disfellowshipped the individual are selected for the reinstatement
hearing. If the applicant is in a different area, the person will meet with a
local judicial committee that will communicate with either the original
judicial committee if available or a new one in the original congregation. A
Witness who has been formally reproved or reinstated cannot be appointed to any
"special privilege of service" for at least one year. Serious sins involving
child sex abuse permanently disqualify the sinner from appointment to any
congregational "privilege of service", regardless of whether the sinner was
convicted of any secular crime. Christadelphians. Similarly to many groups
having their origins in the 1830s Restoration Movement, Christadelphians call
their form of excommunication "disfellowshipping", though they do not practice
"shunning". Disfellowshipping can occur for moral reasons, changing beliefs, or
(in some ecclesias) for not attending communion (referred to as "the emblems"
or "the breaking of bread"). In such cases, the person involved is usually
required to discuss the issues. If they do not conform, the church ('meeting'
or 'ecclesia') is recommended by the management committee ("Arranging
Brethren") to vote on disfellowshipping the person. These procedures were
formulated 1863 onwards by early Christadelphians, and then in 1883 codified by
Robert Roberts in "A Guide to the Formation and Conduct of Christadelphian
Ecclesias" (colloquially "The Ecclesial Guide"). However Christadelphians
justify and apply their practice not only from this document but also from
passages such as the exclusion in 1Co.5 and recovery in 2Co.2. Christadelphians
typically avoid the term "excommunication" which many associate with the
Catholic Church; and may feel the word carries implications they do not agree
with, such as undue condemnation and punishment, as well as failing to
recognise the remedial intention of the measure. In the case of adultery and
divorce, the passage of time usually means a member can be restored if he or
she wants to be. In the case of ongoing behaviour, cohabitation, homosexual
activity, then the terms of the suspension have not been met. In the case of
doctrinal issues, refellowship is typically not sought because showing the
necessary conformity of thought that would be required is not conscientiously
possible. In some cases if the person will agree to refrain from expressing any
thoughts on these issues they can remain and some liberal meetings will show
tolerance. However in some cases of tolerance, block (or whole ecclesia)
disfellowshipping has happened. The mechanics of "refellowship" follow the
reverse of the original process; the individual makes an application to the
"ecclesia", and the "Arranging Brethren" give a recommendation to the members
who vote. If the "Arranging Brethren" judge that a vote may divide the
ecclesia, or personally upset some members, they may seek to find a third party
ecclesia which is willing to "refellowship" the member instead. According to
the Ecclesial Guide a third party ecclesia may also take the initiative to
"refellowship" another meeting's member. However this cannot be done
unilaterally, as this would constitute heteronomy over the autonomy of the
original ecclesia's members. Society of Friends (Quakers). Among many of the
Society of Friends groups (Quakers) one is "read out of meeting" for behaviour
inconsistent with the sense of the meeting. However it is the responsibility of
each meeting, quarterly meeting, and yearly meeting, to act with respect to
their own members. For example, during the Vietnam War many Friends were
concerned about Friend Richard Nixon's position on war which seemed at odds
with their beliefs; however, it was the responsibility of Nixon's own meeting,
the East Whittier Meeting of Whittier, California, to act if indeed that
meeting felt the leaning. They did not. In the 17th century, before the
founding of abolitionist societies, Avant-garde Friends who too forcefully
tried to convince their coreligionists of the evils of slavery were read out of
meeting. Benjamin Lay was read out of the Philadelphia Yearly Meeting for this.
During the American Revolution over 400 Friends were read out of meeting for
their military participation or support. Buddhism. There is no direct
equivalent to excommunication in Buddhism. However, in the Theravadan monastic
community monks can be expelled from monasteries for heresy and/or other acts.
In addition, the monks have four vows, called the four defeats, which are
abstaining from sexual intercourse, stealing, murder, and refraining from lying
about spiritual gains (e.g., having special power or ability to perform
miracles). If even one is broken, the monk is automatically a layman again and
can never become a monk in his or her current life. Most Japanese Buddhist
sects hold ecclesiastical authority over its followers and have their own rules
for excommunicating members of the sangha, lay or bishopric. The lay Japanese
Buddhist organization Sōka Gakkai was excommunicated from the Nichiren Shoshu
sect in 1991. Hinduism. Hinduism has been too diverse to be seen as a
monolithic religion, and with a conspicuous absence of any listed dogma or
ecclesia (organised church), has no concept of excommunication and hence no
Hindu may be ousted from the Hindu religion, although a person may easily lose
caste status for a very wide variety of infringements of caste prohibitions.
This may or may not be recoverable. However, some of the modern organized sects
within Hinduism may practice something equivalent to excommunication today, by
ousting a person from their own sect. In medieval and early-modern times (and
sometimes even now) in South Asia, excommunication from one's "caste" ("jati"
or "varna") used to be practiced (by the caste-councils) and was often with
serious consequences, such as abasement of the person's caste status and even
throwing him into the sphere of the untouchables or bhangi. In the 19th
century, a Hindu faced excommunication for going abroad, since it was presumed
he would be forced to break caste restrictions and, as a result, become
polluted. After excommunication, it would depend upon the caste-council whether
they would accept any form of repentance (ritual or otherwise) or not. Such
current examples of excommunication in Hinduism are often more political or
social rather than religious, for example the excommunication of lower castes
for refusing to work as scavengers in Tamil Nadu. An earlier example of
excommunication in Hinduism is that of Shastri Yagnapurushdas, who voluntarily
left and was later expelled from the Vadtal Gadi of the Swaminarayan Sampraday
by the then Vadtal acharya in 1906. He went on to form his own institution,
"Bochasanwasi Swaminarayan Sanstha" or "BSS" (now BAPS) claiming Gunatitanand
Swami was the rightful spiritual successor to Swaminarayan. Islam.
Excommunication as it exists in Christian faiths does not exist in Islam. The
nearest approximation is "takfir", a declaration that an individual or group is
"kafir" (or "kuffar" in plural), a non-believer. This does not prevent an
individual from taking part in any Islamic rite or ritual, and since the matter
of whether a person is "kafir" is a rather subjective matter, a declaration of
"takfir" is generally considered null and void if the target refutes it or if
the Islamic community in which he or she lives refuses to accept it. "Takfir"
has usually been practiced through the courts. More recently, cases have taken
place where individuals have been considered kuffar. These decisions followed
lawsuits against individuals, mainly in response to their writings that some
have viewed as anti-Islamic. The most famous cases are of Salman Rushdie, Nasr
Abu Zayd, and Nawal El-Saadawi. The repercussions of such cases have included
divorce, since under traditional interpretations of Islamic law, Muslim women
are not permitted to marry non-Muslim men. However, "takfir" remains a highly
contentious issue in Islam, primarily because there is no universally accepted
authority in Islamic law. Indeed, according to classical commentators, the
reverse seems to hold true, in that Muhammad reportedly equated the act of
declaring someone a "kafir" itself to blasphemy if the accused individual
maintained that he was a Muslim. Judaism. "Cherem" is the highest
ecclesiastical censure in Judaism. It is the total exclusion of a person from
the Jewish community. Except for cases in the Charedi community, "cherem"
stopped existing after The Enlightenment, when local Jewish communities lost
their political autonomy, and Jews were integrated into the gentile nations in
which they lived. A "siruv" order, equivalent to a contempt of court, issued by
a Rabbinical court may also limit religious participation.
