Expository preaching Expository preaching (also referred to as systematic
exposition) is a form of preaching that throws light upon the meaning of a
particular text or passage of Scripture. As "throwing light," this term is more
general than "exegesis", which is used for more technical and grammatical
exposition, a careful drawing out of the exact meaning of a passage in its
original context. While the term exposition could be used in connection with
any verbal informative teaching on any subject, the term is most usually used
in relation to Bible-teaching and preaching. The practice possibly originated
from the Jewish tradition of the rabbi giving a "Dvar Torah", explaining a
passage from the Torah, during the prayer services. Expository preaching
differs from topical preaching in that the former concentrates on a specific
text and discusses topics covered therein, whereas the latter concentrates on a
specific topic and references texts covering the topic. General Overview and
Background. Expository preaching is a term and technique that refers to the
proclamation the content of the Bible as it appears in the text, as opposed to
an emphasis on application to the hearers. There are a number of other
techniques for preaching, some of which are covered in this article including
textual, topical, topical-expository, and lectionary. According to the
proponents of expository preaching the weaknesses of the other forms generally
center around their inability to strictly expose the original meaning of the
text. There is of course overlap between all types as they share one text. The
expository method of preaching is favored among those who believe that the
Bible is the very word of God and thus worthy of being presented in its purest
essence, rather than modifying the message to match the characteristics of the
audience. Methods of Exposition. The Lectionary Method. A lectionary is a pre-
arranged set of passages on which the preacher is to expound. The passages
found in the lectionary are usually influenced by the church calendar, and are
sometimes set by the particular denomination of the minister and church. The
Individual Choice Method. When the passages are determined by the preacher or
the individual church, the preacher has the freedom to work out which passages
are studied at particular times. In such a situation, the preacher will preach
through an entire book of Scripture, which generally allows a far more detailed
look at the text being studied. Under some circumstances, preachers may prefer
to preach through whole books of the Bible systematically over a long period of
time. For example, suppose a preacher decides to cover the book of I John. On
the beginning week of the series, the preacher may explain and apply 1 John
1.1-4, then 1 John 1.5-7 the following week, then 1 John 1.8-10 after that, and
would continue until all of 1 John is covered. Then another book of the Bible
is examined, or else a specific topic is covered for a time (few if any
churches use the expository method exclusively, even where it is predominant
topical studies are used as either "breaks" between books or to cover a
specific area of concern to the congregation). Advantages and Disadvantages of
Expository Preaching. Some advantage of expository preaching are as follows: 1)
The presentation of the entire content of an entire Bible passage is attempted
regardless of the desires of the congregation. Hot topics and controversial
topics may not be avoided; pandering is diminished. 2) The preacher is never be
lost for a sermon subject. 3) The preacher is not left to guess the needs of
his flock and to present appropriate topics, since the preacher believes that
God's word has God's comprehensive diet for his sheep. Some disadvantages of
expository preaching are as follows: 1) the truths in a particular Bible
passage may not be those most needed by a particular audience at their point of
life. 2) The topic presented may lack the unity afforded by the topical method.
3) By limiting the message to a certain passage, the presentation of topics in
their fullness, may be neglected. Therefore, in order to properly address the
context and content at hand in a given passage, the preacher may become topical
by concentrating on the topic at hand, and integrating other supporting
passages. W.A. Criswell managed to cover the entire Bible over a 17 year period
as pastor of the First Baptist Church in Dallas, Texas. But John MacArthur
(pastor of Grace Community Church in Sun Valley, CA) has spent nearly a decade
in the book of Luke alone. J. Vernon McGee, radio preacher, preached through
the entire Bible in 5 year cycles. Prominent Expository Preachers. Many famous
evangelical preachers have used systematic exposition, though the line between
exposition, topical message, and rabbit paths is not sharply defined. J. Vernon
McGee of the "Through the Bible" radio program may be the best exemplar of the
purely expository method of preaching in modern American times. He preached
more than one 5 year cycle through the entire Bible. Reputed to be a great
evangelical preacher of the 20th Century D Martyn Lloyd-Jones was the minister
of Westminster Chapel in London from the late 1940s to the late 1960s. His
series on Romans took years to complete as he worked through the book almost a
verse at a time. Other famous expository preachers include John Stott, Dick
Lucas and Charles Spurgeon from England, William Still from Scotland, Phillip
Jensen and David Cook from Australia, and Stephen F. Olford, and Fred Craddock
from America. John MacArthur is probably the best known expository preacher in
America, and is a proponent of the expository method of preaching (and an
outspoken opponent of the topical method as used almost exclusively by some
churches). In addition, the Calvary Chapel group of churches, headed by Chuck
Smith, include the regular use of expository preaching as one of their
distinctives. Many such prominent preachers in the second half of the twentieth
century have put on record that to a lesser or greater extent they were
persuaded of the importance of systematic exposition as a result of reading the
works of A.W. Pink. Relative importance of expository preaching. There has been
some discussion among preachers of the relative importance of expository
preaching. Some churches give Scripture the dominant position over all other
sources of religious understanding. This is most common in fundamentalist and
evangelical denominations that take the position that the Bible is God's
inerrant word, and contains sufficient information for the Christian to
understand their faith and how they should live their lives. In historical
theology, these churches may adhere to the Reformation teaching of Sola
Scriptura which is present in the statements of faith of a number of mainline
denominations (e.g., chapter 1 of The Westminster Confession of Faith). In
practice, many Evangelical and Fundamentalist churches are not regularly
exposed to Expository preaching from the pulpit. Despite this, expositions of
scripture are more likely to occur in these churches than in non-evangelical
ones. The exposition is unlikely to be influenced by material from outside the
Bible (though such material may be mentioned in the sermon, for example the
writings of a commentator on the passage), but instead involves detailed
comparison of one Biblical text with other texts on the same subject in order
to reach a synthesis. Regardless of these differences of emphasis, however,
most preachers and congregations would agree that preaching must be honouring
to God rather than to human beings. In practice, this means that the preacher
as expositor should be concerned with speaking about what God sees as
important. This will be of little use, however, if it does not connect to what
the people in the congregation see as important - even if it only does so by
seeking to upset their priorities. But the principle must be that when a church
is exposed to expository preaching, they are being enabled to hear God speak
rather than being told what they think they need to hear. Scriptural basis for
exposition. For those who believe that the dominant source of Christian
understanding is the Bible, it may seem obvious that expository preaching
should be essential (though this is not the case with the seeker movement).
Nonetheless the logic of their position demands that preaching itself should
have a scriptural warrant. The biblical basis for expository preaching can be
found in many places in the Bible. 2 Timothy 3:16-17 is perhaps the most
important, for it states that Scripture is "breathed out by God", which means
that the Bible is actually God's words. The phrase "breathed out" is also a
link to the Holy Spirit, which shows a link between the work of God's Spirit,
and the work of God's Word. The verse also goes on to explain that Scripture is
"profitable for teaching, for reproof, for correction, and for training in
righteousness". This shows that the Bible is not theoretical, but practical in
its application. Finally, it states that "the man of God may be competent,
equipped for every good work". This has been claimed to show the sufficiency of
scripture - that it is all that a Christian needs to understand his faith and
how to live his life. Another important verse is Ephesians 6:17, which states
that the "Sword of the Spirit is the Word of God". This indicates again the
link between the work of the Holy Spirit and the work of God's word. It shows
that when the word of God is read, examined and applied, there also works the
Holy Spirit. A third important verse is found in Hebrews 4:12, which says that
"The word of God is living and active, sharper than any double edged sword,
piercing to the division of soul and spirit, of joints and of marrow, and
discerning the thoughts and intentions of the heart". This second picture of
God's word as a deadly sword is deliberate, not because of the violence it
implies, but because of the change it can bring to those who listen to God's
word. Here also the word of God is almost given a personality of its own -
which implies, again, the hidden work of the Holy Spirit as it works with the
word of God to change people's lives. Most churches that are committed to
Reformed Theology and Calvinism are similarly committed to the practice of
expository preaching. Most of the notable preachers mentioned above are
Calvinistic in their theology. Expository preaching is not limited to those who
embrace this theology, however, and can be found in a wide variety of churches.
Criticisms. David Fitch, an editor of Leadership Journal, wrote three articles
entitled "The Myth of Expository Preaching & the Commodification of the Word"
part 1 part 2 part 3. Fitch, an evangelical, argues that an underlying
assumption behind much expository preaching is an individualistic understanding
of scripture and an over-reliance upon the expository preacher as the means by
which God works in the church. Simon Perry, another evangelical preacher, has
warned that most forms of expository preaching place the authority of Scripture
above that of the Christ to whom the Scripture witnesses. As such, he claims,
expository preaching is inconsistent with the teachings of Scripture itself.
Movements that promote Expository preaching. Australia Britain Republic of
Ireland United States The expository preacher. Expository preachers generally
believe that their main duty as a pastor is the preaching of the Bible. As
such, they will spend a "considerable" amount, if not the "majority", of their
time studying and understanding the text in question, as well as associated
texts on the same subject, believing it to be absolutely necessary for the
welfare of their congregation. While studying, they will also be praying that
God will reveal to them the proper meaning of the text, and that the hearts and
minds of the congregation will be changed by it (believing that they do not
have any inherent ability to effect such change, only God can do so).
Expository preachers thus assure themselves that, no matter the "results", so
long as they preach the Bible and through the Bible, they have followed God's
direction. Note. Bible quotations are from "The Holy Bible, English Standard
Version", published by HarperCollins Publishers (c) 2001 by Crossway Bibles, a
division of Good News Publishers. Used by permission. All rights reserved.
