Extra Ecclesiam nulla salus The Latin phrase extra Ecclesiam nulla salus means:
"outside the church there is no salvation". The most recent Catholic Catechism
interpreted this to mean that "all salvation comes from Christ the Head through
the Church which is his Body." This expression comes from the writings of Saint
Cyprian of Carthage, a bishop of the 3rd century. The axiom is often used as
short-hand for the doctrine, upheld by both the Eastern Orthodox Church and the
Roman Catholic Church, that the Church is necessary for salvation ("one true
faith"). The theological basis for this doctrine is founded on the beliefs that
(1) Jesus Christ personally established the one Church; and (2) the Church
serves as the means by which the graces won by Christ are communicated to
believers. The Roman Catholic Church also teaches that the doctrine does not
mean that everyone who is not visibly within the Church is necessarily damned
(see below). Some of the most pertinent Roman Catholic expressions of this
doctrine are: the profession of faith of Pope Innocent III (1208), the
profession of faith of the Fourth Lateran Council (1215), the bull "Unam
sanctam" of Pope Boniface VIII (1302), and the profession of faith of the
Council of Florence (1442). The axiom "No salvation outside the Church" has
been frequently repeated over the centuries in different terms by the ordinary
magisterium. Catholic statements of this teaching. The original saying by Saint
Cyprian of Carthage (3rd century AD) is found his Letter LXXII, "Ad Jubajanum
de haereticis baptizandis", and in Latin reads: ""Salus extra ecclesiam non
est"". Fourth Lateran Council (1215): "There is but one universal Church of the
faithful, outside which no one at all is saved." Pope Boniface VIII, Bull "Unam
sanctam" (1302): "We are compelled in virtue of our faith to believe and
maintain that there is only one holy Catholic Church, and that one is
apostolic. This we firmly believe and profess without qualification. Outside
this Church there is no salvation and no remission of sins, the Spouse in the
Canticle proclaiming: 'One is my dove, my perfect one. One is she of her
mother, the chosen of her that bore her' (Canticle of Canticles 6:8); which
represents the one mystical body whose head is Christ, of Christ indeed, as
God. And in this, 'one Lord, one faith, one baptism' (Ephesians 4:5). Certainly
Noah had one ark at the time of the flood, prefiguring one Church which perfect
to one cubit having one ruler and guide, namely Noah, outside of which we read
all living things were destroyed… We declare, say, define, and pronounce that
it is absolutely necessary for the salvation of every human creature to be
subject to the Roman Pontiff." Pope Eugene IV, "Cantate Domino" (1441): "The
most Holy Roman Church firmly believes, professes and preaches that none of
those existing outside the Catholic Church, not only pagans, but also Jews and
heretics and schismatics, can have a share in life eternal; but that they will
go into the "eternal fire which was prepared for the devil and his angels"
(Matthew 25:41), unless before death they are joined with Her; and that so
important is the unity of this ecclesiastical body that only those remaining
within this unity can profit by the sacraments of the Church unto salvation,
and they alone can receive an eternal recompense for their fasts, their
almsgivings, their other works of Christian piety and the duties of a Christian
soldier. No one, let his almsgiving be as great as it may, no one, even if he
pour out his blood for the Name of Christ, can be saved, unless he remain
within the bosom and the unity of the Catholic Church." Pope Boniface I,
Epistle 14.1: "It is clear that this Roman Church is to all churches throughout
the world as the head is to the members, and that whoever separates himself
from it becomes an exile from the Christian religion, since he ceases to belong
to its fellowship." Pope Pelagius II (578-590): "Consider the fact that whoever
has not been in the peace and unity of the Church cannot have the Lord…
Although given over to flames and fires, they burn, or, thrown to wild beasts,
they lay down their lives, there will not be (for them) that crown of faith but
the punishment of faithlessness… Such a one can be slain, he cannot be
crowned… slain outside the Church, he cannot attain the rewards of the
Church" ([http://catho.org/9.php?d=bxq Denzinger, 469). Saint Gregory the Great
(590-604), "Moralia": "Now the holy Church universal proclaims that God cannot
be truly worshipped saving within herself, asserting that all they that are
without her shall never be saved." Pope Sylvester II, Profession of Faith, June
AD 991: "I believe that in Baptism all sins are forgiven, that one which was
committed originally as much as those which are voluntarily committed, and I
profess that outside the Catholic Church no one is saved." Pope Innocent III
(1198–1216), Profession of Faith prescribed for the Waldensians: "With our
hearts we believe and with our lips we confess but one Church, not that of the
heretics, but the Holy Roman Catholic and Apostolic Church, outside which we
believe that no one is saved" (Denzinger 792). Pope Clement VI, Letter "Super
Quibusdam" (to Consolator the Catholicos of Armenia), September 20, 1351: "In
the second place, we ask whether you and the Armenians obedient to you believe
that no man of the wayfarers outside of the faith of this Church, and outside
the obedience of the Pope of Rome, can finally be saved… In the ninth place,
if you have believed and do believe that all who have raised themselves against
the faith of the Roman Church and have died in final impenitence have been
damned and have descended to the eternal punishments of hell." Pope Leo XII
(1823–1829), Encyclical "Ubi Primum": "It is impossible for the most true
God, who is Truth Itself, the best, the wisest Provider, and rewarder of good
men, to approve all sects who profess false teachings which are often
inconsistent with one another and contradictory, and to confer eternal rewards
on their members. For we have a surer word of the prophet, and in writing to
you We speak wisdom among the perfect; not the wisdom of this world but the
wisdom of God in a mystery. By it we are taught, and by divine faith we hold,
one Lord, one faith, one baptism, and that no other name under heaven is given
to men except the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth in which we must be saved.
This is why we profess that there is no salvation outside the Church… For the
Church is the pillar and ground of the truth. With reference to those words
Augustine says: 'If any man be outside the Church he will be excluded from the
number of sons, and will not have God for Father since he has not the Church
for mother.'" Pope Gregory XVI (1831–1846), Encyclical "Summo Jugiter Studio"
(on mixed marriages), 5-6, May 27, 1832: "You know how zealously Our
predecessors taught that very article of faith which these dare to deny, namely
the necessity of the Catholic faith and of unity for salvation. The words of
that celebrated disciple of the Apostles, martyred Saint Ignatius, in his
letter to the Philadelphians are relevant to this matter: 'Be not deceived, my
brother; if anyone follows a schismatic, he will not attain the inheritance of
the kingdom of God.' Moreover, Saint Augustine and the other African bishops
who met in the Council of Cirta in the year 412 explained the same thing at
greater length: 'Whoever has separated himself from the Catholic Church, no
matter how laudably he lives, will not have eternal life, but has earned the
anger of God because of this one crime: that he abandoned his union with
Christ' (Epsitle 141). Omitting other appropriate passages which are almost
numberless in the writings of the Fathers, We shall praise Saint Gregory the
Great, who expressly testifies that this is indeed the teaching of the Catholic
Church. He says: 'The holy universal Church teaches that it is not possible to
worship God truly except in her and asserts that all who are outside of her
will not be saved' (Moral. in Job, 16.5). Official acts of the Church proclaim
the same dogma. Thus, in the decree on faith which Innocent III published with
the synod of the Lateran IV, these things are written: 'There is one universal
Church of the faithful outside of which no one at all is saved.' Finally, the
same dogma is expressly mentioned in the profession of faith proposed by the
Apostolic See, not only that which all Latin churches use (Creed of the Council
of Trent), but also that which the Greek Orthodox Church uses (cf. Gregory
XIII, Profession 'Sanctissimus') and that which other Eastern Catholics use
(cf. Benedict XIV, Profession 'Nuper ad Nos')… We are so concerned about this
serious and well known dogma, which has been attacked with such remarkable
audacity, that We could not restrain Our pen from reinforcing this truth with
many testimonies." Pope Pius IX (1846–1878), Allocution "Singulari Quadem",
December 9, 1854: "Not without sorrow we have learned that another error, no
less destructive, has taken possession of some parts of the Catholic world, and
has taken up its abode in the souls of many Catholics who think that one should
have good hope of the eternal salvation of all those who have never lived in
the true Church of Christ. Therefore, they are wont to ask very often what will
be the lot and condition of those who have not submitted in any way to the
Catholic faith, and, by bringing forward most vain reasons, they make a
response favorable to their false opinion. Far be it from Us, Venerable
Brethren, to presume on the limits of the divine mercy which is infinite; far
from Us, to wish to scrutinize the hidden counsel and "judgements of God" which
are "a great abyss" (Ps. 35.7) and cannot be penetrated by human thought. But,
as is Our Apostolic Duty, we wish your episcopal solicitude and vigilance to be
aroused, so that you will strive as much as you can to drive form the mind of
men that impious and equally fatal opinion, namely, that the way of eternal
salvation can be found in any religion whatsoever. May you demonstrate with
skill and learning in which you excel, to the people entrusted to your care
that the dogmas of the Catholic faith are in no wise opposed to divine mercy
and justice. "Singulari Quadam" Pope Pius IX (1846–1878), Encyclical
"Singulari Quidem" March 17, 1856): "Teach that just as there is only one God,
one Christ, one Holy Spirit, so there is also only one truth which is divinely
revealed. There is only one divine faith which is the beginning of salvation
for mankind and the basis of all justification, the faith by which the just
person lives and without which it is impossible to please God and come to the
community of His children (Romans 1; Hebrews 11; Council of Trent, Session 6,
Chapter 8). There is only one true, holy, Catholic Church, which is the
Apostolic Roman Church. There is only one See founded on Peter by the word of
the Lord (St. Cyprian, Epistle 43), outside of which we cannot find either true
faith or eternal salvation. He who does not have the Church for a mother cannot
have God for a father, and whoever abandons the See of Peter on which the
Church is established trusts falsely that he is in the Church (ibid, On the
Unity of the Catholic Church). ... Outside of the Church, nobody can hope for
life or salvation unless he is excused through ignorance beyond his control."
Pope Pius IX (1846–1878), Encyclical "Quanto conficiamur moerore", August 10,
1863: "And here, beloved Sons and Venerable Brothers, We should mention again
and censure a very grave error in which some Catholics are unhappily engaged,
who believe that men living in error, and separated from the true faith and
from Catholic unity, can attain eternal life. Indeed, this is certainly quite
contrary to Catholic teaching. It is known to Us and to you that they who labor
in invincible ignorance of our most holy religion and who, zealously keeping
the natural law and its precepts engraved in the hearts of all by God, and
being ready to obey God, live an honest and upright life, can, by the operating
power of divine light and grace, attain eternal life, since God who clearly
beholds, searches, and knows the minds, souls, thoughts, and habits of all men,
because of His great goodness and mercy, will by no means suffer anyone to be
punished with eternal torment who has not the guilt of deliberate sin. But, the
Catholic dogma that no one can be saved outside the Catholic Church is well-
known; and also that those who are obstinate toward the authority and
definitions of the same Church, and who persistently separate themselves from
the unity of the Church, and from the Roman Pontiff, the successor of Peter, to
whom 'the guardianship of the vine has been entrusted by the Savior,' (Council
of Chalcedon, Letter to Pope Leo I) cannot obtain eternal salvation. The words
of Christ are clear enough: 'And if he will not hear the Church, let him be to
thee as the heathen and publican' (Matthew 18:17); 'He that heareth you,
heareth Me; and he that dispeth you, despiseth Me; and he that dispiseth Me,
despiseth Him that sent Me' (Luke 10:16); 'He that believeth not shall be
condemned' (Mark 16:16); 'He that doth not believe, is already judged' (John 3:
18); 'He that is not with Me, is against Me; and he that gathereth not with Me,
scattereth' (Luke 11:23). The Apostle Paul says that such persons are
'perverted and self-condemned' (Titus 3:11); the Prince of the Apostles calls
the 'false prophets… who shall bring in sects of perdition, and deny the Lord
who bought them: bringing upon themselves swift destruction' (2 Peter 2:1)."
Pope Pius IX The "Syllabus of Errors", attached to Encyclical "Quanta Cura",
1864: following are prescribed errors: "16. Men can, in the cult of any
religion, find the way of eternal salvation and attain eternal salvation. -
Encyclical Qui pluribus, November 9, 1846. Believing in Jesus Christ and in the
One Who sent Him for our salvation is necessary for obtaining that salvation
(cf. Mark 16:16; John 3:36; 6:40; et al.). "Since 'without faith it is
impossible to please ' and to attain to the fellowship of His sons, therefore
without faith no one has ever attained justification, nor will anyone obtain
eternal life `but he who endures to the end,'" (Vatican I, Dei Fillius 3; cf.
Matthew 10:22; 24:13 and Hebrews 11:6; Council of Trent Decree on
Justification, 8) The Popes quoted above as stating that outside of the Church
there is no salvation did not see this statement as contradicting their other
statements that salvation is possible for those who, while not knowing the
Church as necessary for salvation and thus not explicitly entering the Church,
nevertheless accept whatever grace Christ gives them and thus receive what the
Council of Trent called Baptism of Desire. Pope Pius IX wrote in "Quanto
conficiamur moerore", 7:There are, of course, those who are struggling with
invincible ignorance about our most holy religion. Sincerely observing the
natural law and its precepts inscribed by God on all hearts and ready to obey
God, they live honest lives and "are able to attain eternal life" by the
efficacious virtue of divine light and grace since God who clearly beholds,
searches, and knows the minds, souls, thoughts, and habits of all men, because
of His great goodness and mercy, will by no means suffer anyone to be punished
with eternal torment who has not the guilt of deliberate sin.He saw their
situation as different from that of people "living in error and alienated from
the true faith and Catholic unity … stubbornly separated from the unity of
the Church and also from the successor of Peter, the Roman Pontiff," namely
those of whom the Second Vatican Council said, as quoted above: "They could not
be saved who, knowing that the Catholic Church was founded as necessary by God
through Christ, would refuse either to enter it or to remain in it." For the
invincibly ignorant, he saw their path to salvation as being through the
mediation of the Church's missionary activity: "the sons of the Catholic
Church… should always be zealous to seek them out and aid them, whether poor,
or sick, or afflicted with any other burdens, with all the offices of Christian
charity; and they should especially endeavor to snatch them from the darkness
of error in which they unhappily lie, and lead them back to Catholic truth and
to the most loving Mother the Church, who never ceases to stretch out her
maternal hands lovingly to them, and to call them back to her bosom so that,
established and firm in faith, hope, and charity, and 'being fruitful in every
good work' (Colossians 1:10), they may attain eternal salvation. In his
encyclical "Mystici Corporis", 103 Pope Pius XII said thatthose who do not
belong to the visible Body of the Catholic Church… We ask each and every one
of them to correspond to the interior movements of grace, and to seek to
withdraw from that state in which they cannot be secure about their
salvation.Pius IX, Iam Vos Omnes, 13 Sept. 1868 For even though by an
unconscious desire and longing have a certain relationship with the Mystical
Body of the Redeemer, they still remain deprived of those many heavenly gifts
and helps which can only be enjoyed in the Catholic Church. As indicated above,
the Catholic Church rejects both Feeneyism and (by stating that "they could not
be saved who, knowing that the Catholic Church was founded as necessary by God
through Christ, would refuse either to enter it or to remain in it") the
contrary notion that one can be saved while knowingly and deliberately
rejecting the Catholic Church. Certain Traditionalists contend that the
statement of Pius IX above from Quanto conficiamur moerore does not deny the
need to know and hold the Catholic faith The phrase of Pius IX in Quanto
conficamur moerore, "effiacious virtue of divine light and grace", is vague and
could simply mean that God would bring unbelievers explicitly to the gospel at
some later point in their lives. The modern Catholic Church holds that, among
those who "do not profess the Catholic faith in its entirety or have not
preserved unity or communion under the successor of Peter… those who believe
in Christ and have been properly baptized are put in a certain, although
imperfect, communion with the Catholic Church" and that "(t)hose who have not
yet received the Gospel are related to the People of God in various ways"
("Catechism of the Catholic Church", 838-839). But even in spite of them it
remains true that all who have been justified by faith in Baptism are members
of Christ's body, and have a right to be called Christian, and so are correctly
accepted as brothers by the children of the Catholic Church. Moreover, some and
even very many of the significant elements and endowments which together go to
build up and give life to the Church itself, can exist outside the visible
boundaries of the Catholic Church: the written word of God; the life of grace;
faith, hope and charity, with the other interior gifts of the Holy Spirit, and
visible elements too. All of these, which come from Christ and lead back to
Christ, belong by right to the one Church of Christ. The brethren divided from
us also use many liturgical actions of the Christian religion. These most
certainly can truly engender a life of grace in ways that vary according to the
condition of each Church or Community. These liturgical actions must be
regarded as capable of giving access to the community of salvation. It follows
that the separated Churches and Communities as such, though we believe them to
be deficient in some respects, have been by no means deprived of significance
and importance in the mystery of salvation. For the Spirit of Christ has not
refrained from using them as instruments of salvation which derive their
efficacy from the very fullness of grace and truth entrusted to the Church.
Nevertheless, our separated brethren, whether considered as individuals or as
communities and Churches, are not blessed with that unity which Jesus Christ
wished to bestow on all those to whom He has given new birth into one body, and
whom He has quickened to newness of life - that unity which the Holy Scriptures
and the ancient Tradition of the Church proclaim. For it is through Christ's
Catholic Church alone, which is the universal help towards salvation, that the
fullness of the means of salvation can be obtained. It was to the apostolic
college alone, of which Peter is the head, that we believe that our Lord
entrusted all the blessings of the New Covenant, in order to establish on earth
the one body of Christ into which all those must be fully incorporated who
belong in any way to the people of God… All men are called to this catholic
unity which prefigures and promotes universal peace. And in different ways to
it belong, or are related: the Catholic faithful, others who believe in Christ,
and finally all mankind, called by God's grace to salvation… Hence to procure
the glory of God and the salvation of all these, the Church, mindful of the
Lord's command, "preach the Gospel to every creature" (Mark 16.16) takes
zealous care to foster the missions. The reason for missionary activity lies in
the will of God, "Who wishes all men to be saved and to come to the knowledge
of the truth. For there is one God and one Mediator between God and men,
Himself a man, Jesus Christ, Who gave himself as a ransom for all" (1 Timothy
2.4-5), "neither is there salvation in any other" (Acts 4.12). Everyone,
therefore, ought to become converted to Christ, who is known through the
preaching of the Church, and they ought, by baptism, to become incorporated
into Him, and into the Church which is His body. Christ Himself explicitly
asserted the necessity of faith and baptism (cf. Mark 16.16, John 3.5), and
thereby affirmed at the same time the necessity of the Church, which men enter
through baptism as through a door. Hence, those cannot be saved, who, knowing
that the Catholic Church was founded through Jesus Christ, by God, as something
necessary, still refuse to enter it, or to remain in it. So, although in ways
known only to Himself, God can lead those who, through no fault of their own,
are ignorant of the Gospel to that faith without which it is impossible to
please Him (Hebrews 11.6), the Church nevertheless, still has the obligation
and sacred right to evangelize. And today, as always, missionary activity
retains its full force and necessity. By means of this activity the mystical
Body of Christ unceasingly gathers and directs its energies towards its own
increase (Ephesians 4:11-16). The members of the Church are impelled to engage
in this activity because of the charity with which they love God and by which
they desire to share with all men in the spiritual goods of this life and the
life to come… Christ is the Truth and the Way which the preaching of the
Gospel lays open to all men when it speaks those words of Christ in their ear:
"Repent, and believe in the Gospel" (Mark 1;15). Since he who does not believe
is already judged (cf. John 3:18), the words of Christ are at once words of
judgement and grace, of life and death. For it is only by putting to death that
which is old that we can come to the newness of life. Now although this refers
primarily to people, it is also true of various worldly goods which bear the
mark both of man's sin and the blessing of God: "For all have sinned and have
need of the glory of God" (Romans 3.23). No one is freed from sin by himself or
by his own efforts, no one is raised above himself or completely delivered from
his own weakness, solitude or slavery; all have need of Christ Who is the
model, master, liberator, savior, and giver of life (cf. Irenaeus, Av. Haer.
3.15.3: "They were preachers of truth and apostles of liberty.") The 2000
declaration "Dominus Iesus" of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith
states that "it must be firmly believed that the Church, a pilgrim now on
earth, is necessary for salvation: the one Christ is the mediator and the way
of salvation; he is present to us in his body which is the Church. He himself
explicitly asserted the necessity of faith and baptism (cf. Mk 16:16; Jn 3:5),
and thereby affirmed at the same time the necessity of the Church which men
enter through baptism as through a door." "Dominus Iesus" then adds that "for
those who are not formally and visibly members of the Church, salvation in
Christ is accessible by virtue of a grace which, while having a mysterious
relationship to the Church, does not make them formally part of the Church, but
enlightens them in a way which is accommodated to their spiritual and material
situation. This grace comes from Christ; it is the result of his sacrifice and
is communicated by the Holy Spirit; it has a relationship with the Church,
which, according to the plan of the Father, has her origin in the mission of
the Son and the Holy Spirit."[http://www.vatican.va/roman_curia/congregations/
cfaith/documents/rc_con_cfaith_doc_20000806_dominus-iesus_en.html] Many
Traditionalists would contend that Church statements since the Second Vatican
Council are a radical departure from what was originally taught by the Catholic
Church. Many of the recent Vatican II Council's statements imply that those who
do not know the gospel and adhere to other religions can be saved without
holding the Catholic faith or religion. The Athanasian Creed, one of the oldest
creeds of the Church confirmed by both the Council of Florence and Pope Gregory
XVI, taught unequivocally that only those who held the Catholic Faith whole and
inviolate could be saved from eternal damnation. The Athanasian Creed states
"whosoever will be saved, above all it is necessary to hold the Catholic faith.
Unless each one holds this faith whole and inviolate, without a doubt he will
perish in eternity." Athanasian Creed The statements of the Church since
Vatican II, traditionalists argue, countermand the original Athanasian Creed by
stating that Protestants, pagans, Muslims, Jews and others who do not hold the
Catholic faith whole and inviolate can still participate in salvation, and have
the grace of faith. Most Holy Family Monastery in Fillmore, New York, and the
Saint Benedict Center in Richmond, New Hampshire argue strenuously for this
position.[http://www.mostholyfamilymonastery.com/
the_catholic_church_salvation_faith_and_baptism.php Inculpable ignorance. In
its statements of this doctrine quoted above, the Church expressly teaches that
"it is necessary to hold for certain that they who labor in ignorance of the
true religion, if this ignorance is invincible, will not be held guilty of this
in the eyes of God" ("Singulari Quadam"), that "outside of the Church, nobody
can hope for life or salvation unless he is excused through ignorance beyond
his control" ("Singulari Quidem"), that "they who labor in invincible ignorance
of our most holy religion and who, zealously keeping the natural law and its
precepts engraved in the hearts of all by God, and being ready to obey God,
live an honest and upright life, can, by the operating power of divine light
and grace, attain eternal life" ("Quanto Conficiamur Moerore"). Inculpable
ignorance is not a "means" of salvation. But if by no fault of the individual
ignorance cannot be overcome (if, that is, it is inculpable and invincible), it
does not prevent the grace that comes from Christ, a grace that has a
relationship with the Church, saving that person. Controversy for the Catholic
Church. Those who disagree with the Church's interpretation of the teaching
"outside the Church there is no salvation" claim that the Church has
contradicted itself in its teachings on faith and morals. They say that the
medieval Church statements indicate that no person could possibly be saved
unless a visible member of the Catholic Church on earth, and that this was the
meaning intended by the Popes of the time, whom they contend made no "lenient
statements" on the matter. However, several Church Fathers did in fact make
exceptions to visible membership, citing for example baptism ex voto, pre-
baptismal martyrdom, although they made it clear that salvation was still
mediated by Christ through the Catholic Church, albeit in an invisible,
extraordinary manner. Still, certain people like Father Leonard Feeney and some
traditionalists believe their understanding of the original doctrine to be
correct and that, if the Church were now to teach that the salvation people
outside formal membership in the Church is possible, it would contradict its
earlier teaching, and would violate the doctrine of the Church's infallibility.
Some sedevacantists hold that the Second Vatican Council did in fact defect
from the Church's infallible teaching, and that what is today generally
recognized as the Catholic Church is a counterfeit, which therefore is not
infallible. Protestant interpretation of the dogma. The Latin phrase's
antiquity has assured its continuance even within the Protestant tradition.
Martin Luther, the foremost leader of the reformation, spoke of the necessity
of belonging to the church (albeit in the sense of perceived "company of
believing people" in Protestantism, not the Roman Catholic Church) in order to
be saved:"Sermon for the Early Christmas Service"; Luke 2:15-20 (1521-1522).
"Luther's Works", American Ed., Hans J. Hillerbrand, Helmut T. Lehmann ed.,
Philadelphia, Concordia Publishing House/Fortress Press, 1974, ISBN 0-8006-
0352-4 (Sermons II), vol. 52:39-40 The Genevan reformer John Calvin, writing
his Institutes of the Christian Religion at the very time of the Reformation,
wrote therein "beyond the pale of the Church no forgiveness of sins, no
salvation, can be hoped for". Calvin wrote also that "those to whom he is a
Father, the Church must also be a mother," echoing the words of the originator
of the Latin phrase himself, Cyprian: "He can no longer have God for his Father
who has not the Church for his mother." The mother of Philip Melanchthon had
followed her son in the Protestant Reformation. Dying, she adjured him to tell
her unreservedly in which faith she should die. He answered: "My mother, the
new faith is the most convenient; the other is most secure." The idea is
further affirmed in the Westminster Confession of Faith of 1647 that "the
visible Church . . . is the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus Christ, the house and
family of God, out of which there is no ordinary possibility of salvation."
Despite this, it is not necessarily a commonly held belief within modern
Protestantism, especially Evangelicalism and those denominations which believe
in the autonomy of the local church. The dogma is related to the universal
Protestant dogma that the church is the body of all believers and debates
within Protestantism usually centre on the meaning of "church" ("ecclesiam")
and "apart" ("extra"). See "Sola Ecclesia" for a Calvinist exposition of "extra
ecclesiam nulla salus".
