Faith Depending on the religion, faith is belief in a god or gods or in the
doctrines or teachings of the religion. Informal usage of faith can be quite
broad, including trust or belief without proof, and "faith" is often used as a
substitute for "hope", "trust" or "belief". Some critics of faith have argued
that faith is opposed to reason. In contrast, some advocates of faith argue
that the proper domain of faith concerns questions which cannot be settled by
evidence. This is exemplified by attitudes about the future, which (by
definition) has not yet occurred. Etymology. The English word is thought to
date from 1200–50, from the Middle English "feith", via Anglo-French "fed",
Old French "feid", "feit" from Latin "fidem", accusative of "fidēs" (trust),
akin to "fīdere" (to trust). Epistemological validity of faith. There is a
wide spectrum of opinion with respect to the epistemological validity of faith.
On one extreme is logical positivism, which denies the validity of any beliefs
held by faith; on the other extreme is fideism, which holds that true belief
can only arise from faith, because reason and physical evidence cannot lead to
truth. Some foundationalists, such as St. Augustine of Hippo and Alvin
Plantinga, hold that all of our beliefs rest ultimately on beliefs accepted by
faith. Others, such as C.S. Lewis, hold that faith is merely the virtue by
which we hold to our reasoned ideas, despite moods to the contrary. William
James believed that the varieties of religious experiences should be sought by
psychologists, because they represent the closest thing to a microscope of the
mind—that is, they show us in drastically enlarged form the normal processes
of things. For a useful interpretation of human reality, to share faith
experience he said that we must each make certain "over-beliefs" in things
which, while they cannot be proven on the basis of experience, help us to live
fuller and better lives. Fideism. Fideism is not a synonym for religious
belief, but describes a particular philosophical proposition in regard to the
relationship between faith's appropriate jurisdiction at arriving at truths,
contrasted against reason. It states that faith is needed to determine some
philosophical and religious truths, and it questions the ability of reason to
arrive at all truth. The word and concept had its origin in the mid- to late-
19th century by way of Catholic thought, in a movement called Traditionalism.
The Roman Catholic Magisterium has, however, repeatedly condemned fideism.
Faith in world religions. Bahá'í Faith. In the Bahá'í Faith, faith is
ultimately the acceptance of the divine authority of the Manifestations of God.
In the religion's view, faith and knowledge are both required for spiritual
growth. Faith involves more than outward obedience to this authority, but also
must be based on a deep personal understanding of religious teachings.Baha'i
World Faith - Abdu'l-Baha Section, p. 383 Buddhism. While faith in Buddhism
does not imply "blind faith", Buddhist faith nevertheless requires a degree of
faith and belief, primarily in the spiritual attainment of Gautama Buddha.
Faith in Buddhism centers on the understanding that the Buddha is an Awakened
being, on his superior role as teacher, in the truth of his Dharma (spiritual
teachings), and in his Sangha (community of spiritually developed followers).
Faith in Buddhism can be summarised as faith in the Three Jewels: the Buddha,
Dharma and Sangha. It is intended to lead to the goal of enlightenment, or
bodhi, and Nirvana. Volitionally, faith implies a resolute and courageous act
of will. It combines the steadfast resolution that one will do a thing with the
self-confidence that one can do it. As a counter to any form of "blind faith",
the Buddha's teachings included those included in the Kalama Sutra, exhorting
his disciples to investigate any teaching and to live by what is learnt and
accepted, rather than believing in something simply because it is taught.
Christianity. Faith in Christianity is based on the work and teachings of Jesus
Christ. Christianity declares not to be distinguished by faith, but by the
object of its faith. Rather than being passive, faith leads to an active life
aligned with the ideals and the example of the life of Jesus. It sees the
mystery of God and his grace and seeks to know and become obedient to God. To a
Christian, faith is not static but causes one to learn more of God and grow,
and has its origin in God. In Christianity, faith causes change as it seeks a
greater understanding of God. Faith is not fideism or simple obedience to a set
of rules or statements. Before the Christian has faith, they must understand in
whom and in what they have faith. Without understanding, there cannot be true
faith and that understanding is built on the foundation of the community of
believers, the scriptures and traditions and on the personal experiences of the
believer. In English translations of the New Testament, the word faith
generally corresponds to the Greek noun πίστις ("pistis") or the Greek
verb πιστεύω ("pisteuo"), meaning "to trust, to have confidence,
faithfulness, to be reliable, to assure". The Bible says that faith is "the
substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen." Hinduism.
"Śrāddha" (ITRANS: shraddhA) is translated as faith in Sanskrit. All schools
of Hindu philosophy posit that consciousness ("ātman") is distinct and
independent from mind and matter ("prakṛti"). Therefore, Hindu faith is based
on the premise that logic and reason are not conclusive methods of epistemic
knowing. Spiritual practice ("sadhana") is performed with the faith that
knowledge beyond the mind and sense perception will be revealed to the
practitioner. The schools of Hindu philosophy differ in their recommended
methods to cultivate faith, including selfless action ("karma-yoga"),
renunciation ("jnana-yoga") and devotion ("bhakti-yoga"). In chapter 17 of the
Bhagavad Gita, Krishna describes how faith, influenced by the three modes
("guṇa"s) lead to different approaches in worship, diet, sacrifice, austerity
and charity. Tripurari, Swami, "On Faith and Reason", The Harmonist, May 27,
2009. Islam. In Islam, faith ("iman") is complete submission to the will of
God, which includes belief, profession and the body's performance of deeds,
consistent with the commission as vicegerent on Earth, all according to God's
will. In the Qur'an, it is stated that (2:62): "Surely, those who believe,
those who are Muslims, Jewish, the Christians, and the Sabians; anyone who (1)
believes in GOD, and (2) believes in the Last Day, and (3) leads a righteous
life, will receive their recompense from their Lord. They have nothing to fear,
nor will they grieve." Judaism. Faith itself is not a religious concept in
Judaism. Although Judaism does recognize the positive value of "Emunah"
(generally translated as faith, trust in God) and the negative status of the
"Apikorus" (heretic), faith is not as stressed or as central as it is in other
religions, especially as it is in the faith-possessed Christendom. It could be
a necessary means for being a practicing religious Jew, but the emphasis is
placed on practice rather than on faith itself. Very rarely does it relate to
any teaching that must be believed. Classical Judaism does not require one to
explicitly identify God (a key tenet of faith in Christianity), but rather to
honour the idea of God. In the Jewish scriptures trust in God - Emunah - refers
to how God acts toward his people and how they are to respond to him; it is
rooted in the everlasting covenant established in the Torah, notably
Deuteronomy 7:9 (The Torah - A Modern Commentary; Union of American Hebrew
Congregations, NY 1981 by W. G. Plaut)"Know, therefore, that only the LORD your
God is God, the steadfast God who keeps His gracious covenant to the thousandth
generation of those who love Him and keep His commandments" The specific tenets
that compose required belief and their application to the times have been
disputed throughout Jewish history. Today many, but not all, Orthodox Jews have
accepted Maimonides' Thirteen Principles of Belief. For a wide history of this
dispute see: Shapiro, Marc: "The Limits of Orthodox Theology: Maimonides'
Thirteen Principles Reappraised" (Littman Library of Jewish Civilization
(Series).) A traditional example of Emunah as seen in the Jewish annals is
found in the person of Abraham. On a number of occasions, Abraham both accepts
statements from God that seem impossible and offers obedient actions in
response to direction from God to do things that seem implausible (see Genesis
12-15). "The Talmud describes how a thief also believes in G‑d: On the brink
of his forced entry, as he is about to risk his life—and the life of his
victim—he cries out with all sincerity, 'G‑d help me!' The thief has faith
that there is a G‑d who hears his cries, yet it escapes him that this G‑d
may be able to provide for him without requiring that he abrogate G‑d’s
will by stealing from others. For emunah to affect him in this way he needs
study and contemplation." Sikh. Sikhism, the fifth-largest organized religion
in the world, was founded in 15th-century Punjab on the teachings of Guru Nanak
Dev and ten successive Sikh gurus, the last one being the sacred text Guru
Granth Sahib. The core philosophy of the Sikh religion is described in the
beginning hymn of the Guru Granth Sahib, Guru Nanak, the founder of the faith,
summed up the basis of Sikh lifestyle in three requirements: "Nām Japō"
(meditate on the holy name (Waheguru), "Kirat karō" (work diligently and
honestly) and "Vaṇḍ chakkō" (share one's fruits). Faith in other spiritual
traditions. Meher Baba. Baba, Meher: "Discourses", Volume Three, Sufism
Reoriented, 1967, pp. 132-133. Support. Religious epistemologists have
formulated and defended reasons for the rationality of accepting belief in God
without the support of an argument. Some religious epistemologists hold that
belief in God is more analogous to belief in a person than belief in a
scientific hypothesis. Human relations demand trust and commitment. If belief
in God is more like belief in other persons, then the trust that is appropriate
to persons will be appropriate to God. American psychologist and philosopher
William James offers a similar argument in his lecture "The Will to Believe."
Foundationalism is a view about the structure of justification or knowledge.
Foundationalism holds that all knowledge and justified belief are ultimately
based upon what are called properly basic beliefs. This position is intended to
resolve the infinite regress problem in epistemology. According to
foundationalism, a belief is epistemically justified only if it is justified by
properly basic beliefs. One of the significant developments in foundationalism
is the rise of reformed epistemology. Reformed epistemology is a view about the
epistemology of religious belief, which holds that belief in God can be
properly basic. Analytic philosophers Alvin Plantinga and Nicholas Wolterstorff
develop this view. Plantinga holds that an individual may rationally believe in
God even though the individual does not possess sufficient evidence to convince
an agnostic. One difference between reformed epistemology and fideism is that
the former requires defence against known objections, whereas the latter might
dismiss such objections as irrelevant. Plantinga has developed reformed
epistemology in "Warranted Christian Belief" as a form of externalism that
holds that the justification conferring factors for a belief may include
external factors. Some theistic philosophers have defended theism by granting
evidentialism but supporting theism through deductive arguments whose premises
are considered justifiable. Some of these arguments are probabilistic, either
in the sense of having weight but being inconclusive, or in the sense of having
a mathematical probability assigned to them. Notable in this regard are the
cumulative arguments presented by British philosopher Basil Mitchell and
analytic philosopher Richard Swinburne, whose arguments are based on Bayesian
probability. In a notable exposition of his arguments, Swinburne appeals to an
inference for the best explanation. Criticism. Some critics argue that
religious faith is irrational and see faith as ignorance of reality: a strong
belief in something with no evidence and sometimes a strong belief in something
even with evidence against it. Bertrand Russell noted, "Where there is
evidence, no one speaks of 'faith'. We do not speak of faith that two and two
are four or that the earth is round. We only speak of faith when we wish to
substitute emotion for evidence." In the rationalist view, belief should be
restricted to direct observation in the past and present. Evolutionary
biologist Richard Dawkins criticizes all faith by generalizing from specific
faith in propositions that conflict directly with scientific evidence. He
describes faith as mere belief without evidence; a process of active non-
thinking. He states that it is a practice that only degrades our understanding
of the natural world by allowing anyone to make a claim about nature that is
based solely on their personal thoughts, and possibly distorted perceptions,
that does not require testing against nature, has no ability to make reliable
and consistent predictions, and is not subject to peer review.
