Fall of man In Christian doctrine, the fall of man, or simply the fall, was the
transition of the first humans from a state of innocent obedience to God to a
state of guilty disobedience to God. Though not named in the Bible, the concept
for the Fall comes from Genesis chapter 3. Adam and Eve live at first with God
in a paradise, but the serpent tempts them into eating the fruit from the tree
of knowledge of good and evil, which God forbade. After doing so they become
ashamed of their nakedness and God consequently expelled them from paradise.
The Fall is a story of disobedience and expulsion and is referred to in both
Testaments. Many Christian denominations believe that the fall corrupted the
entire natural world, including human nature, causing people to be born into
original sin, a state from which they cannot attain eternal life without the
gracious intervention of God. Protestants hold that Jesus gave his life as a
sacrifice for the elect, so they may be redeemed from their sin, both actual
and original. In other religions, such as Judaism, Islam, and Gnosticism, the
term "the fall" is not recognised and varying interpretations of the Eden
narrative are presented. The term "" refers to the sin-free state of humanity
prior to the fall. Origins. Genesis 3. The concept for the "fall of man" is
extrapolated from Christian exegesis of Genesis 3. According to the narrative,
God creates Adam and Eve, the first man and woman, in His own image. God places
them in the Garden of Eden and forbids them to eat fruit from the "tree of
knowledge of good and evil" (often symbolised in European art and literature as
an apple tree). The serpent tempts Eve to eat fruit from the forbidden tree.
Eve shares the fruit with Adam and they immediately become ashamed of their
nakedness. Subsequently, God banishes Adam and Eve from the Garden of Eden, and
places cherubim to guard the entrance, so that Adam and Eve will not eat from
the Tree of Life. Babylonian legend. The cylinder seal, known as the Temptation
seal from post-Akkadian periods in Mesopotamia (c. 23–22 Century BCE), has
been linked to the Adam and Eve story. Assyriologist George Smith (1840–1876)
describes the seal as having two figures (male and female) on each side of a
tree, holding out their hands to the fruit, while at the back of one is a
serpent, giving evidence that the "Fall of man" legend was known in early times
of Babylonia. Interpretations. Immortality. According to the Genesis narrative,
during the Antediluvian age, human longevity has been less than a millennium.
Such as the case of Adam who lives 930 years. Christian exegetes of Genesis 2:
9, "On the day that you eat of it, you will die", have applied the Day-year
principle to explain how Adam died within a "day". Given these conditions, it
has led some to believe that God may have intended for Adam and Eve to be
immortal. Thus, to "die" has been interpreted as "to become mortal". Original
sin. Catholic exegesis of Genesis 3 affirms that the "fall of man" was a
primeval event, where the crime took place at the beginning of the history of
man." This first sin was "transmitted" by Adam and Eve to all of their
descendants as original sin, causing humans to be "subject to ignorance,
suffering and the dominion of death, and inclined to sin." Baptism is
considered to erase original sin, though the effects on human nature remain,
and for this reason the Catholic Church baptizes even infants who have not
committed any personal sin. Although the state of corruption, inherited by
humans after the primeval event of Original Sin, is clearly called guilt or
sin, it is understood as a sin acquired by the unity of all humans in Adam
rather than a personal responsibility by mankind. Even children partake in the
guilt or sin of Adam, but not in the responsibility of Original Sin, as sin is
always a personal act. The Eastern Orthodoxy rejects the idea that the guilt of
original sin is passed down through generations. It bases its teaching in part
on a passage in Exodus saying a son is not guilty of the sins of his father.
The Church teaches that in addition to their conscience and tendency to do
good, men and women are born with a tendency to sin due to the fallen condition
of the world. It follows Maximus the Confessor and others in characterising the
change in human nature as the introduction of a "deliberative will"
(θέλημα γνωμικόν) in opposition to the "natural will"
(θέλημα φυσικόν) created by God which tends toward the good. Thus
according to St Paul in his epistle to the Romans, non-Christians can still act
according to their conscience. Nonetheless, as a consequence of Adam's sin,
seen merely as the prototype (since human nature has been degraded) of all
future sinners, each of whom, in repeating Adam’s sin, bears responsibility
only for his own sins, humans became mortal. Adam's sin isn't comprehended only
as disobedience to God's commandment, but as a change in man's hierarchy of
values from theocentricism to anthropocentrism, driven by the object of his
lust, outside of God, in this case the tree which was seen to be "good for
food", and something "to be desired" (see also theosis, seeking union with
God).
