Fallen angel Fallen angel is a concept that is typically synonymous with a
wicked or rebellious angel. As the actual term "fallen angel" is not found in
either the Hebrew Bible or the Deuterocanonical Books or the New Testament,
biblical commentators use this term to describe angels who sinned or angels
cast down to the earth from the War in Heaven, Satan, demons, or certain
Watchers. Fallen angels. Watchers. A Jewish myth of angels coming down to earth
rather than being cast down, referred to as the myth of angelic descent, is
found chiefly in the Jewish pseudepigraphic "Book of Enoch", 6-9 and the Qumran
"Book of Giants" and perhaps in . The angels in question were Watchers who were
inveigled by the beauty of human women, had intercourse with them and corrupted
mankind. They were the prime instigators of the sinfulness that led to the
"Great Deluge". This myth was adopted by early Christianity, but abandoned by
Rabbinic Judaism and later Christianity. During the period immediately before
the rise of Christianity, the intercourse between these Watchers and human
women was often seen as the first fall of the angels. Sons of God. In the
period immediately preceding the composition of the New Testament, some sects
of Judaism identified the "sons of God" (◊ë◊ ◊ô ◊î◊ê◊ú◊î◊ô◊ù) of with fallen
angels. Some scholars consider it most likely that this Jewish tradition of
fallen angels predates, even in written form, the composition of Gen 6:1-4.
Lester L. Grabbe calls the story of the sexual intercourse of angels with women
"an old myth in Judaism". Indeed, until the mid-2nd century AD, Jewish writing
(such as midrashim) can be taken to identify the "sons of God" of Gen 6:1 and 4
as angels. By the 3rd century, there is evidence that some early Christians
accepted this Jewish Enochic pseudepigraphy and the application of the angelic
descent myth to the "sons of God" passage in , Its presence not only in the
East but also in the Latin-speaking West is attested by the polemic of
Augustine of Hippo (354‚Äì430) against the motif of giants born of the union
between fallen angels and human women. Rabbinic Judaism and Christian
authorities rejected the tradition. Those who adopted the tradition viewed the
"sons of God" as fallen angels who married human women and by unnatural union
begot the Nephilim. Grigori. The Second Book of Enoch refers to "the Grigori,
who with their prince Satanail rejected the Lord of light". The Grigori are
identified with the Watchers of 1 Enoch. The Grigori who "went down on to earth
from the Lord's throne", married women and "befouled the earth with their
deeds", resulting in confinement under earth (2 Enoch 18:1-7) In the longer
recension of 2 Enoch, chapter 29 refers to angels who were "thrown out from the
height" when their leader tried to become equal in rank with the Lord's power
(2 Enoch 29:1-4). Most sources quote 2 Enoch as stating that those who
descended to earth were three, but Andrei A. Orlov, while quoting 2 Enoch as
saying that "three" went down to the earth, remarks in a footnote that some
manuscripts put them at 200 or even 200 myriads. In "The Old Testament
Pseudepigrapha: Apocalypic Literature and Testaments" edited by James H.
Charlesworth, manuscript J, taken as the best representative of the longer
recension, has "and "three of them" descended" (p.¬ 130), while manuscript A,
taken as the best representative of the shorter recension, has "and "they"
descended", which might indicate that all the Grigori descended, or 200 princes
of them, or 200 princes and 200 followers, since it follows the phrase "These
are the Grigori, 200 princes of whom turned aside, 200 walking in their train"
(p.¬ 131). Chapter 29, referring to the second day of creation, before the
creation of human beings, says that "one from out the order of angels" or,
according to other versions of 2 Enoch, "one of the order of archangels" or
"one of the ranks of the archangels" "conceived an impossible thought, to place
his throne higher than the clouds above the earth, that he might become equal
in rank to Lord's power. And Lord threw him out from the height with his
angels, and he was flying in the air continuously above the bottomless." In
this chapter the name "Satanail" is mentioned only in a heading added in a
single manuscript, the "GIM khlyudov" manuscript, which is a representative of
the longer recension and was used in the English translation by R.H. Charles.
Fall of Satan. Satan, presented in the Hebrew Bible as subordinate to God's
designs, is pictured in Jewish pseudepigrapha as a chief evil figure opposed to
God, as ruler of demons and from 2 Enoch as a fallen angel cast out of heaven.
In Christianity also Satan, though capable of disguising himself as an "angel
of light" (), is the leader of the fallen angels. The New Testament mentions
Satan 36 times in 33 verses, and the Book of Revelation tells of "that ancient
serpent, who is called the devil and Satan, the deceiver of the whole world,"
being thrown down to the earth together with his angels. has Jesus say: "I saw
Satan fall like lightning from heaven", a phrase that, according to Ben
Witherington, can mean either "fall from heaven, like lightning" or "fall, like
lightning from heaven". A dragon and his angels. In the New Testament, speaks
of a great red dragon whose tail swept a third part of the stars of heaven and
cast them to the earth. In verses 7-9, after defeat in a War in Heaven in which
the dragon and his angels fought against Michael and his angels, "the great
dragon was thrown down, that ancient serpent, who is called the devil and
Satan, the deceiver of the whole world - he was thrown down to the earth, and
his angels were thrown down with him." Thus, amongst Christians, fallen angels
have been associated with the term ‚Äúcast out‚Äù. Fall of Lucifer. The "fall
of Lucifer" finds its earliest identification with a fallen angel in Origen,
based on an interpretation of , which describes a king of Babylon as a fallen
"morning star" (in Hebrew, ◊î◊ô◊ú◊ú ). When this description was interpreted as
regarding an angel, not a human king, the image of the fallen morning star or
angel was applied to Satan both in Jewish pseudepigrapha and by early Christian
writers, following the transfer of the Lucifer myth to Satan in the pre-
Christian century. Origen and other Christian writers linked the fallen morning
star of Isaiah 14:12 to Jesus' statement in , "I saw Satan fall like lightning
from heaven" and to the mention of a fall of Satan in . In Latin-speaking
Christianity, the Latin word "lucifer", employed in the late 4th-century AD
Vulgate to translate ◊î◊ô◊ú◊ú, gave rise to the name "Lucifer" for the angel
believed to be referred to in the text. Religious views. Judaism. The concept
of fallen angels is first found in Judaism among texts of the Second Temple
era, being applied in particular to Azazel and Satan. However, from the Middle
Ages certain Jewish scholars, both rationalist and traditionalist, rejected
belief in rebel or fallen angels, since they considered evil as simply the
absence of good or at least as not absolute. Christianity. Christians adopted
the concept of fallen angels mainly based on their interpretations of the Book
of Revelation Chapter 12. In Catholicism, the Catechism of the Catholic Church
speaks of "the fall of the angels" not in spatial terms but as a radical and
irrevocable rejection of God and his reign by some angels who, though created
as good beings, freely chose evil, their sin being unforgivable because of the
irrevocable character of their choice, not because of any defect in the
infinite divine mercy. In 19th-century Universalism, Universalists such as
Thomas Allin (1891) claimed that Clement of Alexandria, Origen and Gregory of
Nyssa taught that even the Devil and fallen angels will eventually be saved. In
Unitarianism, Joseph Priestley suggested that the passages refer to Korah.
William Graham (1772) suggested that it referred to the spies in Canaan. These
passages are generally held today to be commentary, either positive or neutral
or negative, on Jewish traditions concerning Enoch circulating in the Early
Church. Islam. The Quran mentions angels ("malak" ŸÖŸÑÿßŸÉ) around ninety
times, usually in the plural and referring to obedient angels. The Quran states
that Satan was a jinn (as in Islam, angels cannot disobey Allah) and also he is
mentioned with the angels in verses (2:34, 7:11, 15:29, 17:61, 18:50, 20:116,
38:71) prior to his fall. Satan (also called "Iblis" from Greek "diabolos",
"the devil") rebelled and was banished on earth, and he vowed to create
mischief on earth after being given respite by Allah till the Day of Judgment,
according to verses (80-85:38). In Islamic terminology, jinns, like humans,
have the capacity to choose whether to obey Allah or disobey him, which means
they have free will. Harut and Marut (Arabic: Ÿáÿßÿ±Ÿàÿ™ ŸàŸÖÿßÿ±Ÿàÿ™) are two
angels sent to test the people of Babylon. That there are fallen angels is not
in the Quran and the Quran explicitly states angels have no free will, but are
like appendages of Allah. But, it is said Allah gave free will to those two
angels for 2 months to show them why human beings are superior creatures, and
then they were taken back to the heavens. In the meantime, they taught some
spiritual things and magic to human beings.(Quran 2:30) Influence. In
literature, John Milton's "Paradise Lost" (7.131-134, etc.), refers to Satan as
being "brighter once amidst the host of Angels, than the sun amidst the stars."
