Lemuria (festival) The Lemuralia or Lemuria was a feast in the religion of
ancient Rome during which the Romans performed rites to exorcise the malevolent
and fearful ghosts of the dead from their homes. The unwholesome spectres of
the restless dead, the "lemures" or "larvae" were propitiated with offerings of
beans. On those days, the Vestals would prepare sacred "mola salsa", a salted
flour cake, from the first ears of wheat of the season. In the Julian calendar
the three days of the feast were 9, 11, and 13 May. The myth of origin of this
ancient festival, according to Ovid, who derives "Lemuria" from a supposed
"Remuria" was that it had been instituted by Romulus to appease the spirit of
Remus (Ovid, "Fasti", V.421ff; Porphyrius ). Ovid notes that at this festival
it was the custom to appease or expel the evil spirits by walking barefoot and
throwing black beans over the shoulder at night. It was the head of the
household who was responsible for getting up at midnight and walking around the
house with bare feet throwing out black beans and repeating the incantation, "I
send these; with these beans I redeem me and mine ("haec ego mitto; his redimo
meque meosque fabis.")." nine times. The household would then clash bronze pots
while repeating, "Ghosts of my fathers and ancestors, be gone!" nine times.
Because of this annual exorcism of the noxious spirits of the dead, the whole
month of May was rendered unlucky for marriages, whence the proverb "Mense Maio
malae nubent" ("They wed ill who wed in May"). On what had been the culminating
day of the "Lemuralia", May 13 in 609 or 610— the day being recorded as more
significant than the year—, Pope Boniface IV consecrated the Pantheon at Rome
to the Blessed Virgin and "all the martyrs", and the feast of that "dedicatio
Sanctae Mariae ad Martyres" has been celebrated at Rome ever since. According
to cultural historians, this ancient custom was Christianized in the feast of
All Saints' Day, established in Rome first on May 13, in order to de-paganize
the Roman "Lemuria", while others see a link to the May 13 date in Saint
Ephrem's celebration of All Saints on that day in the 4th century.
