Fetishism A fetish (derived from the French "fétiche"; which comes from the
Portuguese "feitiço"; and this in turn from Latin "facticius", "artificial"
and "facere", "to make") is an object believed to have supernatural powers, or
in particular, a man-made object that has power over others. Essentially,
fetishism is the emic attribution of inherent value or powers to an object.
History. Initially, the Portuguese developed the concept of fetishism to refer
to the objects used in religious cults by West African natives. The concept was
popularized in Europe circa 1757, when Charles de Brosses used it in comparing
West African religion to the magical aspects of ancient Egyptian religion.
Later, Auguste Comte employed the concept in his theory of the evolution of
religion, wherein he posited fetishism as the earliest (most primitive) stage,
followed by polytheism and monotheism. That said, ethnography and anthropology
would nonetheless classify some artifacts of monotheistic religions as
fetishes. For example, the Holy Cross and the consecrated host or tokens of
communion found in some forms of Christianity (a monotheistic religion), are
here regarded as examples of fetishism. In the 19th and 20th centuries, Tylor
and McLennan, historians of religion, held that the concept of fetishism
fostered a shift of attention away from the relationship between people and
God, to focus instead on a relationship between people and material objects,
and that this, in turn, allowed for the establishment of false models of
causality for natural events. This they saw as a central problem historically
and sociologically. In 1927, Sigmund Freud published his essay on "Fetishism,"
in which he writes that the meaning and purpose of the fetish turns out,
through analysis, to always be the same: "the fetish is a substitute for the
penis...for a particular and quite special penis that had been extremely
important in early childhood but had later been lost." In refusing to see his
mother's lack of penis, the boy disavows (German: Verleugnung, not repression:
Verdrängung) what he sees, resulting in both a belief and a non-belief in the
woman's phallus. This compromise (produced by the conflict between perception
and the counter-wish) results in a substitute (the fetish). "It remains a token
of triumph over the threat of castration and a protection against it."
Practice. Theoretically, fetishism is present in all religions, but the use of
the concept in the study of religion derives from studies of traditional West
African religious beliefs, as well as from Voodoo, which in turn derives from
those beliefs. Blood is often included as a particularly powerful fetish or
ingredient in fetishes. In addition to blood, other objects and substances,
such as bones, fur, claws, feathers, gemstones and crystals, water from certain
places, certain types of plants and wood are common fetishes in the traditions
of cultures worldwide. Fetishes were commonly used in Native American religion
and practices. The bear represented the shaman, the buffalo was the provider,
the mountain lion was the warrior, and the wolf was the pathfinder. Secular
fetishism. The 19th century saw the introduction of two theories of fetishism
outside what was typically considered religion. The first was Karl Marx's idea
of commodity fetishism, in which objects are imagined to dictate the social
activities that produce them. The second was Alfred Binet's term sexual
fetishism, the sexual attachment to an object in place of a person. Scholars
have continued to develop these theories ever since, and they have influenced
anthropologists' understanding of fetishism in general.
