Fideism Fideism is an epistemological theory which maintains that faith is
independent of reason, or that reason and faith are hostile to each other and
faith is superior at arriving at particular truths (see natural theology). The
word "fideism" comes from "fides", the Latin word for faith, and literally
means "faith-ism." Theologians and philosophers have responded in various ways
to the place of faith and reason in determining the truth of metaphysical
ideas, morality, and religious beliefs. The term fideist, one who argues for
fideism, is very rarely self-applied. Support of fideism is most commonly
ascribed to five philosophers: Montaigne, Pascal, Kierkegaard, William James,
and Wittgenstein; with fideism being a label applied in a negative sense by
their opponents, but which is not supported by their own ideas and works or
followers. There are a number of different forms of fideism. Overview. Alvin
Plantinga defines "fideism" as "the exclusive or basic reliance upon faith
alone, accompanied by a consequent disparagement of reason and utilized
especially in the pursuit of philosophical or religious truth." The fideist
therefore "urges reliance on faith rather than reason, in matters philosophical
and religious," and therefore may go on to disparage the claims of reason. The
fideist seeks truth, above all: and affirms that reason cannot achieve certain
kinds of truth, which must instead be accepted only by faith. Plantinga's
definition might be revised to say that what the fideist objects to is not so
much "reason" per se ‚Äî it seems excessive to call Blaise Pascal anti-rational
‚Äî but "evidentialism": the notion that no belief should be held unless it is
supported by evidence. Theories of truth. Some forms of fideism outright reject
the correspondence theory of truth, which has major philosophical implications.
Some only claim a few religious details to be axiomatic. Tertullian - "I
believe because it is absurd". The statement ""Credo quia absurdum"" ("I
believe because it is absurd"), often attributed to Tertullian, is sometimes
cited as an example of such a view in the Church Fathers, but this appears to
be a misquotation from Tertullian's "De Carne Christi" (On the Flesh of
Christ]). What he actually says in DCC 5 is "... the Son of God died; it is by
all means to be believed, because it is absurd." This, however, is not a
statement of a fideist position; rather, it is rendered somewhat plausible by
the context‚Äîthat Tertullian was simply engaging in ironic overstatement. As a
matter of fact, this work used an argument from Aristotle's rhetoric saying
that if a man in whom you have trust tells you about a miraculous event he
witnessed, you can allow yourself to consider that he may be saying the truth
despite the fact that the event is very unlikely. Blaise Pascal and fideism.
Pascal moreover contests the various proposed proofs of the existence of God as
irrelevant. Even if the proofs were valid, the beings they propose to
demonstrate are not congruent with the deity worshiped by historical faiths,
and can easily lead to deism instead of revealed religion: "The God of Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob ‚Äî not the god of the philosophers!" Hamann and fideism.
Considered to be the father of modern irrationalism, Johann Georg Hamann
promoted a view that elevated faith alone was the only guide to human conduct.
Using the work of David Hume he argued that everything people do is ultimately
based on faith. Without faith (for it can never be proven) in the existence of
an external world, human affairs could not continue; therefore, he argued, all
reasoning comes from this faith: it is fundamental to the human condition. Thus
all attempts to base belief in God using Reason are in vain. He virulently
attacks systems like Spinozism that try to confine what he feels is the
infinite majesty of God into a finite human creation. There is only one path to
God, that of a childlike faith not Reason. Kierkegaard. A fideist position of
this general sort ‚Äî that God's existence cannot be certainly known, and that
the decision to accept faith is neither founded on, nor needs, rational
justification ‚Äî may be found in the writings of S√∏ren Kierkegaard and his
followers in Christian existentialism. Many of Kierkegaard's works, including
"Fear and Trembling", are under pseudonyms; they may represent the work of
fictional authors whose views correspond to hypothetical positions, not
necessarily those held by Kierkegaard himself. In "Fear and Trembling",
Kierkegaard focused on Abraham's willingness to sacrifice Isaac. The New
Testament apostles repeatedly argued that Abraham's act was an admirable
display of faith. To the eyes of a non-believer, however, it must necessarily
have appeared to be an unjustifiable attempted murder, perhaps the fruit of an
insane delusion. Kierkegaard used this example to focus attention on the
problem of faith in general. He ultimately affirmed that to believe in the
incarnation of Christ, in God made flesh, was to believe in the "absolute
paradox", since it implies that an eternal, perfect being would become a simple
human. Reason cannot possibly comprehend such a phenomenon; therefore, one can
only believe in it by taking a "leap of faith". Wittgenstein and fideism. The
philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein did not write systematically about religion,
though he did lecture on the topic. Some of his students' notes have been
collected and published. On the other hand, it has been asserted that religion
as a "form of life" is something that intrigued Wittgenstein to a great degree.
In his 1967 article, entitled "Wittgensteinian Fideism," Kai Nielsen argues
that certain aspects of Wittgenstein's thought have been interpreted by
Wittgensteinians in a "fideistic" manner. According to this position, religion
is a self-contained‚Äîand primarily expressive‚Äîenterprise, governed by its
own internal logic or ‚Äúgrammar.‚Äù This view‚Äîcommonly called
Wittgensteinian fideism‚Äîstates: (1) that religion is logically cut off from
other aspects of life; (2) that religious concepts and discourse are
essentially self-referential; and (3) that religion cannot be criticized from
an external (i.e., non-religious) point of view.[http://plato.stanford.edu/
entries/fideism/#2.2] Although there are other aspects that are often
associated with the phenomena of Wittgensteinian fideism, Kai Nielsen has
argued that such interpretations are implausible misrepresentations of the
position. It is worth noting, however, that no self-proclaimed Wittgensteinian
actually takes Nielsen's analysis to be at all representative of either
Wittgenstein's view, or their own. This is especially true of the best-known
Wittgensteinian philosopher of religion, D. Z. Phillips, who is also the best-
known "Wittgensteinan fideist." In their co-written book, "Wittgensteinian
fideism?" (SCM Press, 2005) D. Z. Phillips and Kai Nielsen debate the status of
Wittgensteinian fideism. Both agree that the position "collapses," though they
think it fails for different reasons. For Nielsen, the position is socially and
politically irresponsible since it ignores prudential, practical, and pragmatic
considerations as a basis for criticizing different language games. For
Phillips, the position fails because it is not Wittgensteinian, and thus is a
caricature of his position. Amongst other charges, Nielsen argues, most
forcefully in an article entitled "On Obstacles of the Will," that Phillips'
Wittgensteinian view is relevantly fideistic and that it, therefore, fails on
the grounds that it cannot account for the possibility of external, cultural
criticism. Phillips, in turn, in the last article in the book, entitled
"Wittgenstein: Contemplation and Cultural Criticism," argues that the position
is not Wittgensteinian at all, and that Wittgenstein's considered view not only
allows for the possibility of external, cultural criticism, but also "advances"
philosophical discussion concerning it. Fideism and presuppositional
apologetics. Presuppositional apologetics is a Christian system of apologetics
associated mainly with Calvinist Protestantism; it attempts to distinguish
itself from fideism. It holds that all human thought must begin with the
proposition that the revelation contained in the Bible is axiomatic, rather
than transcendentally necessary, else one would not be able to make sense of
any human experience (see also epistemic foundationalism). To a non-believer
who rejects the notion that the truth about God, the world and themselves can
be found within the Bible, the presuppositional apologist attempts to
demonstrate the incoherence of the epistemic foundations of the logical
alternative by the use of what has come to be known as the "Transcendental
Argument for God's existence" or (TAG). On the other hand, some
presuppositional apologists believe that such a condition of true unbelief is
impossible, claiming that all people actually believe in God (even if only on a
subconscious level), whether they admit or deny it. Presuppositional
apologetics could be seen as being more closely allied with foundationalism
than fideism, though it has sometimes been critical of both. Protestantism.
Martin Luther taught that faith informs the Christian's use of reason.
Regarding the mysteries of Christian faith, he wrote, "All the articles of our
Christian faith, which God has revealed to us in His Word, are in presence of
reason sheerly impossible, absurd, and false." And "Reason is the greatest
enemy that faith has." However, Luther conceded that, grounded upon faith in
Christ, reason can be used in its proper realm, as he wrote, "Before faith and
the knowledge of God reason is darkness in divine matters, but through faith it
is turned into a light in the believer and serves piety as a excellent
instrument. For just as all natural endowments serve to further impiety in the
godless, so they serve to further salvation in the godly. An eloquent tongue
promotes faith; reason makes speech clear, and everything helps faith forward.
Reason receives life from faith; it is killed by it and brought back to life."
Luther's perspective did not last long, though, as the scholasticism Protestant
theology assumed in the 16th century debates to fight Catholicism overwhelmed
the original existential import of Luther's insight, such as the hardening of
the doctrine of justification by faith into harsh theories of moral depravity.
Calvinists, for their part, rejected Luther's Doctrine of the Two Kingdoms in
favor of a more monist conception of God's sovereignty, and thus constructed
metaphysical-like dogmas about subjects like double predestination, buttressing
them with elaborate systems of logic. Apologetics thus became the main
intellectual activity of orthodox Lutherans and Reformed, a situation that
caused grave crises for those churches with the arrival of the Enlightenment.
Reactions to notions that authority and tradition need not necessarily guide
human activity split Protestantism into numerous groups, some of which accepted
the secularist program concerning reason and human capabilities. Meanwhile,
some of the liberal strands within Protestantism developed affinities with
Kantian and Hegelian theories about religion, with their respective
dispositions against the Biblical rendering of God as simultaneously
transcendent and immanent. With the collapse of this tension, philosophical
idealism moved into the vacuum, making claims that the human mind could somehow
appropriate the divine nature. Logic and determinism would, in time, calcify
this movement also, which, unlike the orthodox, abandoned much of its Christian
trappings in favor of an outright human-centered cosmology and ethics. On the
other hand, Calvinist scholasticism, possibly encouraged by the prestige of
science, developed an ever-more elaborate systematic theology that sought to
make a rational, and thus, invulnerable, account of all God's dealings with
humanity. These constructions would provide the intellectual foundation for the
eventual fundamentalist movement in the U.S., and have remained influential to
the present time within those circles. One might sum up those theologians'
attitudes by the concise observation of a modern-day Calvinist thinker, Robert
L. Reymond, when he claims: "Biblical faith is not a leap in the dark; it is
not fideism." The 19th-century Princeton theologian Benjamin B. Warfield says,
"We cannot be said to believe or to trust in a thing or person of which we have
no knowledge; 'implicit faith' in this sense is an absurdity." Reformed
Protestants hold that Biblical faith is based upon the revelation of divine
knowledge. Faith devoid of knowledge is "believing the lie" that "leads to
condemnation" (2 Thessalonians 2:11‚Äì12). To him, Biblical faith wants nothing
to do with a mindless Christianity. Compared to other religions, Christianity
is "preeminently the reasoning religion" ‚Äî the Bible commands people to know
what they must believe in. However, other schools within Protestantism are more
inclined to base their theology upon fideist premises, especially those
descending from thinkers such as Kierkegaard and Karl Barth. Both men
confronted the increasing crisis within Western Civilization in the late 19th
and early 20th centuries and concluded that the various kinds of philosophical
theology, whether liberal or conservative, were handmaidens in the cultural
captivity of the faith, and that the faith had to be liberated from such
shackles. Kierkegaard's espousal of non-rational methods of communicating the
Gospel such as indirect communication and irony and Barth's complete
repudiation of natural theology signaled a return to Luther's concept of the
faith as "fiducia" (trust) in God's grace through Jesus Christ and the Holy
Spirit, instead of primarily "assentia" to human ideas about the ontologically
prior acts of God. Understandings of God and truth were increasingly defined in
dialectical terms, as opposed to strict logic and metaphysical speculation.
Neo-orthodoxy became the main school oriented around this new fideist
perspective, although several movements descending from it such as liberation
theology and postliberalism continue to bear the fideist stamp, in that they
have little or no interest in seeking philosophical or scientific prestige for
their claims. They are content to retain Christianity's sense of mystery and
paradox and regard attempts to relate those qualities to unaided human reason
as inherently compromising. Theologies opposed to fideism. Fideism rejected by
the Catholic Church. Some theologies strongly reject fideism. The "Catechism of
the Catholic Church", representing Catholicism's great regard for Thomism, the
teachings of St. Thomas Aquinas, affirms that it is a Catholic doctrine that
God's existence can indeed be demonstrated by reason. Aquinas' rationalism has
deep roots in Western Christianity; it goes back to St. Anselm of Canterbury's
observation that the role of reason was to explain faith more fully: "fides
quaerens intellectum", "faith seeking understanding," is his formula. Pope John
Paul II's encyclical "Fides et Ratio" also affirms that God's existence is in
fact demonstrable by reason, and that attempts to reason otherwise are the
results of sin. In the encyclical, John Paul II warned against "a resurgence of
fideism, which fails to recognize the importance of rational knowledge and
philosophical discourse for the understanding of faith, indeed for the very
possibility of belief in God." Fideist currents in Catholic thought.
Historically, there have been a number of fideist strains within the Catholic
orbit. Catholic traditionalism, exemplified in the nineteenth century by Joseph
de Maistre, emphasized faith in tradition as the means of divine revelation.
The claims of reason are multiple, and various people have argued rationally
for several contradictory things: in this environment, the safest course is to
hold true to the faith that has been preserved through tradition, and to
resolve to accept what the Church has historically taught. In his essay "Du
pape" ("On the Pope"), de Maistre argued that it was historically inevitable
that all of the Protestant churches would eventually seek reunification and
refuge in the Catholic Church: science was the greater threat, it threatened
all religious faith, and "no religion can resist science, except one." Another
refuge of fideist thinking within the Catholic Church is the concept of "signs
of contradiction". According to this belief, the holiness of certain people and
institutions is confirmed by the fact that other people contest their claims:
this opposition is held to be worthy of comparison to the opposition met by
Jesus Christ himself. The fact that the authenticity of the Shroud of Turin is
widely disbelieved, for example, is thought to confirm its authenticity under
this belief; the same has been claimed for the doctrine of the real presence of
the Eucharist, or the spiritual merits of the Opus Dei organization and its
discipline. However, opposition and contradiction does not inherently prove
something is true in Catholic thought, but only acts an additional sign of a
truth. The Christological argument. Likewise, a tradition of argument found
among some Protestants and Catholics alike argues that respect for Jesus as a
teacher and a wise man is logically contradictory if one does not accept him as
God as well, also known as the 'Lord, Liar, or Lunatic' argument: either He was
insane, or a charlatan, or he was in fact the Messiah and Son of God. "Cf.
Christological argument". This argument was popularised by the Christian
apologist C. S. Lewis in his book "Mere Christianity" (p.¬ 52). Critics of this
argument assert that it presents a false trichotomy. Jesus may well have
important things to teach and have wisdom to give even if he is wrong, ironic,
misunderstood, or misquoted about his own relation to God. One need not be
right about everything to be right about something. In this line of thinking,
the teaching can be true independently of the conduct of the teacher. However,
proponents of this argument deny that it is a false trichotomy by appealing to
personhood, claiming that Christ as a person could not have died for teachings
he knew to be false. Furthermore, he would not have made ridiculous claims of
his own divinity alongside otherwise sound teachings if these claims (cf. Mark
14:61-62) were not true. He would not have died for all these things if he had
not himself truly believed them, as the argument goes. But if he was so
sincerely self-deceived on such a grand level, then he would be among the most
lunatic, unworthy of the label of "Rabbi". These arguments assume a level of
consistency in Christ that is not found in most human beings, who frequently do
both lie and tell the truth, and speak both profundities and falsehoods with
the same mouth. They also fail to note founders of other religions who also
died for their claims. Another argument against the 'Lord, Liar, or Lunatic'
argument is that fideism simply applies to those who never met Jesus (i.e. all
of his subsequent followers). We have no proof of his actions, only accounts of
them (in the same way we only have accounts of God's actions from the Old
Testament). As such, followers must take what God has shown them (the bringing
of his son, Jesus, into our mortal sphere) as enough to inspire them to
believe, even if they feel they have no personal proof for themselves. The
Christian counter-argument is that there is a great weight of evidence to
support the historical authenticity of the Gospels. Higher Criticism would
dispute this assertion. The point of fideism is to pull followers away from
asking God to prove his existence (which would be laying the burden of proof on
God). This is based on the faith that God knows best, regardless of the
evidence which God could provide. Criticism. As relativism. Relativism is the
position where two opposing positions are both true. The existence of other
religions puts a fundamental question to fideists‚Äîif faith is the only way to
know the truth of God, how are we to know which God to have faith in? Fideism
alone is not considered an adequate guide to distinguish true or morally
valuable revelations from false ones. An apparent consequence of fideism is
that all religious thinking becomes equal. The major monotheistic religions
become on par with obscure fringe religions, as neither can be advocated or
disputed. As articulated by Friedrich Nietzsche, "A casual stroll through the
lunatic asylum shows that faith does not prove anything". A case for reason.
These critics note that people successfully use reason in their daily lives to
solve problems and that reason has led to progressive increase of knowledge in
the sphere of science. This gives credibility to reason and argumentative
thinking as a proper method for seeking truth. "I do not feel obliged to
believe that the same God who has endowed us with sense, reason and intellect
has intended us to forgo their use." - Galileo Galilei On the other hand,
according to these critics, there is no evidence that a religious faith that
rejects reason would also serve us while seeking truth. In situations in which
our reason is not sufficient to find the truth (for example, when trying to
answer a difficult mathematical question) fideism also fails.
