Five Pillars of Islam The Five Pillars of Islam (' ; also ' "pillars of the
religion") are five basic acts in Islam, considered obligatory by believers and
are the foundation of Muslim life. These are summarized in the famous Hadith of
Gabriel. The Quran presents them as a framework for worship and a sign of
commitment to the faith. They make up Muslim life, prayer, concern for the
needy, self purification and the pilgrimage. The minority Shi'a and majority
Sunni both agree on the essential details for the performance of these acts,
but the Shi'a do not refer to them by the same name (see Ancillaries of the
Faith, for the Twelvers, and Seven pillars of Ismailism). The Five Pillars of
Islam. Shahada. "Shahada" is the declaration of faith, i.e. the professing that
there is only one God "(Allah)" (monotheism) and that Muhammad is God's
messenger. "Kalima" is a set statement normally recited in Arabic: La 'ilaa-ha
'il-lal-laa-hu mu-ham-ma-dur ra-soo-lul-laah" "I bear witness that there is
none worthy of worship except Allah and Muhammad is His Servant and Messenger."
Reciting this statement is obligatory in daily prayer "(salāh)" as well as on
other occasions; it is also a key part in a person's conversion to Islam.
Salat: Prayer. "Salat" "(ṣalāh)" is the Islamic prayer. "Salat" consists of
five daily prayers according to the Sunna; the names are according to the
prayer times: "Fajr" (morning dawn), "Zuhr" (noon), Asr (afternoon), Maghrib
(after-sunset), and Isha (late evening, night). The Fajr prayer is performed
before sunrise, Zuhr is performed in the midday after the sun has surpassed its
highest above you, Asar is the evening prayer before sunset, Maghrib is the
evening prayer after sunset and Isha is the night prayer. All of these prayers
are recited while facing the Kaaba in Mecca. Muslims must wash themselves
before prayer, this washing is called wudū' ("purification"). The prayer is
accompanied by a series of set positions including; bowing with hands on knees,
standing, prostrating and sitting in a special position (not on the heels, nor
on the buttocks). Zakāt. "Zakat" or alms-giving is the practice of charitable
giving by Muslims based on accumulated wealth, and is obligatory for all who
are able to do so. It is considered to be a personal responsibility for Muslims
to ease economic hardship for others and eliminate inequality. Zakat consists
of spending 2.5% of one's wealth for the benefit of the poor or needy,
including slaves, debtors and travelers. A Muslim may also donate more as an
act of voluntary charity ("sadaqah"), rather than to achieve additional divine
reward. Sawm of Ramadan: Fasting. Three types of fasting ("Sawm") are
recognized by the Qur'an: Ritual fasting, fasting as compensation for
repentance (both from sura Al-Baqara), and ascetic fasting (from Al-Ahzab).
Ritual fasting is an obligatory act during the month of Ramadan. Muslims must
abstain from food and drink from dawn to dusk during this month, and are to be
especially mindful of other sins. Fasting is necessary for every Muslim that
has reached puberty (unless he/she suffers from a medical condition which
prevents him/her from doing so.) The fast is meant to allow Muslims to seek
nearness and to look for forgiveness Allah, to express their gratitude to and
dependence on him, atone for their past sins, and to remind them of the needy.
During Ramadan, Muslims are also expected to put more effort into following the
teachings of Islam by refraining from violence, anger, envy, greed, lust,
profane language, gossip and to try to get along with fellow Muslims better. In
addition, all obscene and irreligious sights and sounds are to be avoided.
Fasting during Ramadan is obligatory, but is forbidden for several groups for
whom it would be very dangerous and excessively problematic. These include pre-
pubescent children, those with a medical condition such as diabetes, elderly
people, and pregnant or breastfeeding women. Observing fasts is not permitted
for menstruating women. Other individuals for whom it is considered acceptable
not to fast are those who are ill or traveling. Missing fasts usually must be
made up for soon afterward, although the exact requirements vary according to
circumstance. Hajj: Pilgrimage to Mecca. The "Hajj" is a pilgrimage that occurs
during the Islamic month of Dhu al-Hijjah to the holy city of Mecca. Every
able-bodied Muslim is obliged to make the pilgrimage to Mecca at least once in
their lifetime . When the pilgrim is around from Mecca, he/she must dress in
Ihram clothing, which consists of two white sheets. Both men and women are
required to make the pilgrimage to Mecca. After a Muslim makes the trip to
Mecca, he/she is known as a hajj/hajja (one who made the pilgrimage to Mecca).
The main rituals of the Hajj include walking seven times around the Kaabatermed
Tawaf , touching the Black Stone termed Istilam, traveling seven times between
Mount Safa and Mount Marwah termed Saee, and symbolically stoning the Devil in
Mina termed Ramee. The pilgrim, or the "haji", is honoured in the Muslim
community. Islamic teachers say that the Hajj should be an expression of
devotion to Allah, not a means to gain social standing. The believer should be
self-aware and examine their intentions in performing the pilgrimage. This
should lead to constant striving for self-improvement. A pilgrimage made at any
time other than the Hajj season is called an "Umrah", and while not mandatory
is strongly recommended. Also, they make a pilgrimage to the holy city of
Jerusalem in their alms giving feast. Pillars of Shia Islam. Twelvers. In
Twelver Shia Islam, there are ten practices that Shia Muslims must perform,
called the "Ancillaries of the Faith" ("furūʿ al-dīn").
