Five solae The Five "solae" are five Latin phrases that emerged during the
Protestant Reformation and summarize the Reformers' basic theological beliefs
in contradistinction to the teaching of the Roman Catholic Church of the day.
The Latin word "sola" means "alone" or "only" in English. The five "solae"
articulated five fundamental beliefs of the Protestant Reformation, pillars
which the Reformers believed to be essentials of the Christian life and
practice. All five implicitly rejected or countered the teachings of the then-
dominant Catholic Church, which the Reformers claimed had usurped divine
attributes or qualities for the Church and its hierarchy, especially its head,
the Pope. Sola scriptura ("by Scripture alone"). "Sola scriptura" is the
teaching that the Bible is the only inspired and authoritative word of God, is
the only source for Christian doctrine, and is accessible to all‚Äîthat is, it
is perspicuous and self-interpreting. That the Bible requires no interpretation
outside of itself is in direct opposition to the teachings of the Eastern
Orthodox, Oriental Orthodox, Anglo-Catholic, and Roman Catholic traditions,
which teach that the Bible can be authentically interpreted only by apostolic
or sacred Tradition. In the Catholic Church, this teaching authority is
referred to as the Magisterium, understood to be embodied in the episcopacy,
the aggregation of the current bishops of the Church in union with the pope.
"Sola scriptura" is sometimes called the formal principle of the Reformation,
since it is the source and norm of the material principle, the gospel of Jesus
Christ that is received "sola fide" ("through faith alone") "sola gratia" (by
God's favor or "grace alone"). The adjective ("sola") and the noun
("scriptura") are in the ablative case rather than the nominative case to
indicate that the Bible does not stand alone apart from God, but rather that it
is the instrument of God by which he reveals himself for salvation through
faith in Christ ("solus Christus" or "solo Christo"). Sola fide ("by faith
alone"). "Sola fide" is the teaching that justification (interpreted in
Protestant theology as "being "declared" just by God") is received by faith
only, without any mixture of or need for good works, though in classical
Protestant theology, saving faith is always evidenced, but not determined, by
good works. Some Protestants see this doctrine as being summarized with the
formula "Faith yields justification and good works" and as contrasted with the
Roman Catholic formula "Faith and good works yield justification." However,
this is disputed by the Roman Catholic position as a misrepresentation; they
claim it is better contrasted with a comparison of what is meant by the term
"justification": both sides agree that the term invokes a communication of
Christ's merits to sinners, not a declaration of sinlessness; Luther used the
expression "simul justus et peccator" ("at the same time justified and a
sinner"). Roman Catholicism sees justification as a communication of God's life
to a human being, cleansing him of sin and transforming him truly into a son of
God, so that it is not merely a declaration, but rather the soul is made
actually objectively righteous. The Protestant response to this criticism is to
state that this is a misrepresentation of "their" doctrines. Martin Luther
taught that faith is not human response, but the work of God through the means
of grace. Faith is the righteousness of God that is accomplished in us through
word and sacraments. Law and gospel work to kill the sinful self and to
accomplish the new creation within us. This new creation within us is the faith
of Christ. If we do not have this faith, then we are ungodly. Indulgences or
human prayers add nothing‚Äîthey are nothing. Everyone has some kind of
faith‚Äîusually a faith in themselves. But we need God to continually destroy
self-righteous faith and to replace it with the life of Christ. We need the
faith that comes from God through law and gospel, word and sacraments. In the
founding document of the Reformation, the 95 Theses, Luther said that 1.)
‚ÄúWhen our Lord and Master Jesus Christ said, ‚ÄòRepent‚Äô (Matthew 4:17) He
willed the entire life of believers to be one of repentance.‚Äù and 95.) And
thus be confident of entering into heaven through many tribulations rather than
through the false security of peace (Acts 14:22). The true distinction,
therefore, between the Protestant and the Catholic view of Justification is not
an issue of being "declared righteous" versus being "made righteous", but
rather it is the means by which one is Justified. In Catholic theology
righteous works are considered meritorious toward salvation in addition to
faith, whereas in Protestant theology, righteous works are seen as the "result
and evidence" of a truly Justified and Regenerate believer who has received
these by Faith Alone. The actual effectual means by which a person receives
Justification is also a fundamental division between Catholic and Protestant
belief. In Catholic theology, the means by which Justification is applied to
the soul is the Sacrament of Baptism. In Baptism, even of infants, the grace of
Justification and Sanctification is "infused" into the soul, making the
recipient Justified even before he has exercised his own faith (or indeed in
the case of an infant who is baptized, before he even has the ability to
consciously understand the Gospel and respond with faith). In Catholic
theology, faith is not a prerequisite to Justification. For the Catholic,
baptism functions ""ex operere operato"" or "by the working of the act", and
thus is the efficient and sufficient act to bring about Justification. In
Protestant theology, however the Faith of the individual is absolutely
necessary and is itself the efficient and sufficient response of the individual
that effects Justification. The "Sola fide" doctrine is sometimes called the
material cause or principle of the Reformation because it was the central
doctrinal issue for Martin Luther and the other reformers. Luther called it the
"doctrine by which the church stands or falls" (Latin, "articulus stantis et
cadentis ecclesiae"). Sola gratia ("by grace alone"). "Sola gratia" is the
teaching that salvation comes by divine grace or "unmerited favor" only, not as
something merited by the sinner. This means that salvation is an unearned gift
from God for Jesus' sake. Some refer to it as a "de-earned" gift since
unbelievers lived in such a way as forfeit any gift from God. While some
maintain that this doctrine is the opposite of "works' righteousness" and
conflicts with some of the aspects of the Roman Catholic doctrine of merit, it
might be asserted that this article, taken at face value, conflicts in no way
with Roman Catholic teaching; while the doctrine that grace is truly and always
a gift of God is held in agreement between both views, the difference in
doctrine lies mainly in two facts: that of God as sole actor in grace (in other
words, that grace is always efficacious "without" any cooperation by man), and
second, that man cannot by any action of his own, acting under the influence of
grace, cooperate with grace to "merit" greater graces for himself (the latter
would be the doctrine of the Roman Catholic Church). This doctrine asserts
divine monergism in salvation: God acts alone to save the sinner. The
responsibility for salvation does not rest on the sinner to any degree as in
"synergism" or Arminianism. Lutheranism holds that this doctrine must not be
maintained to the exclusion of "gratia universalis" (that God seriously wills
the salvation of all people). Protestant Arminians may also claim the doctrine
of "sola gratia" (but understand it differently) and generally deny the term
"synergism" is appropriate to describe their beliefs. Arminians believe that
God saves only by grace and not at all by merit, but man, enabled by what is
referred to as "prevenient grace", is enabled by the Holy Spirit to understand
the Gospel and respond in faith. Arminians believe that this is compatible with
salvation by grace alone, since all the actual saving is done by grace.
Arminians believe that humans are only capable of receiving salvation when
first enabled to do so by prevenient grace, which they believe is distributed
to everyone. Arminians therefore do not reject the conception of sola gratia
expounded by the Reformation theologians. Solus Christus or Solo Christo
("Christ alone" or "through Christ alone"). "Solus Christus" is the teaching
that Christ is the only mediator between God and man, and that there is
salvation through no other (hence, the phrase is sometimes rendered in the
ablative case, "solo Christo", meaning that salvation is "by Christ alone").
While rejecting all other mediators between God and man, classical Lutheranism
continues to honor the memory of the Virgin Mary and other exemplary saints.
This principle rejects "sacerdotalism," which is the belief that there are no
sacraments in the church without the services of priests ordained by apostolic
succession under the authority of the pope. Martin Luther taught the "general
priesthood of the baptized," which was modified in later Lutheranism and
classical Protestant theology into "the priesthood of all believers," denying
the exclusive use of the title "priest" (Latin, "sacerdos") to the clergy. This
principle does not deny the office of the holy ministry to which is committed
the public proclamation of the Gospel and the administration of the sacraments.
In this way, Luther in his "Small Catechism" could speak of the role of "a
confessor" to confer sacramental absolution on a penitent. The section in this
catechism known as "The Office of the Keys" (not written by Luther but added
with his approval) identifies the "called ministers of Christ" as being the
ones who exercise the binding and loosing of absolution and excommunication
through Law and Gospel ministry. This is laid out in the Lutheran formula of
holy absolution: the "called and ordained servant of the Word" forgives
penitents' sins (speaks Christ's words of forgiveness: "I forgive you all your
sins") without any addition of penances or satisfactions and not as an
interceding or mediating "priest," but "by virtue of office as a called and
ordained servant of the Word" and "in the stead and by the command of [his Lord
Jesus Christ" ["The Lutheran Hymnal", (St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House,
1941), p.¬ 16]. In this tradition absolution reconciles the penitent with God
directly through faith in Christ's forgiveness rather than with the priest and
the church as mediating entities between the penitent and God. Soli Deo gloria
("glory to God alone"). "Soli Deo gloria" is the teaching that all glory is to
be due to God alone, since salvation is accomplished solely through His will
and action ‚Äî not only the gift of the all-sufficient atonement of Jesus on
the cross but also the gift of faith in that atonement, created in the heart of
the believer by the Holy Spirit. The reformers believed that human beings
‚Äîeven saints canonized by the Roman Catholic Church, the popes, and the
ecclesiastical hierarchy‚Äî are not worthy of the glory that was accorded them.
That is that one should not exalt such humans for their good works, but rather
praise and give glory to God who is the author and sanctifier of these people
and their good works.
