Flirty Fishing Flirty Fishing (FFing) is a form of evangelistic religious
prostitution practiced from around 1974 to 1987 by female members in the new
religious movement the Children of God, now known as The Family International.
Etymology, definition. The term refers to Matthew 4:19 from the New Testament,
in which Jesus tells two fishermen that he will make them "fishers of men".
Cult leader David Berg extrapolated from this that women in his movement should
be "flirty fishers" (also called "bait" or "fisherwomen"): the targeted men
were called "fish". The cult published several documents with exact
instructions. Flirty Fishing was defined as using sex appeal for proselytizing.
If masturbation, oral, or penetrative sex ensued, this was termed as "loving
sexually" and also counted as a "deep witness", meaning that the "bait" earned
more brownie points within the group than by mere flirting. Berg noted that
Flirty Fishing did not necessarily entail intercourse, but that this was by far
the most efficient method of proselytizing. Impact on members. Women who
objected to being what the cult itself bluntly described as "God's whores" or
"hookers for Jesus" were admonished not to "let self and pride enter in" and
reminded that their body did not really belong to them as according to 1
Corinthians 6:19–20 it had been "bought" (by Jesus through his crucifixion)
"with a price". After an initial phase, male members no longer partook in this
drive, partially because of the cult's dismissive stance towards homosexuality,
but also because Berg thought it did not "pay off financially". Many of the
Flirty Fishers had boyfriends, were married, or had children. In Family
publications, Flirty Fishers and Escort Servicers (see below) frequently
reported that they found their work hard, dangerous, and exhausting. ESing. The
financial benefit of Flirty Fishing soon led to a further degeneration of the
practice from mere flirting into "loving sexually" to "Escort Servicing"
("ESing")—described as "making FFing pay" by Berg—in which female cult
members would work as regular call girls for escort agencies or freelance, and
merely "witness" (proselytize) to their clients when the occasion offered
itself. Effects. The Children of God practiced Flirty Fishing and Escort
Servicing from 1974 until 1987, when it was officially abandoned, partially
because of the AIDS epidemic. As the women were expected to keep exact records
of their "fruits" (successes), a 1988 statistic showed that more than 223,000
men had been "fished" since 1978—and that FFing had nevertheless continued
into 1988. As the cult generally discourages birth control, the practice also
resulted in numerous pregnancies, the offspring of which were termed "Jesus
babies" by the organization.
