Folk religion Folk religion consists of ethnic or regional religious customs
under the umbrella of an religion, but outside of official doctrine and
practices. Folk religion has been defined as "the totality of all those views
and practices of religion that exist among the people apart from and alongside
the strictly theological and liturgical forms of the official religion." The
term "folk religion" is generally held to encompass two related but separate
subjects. The first is the religious dimension of folk culture, or the folk-
cultural dimensions of religion. The second refers to the study of syncretisms
between two cultures with different stages of formal expression, such as the
melange of African folk beliefs and Roman Catholicism that led to the
development of Vodun and Santería, and similar mixtures of formal religions
with folk cultures. Chinese folk religion, Folk Christianity, Folk Hinduism,
and Folk Islam are examples of folk religion associated with major religions.
The term is also used, especially by the clergy of the faiths involved, to
describe the desire of people who otherwise infrequently attend religious
worship, do not belong to a church or similar religious society, and who have
not made a formal profession of faith in a particular creed, to have religious
weddings or funerals, or (among Christians) to have their children baptised.
Chinese folk religion. Chinese folk religion or Shenism are labels used to
describe the collection of ethnic religious traditions which have historically
comprised the predominant belief system in China and among Han Chinese ethnic
groups up to the present day. Shenism describes Chinese mythology and includes
the worship of "shen" (spirit, god, awareness, consciousness) which can be
nature deities, Taizu or clan deities, city gods, national deities, culture
heros and demigods, dragons and ancestors. "Shenism" as a term was first
published by A. J. A Elliot in 1955. Chinese folk religion is sometimes
categorized with Taoism, since over the centuries institutional Taoism has been
attempting to assimilate or administrate local religions. More accurately,
Taoism can be defined as a branch of Shenism, since it sprang out of folk
religion and Chinese philosophy. Chinese folk religion is sometimes seen as a
constituent part of Chinese traditional religion, but more often, the two are
regarded as synonymous. With around 454 million adherents, or about 6.6% of the
world population, Chinese folk religion is one of the major religious
traditions in the world. In China more than 30% of the population adheres to
Shenism or Taoism. Despite being heavily suppressed during the last two
centuries, from the Taiping Rebellion to the Cultural Revolution, it is
currently experiencing a modern revival in both Mainland China and Taiwan.
Various forms have received support by the Government of the People's Republic
of China, such as Mazuism in Southern China (officially about 160 million
Chinese are Mazuists), Huangdi worship, Black Dragon worship in Shaanxi, and
Cai Shen worship. Folk Christianity. Folk Christianity is defined differently
by various scholars. Definitions include "the Christianity practiced by a
conquered people", Christianity as most people live it – a term used to
"overcome the division of beliefs into Orthodox and unorthodox", Christianity
as impacted by superstition as practiced by certain geographical Christian
groups, and Christianity defined "in cultural terms without reference to the
theologies and histories." Folk Islam. Folk Islam is an umbrella term used to
collectively describe forms of Islam that incorporate native folk beliefs and
practices. Folk Islam has been described as the Islam of the "urban poor,
country people, and tribes", (Ridgeon, 2003) in contrast to orthodox or "High"
Islam (Gellner, 1992; Malesevic et al., 2007). Sufism and Sufi concepts are
often integrated into Folk Islam. Folk Hinduism. Folk Hinduism differs slightly
from folk Islam or folk Christianity, as the term Hinduism itself was coined in
the 19th century as an umbrella term for all folk religion practiced in India.
But today, folk Hinduism ("Indian folk religion" or "popular Hinduism") may
still be distinguished from "high" forms of Hindu philosophy, or mystical or
ascetic forms. Folk Hinduism is emphatically polytheistic.
