Forgiveness Forgiveness is the renunciation or cessation of resentment,
indignation or anger as a result of a perceived offense, disagreement, or
mistake, or ceasing to demand punishment or restitution. The Oxford English
Dictionary defines forgiveness as 'to grant free pardon and to give up all
claim on account of an offense or debt'. The concept and benefits of
forgiveness have been explored in religious thought, the social sciences and
medicine. Forgiveness may be considered simply in terms of the person who
forgives including forgiving themselves, in terms of the person forgiven or in
terms of the relationship between the forgiver and the person forgiven. In most
contexts, forgiveness is granted without any expectation of restorative
justice, and without any response on the part of the offender (for example, one
may forgive a person who is incommunicado or dead). In practical terms, it may
be necessary for the offender to offer some form of acknowledgment, an apology,
or even just ask for forgiveness, in order for the wronged person to believe
himself able to forgive. Most world religions include teachings on the nature
of forgiveness, and many of these teachings provide an underlying basis for
many varying modern day traditions and practices of forgiveness. Some religious
doctrines or philosophies place greater emphasis on the need for humans to find
some sort of divine forgiveness for their own shortcomings, others place
greater emphasis on the need for humans to practice forgiveness of one another,
yet others make little or no distinction between human and divine forgiveness.
Research. Although there is presently no consensus for a psychological
definition of forgiveness in the research literature, agreement has emerged
that forgiveness is a process and a number of models describing the process of
forgiveness have been published, including one from a radical behavioral
perspective. Dr. Robert Enright from the University of Wisconsin–Madison
founded the International Forgiveness Institute and is considered the initiator
of forgiveness studies. He developed a 20-Step Process Model of Forgiveness.
Recent work has focused on what kind of person is more likely to be forgiving.
A longitudinal study showed that people who were generally more neurotic, angry
and hostile in life were less likely to forgive another person even after a
long time had passed. Specifically, these people were more likely to still
avoid their transgressor and want to enact revenge upon them two and a half
years after the transgression. Studies show that people who forgive are happier
and healthier than those who hold resentments. The first study to look at how
forgiveness improves physical health discovered that when people think about
forgiving an offender it leads to improved functioning in their cardiovascular
and nervous systems. Another study at the University of Wisconsin found the
more forgiving people were, the less they suffered from a wide range of
illnesses. The less forgiving people reported a greater number of health
problems. The research of Dr. Fred Luskin of Stanford University shows that
forgiveness can be learned. Dr. Frederic Luskin's work is based on seven major
research projects into the effects of forgiveness, giving empirical validity to
the concept that forgiveness is not only powerful, but also excellent for your
health. Dr. Fred Luskin author of the book "Learning to forgive" was presented
with a Champion of Forgiveness award by the Forgiveness Alliance for his
groundbreaking work with forgiveness, reconciliation and peace. In three
separate studies, including one with Catholics and Protestants from Northern
Ireland whose family members were murdered in the political violence, he found
that people who are taught how to forgive become less angry, feel less hurt,
are more optimistic, become more forgiving in a variety of situations, and
become more compassionate and self-confident. His studies show a reduction in
experience of stress, physical manifestations of stress, and an increase in
vitality. Religious views. Abrahamic. Judaism. Thus the "reward" for forgiving
others is not God's forgiveness for wrongs done to others, but rather help "in
obtaining forgiveness from the other person." Sir Jonathan Sacks, Chief Rabbi
of the United Hebrew Congregations of the Commonwealth, summarized: "it is not
that God forgives, while human beings do not. To the contrary, we believe that
just as only God can forgive sins against God, so only human beings can forgive
sins against human beings." Jews observe a Day of Atonement Yom Kippur on the
day before God makes decisions regarding what will happen during the coming
year. Just prior to Yom Kippur, Jews will ask forgiveness of those they have
wronged during the prior year (if they have not already done so). During Yom
Kippur itself, Jews fast and pray for God's forgiveness for the transgressions
they have made against God in the prior year. Sincere repentance is required,
and once again, God can only forgive one for the sins one has committed against
God; this is why it is necessary for Jews also to seek the forgiveness of those
people who they have wronged. Christianity. In the New Testament, Jesus speaks
of the importance of Christians forgiving or showing mercy towards others. The
Parable of the Prodigal Son is perhaps the best known instance of such teaching
and practice of forgiveness. In the Sermon on the Mount, Jesus repeatedly spoke
of forgiveness, “Blessed are the merciful, for they will be shown mercy.”
Matthew 5:7 (NIV) “Therefore, if you are offering your gift at the altar and
there remember that your brother has something against you, leave your gift
there in front of the altar. First go and be reconciled to your brother; then
come and offer your gift.” Matthew 5:23-24 (NIV) “And when you stand
praying, if you hold anything against anyone, forgive him, so that your Father
in heaven may forgive you your sins.” Mark 11:25 (NIV) “But I tell you who
hear me: Love your enemies, do good to those who hate you, bless those who
curse you, pray for those who mistreat you. If someone strikes you on one
cheek, turn to him the other also.” Luke 6:27-29 (NIV) “Be merciful, just
as your Father is merciful.” Luke 6:36 (NIV) “Do not judge, and you will
not be judged. Do not condemn, and you will not be condemned. Forgive, and you
will be forgiven.” Luke 6:37 (NIV) Elsewhere, it is said, "Then Peter came to
Him and said, “Lord, how often shall my brother sin against me, and I forgive
him? Up to seven times?” Jesus said to him, “I do not say to you, up to
seven times, but up to seventy times seven. Matthew 18:21-22 (NKJV) Jesus asked
for God's forgiveness of those who crucified him. "And Jesus said, 'Father,
forgive them, for they know not what they do.'" Luke 23: 34 (ESV) Islam. Islam
teaches that God is "Al-Ghaffur" "The All-Forgiving", and is the original
source of all forgiveness ("ghufran" غفران). Forgiveness often requires
the repentance of those being forgiven. Depending on the type of wrong
committed, forgiveness can come either directly from Allah, or from one's
fellow man who received the wrong. In the case of divine forgiveness, the
asking for divine forgiveness via repentance is important. In the case of human
forgiveness, it is important to both forgive, and to be forgiven. The Qur'an
never allows for violent behavior on the part of Muslim believers, except in
the cases of defending one's religion, one's life, or one's property. Outside
of this, the Qu'ran makes no allowances for violent behavior. From time to time
certain Muslims have interpreted such Qur'anic allowances for "defensive
violence" to include what other Muslims have viewed more as unwarranted and
overly aggressive violence. This interpretative debate about when to forgive
and when to aggressively attack or defend continues to this day within the
Muslim community. The Qur'an makes it clear that, whenever possible, it is
better to forgive another than to attack another. The Qur'an describes the
believers (Muslims) as those who, "avoid gross sins and vice, and when angered
they forgive." (Qur'an 42:37) and says that "Although the just requital for an
injustice is an equivalent retribution, those who pardon and maintain
righteousness are rewarded by GOD. He does not love the unjust." (Qur'an 42:
40). If the offense was committed against another human being, or against
society, a Islamic teaching presents the Prophet Muhammad as an example of
someone who would forgive others for their ignorance, even those who might have
once considered themselves to be his enemies. One example of Muhammad's
practice of forgiveness can be found in the Hadith, the body of early Islamic
literature about the life of Muhammad. This account is as follows:  Bahá'í
Faith. — `Abdu'l-Bahá, "The Promulgation of Universal Peace", p. 92 Eastern.
Buddhism. In Buddhism, forgiveness is seen as a practice to prevent harmful
thoughts from causing havoc on one’s mental well-being. Buddhism recognizes
that feelings of hatred and ill-will leave a lasting effect on our mind karma.
Instead, Buddhism encourages the cultivation of thoughts that leave a wholesome
effect. "In contemplating the law of karma, we realize that it is not a matter
of seeking revenge but of practicing mettā and forgiveness, for the victimizer
is, truly, the most unfortunate of all. When resentments have already arisen,
the Buddhist view is to calmly proceed to release them by going back to their
roots. Buddhism centers on release from delusion and suffering through
meditation and receiving insight into the nature of reality. Buddhism questions
the reality of the passions that make forgiveness necessary as well as the
reality of the objects of those passions. "If we haven’t forgiven, we keep
creating an identity around our pain, and that is what is reborn. That is what
suffers." Buddhism places much emphasis on the concepts of "Mettā" (loving
kindness), "karuna" (compassion), "mudita" (sympathetic joy), and "upekkhā"
(equanimity), as a means to avoiding resentments in the first place. These
reflections are used to understand the context of suffering in the world, both
our own and the suffering of others. Hinduism. The concept of performing
atonement from one's wrongdoing (Prayaschittha — Sanskrit: Penance), and
asking for forgiveness is very much a part of the practice of Hinduism.
Prayaschittha is related to the law of Karma. Karma is a sum of all that an
individual has done, is currently doing and will do. The effects of those deeds
and these deeds actively create present and future experiences, thus making one
responsible for one's own life, and the pain in others. Addressing
Dhritarashtra, Vidura said: "There is one only defect in forgiving persons, and
not another; that defect is that people take a forgiving person to be weak.
That defect, however, should not be taken into consideration, for forgiveness
is a great power. Forgiveness is a virtue of the weak, and an ornament of the
strong. Forgiveness subdues (all) in this world; what is there that forgiveness
cannot achieve? What can a wicked person do unto him who carries the sabre of
forgiveness in his hand? Fire falling on the grassless ground is extinguished
of itself. And unforgiving individual defiles himself with many enormities.
Righteousness is the one highest good; and forgiveness is the one supreme
peace; knowledge is one supreme contentment; and benevolence, one sole
happiness." (From the Mahabharata, Udyoga Parva Section XXXIII, Translated by
Sri Kisari Mohan Ganguli). An even more authoritative statement about
forgiveness is espoused by Krishna, who is considered to be an incarnation
("Avatar") of Vishnu by Hindus. Krishna said in the Gita that forgiveness is
one of the characteristics of one born for a divine state. It is noteworthy
that he distinguishes those good traits from those he considered to be
demoniac, such as pride, self-conceit and anger (Bhagavad Gita, Chapter 16,
verse 3). Thou art everywhere, but I worship thee here; Thou art without form,
but I worship thee in these forms; Thou needest no praise, yet I offer thee
these prayers and salutations, Lord, forgive three sins that are due to my
human limitations. Jainism. In Jainism, forgiveness is one of the main virtues
that needs to be cultivated by the Jains. "Kṣamāpanā" or supreme
forgiveness forms part of one of the ten characteristics of "dharma". In the
Jain prayer, ("pratikramana") Jains repeatedly seek forgiveness from various
creatures—even from "ekindriyas" or single sensed beings like plants and
microorganisms that they may have harmed while eating and doing routine
activities. Forgiveness is asked by uttering the phrase, "Micchāmi
dukkaḍaṃ." "Micchāmi dukkaḍaṃ" is a Prakrit language phrase literally
meaning "may all the evil that has been done be fruitless." During
"samvatsari"—the last day of Jain festival "paryusana"—Jains utter the
phrase "Micchami Dukkadam" after "pratikraman". As a matter of ritual, they
personally greet their friends and relatives "micchāmi dukkaḍaṃ" seeking
their forgiveness. No private quarrel or dispute may be carried beyond
samvatsari, and letters and telephone calls are made to the outstation friends
and relatives asking their forgiveness. "Khāmemi savva-jīve savvë jive
khamantu me / " "metti me savva-bhūesu, veraṃ mejjha na keṇavi //" (I ask
pardon of all creatures, may all creatures pardon me. May I have friendship
with all beings and enmity with none.) May you, O Revered One! Voluntarily
permit me. I would like to confess my sinful acts committed while walking. I
honour your permission. I desire to absolve myself of the sinful acts by
confessing them. I seek forgiveness from all those living beings which I may
have tortured while walking, coming and going, treading on living organism,
seeds, green grass, dew drops, ant hills, moss, live water, live earth, spider
web and others. I seek forgiveness from all these living beings, be they —
one sensed, two sensed, three sensed, four sensed or five sensed. Which I may
have kicked, covered with dust, rubbed with ground, collided with other, turned
upside down, tormented, frightened, shifted from one place to another or killed
and deprived them of their lives. (By confessing) may I be absolved of all
these sins. — Māhavīra in "Uttarādhyayana Sūtra" 29:17–18 — "Kalpa
Sūtra" 8:59 Hoʻoponopono. Hoʻoponopono is an ancient Hawaiian practice of
reconciliation and forgiveness, combined with prayer. Similar forgiveness
practices were performed on islands throughout the South Pacific, including
Samoa, Tahiti and New Zealand. Traditionally Hoʻoponopono is practiced by
healing priests or "kahuna lapaʻau" among family members of a person who is
physically ill. Modern versions are performed within the family by a family
elder, or by the individual alone. Popular recognition. The need to forgive is
widely recognized by the public, but they are often at a loss for ways to
accomplish it. For example, in a large representative sampling of American
people on various religious topics in 1988, the Gallup Organization found that
94% said it was important to forgive, but 85% said they needed some outside
help to be able to forgive. However, not even regular prayer was found to be
effective. The Gallup poll revealed that the only thing that was effective was
"meditative prayer".
