Arval Brethren In ancient Roman religion, the Arval Brethren (, "Brothers of
the Fields") or Arval Brothers were a body of priests who offered annual
sacrifices to the Lares and gods to guarantee good harvests. Inscriptions
provide evidence of their oaths, rituals and sacrifices. Origin. Roman legend
held that the priestly college was originated by Romulus, who took the place of
a dead son of his nurse Acca Laurentia, and formed the priesthood with the
remaining eleven sons. They were also connected originally with the Sabine
priesthood of "Sodales Titii" who were probably originally their counterpart
among the Sabines. The brethren dated back to the time of Numa Pompilius,
second king of Rome, and persisted to the imperial period. Their task was the
worship of Dea Dia, an old fertility goddess and probably an aspect of Ceres.
On the three days of her May festival, they offered sacrifices and chanted
secretly inside the temple of the goddess at her "lucus" the "Carmen Arvale",
the exact meaning of which was no longer understood in later times. The
"magister" (master) of the college selected the exact three days of the
celebration by an unknown method. The celebration began in Rome on the first
day, was transferred to a sacred grove outside the city wall on the second day
and ended back in the city on the third day. Structure and duties. Arval
Brethren formed a college of twelve priests, although archaeologists have found
only up to nine names at a time in the inscriptions. They were appointed for
life and did not lose their status even in exile. Their sign was a white band
with the chaplet of sheaves of grain. The Brethren assembled in the Regia.
Their duties included ritual propitiations or thanksgivings as the
"Ambarvalia", the sacrifices done at the borders of Rome at the fifth mile of
the "Via Campana" or "Salaria" (a place now on the hill Monte delle Piche at
the Magliana Vecchia on the right bank of the Tiber). Before the sacrifice, the
sacrificial victim was led three times around a grain field where a chorus of
farmers and farm-servants danced and sang praises for Ceres and offered her
libations of milk, honey and wine. Archaic traits of the rituals included the
prohibition of the use of iron, the use of the "olla terrea" (a jar made of
unbaked earth) and of the sacrificial burner of Dea Dia made of silver and
adorned with grassy clods. Restoration of the priesthood. The importance of
Arval Brethren apparently dwindled during the Roman Republic, but emperor
Augustus revived their practices to enforce his own authority. After Augustus'
time emperors and senators frequented the festivities. At least two emperors,
Marcus Aurelius and Elagabalus, were formally accepted as members of the
Brethren. The first full descriptions of their rituals also originate from this
time. The last inscriptions about the Arval Brethren date from about 325 AD.
They were abolished along with other pagan priesthoods in 400 AD.
