Free will Free will is the ability of agents to make choices free from certain
kinds of constraints. The existence of free will and its exact nature and
definition have long been debated in philosophy. Historically, the constraint
of dominant concern has been nomological determinism, the notion that the
present dictates the future entirely and necessarily, that every occurrence
results inevitably from prior events. Many hold that nomological determinism
must be false in order for free will to be possible, and then debate whether it
is true or false and thus whether free will is possible or not. The two main
positions within that debate are metaphysical libertarianism, the claim that
nomological determinism is false, so free will is at least possible; and hard
determinism, the claim that nomological determinism is true, so free will does
not exist. Both of these positions, which agree that nomological determination
is the relevant factor in the question of free will, are classed as
"incompatibilist". Positions that deny that nomological determinism is
relevant, saying that we could have free will either way, are classified as
"compatibilist", and offer various alternative explanations of what constraints
are relevant, such as physical constraints (e.g. chains or imprisonment),
social constraints (e.g. threat of punishment or censure), or psychological
constraints (e.g. compulsions or phobias). Such compatibilists thus consider
the debate between libertarianism and hard determinism a false dilemma. Some
compatibilists assert that determinism is not just compatible with free will,
but actually necessary for it; that the randomness of indeterminism is a
greater obstacle to free will. Similarly, hard incompatibilism, while still
holding that determinism is an obstacle to free will, agrees with the
aforementioned compatibilists that indeterminism is likewise an obstacle to
free will, and concludes that free will is thus impossible in either case. The
principle of free will has religious, ethical, and scientific implications. For
example, in the religious realm, free will implies that individual will and
choices can coexist with an omnipotent divinity. In ethics, it may hold
implications for whether individuals can be held morally accountable for their
actions. In science, neuroscientific findings regarding free will may suggest
different ways of predicting human behavior. In Western philosophy.
Incompatibilism. Incompatibilism is the position that free will and determinism
are logically incompatible, and that the major question regarding whether or
not people have free will is thus whether or not their actions are determined.
"Hard determinists", such as Martin Luther and d'Holbach, are those
incompatibilists who accept determinism and reject free will. "Metaphysical
libertarians", such as Thomas Reid, Peter van Inwagen, and Robert Kane, are
those incompatibilists who accept free will and deny determinism, holding the
view that some form of indeterminism is true. Another view is that of hard
incompatibilists, which state that free will is incompatible with both
determinism and indeterminism. Traditional arguments for incompatibilism are
based on an "intuition pump": if a person is like other mechanical things that
are determined in their behavior such as a wind-up toy, a billiard ball, a
puppet, or a robot, then people must not have free will. This argument has been
rejected by compatibilists such as Daniel Dennett on the grounds that, even if
humans have something in common with these things, it remains possible and
plausible that we are different from such objects in important ways. Another
argument for incompatibilism is that of the "causal chain." Incompatibilism is
key to the idealist theory of free will. Most incompatibilists reject the idea
that freedom of action consists simply in "voluntary" behavior. They insist,
rather, that free will means that man must be the "ultimate" or "originating"
cause of his actions. He must be "causa sui", in the traditional phrase. Being
responsible for one's choices is the first cause of those choices, where first
cause means that there is no antecedent cause of that cause. The argument,
then, is that if man has free will, then man is the ultimate cause of his
actions. If determinism is true, then all of man's choices are caused by events
and facts outside his control. So, if everything man does is caused by events
and facts outside his control, then he cannot be the ultimate cause of his
actions. Therefore, he cannot have free will. This argument has also been
challenged by various compatibilist philosophers. A third argument for
incompatibilism was formulated by Carl Ginet in the 1960s and has received much
attention in the modern literature. The simplified argument runs along these
lines: if determinism is true, then we have no control over the events of the
past that determined our present state and no control over the laws of nature.
Since we can have no control over these matters, we also can have no control
over the "consequences" of them. Since our present choices and acts, under
determinism, are the necessary consequences of the past and the laws of nature,
then we have no control over them and, hence, no free will. This is called the
"consequence argument". Peter van Inwagen remarks that C.D. Broad had a version
of the consequence argument as early as the 1930s. The difficulty of this
argument for some compatibilists lies in the fact that it entails the
impossibility that one could have chosen other than one has. For example, if
Jane is a compatibilist and she has just sat down on the sofa, then she is
committed to the claim that she could have remained standing, if she had so
desired. But it follows from the consequence argument that, if Jane had
remained standing, she would have either generated a contradiction, violated
the laws of nature or changed the past. Hence, compatibilists are committed to
the existence of "incredible abilities", according to Ginet and van Inwagen.
One response to this argument is that it equivocates on the notions of
abilities and necessities, or that the free will evoked to make any given
choice is really an illusion and the choice had been made all along, oblivious
to its "decider". David Lewis suggests that compatibilists are only committed
to the ability to do something otherwise if "different circumstances" had
actually obtained in the past. "Incompatibilism" may occupy any of the nine
positions except (5), (8) or (3), which last corresponds to "soft determinism".
Position (1) is "hard determinism",and position (2) is "libertarianism". The
position (1) of hard determinism adds to the table the contention that "D"
implies "FW" is untrue, and the position (2) of libertarianism adds the
contention that "FW" implies "D" is untrue. Position (9) may be called "hard
incompatibilism" if one interprets "?" as meaning both concepts are of dubious
value. "Compatibilism" itself may occupy any of the nine positions, that is,
there is no logical contradiction between determinism and free will, and either
or both may be true or false in principle. However, the most common meaning
attached to "compatibilism" is that some form of determinism is true and yet we
have some form of free will, position (3). Below these positions are examined
in more detail. Metaphysical Libertarianism. Metaphysical libertarianism is one
philosophical view point under that of incompatibilism. Libertarianism holds
onto a concept of free will that requires that the agent be able to take more
than one possible course of action under a given set of circumstances. Accounts
of libertarianism subdivide into non-physical theories and physical or
naturalistic theories. Non-physical theories hold that the events in the brain
that lead to the performance of actions do not have an entirely physical
explanation, which requires that the world is not closed under physics. Such
interactionist dualists believe that some non-physical mind, will, or soul
gives input to physical causality. As consequent of incompatibilism,
metaphysical libertarian explanations that do not involve dispensing with
physicalism require physical indeterminism, such as probabilistic subatomic
particle behavior – theory unknown to many of the early writers on free will.
Physical determinism, under the assumption of physicalism, implies there is
only one possible future and is therefore not compatible with libertarian free
will. Some libertarian explanations involve invoking panpsychism, the theory
that a quality of mind is associated with all particles, and pervades the
entire universe, in both animate and inanimate entities. Other approaches do
not require that free will be a fundamental constituent of the universe.
Ordinary randomness is appealed to as supplying the "elbow room" that
libertarians believe necessary. Models of volition have been constructed in
which it is seen as a particular kind of complex, high-level process with an
element of physical indeterminism. An example of this approach is that of
Robert Kane, where he hypothesizes that, Although at the time quantum mechanics
(and physical indeterminism) was only in the initial stages of acceptance, in
his book "Miracles: A preliminary study" C. S. Lewis stated the logical
possibility that if the physical world were proved indeterministic this would
provide an entry point to describe an action of a non-physical entity on
physical reality. Indeterministic physical models (particularly those involving
quantum indeterminacy) introduce random occurrences at an atomic or subatomic
level. These events might affect brain activity, and could seemingly allow
incompatibilist free will if the apparent indeterminacy of some mental
processes (for instance, subjective perceptions of control in conscious
volition) map to the underlying indeterminacy of the physical construct. This
relationship however requires a causative role over probabilities that is
questionable, and it is far from established that brain activity responsible
for human action can be affected by such events. Secondarily, these
incompatibilist models are dependent upon the relationship between action and
conscious volition, as studied in the neuroscience of free will. Hard
incompatibilism. Pereboom calls positions 3 and 4 "soft determinism", position
1 a form of "hard determinism", position 6 a form of "classical
libertarianism", and any position that includes having F as "compatibilism". He
largely ignores position 2. John Locke denied that the phrase "free will" made
any sense (compare with theological noncognitivism, a similar stance on the
existence of God). He also took the view that the truth of determinism was
irrelevant. He believed that the defining feature of voluntary behavior was
that individuals have the ability to "postpone" a decision long enough to
reflect or deliberate upon the consequences of a choice: "...the will in truth,
signifies nothing but a power, or ability, to prefer or choose". The
contemporary philosopher Galen Strawson agrees with Locke that the truth or
falsity of determinism is irrelevant to the problem. He argues that the notion
of free will leads to an infinite regress and is therefore senseless. According
to Strawson, if one is responsible for what one does in a given situation, then
one must be responsible for the way one is in certain mental respects. But it
is impossible for one to be responsible for the way one is in any respect. This
is because to be responsible in some situation "S", one must have been
responsible for the way one was at "S−1". To be responsible for the way one
was at "S−1", one must have been responsible for the way one was at "S−2",
and so on. At some point in the chain, there must have been an act of
origination of a new causal chain. But this is impossible. Man cannot create
himself or his mental states "ex nihilo". This argument entails that free will
itself is absurd, but not that it is incompatible with determinism. Strawson
calls his own view "pessimism" but it can be classified as hard
incompatibilism. Compatibilism. Compatibilists maintain that determinism is
compatible with free will. It may, however, be more accurate to say that
compatibilists "define" "free will" in a way that allows it to co-exist with
determinism (in the same way that incompatibilists define "free will" such that
it cannot). Compatibilists believe freedom can be present or absent in a
situation for reasons that have nothing to do with metaphysics. For instance,
courts of law make judgments about whether individuals are acting under their
own free will under certain circumstances without bringing in metaphysics.
Similarly, political liberty is a non-metaphysical concept. Likewise,
compatibilists define free will as freedom to act according to one's determined
motives without hindrance from other individuals. So for example Aristotle in
his "Nicomachean Ethics", and the Stoic Chrysippus. In contrast, the
incompatibilist positions are concerned with a sort of "metaphysically free
will," which compatibilists claim has never been coherently defined.
Compatibilists argue that determinism does not matter; what matters is that
individuals' wills are the result of their own desires and are not overridden
by some external force. To be a compatibilist, one need not endorse any
particular conception of free will, but only deny that determinism is at odds
with free will. Nonetheless, some philosophers have defined free will as the
absence of various impediments. Some "modern compatibilists", such as Harry
Frankfurt and Daniel Dennett, argue free will is simply freely choosing to do
what constraints allow one to do. In other words, a coerced agent's choices are
still free because such coercion coincides with the agent's personal intentions
and desires. Free will as lack of physical restraint. Most "classical
compatibilists", such as Thomas Hobbes, claim that a person is acting on the
person's own will only when it is the desire of that person to do the act, and
also possible for the person to be able to do otherwise, "if the person had
decided to". Hobbes sometimes attributes such compatibilist freedom to each
individual and not to some abstract notion of "will", asserting, for example,
that "no liberty can be inferred to the will, desire, or inclination, but the
liberty of the man; which consisteth in this, that he finds no stop, in doing
what he has the will, desire, or inclination to doe." In articulating this
crucial proviso, David Hume writes, "this hypothetical liberty is universally
allowed to belong to every one who is not a prisoner and in chains". Free will
as a psychological state. Thirteenth century philosopher Thomas Aquinas viewed
humans as pre-programmed (by virtue of being human) to seek certain goals, but
able to choose between routes to achieve these goals. In facing these choices,
humans are governed by "intellect", "will", and "passions". The will is "the
primary mover of all the powers of the soul...and it it is also the efficient
cause of motion in the body." Choice falls into five stages: (i) intellectual
consideration of whether an objective is desirable, (ii) intellectual
consideration of means of attaining the objective, (iii) will arrives at an
intent to pursue the objective, (iv) will and intellect jointly decide upon
choice of means (v) will elects execution. Free will enters as follows: Free-
will is an "appetitive power", that is, not a cognitive power of intellect (the
term "appetite" from Aquinas's definition "includes all forms of internal
inclination.") He states that judgment "concludes and terminates counsel. Now
counsel is terminated, first, by the judgment of reason; secondly, by the
acceptation of the appetite is, the free-will." Aquinas's compatabilist view is
defended thus: "Free-will is the cause of its own movement, because by his
free-will man moves himself to act. But it does not of necessity belong to
liberty that what is free should be the first cause of itself, as neither for
one thing to be cause of another need it be the first cause. God, therefore, is
the first cause, Who moves causes both natural and voluntary. And just as by
moving natural causes He does not prevent their acts being natural, so by
moving voluntary causes He does not deprive their actions of being voluntary:
but rather is He the cause of this very thing in them; for He operates in each
thing according to its own nature." The notion of levels of decision is
presented in a different manner by Frankfurt. Frankfurt argues for a version of
compatibilism called the "hierarchical mesh". The idea is that an individual
can have conflicting desires at a first-order level and also have a desire
about the various first-order desires (a second-order desire) to the effect
that one of the desires prevails over the others. A person's will is identified
with their effective first-order desire, i.e., the one they act on, and this
will is free if it was the desire the person wanted to act upon, i.e., the
person's second-order desire was effective. So, for example, there are "wanton
addicts", "unwilling addicts" and "willing addicts." All three groups may have
the conflicting first-order desires to want to take the drug they are addicted
to and to not want to take it. The first group, "wanton addicts", have no
second-order desire not to take the drug. The second group, "unwilling
addicts", have a second-order desire not to take the drug, while the third
group, "willing addicts", have a second-order desire to take it. According to
Frankfurt, the members of the first group devoid of will and therefore no
longer persons. The members of the second group freely desire not to take the
drug, but their will is overcome by the addiction. Finally, the members of the
third group willingly take the drug they are addicted to. Frankfurt's theory
can ramify to any number of levels. Critics of the theory point out that there
is no certainty that conflicts will not arise even at the higher-order levels
of desire and preference. Others argue that Frankfurt offers no adequate
explanation of how the various levels in the hierarchy mesh together. Free will
as unpredictability. In "Elbow Room", Dennett presents an argument for a
compatibilist theory of free will, which he further elaborated in the book
"Freedom Evolves". The basic reasoning is that, if one excludes God, an
infinitely powerful demon, and other such possibilities, then because of chaos
and epistemic limits on the precision of our knowledge of the current state of
the world, the future is ill-defined for all finite beings. The only well-
defined things are "expectations". The ability to do "otherwise" only makes
sense when dealing with these expectations, and not with some unknown and
unknowable future. According to Dennett, because individuals have the ability
to act differently from what anyone expects, free will can exist.
Incompatibilists claim the problem with this idea is that we may be mere
"automata responding in predictable ways to stimuli in our environment".
Therefore, all of our actions are controlled by forces outside ourselves, or by
random chance. More sophisticated analyses of compatibilist free will have been
offered, as have other critiques. In the philosophy of decision theory, a
fundamental question is: From the standpoint of statistical outcomes, to what
extent do the choices of a conscious being have the ability to influence the
future? Newcomb's paradox and other philosophical problems pose questions about
free will and predictable outcomes of choices. Other views. Some philosophers'
views are difficult to categorize as either compatibilist or incompatibilist,
hard determinist or libertarian. For example, Ted Honderich holds the view that
"determinism is true, compatibilism and incompatibilism are both false" and the
real problem lies elsewhere. Honderich maintains that determinism is true
because quantum phenomena are not events or things that can be located in space
and time, but are abstract entities. Further, even if they were micro-level
events, they do not seem to have any relevance to how the world is at the
macroscopic level. He maintains that incompatibilism is false because, even if
determinism is true, incompatibilists have not provided, and cannot provide, an
adequate account of origination. He rejects compatibilism because it, like
incompatibilism, assumes a single, fundamental notion of freedom. There are
really two notions of freedom: voluntary action and origination. Both notions
are required to explain freedom of will and responsibility. Both determinism
and indeterminism are threats to such freedom. To abandon these notions of
freedom would be to abandon moral responsibility. On the one side, we have our
intuitions; on the other, the scientific facts. The "new" problem is how to
resolve this conflict. Two-stage models. In 1884 William James described a two-
stage model of free will: in the first stage the mind develops random
alternative possibilities for action, and in the second an adequately
determined will selects one option. A number of other thinkers have since
refined this idea, including Henri Poincaré, Arthur Holly Compton, Karl
Popper, Henry Margenau, Robert Kane, Alfred Mele, and Martin Heisenberg. Each
of these models tries to reconcile libertarian free will with the existence of
irreducible chance (today in the form of quantum indeterminacy), which
threatens to make an agent's decision random, thus denying the control needed
for responsibility. If a single event is caused by chance, then "logically"
indeterminism would be "true." For centuries, philosophers have said this would
undermine the very possibility of certain knowledge. Some go to the extreme of
saying that real chance would make the whole state of the world totally
independent of any earlier states. Some Stoics are reported to have said that a
single uncaused cause could destroy the universe (cosmos), James said most
philosophers have an "antipathy to chance." His contemporary John Fiske
described the absurd decisions that would be made if chance were real, Fiske,
John . "Outline of Cosmic Philosophy", part. H. chap. xvii, cited by William
James, "Principles of Psychology", Vol. 2. Dover p. 577 In modern times, J. J.
C. Smart has described the problem of admitting indeterminism, "Atheism and
Theism", Wiley-Blackwell (2003) p.63 Terence McKenna would disagree with J.J.C.
Smart. Terence McKenna thought biological systems were a chemical strategy of
amplifying of quantum mechanical indeterminacy to such a degree that freedom,
true freedom, shimmers into existence at the macrophysical level. The challenge
for two-stage models is to admit some indeterminism but not permit it to
produce random actions, as determinists fear. And of course a model must limit
determinism but not eliminate it as some libertarians think necessary. Two-
stage models limit the contribution of random chance to the "generation of
alternative possibilities" for action. But note that, in recent years,
compatibilist analytic philosophers following Harry Frankfurt have denied the
existence of alternative possibilities. They develop "Frankfurt-type examples"
(thought experiments) in which they argue an agent is free even though no
alternative possibilities exist, or the agent is prevented at the last moment
by neuroscientific demons from "doing otherwise." Free will as an illusion.
David Hume discussed the possibility that the entire debate about free will is
nothing more than a merely "verbal" issue. He suggested that it might be
accounted for by "a false sensation or seeming experience" (a "velleity"),
which is associated with many of our actions when we perform them. On
reflection, we realize that they were necessary and determined all along.
Schopenhauer, Arthur, "The Wisdom of Life", p 147 In his essay "On the Freedom
of the Will", Schopenhauer stated, "You can do what you will, but in any given
moment of your life you can "will" only one definite thing and absolutely
nothing other than that one thing." Free will as "moral imagination". Rudolf
Steiner, who collaborated in a complete edition of Arthur Schopenhauer's work,
wrote The Philosophy of Freedom, which focuses on the problem of free will.
Steiner (1861–1925) initially divides this into the two aspects of freedom:
"freedom of thought" and "freedom of action". The controllable and
uncontrollable aspects of decision making thereby are made logically separable,
as pointed out in the introduction. This separation of "will" from "action" has
a very long history, going back at least as far as Stoicism and the teachings
of Chrysippus (279 – 206 BC), who separated external "antecedent" causes from
the internal disposition receiving this cause. Steiner then argues that inner
freedom is achieved when we bridge the gap between our sensory impressions,
which reflect the outer appearance of the world, and our thoughts, which give
us access to the inner nature of the world. Acknowledging the many influences
on our choice, he points to the impact of our becoming aware of just these
determinants. Outer freedom is attained by permeating our deeds with "moral
imagination". Steiner aims to show that these two aspects of inner and outer
freedom are integral to one another, and that true freedom is only achieved
when they are united. Free will as a pragmatically useful concept. William
James' views were ambivalent. While he believed in free will on "ethical
grounds," he did not believe that there was evidence for it on scientific
grounds, nor did his own introspections support it. Moreover, he did not accept
incompatibilism as formulated below; he did not believe that the indeterminism
of human actions was a prerequisite of moral responsibility. In his work
"Pragmatism", he wrote that "instinct and utility between them can safely be
trusted to carry on the social business of punishment and praise" regardless of
metaphysical theories. He did believe that indeterminism is important as a
"doctrine of relief"—it allows for the view that, although the world may be
in many respects a bad place, it may, through individuals' actions, become a
better one. Determinism, he argued, undermines meliorism—the idea that
progress is a real concept leading to improvement in the world. Free will and
variations of causality. In this view, mind and neurological functions are
tightly coupled in a situation where feedback between collective actions (mind)
and individual subsystems (for example, neurons and their synapses) jointly
decide upon the behavior of both. The adjective "circular" in "circular
causality" is intended to separate this interactive causation from simple
stimulus-response and to express an extension of traditional feedback theory to
cases where no obvious feedback loops can be identified. An analogy is drawn
between "mind" and some emergent behavior seen in inanimate nature, such as
Rayleigh–Bénard convection. The mind-body problem. The idea of "free will"
is one aspect of the mind-body problem, that is, consideration of the relation
between mind (for example, consciousness, memory, and judgment) and body (for
example, the human brain and nervous system). Philosophical models of mind are
divided into physical and non-physical expositions. Cartesian dualism held that
the mind is a nonphysical substance, the seat of consciousness and
intelligence, and raised the question of how mind and body interact. It is
suggested that although the two worlds do interact, each retains some measure
of autonomy. Of course, unconscious brain activity often is caused by external
events, for example, the instantaneous reaction to being burned. Under
Cartesian dualism, however, it also occurs that external mind is responsible
for bodily action. Cartesian dualism implies a form of physical indeterminism
in which external mind controls (at least some) physical events, providing an
interpretation of incompatibilist free will. Stemming from Cartesian dualism, a
formulation sometimes called " interactionalist dualism" suggests a two-way
interaction, that some physical events cause some mental acts and some mental
acts cause some physical events. One modern vision of the possible separation
of mind and body is the "three-world" formulation of Popper. Cartesian dualism
and Popper's three worlds are two forms of what is called epistemological
pluralism, that is the notion that different epistemological methodologies are
necessary to attain a full description of the world. Epistemological pluralism
is one view in which the mind-body problem is "not" reducible to the concepts
of the natural sciences. A contrasting approach is called "cognitive
naturalism", in which mind is simply part of nature, perhaps merely a feature
of many very complex self-programming feedback systems (for example, neural
networks and cognitive robots), and so must be studied by the methods of
empirical science, for example, behavioral science and the cognitive sciences
like neuroscience and cognitive psychology. Cognitive naturalism stresses the
role of neurological sciences. Overall brain health, substance dependence,
depression, and various personality disorders clearly influence mental
activity, and their impact upon volition also is important. For example, an
addict may experience a conscious desire to escape addiction, but be unable to
do so. The "will" is disconnected from the freedom to act. This situation is
related to an abnormal production and distribution of dopamine in the brain.
Incompatibilism requires a distinction between the mental and the physical,
being a commentary on the incompatibility of (determined) physical reality and
one's presumably distinct experience of will. Although substance dualism offers
such a distinction, a less extreme form of naturalism known as non-reductive
physicalism may also suffice. Although one might suppose that mental states and
neurological states are different in kind, that does not rule out the
possibility that mental states correspond to neurological states. Under non-
reductive physicalism, although physical states do "cause" mental states, they
are not ontologically reducible to them. In one such construction, mental
events "supervene" on physical events, describing the emergence of mental
properties as correspondent to physical properties. This relationship is known
as causal reducibility. Non-reductive physicalism is therefore often
categorised as property dualism rather than monism, yet other types of property
dualism do not adhere to the causal reducibility of mental states - such as
epiphenomenalism. In science. Physics. Early scientific thought often portrayed
the universe as deterministic – for example in the thought of Democritus or
the Cārvākans – and some thinkers claimed that the simple process of
gathering sufficient information would allow them to predict future events with
perfect accuracy. Modern science, on the other hand, is a mixture of
deterministic and stochastic theories. Quantum mechanics predicts events only
in terms of probabilities, casting doubt on whether the universe is
deterministic at all. Current physical theories cannot resolve the question of
whether determinism is true of the world, being very far from a potential
Theory of Everything, and open to many different interpretations. Assuming that
an indeterministic interpretation of quantum mechanics is correct, one may
still object that such indeterminism is for all practical purposes confined to
microscopic phenomena. This is not always the case: many macroscopic phenomena
are based on quantum effects. For instance, some hardware random number
generators work by amplifying quantum effects into practically usable signals.
A more significant question is whether the indeterminism of quantum mechanics
allows for the traditional idea of free will (based on a perception of free
will). If a person's action is however only result of complete quantum
randomness, and mental processes as experienced have no influence on the
probabilistic outcomes (e.g. volition), this in itself would mean that such
traditional free will does not exist (because the action was not controllable
by the physical being who claims to possess the free will). Under the
assumption of physicalism it has been argued that the laws of quantum mechanics
provide a complete probabilistic account of the motion of particles, regardless
of whether or not free will exists. Physicist Stephen Hawking describes such
ideas in his 2010 book "The Grand Design". According to Hawking, these findings
from quantum mechanics suggest that humans are sorts of complicated biological
machines; although our behavior is impossible to predict perfectly in practice,
"free will is just an illusion." In other words, Hawking thinks that only
compatibilistic (deterministic) free will is possible based on the data. Erwin
Schrödinger, a nobel laureate in physics and one of the founders of quantum
mechanics, came to a different conclusion than Hawking. Near the end of his
1944 essay titled "What Is Life?" he says that there is "incontrovertible
direct experience" that humans have free will. He also states that the human
body is wholly or at least partially determined, leading him to conclude that
"...'I' -am the person, if any, who controls the 'motion of the atoms'
according to the Laws of Nature." He explains this position on free will by
appealing to a notion of self that is emergent from the entire collection of
atoms in his body, and other convictions about conscious experience. However,
he also qualifies the conclusion as "necessarily subjective" in its
"philosophical implications." Contrasting the views of Hawking and
Schrödinger, it is clear that even among eminent physicists there is not
unanimity regarding free will. Genetics. Like physicists, biologists have
frequently addressed questions related to free will. One of the most heated
debates in biology is that of "nature versus nurture", concerning the relative
importance of genetics and biology as compared to culture and environment in
human behavior. The view of many researchers is that many human behaviors can
be explained in terms of humans' brains, genes, and evolutionary histories.
This point of view raises the fear that such attribution makes it impossible to
hold others responsible for their actions. Steven Pinker's view is that fear of
determinism in the context of "genetics" and "evolution" is a mistake, that it
is "a confusion of "explanation" with "exculpation"". Responsibility doesn't
require that behavior be uncaused, as long as behavior responds to praise and
blame. Moreover, it is not certain that environmental determination is any less
threatening to free will than genetic determination. Neuroscience. It has
become possible to study the living brain, and researchers can now watch the
brain's decision-making process at work. A seminal experiment in this field was
conducted by Benjamin Libet in the 1980s, in which he asked each subject to
choose a random moment to flick her wrist while he measured the associated
activity in her brain; in particular, the build-up of electrical signal called
the readiness potential (after German Bereitschaftspotential). Although it was
well known that the readiness potential caused and preceded the physical
action, Libet asked whether it could be recorded before the conscious intention
to move. To determine when subjects felt the intention to move, he asked them
to watch the second hand of a clock. After making a movement, the volunteer
reported the time on the clock when they first felt the conscious intention to
move; this became known as Libet's W time. Libet found that the "unconscious"
brain activity of the readiness potential leading up to subjects' movements
began approximately half a second before the subject was aware of a conscious
intention to move. These studies of the timing between actions and the
conscious decision bear upon the role of the brain in understanding free will.
A subject's declaration of intention to move a finger appears "after" the brain
has begun to implement the action, suggesting to some that unconsciously the
brain has made the decision "before" the conscious mental act to do so. Some
believe the implication is that free will was not involved in the decision and
is an illusion. The first of these experiments reported the brain registered
activity related to the move about 0.2 s before movement onset. The bearing of
timing experiments upon free will is still under discussion. Neurology and
psychiatry. In several brain-related conditions, individuals cannot entirely
control their own actions. Though the existence of such conditions does not
directly refute the existence of free will, the study of such conditions, like
the neuroscientific studies above, is valuable in developing models of how the
brain may construct our experience of free will. For example, people with
Tourette syndrome and related tic disorders make involuntary movements and
utterances, called tics, despite the fact that they would prefer not to do so
when it is socially inappropriate. Tics are described as semi-voluntary or
""unvoluntary"," because they are not strictly "involuntary": they may be
experienced as a "voluntary" response to an unwanted, premonitory urge. Tics
are experienced as irresistible and must eventually be expressed. People with
Tourette syndrome are sometimes able to suppress their tics for limited
periods, but doing so often results in an explosion of tics afterward. The
control exerted (from seconds to hours at a time) may merely postpone and
exacerbate the ultimate expression of the tic. In alien hand syndrome, the
afflicted individual's limb will produce meaningful behaviors without the
intention of the subject. The affected limb effectively demonstrates 'a will of
its own.' The sense of agency does not emerge in conjunction with the overt
appearance of the purposeful act even though the sense of ownership in
relationship to the body part is maintained. This phenomenon corresponds with
an impairment in the premotor mechanism manifested temporally by the appearance
of the readiness potential (see section on the Neuroscience of Free Will above)
recordable on the scalp several hundred milliseconds before the overt
appearance of a spontaneous willed movement. Using functional magnetic
resonance imaging with specialized multivariate analyses to study the temporal
dimension in the activation of the cortical network associated with voluntary
movement in human subjects, an anterior-to-posterior sequential activation
process beginning in the supplementary motor area on the medial surface of the
frontal lobe and progressing to the primary motor cortex and then to parietal
cortex has been observed. The sense of agency thus appears to normally emerge
in conjunction with this orderly sequential network activation incorporating
premotor association cortices together with primary motor cortex. In
particular, the supplementary motor complex on the medial surface of the
frontal lobe appears to activate prior to primary motor cortex presumably in
associated with a preparatory pre-movement process. In a recent study using
functional magnetic resonance imaging, alien movements were characterized by a
relatively isolated activation of the primary motor cortex contralateral to the
alien hand, while voluntary movements of the same body part included the
concomitant activation of motor association cortex associated with the premotor
process. The clinical definition requires "feeling that one limb is foreign or
has a "will of its own," together with observable involuntary motor activity"
(emphasis in original). This syndrome is often a result of damage to the corpus
callosum, either when it is severed to treat intractable epilepsy or due to a
stroke. The standard neurological explanation is that the felt will reported by
the speaking left hemisphere does not correspond with the actions performed by
the non-speaking right hemisphere, thus suggesting that the two hemispheres may
have independent senses of will. Similarly, one of the most important ("first
rank") diagnostic symptoms of schizophrenia is the delusion of being controlled
by an external force. People with schizophrenia will sometimes report that,
although they are acting in the world, they did not initiate, or will, the
particular actions they performed. This is sometimes likened to being a robot
controlled by someone else. Although the neural mechanisms of schizophrenia are
not yet clear, one influential hypothesis is that there is a breakdown in brain
systems that compare motor commands with the feedback received from the body
(known as proprioception), leading to attendant hallucinations and delusions of
control. Determinism and emergent behavior. In some generative philosophies of
cognitive sciences and evolutionary psychology, free will is assumed not to
exist. However, an illusion of free will is created, within this theoretical
context, due to the generation of infinite or computationally complex behavior
from the interaction of a finite set of rules and parameters. Thus, the
unpredictability of the emerging behavior from deterministic processes leads to
a perception of free will, even though free will as an ontological entity is
assumed not to exist. In this picture, even if the behavior could be computed
ahead of time, no way of doing so is simpler than just observing the outcome of
the brain's own computations. As an illustration, some strategy board games
have rigorous rules in which no information (such as cards' face values) is
hidden from either player and no random events (such as dice rolling) occur in
the game. Nevertheless, strategy games like chess and especially Go, with its
simple deterministic rules, can have an extremely large number of unpredictable
moves. By analogy, "emergentists" suggest that the experience of free will
emerges from the interaction of finite rules and deterministic parameters that
generate infinite and unpredictable behavior. Yet, if "all" these events were
accounted for, and there were a known way to evaluate these events, the
seemingly unpredictable behavior would become predictable. Cellular automata
and the generative sciences can model emergent processes of social behavior on
this philosophy. Today robots can be made that adapt their responses to their
environment through self-programming, so-called intelligent robots. Much of the
description of these machines seems parallel to human behavior, although
technology has still not reached sufficient complexity to make a strong case
for the similarities. Is such a machine deterministic? We cannot predict the
machine's exact behavior without a complete knowledge of its personal history
with its environment, the reliability of its components, and its present state
of programming, uncertainties in which limit us to probabilistic statements.
One can conjecture that some such groups could evolve following a Darwinian
scheme, not only an interest of engineers, but a recurrent topic of science
fiction. Experimental psychology. For example, if a person hears an explosion
and sees a tree fall down that person is likely to infer that the explosion
caused the tree to fall over. However, if the explosion occurs after the tree
falls down (i.e., the first requirement is not met), or rather than an
explosion, the person hears the ring of a telephone (i.e., the second
requirement is not met), then that person is not likely to infer that either
noise caused the tree to fall down. Wegner has applied this principle to the
inferences people make about their own conscious will. People typically
experience a thought that is consistent with a behavior, and then they observe
themselves performing this behavior. As a result, people infer that their
thoughts must have caused the observed behavior. However, Wegner has been able
to manipulate people's thoughts and behaviors so as to conform to or violate
the two requirements for causal inference. Through such work, Wegner has been
able to show that people often experience conscious will over behaviors that
they have not, in fact, caused—and conversely, that people can be led to
experience a lack of will over behaviors they did cause. For instance, priming
subjects with information about an effect increases the probability that a
person falsely believes is the cause. The implication for such work is that the
perception of conscious will (which he says might be more accurately labelled
as 'the emotion of authorship') is not tethered to the execution of actual
behaviors, but is inferred from various cues through an intricate mental
process, "authorship processing". Although many interpret this work as a blow
against the argument for free will, both psychologists and philosophers have
criticized Wegner's theories. Emily Pronin has argued that the subjective
experience of free will is supported by the introspection illusion. This is the
tendency for people to trust the reliability of their own introspections while
distrusting the introspections of other people. The theory implies that people
will more readily attribute free will to themselves rather than others. This
prediction has been confirmed by three of Pronin and Kugler's experiments. When
college students were asked about personal decisions in their own and their
roommate's lives, they regarded their own choices as less predictable. Staff at
a restaurant described their co-workers' lives as more determined (having fewer
future possibilities) than their own lives. When weighing up the influence of
different factors on behavior, students gave desires and intentions the
strongest weight for their own behavior, but rated personality traits as most
predictive of other people. Psychologists have shown that reducing a person's
belief in free will makes them less helpful and more aggressive. This may occur
because the subject loses a sense of Self-efficacy. Believing in free will. In
recent years, free will belief in individuals has been analysed with respect to
traits in social behaviour. In general the concept of free will researched to
date in this context has been that of the incompatabilist, or more
specifically, the libertarian, i.e. freedom from determinism. What people
believe. Whether people naturally adhere to an incompatibilist model of free
will has been questioned in the research. Eddy Nahmias has found that
incompatibilism is not intuitive – it was not adhered to, in that determinism
does not negate belief in moral responsibility (based on an empirical study of
people's responses to moral dilemmas under a deterministic model of reality).
Edward Cokely has found that incompatibilism is intuitive – it was naturally
adhered to, in that determinism does indeed negate belief in moral
responsibility in general. Joshua Knobe and Shaun Nichols have proposed that
incompatibilism may or may not be intuitive, and that it is dependent to some
large degree upon the circumstances; whether or not the crime incites an
emotional response – for example if it involves harming another human being.
They found that belief in free will is a cultural universal, and that the
majority of participants said that (a) our universe is indeterministic and (b)
moral responsibility is not compatible with determinism. Studies indicate that
peoples' belief in free will is inconsistent. Emily Pronin and Matthew Kugler
found that people believe they have more free will than others. Studies also
reveal a correlation between someone's likelihood of accepting a deterministic
model of mind, and their personality type. For example, Adam Feltz and Edward
Cokely found that people of an extrovert personality type are more likely to
dissociate belief in determinism from belief in moral responsibility. Roy
Baumeister and colleagues reviewed literature on the psychological effects of a
belief (or disbelief) in free will. The first part of their analysis (which is
all that we are concerned with here) was not meant to discover which types of
free will actually exist. The researchers instead sought to identify what other
people believe, how many people believed it, and the effects of those beliefs.
Baumeister found that most people tend to believe in a sort of "naive
compatibilistic free will". The researchers also found that people consider
acts more "free" when they involve a person opposing external forces, planning,
or making random actions. Notably, the last behaviour, "random" actions, may
not be possible; when participants attempt to perform tasks in a random manner
(such as generating random numbers), their behaviour betrays many patterns.
Effects of the belief itself. Baumeister and colleagues found that provoking
disbelief in free will seems to cause various negative effects. The authors
concluded, in their paper, that it is belief in determinism that causes those
negative effects. This may not be a very justified conclusion, however. First
of all, free will can at least refer to either libertarian (indeterministic)
free will or compatibilistic (deterministic) free will. Having participants
read articles that simply "disprove free will" is unlikely to increase their
understanding of determinism, or the compatibilistic free will that it still
permits. In other words, "provoking disbelief in free will" probably causes a
belief in fatalism. As discussed earlier in this article, compatibilistic free
will is illustrated by statements like ""my choices have causes, and an effect
– so I affect my future"", whereas fatalism is more like ""my choices have
causes, but no effect – I am powerless"". Fatalism, then, may be what
threatens people's sense of self-efficacy. Lay people should not confuse
fatalism with determinism, and yet even professional philosophers occasionally
confuse the two. It is thus likely that the negative consequences below can be
accounted for by participants developing a belief in "fatalism" when
experiments attack belief in "free will". To test the effects of belief in
determinism, future studies would need to provide articles that do not simply
"attack free will", but instead focus on explaining determinism and
compatibilism. Some studies have been conducted indicating that people react
strongly to the way in which mental determinism is described, when reconciling
it with moral responsibility. Eddy Nahmias has noted that when peoples actions
are framed with respect to their beliefs and desires (rather than their
neurological underpinnings) they are more likely to dissociate determinism from
moral responsibility. Various social behavioural traits have been correlated
with the belief in deterministic models of mind, some of which involved the
experimental subjection of individuals to libertarian and deterministic
perspectives. After researchers provoked volunteers to disbelieve in free will,
participants lied, cheated, and stole more. Kathleen Vohs has found that those
whose belief in free will had been eroded were more likely to cheat. In a study
conducted by Roy Baumeister, after participants read an article disproving free
will, they were more likely to lie about their performance on a test where they
would be rewarded with cash. Provoking a rejection of free will has also been
associated with increased aggression and less helpful behaviour as well as
mindless conformity. Disbelief in free will can even cause people to feel less
guilt about transgressions against others. Baumeister and colleagues also note
that volunteers disbelieving in free will are less capable of counterfactual
thinking. This is worrying because counterfactual thinking ("If I had done
something different...") is an important part of learning from one's choices,
including those that harmed others. Again, this cannot be taken to mean that
belief in determinism is to blame; these are the results we would expect from
increasing people's belief in fatalism. Along similar lines, Tyler Stillman has
found that belief in free will predicts better job performance. In Eastern
philosophy. In Hindu philosophy. The six orthodox (astika) schools of thought
in Hindu philosophy do not agree with each other entirely on the question of
free will. For the Samkhya, for instance, matter is without any freedom, and
soul lacks any ability to control the unfolding of matter. The only real
freedom ("kaivalya") consists in realizing the ultimate separateness of matter
and self. For the Yoga school, only Ishvara is truly free, and its freedom is
also distinct from all feelings, thoughts, actions, or wills, and is thus not
at all a freedom of will. The metaphysics of the Nyaya and Vaisheshika schools
strongly suggest a belief in determinism, but do not seem to make explicit
claims about determinism or free will. A quotation from Swami Vivekananda, a
Vedantist, offers a good example of the worry about free will in the Hindu
tradition. However, the preceding quote has often been misinterpreted as
Vivekananda implying that everything is predetermined. What Vivekananda
actually meant by lack of free will was that the will was not "free" because it
was heavily influenced by the law of cause and effect—"The will is not free,
it is a phenomenon bound by cause and effect, but there is something behind the
will which is free." Vivekananda never said things were absolutely determined
and placed emphasis on the power of conscious choice to alter one's past karma:
"It is the coward and the fool who says this is his fate. But it is the strong
man who stands up and says I will make my own fate." In Buddhist philosophy.
Buddhism accepts both freedom and determinism (or something similar to it), but
rejects the idea of an agent, and thus the idea that freedom is a free will
belonging to an agent. According to the Buddha, "There is free action, there is
retribution, but I see no agent that passes out from one set of momentary
elements into another one, except the of those elements." Buddhists believe in
neither absolute free will, nor determinism. It preaches a middle doctrine,
named "pratitya-samutpada" in Sanskrit, which is often translated as "inter-
dependent arising". This theory is also called "Conditioned Genesis" or
"Dependent Origination". It teaches that every volition is a conditioned action
as a result of ignorance. In part, it states that free will is inherently
conditioned and not "free" to begin with. It is also part of the theory of
karma in Buddhism. The concept of karma in Buddhism is different from the
notion of karma in Hinduism. In Buddhism, the idea of karma is much less
deterministic. The Buddhist notion of karma is primarily focused on the cause
and effect of moral actions in this life, while in Hinduism the concept of
karma is more often connected with determining one's destiny in future lives.
In Buddhism it is taught that the idea of absolute freedom of choice (i.e. that
any human being could be completely free to make any choice) is unwise, because
it denies the reality of one's physical needs and circumstances. Equally
incorrect is the idea that humans have no choice in life or that their lives
are pre-determined. To deny freedom would be to deny the efforts of Buddhists
to make moral progress (through our capacity to freely choose compassionate
action). "Pubbekatahetuvada", the belief that all happiness and suffering arise
from previous actions, is considered a wrong view according to Buddhist
doctrines. Because Buddhists also reject agenthood, the traditional
compatibilist strategies are closed to them as well. Instead, the Buddhist
philosophical strategy is to examine the metaphysics of causality. Ancient
India had many heated arguments about the nature of causality with Jains,
Nyayists, Samkhyists, Cārvākans, and Buddhists all taking slightly different
lines. In many ways, the Buddhist position is closer to a theory of
"conditionality" than a theory of "causality", especially as it is expounded by
Nagarjuna in the "Mūlamadhyamakakārikā". In other theology. The theological
doctrine of divine foreknowledge is often alleged to be in conflict with free
will, particularly in Reformed circles—for if God knows exactly what will
happen, right down to every choice, that calls into questions the status of
choices as free. If God has timelessly true knowledge about one's choices, this
seems to constrain individual freedom. This problem is related to the
Aristotelian problem of the sea battle: tomorrow there will or will not be a
sea battle. If there will be one, then it seems that it was true yesterday that
there would be one. Then it would be necessary that the sea battle will occur.
If there won't be one, then by similar reasoning, it is necessary that it won't
occur. This means that the future, whatever it is, is completely fixed by past
truths—true propositions about the future. However, some philosophers follow
William of Ockham in holding that necessity and possibility are defined with
respect to a given point in time and a given matrix of empirical circumstances,
and so something that is merely possible from the perspective of one observer
may be necessary from the perspective of an omniscient. Some philosophers
follow Philo of Alexandria, a philosopher known for his homocentrism, in
holding that free will is a feature of a human's soul, and thus that non-human
animals lack free will. Some views in Jewish philosophy stress that free will
is a product of the intrinsic human soul, using the word "neshama" (from the
Hebrew root "n.sh.m." or . .ש.מ meaning "breath"), but the ability to make a
free choice is through "Yechida" (from Hebrew word "yachid", יחיד,
singular), the part of the soul that is united with God, the only being that is
not hindered by or dependent on cause and effect (thus, freedom of will does
not belong to the realm of the physical reality, and inability of natural
philosophy to account for it is expected). While there are other views of free
will in Judaism, most share the same basic Kabbalah principles. In Islam the
theological issue is not usually how to reconcile free will with God's
foreknowledge, but with God's "jabr", or divine commanding power. al-Ash'ari
developed an "acquisition" or "dual-agency" form of compatibilism, in which
human free will and divine "jabr" were both asserted, and which became a
cornerstone of the dominant Ash'ari position. In Shia Islam, Ash'aris
understanding of a higher balance toward predestination is challenged by most
theologians. Free will, according to Islamic doctrine is the main factor for
man's accountability in his/her actions throughout life. Actions taken by
people exercising free will are counted on the Day of Judgement because they
are their own, however the free will happens with the permission of God . The
philosopher Søren Kierkegaard claimed that divine omnipotence cannot be
separated from divine goodness. As a truly omnipotent and good being, God could
create beings with true freedom over God. Furthermore, God would voluntarily do
so because "the greatest good ... which can be done for a being, greater than
anything else that one can do for it, is to be truly free." Alvin Plantinga's
"free will defense" is a contemporary expansion of this theme, adding how God,
free will, and evil are consistent. References. Hawking, Stephen, and Mlodinow,
Leonard, "The Grand Design", New York, Bantam Books, 2010.
