Gabriel In Abrahamic religions, Gabriel (; Arabic: جبريل, "Jibrīl" or
جبرائيل "Jibrāʾīl") is an archangel who typically serves as a
messenger to humans from God. Gabriel is mentioned in the Bible once in the Old
Testament and once in the New. In the Old Testament, he appears to the prophet
Daniel, delivering explanations of Daniel's visions (Daniel 8:15–26, 9:
21–27). In the Gospel of Luke, Gabriel appears to the virgin Mary and to
Zechariah, foretelling the births of Jesus and John the Baptist, respectively
(Luke 1:11–38). Daniel does not explicitly identify Gabriel as an angel: he
is a visionary figure whom Daniel calls "the man Gabriel". In the Gospel of
Luke, Gabriel is referred to as "an angel of the Lord". (Luke 1:11) But
Christians of the Catholic traditions call him an archangel, following
terminology developed in the Intertestamental period, especially the Book of
Enoch. In the Roman Catholic, Anglican, Eastern and Oriental Orthodox Churches,
the archangels Michael, Raphael and Gabriel are considered saints. In Islam,
Gabriel ("Jibra'il") is believed to have been the angel who revealed the Qur'an
to the Prophet Mohammed in the period of 23 years. Judaism. Gabriel is
mentioned in the Book of Daniel, in the Hebrew Scriptures where he is sent as a
messenger of YHWH (see God in Judaism) to Daniel during the Jewish captivity in
Babylon. He is later mentioned in the Talmud. Gabriel is interpreted by the
Rabbis to be the "man in linen" in the Book of Daniel and the Book of Ezekiel.
In the Book of Daniel, he is responsible for interpreting Daniel's visions and
acting as a spokesman providing God's responses to his prayers and fasting. In
the Book of Ezekiel, Gabriel is understood to be the angel that was sent to
destroy Jerusalem for its wickedness and idolatry during the late Kingdom of
Judah, separating the few righteous Jews that would not be destroyed and would
be exiled from the majority of wicked ones that would perish there for their
iniquities and failure to return. In the Kabbalah, he is identified with the
sephirot of gevurah. He also has a prominent role as one of God's archangels in
the Kabbalah literature. There, he is portrayed as working in concert with
Michael as part of God's court. He is not to be prayed to directly; only God
can answer prayers and send him as His agent. According to Jewish mythology, in
the Garden of Eden there is a Tree of life or the "Tree of Souls" that blossoms
and produces new souls, which fall into the Guf, the "Treasury of Souls".
Gabriel reaches into the treasury and takes out the first soul that comes into
his hand. Then Lailah, the Angel of Conception, watches over the embryo until
it is born. Intertestamental literature. The inter-testamental period (roughly
200 BCE – 50 CE) produced a wealth of literature, much of it having an
apocalyptic orientation. The names and ranks of angels and devils were greatly
expanded there, and given particular duties and status before God. In 1 Enoch
9:1–2, Gabriel, along with Michael, Raphael, Uriel and Suriel, hears the
cries of humanity under the strain of the Nephilim. It was their beseeching of
"the Ancient of Days" - interpreted to be Yahweh - that prompted God to call
Enoch to the prophetical office. After Enoch informed the Watchers (or
"Grigori") of their fall from grace, the Ancient of Days sent the archangels to
earth to complete various tasks. In Enoch 10:13, Gabriel was to "Go to the
biters, to the reprobates, to the children of fornication, the offspring of the
Watchers, from among men; bring them forth and excite them against one another.
Let them perish under mutual slaughter; for length of days shall not be
theirs." And so, Gabriel instigated wars among the Nephilim (the sons of the
Watchers). Enoch (20:7) says that Gabriel presides over "Ikisat" (the fiery
serpents) or Seraphim, Cherubim, and paradise, while Enoch 40:9 states that
Gabriel presides over "all that is powerful." Gabriel sits on the left hand of
God with Metatron. Christianity. New Testament. an angel of the Lord standing
on the right side of the altar of incense. even from his mother’s womb.
16 And many of the children of Israel shall he turn to the Lord their God.
17 And he shall go before him in the spirit and power of Elias, to turn the
hearts of the fathers to the children, and the disobedient to the wisdom of the
just; to make ready a people prepared for the Lord.
18 And Zacharias said unto the angel, Whereby shall I know this? for I am an
old man, and my wife well stricken in years.
19 And the angel answering said unto him, I am Gabriel, that stand in the
presence of God; and am sent to speak unto thee, and to shew thee these glad
tidings.( KJV) (other versions: ) the angel Gabriel was sent from God unto a
city of Galilee, named Nazareth,( KJV) (other versions: ) Gabriel only appears
by name in those two passages in Luke. In the first passage the angel
identified himself as Gabriel, but in the second it is Luke who identified him
as Gabriel. The only other named angel in the New Testament is "Michael the
archangel" (in ). Gabriel is not called an archangel in the Bible. Believers
are expressly warned not to worship angels (in and ). Gabriel's horn. In
English-speaking culture, a familiar trope is the image of Gabriel blowing a
trumpet blast to indicate the Lord's return to Earth. It ranges from its first
appearance in English in John Milton's "Paradise Lost" (1667) to African-
American spirituals: in Marc Connelly's play based on spirituals, "The Green
Pastures" (1930), Gabriel has his beloved trumpet constantly with him, and the
Lord has to warn him not to blow it too soon. Four years later "Blow, Gabriel,
Blow" was introduced by Ethel Merman in Cole Porter's "Anything Goes" (1934).
The mathematical figure given the modern name "Gabriel's Horn", was invented by
Evangelista Torricelli (1608–1647); it is a paradoxical solid of revolution
that has infinite surface area, but finite volume. In Islamic tradition, though
not specified in the Qur'an, the trumpeter sounding the "trump of doom" is not
Gabriel, but Israfel. The earliest identification of Gabriel as the trumpeter
that S. Vernon McCasland was able to trace was in an Armenian illuminated
manuscript dated 1455, at the Walters Art Museum, Baltimore. Feast days. The
feast of Saint Gabriel was included for the first time in the General Roman
Calendar in 1921, for celebration on March 24. In 1969 it was transferred to 29
September for celebration together with St. Michael and St. Raphael. The Church
of England has also adopted the 29 September date, known as Michaelmas. The
Eastern Orthodox Church and those Eastern Catholic Churches which follow the
Byzantine Rite celebrate his feast day on 8 November (for those churches that
follow the traditional Julian Calendar, 8 November currently falls on 21
November of the modern Gregorian Calendar, a difference of 13 days). Eastern
Orthodox commemorate him, not only on his November feast, but also on two other
days: 26 March is the "Synaxis of the Archangel Gabriel" and celebrates his
role in the Annunciation. 13 July is also known as the "Synaxis of the
Archangel Gabriel", and celebrates all the appearances and miracles attributed
to Gabriel throughout history. The feast was first established on Mount Athos
when, in the ninth century, during the reign of Emperor Basil II and the
Empress Constantina Porphyrogenitus and while Nicholas Chrysoverges was
Patriarch of Constantinople, the Archangel appeared in a cell near Karyes,
where he wrote with his finger on a stone tablet the hymn to the Theotokos, "It
is truly meet...". The Ethiopian Church celebrates his feast on 28 December,
with a sizeable number of its believers making a pilgrimage to a church
dedicated to "Saint Gabriel" in Kulubi on that day. Additionally Gabriel is the
patron saint of messengers, those who work for broadcasting and
telecommunications such as radio and television, remote sensing, and postal
workers. Islam. According to the Quran, Gabriel ("Jibra'il") the angel who
revealed the Qur'an to the prophet Muhammad, and sent a message to most
prophets, if not all, revealing their obligations. Gabriel is named numerous
times in the Qur'an (II: 97, 98; LXVI: 4); and, in II: 97, the Qur'an expressly
narrates:"Who is an enemy to Gabriel! For he it is who hath revealed (this
scripture) to thy heart by God's leave, confirming that which was (revealed)
before it, and a guidance and glad tidings to believers." Gabriel makes a
famous appearance in the Hadith of Gabriel, where he quizzes the Prophet
Muhammad on the core tenets of Islam. In Muslim tradition, Gabriel occupies the
role of one of the primary archangels and all historical commentaries build
upon Gabriel's role as the transmitter of the Qur'an. Exegesis narrates that
Muhammad saw Gabriel in his full angelic splendor only twice, the first being
when he received his first revelation. Muslims also revere Gabriel for a number
of historical events predating the first revelation. Muslims believe that
Gabriel was the angel who informed Zachariah of John's birth as well as Mary of
the future birth of Jesus and that Gabriel was one of three angels who had
earlier informed Abraham of the birth of Isaac. These events of Zachariah and
Mary can be found also in the Quran, mentioned in surah Maryam, below are some
ayat from the Quran referring to the archangel Gabriel (interpretation of the
meanings). angel said, "Thus will be; your Lord says, 'It is easy for Me, for I
created you before, while you were nothing.' " When the angel Gabriel appeared
to Mary: Our Angel, and he represented himself to her as a well-proportioned
man. Mormonism. In Mormon theology, Gabriel is believed to have lived a mortal
life as the prophet Noah. The two are regarded as the same individual; Noah
being his mortal name and Gabriel being his heavenly name. Arts and media.
Music. The eccentric English hagiographer and antiquarian, Sabine Baring-Gould
(1834–1924), wrote the English lyrics to "Gabriel's Message", which he
translated from the Basque Christmas carol "Birjina gaztetto bat zegoen", which
was probably related to the 13th or 14th century Latin chant "Angelus Ad
Virginem" which itself is based on the biblical account of the Annunciation in
the New Testament Gospel of Luke.
