Geneva Bible The Geneva Bible is one of the most historically significant
translations of the Bible into the English language, preceding the King James
translation by 51 years. It was the primary Bible of 16th century Protestantism
and was the Bible used by William Shakespeare, Oliver Cromwell, John Milton,
John Knox, John Donne, and John Bunyan, author of "Pilgrim's Progress". It was
one of the Bibles taken to America on the "Mayflower", it was used by many
English Dissenters, and it was still respected by Oliver Cromwell's soldiers at
the time of the English Civil War. This version of the Holy Bible is
significant because, for the very first time, a mechanically printed, mass-
produced Bible was made available directly to the general public which came
with a variety of scriptural study guides and aids (collectively called an
apparatus), which included verse citations which allow the reader to cross-
reference one verse with numerous relevant verses in the rest of the Bible,
introductions to each book of the Bible which acted to summarize all of the
material that each book would cover, maps, tables, woodcut illustrations,
indexes, as well as other included features ‚Äî all of which would eventually
lead to the reputation of the Geneva Bible as history's very first study bible.
Because the language of the Geneva Bible was more forceful and vigorous, most
readers preferred this version strongly over the Great Bible. In the words of
Cleland Boyd McAfee, "it drove the Great Bible off the field by sheer power of
excellence". History. During the reign of Queen Mary I of England (1553‚Äì58),
a number of Protestant scholars fled from England to Geneva in Switzerland,
which was then ruled as a republic in which John Calvin and, later, Theodore
Beza provided the primary spiritual and theological leadership. Among these
scholars was William Whittingham, who supervised the translation now known as
the Geneva Bible, in collaboration with Myles Coverdale, Christopher Goodman,
Anthony Gilby, Thomas Sampson, and William Cole; several of this group later
became prominent figures in the Vestments controversy. Whittingham was directly
responsible for the New Testament, which was complete and published in 1557,
while Gilby oversaw the Old Testament. The first full edition of this Bible,
with a further revised New Testament, appeared in 1560, but it was not printed
in England until 1575 (New Testament) and 1576 (complete Bible). Over 150
editions were issued; the last probably in 1644. The very first Bible printed
in Scotland was a Geneva Bible, which was first issued in 1579. In fact, the
involvement of Knox and Calvin in the creation of the Geneva Bible made it
especially appealing in Scotland, where a law was passed in 1579 requiring
every household of sufficient means to buy a copy. Some editions from 1576
onwards included Laurence Tomson's revisions of the New Testament. Some
editions from 1599 onwards used a new "Junius" version of the Book of
Revelation, in which the notes were translated from a new Latin commentary by
Franciscus Junius. The annotations which are an important part of the Geneva
Bible were Calvinist and Puritan in character, and as such they were disliked
by the ruling pro-government Anglicans of the Church of England, as well as
King James I, who commissioned the "Authorized Version", or King James Bible,
in order to replace it. The Geneva Bible had also motivated the earlier
production of the Bishops' Bible under Elizabeth I, for the same reason, and
the later Rheims-Douai edition by the Catholic community. The Geneva Bible
remained popular among Puritans and remained in widespread use until after the
English Civil War. The Geneva notes were surprisingly included in a few
editions of the King James version, even as late as 1715. Translation. Like
most English translations of the time, the Geneva Bible was translated from
scholarly editions of the Greek New Testament and the Hebrew Scriptures that
comprise the Christian Old Testament. The English rendering was substantially
based on the earlier translations by William Tyndale and Myles Coverdale (more
than 80 percent of the language in the Genevan Bible is from Tyndale). However,
the Geneva Bible was the first English version in which "all" of the Old
Testament was translated directly from the Hebrew (cf. Coverdale Bible, Matthew
Bible). Format. The Geneva Bible was the first English Bible to use verse
numbers based on the work of Stephanus (Robert Estienne of Paris). It also had
an elaborate system of commentary in marginal glosses. This annotation was done
by Laurence Tomson, who translated (for the 1560 Geneva Bible) L'Oiseleur's
notes on the Gospels, which themselves came from Camerarius. In 1576 Tomson
added L'Oiseleur's notes for the Epistles, which came from Beza's Greek and
Latin edition of the Bible (1565 and later). Beginning in 1599 Franciscus
Junius' notes on Revelation were added, replacing the original notes deriving
from John Bale and Heinrich Bullinger. Bale's "The Image of both churches" had
a great impact on these notes as well as Foxe's Book of Martyrs. Both the
Junius and Bullinger-Bale annotations are explicitly anti-Roman Catholic and
representative of much popular Protestant apocalypticism during the
Reformation. The 1560 Geneva Bible was printed in Roman type‚Äîthe style of
type regularly used today‚Äîbut many editions used the older black-letter
("Gothic") type. Of the various later English Bible translations, the next to
use Roman type was the Douay-Rheims Bible of 1582 (New Testament) and 1609‚Äì10
(Old Testament). The Geneva Bible was also issued in more convenient and
affordable sizes than earlier versions. The 1560 Bible was in quarto format
(218 √ó 139¬ mm type area), but pocketable octavo editions were also issued,
and a few large folio editions. The New Testament was issued at various times
in sizes from quarto down to 32¬∫ (the smallest, 70√ó39¬ mm type area). In the
late sixteenth century it is likely that the Geneva New Testament cost less
than a week's wages even for the lowest-paid labourers. The 1560 Geneva Bible
contained a number of study aids, including woodcut illustrations, maps and
explanatory 'tables', i.e. indexes of names and topics, in addition to the
famous marginal notes. Each book was preceded by an 'argument' or introduction,
and each chapter by a list of contents giving verse numbers. Smaller-format
editions might be unillustrated and lack the marginal notes, but some large
folio editions had additional illustrations, such as one showing Adam and Eve,
where Adam wears a typical Elizabethan beard and moustache. Modern spelling
version of the 1599 Geneva Bible. In 2006, Tolle Lege Press released a version
of the 1599 Geneva Bible with modern spellings as part of their 1599 Geneva
Bible restoration project. The original cross references were retained as well
as the study notes by the Protestant Reformation leaders. In addition, the Old
English glossary was included in the updated version. The advisory board of the
restoration project included several Protestant Christian leaders and scholars.
Sample. Geneva Bible King James Bible The two versions are very similar to each
other. Examination of the differences shows that the earlier Geneva version is
often more direct and modern in style than the later King James, e.g. ‚Äúand
the moon was like blood‚Äù (Geneva) versus ‚Äúand the moon became as blood‚Äù
(King James) ‚Äúas a fig tree casteth her green figs‚Äù (Geneva) versus ‚Äúeven
as a fig tree casteth her untimely figs‚Äù (King James) By and large, the
difference is that the KJV lacked footnotes that the Geneva Bible contained.
External links. Text Articles Editions Currently in Print FAQ
