Glossolalia Glossolalia or speaking in tongues is the fluid vocalizing (or less
commonly, the writing) of speech-like syllables which lack any readily
comprehended meaning, in some cases as part of religious practice. The
significance of glossolalia has varied in context, with some minorities
considering it as a part of a sacred language. It is most prominently practiced
within Pentecostal and Charismatic Christianity, but it is also practiced in
non-Christian religions. Glossolalia also sometimes refers to xenoglossy, which
is speaking in a natural language that was previously unknown to the speaker.
Etymology. "Glossolalia" is constructed from the Greek word
γλωσσολαλία, itself a compound of the words γλῶσσα
("glossa"), meaning "tongue" or "language" and λαλέω ("laleō"), "To
speak, talk, chat, prattle, or to make a sound". The Greek expression (in
various forms) appears in the New Testament in the books of Acts and 1
Corinthians. "Speaking in tongues" has been used at least since the translation
of the New Testament into Middle English in the Wycliffe Bible in the 14th
century. Frederic William Farrar first used the word "glossolalia" in 1879.
Linguistics. In 1972, William J. Samarin, a linguist from the University of
Toronto, published a thorough assessment of Pentecostal glossolalia that became
a classic work on its linguistic characteristics. His assessment was based on a
large sample of glossolalia recorded in public and private Christian meetings
in Italy, The Netherlands, Jamaica, Canada and the USA over the course of five
years; his wide range included the Puerto Ricans of the Bronx, the Snake
Handlers of the Appalachians, and Russian Molokan in Los Angeles.   That the
sounds are taken from the set of sounds already known to the speaker is
confirmed by others. Felicitas Goodman, a psychological anthropologist and
linguist, also found that the speech of glossolalists reflected the patterns of
speech of the speaker's native language. Samarin found that the resemblance to
human language was merely on the surface, and so concluded that glossolalia is
"only a facade of language". He reached this conclusion because the syllable
string did not form words, the stream of speech was not internally organised,
and– most importantly of all– there was no systematic relationship between
units of speech and concepts. Humans use language to communicate, but
glossolalia does not. Therefore he concluded that glossolalia is not "a
specimen of human language because it is neither internally organized nor
systematically related to the world man perceives". On the basis of his
linguistic analysis, Samarin defined Pentecostal glossolalia as "meaningless
but phonologically structured human utterance, believed by the speaker to be a
real language but bearing no systematic resemblance to any natural language,
living or dead". Practitioners of glossolalia may disagree with linguistic
researchers and claim that they are speaking human languages (xenoglossia).
Felicitas Goodman studied a number of Pentecostal communities in the United
States, the Caribbean and Mexico; these included English, Spanish and Mayan
speaking groups. She compared what she found with recordings of non-Christian
rituals from Africa, Borneo, Indonesia and Japan. She took into account both
the segmental structure (such as sounds, syllables, phrases) and the supra-
segmental elements (rhythm, accent, intonation), and concluded that there was
no distinction between what was practiced by the Pentecostal Protestants and
the followers of other religions. Glossolalia in Christianity. Theological
explanations. In Christianity, a supernatural explanation for glossolalia is
advocated by some and rejected by others. Proponents of each viewpoint use the
biblical writings and historical arguments to support their positions. Biblical
practice. Other verses by inference may be considered to refer to 'speaking in
tongues', such as Isaiah 28:11, Romans 8:26 and Jude 20. The biblical account
of Pentecost in the second chapter of the book of Acts describes the sound of a
mighty rushing wind and "divided tongues like fire" coming to rest on the
apostles. The text further describes that "they were all filled with the Holy
Spirit, and began to speak in unknown languages." It goes on to say in verses
5-11 that when the Apostles spoke, each person in attendance "heard their own
language being spoken." Therefore, the gift of speaking in tongues refers to
the Apostles' ability to speak in their native language while the people
listening heard "them declaring the wonders of God in own tongues."
Glossolalists and cessationists both recognize this as xenoglossia, a
miraculous ability that marked their baptism in the Holy Spirit. Something
similar (although perhaps not xenoglossia) took place on at least two
subsequent occasions, in Caesarea and Ephesus. The Apostle Paul instructed the
church in Corinth about speaking in tongues in his discussion of the gifts of
the Spirit in a letter to them. His purpose was to encourage them to value the
gift, but not too highly; to practice it, but not abuse it. In the letter, Paul
commands church brethren, ""Do not forbid to speak in tongues"" (1 Cor 14:39),
while warning them that ""all things must be done properly and in an orderly
manner"" He further expresses his wishes that those to whom he wrote ""all
spoke with tongues"" (1 Cor 14:5) and claims himself to speak with tongues more
than any in the church at Corinth (""I thank God I speak with tongues more than
you all"" 1 Cor 14:18). At the same time he argues that not everyone can speak
in tongues (1 Cor 12:29) and discourages simultaneous speaking in tongues
directed at people rather than God, lest unbelievers should think that the
assembled believers were "mad" (1 Cor 14:23, 27). Tongues, says Paul, is
speaking to God, rather than men (""in the Spirit he speaks mysteries"" (1 Cor
14:2)). Paul claims that speaking in tongues edifies the person speaking (1 Cor
14:4), that it is the action of a praying speaker's spirit (as opposed his or
her understanding, see 1 Cor 14:14), and that praying in tongues serves both to
bless God as well as to give thanks (1 Cor 14:16-17). However, he also
expressed a preference for prophecy over speaking in tongues, "unless speaker
in tongues interprets, so that the church may be edified"(1 Cor 14:5). Paul
also gave instructions that, unless there was an interpreter present, the
speaker should ""keep quiet in the church"", and speak only to himself and to
God (1 Cor 14:27-28). Glossolalists and cessationists generally agree that the
primary purpose of the gift of speaking in tongues was to mark the Holy Spirit
being poured out. At Pentecost the Apostle Peter declared that this gift, which
was making some in the audience ridicule the disciples as drunks, was the
fulfilment of the prophecy of Joel which described that God would pour out his
Spirit on all flesh (). Despite these commonalities, there are significant
variations in interpretation. Church practice. A.D. 100 to 400. 20th century
Pentecostalism was not the earliest instance of "speaking in tongues" in church
history, but earlier examples are few; in church history and writing after the
New Testament, it had never been regarded as orthodox until the rise of
Pentecostalism. References to speaking in tongues by the Church fathers are
rare. Except for Irenaeus' 2nd-century reference to many in the church speaking
all kinds of languages 'through the Spirit', and Tertullian's reference in 207
AD to the spiritual gift of interpretation of tongues being encountered in his
day, there are no other known first-hand accounts of glossolalia, and very few
second-hand accounts among their writings. What we do have are general remarks
that Christ had given the gifts of the Spirit to the church, and that the gifts
in general remained in the church. Justin Martyr, "Dialogue with Trypho", .
Justin Martyr, "Dialogue with Trypho", . The Fathers also recount the lists of
gifts of the Spirit recorded in the New Testament. Novatian, "Treatise
Concerning the Trinity", Chapter 29. Hilary of Poitiers, "On the Trinity", Vol
8 Chap 33 Irenaeus, "Against Heresies", Book V, . Tertullian, "Against
Marcion", Book V, Chapter VIII, . Eusebius, "Ecclesiastical History", V,17,3
Their hostility to such a practice demonstrates that the mainstream (the anti-
Montanists) regarded it as false, and would never have practised it. Indeed,
"after the first or perhaps the second century, there is not record of it in
any Orthodox source, and it is not recorded as occurring even among the great
Fathers of the Egyptian desert, who were so filled with the Spirit of God they
performed numerous astonishing miracles, including raising the dead". However,
Eusebius' words demonstrate that he still regards the gift of prophesying as
being a normal part of church life, so he is clearly not a cessationist.
Chrysostom regarded the whole phenomenon of 'speaking in tongues' as not only
something that was not practised in his own day, but was even obscure.
Chrystostom, "Homilies on First Corinthians", xxix, 1 Augustine of Hippo
regarded speaking in tongues (that is, xenoglossia) as a gift for the apostolic
church alone, and argued that this was evident from the fact that his
contemporaries did not see people receiving that gift in their own day.
Augustine, "Homilies on the Gospel of John 6:10", in "The Nicene and Post-
Nicene Fathers" [7:497-98] 20th century to present. During the 20th century,
glossolalia would primarily become associated with Pentecostalism and the later
charismatic movement. The holiness preachers Charles Parham and William Seymour
are credited as co-founders of the movement. It was Parham who formulated the
doctrine of "initial evidence". After studying the Bible, Parham came to the
conclusion that speaking in tongues was the Bible evidence that one had
received the baptism with the Holy Spirit. Parham and his early followers
believed that speaking in tongues was xenoglossia, and some followers traveled
to foreign countries and tried to use the gift to share the Gospel with non-
English-speaking people. These attempts consistently resulted in failure and
many of Parham's followers rejected his teachings after being disillusioned
with their attempts to speak unlearned foreign languages. Despite these
setbacks, belief in xenoglossia persisted into the latter half of the 20th
century among Pentecostal groups. The revival at Azusa Street lasted until
around 1915. From it grew many new Pentecostal churches as people visited the
services in Los Angeles and took their new found beliefs to communities around
the United States and abroad. During the 20th century, glossolalia became an
important part of the identity of these religious groups. During the 1960s, the
charismatic movement within the mainline Protestant churches and among
charismatic Roman Catholics would adopt some Pentecostal beliefs, and the
practice of glossolalia would spread to other Christian denominations. The
discussion regarding tongues has permeated many branches of the Protestantism,
particularly since the widespread Charismatic Movement in the 1960s. Many books
have been published either defending or attacking the practice. Because
Pentecostal and charismatic beliefs are not monolithic, there is not complete
theological agreement on speaking in tongues. Generally, however, it is agreed
that speaking in tongues is a spiritual gift that can be manifested as either a
human language or a heavenly supernatural language in three ways . The "sign of
tongues" refers to xenoglossia, wherein one speaks an actual language he has
never learned. The "gift of tongues" refers to a glossolalic utterance spoken
by an individual and addressed to a congregation of, typically, other
believers. Lastly, "praying in the spirit" is typically used to refer to
glossolalia as part of personal prayer. Many Pentecostals and charismatics
adhere to Paul's words in 1 Corinthians 14 which established guidelines on the
public use of glossolalia in the church at Corinth. The gift of tongues is
often referred to as a "message in tongues". This use of glossolalia requires
an interpretation so that the gathered congregation can understand the message.
This is accomplished by the interpretation of tongues, another spiritual gift.
There are two schools of thoughts concerning the nature of a message in
tongues. One school of thought believes it is always directed "to" God as
prayer, praise, or thanksgiving but is spoken in for the hearing and
edification of the congregation. The other school of thought believes that a
message in tongues can be a prophetic utterance inspired by the Holy Spirit. In
this case, the speaker delivers a message to the congregation on behalf of God.
In addition to praying in the Spirit, many Pentecostal and charismatic churches
practice what is known as singing in the Spirit. Non-Christian practice. Other
religious groups have been observed to practice some form of "theopneustic
glossolalia." It is perhaps most commonly in Paganism, Shamanism, and other
mediumistic religious practices. In Japan, the God Light Association used to
practice glossolalia to cause adherents to recall past lives. Glossolalia has
even been postulated as an explanation for the Voynich manuscript. Certain
Gnostic magical texts from the Roman period have written on them unintelligible
syllables such as "t t t t n n n n d d d d d..." etc. It is conjectured that
these may be transliterations of the sorts of sounds made during glossolalia.
The Coptic Gospel of the Egyptians also features a hymn of (mostly)
unintelligible syllables which is thought to be an early example of Christian
glossolalia. In the 19th century, Spiritism was developed by the work of Allan
Kardec, and the phenomenon was seen as one of the self-evident manifestations
of spirits. Spiritists argued that some cases were actually cases of
xenoglossia. Glossolalia has also been observed in the Voodoo religion of
Haiti, as well as in the Hindu Gurus and Fakirs of India. Scientific
explanations. Scientific explanations for these physical and psychological
phenomena have been suggested, including mental illness, hypnosis, and learned
behavior. Neuroscience. In 2006, the brains of a group of individuals were
scanned while they were speaking in tongues. Activity in the language centers
of the brain decreased, while activity in the emotional centers of the brain
increased. Activity in the area of control decreased. There were no changes in
any language areas, suggesting that glossolalia is not associated with usual
language function. One of the researchers, Andrew Newberg, said: "It's
fascinating because these subjects truly believe that the spirit of God is
moving through them and controlling them to speak". The data demonstrated that
subject's usual language centres were not activated as they spoke in tongues,
which suggests that a different region of the brain is responsible for this
activity. Other brain wave studies have also found that brain activity alters
in glossolalia. Mental illness. As Pentecostalism expanded in the 20th century
and attracted the attention of the wider world, psychologists initially thought
of glossolalia in pathological terms, thinking that it was caused by mental
illness. In 1927 George Cutten described speakers in tongues as people of low
mental abilities. This explanation was effectively refuted in 1969 by a team
from the University of Minnesota, who conducted an extensive study covering the
United States, Mexico, Haiti and Colombia; they reached practitioners among
Pentecostals, other Protestant groups, and Roman Catholics.  Subsequently, a
2003 statistical study in the religious journal Pastoral Psychology concluded
that, among the 991 male evangelical clergy sampled, glossolalia was associated
with stable extroversion, and contrary to some theories, completely unrelated
to psychopathology. Hypnosis. Some kind of hypnosis or trance has often been
suggested as the explanation for glossolalia. Much glossolalia takes place in
heightened states, whether in Pentecostal Christian or non-Christian contexts.
But glossolalia does not require a state of hypnosis or trance. An experiment
was conducted in which 12 experienced glossolalists performed with eyes open
and without accompanying kinetic activity (such as trembling or shaking) or any
residual disorientation. Moreover glossolalia is not only displayed in group
situations. The Minnesotan study found that "after the initial experience of
glossolalia, most Pentecostals speak with tongues as frequently, if not more
frequently, alone in private prayer", including some for the first time. These
findings rule out hypnosis by another, although self-hypnosis may play a part.
A New Zealand researcher, Heather Kavan, found that whether a person
experienced trance or hypnosis depended on the type of group with which they
were affiliated. Kavan found that most New Zealand Pentecostals and
Charismatics did not experience trance except during the baptism of the spirit.
However, meditators in a yoga-based purification group experienced frequent
intense trances, of which glossolalia was an occasional manifestation. Kavan
suggested that there are two types of glossolalia– spontaneous and context-
dependent– and the former is more likely to occur in groups that are radical,
experiential and charismatically led. Learned behavior.  The admittedly
fraudulent preacher Marjoe Gortner described in a 1977 interview how people
learn glossolalia in a highly emotional religious setting. Flo Conway and Jim
Siegelman, "Marjoe Gortner". Reprinted from Conway and Siegelman's book
"Snapping: America's Epidemic of Sudden Personality Change" (Stillpoint, 1995).
That glossolalia can be learned is also seen in the traces left behind by
teachers. An investigation by the Lutheran Medical Center in Brooklyn showed
that the influence of a particular leader can shape a group's glossolalia:
where certain prominent glossolalists had visited, whole groups of
glossolalists would speak in his style of speech. External links. Religious
perspectives Other
