Gog and Magog Gog and Magog ( ""; "Gog u-Magog") are names that appear
primarily in various Abrahamic scriptures, as well as numerous subsequent
references in other works. Their context can be either genealogical (as "Magog"
in Genesis 10:2) or eschatological and apocalyptic, as in the Book of Ezekiel
and Revelation. They are sometimes individuals, sometimes peoples, and
sometimes geographic regions. The passages from Ezekiel and Revelation in
particular have attracted attention due to their prophetic descriptions of
conflicts said to occur near the "end times". Etymology. The etymology of both
the names "Gog" and "Magog" remains uncertain. The "ma-" at the beginning of
"Magog" may indicate a land, or it may mean "from", so that "Magog" means "of
the land of Gog" or "from Gog". "Gog" may originate as the Hebrew version of
the name of Gyges of Lydia, who made his kingdom a great power in the early 7th
century BC, but this explanation, although common, is not universally accepted.
A different theory is that "Magog" might be a reference to Babylon, by turning
BBL ("Babylon" in Hebrew script, which originally had no vowel-signs) into MGG
(Magog), but this account, like the others, has problems. Texts. Genesis and
Chronicles. Genesis 10 "1 Chronicles" begins with a list of genealogies
repeating that in the Table of Nations but continuing well beyond. In chapter
5, among the many descendants of Reuben, first of the twelve sons of the
patriarch Jacob, it mentions an individual named Gog. Ezekiel. Ezekiel 38-39.
For discussion of uncertainties over the translation of this passage, see
Block, pp.432 ff. Ezekiel lived in the first half of the 6th century BC, and
the earliest possible date for the prophecy is c. 585 BC. Scholars disagree,
however, as to whether Ezekiel 38-39 was part of the original text (compare,
for example, Joseph Blenkinsopp, who believes it to be a late addition, and
Daniel Block, who argues for its original status). Its prophecy of a savage foe
from the north is based on Jeremiah 1:3-16, where Jeremiah is talking about the
Babylonians; Ezekiel turns this into an eschatological enemy who will come "in
the latter years," an apocalypse at the end of time. Gog's allies - Meshech and
Tubal, Persia, Cush and Put, and "Gomer with all its troops, and Beth Togarmah
from the far north" - are all, with the exception of Persia, taken from the
Table of Nations. Meshech, Tubal, Gomer and Beth Togarmah can be identified
with real 8th and 7th century peoples, kings or kingdoms of Anatolia, modern
Turkey. "Why the prophet's gaze should have focused on these particular nations
is unclear," says Daniel Block in a recent study of Ezekiel 25-48, but suggests
that their remoteness and reputation for violence and mystery "made Gog and his
confederates perfect symbols of the archetypal enemy, rising against God and
his people." Cush (Sudan or Ethiopia) and Put (Libya) are sons of Ham according
to Genesis 10, while Persia is located to the east, and is not mentioned in
Genesis 10 at all. Since Ezekiel insists on a northerly situation of Gog and
his allies, many commentators believe that these three names were added later,
although this too is disputed. Intertestamental period. Around the middle of
the 2nd century BC, the "Sibylline Oracles" mention the "land of Gog and Magog"
as "situated in the midst of Aethiopian rivers", but in a second mention links
it with the "Marsians and Dacians", in eastern Europe; in both cases they are
about to receive "woe," and according to Boe, "there can be little doubt about
the direct use of Ezekiel's oracles" in their composition. The "Book of
Jubilees", known from about the same time, mentions Magog as a son of Japheth
to whom land is allocated, while Gog is a region on Japheth's borders. 1 Enoch
tells how God stirs up the Medes and Parthians (instead of Gog and Magog) to
attack Jerusalem, where they are destroyed; an indebtedness to Ezekiel 38-39
has also been asserted. In the "Dead Sea Scrolls", the Messiah will rule "over
all the peoples and Magog," and Magog is allocated land next to Gomer, the
first son of Japheth. The sole fragment where the two names are combined as
"Gog and Magog" is too small to be meaningful. The 1st century "Liber
Antiquitatum Biblicarum" is notable for listing and naming seven of Magog's
sons, and mentions his "thousands" of descendants. The Greek translation of the
Hebrew Bible, made during this period, occasionally introduces the name of Gog
where the Hebrew original has something else. Thus at "Numbers" 24:7 it
replaces Agag, a mysterious but clearly powerful figure, with Gog, and at
"Amos" 7:1 the Greek has Gog as the leader of a threatening locust-like army.
The Greek translation of Ezekiel takes Gog and Magog to be synonyms for the
same country, a step which paved the way for the "Book of Revelation" to turn
"Gog from Magog" into "Gog and Magog." Book of Revelation. Revelation 20:7-10
Ezekiel's Gog from Magog was a symbol of the evil darkness of the north and the
powers hostile to God, but in Revelation, Gog and Magog have no geographic
location, and instead represent the nations of the world, banded together for
the final assault on Christ and those who follow him. Qur'an. In Surat Al-Kahf
("The Cave", 18:83–98) of the Qur'an, a pious warrior king called Dhul-
Qarnayn journeys to the place between the East and the West, and in the place
between the two mountains he finds people who scarcely understood a word"18:94
They said: "O Dhul-Qarnain! the Gog and Magog (People) do great mischief on
earth: shall we then render thee tribute in order that thou mightest erect a
barrier between us and them?" Dhu'l-Qarnayn doesn't take any tribute from them
and makes a wall made of iron between the mountains to keep Gog and Magog out,
but warns that it will be broken at the time appointed by Allah (before the Day
of Resurrection). In Surat Al-Anbiya ("The Prophets", 21:96–100) in fact, we
read that Allah threatens to open "the dam of Gog and Magog" to let those
people descend from above. Also, those forces from above can be intended as
"false gods" the worshippers of which will be damned in the Last Days. Rabbinic
literature. According to the Radak commenting on Zechariah 14, this part of
Zechariah refers to the war of Gog and Magog, that in the end of days Jerusalem
will be the battle ground of Gog and Magog. Identifying Gog and Magog. Separate
passages in the "Jewish Antiquities" and "Jewish War" of the 1st century Jewish
historian and scholar Josephus show that Jews of that time identified Gog and
Magog with the Scythians: Alexander the Great, Josephus said, locked these
horse-riding barbarians of the far north behind the Caucasus mountains with
iron gates. Some early Christian writers (e.g. Eusebius) identified Gog and
Magog with the Romans. After the Roman Empire became Christian this was no
longer possible and attention switched to Rome's northern barbarian enemies.
Ambrose (d.397) identified them with the Goths, and Isidore of Seville
confirmed that people in his day supposed that the Goths were descended from
Magog "because of the similarity of the last syllable". The idea that Gog and
Magog were connected with the Goths was longstanding; in the mid-16th century,
Archbishop of Uppsala Johannes Magnus traced the royal family of Sweden back to
Magog son of Japheth, (Magnus identified two of Magog's sons as Suenno,
progenitor of the Swedes, and Gethar (also known as Gog or Gogus), ancestor of
the Goths). In the 6th century, the Byzantine historian Procopius (d. after
562) saw Attila and the Huns as the nation locked out by Alexander, and a
little later other Christian writers identified them with the Saracens. Still
later, Gog and Magog became identified with the Khazars, whose empire dominated
Central Asia in the 9th and 10th centuries. In his 9th century work "Expositio
in Matthaeum Evangelistam", the Benedictine monk Christian of Stavelot referred
to them as descendants of Gog and Magog, and says they are "Circumcised and
observing all laws of Judaism"; the 14th century Sunni scholar Ibn Kathir also
identified Gog and Magog with the Khazars, as did a Georgian tradition, which
called them "wild men with hideous faces and the manners of wild beasts, eaters
of blood". According to the famous Khazar Correspondence (c. 960), King Joseph
of Khazaria claimed to be a descendant of Magog's nephew Togarmah. The Mongols
were the next barbarians. Early in the 13th century reports began to reach
Europe of a mysterious and invincible horde from the east that destroyed Muslim
empires and kingdoms, leading kings and popes to take them for Prester John,
marching to save Christians from the Saracens; but when they entered Poland and
Hungary and annihilated Christian armies, a terrified Europe concluded that
they were "Magogoli", the offspring of Gog and Magog, released from the prison
Alexander had constructed for them and heralding Armageddon. The Mongolian
armies decided to turn back because of the death of Genghis Khan back in the
East and their defeat in the Battle of Ain Jalut in Palestine. Gog and Magog
became the subject of literature. The "Travels of Sir John Mandeville", a 14th
best-seller, associated the Jews with Gog and Magog, saying the nation trapped
behind the Gates of Alexander comprised the Ten Lost Tribes of Israel. Marco
Polo located Gog and Magog as regions of Tenduk, a province belonging to the
legendary Prester John, and governed by one George, fourth in descent from the
original John. According to this account Gog (locally "Ung") is inhabited by a
tribe called the Gog, whilst Magog (or "Mongul") is inhabited by Tatars. The
14th century Muslim traveller Ibn Battuta reported that "the rampart of Yajuj
and Majuj" was "sixty days' travel" from the city of Zeitun; the translator
notes that Ibn Battuta has confused the Great Wall of China with that built by
Dhul-Qarnayn. A German tradition claimed a group called the Red Jews would
invade Europe at the end of the world; the "Red Jews" became associated with
different peoples, but especially the Eastern European Jews and the Ottoman
Turks. Jewish scholars of the Middle Ages, including Rashi, Radak and others,
had associated no specific nation or territory with Magog, beyond locating it
to the north of Israel. In the early 19th century some Chasidic rabbis
identified Napoleon's invasion of Russia as "The War of Gog and Magog" which
would precede the coming of the Messiah, so that the Emperor filled the role of
Gog. In the 20th century Hitler was seen as a likely candidate. During the Cold
War the idea (first advanced by Wilhelm Gesenius in the mid-1800s) that Russia
itself had the role of Gog gained popularity (since Ezekiel's words describing
him as "prince of Meshek" - "rosh meshek" in Hebrew - sounded suspiciously like
Russia and Moscow). This interpretation has been taken up by several Christian
authors and preachers since then (such as Hal Lindsey's "The Late Great Planet
Earth"; Grant R. Jeffrey's "Armageddon: Appointment with Destiny"; M. R. De
Haan's "The Signs of the Times"; Tim LaHaye's "Are We Living in the End
Times?"). The popularity of this theory during the Cold War can be seen in that
it was openly advocated in 1971 by the then Governor of California, Ronald
Reagan. During a dinner address to state legislators Reagan said "Ezekiel tells
us that Gog, the nation that will lead all of the other powers of darkness
against Israel, will come out of the north. Biblical scholars have been saying
for generations that Gog must be Russia. What other powerful nation is to the
north of Israel? None. But it didn’t seem to make sense before the Russian
revolution, when Russia was a Christian country. Now it does, now that Russia
has become Communistic and atheistic, now that Russia has set itself against
God. Now it fits the description of Gog perfectly." With the closing of the
Cold War, some Christian thinkers who accepted this interpretation altered it
after the fall of the Soviet Union (such as Pat Robertson who advocated it in
his 1982 book "The Secret Kingdom", but in 1992 suggested Gog was "Kazakhstan,
Tajikistan, Uzbekistan, and Azerbaijan"). Other Christian thinkers do not
consider the fall of communism to have any relevance in maintaining their
interpretation that Russia is Gog (such as Chuck Missler in his book "Magog
Invasion"). The biblical interpretation that Russia is Gog, is one that some
Russians believe themselves according to historian Christopher Marsh. He writes
"Russians and Ukrainians, two peoples with a long history of looking to the
Bible for clues to their past and future. At least as far back as the "Primary
Chronicle", the "Rus"' looked to scripture for such clues and found them from
Genesis to Revelations. They were the descendants of Noah's third son, Japheth,
giving themselves direct lineage to the diluvian period, and they were of the
tribe of Magog (or Gog), in the land of Rosh. The implications of such identity
as expressed in Revelations, where the Gog and Magog were both thrown out of
heaven, apparently didn't matter to those drawing these lines. Ancestors were
found in the Bible, and that was enough." In his 1945 book ""The Reign of
Quantity and The Sign of Times"" metaphysician and author René Guénon has a
full chapter on the subject of Gog and Magog (""The fissures of the great
wall""). Gog and Magog are related to their Hindu counterpart called demon
brothers Koka and Vikoka ""whose names are obviously similar"", and refer
symbolically, according to Guénon, not to groups of people on earth, but to
entities belonging to the "subtle world" and having an existence presently
hidden from the human realm and symbolically described as subterranean. Gog and
Magog in Britain and Ireland. Giants. Despite their generally negative
depiction in the Bible, Lord Mayors of the City of London carry images of Gog
and Magog (depicted as giants) in a traditional procession in the Lord Mayor's
Show. According to the tradition, the giants Gog and Magog are guardians of the
City of London, and images of them have been carried in the Lord Mayor's Show
since the days of King Henry V. The Lord Mayor's procession takes place each
year on the second Saturday of November. The Lord Mayor's account of Gog and
Magog says that the Roman Emperor Diocletian had thirty-three wicked daughters.
He found thirty-three husbands for them to curb their wicked ways; they chafed
at this, and under the leadership of the eldest sister, Alba, they murdered
their husbands. For this crime they were set adrift at sea; they washed ashore
on a windswept island, which they named "Albion" - after Alba. Here they
coupled with demons and gave birth to a race of giants, whose descendants
included Gog and Magog. Gog Magog Hills. The Gog Magog Downs are about three
miles south of Cambridge, said to be the metamorphosis of the giant after being
rejected by the nymph Granta (i.e. the River Cam). The dowser Thomas Charles
Lethbridge claimed to have discovered a group of three hidden chalk carvings in
the Gogmagog Hills. This alleged discovery is described at length in his book
"Gogmagog: The Buried Gods", in which Lethbridge uses his discoveries to
extrapolate a primal deity named 'Gog' and his consort, 'Ma-Gog', which he
believed represented the Sun and Moon. Although his discovery of the chalk
figures in the Gogmagog Hills has been dogged by controversy, there are
similarities between the name and nature of the purported 'Gog' and the Irish
deity Ogma, or the Gaulish Ogmios. Gog and Magog in Ireland. Works of Irish
mythology, including the "Lebor Gabála Érenn" (the Book of Invasions), expand
on the Genesis account of Magog as the son of Japheth and make him the ancestor
to the Irish through Partholón, leader of the first group to colonize Ireland
after the Deluge, and a descendant of Magog, as also were the Milesians, the
people of the 5th invasion of Ireland. Magog was also the progenitor of the
Scythians, as well as of numerous other races across Europe and Central Asia.
His three sons were Baath, Jobhath, and Fathochta. Gog and Magog elsewhere. Gog
and Magog in the Stirling Range, Western Australia. Mt Magog, the third-highest
peak in Western Australia's Stirling Range, stands near Mt Gog, a smaller peak.
Gog and Magog in Colorado. Two rock outcroppings visible from Manitou Springs
Colorado named after the two giants. Gog and Magog in Tasmania. In northern
Tasmnania, two large dolerite hills overlooking the Mersey River are named Gog
and Magog. They form part of Gog Range and mark the opening of the gorge
through which the river flows. Gog and Magog in Canada. Gog and Magog are also
names given to two rock formations near Friendship Col, 2000 feet above the
Alpine Club of Canada's Fairy Meadows hut in the northern Selkirk Mountains of
British Columbia, Canada. Gog and Magog in American Politics/Iraq. In the
prelude to the American invasion of Iraq in 2003, President George W. Bush told
French President Jacques Chirac that biblical prophecies were being fulfilled
there and that “Gog and Magog are at work in the Middle East." Bush said Gog
and Magog would come from modern day Iraq, and it was important to try and stop
that.
