Gospel of Mark The Gospel According to Mark (, , "to euangelion kata Markon"),
commonly shortened to the Gospel of Mark or simply Mark, is the second book of
the New Testament. This canonical account of the life of Jesus of Nazareth is
one of the three synoptic gospels. It was thought to be an epitome, which
accounts for its place as the second gospel in the Bible. However, most
contemporary scholars now regard it as the earliest of the canonical gospels
("c" 70). The Gospel of Mark narrates the Ministry of Jesus from his baptism by
John the Baptist to his death and resurrection. It focuses particularly on the
last week of his life (chapters 11–16) in Jerusalem. Its swift narrative
portrays Jesus as a heroic man of action, an exorcist, healer and miracle
worker. An important theme of Mark is the Messianic Secret. Jesus silences the
demoniacs he heals, tries unsuccessfully to keep his messianic identity secret,
and conceals his message with parables. Meanwhile, the disciples fail to
understand both the implication of the miracles of Jesus and the meaning of the
things he predicts about his arrest, death and resurrection. According to
tradition and some early church writers, the author is Mark the Evangelist, the
companion of the apostle Peter. The gospel, however, appears to rely on several
underlying sources, varying in form and in theology, and which tells against
the tradition that the gospel was based on Peter's preaching. Various elements
within the gospel, including the importance of the authority of Peter and the
breadth of its basic theology, suggest that the author wrote in Syria or
Palestine for a non-Jewish Christian community which had earlier absorbed the
influence of pre-Pauline beliefs and then developed them further independent of
Paul. Composition and setting. The Gospel According to Mark does not name its
author. A tradition evident in the 2nd century ascribes it to Mark the
Evangelist (also known as John Mark), the companion of Peter, on whose memories
it is supposedly based. However, according to the majority view the author is
unknown, the author's use of varied sources telling against the traditional
account. The gospel was written in Greek shortly after the destruction of the
Second Temple in AD 70, possibly in Syria. Authorship and sources. According to
Papias of Hierapolis, writing in the early 2nd century, this gospel was by John
Mark, the companion of Saint Paul in Rome, who "had one purpose only – to
leave out nothing that he had heard, and to make no misstatement about it."
Other early writers such as Irenaeus agree with this. "No early church
tradition and no church father ascribes the Gospel to anyone other than Mark."
Some modern scholars believe that the gospel was written in Syria by an unknown
Christian no earlier than AD 70, using various sources including a passion
narrative (probably written), collections of miracles stories (oral or
written), apocalyptic traditions (probably written), and disputations and
didactic sayings (some possibly written). Some of the material in Mark,
however, goes back a very long way, representing an important source for
historical information about Jesus. Mark wrote primarily for an audience of
gentile Greek-speaking residents of the Roman Empire: Jewish traditions are
explained, clearly for the benefit of non-Jews (e.g., ; ; ), and Aramaic words
and phrases are expanded upon by the author, e.g., ταλιθα κουμ
("talitha koum", ); κορβαν ("Corban", ); αββα ("abba", ). When Mark
makes use of the Old Testament he does so in the form in which it had been
translated into Greek, the Septuagint, for instance ; ; ; ; also compare with
Daniel . Genre. Franz Overbeck considered the gospels as the only new Christian
genre, whereas other books of the New Testament were modeled on traditional
types of religious literature. The influential discipline called form criticism
propagated this view and defined the genre as an account of the “good news”
centering on life, death and resurrection of Jesus Christ, with the evocation
of repentance and faith as primary function. However, parallels to Greco-Roman
literature exist, e.g. to didactic biographies like the life of Moses by Philo
of Alexandria. Furthermore, Mark is not interested in origins, education and
inner development of Jesus, but narrates the history of the fulfillment of the
divine promises from his perspective. In this focus Mark resembles a historical
biography like Suetonius's "Lives of Caesars". Often in ancient literature
historical events were related to divine power by direct interactions, as the
splitting of the heavens in Mark 1:10 or the cloud in 9:7. Yet the dominant
strategy of Mark is to describe humans as acting independently, but in the
context of an underlying divine plan. Hence, he reflects the difference between
Homer's Iliad on the one hand and Herodotus and the Deuteronomist on the other.
Historiography in antiquity was not predominantly interested in facts, as in
modern positivism, but in representation and explanation. For this purpose,
miracles were included by Herodotus in ethnography; in Old Testament
traditions, Moses, Samuel or Elijah appear as mediators between God and the
people. Adela Yarbro Collins integrates these observations into the
characterization of Mark as an “eschatological historical monograph”, a new
type of writing enrooted in traditional and contemporary literature. Source for
Matthew and Luke. Most scholars believe that the Gospel of Mark was the first
of the canonical gospels, and was available when the gospels of Matthew and
Luke were written. The reason that such great importance is attached to this
Gospel has been the widespread belief among scholars that the Gospel of Mark
and probably Q were the basis of the Synoptic Gospels, as held in the two-
source hypothesis. Mark's gospel is a short, Koine Greek basis for the Synoptic
Gospels. It provides the general chronology, from Jesus' baptism to the empty
tomb. Differing versions. Mark is the shortest of the canonical gospels.
Manuscripts, both scrolls and codices, tend to lose text at the beginning and
the end, not unlike a coverless paperback in a backpack. These losses are
characteristically unconnected with excisions. For instance, has been found in
two different forms. Most manuscripts of Mark, including the 4th-century Codex
Vaticanus, have the text "son of God", but three important manuscripts do not.
Those three are: Codex Sinaiticus (01, א; dated 4th century), Codex Koridethi
(038, Θ; 9th century), and the text called Minuscule 28 (11th century).
Textual support for the term "Son of God" is strong, but the phrase may not
have been original. Interpolations may not be editorial, either. It is a common
experience that glosses written in the margins of manuscripts get incorporated
into the text as copies are made. Any particular example is open to dispute, of
course, but one may take note of , "Let anyone with ears to hear, listen,"
which is not found in early manuscripts. Revision and editorial error may also
contribute. Most differences are trivial but , where the leper approached Jesus
begging to be healed, is significant. An early (Western) manuscript (Codex
Bezae) reads that Jesus became angry with the leper while Byzantine and
Alexandrian manuscripts indicate that Jesus showed compassion. This is possibly
a confusion between the Aramaic words "ethraham" (he had pity) and "ethra'em"
(he was enraged). Since it is easier to understand why a scribe would change
"rage" to "pity" than "pity" to "rage," the earlier version is probably
original. Ending. , describing some disciples' encounters with the resurrected
Jesus, appears to be a later addition to the gospel. Mark 16:8 stops at a
description of the empty tomb, which is immediately preceded by a statement by
a "young man dressed in a white robe" that Jesus is "risen" and is "going ahead
of you into Galilee." The last twelve verses are missing from the oldest
manuscripts of Mark's Gospel. The style of these verses differs from the rest
of Mark, suggesting they were a later addition. In a handful of manuscripts, a
"short ending" is included after 16:8, but before the "long ending", and exists
by itself in one of the earliest Old Latin codices, Codex Bobiensis. By the 5th
century, at least four different endings have been attested. (See Mark 16 for a
more comprehensive treatment of this topic.) Possibly, the Long Ending (16:
9–20) started as a summary of evidence for Jesus' resurrection and the
apostles' divine mission, based on other gospels. It was likely composed early
in the 2nd century and incorporated into the gospel around the middle of the
2nd century. The 3rd-century theologian Origen of Alexandria quoted the
resurrection stories in Matthew, Luke, and John but failed to quote anything
after , suggesting that his copy of Mark stopped there. Eusebius and Jerome
both mention the majority of texts available to them omitted the longer ending.
Critics are divided over whether the original ending at 16:8 was intentional,
whether it resulted from accidental loss, or even the author's death. Those who
believe that 16:8 was not the intended ending argue that it would be very
unusual syntax for the text to end with the conjunction "gar" (), as does Mark
16:8, and that thematically it would be strange for a book of good news to end
with a note of fear (, "for they were afraid"). If the 16:8 ending was
intentional, it could indicate a connection to the theme of the "Messianic
Secret". This abrupt ending is also used to support the identification of this
book as an example of closet drama, which characteristically ended without
resolution and often with a tragic or shocking event that prevents closure.
Characteristics. The "Gospel of Mark" differs from the other gospels in
language, detail and content. Its theology is unique. The gospel's vocabulary
embraces 1330 distinct words, of which 60 are proper names. Eighty words,
(exclusive of proper names), are not found elsewhere in the New Testament.
About one quarter of these are non-classical. In addition Mark makes use of the
"historic present" as well as the "Messianic secret" to make known his Gospel
message. Theology. The "Suffering Messiah" is central to Mark's portrayal of
Jesus, his theology and the structure of the gospel. This knowledge is hidden
and only those with spiritual insight may see. The concept of hidden knowledge
may have become the basis of the Gnostic Gospels. John Killinger, arguing that,
in "Mark", the resurrection account is hidden throughout the gospel rather than
at the end, speculates that the Markan author might himself have been a Gnostic
Christian. Messianic secret. In 1901, William Wrede challenged the then-current
critical view that Mark comprised a straightforward historical account and gave
the name “Messianic secret” to this gospel theme. He argued that the
Messianic secret was a literary device that Mark used to resolve the tension
between early Christians, who hailed Jesus as the Messiah, and the historical
Jesus who, he argued, never made any such claim for himself. In Mark, more than
in the other synoptics, Jesus hides his messianic identity. When he exorcises
demons, they recognize him, but he commands them to be silent. When he heals
people, he tells them not to reveal how they were healed. When he preaches, he
uses parables to conceal his true message from the crowds (). According to v.
34, Jesus “explained everything in private to his disciples”. However, in
sentences like also the disciples are obtuse, understanding the true
significance of Jesus only after his death. This "Messianic secret" is a
central issue in Bible scholarship. Adoptionism. Adoptionism is the idea that
Jesus was fully human, born of a sexual union between Joseph and Mary. Jesus
only became divine, i.e. (adopted as God's son), later at his baptism. He was
chosen as the firstborn of all creation because of his sinless devotion to the
will of God. Adoptionism probably arose among early Jewish Christians seeking
to reconcile the claims that Jesus was the Son of God with the strict
monotheism of Judaism, in which the concept of a trinity of divine persons in
one Godhead was unacceptable. Scholar Bart D. Ehrman argues that adoptionist
theology may date back almost to the time of Jesus. The early Jewish-Christian
Gospels make no mention of a supernatural birth. Rather, they state that Jesus
was begotten at his baptism. The theology of Adoptionism fell into disfavor as
Christianity left its Jewish roots and Gentile Christianity became dominant.
Adoptionism was declared heresy at the end of the 2nd century, and was rejected
by the First Council of Nicaea, which proclaimed the orthodox doctrine of the
Trinity and identifies Jesus as eternally begotten of God. The Creed of Nicaea
now holds Jesus was born of the Holy Spirit and the Virgin Mary. (See Virgin
Birth). Adoptionism may go back as far as Matthew and the Apostles. According
to some early church writers, the first gospel was written by the Apostle
Matthew, and his account was called the Gospel of the Hebrews or the "Gospel of
the Apostles". This, the first written account of the life of Jesus, was
adoptionist in nature. The Gospel of the Hebrews has no mention of a virgin
birth and when Jesus is baptized it states, "Jesus came up from the water,
Heaven was opened, and He saw the Holy Spirit descend in the form of a dove and
enter into Him. And a voice from Heaven said, ‘You are my beloved Son; with
You I am well pleased.’ And again, ‘Today I have begotten You.’
Immediately a great light shone around the place". Scholars also see
adoptionist theology in the Gospel of Mark. Mark names Jesus as the son of God
at the strategic points of 1:1 ("The beginning of the gospel about Jesus
Christ, the Son of God") and 15:39 ("Surely this man was the Son of God!"), but
the virgin birth story has not been developed. The phrase "Son of God" is not
present in some early manuscripts at 1:1. Bart D. Ehrman uses this omission to
support the notion that the title "Son of God" is not used of Jesus until his
baptism, and that "Mark" reflects an adoptionist view. The authenticity of the
omission of "Son of God" and its theological significance has been rejected by
Bruce Metzger and Ben Witherington III. but has been affirmed by other
contemporary scholars, including the Jesus Seminar and Ched Meyers. By
comparison, the gospels of Luke and Matthew portray Jesus as being the Son of
God from the time of birth, while the Gospel of John portrays the Son as
existing "in the beginning." Meaning of Jesus' death. Mark portrays Jesus'
death as an atoning sacrifice for sin. The Temple curtain, which served as a
barrier between the holy presence of God and the profane world, rips at the
moment of Jesus' death, symbolizing an end to the division between humans and
God. The only explicit mention of the meaning of Jesus' death in Mark occurs in
where Jesus says that the "Son of Man came not to be served but to serve, and
to give his life as a ransom ("lutron") for many ("anti pollōn")." According
to Barnabas Lindars, this refers to Isaiah's fourth servant song, with "lutron"
referring to the "offering for sin" (Isaiah 53:10) and "anti pollōn" to the
Servant "bearing the sin of many" in Isaiah 52:12. The Greek word "anti" means
"in the place of", which indicates a substitutionary death. The author of this
gospel also speaks of Jesus' death through the metaphors of the departing
bridegroom in , and of the rejected heir in . He views it as fulfilling Old
Testament prophecy (, , and ). Many scholars believe that Mark structured his
gospel in order to emphasise Jesus' death. For example, Alan Culpepper sees
Mark 15:1–39 as developing in three acts, each containing an event and a
response. The first event is Jesus' trial, followed by the soldiers' mocking
response; the second event is Jesus' crucifixion, followed by the spectators
mocking him; the third and final event in this sequence is Jesus' death,
followed by the veil being rent and the centurion confessing, "truly this man
was the Son of God." In weaving these things into a triadic structure, Mark is
thereby emphasising the importance of this confession, which provides a
dramatic contrast to the two scenes of mocking which precede it. D. R. Bauer
suggests that "by bringing his gospel to a climax with this christological
confession at the cross, Mark indicates that Jesus is first and foremost Son of
God, and that Jesus is Son of God as one who suffers and dies in obedience to
God." Joel Marcus notes that the other Evangelists "attenuate" Mark's emphasis
on Jesus' suffering and death, and sees Mark as more strongly influenced than
they are by Paul's "theology of the cross". Characteristics of Mark's content.
The narrative can be divided into three sections: the "Galilean ministry",
including the surrounding regions of Phoenicia, Decapolis, and Cæsarea
Philippi (1–9); the "Journey to Jerusalem" (10); and the "Events in
Jerusalem" (11–16). Characteristics of Mark's language. The phrase "and
immediately" occurs forty-two times in Mark; while in Luke, which is much
longer, it is used only seven times, and in John only four times. The word from
, which roughly translates as "law," ([http://www.blueletterbible.org/cgi-bin/
strongs.pl?strongs=3551]) is never used, while it appears 8 times in Matthew, 9
times in Luke, 15 times in John, 19 times in Acts, many times in Romans. Latin
loanwords are often used: speculator, sextarius, centurion, legion, quadrans,
praetorium, caesar, census, flagello, modius, denarius. Mark has over a dozen
direct Old Testament quotations: , , , , , , , , , , , , . Mark makes frequent
use of the narrative present; Luke changes about 150 of these verbs to past
tense. Mark frequently links sentences with ("and"); Matthew and Luke replace
most of these with subordinate clauses. Secret Gospel of Mark. The "Secret
Gospel of Mark" refers to a version of the "Gospel of Mark" being circulated in
2nd century Alexandria, which was kept from the Christian community at large.
This non-canonical gospel fragment was discovered in 1958, by biblical
researcher Morton Smith at the Mar Saba monastery. In this fragment, Clement of
Alexandria explains that Mark, during Peter's stay in Rome wrote an account of
the life of Jesus. Mark selected those events that would be the most helpful to
the Church. When Peter died a martyr, Mark left Rome and went to Alexandria. He
brought both his own writings and those of Peter. It was here that Mark
composed a second more spiritual Gospel and when he died, he left his
composition to the Church. The Carpocrates got a copy of this Gospel and they
misinterpreted it, which caused problems for the early Church. Some modern
scholars maintain the Secret Gospel is a clumsy forgery, while others accept
this text as being authentic. The nature of the "Secret Gospel of Mark" as well
as Morton Smith's role in its discovery are still being debated. Canonical
Status. A related issue is the adoption of the "Gospel of Mark" as a Canonical
Gospel, given that, like the hypothetical Q, it is largely reproduced in
Matthew and Luke, but, unlike Q, it did not become "lost". Traditionally Mark's
authority and survival has derived from its Petrine origins (see above
"Authorship"). A recent suggestion is that Mark gained widespread popularity in
oral performance, apart from readings from manuscript copies. Its widespread
oral popularity ensured it a place in the written canon.
