Gospel of Luke The Gospel According to Luke (, "to kata Loukan euangelion"),
commonly shortened to the Gospel of Luke or simply Luke, is the third and
longest of the four canonical Gospels. This synoptic gospel is an account of
the life and ministry of Jesus of Nazareth. It details his story from the
events of his birth to his Ascension. According to the preface the purpose of
Luke is to write a historical account, while bringing out the theological
significance of the history. The writer divides history into three stages: the
first ends with John the Baptist, the second consists of Jesus' earthly
ministry, and the third is the life of the church after Jesus' resurrection.
Here, Jesus' compassion extends to all who are needy, women are important among
his followers, the despised Samaritans are commended, and Gentiles are promised
the opportunity to accept the gospel. While the gospel is written as a
historical narrative, many of the facts portrayed therein are based on previous
traditions of the recorded Gospel story and not on what some might consider to
be historical record. Certain popular stories, such as the Prodigal Son and the
Good Samaritan, are found only in this gospel. This account also has a special
emphasis on prayer, the activity of the Holy Spirit, women, and joyfulness.
Jesus is presented as the Son of God, but attention especially paid to the
humanity of Jesus, featuring his compassion for the weak, the suffering and the
outcast. The author is traditionally identified as Luke the Evangelist.
Biblical Scholars are in wide agreement that the author of the Gospel of Luke
also wrote the Acts of the Apostles. Many believe that these two books
originally constituted a two-volume work, which scholars refer to as Luke-Acts.
However, according to some scholars, it is not impossible that Luke was the
author. While the traditional view that Luke authored the gospel is still often
put forward, a number of possible contradictions between Acts and Paul's
letters lead many scholars to dispute this account, and for some the author
remains unknown. Most modern critical scholarship concludes that Luke used the
Gospel of Mark for his chronology and a hypothetical sayings source Q document
for many of Jesus' teachings. Luke may also have drawn from independent written
records. Traditional Christian scholarship has dated the composition of the
gospel to the early 60s, while higher criticism dates it to the later decades
of the 1st century. Title. Early on, the gospel was given the title Gospel
According to Luke (, "kata Loukan euangelion", or , "to euangelion kata
Loukan"). It is commonly called the Gospel of Luke or simply Luke. "Gospel"
means "good news." Composition. The date of the Gospel of Luke is traditionally
fixed to some time before the end of the final events of Luke's second volume
to Theophilus, Acts, so as early as 59 or 60. The author of the "Gospel of
Luke" acknowledges familiarity with earlier gospels (1:1). Although semitisms
exist throughout the "Gospel of Luke", it was composed in Koine Greek. Like
Mark (but unlike Matthew), the intended audience is the Greek-speaking
populations of the region; it assures readers that Christianity is an
international religion, not an exclusively Jewish sect. Synoptic Gospels. The
Gospels of Luke, Matthew and Mark (known as the Synoptic Gospels) include many
of the same stories, often in the same sequence, and sometimes exactly the same
wording. The most commonly accepted explanation for this similarity is the two-
source hypothesis. It hypothesizes that Matthew and Luke each borrowed from
both Mark and a hypothetical sayings collection, called Q. For most scholars,
the Q collection accounts for what the gospels of Luke and Matthew share but
are not found in Mark. In "The Four Gospels: A Study of Origins" (1924),
Burnett Hillman Streeter argued that another source, referred to as "L" and
also hypothetical, lies behind the material in Luke that has no parallel in
Mark or Matthew. (See the Four Document Hypothesis ) Sources. The traditional
view is that Luke, who was not an eye-witness of Jesus' ministry, wrote his
gospel after gathering the best sources of information within his reach (Luke
1:1-4). Critical scholarship generally holds to the two-source hypothesis as
most probable, which argues that the author used the Gospel of Mark and the
hypothetical Q document in addition to unique material, as sources for the
gospel. The Gospel of Mark. Most modern scholars agree that Luke used the
"Gospel of Mark" as one of his sources. The understanding that Mark was the
first of the synoptic gospels and that it served as a source for Matthew and
Luke is foundational to modern critical scholarship. Mark's gospel is quite
short, and written in Koine Greek (that is, common Greek). It provides a
general chronology from Jesus' baptism to the empty tomb. Luke, however,
sometimes presented events in a different order to more clearly support his
emphases. For example, Mark has Jesus recruit his first disciples before he has
performed any miracles, and Luke moves the recruitment scene to a point after
Jesus' first miracles. The sayings gospel Q. A majority of scholars believe
that Luke used Q as his second source. Q (for "Quelle," German for "source") is
a hypothetical collection of Jesus' sayings. In the "two-source hypothesis," Q
explains where the authors of Matthew and Luke got the material that they have
in common with each other but that is not found in Mark, such as the Lord's
prayer. The existence of a highly treasured dominical sayings document in
circulation going totally unmentioned by the Fathers of the Early Church,
remains one of the great conundrums of Modern Biblical Scholarship. L source.
Material unique to Luke is said to derive from the L source, which is thought
to derive from the oral tradition. Luke apparently draws formal set pieces from
the "teachings" of Christianity and incorporates into the gospel. The
Magnificat, in which Mary praises God, is one such element. The birth
narratives in both Luke and Matthew seem to be the latest component of the
Gospels. Luke may have originally begun with verses 3:1-7, a second prologue.
“He will be great, and will be called the Son of the Most High … The power
of the Most High will overshadow you; therefore the child to be born will be
called holy, the Son of God” (Luke 1:32, 35). ""An Unpublished Dead Sea
Scroll Text Parallels Luke’s Infancy Narrative"", Biblical Archaeology
Review, April/May 1990 The similarity in content has been described as such
that ""it is difficult to avoid the conclusion that Luke is dependent in some
way, whether directly or indirectly, on this long lost text from Qumran"".
Greek. The books of the New Testament were written in Greek. Luke's style is
the most literary of all these books. Graham Stanton evaluates the opening of
the Gospel of Luke as "the most finely composed sentence in the whole of post-
Classical Greek literature." Authorship. Although the Gospel survives in
anonymous form, it is considered that the name was known to the addressee,
Theophilus. The author was probably a Gentile Christian. Whoever the author
was, he was highly educated, well traveled, well connected, and extremely
widely read. By the time he composed the Gospel, he must have been a highly
practiced and competent author - able to compose in a wide variety of literary
forms according to the demands of the moment. Despite the majority opinion that
Luke was a gentile writing to other gentiles, a few authors have challenged
this view. Birger Gerhardsson notes his opinion that “Luke is very much
dependent upon Palestinian tradition.” Adolf Schlatter concluded that the
text's character together with other indicators point to the author's
provenance from the Jewish church. Luke presupposes a knowledge of the Old
Testament and Jewish history (1:7; 4:38; 9:9-10 & 9:28-36). In fact, “Luke
perceives himself to be a Jew.” Finally, Rebecca Denova concludes her book
with these words: “Luke-Acts, we may conclude on the basis of a narrative-
critical reading, was written by a Jew to persuade other Jews that Jesus of
Nazareth was the messiah of Scripture and that the words of the prophets
concerning ‘restoration’ have been ‘fulfilled.’” Finally it should be
noted that Strelan in 2008 not only concluded that Theophilus was Jewish but
also that Luke was a priest. The "Gospel of Luke" and the Acts of the Apostles
were both written by the same author. The most direct evidence comes from the
prefaces of each book. Both prefaces were addressed to Theophilus, and the
preface of Acts explicitly references "my former book" about the life of Jesus.
Furthermore, there are linguistic and theological similarities between the two
works, suggesting that they have a common author. Both books also contain
common interests. Linguistic and theological agreements and cross-references
between the books indicate that they are from the same author. Those biblical
scholars who consider the two books a single, two-volume work often refer to
both together as Luke-Acts. The "we" passages in Acts, where the first person
plural is used, point to the author being a companion of Paul. Tradition holds
that the text was written by Luke the companion of Paul (named in Colossians ).
The Church Fathers, witnessed by the Muratorian Canon, Irenaeus ("c." 170),
Clement of Alexandria, Origen, and Tertullian, held that the "Gospel of Luke"
was written by Luke. The oldest manuscript of the gospel P75 ("circa" 200)
carries the attribution “the Gospel according to Luke”. however another
manuscript P4 from about the same time period has no such (surviving)
attribution. Critical view. According to the majority view, the evidence
against Luke's being the author is strong enough that the author is unknown.
The Book of Acts contradicts the letters of Paul on many points, such as Paul's
second trip to Jerusalem for an apostolic council. Paul placed an emphasis on
Jesus' death while the author of Luke instead emphasizes Jesus' suffering, and
there are other differences regarding eschatology and the Law. Paul described
Luke as “the beloved physician”, leading Hobart to claim in 1882 that the
vocabulary used in Luke-Acts suggests its author may have had medical training.
However, this assertion was contradicted by an influential study by Cadbury in
1926, and has since been abandoned; instead it is now believed this language
reflects merely a common Greek education. Traditional view. The traditional
view on Lukan authorship, however, is held by many scholars, and according to
some scholars it is "not impossible" that they are right. Since Luke was not
prominent there is no obvious reason that this gospel and Acts would have been
attributed to him if he didn't write them. If Luke was only a sometime
companion of Paul who idealized him long after his death, that could explain
the differences between Acts and Paul's letter. Even though the evangelist as
depicted in the New Testament doesn't match the patristic description of Luke,
the traditional view is still argued today. Date. Traditionally Luke has been
regarded as written by Luke the Evangelist some time between the "we" passages
in Acts 16 onwards and the imprisonment of Paul in Rome in Acts 28, leading as
with some modern scholars to argue for a date "c." 60-65. However many critical
scholars consider the "we" passages spurious or inserted and place the date "c"
80-90, AD 75 to 100. Most contemporary scholars regard Mark as a source used by
Luke (see Markan Priority). If it is true that Mark was written around the
destruction of the Temple of Jerusalem, around 70, they theorize that Luke
would not have been written before 70. Some who take this view believe that
Luke's prediction of the destruction of the temple could not be a result of
Jesus predicting the future but with the benefit of hindsight regarding
specific details. They believe that the discussion in Luke 21:5-30 is specific
enough (more specific than Mark's or Matthew's) that a date after 70 seems
likely. These scholars have suggested dates for Luke from 75 to 100. Support
for a later date comes from a number of reasons. Differences of chronology,
"style", and theology suggest that the author of Luke-Acts was not familiar
with Paul's distinctive theology but instead was writing a decade or more after
his death, by which point significant harmonization between different
traditions within Early Christianity had occurred. Furthermore, Luke-Acts has
views on Jesus' divine nature, the end times, and salvation that are similar to
the those found in Pastoral epistles, which are often seen as pseudonymous and
of a later date than the undisputed Pauline Epistles. Some scholars from the
Jesus Seminar argue that the birth narratives of Luke and Matthew are a late
development in gospel writing about Jesus. In this view, Luke might have
originally started at 3:1, with John the Baptist. However, given as the birth
narrative of Luke contains several 'tropes' that would indicate to a Roman
audience that Jesus was special (the virgin birth, wise teaching at twelve,
c.f. The Life of Flavius Josephus, "Moreover, when I was...of the law."), and
so would have been likely to have been included in the original manuscript. The
"terminus ad quem", or latest possible date, for Luke is bound by the earliest
papyri manuscripts that contains portions of Luke (late 2nd/early 3rd century)
and the mid to late 2nd century writings that quote or reference Luke. The work
is reflected in the Didache, the Gnostic writings of Basilides and Valentinus,
the apologetics of the Church Father Justin Martyr, and was used by Marcion.
Christian scholar Donald Guthrie claims that the Gospel was likely widely known
before the end of the 1st century, and was fully recognized by the early part
of the second, while Helmut Koester states that aside from Marcion, "there is
no certain evidence for its usage," prior to "ca." 150. In the middle of the
2nd century, an edited version of the Gospel of Luke was the only gospel
accepted by Marcion, a heretic who rejected Christianity's connection to Jewish
scripture. Before AD 70. A minority argument for a date between AD 37 and AD 61
for the Gospel typically suggests that Luke's address to "Most Excellent
Theophilus," may be a reference to the Roman-imposed High Priest of Israel
between AD 37 and AD 41, Theophilus ben Ananus. Christian scholar Donald
Guthrie reports that some think Luke collected much of his unique material
during the imprisonment of Paul in Caesarea, when Luke attended to him. Paul
mentions Luke, in passing, several times as traveling with Paul. Guthrie notes
that much of the evidence for dating the Gospel at any point is based upon
conjecture. "None of the gospels mention the destruction of the Jewish temple
in 70 A.D. This is significant because Jesus had prophesied concerning the
temple when He said "As for these things which you are looking at, the days
will come in which there will not be left one stone upon another which will not
be torn down," (Luke 21:6, see also Matt. 24:1; Mark 13:1). This prophecy was
fulfilled in 70 A.D. when the Romans sacked Jerusalem and burned the temple.
The gold in the temple melted down between the stone walls and the Romans took
the walls apart, stone by stone, to get the gold. Such an obvious fulfillment
of Jesus' prophecy most likely would have been recorded as such by the gospel
writers who were fond of mentioning fulfillment of prophecy if they had been
written after 70 A.D. Also, if the gospels were fabrications of mythical events
then anything to bolster the Messianic claims -- such as the destruction of the
temple as Jesus said -- would surely have been included. But, it was not
included suggesting that the gospels (at least Matthew, Mark, and Luke) were
written before 70 A.D." Audience and authorial intent. It is thought that like
Mark (but unlike Matthew), the intended audience is international. Luke
portrays his subject as regarded in a positive light by Roman authorities. For
example, the Jews are said to be responsible for Jesus' crucifixion, with
Pontius Pilate finding no wrong in him. The Gospel is addressed to the author's
patron, Theophilus, which in Greek simply means "friend of God" or "(be)loved
by God" or "loving God", and may not be a name but a generic term for a
Christian. However, as the patron is described as 'Most Excellent Theophilus',
this would indicate that the patron is in fact a governor or other highly
ranked Roman official, as 'most excellent' is also used in other texts as a
title for highly ranked officials. Content. Formal introduction Jesus' birth
and boyhood Jesus' baptism and temptation Jesus' ministry in Galilee Jesus'
teaching on the journey to Jerusalem Jesus' Jerusalem conflicts, crucifixion,
and resurrection Content summary. The Gospel of Luke tells the story of Jesus'
miraculous birth, ministry of healing and parables, passion, resurrection, and
ascension. Christian scholar Donald Guthrie claims, “it is full of superb
stories and leaves the reader with a deep impression of the personality and
teachings of Jesus." Introduction. Luke is the only gospel with a formal
introduction, in which the author explains his methodology and purpose. It
states that many others have already "undertaken to set down an orderly account
of the events that have been fulfilled among us, just as they were handed on to
us by those who from the beginning were eyewitnesses and servants of the word."
The author adds that he too wishes to compose an orderly account for
Theophilus, so that Theophilus "may know the certainty of the things has been
taught". Birth narratives and genealogy. Like Matthew, Luke recounts a royal
genealogy and a virgin birth for Jesus. Unlike Matthew, who traces Jesus' birth
back through the line of David to Abraham in order to appeal to his Jewish
audience, in Luke the evangelist traces Jesus' lineage back to Adam, indicating
a universal sense of salvation. Luke's birth narrative features the Christmas
story, in which Mary and Joseph travel to Bethlehem for a census, the newborn
Jesus is laid in a feeding trough (or manger), angels proclaim him the savior
for all people, and shepherds come to adore him. Also unique to Luke is John
the Baptist's birth story and three canticles (including the Magnificat) as
well as the only story from Jesus' boyhood. Miracles and parables. Luke
emphasizes Jesus' miracles, recounting 20, four of which are unique. Like
Matthew, it includes important sayings from the Q source, such as the
Beatitudes. Luke's version of the Beatitudes differs from Matthew's, and Luke's
seems closer to the source in Q. More than a dozen of Jesus' most memorable
parables are unique to Luke, including the Good Samaritan, the Corrupt Steward
and the Parable of the Prodigal Son. Role of women. More than the other
gospels, Luke focuses on women as playing important roles among Jesus'
followers, such as Mary Magdalene, Martha, and Mary of Bethany. The Gospel of
Luke is the only Gospel which contains the Annunciation of the Birth of Jesus
to Mary his mother (1:26-38). Compared to the other canonical gospels, Luke
devotes significantly more attention to women. The Gospel of Luke features more
female characters, features a female prophet (), and details the experience of
pregnancy (). Prominent discussion is given to the lives of Elizabeth, the
mother of John the Baptist and of Mary, the mother of Jesus (ch. ). Last
supper. Luke is the only gospel that treats the Last Supper the way Paul does,
as the institution of a liturgy to be repeated by his followers. According to
Geza Vermes, Paul is to be considered the primary source for this
interpretation because he says he received this insight from direct revelation
rather than from the other apostles. The verses in question are not found in
certain older manuscripts, and Bart Ehrman concludes that they were added in
order to support the theme of Jesus' atoning death, a theme found in Mark but
that the evangelist excluded from the original Luke. Trials and crucifixion.
Luke emphasizes that Jesus had committed no crime against Rome, as confirmed by
Herod, Pilate, and the thief crucified with Jesus. It is possible that the
author of Luke was trying to gain the respect of the Roman authorities for the
benefit of the church by stressing Jesus' innocence. In addition, it is also
noted that Luke downplays Roman involvement in Jesus' execution and places
responsibility more on the Jews. In Luke's Passion narrative, Jesus prays that
God forgive those who crucify him and his assurance to a crucified thief that
they will be together in Paradise. Resurrection appearances. Luke's accounts
differ from those in Mark and Matthew. Luke tells the story of two disciples on
the road to Emmaus, and (as in John) Jesus appears to the Eleven and
demonstrates that he is flesh and blood, not a spirit. Some scholars suggest
that by writing of the "flesh and bones" properties of the resurrected Jesus,
the author was making an apologetic response to docetic or gnostic views about
Jesus' body, or to views that the disciples had merely seen his ghost. However,
scholar Daniel A. Smith writes that the author was more likely concerned with
those in Christian circles who may have believed that the resurrection as
merely "spiritual" and that it could have occurred without the transformation
of the natural body. Jesus' commission (the Great Commission), to the disciples
to carry his message to all the nations, affirms Christianity as a universal
religion. The Book of Acts, also written by Luke to the same Theophilus,
declares about Jesus that "he showed himself alive after his passion by many
infallible proofs, being seen of them forty days..." The detailed narration of
the "Road to Emmaus appearance" in is at times considered one of the best
sketches of a biblical scene in the Gospel of Luke. Manuscripts. The earliest
manuscripts of the Gospel of Luke are three extensive papyrus fragments dating
from the late 2nd century or early 3rd century. P4 is probably the earliest,
dating from the late 2nd century. P75 dates from the late 2nd century/early 3rd
century. Finally P45 (mid-3rd century) contains an extensive portion of all
four Gospels. In addition to these major early papyri there are 6 other papyri
(P3, P7, P42, P69, P82 and P97) dating from between the 3rd-8th century which
also have small portions of Luke's Gospel. The early copies, as well as the
earliest copies of Acts, date after the Gospel was separated from Acts. The
Codex Sinaiticus and Vaticanus, 4th-century codices of the Greek bible, are the
oldest manuscripts that contain the full text of Luke. Codex Bezae is a 5th- or
6th-century Western text-type manuscript that contains Luke in Greek and Latin
versions on facing pages. This text-type appears to have descended from an
offshoot of the main manuscript tradition, departing from more familiar
readings at many points. Verses are omitted only in Codex Bezae and a handful
of Old Latin manuscripts. Nearly all other manuscripts including Codex
Sinaiticus and Codex Vaticanus and Church Fathers contain the "longer" reading
of Luke 22:19 and 20. Verse 22:20, which is very similar to , provides the only
gospel support for the doctrine of the New Covenant. Verses are found in
Western text-type. But they are omitted by a diverse number of ancient
witnesses and are generally marked as such in modern translations. See Bruce M.
Metzger's "Textual Commentary on the Greek New Testament" for details. Disputed
verses. Some argue that early Christian scribes introduced numerous accidental
and deliberate alterations into New Testament documents. Textual critics have
used principles of textual criticism to tentatively identify which variants are
original. Bart D. Ehrman cites two cases where proto-orthodox Christians may
have altered the text in order to prevent its being used to support heretical
beliefs. When Jesus is baptized, some early witnesses attest that Luke's gospel
had God the Father say to Jesus, "This day I have begotten you." In orthodox
texts (and thus in most modern Bibles), this text is replaced by the text from
Mark. Ehrman concludes that the original text was changed because it had
adoptionist overtones. When Jesus prays in the garden of Gethsemane, the text
refers to his being comforted by an angel and sweating drops like blood (verses
43-44 in ). These two verses disrupt the literary structure of the scene (the
chiasmus), they are not found in all the early manuscripts, and they are the
only place in Luke where Jesus is seen to be in agony. Ehrman concludes that
they were inserted in order to counter doceticism, the belief that Jesus, as
divine, only "seemed" to suffer. While probably not original to the text, these
verses reflect 1st-century tradition. References. "This article was originally
based on text from Easton Bible Dictionary of 1897 and from M.G. Easton M.A.,
D.D., "Illustrated Bible Dictionary", Third Edition, published by Thomas
Nelson, 1897." ^ Theissen, Gerd and Annette Merz. The historical Jesus: a
comprehensive guide. Fortress Press. 1998. translated from German (1996
edition). p. 24-27.
