Gospel of Matthew The Gospel According to Matthew (, "to euangelion kata
Matthaion") (Gospel of Matthew or simply Matthew) is one of the four canonical
gospels, one of the three synoptic gospels, and the first book of the New
Testament. It tells of the life, ministry, death, and resurrection of Jesus of
Nazareth. Matthew probably originated in a Jewish-Christian community in Roman
Syria towards the end of the first century A.D. The anonymous author drew three
main sources, including the Gospel of Mark, the sayings collection known as the
Q source, and material unique to his own community. The narrative tells how
Israel's Messiah, having been rejected by Israel (i.e., God's chosen people),
withdrew into the circle of his disciples, passed judgment on those who had
rejected him (so that "Israel" becomes the non-believing "Jews"), and finally
sent the disciples instead to the gentiles Composition and setting. Authorship
and sources. The Gospel of Matthew does not name its author. The tradition that
this was the disciple Matthew begins with the early Christian bishop Papias of
Hierapolis (about 100–140 AD), who, in a passage with several ambiguous
phrases, wrote: "Matthew collected the oracles ("logia"—sayings of or about
Jesus) in the Hebrew language ("Hebraïdi dialektōi"—perhaps alternatively
"Hebrew style") and each one interpreted ("hērmēneusen"—or "translated")
them as best he could." On the surface this implies that Matthew was written in
Hebrew and translated into Greek, but Matthew's Greek "reveals none of the
telltale marks of a translation." Scholars have put forward several theories to
explain Papias: perhaps Matthew wrote two gospels, one, now lost, in Hebrew,
the other our Greek version; or perhaps the "logia" was a collection of sayings
rather than the gospel; or by "dialektōi" Papias may have meant that Matthew
wrote in the Jewish style rather than in the Hebrew language. Papias does not
identify his Matthew, but by the end of the 2nd century the tradition of
Matthew the tax-collector had become widely accepted, and the line "The Gospel
According to Matthew" began to be added to manuscripts. For many reasons
scholars today believe otherwise—for example, the gospel is based on Mark,
and "it seems unlikely that an eyewitness of Jesus's ministry, such as Matthew,
would need to rely on others for information about it"—and believe instead
that it was written between about 80–90 AD by a highly educated Jew (an
"Israelite", in the language of the gospel itself), intimately familiar with
the technical aspects of Jewish law, standing on the boundary between
traditional and non-traditional Jewish values. The disciple Matthew was
probably honoured within the author's circle, as the name Matthew is more
prominent in this gospel than any other. The author drew on three primary
sources, each representing a distinct community: a hypothetical collection, or
several collections, of sayings (called "Q", and shared with Luke); the Gospel
of Mark; and material unique to Matthew (called "M", some of which may have
originated with Matthew himself). He wrote for a Jewish audience: like "Q" and
"M", he stresses the continuing relevance of the Jewish law; unlike Mark he
never bothers to explain Jewish customs; and unlike Luke, who traces Jesus's
ancestry back to Adam, father of the human race, he traces it only to Abraham,
father of the Jews. The content of "M" suggests that this community was
stricter than the others in its attitude to keeping the Jewish law, holding
that they must exceed the scribes and the Pharisees in "righteousness"
(adherence to Jewish law); and of the three only "M" refers to a "church"
("ecclesia"), an organised group with rules for keeping order. View of an
Aramaic original New Testament is held by a minority of scholars. Setting: the
community of the Gospel of Matthew. Saldarini (1994), p.198 The community which
gave rise to Matthew originated in Palestine, but: "There the community’s
mission to Israel failed, and eventually, probably in the period preceding the
Jewish War of 66-70, they were forced to leave the land of Israel. They found a
new home in Syria and began to missionize among the Gentiles." Antioch, a
coastal city in northern Syria and the third largest in the Roman world, is
often mentioned as this later home of the Matthean community, but it could have
been any large city in the eastern Mediterranean with large Jewish and
Christian populations, and recent research points towards a location near
Galilee or Judea. According to an influential hypothesis put forward by W.D.
Davies, the gospel of Matthew was written as a direct response to developments
within the Jewish community following the destruction of the Temple in
Jerusalem in 70 AD. The Pharisees of Judea emerged as the new leaders of the
Jewish community after the war, and the loss of the Temple and its priests and
the ritual of sacrifice faced them with the problem of finding a new Jewish
identity. Their answer was to insist on strict observance of the Law (the
Torah), isolation from the gentiles, and minimalisation of the expectation of
the coming of the Messiah (the expectation which had provoked the war). The
Jewish Christians of Antioch responded differently: obedience to law will be
done though following Jesus; Jesus was the Messiah; and Jew and gentile were to
be brought into the one community. If Matthew's prime concern was to preserve
the Jewish character of the church, he failed: Christianity became a Gentile
religion, and Christianity and Judaism came to view each other as opposites.
Matthew's own Christian community may have called themselves Nazoreans, a sect
mentioned by Jerome and others: like Matthew, they maintained a "high
Christology" (i.e., they stressed Jesus' divine nature over his human-ness),
and did not demand that Gentile Christians observe all the Law. Structure and
content. Structure. Most commentators seem to agree that Matthew, alone among
the gospels, alternates five blocks of narrative with five of discourse,
marking each off with the phrase "When Jesus had finished..." (see Five
Discourses of Matthew). Some scholars see in this five-part layout a deliberate
plan to create a parallel to the first five books of the Old Testament; others
see a three-part structure based around the idea of Jesus as Messiah; or a set
of weekly readings spread out over the year; or no plan at all. Davies and
Allison draw attention to the use of "triads" (the gospel groups things in
threes), and R. T. France notes the geographic movement from Galilee to
Jerusalem and back (the post-resurrection appearances in Galilee are the
culmination of the whole story). Prologue: genealogy, nativity and infancy. The
Gospel of Matthew begins with the words "The Book of Genealogy Greek, "Genesis"
of Jesus Christ", deliberately echoing the first words of the Old Testament in
Greek. The genealogy tells of Jesus' descent from Abraham and King David and
the miraculous events surrounding his virgin birth, and the infancy narrative
tells of the massacre of the innocents, the flight into Egypt, and eventual
journey to Nazareth. First narrative and discourse. The first narrative section
begins. John baptizes Jesus, and the Holy Spirit descends upon him. Jesus prays
and meditates in the wilderness for forty days, and is tempted by Satan. His
early ministry by word and deed in Galilee meets with much success, and leads
to the Sermon on the Mount, the first of the discourses. The sermon presents
the ethics of the kingdom of God, and includes the Beatitudes ("Blessed
are...") as its introduction. It concludes with a reminder that the response to
the kingdom will have eternal consequences, and the crowd's amazed response
leads into the next narrative block. Second narrative and discourse. From the
authoritative words of Jesus the gospel turns to three sets of three miracles
interwoven with two sets of two discipleship stories (the second narrative),
followed by a discourse on mission and suffering. Jesus commissions the Twelve
Disciples and sends them to preach to the Jews, perform miracles, and prophesy
the imminent coming of the Kingdom, commanding them to travel lightly, without
staff or sandals, and to be prepared for persecution. Scholars are divided over
whether these rules originated with Jesus or with apostolic practice. Third
narrative and discourse. Opposition to Jesus comes to a head with accusations
that his deeds are done through the power of Satan; Jesus in turn accuses his
opponents of blaspheming the Holy Spirit. The discourse is a set of parables
emphasising the sovereignty of God, and concluding with a challenge to the
disciples to understand the teachings as scribes of the kingdom of heaven.
(Matthew avoids using the holy word God in the expression "Kingdom of God";
instead he prefers the term "Kingdom of Heaven", reflecting the Jewish
tradition of not speaking the name of God). Fourth narrative and discourse. The
fourth narrative section reveals that the increasing opposition to Jesus will
result in his crucifixion in Jerusalem, and that his disciples must therefore
prepare for his absence. The instructions for the post-crucifixion church
emphasize responsibility and humility. (This section contains Matthew 16:
13–19, in which Simon, newly renamed Peter, (πέτρος, "petros," meaning
"stone"), calls Jesus "the Christ, the son of the living God", and Jesus states
that on this "bedrock" (πέτρα, "petra") he will build his church—the
passage forms the foundation for the papacy's claim of authority). Fifth
narrative and discourse. Jesus travels to Jerusalem, and the opposition
intensifies: he is tested by Pharisees immediately he begins to move towards
the city, and when he arrives he is soon in conflict with the Temple and other
religious leaders. The disciples ask about the future, and in his final
discourse (the Olivet discourse) Jesus speaks of the coming end. There will be
false Messiahs, earthquakes, and persecutions, the sun, moon, and stars will
fail, but "this generation" will not pass away before all the prophecies are
fulfilled. The disciples must steel themselves for ministry to all the nations.
At the end of the discourse Matthew notes that Jesus has finished all his
words, and attention turns to the crucifixion. Conclusion: Passion,
Resurrection and Great Commission. The events of Jesus' last week occupy a
third of the content of all four gospels. Jesus enters Jerusalem in triumph and
drives the money changers from the temple, holds a last supper, prays to be
spared the coming agony, and is betrayed. He is tried by the Jewish leaders
(the Sanhedrin) and before Pontius Pilate, and Pilate washes his hands of his
blood. Jesus is crucified as king of the Jews, mocked by all. On his death
there is an earthquake, and saints rise from their tombs. The two Marys
discover the empty tomb, guarded by an angel, and Jesus himself tells them to
tell the disciples to meet him in Galilee. After the resurrection the remaining
disciples return to Galilee, "to the mountain that Jesus had appointed," where
he comes to them and tells them that he has been given "all authority in heaven
and on Earth." He gives the Great Commission: "Therefore go and make disciples
of all the nations, baptising them in the name of the Father and of the Son and
of the Holy Spirit, teaching them to obey everything that I have commanded
you;" Jesus will be with them "to the very end of the age." Themes in Matthew.
Matthew's gospel tells how Israel's Messiah is rejected by Israel, withdraws
into the circle of his disciples, passes judgment on those who have rejected
him so that "Israel" becomes the non-believing "Jews", and sends the disciples
instead to the gentiles. The title Son of David identifies Jesus as the healing
and miracle-working Messiah of Israel (it is used exclusively in relation to
miracles, and the Jewish messiah is sent to Israel alone); as Son of Man he
will return to judge the world (a fact his disciples recognise but of which his
enemies are unaware); and as Son of God he has a unique relationship with God,
God revealing himself through his son, and Jesus proving his sonship through
his obedience and example. Prior to the Crucifixion the Jews are called
Israelites, the honorific title of God's chosen people; after it, they are
called "Ioudaioi", Jews, a sign that through their rejection of the Christ the
"kingdom of Heaven" has been taken away from them and given instead to the
church. The gospel has been interpreted as reflecting the struggles and
conflicts between the evangelist's community and the other Jews, particularly
with its sharp criticism of the scribes and Pharisees. The roots of the gospel
in the Matthew-community of the late 1st century give rise to another important
title bestowed on Jesus by Matthew, Emmanuel, "God is With Us"—meaning that
through Jesus, God is with the "ecclesia" (literally "assembly", but translated
as "church"). Theologically, Matthew's prime concern was that the Jewish
tradition should not be lost in a church increasingly becoming gentile. This
concern lies behind the frequent citations of Jewish scripture, the evocation
of Jesus and the new Moses along with other events from Jewish history, and the
concern to present Jesus as fulfilling, not destroying, the Law. The Jewish
theme in the Gospel of Matthew is apparent in other ways as well. First, nearly
every important person in the Gospel of Matthew is Jewish. For example, Jesus,
the twelve apostles, and the crowds are Jewish. They never deny their Jewish
faith in the gospel. Next, Israel is a common theme in the Gospel of Matthew.
For instance, in Matthew 15:31, after a story of the healings of Jesus, the
text reads that the crowds ‘praised the God of Israel.’ Matthew may have
been influenced by Jewish Christianity, a movement in the first few centuries
CE which saw Jesus as the Messiah, but continued to practice Jewish customs and
traditions. The Gospel of the Nazarenes, a Jewish Christian text, possesses
similar themes to the Gospel of Matthew. These themes include many Jewish
related elements. Comparison with other writings. Matthew, like Luke,
incorporates nearly the whole of Mark, keeping the outline intact and adding
genealogy-birth-infancy stories to the beginning and post-resurrection
appearances to the end. Many scholars have argued that Matthew is simply an
expanded version of Mark, but it is also a creative reinterpretation of the
source, stressing Jesus' teachings as much as his acts, and making subtle
changes in order to stress Jesus' divine nature – Mark's "young man" who
appears at Jesus' tomb, for example, becomes a radiant angel in Matthew. The
miracle stories in Mark do not demonstrate the divinity of Jesus, as this is an
idea not found in that gospel, but rather confirm his status as an emissary of
God (which was Mark's understanding of the Messiah). There is a broad
disagreement over chronology between Matthew, Mark and Luke on one hand and
John on the other: all four agree that Jesus' public ministry began with an
encounter with John the Baptist, but Matthew, Mark and Luke follow this with an
account of teaching and healing in Galilee, then a trip to Jerusalem where
there is an incident in the Temple, climaxing with the crucifixion on the day
of the Passover holiday. John, by contrast, puts the Temple incident very early
in Jesus' ministry, has several trips to Jerusalem, and puts the crucifixion
immediately before the Passover holiday, on the day when the lambs for the
Passover meal were being sacrificed in Temple. Matthew agrees with Paul that
gentiles did not have to be circumcised in order to enter the church, but
unlike Paul (and like Luke) he believed that the Law was still in force, which
meant that Jews within the church had to keep it. In art. In Insular Gospel
Books (copies of the Gospels produced in Ireland and Britain under Celtic
Christianity), the first verse of Matthew's genealogy of Christ was often
treated in a decorative manner, as it began not only a new book of the Bible,
but was the first verse in the Gospels.
