Great Bible The Great Bible was the first authorized edition of the Bible in
English, authorized by King Henry VIII of England to be read aloud in the
church services of the Church of England. The Great Bible was prepared by Myles
Coverdale, working under commission of Sir Thomas Cromwell, Secretary to Henry
VIII and Vicar General. In 1538, Cromwell directed the clergy to provide "one
book of the bible of the largest volume in English, and the same set up in some
convenient place within the said church that ye have care of, whereas your
parishioners may most commodiously resort to the same and read it." The Great
Bible includes much from the "Tyndale Bible", with the objectionable features
revised. As the "Tyndale Bible" was incomplete, Coverdale translated the
remaining books of the Old Testament and Apocrypha from the Latin Vulgate and
German translations, rather than working from the original Greek, Hebrew and
Aramaic texts. Although called the Great Bible because of its large size, it is
known by several other names as well: the Cromwell Bible, since Thomas Cromwell
directed its publication; Whitchurch's Bible after its first English printer;
the Chained Bible, since it was chained to prevent removal from the church. It
has also been termed less accurately Cranmer's Bible, since Thomas Cranmer was
not responsible for the translation, and his preface first appeared in the
second edition. Sources and history. The Tyndale New Testament had been
published in 1525, followed by his English version of the Pentateuch in 1530;
but both employed vocabulary, and appended notes, that were unacceptable to
English churchmen, and to the King. Tyndale's books were banned by royal
proclamation in 1530, and Henry then held out the promise of an officially
authorised English Bible being prepared by learned and catholic scholars. In
1534, Thomas Cranmer sought to advance the King's project by press-ganging ten
diocesan bishops to collaborate on an English New Testament, but most delivered
their draft portions late, inadequately, or not at all. By 1537 Cranmer was
saying that the proposed Bishops' Bible would not be completed until the day
after Doomsday. The King was becoming impatient with the slow progress,
especially in view of his conviction that the Pilgrimage of Grace had been
substantially exacerbated due to the rebels' exploitation of popular religious
ignorance. With the bishops showing no signs of completing their task, Cromwell
gave official approval to the Matthew Bible as an interim measure in 1537, the
year of its publication under the pseudonym "Thomas Matthew". The Matthew Bible
combined the New Testament of William Tyndale, and as much of the Old Testament
as Tyndale had been able to translate before being put to death the prior year
for "heresy." Coverdale based the Great Bible on Tyndale's work, but removed
the features objectionable to the bishops. He translated the remaining books of
the Old Testament using mostly the Latin Vulgate and German translations.
Coverdale's failure to translate from the original Hebrew, Aramaic, and Greek
texts gave impetus to the "Bishops' Bible". The non-italicized portions are
taken over from Tyndale without change, but the italicized words, which are not
found in the Greek text translated by Tyndale, have been added from the Latin.
(The added sentence can also be found, with minor verbal differences, in the
Douai-Rheims New Testament.) These inclusions appear to have been done to make
the Great Bible more palatable to conservative English churchmen, many of whom
considered the Vulgate to be the only legitimate Bible. The psalms in the Book
of Common Prayer of 1662 continue to be taken from the Great Bible rather than
the King James Bible. In 1568, the Great Bible was superseded as the authorised
version of the Anglican Church by the Bishops' Bible. The last of over 30
editions of the Great Bible appeared in 1569. Printing. The first edition was a
run of 2,500 copies that were begun in Paris in 1539. Much of the printing was
done at Paris, and after some misadventures where the printed sheets were
seized by the French authorities on grounds of heresy (since relations between
England and France were somewhat troubled at this time), the publication was
completed in London in April 1539. It went through six subsequent revisions
between 1540 and 1541. The second edition of 1540, included a preface by Thomas
Cranmer, Archbishop of Canterbury, recommending the reading of the scriptures.
(Cranmer’s preface was also included in the front of the Bishops' Bible.) A
version of Cranmer's Great Bible can be found included in the English Hexapla,
produced by Samuel Baxter & Sons in 1841. However copies of this work are
fairly rare. The most available reprinting of the Great Bible's New Testament
(minus its marginal notes) can be found in the second column of the "New
Testament Octapla" edited by Luther Weigle, chairman of the translation
committee that produced the Revised Standard Version.
