Great Apostasy The Great Apostasy is a term used by some religious groups to
describe a general fallen state of traditional Christianity, especially the
Papacy, because they claim it allowed the traditional Roman mysteries and
deities of solar monism such as Mithras and Sol Invictus and idol worship back
into the church, and is not representative of the faith founded by Jesus and
his twelve Apostles: in short, in their opinion, the church has fallen into
apostasy. They feel that to conciliate the Pagans to nominal Christianity, the
Catholic Church took measures to amalgamate the Christian and Pagan festivals
so pagans would join the church; for example, bringing in the pagan festival of
Easter as a substitute for the Pasch or Passover, although neither Jesus nor
his Apostles enjoined the keeping of this or any other festival. It is
officially agreed by the Catholic Church that it was magisterial Protestantism
and Eastern Orthodoxy that fell into apostasy. Overview. History shows that the
early church especially in Rome, was influenced by pagan rituals and beliefs
from the Roman imperial cult, Hellenistic philosophy, notably Neoplatonism, and
Gnosticism. Some modern scholars believe that the church in the early stages
picked up pagan oral teachings from Palestinian and Hellenistic sources which
formed the basis of a secret oral tradition, which in the 4th century came to
be called the disciplina arcani. Mainstream theologians believe it contained
liturgical details and certain other pagan traditions which remain a part of
some branches of mainstream Christianity (for example, the doctrine of
Transubstantiation is thought to have been a part of this by Catholic
theologians). Important esoteric influences on the church were the Christian
theologians Clement of Alexandria and Origen, the main figures of the
Catechetical School of Alexandria. Origen wrote about 6,000 books - and it is
unclear whether pagan traditions such reincarnation and the pre-existence of
souls formed part of Origen's beliefs. Protestants, most significantly starting
with Martin Luther, who wrote the 95 Theses, and Evangelical Christians not
following the rites of Latin Catholic and Orthodox Christian denominations,
have formally taught that the Bishop of Rome, along with the Catholic Church,
greatly abused the original teachings and practices of the primitive or
"original Christian church" as depicted in the Acts of the Apostles. They teach
that the Papacy arose after the Roman Empire and slowly became corrupted as it
strove to attain great dominion and authority, civil and ecclesiastical, and
retained pagan beliefs held during the Empire. It arrayed itself in a Christian
garb on the heathen one that had dominated during the Roman Empire. For
example, it reinstated the ceremonies and obligations of the Collegium
Pontificum and the position of Pontifex Maximus of the ancient Roman
polytheistic religion and created Christian orders to replace the ancient Roman
ones such as the Vestal Virgins and the flamines. Following the Protestant
Reformation, Protestantism separated itself from Catholicism, and the
subsequent denominations spawned from the Reformation have considered their own
teachings to be restorative in nature, falling back to the basic tenets of
Biblical Christianity and Sola Scriptura. Although each denomination may differ
in application, the essential ideas of the Reformation remain foundational. In
turn, these views are taught in the modern descendant denominations, and
historically these types of doctrinal stances account for the continuing
separation of the denominations from the Catholic Church. Protestant groups
differ slightly in their perception of the types and the extent of errors
evident in Catholic-Anglican-Orthodox traditions, and therefore their proposed
corrections also differ, but all agree that the Catholic-Anglican-Orthodox
tradition is to some important degree counter-biblical in the sense that it
moves away from Scripture to reconcile many of its teachings and doctrine. This
alleged "corruption" and resistance to reform by the traditional, especially
Catholic, churches may sometimes be called "The Great Apostasy" by some
religious groups. Although Protestant Christianity, as a whole, rejects the
overall concept that the original Church (established by Jesus Christ) was
thrown into complete anarchy and chaos through Catholicism, it does however
assert that there was gross abuse of Biblical authority (especially by the
Papacy) and a wandering from clear Biblical teachings prior to the Reformation.
In effect, some groups see themselves as uniquely restoring original
Christianity. In their case, the term "Great Apostasy" is used more technically
than above, directed in a sweeping way over all of Christianity beyond their
group, indicating that true Christianity has not been preserved, but rather
restored. These various groups differ as to exactly when the Great Apostasy
took place and what the exact errors or changes were, but all of them make a
similar claim that true Christianity was generally lost until it was disclosed
again in themselves. The term "Great Apostasy" appears to have been coined in
this narrower, technical sense, by "Restorationists". The term may sometimes be
used in this sense by other groups claiming their unique authority as
representing Christianity. Protestant Views. Protestant Christianity separated
itself from what it felt was the fulfilment of prophecy that there would be a
falling away from the truth given by Jesus Christ and his apostles. They look
to 2 Thessalonians prediction regarding the "falling away." 2 Thess. 2:3-12
says, "Let no one deceive you by any means; for that Day will not come unless
the falling away comes first, and the man of sin is revealed, the son of
perdition, who opposes and exalts himself above all that is called God or that
is worshiped, so that he sits as God in the temple of God, showing himself that
he is God. Do you not remember that when I was still with you I told you these
things? And now you know what is restraining, that he may be revealed in his
own time. For the mystery of lawlessness is already at work; only he who now
restrains will do so until he is taken out of the way. And then the lawless one
will be revealed, whom the Lord will consume with the breath of His mouth and
destroy with the brightness of His coming. The coming of the lawless one is
according to the working of Satan, with all power, signs, and lying wonders,
and with all unrighteous deception among those who perish, because they did not
receive the love of the truth, that they might be saved. And for this reason
God will send them strong delusion, that they should believe the lie, that they
all may be condemned who did not believe the truth but had pleasure in
unrighteousness." They felt Papacy fulfilled the falling away of the
scriptures, for it agrees on the prophecy in all the following points: 1. It
has one official man as its head, and its claims are centered in him, the
Bishop of Rome. 2. The Bishop of Rome exalts himself against all that is called
God; e.g., he is addressed by terms (Pope, Supreme Pontiff, Holy Father, etc.)
which belong only to God, and that man came with and out of an apostasy, the
very kind the apostles describe elsewhere (1 Tim. 4:1-3; Acts 20:28-31; 2 Pet.
2:1-3). 3. He sits in the temple of God, e.g., his sphere of dominion is in the
church or temple of God, as seen in the Papacy. 4. His appearance was hindered
by some force in Paul's time (2 Thess. 2:6-7); e.g., when the bishops of Rome
began to assert power, they were in conflict with the Roman civil government;
however, when the Roman empire collapsed, they quickly gained supremacy. 5. The
mystery of iniquity was already working in Paul's day (2 Thess. 2:7) and would
continue until the Lord's coming (2 Thess. 2:8). 6. The apostasy would produce
fraudulent miracles, signs and wonders; e.g., supposed cures brought about by
relics and shrines. 7. The Lord shall destroy him with the brightness of His
coming (2 Thess. 2:8). Only by a continual succession of the men of sin as seen
in the line of men ascended to the title of Pope, could this be possible.
Protestantism asserts that many abuses by Church leadership occurred prior to
the Reformation in 1517 AD. Nevertheless, it does not suggest that these abuses
led to a complete state of anarchy and apostate renderings of Scripture within
the Early Church. In turn, from the Protestant perspective, abuses within the
church led to a poor application of doctrine and Biblical Truths. Historically,
this view is generally seen to have been declared by the contents of the "95
Theses" compiled by Martin Luther. To a large degree, Protestantism recognizes
that the formation of the Orthodox-Catholic Church under Caesar Constantine I
(c. 325 AD) sought to bring stability, continuity and organization to the birth
of the relatively new Christian faith. However, through decades of succession
by poor, often politically motivated leadership, abuses of Scriptural
application became prevalent. In turn, Protestantism generally asserts that
although Scripture itself remained pristine, the leaders and teachers became
fouled. To that end, most of Traditional Christianity agrees that the Biblical
message itself was ultimately never lost to mankind. In addition, historical
and archeological evidence - such as the Dead Sea Scrolls - have provided a
considerable measure of creditability to this position. Additionally,
Protestant Evangelicals concede that although the Early Church had not
completely "fallen away" after the death of the first Apostles, it fell under
the control of the bishop of Rome and became governed by errant men with a poor
understanding of Scripture. Reformed Perspective. Calvinists have taught that a
gradual process of corruption was predicted in the New Testament, that this
process began within the New Testament era itself, and culminated in a self-
proclaimed corrective brought about by the Protestant Reformation. The Roman
Catholic and Eastern Orthodox Churches had developed from early on the idea of
infallibility of the Church — that the Church may speak entirely without
error in particular councils or edicts; or that, in a less definable way, the
Church is infallibly directed so that it always stands in the truth; and
indeed, and claim that the Church has the promise of Jesus that it shall do so.
The Roman Catholic Church also developed on the parallel and complementary idea
of papal infallibility — that the pope may speak in the same capacity; this
idea was finally defined dogmatically at the First Vatican Council of 1870 and
incorporated into doctrine. In contrast, Protestants believe that the Church
has only spoken infallibly through the Scriptures since the time of the
Apostles, and should not expect to be completely free of error at any time
until the end of the world, and rather must remain continually vigilant to
maintain a Biblical (and therefore authoritative) doctrine and faith, or else
fall away from the Christian faith and become an enemy of the truth. In the
Reformed view of church history, the true church cannot declare itself
infallible, but rather calls itself "ecclesia semper reformanda" ("the Church
which must be always reformed"), the church that is always repenting of error.
This Protestant view is that people are naturally inclined to elevate tradition
to equality with the written testimony of the Bible, which is the word of God
(cf. Sacred Tradition). The reforming churches believe that human weakness is
naturally drawn to a form of false religion that is worldly, pompous,
ritualistic, anthropomorphic, polytheistic, infected with magical thinking and
legalism, and that values human accomplishment more highly or more practically
than the work of God (divine grace) is valued. Given the chance, people will
substitute the sort of religion they naturally prefer, over the Gospel, see
also Cafeteria Christianity. The Hebrew Bible contains multiple episodes of
backsliding by the very people who first received God's revelation; to the
Protestant mind, this shows that teaching the Gospel is a straight and narrow
path, one that requires that natural religion be held in check and that God's
grace, holiness, and otherness be rigorously proclaimed. Temptations of power.
According to these Reformers, even as early as the Apostles a natural process
of corruption began, and reached a crucial point of development when the
Christian church was made the official religion of the Roman Empire by
Theodosius I. From this point on, compromise of the truth deepened over time
until the church became thoroughly worldly and corrupt, so that the true faith
was first no longer openly taught, and instead suppressed, and at times
persecuted, and cast out. The persecuted church was attractive to rejected
people; but worldly men were attracted to the same church when it began to
wield power and possessions. Protestants also believe that the Roman Emperors
were not about to support a church that they did not control. The development
of formal hierarchy within the Catholic Church, as opposed to local among
Christian congregations, with levels of rank among the bishops, and a handful
of patriarchs to supervise the bishops, is seen by some Protestants as
conducive to imperial manipulation of the Church, susceptible to general
control by capture of only a few seats of power. Similarly, the defenses of the
right belief and worship of the church resided in the bishops, and Protestants
theorize that the process of unifying the doctrine of the Church also
concentrated power into their own hands (see also Ignatius of Antioch, who
advocated a powerful bishop), and made their office an instrument of power
coveted by ambitious men. They charge that, through ambition and jealousy, the
church has been at times, and not very subtly, subverted from carrying out its
sacred aim. For the Reformers, the culmination of this gradual corruption was
typified, in a concentrated way, in the office of the Pope who took on ancient
titles such as Pontifex Maximus and supreme power in the church, which they
characterized in its final form as being an usurpatious throne of Satanic
authority set up in pretense of ruling over the Kingdom of God. The dangers of
theology. Theological controversy also had a polluting effect, according to
this view of "Apostasy" as a gradual process, rather than a cataclysmic event.
That is, in the process of defending the received truth, the Church became
sullied by the engagements with its opponents both outside and within the
Church. Giving power to men as Bishops and Priest with forgiving power equal to
Christ, the Church become so much like the Devil, desiring of power over the
masses. For example, the Church defeated paganism, but incorporated many of its
idols as saints and was also susceptible to incorporating attitudes and
traditions which are foreign to the biblical faith. Or, for another case, in
the process of overcoming Arius' religious hero-worship of Jesus, the church
absorbed hero-worshiping ideas, so that, while the doctrine of Jesus was
rescued from the heresy, the same idea continued in the veneration of the
Saints, although veneration of the saints and martyrs long predated the Arian
heresy. Similarly for the early battles with Marcion and Valentinius and
Montanus, perhaps even as early as Simon Magus, see also Early Christianity.
This corruption was not necessarily intentional although, in some cases, it is
suggested that teachers of error brought in these pollutions deceitfully in
order to escape detection. Compromise with folk religion. Especially in the
worship of the Church, many Protestants viewed the Roman Catholic Mass as an
amalgam of superstitious inventions more reminiscent of a pagan mystery rite
than the simple discipline taught by the Apostles and practiced by the early
church. A number of Protestant denominations tend to think of many of the
Catholic holy days, and most of the rituals, as accommodations to the popular
tastes of unconverted people through the centuries, incompatible with biblical
faith. Natural tastes for pomp and ceremony, and the sort of natural belief in
mana and fetishism that seem common in unrevealed religions, and the natural
man's wish to have sacred places to pray in, and sacred objects that enable
mortals to touch the divine, tempted people away from the truth of the absolute
sovereignty, holiness, and otherness of God. Verses used to support apostasy of
the Roman Catholic Church. Although Lutherans and Calvinists hold that the
Ecumenical Councils of the early and medieval church are true expressions of
the Christian faith, many assert that the councils are at times inconsistent
with one another, and err on particular points. The true Church, they argue,
will be mixed with alien influences and false beliefs, which is necessary in
order for these impurities ultimately to be overcome and the truth to be
vindicated. Acts 20:28-29 According to this view, these verses foretold the
rise of errors, among which they count the veneration of relics, saints and the
Blessed Virgin Mary, importing polytheism, idolatry, and fetishism into
Christianity; these are the "seducing spirits and doctrines of devils." The
"forbidding to marry" and the "commanding to abstain from meats" (foods) were
held to refer to the elaborate code, or Canon law of the Roman Catholic Church,
involving priestly celibacy, Lent, and similar rules promulgated by the
medieval church. Calvinists thought these rules were legalism and inappropriate
impositions on the faithful. "Speaking lies in hypocrisy" and "having their
conscience seared with a hot iron" were held to refer to the general corruption
of the Church as it became heir to the Roman Emperors and claimed to rule an
earthly kingdom, and its prelates became authoritarian lords of civil
government, achieving a social rank never sought by Jesus himself (see also
Evangelical counsels and ). The "searing of the conscience" was interpreted as
referring to the Roman Catholic development of casuistry that sought to justify
these various acts, and to excuse the sins of the powerful in exchange for
gifts of land and money. This article was abrogated in 1967 by the Presbyterian
Church (USA), the largest Presbyterian denomination in the United States. It
remains officially in force in other Presbyterian denominations. "Roman
Catholic apostasy" doctrine supplanted by dispensationalism. Most leaders in
mainstream Protestant churches have changed what was held from the start of the
Reformation and backed away from teaching the apostasy of the Roman Catholic
Church as it is the largest in the world, which is now felt to be divisive, and
to belong to the more vehement quarrels of another day. Conservative and
fundamentalist churches insisted on these teachings the longest, and some still
do, especially among the stricter Calvinists and Fundamentalists. The spread of
dispensationalism doctrine has led conservative Protestants to drop the
traditional interpreting of the Book of Revelation as predicting events that
have taken place throughout history (historicism) and pushed it to some far off
future events (futurism). This has resulted in a re-interpretation of the end
times; and while Protestant fundamentalists may continue to believe that the
Roman Church errs, they have dropped the Protestant Reformation view or are
less likely to believe that the Pope is Antichrist. Dispensationalists
generally view passages such as 2 Thessalonians (referenced above) as referring
to a reconstructed Temple in Jerusalem (see also Jerusalem in Christianity and
Christian Zionism) in the last days. The great "Falling Away", they tend to
view as a present or future affair, in which not only Rome but all of the
world's religions join against the truth, for the sake of a false peace and
prosperity. For an extensive 18th century Protestant perspective on the Great
Apostasy, see the treatment on that subject by the German historian J. L.
Mosheim, a Lutheran, whose six volume work in Latin on "Ecclesiastical History"
is referred to by some Protestants who emphasize a great apostasy. The result.
In this view, it would be difficult to set a clear dividing line as to when the
purported widespread Apostasy began but Paul tells us it was already starting
at the last days of the Roman Empire and the rise of the power that would take
control over Christianity after it. It was a gradual process of corruption, as
venal and materialistic leaders came into the Church, in love with their own
high office and authority, and power was consolidated by the bishop of Rome
into one man. The Great Apostasy surely was complete, for purposes of the
Reformers, when the Council of Trent emphatically rejected even a modified form
of Protestant reformation for the Roman Catholic Church. The ultramontane
tendencies of Rome continued to increase until at least the First Vatican
Council, with its proclamation of both papal infallibility and papal
absolutism, down to early 20th century changes in Canon law that make it more
clear today than it was in the past that the Pope is the absolute monarch of
the Roman Catholic Church, answerable to no council, no other bishop, and
indeed to no other man or woman. Here the Protestants see the completion of the
Great Apostasy as one man makes himself above all others as the pagan Emperors
before strove to be. The Second Vatican Council stated the Church as the
pilgrim "people of God" and the collegiality of all the bishops "in communion"
with the Pope. It is also important to note that this view of the general
Apostasy does not mean that the Gospel had lost its power to save, or that all
Christians during this time were denied Heaven; rather, the Reformers
characterized the papacy and the hierarchy of priests, as an usurpatious
government pretending to rule over the kingdom of God. God's grace preserved
the true teachings and the Bible intact despite the corruption of those who
were supposed to be official spokesmen for Christendom. Restorationist
perspective. Anabaptists. The Anabaptists of the Protestant Reformation believe
that the Church became corrupt when Constantine I ended the persecution of
Christians with the Edict of Milan, and was not recovered until the Anabaptists
came along. Other Reformers set other dates or time periods when the Church
corrupted itself, making it necessary for them to leave the Roman Catholic
Church in order to re-establish the true Church. Several groups, including
Baptists and Mennonites, believe that besides the Great Apostasy there has also
always been a "little flock", a "narrow way" which struggled through
persecution and remained faithful to the truth. For example, the Mennonites
published a book called the "Martyrs Mirror" in 1660 that attempted to show
that exclusive Believer's baptism was practiced and passed down in every
century, and how those who held that belief were persecuted for it. Some
Anabaptist and Baptist groups have held that the Apostasy of the Roman Catholic
Church was so complete as to nullify its claims to Christianity. Consequently,
in these groups, repudiation of the ecumenical councils has followed, in a few
minority cases engendering seventh-day Sabbatarianism and unitarianism, along
with believers baptism and pacifism, and other anti-traditional views. Some of
these views, more radical than other Protestants, were influential in the
founding of the Restoration Movement and the Adventist churches in the United
States in the 19th century and continue to be influential in the house church
movement. Christians in military service and political office. The fusion of
church and state as seen in the Papacy is a central theme of the Anabaptist
view of the Great Apostasy, and of their consequent assertion during the
Protestant Reformation that the churches of Catholic Europe needed not simply
reform, but a radical re-establishment based on the Bible alone. In sympathy
with this assessment, philosopher Jacques Ellul, in "Anarchy and Christianity",
mentions a dramatic shift in AD 313, at the Council of Elvira. Christians who
held public office were no longer cast out of the church entirely as apostates,
but were only cast out so long as they held office. At the Synod of Arles in
314, Christian pacifism was totally reversed; the third canon excommunicated
soldiers who refused military service, or who mutinied. The seventh canon of
that same council allowed Christians to be state officials, as long as they did
not take part in pagan acts. With this, Ellul sees the end of the original
anti-statist, anti-militarist, anarchist Christianity. However, accounts of
martyred Christian soldiers from the 100s, 200s and early 300s indicate that
Christians were allowed to continue serving in the Roman army provided they did
not sacrifice to the Roman gods, and that therefore the original church may not
have been as anti-militarist as Ellul supposes. Ignatius of Antioch's letters
from the 100s, the use of deacons in the Acts of the Apostles and Paul's
Pastoral epistles describing deacons, bishops and presbyters suggest that the
early church was not anarchist in the way it governed itself internally. The
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Beginning in the 1st century and
continuing up to the 4th century AD the various emperors of the Roman Empire
carried out violent persecutions against Christians. Apostles, bishops,
disciples and other leaders and followers of Jesus who would not compromise
their faith were persecuted and martyred. The LDS Church declares that all
Priesthood leaders with authority to conduct and perpetuate church affairs were
either martyred, taken from the earth, or began to teach impure doctrines,
causing a break in the necessary Apostolic Succession. Latter-day Saints
believe that what survived was but a fragment of the light and truth that Jesus
had established: the Church of Jesus Christ, as established by him, was no
longer to be found on the earth. Survivors of the persecutions were overly-
influenced by various pagan philosophies either because they were not well
indoctrinated in Jesus' teachings or they corrupted their Christian beliefs
(willingly, by compulsion, or with good intentions but without direct
revelation from God to help them interpret said beliefs) by accepting non-
Christian doctrines into their faith. Latter-day Saints believe that many plain
and simple truths of the gospel of Christ were, therefore, lost. Latter-day
Saints understand various writings in the New Testament to be an indication
that even soon after Jesus' ascension the Apostles struggled to keep early
Christians from distorting Jesus' teachings and to prevent the followers from
dividing into different ideological groups. Latter-day Saints claim that
various Old Testament and New Testament scriptures, including teachings of
Christ himself, prophesy of this "falling away" or "apostasy." The Christian
believers who survived the persecutions took it upon themselves to speak for
God, interpret, amend or add to his doctrines and ordinances, and carry out his
work without proper authority and divine direction from God to do so. During
this time, important doctrines and rites were lost or corrupted. Latter-day
Saints point to the doctrine of the Trinity adopted at the Council of Nicaea as
an example of how pagan philosophy corrupted Jesus' teachings. Mormonism
teaches that God, the Eternal Father, His Son, Jesus Christ, and the Holy Ghost
are not one substance, but three separate and distinct beings forming one
Godhead. The Latter-day Saints reject the early ecumenical councils for what
they see as misguided human attempts without divine assistance to decide
matters of doctrine, substituting debate or politics for divine revelation.
Latter-day Saints believe that the often heated proceedings of such councils
were evidence that the church was no longer led by revelation and divine
authority. Thus, Latter-day Saints refer to the "restitution of all things"
mentioned in and claim that a restoration of all the original and primary
doctrines and rites of Christianity was necessary. The LDS believe that God the
Father and His Son, Jesus Christ, appeared to a 14-year old boy named Joseph
Smith and called him to be a prophet. Later Peter, James, and John, three of
Christ's apostles in the New Testament, appeared from heaven to Smith and
ordained him an apostle. Through Christ's Priesthood authority and divine
direction from Christ, the LDS believe that Joseph Smith was called and
ordained to re-establish Christ's church. Hence, members of the LDS faith refer
to their church as "The Church of Jesus Christ." The term "latter-day saints"
refers to the fact that members of Christ's church were originally called
"saints" and that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is Christ's
restored church in these, what LDS and other Christian denominations believe,
are the last days prior to prophesied second coming of Jesus. Latter-day Saints
maintain that other religions—Christian or otherwise—have a "portion" of
the truth, though mingled with inaccuracies due to misinterpretations of some
doctrines, such as the nature of the Godhead, how Adam and Eve's choice in the
Garden of Eden and their fall advanced the Plan of salvation, the need for
modern divine revelation through living prophets and apostles, and the
universal divine potential of mankind. They claim that The Church of Jesus
Christ of Latter-day Saints is the restoration of Jesus' original church, has
the authentic Priesthood authority, and all doctrines and ordinances of the
Gospel, fulfilling many of the prophecies of Daniel, Isaiah and Malachi in the
Old Testament and also the prophesies of Peter and Jesus in the New Testament.
(See Ref.) They also maintain that many other religions, Christian and
otherwise, advance many good causes and do much good among the people insofar
as they are led by the light of Christ, "which lighteth every man that cometh
into the world." (John 1:9) Adventists. Most Adventist groups in the Millerite
tradition hold similar beliefs about the Great Apostasy as other Restorationist
types of Christian faith. Some of these, most notably the Seventh-day Adventist
Church, have traditionally held that the apostate church formed when Bishop of
Rome began to dominate and brought heathen corruption and allowed pagan idol
worship and beliefs to come in, and formed the Roman Catholic Church, which
teaches others traditions over Scripture, and to rest from their work on
Sunday, instead of Sabbath, which is not in keeping with Scripture. Seventh-day
Adventists teach that great apostasy corresponded with the rise of the power of
the Roman Bishop which they see as the Little Horn Power of Daniel 7 prophecy,
which as predicted rose after the breakup of the Roman Empire. In 533 A.D.
Justinian, the emperor of the Eastern Roman Empire, legally recognized the
bishop (pope) of Rome as the head of all the Christian churches. Because of the
Arian domination of some of the Roman Empire by the barbarian tribes, this
authority could not be exercised by the bishop of Rome. Finally, in 538 A.D.,
Belisarius, one of Justinian's generals routed the Ostrogoths, the last of the
barbarian kingdoms, from the city of Rome and the bishop of Rome could begin
establishing his universal civil authority. So, by the military intervention of
the Eastern Roman Empire, the bishop of Rome became all-powerful throughout the
area of the old Roman Empire. Seventh-day Adventists view the length of time
the apostate church unbridled power was permitted to rule as shown in Daniel 7:
25 "The little horn would rule a time and times and half a time" or 1,260
years. The papacy ruled supremely in Europe from 538 A.D. when the last of the
Arian tribes was forced out of Rome and into oblivion, until 1798 A.D. when the
French general Berthier took the pope captive, which history records a period
of 1,260 years. Seventh-day Adventists believe that the mark of the beast
refers to the apostate church which in the end times will legally enforce
Sunday-worship. "Those who reject God's memorial of creatorship — the Bible
Sabbath — choosing to worship and honor Sunday in the full knowledge that it
is not God's appointed day of worship, will receive the 'mark of the beast.
"Sunday Sabbath is purely a child of the Papacy. It is the mark of the beast."
They see an apostate church that changed God's law in preference of pagan
traditions, and allowed pagan beliefs and ceremonies into the church and
brought oppression against and persecuted the true believers throughout the
Dark Ages for 1260 years as prophesied in Revelation 12:6, 14-16. They see the
Roman Papacy stepping in after the Roman Empire was taken out of the way and
fulling 2 Thessalonians 2:7 (New International Version) "For the secret power
of lawlessness is already at work; but the one who now holds it back will
continue to do so till he is taken out of the way." Jehovah's Witnesses. Like
many groups, Jehovah's Witnesses strive to reflect Christianity as they believe
it was practiced in the 1st century, the Apostolic Age. The Watch Tower Bible
and Tract Society and its precursor organization, Zion's Watch Tower Tract
Society, considers the Great Apostasy to have properly begun before the death
of the last Apostle, along with the warning signs and precursors starting
shortly after Jesus' ascension. Jehovah's Witnesses consider adoption of the
Trinity--which they allege is based on a specious application of Greek Platonic
and sophistical philosophy and is a violation of the Scriptural precepts set
forth beginning in the Law of Moses—as a prime indicator of apostasy.
Jehovah's Witnesses consider that the falling away from faithfulness was
already complete before the Council of Nicaea, when the Nicene Creed was
adopted, which then enshrined the Trinity doctrine as the central tenet of
nominal "Christian" orthodoxy. This group strictly abstains from political
involvement and military service, for reasons similar to those cited by earlier
Anabaptists, and they point to such entanglements as another aspect of
apostasy, or the willful rebellion against God and rejecting his Word of truth.
Jehovah's Witnesses also teach that Jesus' statements regarding his disciples
being separate from the world at , , and demonstrates that it is Jesus'
intention that his disciples follow the pattern he set for them, as he said at
. They cite discussion above as indicating that the apostasy prophesied by
Jesus at , and , as well as (and others) had already began in the 1st century
of the Common Era, prior to the formation of the Catholic Church as a religion
separate and distinct from the true Christian faith as taught and practiced by
Jesus and his 1st-century followers. Hyperdispensationalism.
Hyperdispensationalism is described as a niche sect in Protestism which views
Pauline Christianity or the beliefs and doctrines espoused by Paul of Tarsus
through his writings, as the purest form of Christian faith and worship.
Carey,Juanita "E.W.Bullinger: A Biography", p.148,quoting from Bullinger's "The
Church Epistles". Traditionalist Catholic perspective. Sedevancantists and
certain other traditionalist Catholics believe that the Great Apostasy began at
the time of the Second Vatican Council, or with the election of Pope John
XXIII, or shortly thereafter. Sedevacantists believe the differences between
the Roman Catholic Church before and after Vatican II are essential in nature,
and enough to regard the contemporary, official Catholic Church as not truly
Catholic, sometimes pointing to the Church of England as a model. They also
point to the precipitous drop in church attendance that occurred after the new
rite of the Mass was made mandatory in the Catholic Church, along with more
liberal interpretations of Church doctrine which are considered heretical in
some circles. [http://www.truecatholic.org/heresiesjp2.htm] Sedevacantists
share the idea with Protestants that the Catholic Church, as represented by the
Vatican is in a fallen state and no longer truly Christian. However, they
differ in that they accept the Church as it existed until Vatican II, usually
until the death of Pope Pius XII and all his pronouncements regarding doctrine,
faith, and morals, and the rite of Mass before Annibale Bugnini's first
innovations were introduced in the 1950s, whereas most Protestants believe that
the Catholic Church began to fall away with the rise of the Emperor
Constantine, his legalization of Christianity, and its latter establishment as
the state religion of the Roman Empire. (Traditional Catholics argue that
Constantine, as a pagan Emperor, would have had no authority over the Church in
doctrinal matters anyway.) Responses of Roman Catholicism and Eastern
Orthodoxy. Both the Roman Catholic Church and the Eastern Orthodox Church
contend that they are still in harmony with the teachings and practices Jesus
gave the Apostles, and that Jesus' promise has been fulfilled: "On this rock I
will build my church, and the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it." And
elsewhere, "I will be with you until the end of the age." Also, "The Father . .
. will give you another Advocate to be with you always." And the passages of
St. Paul describing the church as Christ's body and as the "pillar and bulwark
of the truth." (1 Tim 3:15) They point to their apostolic succession (among
other things) as evidence that they are maintaining authentic orthodox
Christian teachings. They see claims of a complete apostasy (as opposed to a
widespread revolt) as a denial of the promise that Jesus made (as recorded in
scripture) to be with his Church "until the end of time". They also claim that
their ecclesiastical structure (e.g. the Biblical practice of having bishops)
and liturgical practices have their essential roots in the teachings and
practices of the Apostles and early Christian community, and are not the result
of radical changes introduced by either the imperial government or new converts
in the 4th century. Many elements of modern orthodox teachings are traced back
to the writings of those known as the Ante-Nicene Fathers. In these writings
there is found information about the sacraments, organizational structure, and
general Christian lifestyle. The Catholic Church also believes in a future
event termed "The Great Apostasy" based on Biblical teachings. First there is
the quote from 2 Thess. 2:3-4 :"Let no man deceive you by any means, for unless
there come a revolt first, and the man of sin be revealed, the son of
perdition, Who opposeth, and is lifted up above all that is called God, or that
is worshipped, so that he sitteth in the temple of God, shewing himself as if
he were God" which points to the Great Apostasy happening in the future, during
the time of anti-Christ. Furthermore, 2 Thessolonians identifies this with the
anti-Christ, who is held back by the Pope: "And now you know what withholdeth,
that he may be revealed in his time. For the mystery of iniquity already
worketh; only that he who now holdeth, do hold, until he be taken out of the
way. And then that wicked one shall be revealed whom the Lord Jesus shall kill
with the spirit of his mouth; and shall destroy with the brightness of his
coming, him, Whose coming is according to the working of Satan, in all power,
and signs, and lying wonders" (2 Thess. 2:6-9). This verse clearly shows that a
man, whom Catholics believe is the Pope, holds back the anti-Christ, until he
is killed. This is due to the fact that the man was already holding back the
wicked one, and must be the office of the Pope or otherwise this man has lived
for 2000 years. These verses again also show that the Great Apostasy is a
future event. The Early Church Fathers also predicted a future Great Apostasy
in the Church, for example Hippolytus: "And the churches too will wail with a
mighty lamentation, because neither oblation nor incense is attended to, nor a
service acceptable to God; but the sanctuaries of the churches will become like
a garden-watcher's hut, and the Holy Body and Blood of Christ will not be shown
in those days. The public service of God shall be extinguished." (Third
Century) Protestants claim, however, that the Roman Catholic Church has "added"
to the Deposit of Faith handed down by the Apostles, especially since the time
of Reformation, such as the Immaculate Conception and Assumption of Mary and
Papal Infallibility, though Catholics can point to Biblical support for each.
The Orthodox Church also believes in the Assumption (which is termed the
Dormition). In the view of Protestants, these are new doctrines and they take
Roman Catholicism further from the Protestant understanding of Biblical
Christianity, even though Catholics provide the Bibilical citations supporting
their views. Roman Catholics also counter that the Dogmas of the Assumption and
Immaculate Conception are well-supported in the writings of early Church
Fathers (although some Protestants question the way Catholic theologians cite
and interpret early Christian writings, or whether they have the same validity
as the Holy Scripture), in addition to being supported by Holy Scripture.
Orthodox Churches also note that the Roman Catholic Church has added doctrines
since the time of the East-West Schism, which justifies disunity between Roman
Catholic and Eastern Orthodox churches. At the same time, both Roman
Catholicism and Eastern Orthodoxy see much of Protestantism as having
jettisoned much Christian teaching and practice wholesale, and having added
much non-Christian dogma as well. They also accuse Protestants of distorting
Scripture itself to support their own claims, whether by faulty translations,
misinterpretations, or ignoring passages of Scripture which support Catholicism
or Orthodoxy against Protestantism. While both the Catholic and Orthodox
Churches can claim Apostolic Succession, the Orthodox Church claims to be the
only Christian church that has remained unchanged since its establishment by
Christ and His Apostles, though their current teachings on divorce and
contraception are novelties. Of course, that's not entirely correct; all
churches have changed since their founding. The Orthodox Churches do not
consider changes as changes. But while the Orthodox Church sees corruption of
doctrine and authority in the Catholic Church just as the Protestants do, they
view Protestantism as essentially "throwing the baby out with the bathwater",
ultimately separating themselves from the Truth to a larger degree than the
Catholics. Historic Perspective. Protestants often assert that practices that
seem especially strange to them, such as regular fasting (several Protestant
Churches practice fasting), veneration of relics and icons, honoring the Virgin
Mary (known as the Theotokos to the Orthodox and as Mother of God to
Catholics), and observing special holy days, must have been introduced after
the time of Constantine (or even introduced by Constantine as a way to lead the
Church into paganism). Documents from the pre-Constantine church often show
otherwise; however, there were several different Christian sects before
Constantine. Fasting is a biblical practice from even Old Testament times, and
was mentioned by Jesus in the Sermon on the Mount and reportedly practiced by
him as well. Early Christian documents refer to the regular practice of
fasting. For example, the Didache (or "Teaching of the Twelve") instructs
Christians to fast every Wednesday and Friday, a practice the Orthodox Church
continues to this day. Every feast day is preceded (or followed, as with Shrove
Tuesday followed by Ash Wednesday) by a fast as well, in part to avoid the
excessive revelry of pagan feasting without moderation. The catacomb church was
surrounded by relics of necessity, but accounts of early martyrdoms show that
Christians regularly sought the remains of the martyrs for proper burial and
veneration. (See the "Martyrdom of Polycarp".) Many of these early accounts
associate miracles with the relics: mentioned in Acts are Paul's handkerchiefs
which healed the sick (). The "Infancy Gospel of James" is attributed to James
the Just but was certainly written no later than the 2nd century; it lays out
additional details of Mary's life. This "gospel" is viewed by the Orthodox
Church as apocryphal, and beneficial as a teaching tool only. The practice of
observing special holy days was borrowed from the Jews, who were commanded to
observe such days by God. In the same way, other practices were borrowed from
the Jewish liturgy as well, such as the use of incense and oil lamps. The
Orthodox Church also defines the concept of "oikonomia" which is exercised to
facilitate salvation or worship, and is exemplified in the New Testament: in
Acts 16:3 St. Paul set aside the usual rule to circumcise Timothy, whose father
was a gentile, to placate certain Jewish Christians. In both instances, economy
was exercised to facilitate the salvation of some of the parties involved.
Worldly ambitions. There have certainly been times when the Church has
seemingly benefited from its affiliation with ruling governments, and vice
versa. There is also much evidence that the Church sought to subvert or
undermine ruling governments to bring them under its influence. It used its
agents or allowed the methods to be adopted for the acquisition of greater
power and influence for the Roman Catholic Church. The Jesuits were seen as
church's soldiers, and, in the view of some, given free rein to use whatever
methods as outlined in the forged anti-Catholic document "Monita Secreta", also
known as the "Secret Instructions of the Jesuits" published (1612 and 1614) in
Kraków, and were also accused of using casuistry to obtain justifications for
the unjustifiable in their work (See: formulary controversy; Blaise Pascals'
Lettres Provinciales). There are also times in its history when the Church has
taken a doctrinal stance directly contrary to the interests of the State. The
Council of Chalcedon introduced a religious schism that undermined the
Byzantine Empire's unity. The Emperor called the following Ecumenical Council
in an attempt to reach a compromise position that all parties could accept,
urging those involved to do so. A compromise was not reached, and the schism
persisted. Later emperors introduced policies of iconoclasm; yet many
Christians and Church leaders resisted for decades, eventually triumphing when
a later Empress (Irene) came to power who was sympathetic to their cause. In
Russia, Basil, a "Fool for Christ" repeatedly stood up to Ivan the Terrible,
denouncing his policies and calling him to repentance; for this and other
reasons he was buried in the cathedral that now popularly bears his name in
Moscow. The Greek Orthodox Church survived roughly 400 years under the Muslim
Ottoman Empire, preserving its faith when it would have been socially
advantageous to convert to Islam. More recently, in the 20th century, the
Russian Orthodox Church survived over 70 years of persecution under Communism,
while Christians in many Muslim countries continue to refuse assimilation, in
places including Egypt, Palestine, Turkey, and Iraq. Therefore, it would be
more correct to say that there have been times when the State has seen that it
was to its advantage to cooperate with the Church and to adjust accordingly,
than to advocate the opposite position. More importantly, there is a
consistency in Christian teaching, beginning with the persecuted church of its
first few centuries, to the more established state church of the Roman Empire,
to the again persecuted church of the various Muslim and communist regimes.
Theological dangers. In response to the claim that the Church's response to one
heresy led to an overcorrection in the opposite direction, it can only be
admitted that this is always a real danger, and history provides abundant
examples. One famous example is Nestorius, the Patriarch of Constantinople who
so vigorously defended Jesus' humanity that he undermined Jesus' divinity; A
brief definition of Nestorian Christology can be given as: "Jesus Christ, who
is not identical with the Son but personally united with the Son, who lives in
him, is one hypostasis and one nature: human.". Orthodoxy and Catholicism
believe that the Church's leaders have on the whole navigated the centuries
between opposing errors, on occasion providing subtle clarifications or
restatements of earlier doctrines. Some Church fathers have suggested that the
abundance and variety of early controversies were a blessing, in that they
enabled the Church to deal with most or all of the major questions surrounding
the Christian faith in a rather brief period. Protestants who ignore or attack
the historic church's conclusions are at best bound to fight the same fights
all over again, running the same risk of overcorrecting in response to current
doctrinal disputes. Compounding this risk of overcorrection is the growing
propensity among Protestants to split into different denominations when serious
disagreements arise. This risks having two groups, one or both of whom err in
different directions, rather than a single group that adheres to the purported
truth without deviating to any extremes. Some Protestant denominations avoid
this more successfully than others. Of those that avoid further schism, many of
these ignore doctrinal differences within their ranks and just play down the
importance of the issue, which eventually leads to a greater variety of beliefs
within the denomination. This variety, and toleration of greater and greater
differences in belief, has resulted in further deviations from historic
Christianity. Natural or Popular Religion. Many liturgical practices and
beliefs are asserted to be adapted from pagan customs or human preferences,
however in some cases they were carried over from Temple Judaism, which
practices most Christians believe were first given to Moses and the high
priests by God. The idea of setting aside specific places as holy, treating
certain items used in the worship of God with reverence, all go back to the
Hebrew Temple worship, and to the visions the Bible records of what worship in
Heaven looks like, not just to pagan ideas about "mana." The Roman Catholic
Mass or Orthodox Divine Liturgy in many respects more closely resembles the
Temple sacrifice than anything modern Jews practice, since in Judaism there is
no current Temple in Jerusalem, just the Temple Mount. In other cases, local
customs have been deliberately adapted and imbued with Christian meaning in an
effort to keep the Church incarnate and accessible to local Christians. For
example, in many Orthodox Churches in Europe, there has grown a custom of
blessing pussiwillows on Palm Sunday instead of palm branches, since palms do
not grow that far north. When worship involves the use of the entire body, and
all the senses, the Orthodox believe this becomes very helpful in learning to
actively love God with all their "mind, soul, heart and strength" as God
commands. Restricting worship to a mental exercise removes the "strength"
element of loving God, assert some sources. Prohibiting the use of material,
created objects in giving worship to the Creator, is to condemn all the
sacrifices offered by the holy men and women recorded in the Old Testament and
elsewhere. It also appears to reflect the subset of Gnostic beliefs that all
material things of this world are inherently evil, or at best temporary, and
that only invisible, spiritual thoughts and actions can draw us closer to God.
The Church has always fought against this idea, beginning with its 1st and 2nd
century controversies with the Gnostics of that day, including the assertion
that Jesus is identified as an embodiment of the supreme being who became
incarnate to bring "gnōsis" to the earth, as held by some Gnostic sects.
Instead it affirms that all creation was made good, and while it has since
become corrupt, it is being redeemed by continually offering it back to God.
The epitome of this action occurs in the Eucharistic sacrifice, which
represents the offering of ourselves, all that we have, and the entire world
back to God.
