Hagiography Hagiography () is the study of saints. From the Greek ' (',
“holy” or “saint”) and ' (', “to write”), it refers literally to
writings on the subject of such holy people, and specifically to the
biographies of saints and ecclesiastical leaders. The term hagiology, the study
of hagiography, is also current in English, though less common. This latter
term, in fact, follows original Greek practice, where "ἁγιογραφία"
refers to visual images of the saints, while their written lives (' or ') or
the study thereof are known as "". Christian hagiographies focus on the lives,
and notably the miracles of men and women canonized by the Roman Catholic
church, the Anglican Communion, the Eastern Orthodox Church, the Oriental
Orthodox churches, and the Church of the East. Other religions such as
Buddhism, Islam and Sikhism also create and maintain hagiographical texts (such
as the Sikh Janamsakhis) concerning saints, gurus and other individuals
believed to be imbued with sacred power. The term “hagiography” has also
been used as a pejorative reference to the works of biographers and historians
perceived to be uncritical or “reverential” to their subject. Nonetheless,
hagiographic works, particularly those of the Middle Ages, can often
incorporate a valuable record of institutional and local history, and evidence
of popular cults, customs, and traditions. Development. Hagiography constituted
an important literary genre in the early Christian church, providing some
informational history along with the more inspirational stories and legend. A
hagiographic account of an individual saint can constitute a "vita" or
biography, a description of the saint's deeds and/or miracles, or an account of
the saint's martyrdom (a "passio") - or be a combination of these. In Western
Europe hagiography was one of the more important vehicles for the study of
inspirational history during the Middle Ages. The "Golden Legend" of Jacob de
Voragine compiled a great deal of mediæval hagiographic material, with a
strong emphasis on miracle tales. Lives were often written to promote the cult
of local or national states, and in particular to develop pilgrimages to visit
relics. The bronze Gniezno Doors of Gniezno Cathedral in Poland are the only
Romanesque doors in Europe to feature the life of a saint. The life of Saint
Adalbert of Prague, who is buried in the cathedral, is shown in 18 scenes,
probably based on a lost illuminated copy of one of his Lives. The Bollandist
Society continues the study, academic assembly, appraisal and publication of
materials relating to the lives of Christian saints. (See "Acta Sanctorum".)
Medieval England. With the introduction of Latin literature into England in the
7th and 8th centuries the genre of the life of the saint grew increasingly
popular. It is not surprising that such a genre would become popular in
England. When one contrasts it to the popular heroic poem, such as "Beowulf",
one finds that they share certain common features. In "Beowulf", the titular
character battles against Grendel and his mother, while the saint, such as
Athanasius’ Anthony (one of the original sources for the hagiographic motif)
or the character of Guthlac, battles against figures no less substantial in a
spiritual sense. Both genres then focus on the hero-warrior figure, but with
the distinction that the saint is of a spiritual sort. In Anglo-Saxon and
mediæval England, Hagiography became a literary genre par excellence for the
teaching of a largely illiterate audience. Hagiography provided priests and
theologians with the classical handbooks in a form that allowed them the
rhetorical tools necessary to defend the truth of their scriptures. Many of the
important hagiographical texts composed in medieval England were written in the
dialect of Anglo-Norman. Of all the English hagiographers no one was more
prolific nor so aware of the importance of the genre as Abbot Ælfric of
Eynsham. His work The Lives of the Saints (MS Cotton Julius E.7) comprises a
set of sermons on saints' days, formerly observed by the English Church. The
text comprises two prefaces, one in Latin and one in Old English, and 39 lives
beginning on December 25 with the nativity of Christ and ending with three
texts to which no saints' days are attached. The text spans the entire year and
describes the lives of many saints, both English and continental, and hearkens
back to some of the earliest saints of the early church. Imitation of the life
of Christ then was the benchmark against which saints were measured, and
imitation of the lives of saints was the benchmark against which the general
population measured itself. There are two known instances where saint's lives
were adapted into vernacular plays in Britain. These are the Cornish-language
works "Beunans Meriasek" and "Beunans Ke", about the lives of Saints Meriasek
and Kea, respectively. Medieval Ireland. Ireland is notable in its rich
hagiographical tradition, and for the large amount of material which was
produced during the mediæval period. Irish hagiographers wrote primarily in
Latin while some of the later saint's lives were written in the hagiographer's
native vernacular Irish. Of particular note are the lives of St. Patrick, St.
Columba and St. Brigit—Ireland's three patron saints. Eastern Orthodoxy. In
the 10th century, a Byzantine monk Simeon Metaphrastes was the first one to
change the genre of lives of the saints into something different, giving it a
moralizing and panegyrical character. His catalog of lives of the saints became
the standard for all of the Western and Eastern hagiographers, who would create
relative biographies and images of the ideal saints by gradually departing from
the real facts of their lives. Over the years, the genre of lives of the saints
had absorbed a number of narrative plots and poetic images (often, of pre-
Christian origin, such as dragon fighting etc.), mediaeval parables, short
stories and anecdotes. The genre of lives of the saints was brought to Kievan
Rus' by the South Slavs together with writing and also in translations from the
Greek language. In the 11th century, the Rus' began to compile the original
life stories of the first Rus'ian saints, e.g. Boris and Gleb, Theodosius
Pechersky etc. In the 16th century, Metropolitan Macarius expanded the list of
the Rus'ian saints and supervised the compiling process of their life stories.
They would all be compiled in the so called "Velikiye chet’yi-minei" catalog
(Великие Четьи-Минеи, or Great Menaion Reader), consisting of
12 volumes in accordance with each month of the year. They were revised and
expanded by St. Dimitry of Rostov in 1684-1705. This literary genre was often
used as ecclesiastic and political propaganda. Today, the works in the genre of
lives of the saints represent a valuable historical source and reflection of
different social ideas, world outlook and aesthetic concepts of the past.
