Hail Mary The Angelic Salutation, Hail Mary, or Ave Maria (Latin) is a
traditional Catholic prayer asking for the intercession of the Virgin Mary, the
mother of Jesus. The Hail Mary is used within the Catholic Church, and it forms
the basis of the Rosary. The prayer is also used by some Anglicans as well as
by many other groups within the Western Catholic tradition of Christianity. A
somewhat different form of the prayer is used in the Eastern Orthodox and
Oriental Orthodox churches and other groups of Eastern Christianity. Some
Protestant denominations, such as Lutherans, also make use of some form of the
prayer. Most of the text of the Hail Mary can be found within the Gospel of
Luke. Biblical source. The prayer incorporates two passages from Saint Luke's
Gospel: "Hail, full of grace, the Lord is with thee," and "Blessed art thou
amongst women and blessed is the fruit of thy womb." In mid-13th-century
Western Europe the prayer consisted only of these words with the single
addition of the name "Mary" after the word "Hail," as is evident from the
commentary of Saint Thomas Aquinas on the prayer. The first of the two passages
from Saint Luke's Gospel is the greeting of the Angel Gabriel to Mary,
originally written in Koine Greek. The opening word of greeting, , "chaíre",
here translated "Hail," literally has the meaning "rejoice" or "be glad." This
was the normal greeting in the language in which Saint Luke's Gospel is written
and continues to be used in the same sense in Modern Greek. Accordingly, both
"Hail" and "Rejoice" are valid English translations of the word ("Hail"
reflecting the Latin translation, and "Rejoice" reflecting the original Greek).
The word , ("kecharitōménē"), here translated as "full of grace," admits of
various translations. Grammatically, the word is the feminine present perfect
passive voice participle of the verb , "charitóō", which means "to show, or
bestow with, grace" and, in the passive voice, "to have grace shown, or
bestowed upon, one." The text also appears in the account of the annunciation
contained in the apocryphal Infancy Gospel of Matthew, in chapter 9. In Greek
tradition. To the Biblical texts this adds the opening invocation "Theotokos
Virgin," the name "Mary" and the concluding "because it was the Saviour of our
souls that thou barest." In Western (Latin) tradition. After considering the
use of similar words in Syriac, Greek and Latin in the 6th century, the article
on the Hail Mary in the Catholic Encyclopedia concludes that "there is little
or no trace of the Hail Mary as an accepted devotional formula before about
1050," though a later pious tale attributed to Ildephonsus of Toledo (fl. 7th
century) the use of the first part, namely the angel's greeting Mary, without
that of Elizabeth, as a prayer. Saint Thomas Aquinas spoke of the name "Mary,"
which served to indicate who was the "full of grace" person mentioned, as the
only word added at his time to the Biblical text. But at about the same time
the name "Jesus" was also added, to specify who was meant by the phrase "the
fruit of thy womb." The Western version of the prayer is thus not derived from
the Greek version: even the earliest Western forms have no trace of the Greek
version's phrases: "Mother of God and Virgin" and "for thou hast given birth to
the Saviour of our souls." Eleven years later, the sentence was included in the
Catechism of the Council of Trent of 1566. The "Catechism of the Council of
Trent" says that to the first part of the Hail Mary, by which "we render to God
the highest praise and return Him most gracious thanks, because He has bestowed
all His heavenly gifts on the most holy Virgin ... the Church of God has wisely
added prayers and an invocation addressed to the most holy Mother of God ... we
should earnestly implore her help and assistance; for that she possesses
exalted merits with God, and that she is most desirous to assist us by her
prayers, no one can doubt without impiety and wickedness." A version with
macrons follows for any who wish to recite the prayer with the restored
classical pronunciation of Latin, although it would be anachronistic to do so
since this pronunciation died out long before the prayer was composed (note
anyway that since the accents of the previous version refer to stress accent,
and the macrons to vowel length, there is no incompatibility between the two
notations). For translations from the Latin into various languages, see
Wikisource. Eastern Christian use. In the Eastern Orthodox and Byzantine Rite
Eastern Catholic churches, the prayer is very common in the Greek form
indicated above, or in translations from it. Although it is not said quite as
often as in the West, it is well known and often used and appears in several
canons of prayer. It is typically sung thrice at the end of Vespers during an
All-Night Vigil, as well as occurring many times in the course of daily prayer.
Slavonic versions. The first is the older, and remains in use by the Old
Believers as well as those who follow the Ruthenian recension (among them the
Ukrainian Greek-Catholic Church and the Ruthenian Catholic Church). The second,
corresponding more closely to the Greek, appeared in 1656 under the liturgical
reforms of Patriarch Nikon of Moscow, and is in use by the Russian Orthodox
Church, the Serbian Orthodox Church, the Bulgarian Orthodox Church and the
Ukrainian Orthodox Church). Roman Catholic use. The Hail Mary is the essential
element of the Rosary, a prayer method in use especially among Latin Rite
(Western) Catholics. The Eastern Catholic Churches say a similar version of the
Hail Mary. The Rosary consists traditionally of three sets of five Mysteries,
each mystery consisting of one "decade" or ten Ave Marias. The 150 Ave Marias
of the Rosary thus echo the 150 psalms. These meditate upon events of Jesus'
life during his childhood (Joyful Mysteries), Passion (Sorrowful Mysteries),
and from his Resurrection onwards (Glorious Mysteries). Another set, the
Luminous Mysteries, is of comparatively recent origin, having been proposed by
Pope John Paul II in 2002. Each of these Mysteries is prayed as a decade (a
unit of ten), consisting of one Our Father ("Pater Noster" or "The Lord's
Prayer"), ten Hail Marys, and one 'Glory Be' ("Gloria Patri") (Doxology). The
Hail Mary is also the central part of the Angelus, a devotion generally recited
thrice daily by many Catholics, as well as some Anglicans and Lutherans.
Anglican use. Anglo-Catholics also employ the Hail Mary in devotional practice.
Traditional Anglo-Catholics use the prayer in much the same way as the Roman
Catholics, including use of the Rosary and the recitation of the Angelus. Many
Anglican churches contain statues of the Virgin Mary, and the faithful use
devotional prayers including the Hail Mary. Lutheran use. Martin Luther, the
founder of Lutheranism, believed that Mary should be held in highest reverence,
although he did not agree in Mary's veneration, he did advocate the use of the
first half of the Hail Mary (that is, "Hail Mary, full of grace, the Lord is
with thee. Blessed art thou amongst women and blessed is the fruit of thy womb,
Jesus.") as a sign of reverence for and devotion to the Virgin. Musical
settings. The Hail Mary, or Ave Maria in Latin, has been set to music numerous
times. Among the most famous settings is the version by Charles Gounod (1859),
adding melody and words to Johann Sebastian Bach's first prelude from the Well-
Tempered Clavier; and Franz Schubert's "Ave Maria" (Ellens Gesang III, D839, Op
52 no 6, 1825), Ellen's third song in English, as part of his Opus 25, a
setting of seven songs from Walter Scott's popular epic poem "The Lady of the
Lake," loosely translated into German. It has become one of Schubert's most
popular works under the title of Ave Maria. Antonín Dvořák's version was
composed in 1877. Another setting of Ave Maria was written by Giuseppe Verdi
for his 1887 opera "Otello". Russian composer César Cui, who was raised Roman
Catholic, set the text at least three times: as the "Ave Maria," op. 34, for 1
or 2 women's voices with piano or harmonium (1886), and as part of two of his
operas: "Le Flibustier" (premiered 1894) and "Mateo Falcone" (1907). Settings
also exist by Mozart, Byrd, Elgar, Saint-Saëns, Rossini, Brahms, Stravinsky,
Lauridsen, Franz Biebl, and Perosi as well as numerous versions by less well-
known composers, such as J.B. Tresch. Anton Bruckner wrote three different
settings. In Slavonic, the text was also a popular subject for setting to music
by Eastern European composers. These include Rachmaninov, Stravinsky,
Bortniansky, and several others. Ave Maria, gratia plena, Dominus tecum, Virgo
serena. Ave cuius conceptio, solemni plena gaudio, celestia, terrestria, nova
replet letitia. Ave cuius nativitas, nostra fuit solemnitas, ut lucifer lux
oriens verum solem preveniens. Ave pia humilitas, sine viro fecunditas, cuius
annunciatio nostra fuit salvatio. Ave vera virginitas, immaculata castitas,
cuius purificatio nostra fuit purgatio. Ave preclara omnibus angelicis
virtutibus, cuius fuit assumptio nostra glorificatio. O Mater Dei, memento mei.
Amen.  The much anthologized "Ave Maria" 'by' Jacques Arcadelt is actually a
19th century arrangement by Pierre-Louis Dietsch, loosely based on Arcadelt's
three part madrigal "Nous voyons que les hommes". Franz Schubert's "Ellens
dritter Gesang" (D839, Op 52 no 6, 1825) is often performed with the Ave Maria
prayer sung in place of the original text; this is misidentified as "Schubert's
"Ave Maria"." The original text of Schubert's song is from Sir Walter Scott's
"The Lady of the Lake" and was translated into German by Adam Storck; it opens
with the greeting "Ave Maria" ("Hail Mary"), but is not a setting of the
traditional Ave Maria prayer. In Walt Disney's "Fantasia", the tune is used
with yet another text beginning with the phrase. A famous setting for the
Orthodox version of the prayer in Church Slavonic (Bogoroditsye Djevo) was
composed by Sergei Rachmaninoff in his "All-Night Vigil".
