Haitian Vodou Vodou (, , also written as Voodoo (); Vodun, or Vodoun (), etc.)
is a syncretic religion practiced chiefly in Haiti and the Haitian diaspora.
Practitioners are called "vodouists" (French: "vodouisants" ) or "servants of
the spirits" (Haitian Creole: "sèvitè"). Vodouists believe in a distant and
unknowable creator god, "Bondyè". As Bondyè does not intercede in human
affairs, vodouists direct their worship toward spirits subservient to Bondyè,
called loa. Every loa is responsible for a particular aspect of life, with the
dynamic and changing personalities of each loa reflecting the many
possibilities inherent to the aspects of life over which they preside. In order
to navigate daily life, vodouists cultivate personal relationships with the loa
through the presentation of offerings, the creation of personal altars and
devotional objects, and participation in elaborate ceremonies of music, dance,
and spirit possession. Vodou originated in the French slave colony of Saint-
Domingue in the 18th century, when African religious practice was actively
suppressed, and enslaved Africans were forced to convert to Christianity.
Religious practices of contemporary Vodou are descended from, and closely
related to, West African Vodun as practiced by the Fon and Ewe. Vodou also
incorporates elements and symbolism from other African peoples including the
Yorùbá and Bakongo; as well as Taíno religious beliefs, and European
spirituality including Roman Catholic Christianity, European mysticism,
Freemasonry, and other influences. Names and Etymology. "Vodou" is a Haitian
Creole word that formerly referred to only a small subset of Haitian rituals.
It is descended from an Ayizo word referring to "mysterious forces or powers
that govern the world and the lives of those who reside within it, but also a
range of artistic forms that function in conjunction with these "vodun"
energies." In Haiti, practitioners occasionally use “vodou” to refer to
Haitian religion generically, but it is more common for practitioners to refer
to themselves as those who “serve the spirits” ("sèvitè") by
participating in ritual ceremonies, usually called a "service to the loa"
("sèvis loa") or an "African service" ("sèvis gineh"). These terms can also
be used to refer to the religion as a whole. Outside of Haiti, the term "vodou"
refers to the entirety of traditional Haitian religious practice. Originally
written as "vodun", it is first recorded in "Doctrina Christiana", a 1658
document written by the King of Allada's ambassador to the court of Philip IV
of Spain. In the following centuries, "vodou" was eventually taken up by non-
Haitians as a generic descriptive term for traditional Haitian religion. There
are many used orthographies for this word. Today, the spelling "vodou" is the
most commonly accepted orthography in English. Other potential spellings
include "vodou", "vodoun", "vaudoux", and "voodoo", with "vau-" or "vou-
" prefix variants reflecting French orthography, and a final "-n" reflecting
the nasal vowel in West African or older, non-urbanized, Haitian Creole
pronunciations. The spelling "voodoo", once very common, is now generally
avoided by Haitian practitioners and scholars when referring to the Haitian
religion. This is both to avoid confusion with Louisiana voodoo, a related but
distinct set of religious practices, as well as to separate Haitian vodou from
the negative connotations and misconceptions the term “voodoo” has acquired
in popular culture. Beliefs. Deities. Vodouisants believe in a supreme being
called "loa". This belief is held in several West African religions, such as
that of the Yoruba, Odinani, and Vodun. When it came in contact with Roman
Catholicism, the supreme being was associated with the Judeo-Christian God, the
"loa" becoming the saints. Loa. Because Bondyè (God) is unreachable,
Vodouisants aim their prayers to lesser entities, the spirits known as loa, or
"mistè". The most notable loa include Papa Legba (guardian of the crossroads),
Erzulie Freda (the spirit of love), Simbi (the spirit of rain and magicians),
Kouzin Zaka (the spirit of agriculture), and The Marasa, divine twins
considered to be the first children of Bondye. These loa can be divided into 21
nations, which include the Petro, Rada, Congo and Nago. The Petro and the Rada
contrast most with one another, because the Petro are hot or aggressive and
restless, whereas the Rada are cool or calm and peaceful. The loa also fall
into family groups who share a surname, such as Ogou, Ezili, Azaka or Ghede.
For instance, "Ezili" is a family, Ezili Danto and Ezili Freda are two
individual spirits in that family. Each family is associated with a specific
aspect, for instance the Ogou family are soldiers, the Ezili govern the
feminine spheres of life, the Azaka govern agriculture, the Ghede govern the
sphere of death and fertility. Each of the loa is associated with a particular
Roman Catholic saint. Those in the Haitian Vodou practices that serve the loa
are the Bokor. The Bokor are the Vodou priest/priestesses who can be hired to
perform various sorcery. The Bokor practice both light and dark forms of magic.
The Dark magic that they practice revolves mainly around the creation of
zombies through the use of a mixture of poisons. These poisons are derived
mainly from puffer fish and other poisonous substances. Morality. Vodou's moral
code focuses on the vices of dishonor and greed. There is also a notion of
relative propriety—and what is appropriate to someone with Dambala Wedo as
their head may be different from someone with Ogou Feray as their head. For
example, one spirit is very cool and the other is very hot. Coolness overall is
valued, and so is the ability and inclination to protect oneself and one's own
if necessary. Love and support within the family of the Vodou society seem to
be the most important considerations. Generosity in giving to the community and
to the poor is also an important value. One's blessings come through the
community, and one should be willing to give back. There are no "solitaries" in
Voodou—only people separated geographically from their elders and house. A
person without a relationship of some kind with elders does not practice Vodou
as it is understood in Haiti and among Haitians. There is a diversity of
practice in Vodou across the country of Haiti and the Haitian diaspora. For
instance, in the north of Haiti, the "lave tèt" ("head washing") or "kanzwe"
may be the only initiation, as it is in the Dominican Republic and Cuba,
whereas in Port-au-Prince and the south they practice the "kanzo" rites with
three grades of initiationkanzo senp, si pwen, and asogweand the latter is the
most familiar mode of practice outside Haiti. Some lineages combine both, as
Mambo Katherine Dunham reports from her personal experience in her book "Island
Possessed". While the overall tendency in Vodou is conservative in accord with
its African roots, there is no singular, definitive form, only what is right in
a particular house or lineage. Small details of service and the spirits served
vary from house to house, and information in books or on the internet therefore
may seem contradictory. There is no central authority or "pope" in Haitian
Vodou, since "every mambo and houngan is the head of their own house", as a
popular saying in Haiti goes. Another consideration in terms of Haitian
diversity are the many sects besides the Sèvi Gine in Haiti such as the
Makaya, Rara, and other secret societies, each of which has its own distinct
pantheon of spirits. Practices. Liturgy and practice. A Haitian Vodou temple is
called an Hounfour. After a day or two of preparation setting up altars at an
Hounfour, ritually preparing and cooking fowl and other foods, etc., a Haitian
Vodou service begins with a series of prayers and songs in French, then a
litany in Kreyòl and African "langaj" that goes through all the European and
African saints and loa honored by the house, and then a series of verses for
all the main spirits of the house. This is called the "Priyè Gine" or the
African Prayer. After more introductory songs, beginning with saluting Hounto,
the spirit of the drums, the songs for all the individual spirits are sung,
starting with the Legba family through all the Rada spirits, then there is a
break and the Petwo part of the service begins, which ends with the songs for
the Gede family. As the songs are sung, participants believe that spirits come
to visit the ceremony, by taking possession of individuals and speaking and
acting through them. When a ceremony is made, only the family of those
possessed is benefited. At this time it is believed that devious mambo or
houngan can take away the luck of the worshippers through particular actions.
For instance, if a priest asks for a drink of champagne, a wise participant
refuses. Sometimes these ceremonies may include dispute among the singers as to
how a hymn is to be sung. In Haiti, these Vodou ceremonies, depending on the
Priest or Priestess, may be more organized. But in the United States, many
vodouists and clergy take it as a sort of non-serious party or "folly". In a
serious rite, each spirit is saluted and greeted by the initiates present and
gives readings, advice, and cures to those who ask for help. Many hours later,
as morning dawns, the last song is sung, the guests leave, and the exhausted
hounsis, houngans, and mambos can go to sleep. On the individual's household
level, a Vodouisant or "sèvitè"/"serviteur" may have one or more tables set
out for their ancestors and the spirit or spirits that they serve with pictures
or statues of the spirits, perfumes, foods, and other things favored by their
spirits. The most basic set up is just a white candle and a clear glass of
water and perhaps flowers. On a particular spirit's day, one lights a candle
and says an Our Father and Hail Mary, salutes Papa Legba and asks him to open
the gate, and then one salutes and speaks to the particular spirit as an elder
family member. Ancestors are approached directly, without the mediating of Papa
Legba, since they are said to be "in the blood". Priests. Houngans (Male Voodoo
Priest) or Mambos (Female Vodou Priest) are usually people who were chosen by
the dead ancestors and received the divination from the deities while he or she
was possessed. His or her tendency is to do good by helping and protecting
others from spells, however they sometimes use their supernatural power to hurt
or kill people. They also conduct ceremonies that usually take place "Amba
Peristil" (under a Vodou Temple). However, non-Houngan or non-Mambo as
Vodouisants are not initiated, and are referred to as being "bossale"; it is
not a requirement to be an initiate to serve one's spirits. There are clergy in
Haitian Vodou whose responsibility it is to preserve the rituals and songs and
maintain the relationship between the spirits and the community as a whole
(though some of this is the responsibility of the whole community as well).
They are entrusted with leading the service of all of the spirits of their
lineage. Sometimes they are "called" to serve in a process called "being
reclaimed", which they may resist at first. Below the houngans and mambos are
the hounsis, who are initiates who act as assistants during ceremonies and who
are dedicated to their own personal mysteries. A "bokor" is a sorcerer or
magician who casts spells upon request. They are not necessarily priests, and
may be practitioners of "darker" things and often not even accepted by the
mambo or the houngan. Or, a "Bokor" would be the Haitian term for a vodou
priest or other, working both the light and dark arts of magic. History. Before
1685: From Africa to the Caribbean. The cultural area of the Fon, Ewe, and
Yoruba peoples share common metaphysical conceptions around a dual cosmological
divine principle Nana Buluku, the God-Creator, and the voduns(s) or God-Actor
(s), daughters and sons of the Creator's twin children Mawu (goddess of the
moon) and Lisa (god of the sun). The God-Creator is the cosmogonical principle
and does not trifle with the mundane; the voduns(s) are the God-Actor(s) who
actually govern earthly issues. The pantheon of vodoun is quite large and
complex. West African Vodun has its primary emphasis on ancestors, with each
family of spirits having its own specialized priest and priestess, which are
often hereditary. In many African clans, deities might include Mami Wata, who
are gods and goddesses of the waters; Legba, who in some clans is virile and
young in contrast to the old man form he takes in Haiti and in many parts of
Togo; Gu (or Ogoun), ruling iron and smithcraft; Sakpata, who rules diseases;
and many other spirits distinct in their own way to West Africa. A significant
portion of Haitian Vodou often overlooked by scholars until recently is the
input from the Kongo. The entire northern area of Haiti is heavily influenced
by Kongo practices. In northern Haiti, it is often called the Kongo Rite or
Lemba, from the Lemba rituals of the Loango area and Mayombe. In the south,
Kongo influence is called Petwo (Petro). Many loa (a Kikongo term) are of Kongo
origin, such as Basimbi, Lemba, etc. In addition, the Vodun religion (distinct
from Haitian Vodou) already existed in the United States previously to Haitian
immigration, having been brought by enslaved West Africans, specifically from
the Ewe, Fon, Mina, Kabaye, and Nago groups. Some of the more enduring forms
survive in the Gullah Islands. European colonialism, followed by totalitarian
regimes in West Africa, suppressed Vodun as well as other forms of the
religion. However, because the Vodun deities are born to each African clan-
group, and its clergy is central to maintaining the moral, social, and
political order and ancestral foundation of its villagers, it proved to be
impossible to eradicate the religion. 1685-1791: Vodou in Colonial Saint-
Domingue. The majority of the Africans who were brought as slaves to Haiti were
from Western and Central Africa. The survival of the belief systems in the New
World is remarkable, although the traditions have changed with time and have
even taken on some Catholic forms of worship. Two important factors, however,
characterize the uniqueness of Haitian Vodou as compared to African Vodun; the
transplanted Africans of Haiti, similar to those of Cuba and Brazil, were
obliged to disguise their loa or spirits as Roman Catholic saints, an element
of a process called syncretism. Two keys provisions of the Code Noir by King
Louis XIV of France in 1685 severely limited the ability of enslaved Africans
in Saint-Domingue to practice African religions. First, the Code Noir
explicitly forbade the open practice of all African religions. Second, it
forced all slaveholders to convert their slaves to Catholicism within eight
days of their arrival in Saint-Domingue. As a result, over the course of the
18th century, African religious practice in Saint-Domingue adapted to each of
these provisions. First, African religious practice largely went underground,
outside of the control of colonial authorities. Second, the diverse pantheon of
African spirits that had already been incorporated into religious practice in
Saint-Domingue was overlayed with images, practices, and rituals borrowed from
Catholicism. Médéric Louis Élie Moreau de Saint-Méry, a French observer
writing in 1797, noted this religious syncretism, commenting that the Catholic-
style altars and votive candles used by Africans in Haiti were meant to conceal
the Africanness of the religion. Vodou, as it is known in Haiti and the Haitian
diaspora, is the result of the pressures of many different cultures and
ethnicities of people who were uprooted from Africa and imported to Haiti in
the African slave trade. Under slavery, African culture and religion was
suppressed, lineages were fragmented, and people pooled their religious
knowledge and from this fragmentation became culturally unified. In addition to
combining the spirits of many different African and Amerindian nations, Vodou
has incorporated pieces of Roman Catholic liturgy to replace lost prayers or
elements. Images of Catholic saints are used to represent various spirits or
"mistè" ("mysteries", actually the preferred term in Haiti), and many saints
themselves are honored in Vodou in their own right. This syncretism allows
Vodou to encompass the African, the Indian, and the European ancestors in a
whole and complete way. It is truly a "Kreyòl" religion 1791-1804: The Haitian
Revolution. The most historically important Vodou ceremony in Haitian history
was the Bwa Kayiman or Bois Caïman ceremony of August 1791 that began the
Haitian Revolution, in which the spirit Ezili Dantor possessed a priestess and
received a black pig as an offering, and all those present pledged themselves
to the fight for freedom. This ceremony ultimately resulted in the liberation
of the Haitian people from French colonial rule in 1804, and the establishment
of the first black people's republic in the history of the world and the second
independent nation in the Americas. Haitian nationalists have frequently drawn
inspiration by imagining their ancestors' gathering of unity and courage. Since
the 1990s, some neo-evangelicals have interpreted the politico-religious
ceremony at Bois Caïman to have been a pact with demons. This extremist view
is not considered credible by mainstream Protestants, however conservatives
such as Pat Robertson repeat the idea. 20th Century to the Present. Today,
Vodou is practiced not only by Haitians but by Americans and people of many
other nations who have been exposed to Haitian culture. Haitian creole forms of
Vodou exist in Haiti, the Dominican Republic, eastern Cuba, some of the outer
islands of the Bahamas, the United States, and anywhere that Haitians have
emigrated to. There has been a re-emergence of the Vodun traditions in the
United States, maintaining the same ritual and cosmological elements as in West
Africa. These and other African-diasporic religions, such as Lukumi or Regla de
Ocha (also known as Santería) in Cuba, and Candomblé and Umbanda in Brazil,
have evolved among descendants of transplanted Africans in the Americas. Many
Haitians involved in the practice of Vodou have been initiated as Houngans or
Mambos. Some vodouists with a hunger to live a life of wealth and power became
practitioners so they could exploit foreigners and Haitians who are uneducated
about Vodou, bringing them into a web of deceptions to collect large incomes in
exchange for poor quality work. In January 2010, after the Haiti earthquake
there was an outburst of solidarity prayers in Benin with the victims.
Traditional ceremonies were organized to appease the spirits and seek the
blessing of ancestors for the Haitians. Also a ""purification ceremony"" was
planned for Haiti. In a 2010 news story, CNN reported, "At least 45 people,
most of them Vodou priests, have been lynched in Haiti since the beginning of
the cholera epidemic by angry mobs blaming them for the spread of the disease,
officials said. Demographics and Geographic Distribution. Because of the
religious syncretism (that is, the purposeful combination of contradictory and
unrelated beliefs) between Catholicism and Vodou, it is difficult to estimate
the number of Vodouists in Haiti. The CIA currently estimates that
approximately 50% of Haiti's population practices Vodou, with nearly all
Vodouists participating in one of Haiti's Christian denominations. Myths and
misconceptions. Vodou is often associated with the lore of Satanism, zombies
and "voodoo dolls". Zombie creation has been referenced within rural Haitian
culture, but is not a part of the Vodou religion. Such manifestations fall
under the auspices of the "bokor" or sorcerer rather than the priest of the
Loa. The practice of sticking pins in voodoo dolls has history in folk magic.
"Voodoo dolls" are often associated with New Orleans Voodoo and Hoodoo (folk
magic) as well the magical devices of the poppet and the "nkisi" or "bocio" of
West and Central Africa. The dark side of Vodou is often a dramatic device of
modern horror and action-adventure movies such as "The Serpent and the Rainbow"
and "Live and Let Die" (part of the Ian Fleming James Bond series). In April
1997, thirteen scholars gathered at the University of California Santa Barbara
for a colloquium on Haitian Vodou. From that meeting the "Congress of Santa
Barbara" was created, also known as KOSANBA. Organizations. In the aftermath of
the Duvalier dictatorship, a number of individuals, including many houngan,
sought to organize means of defense for Haitian Vodou from defamation by
evangelical Christian missionaries and congregations. One of the first leading
houngan to formally organize other houngan in solidarity was Wesner Morency
(1959–2007), who established the Vodou Church of Haiti in 1998 (registered in
2001 by the Ministry of Justice) and the Commission Nationale pour la
Structuration de Vodou (CONAVO). Another individual who has pursued the
organization of houngan is Max Beauvoir, who established and heads the National
Confederation of Haitian Vodou. However, the ability to organize and speak on
behalf of most, if not all Vodouisants is hampered by the spirituality's
historically decentralized nature.
