Harran Harran () was a major ancient city in Upper Mesopotamia whose site is
near the modern village of Altınbaşak, Turkey, 24 miles (44 kilometers)
southeast of Şanlıurfa. The location is in a district of Şanlıurfa Province
that is also named "Harran". A few kilometers from the village of Altınbaşak
are the archaeological remains of ancient Harran, a major commercial, cultural,
and religious center first inhabited in the Early Bronze Age III (3rd
millennium BCE) period. It was known as "Ḫarrānu" in the Assyrian period;
possibly "Ḫaran" () in the Hebrew Bible; or "Carrhae" under the Roman Empire;
"Hellenopolis" ( 'Greek city') in the Early Christian period; and "Ḥarrān"
(حرّان) in the Islamic period. History. The earliest records of Harran
come from the Ebla tablets (c. 2300 BCE). From these, it is known that an early
king or mayor of Harran had married an Eblaite princess, Zugalum, who then
became "queen of Harran", and whose name appears in a number of documents. It
appears that Harran remained a part of the regional Eblaite kingdom for some
time thereafter. Royal letters from the city of Mari on the middle of the
Euphrates, have confirmed that the area around the Balikh river remained
occupied in ca. the 19th century BCE. A confederation of semi-nomadic tribes
was especially active around the region near Harran at that time. Merchant
outpost. By the 19th Century BCE, Harran was established as a merchant outpost
due to its ideal location. The community, well established before then, was
situated along a trade route between the Mediterranean and the plains of the
middle Tigris. It lay directly on the road from Antioch eastward to Nisibis and
Ninevah. The Tigris could be followed down to the delta to Babylon. The fourth
century Roman historian Ammianus Marcellinus (325/330–after 391) said,
“From there (Harran) two different royal highways lead to Persia: the one on
the left through Adiabene and over the Tigris; the one on the right, through
Assyria and across the Euphrates.” Not only did Harran have easy access to
both the Assyrian and Babylonian roads, but also to north road to the Euphrates
that provided easy access to Malatiyah and Asia Minor. According to Roman
authors such as Pliny the Elder, even through the classical period, Harran
maintained an important position in the economic life of Northern Mesopotamia.
Assyrian period. In its prime Harran was a major Assyrian city which controlled
the point where the road from Damascus joins the highway between Nineveh and
Carchemish. This location gave Harran strategic value from an early date.
Because Harran had an abundance of goods that passed through its region, it
became a target for raids. In the 18th century, Assyrian king Shamshi-Adad I
(1813 – 1781 BCE) launched an expedition to secure the Harranian trade route.
Hittite period. After the Suppiluliuma I–Shattiwaza treaty (14th century BCE)
between the Hittite Empire and Mitanni, Harran was burned by a Hittite army
under Piyashshili in the course of the conquest of Mitanni. Assyrian period. In
the 13th century BCE, Assyrian king Adad-Nirari I reported that he conquered
the "fortress of Kharani" and annexed it as a province. It is frequently
mentioned in Assyrian inscriptions as early as the time of Tiglath-Pileser I,
about 1100 BCE, under the name Harranu (Akkadian "harrānu", "road, path;
campaign, journey"). Tiglath-Pileser had a fortress there, and mentioned that
he was pleased with the abundance of elephants in the region. 10th century BCE
inscriptions reveal that Harran had some privileges of fiscal exemption and
freedom from certain forms of military obligations. It had even been termed as
the "free city of Harran". However, in 763 BCE, it was sacked by a Harranian
rebellion against Assyrian control that resulted in the loss of those
privileges. Not until Sargon II restored order, in the late 8th century BCE,
were those privileges restored. Median period. During the fall of the Neo-
Assyrian Empire, Harran became the stronghold of its last king, Ashur-uballit
II, who had retreated from Nineveh when it was sacked by Nabopolassar of
Babylon and his Median allies in 612 BC. Harran was besieged and conquered by
Nabopolassar and Cyaxares in 610 BC. It was briefly retaken by Ashur-uballit II
and his Egyptian allies in 609 BC before it definitely fell to the Medes and
Babylonians. The last king of the Neo-Babylonian period, Nabonidus, also
originated from Harran as substantiated by evidence from the temple of stele of
his mother Adad-Guppi, who is suspected by some to be of Assyrian origin. The
city became a bastion for the worship of the moon god during the rule of
Nabonidus from 555-536 BC, much to the consternation of the city of Babylon in
the south where Marduk remained the primary deity. Persian period. Harran
became part of the Median Empire after the fall of Assyria, and subsequently
passed to the Persian Achaemenid dynasty in the 6th century BCE. It became part
of the Persian province of Athura, the Persian word for Assyria. The city
remained in Persian hands until 331 BCE, when the soldiers of the Macedonian
conqueror Alexander the Great entered the city. Seleucid period. After the
death of Alexander on June 11, 323 BCE, the city was contested by his
successors: Perdiccas, Antigonus Monophthalmus, and Eumenes visited the city,
but eventually it became part of the realm of Seleucus I Nicator, of the
Seleucid Empire, and capital of a province called Osrhoene (the Greek rendering
of the old name Urhai). For one and a half centuries the town flourished, and
became independent when the Parthian dynasty of Persia occupied Babylonia. The
Parthian and Seleucid kings were both happy with a buffer state, and the
dynasty of the Arabian Abgarides, technically a vassal of the Parthian "king of
kings", was to rule Osrhoene for centuries. The main language spoken in
Oshroene was Aramaic, and the majority of people were Christian Assyrians.
Classical period. In Roman times, Harran was known as Carrhae, and was the
location of the Battle of Carrhae in 53 BCE, in which the Parthians, commanded
by general Surena, defeated a large Roman army under the command of Crassus,
who was killed. Centuries later, the emperor Caracalla was murdered here at the
instigation of Macrinus (217). The emperor Galerius was defeated nearby by the
Parthians' successors, the Sassanid dynasty of Persia, in 296 CE. The city
remained under Persian control until the fall of the Sassanids to the Arabs in
651 CE. Early Islamic Harran. At the beginning of the Islamic period Harran was
located in the land of the Mudar tribe (Diyar Mudar), the western part of
northern Mesopotamia (Jazira). Along with ar-Ruha' (Şanlıurfa) and Ar-Raqqah
it was one of the main cities in the region. During the reign of the Umayyad
caliph Marwan II Harran became the seat of the caliphal government of the
Islamic empire stretching from Spain to Central Asia. It was allegedly the
Abbasid caliph al-Ma'mun who, while passing through Harran on his way to a
campaign against the Byzantine Empire, forced the Harranians to convert to one
of the "religions of the book", meaning Judaism, Christianity, or Islam. The
pagan people of Harran identified themselves with the Sabians in order to fall
under the protection of Islam. Aramaean and Assyrian Christians remained
Christian. Sabians were mentioned in the Qur'an, but those were a group of
Mandaeans (a Gnostic sect) living in southern Mesopotamia. The relationship of
the Harranian Sabians to the ones mentioned in the Qur'an is a matter of
dispute. The Harranians may have identified themselves as Sabians in order to
retain their religious beliefs. Islam's first university. During the late 8th
and 9th centuries Harran was a centre for translating works of astronomy,
philosophy, natural sciences, and medicine from Greek to Syriac by Assyrians,
and thence to Arabic, bringing the knowledge of the classical world to the
emerging Arabic-speaking civilization in the south. Baghdad came to this work
later than Harran. Many important scholars of natural science, astronomy, and
medicine originate from Harran; they were non-Arab and non-Islamic ethnic
Assyrians, including possibly the alchemist Jābir ibn Hayyān. The end of the
Mandaeans. In 1032 or 1033 the temple of the Sabians was destroyed and the
urban community extinguished by an uprising of the rural, starving 'Alid-Shiite
population and impoverished urban Muslim militias. In 1059–60 the temple was
rebuilt into a fortified residence of the Numayrids, an Arab tribe assuming
power in the Diyar Mudar (western Jazira) during the 11th century. The Zangid
ruler Nur al-Din Mahmud transformed the residence into a strong fortress. The
Crusades. During the Crusades, on May 7, 1104, a decisive battle was fought in
the Balikh River valley, commonly known as the Battle of Harran. However,
according to Matthew of Edessa the actual location of the battle lies two days
away from Harran. Albert of Aachen and Fulcher of Chartres locate the
battleground in the plain opposite to the city of ar-Raqqah. During the battle,
Baldwin of Bourcq, Count of Edessa, was captured by troops of the Great Seljuq
Empire. After his release Baldwin became King of Jerusalem. At the end of 12th
century Harran served together with ar-Raqqah as a residence of Kurdish Ayyubid
princes. The Ayyubid ruler of the Jazira, Al-Adil I, again strengthened the
fortifications of the castle. In the 1260s the city was completely destroyed
and abandoned during the Mongol invasions of Syria. The father of the famous
Hanbalite scholar Ibn Taymiyyah was a refugee from Harran, settling in
Damascus. The 13th century Arab historian Abu al-Fida describes the city as
being in ruins. Modern Harran. Harran is famous for its traditional 'beehive'
adobe houses, constructed entirely without wood. The design of these makes them
cool inside (essential in this part of the world) and is thought to have been
unchanged for at least 3,000 years. Some were still in use as dwellings until
the 1980s. However, those remaining today are strictly tourist exhibits, while
most of Harran's population lives in a newly built small village about 2
kilometres away from the main site. At the historical site the ruins of the
city walls and fortifications are still in place, with one city gate standing,
along with some other structures. Excavations of a nearby 4th century BC burial
mound continue under archaeologist Dr Nurettin Yardımcı. The new village is
poor and life is hard in the hot weather on this plain. The people here are now
ethnic Arabs and live by long-established traditions. It is believed that these
Arabs were settled here during the 18th century by the Ottoman Empire. The
women of the village are tattooed and dressed in traditional Bedouin clothes.
The Assyrians who once occupied the area for thousands of years have moved to
other areas, although there are some Assyrian villages in the general area. By
the late 1980s the large plain of Harran had fallen into disuse as the streams
of Cüllab and Deysan, its original water-supply had dried up. But the plain is
irrigated by the recent Southeastern Anatolia Project and is becoming green
again. Cotton and rice can now be grown. Religion. The city was the chief home
of the Mesopotamian moon god Sin, under the Assyrians and Neo-Babylonians/
Chaldeans and even into Roman times. According to an early Arabic work known as
"Kitab al-Magall" or the "Book of Rolls" (part of Clementine literature),
Harran was one of the cities built by Nimrod, when Peleg was 50 years old. The
Syriac "Cave of Treasures" (ca. 350) contains a similar account of Nimrod's
building Harran and the other cities, but places the event when Reu was 50
years old. The "Cave of Treasures" adds an ancient legend that not long
thereafter, Tammuz was pursued to Harran by his wife's lover, B'elshemin, and
that he (Tammuz) met his fate there when the city was then burnt. The pagan
residents of Harran also maintained the tradition well into the tenth century
AD, of being the site of Tammuz' death, and would conduct elaborate mourning
rituals for him each year, in the month bearing his name. However, the Islamic
historian Al-Masudi in his "Meadows of Gold" (ca. 950), as well as the
Christian historian Bar Hebraeus (13th c.), both recounted a legend that Harran
had been built by Cainan (the father of Abraham's ancestor Shelah in some
accounts), and had been named for another son of Cainan called Harran. Sin's
temple was rebuilt by several kings, among them the Assyrian Assur-bani-pal
(7th century BCE) and the Neo-Babylonian Nabonidus (6th century BCE). Herodian
(iv. 13, 7) mentions the town as possessing in his day a temple of the moon.
Harran was a centre of Assyrian Christianity from early on, and was the first
place where purpose-built churches were constructed openly. However, although a
bishop resided in the city, many people of Harran retained their ancient pagan
faith during the Christian period, and ancient Mesopotamian/Assyrian gods such
as Sin and Ashur were still worshipped for a time. In addition the Mandean
religion, a form of Gnosticism, was born in Harran. Harran in scriptures.
Premedieval Harran has been closely associated with the biblical place Haran
(Hebrew: , transliterated: Charan). Very little is known about the premedieval
levels of Harran and even less for the patriarchal times. (Lloyd and Brice)
Scholars have yet to see what physical evidence will link this village of
Harran to the biblical site where Abram and his family encamped as mentioned in
Biblical Haran was where Terah, his son Abram (Abraham), his grandson Lot, and
Abram's wife Sarai settled while in route to Canaan, coming from Ur of the
Chaldees (Genesis 11:26–32). The region of this Haran is referred to
variously as "Paddan Aram" and "Aram Naharaim". Genesis 27:43 makes Haran the
home of Laban and connects it with Isaac and Jacob: it was the home of Isaac's
wife Rebekah, and their son Jacob spent twenty years in Haran working for his
uncle Laban (cf. Genesis 31:38&41). The place-name should not be confused with
the name of Haran (Hebrew: הָרָן), Abraham's brother and Lot's father —
the two names are spelled differently in the original Hebrew. Islamic tradition
does link Harran to "Aran", the brother of Abraham. Prior to Sennacherib's
reign (704–681 BCE), Harran rebelled from the Assyrians, who reconquered the
city (see 2 Kings 19:12 and Isaiah 37:12) and deprived it of many privileges
– which King Sargon II later restored. Archaeology. T. E. Lawrence ("Lawrence
of Arabia") surveyed the ancient Harran site. Decades later, in 1950, Seton
Lloyd conducted a three-week archaeological survey there. An Anglo–Turkish
excavation was begun in 1951, ending in 1956 with the death of D. S. Rice.
