Harrowing of Hell The Harrowing of Hell (Latin "Descensus Christi ad Inferos"
"the descent of Christ into hell") is a doctrine in Christian theology
referenced in the Apostles' Creed and the Athanasian Creed (Quicumque vult)
that states that Jesus Christ "descended into Hell". The lack of explicit
scriptural references to Christ's descent to the underworld has given rise to
controversy and differing interpretations. As an image in Christian art, the
harrowing is also known as the Anastasis (a Greek word for "resurrection"),
considered a creation of Byzantine culture and first appearing in the West in
the early 8th century. Terminology. The Greek wording in the "Apostles' Creed"
is , ("katelthonta eis ta katôtata"), and in Latin "descendit ad inferos". The
Greek ("the lowest") and the Latin "inferos" ("those below") may also be
translated as "underworld", "netherworld", or as "abode of the dead." Modern
versions of the Apostles' Creed often translate this more literally as "he
descended to the dead". The word "harrow" comes from the Old English "hergian"
meaning to harry or despoil and is seen in the homilies of Aelfric, "ca." 1000.
The term "Harrowing of Hell" refers not merely to the idea that Christ
descended into Hell, as in the Creed, but to the rich tradition that developed
later, asserting that he triumphed over "inferos", releasing Hell's captives,
particularly Adam and Eve, and the righteous men and women of Old Testament
times. Sources. Early Christian teaching. The Harrowing of Hell was taught by
theologians of the early church: St Melito of Sardis (died "c" 180) "Homily on
the Passion"; Tertullian ("A Treatise on the Soul", 55), Hippolytus ("Treatise
on Christ and Anti-Christ") Origen ("Against Celsus", 2:43), and, later, St
Ambrose (died 397) all wrote of the Harrowing of Hell. The Gospel of Matthew
relates that immediately after Christ died, the earth shook, there was a
Crucifixion darkness and eclipse, the veil in the Temple was torn in two, and
many people rose from the dead and walked about in Jerusalem and were seen by
many people there. According to the apocryphal Gospel of Nicodemus, the
Harrowing of Hell was foreshadowed by Christ's raising of Lazarus from the dead
prior to his own crucifixion. The hymns proper to the weekend suggest that John
the Baptist prepared the way for Jesus in Hell by prophesying to those held
there that Christ would soon release them, just as he prepared the way for
Jesus on Earth. In the "Acts of Pilate"—usually incorporated with the widely-
read medieval "Gospel of Nicodemus"—texts built around an original that might
have been as old as the 3rd century A.D. with many improvements and embroidered
interpolations, chapters 17 to 27 are called the "Decensus Christi ad Inferos."
They contain a dramatic dialogue between Hades and prince Satan, and the entry
of the King of Glory, imagined as from within Tartarus (see link below). The
richest, most circumstantial accounts of the Harrowing of Hell are found in
medieval dramatic literature, such as the four great cycles of English mystery
plays which each devote a separate scene to depict it, or in passing references
in Dante's "Inferno". The subject is found also in the Cornish mystery plays
and the York and Wakefield cycles. These medieval versions of the story do not
derive from the bare suggestion made in the Epistle ascribed to Peter, but come
from the "Gospel of Nicodemus." See "The Apocryphal New Testament" edited by
Prof JK Elliott 1993 ISBN 0-19-826182-9 pp164 Conceptions of the afterlife. The
Old Testament view of the afterlife was that all people, whether righteous or
unrighteous, went to Sheol when they died. No Hebrew figure ever descended into
Sheol and returned, although an apparition of the recently deceased Samuel
briefly appeared to Saul when summoned by the Witch of Endor. Several works
from the Second Temple period elaborate the concept of Sheol, dividing it into
sections based on the righteousness or unrighteousness of those who have died.
The New Testament maintains a distinction between Sheol, the common "place of
the dead", and the eternal destiny of those condemned at the Final Judgment,
variously described as Gehenna, "the outer darkness," or a lake of eternal
fire. Modern English translations of the Bible maintain this distinction (e.g.
by translating "Sheol" as "the Pit" and "Gehenna" as "Hell"), but the
influential King James Version used the word "hell" to translate both concepts.
The Hellenistic views of heroic descent into the Underworld and successful
return follow traditions that are far older than the mystery religions popular
at the time of Christ. The Epic of Gilgamesh includes such a scene, and it
appears also in "Odyssey" XI. Writing shortly before the birth of Jesus, Vergil
included it in the "Aeneid". What little we know of the worship in mystery
religions such as the Eleusinian Mysteries and Mithraism suggests that a ritual
death and rebirth of the initiate was an important part of their liturgy.
Again, this has earlier parallels, in particular with the worship of Osiris.
The ancient homily on "The Lord's Descent into Hell" may mirror these
traditions by referring to baptism as a symbolic death and rebirth. ("cf." )
Or, these traditions of Mithraism may be drawn from early Christian homilies.
Interpretations of the doctrine. Roman Catholic. There is an ancient homily on
the subject, of unknown authorship, usually entitled "The Lord's Descent into
Hell" that is the second reading at Office of Readings on Holy Saturday in the
Roman Catholic Church. The Catechism of the Catholic Church states: "By the
expression 'He descended into Hell', the Apostles' Creed confesses that Jesus
did really die and through his death for us conquered death and the devil 'who
has the power of death' (). In his human soul united to his divine person, the
dead Christ went down to the realm of the dead. He opened Heaven's gates for
the just who had gone before him." As the Catechism says, the word
"Hell"—from the Norse, "Hel"; in Latin, "infernus, infernum, inferi"; in
Greek, (Hades); in Hebrew, "שאול" (Sheol)—is used in Scripture and the
Apostles' Creed to refer to the abode of all the dead, whether righteous or
evil, unless or until they are admitted to Heaven (CCC 633). This abode of the
dead is the "Hell" into which the Creed says Christ descended. His death freed
from exclusion from Heaven the just who had gone before him: "It is precisely
these holy souls who awaited their Savior in Abraham's bosom whom Christ the
Lord delivered when he descended into Hell", the Catechism states (CCC 633),
echoing the words of the Roman Catechism, 1,6,3. His death was of no avail to
the damned. Conceptualization of the abode of the dead as a place, though
possible and customary, is not obligatory (Church documents, such as
catechisms, speak of a "state or place"). Some maintain that Christ did not go
to the place of the damned, which is what is generally understood today by the
word "Hell". For instance, Thomas Aquinas taught that Christ did not descend
into the "Hell of the lost" in his essence, but only by the effect of his
death, through which "he put them to shame for their unbelief and wickedness:
but to them who were detained in Purgatory he gave hope of attaining to glory:
while upon the holy Fathers detained in Hell solely on account of original sin,
he shed the light of glory everlasting." While some maintain that Christ merely
descended into the "limbo of the fathers", others, notably theologian Hans Urs
von Balthasar (inspired by the visions of Adrienne von Speyr), maintain that it
was more than this and that the descent involved suffering by Jesus. Since both
John Paul II and Benedict XVI have lauded the theology of Balthasar, and
because some do not see a precise doctrinal position of the Church on this
point, some maintain that this is a matter on which differences and theological
speculation are permissible without transgressing the limits of orthodoxy.
Eastern Orthodox. Saint John Chrysostom's "Paschal Homily" also addresses the
Harrowing of Hades, and is typically read during the Paschal Vigil, the major
service of the Eastern Orthodox celebration of Pascha (Easter). In the Eastern
Orthodox Church, the Harrowing of Hades is celebrated annually on Holy and
Great Saturday, during the Vesperal Divine Liturgy of Saint Basil. At the
beginning of the service, the hangings in the church and the vestments worn by
the clergy are all somber Lenten colours (usually purple or black). Then, just
before the Gospel reading, the liturgical colors are changed white and the
deacon performs a censing, and the priest strews laurel leaves around the
church, symbolizing the broken gates of hell; this is done in celebration of
the harrowing of Hades then taking place, and in anticipation of Christ's
imminent resurrection. The Harrowing of Hades is generally more common and
prominent in Orthodox iconography compared to the Western tradition. It is the
traditional icon for Holy Saturday, and is used during the Paschal season and
on Sundays throughout the year. The traditional Eastern Orthodox icon of the
Resurrection of Jesus does not depict simply the physical act of Jesus' coming
out of the Tomb, but rather it depicts what Orthodox Christians believe to be
the spiritual reality of what his Death and Resurrection accomplished. The icon
shows Jesus, vested in white and gold to symbolize his divine majesty, standing
on the brazen gates of Hades (also called the "Doors of Death"), which are
broken and have fallen in the form of a cross, illustrating the belief that by
his death on the cross, Jesus trampled down death (see Paschal troparion). He
is holding Adam and Eve and pulling them up out of Hades. Traditionally, he is
not shown holding them by the hands, but by their wrists, to illustrate the
theological teaching that mankind could not pull himself out of his ancestral
sin, but that it could come about only by the work ("energia") of God. Jesus is
surrounded by various righteous figures from the Old Testament (Abraham, David,
etc.); the bottom of the icon depicts Hades as a chasm of darkness, often with
various pieces of broken locks and chains strewn about. Quite frequently, one
or two figures are shown in the darkness, bound in chains, who are generally
identified as personifications of Death and/or the Devil. Lutheran. Martin
Luther, in a sermon delivered in Torgau in 1533, stated that Christ descended
into Hell. The Formula of Concord (a Lutheran confession) states, "we believe
simply that the entire person, God and human being, descended to Hell after his
burial, conquered the devil, destroyed the power of Hell, and took from the
devil all his power." (Solid Declaration, Art. IX) Many attempts were made
following Luther's death to systematize his theology of the descensus, whether
Christ descended in victory or humiliation. For Luther, however, the defeat or
"humiliation" of Christ is never fully separable from His victorious
glorification. Some argued that Christ's suffering was completed with His words
from the cross, "It is finished", but this would obviously make His subsequent
death and burial completely superfluous, while also obviating the need to
suffer the penalty promised sinful man (death) as a substitute (the
"substitutionary atonement" being a chief principle of Lutheran soteriology).
Luther himself, when pressed to elaborate on the question of whether Christ
descended to Hell in humiliation or victory responded, "It is enough to preach
the article to the laypeople as they have learned to know it in the past from
the stained glass and other sources." Calvinist. The Calvinist position is that
if Christ had descended into Hell (place of eternal suffering), he would have
had to bear God's Curse. John Calvin expressed his concern that many Christians
"have never earnestly considered what it is or means that we have been redeemed
from God's judgment. Yet this is our wisdom: duly to feel how much our
salvation cost the Son of God." Calvin's conclusion is that "Christ's descent
into Hell was necessary for Christians' atonement, because Christ did in fact
endure the penalty for the sins of the redeemed." Latter-day Saints. The
Harrowing of Hell has been a unique and important doctrine among members of The
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints since its founding in 1830 by
Joseph Smith, although members of the church ("Mormons") usually call it by
other terms, such as "Christ's visit to the spirit world." Like Christian
exegetes distinguishing between Sheol and Gehenna, Latter-day Saints
distinguish between the realm of departed spirits (the "spirit world") and the
portion (or state) of the wicked ("spirit prison"). The portion or state of the
righteous is often referred to as "paradise". Perhaps the most notable aspect
of Latter-day Saint beliefs regarding the Harrowing of Hell is their view on
the purpose of it, both for the just and the wicked. Joseph F. Smith, the sixth
president of the Church, explained in what is now a canonized revelation, that
when Christ died, "there were gathered together in one place an innumerable
company of the spirits of the just, . . . rejoicing together because the day of
their deliverance was at hand. They were assembled awaiting the advent of the
Son of God into the spirit world, to declare their redemption from the bands of
death" (D&C 138:12, 15-16). In the LDS view, while Christ announced freedom
from physical death to the just, he had another purpose in descending to Hell
regarding the wicked. "The Lord went not in person among the wicked and the
disobedient who had rejected the truth, to teach them; but behold, from among
the righteous, he organized his forces…and commissioned them to go forth and
carry the light of the gospel to them that were in darkness, even to all the
spirits of men; and thus was the gospel preached to the dead . . . to those who
had died in their sins, without a knowledge of the truth, or in transgression,
having rejected the prophets" (D&C 138:29-30, 32). From the Latter-day Saint
viewpoint, the rescue of spirits was not a one-time event but an ongoing
process that still continues. (D&C 138) (1 Peter 4:6). Christian mortalism. The
above views share the traditional Christian belief in the immortality of the
soul. The mortalist view of the intermediate state requires an alternative view
of the and , taking a view of the New Testament use of Hell as equivalent to
use of Hades in the Septuagint and therefore to Sheol in the Old Testament.
William Tyndale and Martin Bucer of Strassburg argued that Hades in Acts 2 was
merely a metaphor for the grave. Other reformers Christopher Carlisle and
Walter Deloenus in London, argued for the article to be dropped from the creed.
The Harrowing of Hell was a major scene in traditional depictions of Christ's
life avoided by John Milton due to his mortalist views. Mortalist
interpretations of the Acts 2 statements of Christ being in Hades are also
found among later Anglicans such as E. W. Bullinger. Of the three days, Christ
says "I was dead" (Greek "egenomen nekros" ἐγενόμην νεκρὸς,
Latin "fui mortuus") (Revelation 1:18). In art, music and literature. Drama
Literature Parallels also exist in Jewish literature, but referencing legends
of Enoch and Abraham's harrowings of the underworld, not related to Christian
themes. These have been updated in Isaac Leib Peretz's short story "Neilah in
Gehenna", a Jewish hazzan descends to Hell and uses his unique voice to bring
about the repentance and liberation of the souls imprisoned there. Music The
subject of the harrowing of hell was the subject of several baroque oratorios,
most notably Salieri's "Gesù al Limbo" (1803) to a text by Luigi Prividali.
