Haruspex In Roman and Etruscan religious practice, a haruspex (plural
haruspices; from PIE 'gher-, ghor-na' "bowels" (compare Latin 'hernia',
"protruding viscera", 'hira', "empty gut") plus '-spex', "observer", from
'specere') was a person trained to practice a form of divination called
haruspicy, hepatoscopy or hepatomancy. Haruspicy is the inspection of the
entrails of sacrificed animals, especially the livers of sacrificed sheep and
poultry. The rites were paralleled by other rites of divination such as the
interpretation of lightning strikes, of the flight of birds (augury, auspicy),
and of other natural omens. Being a specific form of the general practice of
extispicy, haruspicy is not original to Etruscans nor Romans. Rather, it is now
considered to have originated from the Near East where one would once find
Hittites and Babylonians performing similar rites with entrails and producing
comparable stylized models of the sheep's liver. Babylonian haruspicy. The
Babylonians were famous for hepatoscopy. The liver was considered the source of
the blood and hence the base of life itself. From this belief, the
Mesopotamians deemed the liver of special sheep the means to discover the will
of the gods. The priest, called a "bārû", was specially trained to interpret
the "signs" of the liver and a monumental compendium of omens was assembled
called the Bārûtu. The liver was divided into sections with each section
representing a particular deity. The Nineveh library texts name more than a
dozen liver-related terms and before cuneiform writing was even deciphered,
hints of the existence of Babylonian hepatoscopy were recorded in the Bible.
One Babylonian clay model of a sheep's liver, dated between 2050 and 1750 BC,
is conserved in the British Museum. The model was used for omen divination
which was important to Mesopotamian medicine. This study was carried out by
priests and seers who looked for signs in the stars, or in the organs of
sacrificed animals, to tell them things about a patient’s illness. Wooden
pegs were placed in the holes of the clay tablet to record features found in a
sacrificed animal's liver. The priest or seer then used these features to
predict the course of a patient's illness. Haruspicy was part of a larger study
of organs for the sake of divination, called "extispicy", paying particular
attention to the positioning of the organs and their shape. There are many
records of different peoples using the liver and spleen of various domestic and
wild animals to forecast weather. There are hundreds of ancient architectural
objects, labyrinths composed of cobblestones in the northern countries that are
considered to be a model of the intestines of the sacrificial animal, i.e. the
colon of ruminants. Etruscan haruspicy. The Etruscans were also well known for
the practice of divining by the entrails of sheep. A bronze sculpture of a
liver called the "Piacenza Liver" was discovered in 1877—and dating to c. 100
BC—near the town of Piacenza in northern Italy, complete with the name of
regions marked on it which were assigned to various gods. It has been connected
to the practice of haruspicy. By 1900, a professor of anatomy, Ludwig Stieda,
sought to compare this artifact with a Mesopotamian one dated to a millennium
earlier. Etruscan haruspicy probably reached Etruria via the Hittites, perhaps
because the Etruscans originated in Asia Minor. The art of haruspicy was taught
in the "Libri Tagetici", a collection of texts attributed to Tages, a childlike
being who figures in Etruscan mythology, and who was discovered in an open
field by Tarchon. Roman haruspicy. Haruspicy continued to be practised
throughout the history of the Roman Empire. It was a haruspex, Spurinna, who
warned Julius Caesar to beware the Ides of March. The emperor Claudius was a
student of Etruscan and opened a college to preserve and improve their art,
which lasted until the reign of Theodosius I. Further evidence has been found
of haruspices in Bath, England where the base of a statue was inscribed to
honour a god for a haruspex (Memor).
