Heaven Heaven, the Heavens or Seven Heavens, is a common religious,
cosmological, mythological, or metaphysical term for the physical or
transcendent place from which heavenly beings (such as a God, angels, the jinn,
and sky deities like King or Queen of Heaven, Heavenly Father, Heavenly Mother,
Son of Heaven, heavenly saints or venerated ancestors) originate, are enthroned
or inhabit. It is commonly believed that heavenly beings can descend to earth
or incarnate and that earthly beings can ascend to Heaven in the afterlife or,
in exceptional cases, enter Heaven alive. Heaven is often described as a
"higher place", the holiest place, a Paradise, in contrast to Hell or the
Underworld or the "low places", and universally or conditionally accessible by
earthly beings according to various standards of divinity, goodness, piety,
faith, or other virtues or right beliefs or simply the Will of God. Some
believe in the possibility of a Heaven on Earth in a World to Come. Another
belief is in an Axis mundi or World tree which connects the heavens, the world,
and the underworld. In Indian religions, Heaven is considered as "Svarga loka",
and soul is again subjected to rebirth in different living forms according to
its "karma". This cycle can be broken after a soul achieves "Moksha" or
"Nirvana". Etymology. The modern English word "heaven" is derived from the
earlier (Middle English) "heven" (attested 1159); this in turn was developed
from the previous Old English form "heofon". By c. 1000, "heofon" was being
used in reference to the Christianized "place where God dwells", but
originally, it had signified "sky, firmament" (e.g. in "Beowulf", c. 725). The
English term has cognates in the other Germanic languages: Old Saxon "heƀan"
"sky, heaven", Middle Low German "heven" "sky", Old Icelandic "himinn" "sky,
heaven", Gothic "himins"; and those with a variant final "-l": Old Frisian
"himel", "himul" "sky, heaven", Old Saxon/Old High German "himil", Dutch
"hemel", and modern German "Himmel". All of these have been derived from a
reconstructed Proto-Germanic form *"Hemina-". In many languages, the word for
"heaven" is the same as the word for "sky". Entry into heaven. Religions that
speak about heaven differ on how (and if) one gets into it, either in the
afterlife or while still alive. In many religions, entrance to Heaven is
conditional on having lived a "good life" (within the terms of the spiritual
system) or "accepting God into your heart." A notable exception to this is the
'sola fide' belief of many mainstream Protestant Christians, which teaches that
one does not have to live a perfectly "good life," but that one must accept
(believe and put faith in) Jesus Christ as one's saviour, and then Jesus Christ
will assume the guilt of one's sins; believers are believed to be forgiven
regardless of any good or bad "works" they have participated in. Catholic
Christians too speak of heaven as unattainable by even heroic human effort and
having been "opened" by the death and resurrection of Jesus. They see heaven as
promised by God as a reward for good works made possible only by his grace,
while "the works of the flesh" exclude from heaven. A contrary view is that of
Christian Universalism, which holds that, because of divine love and mercy all
will ultimately be reconciled to God. Dispensationalists hold that, in an event
called the Rapture, Christians will be suddenly removed from earth before or
during the Great Tribulation. They base this belief on , which says that, along
with "the dead in Christ", "we who are alive, who are left, will be caught up
together with them in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air". Results of
exclusion from heaven. Many religions state that those who do not go to heaven
will go to another place, hell, which is eternal in religions such as
Christianity. Some religions uphold the belief that other forms of afterlife
exist in addition to heaven and hell, such as purgatory, though many hells,
such as Naraka, serve as purgatories themselves. Some belief systems contain
universalism, the belief that everyone will go to heaven eventually, no matter
what they have done or believed on earth. Some forms of Christianity, and other
religions believe hell to be the termination of the soul. Some Christian
denominations believe in an Intermediate state between death and the
Resurrection of the Dead. Ancient Near East religions. Egypt. In Ancient
Egyptian faith, belief in an afterlife is much more stressed than in ancient
Judaism. Heaven was a physical place far above the Earth in a "dark area" of
space where there were no stars, basically beyond the Universe. According to
the Book of the Dead, departed souls would undergo a literal journey to reach
Heaven, along the way to which there could exist hazards and other entities
attempting to deny the reaching of Heaven. Their heart would finally be weighed
with the feather of truth, and if the sins weighed it down their heart was
devoured. Canaanite and Phoenician views of heaven. Almost nothing is known of
Bronze Age (pre-1200 BC) Canaanite views of heaven, and the archeological
findings at Ugarit (destroyed c.1200 BC) have not provided information. The 1st
century Greek author Philo of Byblos may preserve elements of Iron Age
Phoenician religion in his "Sanchuniathon". Hurrian and Hittite myths. In the
Middle Hittite myths heaven is abode of the gods. In the Song of Kumarbi, Alalu
was king in heaven for nine years before giving battle to his son Anu. Anu was
himself overthrown by his son Kumarbi. Judaism (Iron Age). The term for heavens
in the Tanakh is "shamayim", located above the firmament (a solid, transparent
dome which covered the earth and separated it from the "waters" above). The God
of Israel (Yahweh) lived in Heaven or in the "Heaven of Heavens" (the exact
difference between these two, if any, is unclear) in a heavenly palace. His
dwelling on earth was Solomon's Temple in Jerusalem, which was a model of the
cosmos and included a section which represented Heaven. Bahá'í faith. The
Bahá'í Faith regards the conventional description of heaven (and hell) as a
specific place as symbolic. The Bahá'í writings describe heaven as a
"spiritual condition" where closeness to God is defined as heaven; conversely
hell is seen as a state of remoteness from God. Bahá'u'lláh, the founder of
the Bahá'í Faith, has stated that the nature of the life of the soul in the
afterlife is beyond comprehension in the physical plane, but has stated that
the soul will retain its consciousness and individuality and remember its
physical life; the soul will be able to recognize other souls and communicate
with them. For Bahá'ís, entry into the next life has the potential to bring
great joy. Bahá'u'lláh likened death to the process of birth. He explains:
"The world beyond is as different from this world as this world is different
from that of the child while still in the womb of its mother." The analogy to
the womb in many ways summarizes the Bahá'í view of earthly existence: just
as the womb constitutes an important place for a person's initial physical
development, the physical world provides for the development of the individual
soul. Accordingly, Bahá'ís view life as a preparatory stage, where one can
develop and perfect those qualities which will be needed in the next life. The
key to spiritual progress is to follow the path outlined by the current
Manifestation of God, which Bahá'ís believe is currently Bahá'u'lláh.
Bahá'u'lláh wrote, "Know thou, of a truth, that if the soul of man hath
walked in the ways of God, it will, assuredly return and be gathered to the
glory of the Beloved." The Bahá'í teachings state that there exists a
hierarchy of souls in the afterlife, where the merits of each soul determines
their place in the hierarchy, and that souls lower in the hierarchy cannot
completely understand the station of those above. Each soul can continue to
progress in the afterlife, but the soul's development is not entirely dependent
on its own conscious efforts, the nature of which we are not aware, but also
augmented by the grace of God, the prayers of others, and good deeds performed
by others on Earth in the name of that person. Buddhism. In Buddhism there are
several heavens, all of which are still part of "samsara" (illusionary
reality). Those who accumulate good karma may be reborn in one of them.
However, their stay in the heaven is not eternal—eventually they will use up
their good karma and will undergo a different rebirth into another realm, as
humans, animals or other beings. Because heaven is temporary and part of
"samsara", Buddhists focus more on escaping the cycle of rebirth and reaching
enlightenment ("Nirvana"). There are several different types of heavens also
based on how the human lives a life along career lines. It is declared that a
warrior who fights for good, and dies for his or her duties will enter the
realm of the "devas of passionate delight," while an actor that makes audiences
laugh will enter the realm of the "laughing devas." According to Buddhist
cosmology the universe is impermanent and beings transmigrate through a number
of existential "planes" in which this human world is only one "realm" or
"path". These are traditionally envisioned as a vertical continuum with the
heavens existing above the human realm, and the realms of the animals, Hungry
ghosts and hell beings existing beneath it. According to Jan Chozen Bays in her
book, "Jizo: Guardian of Children, Travelers, and Other Voyagers", the realm of
the "asura" is a later refinement of the heavenly realm and was inserted
between the human realm and the heavens. One important Buddhist heaven is the
"Trāyastriṃśa", which resembles Olympus of Greek mythology. In the Mahayana
world view, there are also pure lands which lie outside this continuum and are
created by the Buddhas upon attaining enlightenment. These should not be
confused with the heavens as the pure lands are abodes of Buddhas, which the
heavens are not and heavens are looked at "impermanent" places to be
reincarnated in, as heavenly beings still have to die and be reincarnated into
lower realms. This confusion can be made worse when writers use such words
'paradise' to denote such pure lands. One notable Buddhist pure land is the
Pure Land of Amitabha Buddha. Rebirth in the pure land of Amitabha is seen as
an assurance of Buddhahood for once reborn there, beings do not fall back into
cyclical existence unless they choose to do so to save other beings, the goal
of Buddhism being the obtainment of enlightenment and freeing oneself and
others from the birth-death cycle. One of the Buddhist Sutras states that a
hundred years of our existence is equal to one day and one night in the world
of the thirty-three gods. Thirty such days add up to their one month. Twelve
such months become their one year, while they live for a thousand such years
though existence in the heavens is ultimately finite and the beings who reside
there will reappear in other realms based on their karma. The Tibetan word
"Bardo" means literally "intermediate state". In Sanskrit the concept has the
name "antarabhāva". Different heavens. According to "Anguttara Nikaya".
Brahmāloka Here the denizens are Brahmās, and the ruler is Mahābrahmā. Of
all the devas, Brahmās are the wisest of all gods and declared in Buddhism to
be the highest but the Buddha and monks having reached the state of Arahant can
surpass the Brahmās by status. Brahmās also are asexual and do not desire to
procreate. After developing the four Brahmavihāras, King Makhādeva rebirths
here after death. The monk Tissa and Brāhmana Jānussoni were also reborn
here. For a monk, the next best thing to Nirvana is to be reborn in this
Brahmāloka. The lifespan of a Brahmās is not stated but is not eternal.
Kāmāvacaraloka The lifespan of a Kāmāvacara is not stated but is not
eternal. Cātummaharaja Here some denizens are kings that came from human lives
as being kings. The "Anguttara Nikaya" says that on the 15th day, the
Cātummaharaja gods look down to earth and see of the humans are still paying
reverence to mother, father, samanas and brahmanas. Bimbisāra (the king of
Magadha), and Pāyāsi (the king of Kosāla) were reborn here. The denizens
here have a lifespan of 9,216,000,000 years. Nimmānarati The denizens here
have a lifespan of 2,284,000,000 years. Parinimmitavasavatti The denizens here
have a lifespan of 9,216,000,000 years. Tāvatimsa The ruler of this heaven is
Indra or Shakra, and the realm is also called Trayatrimia. Each denizen
addresses other denizens as the title "mārisa." The governing hall of this
heaven is called Sudhamma Hall. This heaven has a garden Nandanavana with
damsels, as its most magnificent sight. Ajita the Licchavi army general was
reborn here. Gopika the Sākyan girl was reborn as a male god in this realm.
Any Buddhist reborn in this realm can outshine any of the previously-dwelling
denizens because of the extra merit acquired for following the Buddha's
teachings. The denizens here have a lifespan of 36,000,000 years. Tusita
Anāthapindika, a Kosālan householder and benefactor to the Buddha's order was
reborn here. The denizens here have a lifespan of 576,000,000 years. Yāma The
denizens here have a lifespan of 1,444,000,000 years. According to Tibetan
Buddhism. There are 5 major types of heavens. Akanishtha This is the most
supreme heaven wherein beings that have achieved Nirvana live for eternity.
Heaven of the Jinas Heavens of Formless Spirits These are 4 in number.
Brahmaloka These are 16 in number, and are free from sensuality. Devaloka These
are 6 in number, and contain sensuality. Chinese faiths. In the native Chinese
Confucian traditions Heaven (Tian) is an important concept, where the ancestors
reside and from which emperors drew their mandate to rule in their dynastic
propaganda, for example. Heaven is a key concept in Chinese mythology,
philosophies and religions, and is on one end of the spectrum a synonym of
"Shangdi" ("Supreme Deity") and on the other naturalistic end, a synonym for
nature and the sky. The Chinese term for Heaven, "Tian" (天), derives from the
name of the supreme deity of the Zhou Dynasty. After their conquest of the
Shang Dynasty in 1122 BC, the Zhou people considered their supreme deity "Tian"
to be identical with the Shang supreme deity "Shangdi". The Zhou people
attributed Heaven with anthropomorphic attributes, evidenced in the etymology
of the Chinese character for Heaven or sky, which originally depicted a person
with a large cranium. Heaven is said to see, hear and watch over all men.
Heaven is affected by man's doings, and having personality, is happy and angry
with them. Heaven blesses those who please it and sends calamities upon those
who offend it. Heaven was also believed to transcend all other spirits and
gods, with Confucius asserting, "He who offends against Heaven has none to whom
he can pray." Other philosophers born around the time of Confucius such as Mozi
took an even more theistic view of Heaven, believing that Heaven is the divine
ruler, just as the Son of Heaven (the King of Zhou) is the earthly ruler. Mozi
believed that spirits and minor gods exist, but their function is merely to
carry out the will of Heaven, watching for evil-doers and punishing them. Thus
they function Mozi criticized the Confucians of his own time for not following
the teachings of Confucius. By the time of the later Han Dynasty, however,
under the influence of Xunzi, the Chinese concept of Heaven and Confucianism
itself had become mostly naturalistic, though some Confucians argued that
Heaven was where ancestors reside. Worship of Heaven in China continued with
the erection of shrines, the last and greatest being the Temple of Heaven in
Beijing, and the offering of prayers. The ruler of China in every Chinese
dynasty would perform annual sacrificial rituals to Heaven, usually by
slaughtering two healthy bulls as sacrifice. Christianity. Traditionally,
Christianity has taught Heaven as a place of the dwelling place of the angels
and the Throne of God, to which all the elect will be admitted. Belief in the
afterlife is professed in the major Christian creeds, such as the Nicene Creed,
which states: "We look for the resurrection of the dead, and the life of the
world to come." Concepts of a future Kingdom of Heaven are also professed in
several scriptural prophecies of the new (or renewed) Earth said to follow the
resurrection of the dead, particularly the books of Isaiah and Revelation. The
resurrected Jesus is said to have ascended to heaven where he now sits at the
Right Hand of God and will return to earth in the Second Coming. His mother
Mary is also said to have been assumed into heaven and is titled the Queen of
Heaven. Many also believe Elijah and Enoch were taken into heaven. In the 2nd
century AD, Irenaeus (a Greek bishop) wrote that not all who are saved would
merit an abode in Heaven itself. One popular medieval view of Heaven was that
it existed as a physical place above the clouds and that God and the Angels
were physically above, watching over man. The ancient concept of "Heaven" as a
synonym for "skies" or "space" is also evident in allusions to the stars as
"lights shining through from heaven", and the like. The New Testament Greek
word translated "heaven" is "ouranos," which refers to the sky above, or the
place from which the Creator rules. Eternal life, by contrast, occurs in a
renewed, unspoilt and perfect creation, which can be termed Heaven since God
will choose to dwell there permanently with his people, as seen in . That there
will no longer be any separation between God and man. The believers themselves
will exist in incorruptible, resurrected and new bodies; there will be no
sickness, no death and no tears. Some teach that death itself is not a natural
part of life, but was allowed to happen after Adam and Eve disobeyed God (see
Original Sin) so that mankind would not live forever in a state of sin and thus
a state of separation from God. Not only will the believers spend eternity with
God, they will also spend it with each other. John's vision recorded in
Revelation describes a New Jerusalem which comes from Heaven to the New Earth,
which is generally seen to be a symbolic reference to the people of God living
in community with one another; in a number of sects this is taken as more
literal than symbolic. Heaven will be the place where life will be lived to the
full, in the way that the designer planned, each believer "loving the Lord
their God with all their heart and with all their soul and with all their mind"
and "loving their neighbour as themselves" (cf. , also known as the Great
Commandment)—a place of great joy, without the negative aspects of present
earthly life. Hinduism. Attaining heaven is not the final pursuit in Hinduism
as heaven itself is ephemeral and related to physical body. Being tied by the
bhoot-tatvas, heaven cannot be perfect either and is just another name for
pleasurable and mundane material life. According to Hindu cosmology, above the
earthly plane, are other planes: 1. Bhuva Loka, 2. Swarga Loka, meaning Good
Kingdom, is the general name for heaven in Hinduism, a heavenly paradise of
pleasure, where most of the Hindu Devatas (Deva) reside along with the king of
Devas, Indra, and beatified mortals. Some other planes are Mahar Loka, Jana
Loka, Tapa Loka and Satya Loka. Since heavenly abodes are also tied to the
cycle of birth and death, any dweller of heaven or hell will again be recycled
to a different plane and in a different form as per the karma and 'maya' i.e.
the illusion of Samsara. This cycle is broken only by self-realization by the
Jivatma. This self-realization is Moksha (Turiya, Kaivalya). The concept of
moksha is unique to Hinduism and is unparalleled. Moksha stands for liberation
from the cycle of birth and death and final communion with Brahma. With moksha,
a liberated soul attains the stature and oneness with Brahma or Pramatma.
Different schools such as Vedanta, Mimansa, Sankhya, Nyaya, Vaisheshika, and
Yoga offer subtle differences in the concept of Brahma, obvious Universe, its
genesis and regular destruction, Jivatma, Nature (Prakriti) and also the right
way in attaining perfect bliss or moksha. In the Vaishnava traditions the
highest heaven is Vaikuntha, which exists above the six heavenly lokas and
outside of the mahat-tattva or mundane world. It's where eternally liberated
souls who have attained moksha reside in eternal sublime beauty with Lakshmi
and Narayana (a manifestation of Vishnu). Islam. The Qur'an contains many
references to an afterlife in Eden for those who do good deeds. Regarding the
concept of heaven (Jannah) in the Qu'ran, verse 35 of Surah Al-Ra’d says,
"The parable of the Garden which the righteous are promised! Beneath it flow
rivers. Perpetual is the fruits thereof and the shade therein. Such is the End
of the Righteous; and the end of the unbelievers is the Fire." Islam rejects
the concept of original sin, and Muslims believe that all human beings are born
pure. Children automatically go to heaven when they die, regardless of the
religion of their parents. The highest level of heaven is Firdaus (فردوس)-
Paradise (پردیس), to which the prophets, martyrs and other pious people
will go at the time of their death. The concept of heaven in Islam differs in
many respects to the concept in Judaism and Christianity. Heaven is described
primarily in physical terms as a place where every wish is immediately
fulfilled when asked. Islamic texts describe immortal life in heaven as happy,
without negative emotions. Those who dwell in heaven are said to wear costly
apparel, partake in exquisite banquets, and recline on couches inlaid with gold
or precious stones. Inhabitants will rejoice in the company of their parents,
wives, and children. In Islam if one's good deeds weigh out one's sins then one
may gain entrance to heaven. Conversely, if one's sins outweigh their good
deeds they are sent to hell. The more good deeds one has performed the higher
the level of heaven one is directed to. It has been said that the lowest level
of heaven is one-hundred times better than the greatest life on earth. The
highest level is the seventh heaven, in which God can be seen and where
anything is possible. Palaces are built by angels for the occupants using solid
gold. Verses which describe heaven include: , , , , . Islamic texts refer to
several levels of heaven: Firdaus or Paradise, 'Adn, Na'iim, Na'wa,
Darussalaam, Daarul Muaqaamah, Al-Muqqamul, Amin & Khuldi. Jainism. The shape
of the Universe as described in Jainism is shown alongside. Please note that
unlike the current convention of using North direction as the top of map, this
uses South as the top. The shape is similar to a part of human form standing
upright. The "Deva Loka" (Heavens) are at the symbolic "chest", where all souls
enjoying the positive karmic effects reside. The heavenly beings are referred
to as "devas"(masculine form) and "devis"(feminine form). According to Jainism,
there is not one heavenly abode, but several layers to reward appropriately the
souls of varying degree of karmit merits. Similarly, beneath the "waist" are
the "Narka Loka" (Hell). Human, animal, insect, plant and microscopic life
forms reside on the middle. The pure souls (who reached Siddha status) reside
at the very south end (top) of the Universe. They are referred to in Tamil
literature as தென்புலத்தார் (Kural 43). Judaism.
Rabbinical Judaism. While the concept of heaven ("malkuth hashamaim" מלכות
השמים, the Kingdom of Heaven) is well-defined within the Christian and
Islamic religions, the Jewish concept of the afterlife, sometimes known as
"olam haba", the World-to-come, is not so precise. The Torah has little to say
on the subject of survival after death, but by the time of the rabbis two ideas
had made inroads among the Jews: one, which is probably derived from Greek
thought, is that of the immortal soul which returns to its creator after death;
the other, which is thought to be of Persian origin, is that of resurrection of
the dead. Jewish writings refer to a "new earth" as the abode of mankind
following the resurrection of the dead. Originally, the two ideas of
immortality and resurrection were different but in rabbinic thought they are
combined: the soul departs from the body at death but is returned to it at the
resurrection. This idea is linked to another rabbinic teaching, that men's good
and bad actions are rewarded and punished not in this life but after death,
whether immediately or at the subsequent resurrection. Around 1 CE, the
Pharisees are said to have maintained belief in resurrection but the Sadducees
are said to have denied it (Matt. 22:23). Some scholars assert that the Sheol
mentioned in Isaiah 38:18, Psalm 6:5 and Job 7:7-10 was an earlier concept than
Heaven, but this theory is not universally held. The Mishnah has many sayings
about the World to Come, for example, "Rabbi Yaakov said: This world is like a
lobby before the World to Come; prepare yourself in the lobby so that you may
enter the banquet hall." Judaism holds that the righteous of all nations have a
share in the World-to-come. According to Nicholas de Lange, Judaism offers no
clear teaching about the destiny which lies in wait for the individual after
death and its attitude to life after death has been expressed as follows: "For
the future is inscrutable, and the accepted sources of knowledge, whether
experience, or reason, or revelation, offer no clear guidance about what is to
come. The only certainty is that each man must die - beyond that we can only
guess." According to Tracey R. Rich of the website "Judaism 101", Judaism,
unlike other world-religions, is not focused on the quest of getting into
heaven but on life and how to live it. Mesoamerican religions. The Nahua people
such as the Aztecs, Chichimecs and the Toltecs believed that the heavens were
constructed and separated into 13 levels. Each level had from one to many Lords
living in and ruling these heavens. Most important of these heavens was
Omeyocan (Place of Two). The thirteen heavens were ruled by Ometeotl, the dual
Lord, creator of the Dual-Genesis who, as male, takes the name Ometecuhtli (Two
Lord), and as female is named Omecihuatl (Two Lady). Polynesia. In the creation
myths of Polynesian mythology are found various concepts of the heavens and the
underworld. These differ from one island to another. What they share is the
view of the universe as an egg or coconut that is divided between the world of
humans (earth), the upper world of heavenly gods, and the underworld. Each of
these is subdivided in a manner reminiscent of Dante's Divine Comedy, but the
number of divisions and their names differs from one Polynesian culture to
another.* Māori. The Māori believe these heavens are supported by pillars.
Other Polynesian peoples see them being supported by gods (as in Hawai'i). In
one Tahitian legend, heaven is supported by an octopus. Paumotu, Tuamotus. The
Polynesian conception of the universe and its division is nicely illustrated by
a famous drawing made by a Tuomotuan chief in 1869. Here, the nine heavens are
further divided into left and right, and each stage is associated with a stage
in the evolution of the earth that is portrayed below. The lowest division
represents a period when the heavens hung low over the earth, which was
inhabited by animals that were not known to the islanders. In the third
division is shown the first murder, the first burials, and the first canoes,
built by Rata. In the fourth division, the first coconut tree and other
significant plants are born. Theosophy. It is believed in Theosophy of Helena
Blavatsky that each religion (including Theosophy) has its own individual
Heaven in various regions of the upper astral plane that fits the description
of that Heaven that is given in each religion, which a soul that has been good
in their previous life on Earth will go to. The area of the upper astral plane
of Earth in the upper atmosphere where the various Heavens are located is
called "Summerland" (Theosophists believe Hell is located in the lower astral
plane of Earth which extends downward from the surface of the earth down to its
center). However, Theosophists believe that the soul is recalled back to Earth
after an average of about 1400 years by the "Lords of Karma" to incarnate
again. The final Heaven that souls go to billions of years in the future after
they finish their cycle of incarnations is called "Devachan". Near death
experiences. Many people who come close to death and have near death
experiences report meeting relatives or entering "the Light" in an otherworldly
dimension, which share similarities with the religious concept of Heaven. Even
though there are also reports of distressing experiences and negative life-
reviews, which share some similarities with the concept of Hell, the positive
experiences of meeting or entering 'the Light' is reported as an immensely
intense feeling state of love, peace and joy beyond human comprehension.
Together with this intensely positive feeling state, people who have near death
experiences also report that consciousness or a heightened state of awareness
seems as if it is at the heart of experiencing a taste of 'Heaven'. Criticism
of the belief in Heaven. Marxists regard heaven, like religion generally, as a
tool employed by authorities to bribe their subjects into a certain way of life
by promising a reward after death. The anarchist Emma Goldman expressed this
view when she wrote, "Consciously or unconsciously, most atheists see in gods
and devils, heaven and hell; reward and punishment, a whip to lash the people
into obedience, meekness and contentment." Many people consider George Orwell's
use of Sugarcandy Mountain in his novel "Animal Farm" to be a literary
expression of this view. In the book, the animals were told that after their
miserable lives were over they would go to a place in which "it was Sunday
seven days a week, clover was in season all the year round, and lump sugar and
linseed cake grew on the hedges". Fantasy author Philip Pullman echoes this
idea in the fantasy series His Dark Materials, in which the characters finally
come to the conclusion that people should make life better on Earth rather than
wait for heaven (this idea is known as the Republic of Heaven). Some atheists
have argued that a belief in a reward after death is poor motivation for moral
behavior while alive. Sam Harris wrote, "It is rather more noble to help people
purely out of concern for their suffering than it is to help them because you
think the Creator of the Universe wants you to do it, or will reward you for
doing it, or will punish you for not doing it. problem with this linkage
between religion and morality is that it gives people bad reasons to help other
human beings when good reasons are available." Representations in arts. Film.
Several works of written and filmed science fiction have plots in which Heaven
can be reached by the living through technological means. An example is Disney
film "The Black Hole", in which a manned spacecraft found both Heaven (or
another dimension) and Hell located at the bottom of a black hole.
