Hebrew Bible The Hebrew Bible (also "Hebrew Scriptures", "Jewish Bible"
(Judaica Bible); ) is a term used by biblical scholars to refer to the "Tanakh"
(), a canonical collection of Jewish texts, which is the common textual source
of the several canonical editions of the Christian Old Testament. These texts
are composed mainly in Biblical Hebrew, with some passages in Biblical Aramaic
(in the books of Daniel, Ezra and a few others). The content, to which the
Protestant Old Testament closely corresponds, does not act as source to the
deuterocanonical portions of the Roman Catholic, nor to the "" portions of the
Eastern Orthodox Old Testaments. The term does not comment upon the naming,
numbering or ordering of books, which varies with later Christian biblical
canons. The term is an attempt to provide specificity with respect to contents,
while avoiding allusion to any particular interpretative tradition or
theological school of thought. It is widely used in academic writing and
interfaith discussion in relatively neutral contexts meant to include dialogue
among all religious traditions, but not widely in the inner discourse of the
religions which use its text. Usage. Hebrew Bible is a term that refers to the
Tanakh (Jewish canon) in relation to the many Christian biblical canons. In its
Latin form, "Biblia Hebraica", it traditionally serves as a title for printed
editions of the Masoretic Text. Many biblical studies scholars advocate use of
the term "Hebrew Bible" when discussing these books in academic writing, as a
neutral substitute to terms with religious connotations (e.g., the non-neutral
term "Old Testament"). The Society of Biblical Literature's "Handbook of
Style", which is the standard for major academic journals like the "Harvard
Theological Review" and conservative Protestant journals like the "Bibliotheca
Sacra" and the "Westminster Theological Journal", suggests that authors "be
aware of the connotations of alternative expressions such as ... Hebrew Bible
Old Testament" without prescribing the use of either. Biblia Hebraica. The
Biblia Hebraica is edited by various German publishers.
