Hebrew calendar The Hebrew calendar ( "ha'luach ha'ivri"), or Jewish calendar,
is a lunisolar calendar used today predominantly for Jewish religious
observances. It determines the dates for Jewish holidays and the appropriate
public reading of Torah portion, "yahrzeits" (dates to commemorate the death of
a relative), and daily Psalm reading, among many ceremonial uses. In Israel, it
is an official calendar for civil purposes and provides a time frame for
agriculture. The current year of the Jewish calendar (16 September 2012 to 4
September 2013) is 5773. The Hebrew calendar has evolved over time. For
example, until the Tannaitic period (approximately 10‚Äì220 CE) the months were
set by observation of a new crescent moon, with an additional month added every
two or three years to correct for the difference between twelve lunar months
and the solar year, and therefore, to keep Passover in the spring. The addition
of the extra month was also based on observation of natural events, namely the
ripening of the barley crop, the age of the kids, lambs and doves, the ripeness
of the fruit trees, and the relation to the Tekufah (seasons). Through the
Amoraic period (200 to 500 CE) and into the Geonic period, this system was
displaced by mathematical rules. The principles and rules appear to have been
settled by the time Maimonides compiled the "Mishneh Torah" in the 12th
century. Because of the roughly eleven-day difference between twelve lunar
months and one solar year, the length of the Hebrew calendar year varies in the
repeating 19-year Metonic cycle of 235 lunar months, with the intercalary month
added according to defined rules every two or three years, for a total of 7
times per 19 years. Seasonal references in the Hebrew calendar reflect its
development in the region east of the Mediterranean and the times and climate
of the Northern Hemisphere. The Hebrew calendar year is longer by about 6
minutes and 25+25/57 seconds than the present-day mean solar year, so that
every 224 years, the Hebrew calendar will fall a full day behind the modern
solar year, and about every 231 years it will fall a full day behind the
Gregorian calendar year. The present counting method for years use the Anno
Mundi epoch (Latin for "in the year of the world", in Hebrew , "from the
creation of the world"), abbreviated "AM" or "A.M." and also referred to as the
Hebrew era. Hebrew year 5772 began at sunset on 28 September 2011 and ended on
16 September 2012. Hebrew year 5773 began at sunset on 16 September 2012 and
will end on 4 September 2013. Structure. The Jewish calendar is a lunisolar
calendar, or fixed lunar year, based on twelve lunar months of twenty-nine or
thirty days, with an intercalary lunar month added seven times every nineteen
years (once every two to three years) to synchronize the twelve lunar cycles
with the slightly longer solar year. Each Jewish lunar month starts with the
new moon. Although originally the new lunar crescent had to be observed and
certified by witnesses, the moment of the new moon is now approximated
arithmetically. Concurrently there is a weekly cycle of seven days, mirroring
the seven-day period of the Book of Genesis in which the world is created. The
names for the days of the week, like those in the Creation account, are simply
the day number within the week, with Shabbat being the seventh day. The Jewish
day always runs from sunset to the next sunset; the formal adjustments used to
specify a standard time and time zones are not relevant to the Jewish calendar.
The twelve regular months are: Nisan (30 days), Iyar (29 days), Sivan (30
days), Tammuz (29 days), Av (30 days), Elul (29 days), Tishrei (30 days),
Marcheshvan (29 or 30 days), Kislev (29 or 30 days), Tevet (29 days), Shevat
(30 days), and Adar (29 days). In the leap years (such as 5771) an additional
month, Adar I (30 days) is added after Shevat, and the regular Adar is referred
to as "Adar II". Tosefta "Sanhedrin" 2.2, Herbert Danby, Trans., "Tractate
Sanhedrin Mishnah and Tosefta", Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge,
London and New York, 1919, p. 31. Also quoted in Sacha Stern, "Calendar and
Community: A History of the Jewish Calendar Second Century BCE-Tenth Century
CE," Oxford University Press, 2001, p. 70. The Bible designates Nisan, which it
calls "Aviv" (), as the first month of the year (). At the same time, the
season of the fall Festival of Booths ("Sukkoth"), is called "the end of the
year" (). The Sabbatical year in which the land was to lie fallow, necessarily
began at the time the winter barley and winter wheat would have been sown, in
the fall. The Gezer calendar, an Israelite or Canaanite inscription c. 900 BCE,
also begins in the fall. Modern practice follows the scheme described in the
Mishnah: Nisan is the new year for the reigns of kings and the festivals. Rosh
Hashanah, which means "the head of the year", and is celebrated in the month of
Tishrei, is "the new year for the counting of years." This is when the numbered
year changes, which is most significant for determining the Shemittah and Yovel
years. Sources and history. The Tanakh contains several commandments related to
the keeping of the calendar and the lunar cycle, and records changes that have
taken place to the Hebrew calendar. Day. The Jewish day is of no fixed length.
The Jewish day is modeled on the reference to "...there was evening and there
was morning..." in the Creation account in the first chapter of Genesis.
Accordingly, it runs from sunset (start of "the evening") to the next sunset.
At higher latitudes in summer, when the sun does not sink below the horizon, a
day is counted from midday to midday, and in the winter, when the sun does not
rise above the horizon, from midnight to midnight. There is no clock in the
Jewish scheme, so that a civil clock is used. Though the civil clock
incorporates local adoptions of various conventions such as time zones,
standard times and daylight saving, these have no place in the Jewish scheme.
The civil clock is used only as a reference point - in expressions such as:
"Shabbat starts at ...". The steady progression of sunset around the world and
seasonal changes results in gradual civil time changes from one day to the next
based on observable astronomical phenomena (the sunset) and not on man-made
laws and conventions. Instead of the international date line convention, there
are varying opinions as to where the day changes. One opinion uses the
antimeridian of Jerusalem. (Jerusalem is 35¬∞13‚Äô east of the prime meridian,
so the antimeridian is at 144¬∞47' W, passing through eastern Alaska.) Other
opinions exist as well. Weeks. The names of the days of the week are modeled on
the seven days mentioned in the Creation story. For example, "... And there was
evening and there was morning, one day". "One day" also translates to "first
day" or "day one". Similarly, see , , , , and . The Jewish Shabbat has a
special role in the Jewish weekly cycle. There are many special rules which
relate to the Shabbat, discussed more fully in the Talmudic tractate Shabbat.
In Hebrew, the word "Shabbat" () can also mean "(Talmudic) week", so that in
ritual liturgy a phrase like "Yom Revi ªi b…ôShabbat" means "the fourth day in
the week". Importance of lunar months. From very early times, the Mesopotamian
lunisolar calendar was in wide use by the countries of the western Asia region.
The structure, which was also used by the Israelites, was based on lunar months
with the intercalation of an additional month to bring the cycle closer to the
solar cycle. According to the "Mishnah" and Tosefta, in the Maccabean,
Herodian, and Mishnaic periods, new months were determined by the sighting of a
new crescent, with two eye witnesses required to testify to the Sanhedrin to
having seen the new lunar crescent at sunset. The practice in the time of
Gamaliel II (c. 100 CE) was for witnesses to select the appearance of the moon
from a collection of drawings that depicted the crescent in a variety of
orientations, only a few of which could be valid in any given month. These
observations were compared against calculations. When thirty days elapsed since
the last new moon, the witnesses were readily believed. At first the beginning
of each Jewish month was signaled to the communities of Israel and beyond by
fires lit on mountaintops, but after the Samaritans began to light false fires,
messengers were sent. The inability of the messengers to reach communities
outside Israel before mid-month High Holy Days (Succot and Passover) led
outlying communities to celebrate scriptural festivals for two days rather than
one, observing the second feast-day of the Jewish diaspora because of
uncertainty of whether the previous month ended after 29 or 30 days. In his
work "Mishneh Torah" (1178), Maimonides included a chapter "Sanctification of
the New Moon", in which he discusses the calendrical rules and their scriptural
basis. He notes, Sanctification of the New Moon. Translated from the Hebrew by
Solomon Gandz; supplemented, introduced, and edited by Julian Obermann; with an
astronomical commentary by Otto Neugebauer. Yale Judaica Series, Volume 11, New
Haven: Yale University Press, 1956 Names of months. Biblical references to the
pre-Jewish calendar include ten months identified by number rather than by
name. In parts of the Torah portion "Noach" ("Noah") (specifically, , , ) it is
implied that the months are thirty days long. There is also indication that
there were twelve months in the annual cycle (, ). All of these are believed to
be Canaanite names, and at least two are Phoenician (Northern Canaanite).
During the Babylonian exile, which started in 586 BCE, Babylonian month names
were adopted, which are still in use. The Syrian calendar used in the Levant
region shares many of the names for months as the Hebrew calendar, such as
Nisan, Iyyar, Tammuz, Ab, Elul, Tishri, and Adar, indicating a common
Babylonian origin. Hebrew names and romanized transliteration may somewhat
differ, as they do for ◊ó◊©◊ï◊ï◊ü / Marcheshvan or ◊õ◊°◊ú◊ï / Kislev: the
Hebrew words shown here are those commonly indicated "e.g." in newspapers. In a
regular ("kesidran") year, Marcheshvan has 29 days and Kislev has 30 days.
However, because of the Rosh Hashanah postponement rules (see below) Kislev may
lose a day to have 29 days, and the year is called a short ("chaser") year, or
Marcheshvan may acquire an additional day to have 30 days, and the year is
called a full ("maleh") year. The calendar rules have been designed to ensure
that Rosh Hashanah does not fall on a Sunday, Wednesday or Friday. This is to
ensure that Yom Kippur does not directly precede or follow Shabbat, which would
create practical difficulties, and that Hoshana Rabbah is not on a Shabbat, in
which case certain ceremonies would be lost for a year. Leap months. The solar
year is about eleven days longer than twelve lunar months. The Bible does not
directly mention the addition of "embolismic" or intercalary months. However,
without the insertion of embolismic months, Jewish festivals would gradually
shift outside of the seasons required by the Torah. This has been ruled as
implying a requirement for the insertion of embolismic months to reconcile the
lunar cycles to the seasons, which are integral to solar yearly cycles. When
the observational form of the calendar was in use, whether or not an embolismic
month was announced after the "last month" (Adar) depended on 'aviv ripeness of
barley, fruits of trees, and the equinox. On two of these grounds it should be
intercalated, but not on one of them alone. It may be noted that in the Bible
the name of the first month, "Aviv", literally means "spring". Thus, if Adar
was over and Spring had not yet arrived, an additional month was observed.
However, according to some traditions, the announcement of the month of "Aviv"
could also be postponed depending on the condition of roads used by families to
come to Jerusalem for Passover, adequate numbers of lambs to be sacrificed at
the Temple, and on the ripeness of the barley that was needed for the first
fruits ceremony. Under the codified rules, the Jewish calendar is based on the
Metonic cycle of 19 years, of which 12 are common years (12 months) and 7 leap
years (13 months). The leap years are years 3, 6, 8, 11, 14, 17, and 19 of the
Metonic cycle. Year 19 (there is no year 0) of the Metonic cycle is a year
exactly divisible by 19 (when the Jewish year number, when divided by 19, has
no remainder). In the same manner, the remainder of the division indicates the
year in the Metonic cycle (years 1 to 18) the year is in. During leap years
Adar I (or Adar Aleph ‚Äî "first Adar") is added before the regular Adar. Adar
I is actually considered to be the extra month, and has 30 days. Adar II (or
Adar Bet ‚Äî "second Adar") is the "real" Adar, and has the usual 29 days. For
this reason, holidays such as Purim are observed in Adar II, not Adar I. New
year. Nisan 1 is referred to as the "ecclesiastical new year". In ancient
Israel, the start of the ecclesiastical new year for the counting of months and
festivals (i.e. Nisan) was determined by reference to Passover. Passover begins
on 14 Nisan, () which corresponds to the full moon of Nisan. As Passover is a
spring festival, 14 Nisan begins on the night of a full moon after the vernal
equinox. According to normative Judaism, the verses in require that the months
be determined by a proper court with the necessary authority to sanctify the
months. According to some Christians and Karaites, the tradition in ancient
Israel was that 1 Nisan would not start until the barley is ripe, being the
test for the onset of spring. If the barley was not ripe an intercalary month
would be added before Nisan. The day most commonly referred to as the "New
Year" is 1 Tishrei, which actually begins in the seventh month of the
ecclesiastical year. On that day the formal New Year for the counting of years
(such as Shmita and Yovel), Rosh Hashanah ("head of the year") is observed.
(see , which uses the phrase "beginning of the year".) This is the civil new
year, and the date on which the year number advances. Certain agricultural
practices are also marked from this date. Josephus, in the 1st century CE,
states that while - Josephus, "Antiquities" 1.81, Loeb Classical Library, 1930.
Edwin Thiele has concluded that the ancient northern Kingdom of Israel counted
years using the ecclesiastical new year starting on 1 Aviv (Nisan), while the
southern Kingdom of Judah counted years using the civil new year starting on 1
Tishrei. The practice of the Kingdom of Israel was also that of Babylon, as
well as other countries of the region. The practice of Judah is still followed.
M. "Rosh Hashanah" 1, in Herbert Danby, trans., "The Mishnah", Oxford
University Press, 1933, p. 188. The month of Elul is the new year for counting
animal tithes (ma'aser). "Tu Bishvat" ("the 15th of Shevat") marks the new year
for trees (and agricultural tithes). Epoch. Since about the 3rd century CE, the
Jewish calendar has used the Anno Mundi epoch (Latin for ‚Äúin the year of the
world,‚Äù abbreviated "AM" or "A.M.;" Hebrew ), sometimes referred to as the
‚ÄúHebrew era.‚Äù According to Rabbinic reckoning, the beginning of "year 1" is
"not" Creation, but about one year before Creation, with the new moon of its
first month (Tishrei) to be called "molad tohu" (the mean new moon of chaos or
nothing). The Jewish calendar's epoch (reference date), 1 Tishrei 1 AM, is
equivalent to Monday, 7 October 3761 BCE in the proleptic Julian calendar, the
equivalent tabular date (same daylight period) and is about one year "before"
the traditional Jewish date of Creation on 25 Elul AM 1, based upon the "Seder
Olam Rabbah" of Rabbi Yossi ben Halafta, a 2nd century CE sage. Thus, adding
3760 before Rosh Hashanah or 3761 after to a Julian or Gregorian year number
after 1 CE will yield the Hebrew year. For earlier years there may be a
discrepancy (see: Missing years (Jewish calendar)). The Jewish year 5771 AM
began on 9 September 2010 (1 Tishrei or Rosh Hashanah) and, since it is a 13-
month year, ended on 28 September 2011 (29 Elul). In Hebrew there are two
common ways of writing the year number: with the thousands, called ("major
era"), and without the thousands, called ("minor era"). Other systems. Before
the adoption of the current year numbering system, other systems were in use.
In early times, the years were counted from some significant historic event.
(e.g. ) During the period of the monarchy, it was the widespread practice in
western Asia to use era year numbers according to the accession year of the
monarch of the country involved. This practice was also followed by the united
kingdom of Israel (e.g. ), kingdom of Judah (e.g. ), kingdom of Israel (e.g. ),
Persia (e.g. ) and others. Besides, the author of Kings coordinated dates in
the two kingdoms by giving the accession year of a monarch in terms of the year
of the monarch of the other kingdom, (e.g. ) though some commentators note that
these dates do not synchronise. Other era dating systems have been used at
other times. For example, during the Babylonian captivity, Ezekiel counted the
years from the first deportation, that of Jehoiachin, (e.g. ). The era year was
then called "year of the captivity of Jehoiachin". (e.g. ) During the Greek
period, Seleucid era counting was used. (e.g. 1 Maccabees 1:54) The "Seder Olam
Rabbah" also recognized the importance of the Jubilee and Sabbatical cycles as
a long-term calendrical system, and attempted at various places to fit the
Sabbatical and Jubilee years into its chronological scheme. Karaite calendar.
Karaites use the lunar month and the solar year, but the Karaite calendar
differs from the Rabbinic calendar in a number of ways. For Karaites, the
beginning of each month, the Rosh Chodesh, can be calculated, but is confirmed
by the observation in Israel of the first sightings of the new moon. This may
result in an occasional variation of a maximum of one day, depending on the
inability to observe the new moon. The day is usually "picked up" in the next
month. The addition of the leap month (Adar II) is determined by observing in
Israel the ripening of barley at a specific stage (defined by Karaite
tradition) (called aviv), rather than using the calculated and fixed calendar
of Rabbinic Judaism. Occasionally this results in Karaites being one month
ahead of other Jews using the calculated Rabbinic calendar. The "lost" month
would be "picked up" in the next cycle when Karaites would observe a leap month
while other Jews would not. Furthermore, the seasonal drift of the Rabbinic
calendar is avoided, resulting in the years affected by the drift starting one
month earlier in the Karaite calendar. Also, the four rules of postponement of
the Rabbinic calendar are not applied, as they are not mentioned in the Tanakh.
This can affect the dates observed for all the Jewish holidays in a particular
year by one day. In the Middle Ages many Karaite Jews outside Israel followed
the calculated Rabbinic calendar, because it was not possible to retrieve
accurate aviv barley data from the land of Israel. However, since the
establishment of the State of Israel, and especially since the Six Day War, the
Karaite Jews that have made "aliyah" can now again use the observational
calendar. Change to a calculated calendar. Observational principles. Evaluation
of the Mishnaic evidence. It has been noted that the procedures described in
the Mishnah and Tosefta are all plausible procedures for regulating an
empirical lunar calendar. Fire-signals, for example, or smoke-signals, are
known from the pre-exilic Lachish ostraca. Furthermore, the Mishnah contains
laws that reflect the uncertainties of an empirical calendar. Mishnah
Sanhedrin, for example, holds that when one witness holds that an event took
place on a certain day of the month, and another that the same event took place
on the following day, their testimony can be held to agree, since the length of
the preceding month was uncertain. Another Mishnah takes it for granted that it
cannot be known in advance whether a year's lease is for twelve or thirteen
months. Hence it is a reasonable conclusion that the Mishnaic calendar was
actually used in the Mishnaic period. The accuracy of the Mishnah's claim that
the Mishnaic calendar was also used in the late Second Temple period is less
certain. One scholar has noted that there are no laws from Second Temple period
sources that indicate any doubts about the length of a month or of a year. This
led him to propose that the priests must have had some form of computed
calendar or calendrical rules that allowed them to know in advance whether a
month would have 30 or 29 days, and whether a year would have 12 or 13 months.
Modern calendar. Between 70 CE and 1178 CE, the observation-based calendar was
gradually replaced by a mathematically calculated one. Except for the epoch
year number, the calendar rules reached their current form by the beginning of
the 9th century, as described by the Muslim astronomer al-Khwarizmi (c.
780‚Äì850 CE) in 823. One notable difference between the calendar of that era
and the modern form was the date of the epoch (the fixed reference point at the
beginning of year 1), which at that time was one year later than the epoch of
the modern calendar. Most of the present rules of the calendar were in place by
823, according to a treatise by al-Khwarizmi. Al-Khwarizmi's study of the
Jewish calendar, ' "Extraction of the Jewish Era" describes the 19-year
intercalation cycle, the rules for determining on what day of the week the
first day of the month Tishrƒ´ shall fall, the interval between the Jewish era
(creation of Adam) and the Seleucid era, and the rules for determining the mean
longitude of the sun and the moon using the Jewish calendar. In 921, Aaron ben
Me√Ør proposed changes to the calendar. Though the proposals were rejected,
they indicate that all of the rules of the modern calendar (except for the
epoch) were in place before that date. In 1000, the Muslim chronologist al-
Biruni described all of the modern rules of the Hebrew calendar, except that he
specified three different epochs used by various Jewish communities being one,
two, or three years later than the modern epoch. There is a tradition, first
mentioned by Hai Gaon (died 1038 CE), that Hillel b. R. Yehuda "in the year 670
of the Seleucid era" (i.e., 358‚Äì359 CE) was responsible for the new
calculated calendar with a fixed intercalation cycle. Later writers, such as
Nachmanides, explained Hai Gaon's words to mean that the entire computed
calendar was due to Hillel b. Yehuda in response to persecution of Jews.
Maimonides, in the 12th century, stated that the Mishnaic calendar was used
"until the days of Abaye and Rava", who flourished c. 320‚Äì350 CE, and that
the change came when "the land of Israel was destroyed, and no permanent court
was left." Taken together, these two traditions suggest that Hillel b. Yehuda
(whom they identify with the mid-4th century Jewish patriarch Ioulos, attested
in a letter of the Emperor Julian, and the Jewish patriarch Ellel, mentioned by
Epiphanius) instituted the computed Hebrew Calendar because of persecution. H.
Graetz linked the introduction of the computed calendar to a sharp repression
following a failed Jewish insurrection that occurred during the rule of the
Christian emperor Constantius and Gallus. A later writer, S. Lieberman, argued
instead that the introduction of the fixed calendar was due to measures taken
by Christian Roman authorities to prevent the Jewish patriarch from sending
calendrical messengers. Both the tradition that Hillel b. Yehuda instituted the
complete computed calendar, and the theory that the computed calendar was
introduced due to repression or persecution, have been questioned. Furthermore,
two Jewish dates during post-Talmudic times (specifically in 506 and 776) are
impossible under the rules of the modern calendar, indicating that its
arithmetic rules were developed in Babylonia during the times of the Geonim
(7th to 8th centuries). The Babylonian rules required the delay of the first
day of Tishrei when the new moon occurred after noon. The Talmuds do, however,
indicate at least the beginnings of a transition from a purely empirical to a
computed calendar. According to a statement attributed to Yose, an Amora who
lived during the second half of the 3rd century, the feast of Purim, 14 Adar,
could not fall on a Sabbath nor a Monday, lest 10 Tishrei (Yom Kippur) fall on
a Friday or a Sunday. This indicates that, by the time of the redaction of the
Jerusalem Talmud (c. 400 CE), there were a fixed number of days in all months
from Adar to Elul, also implying that the extra month was already a second Adar
added before the regular Adar. In another passage, a sage is reported to have
counseled "those who make the computations" not to set the first day of Tishrei
or the Day of the Willow on the sabbath. This indicates that there was a group
who "made computations" and were in a position to control, to some extent, the
day of the week on which Rosh Hashanah would fall. Other practices. Outside of
Rabbinic circles, evidence shows a diversity of Jewish practice. The Qumran
calendar. Many of the Dead Sea (Qumran) Scrolls have references to a unique
calendar, used by the people there, who are often assumed to be Essenes. The
year of this calendar used the ideal Mesopotamian calendar of twelve 30-day
months, to which were added 4 days at the equinoxes and solstices (cardinal
points), making a total of 364 days. There was some ambiguity as to whether the
cardinal days were at the beginning of the months or at the end, but the
clearest calendar attestations give a year of four seasons, each having three
months of 30, 30, and 31 days with the cardinal day the extra day at the end,
for a total of 91 days, or exactly 13 weeks. Each season started on the 4th day
of the week (Wednesday), every year. (Ben-Dov, "Head of All Years", p.¬ 16-17)
With only 364 days, it is clear that the calendar would after a few years be
very noticeably different from the actual seasons, but there is nothing to
indicate what was done about this problem. Various suggestions have been made
by scholars. One is that nothing was done and the calendar was allowed to
change with respect to the seasons. Another suggestion is that changes were
made irregularly, only when the seasonal anomaly was too great to be ignored
any longer. (Ben-Dov, "Head of All Years", p.¬ 19-20) The writings often
discuss the moon, but the calendar was not based on the movement of the moon
any more than indications of the phases of the moon on a modern western
calendar indicate that that is a lunar calendar. Persian civil calendar.
Calendrical evidence for the postexilic Persian period is found in papyri from
the Jewish colony at Elephantine, in Egypt. These documents show that the
Jewish community of Elephantine used the Egyptian and Babylonian calendars. The
Sardica paschal table shows that the Jewish community of some eastern city,
possibly Antioch, used a calendrical scheme that kept Nisan 14 within the
limits of the Julian month of March. Some of the dates in the document are
clearly corrupt, but they can be emended to make the sixteen years in the table
consistent with a regular intercalation scheme. Peter, the bishop of Alexandria
(early 4th century CE), mentions that the Jews of his city "hold their Passover
according to the course of the moon in the month of Phamenoth, or according to
the intercalary month every third year in the month of Pharmuthi", suggesting a
fairly consistent intercalation scheme that kept Nisan 14 approximately between
the Phamenoth 10 (March 6 in the 4th century CE) and Pharmuthi 10 (April 5).
Jewish funerary inscriptions from Zoar, south of the Dead Sea, dated from the
3rd to the 5th century CE, indicate that when years were intercalated, the
intercalary month was at least sometimes a repeated month of Adar. But the
inscriptions reveal no clear pattern of regular intercalations, nor do they
indicate any consistent rule for determining the start of the lunar month. In
1178, Maimonides included all the rules for the calculated calendar and their
scriptural basis, including the modern epochal year in his work, "Mishneh
Torah". Today, the rules detailed in Maimonides' code are those generally used
by Jewish communities throughout the world. Usage in contemporary Israel. Early
Zionist pioneers were impressed by the fact that the calendar preserved by Jews
over many centuries in far-flung diasporas, as a matter of religious ritual,
was geared to the climate of their original country: the Jewish New Year marks
the transition from the dry season to the rainy one, and major Jewish holidays
such as Sukkot, Passover, and Shavuot correspond to major points of the
country's agricultural year such as planting and harvest. Accordingly, in the
early 20th century the Hebrew calendar was re-interpreted as an agricultural
rather than religious calendar. The Kibbutz movement was especially inventive
in creating new rituals fitting this interpretation. After the creation of the
State of Israel, the Hebrew calendar became one of the official calendars of
Israel, along with the Gregorian calendar. Holidays and commemorations not
derived from previous Jewish tradition were to be fixed according to the Hebrew
calendar date. For example, the Israeli Independence Day falls on 5 Iyar,
Jerusalem Reunification Day on 28 Iyar, and the Holocaust Commemoration Day on
27 Nisan. Nevertheless, since the 1950s usage of the Hebrew calendar has
steadily declined, in favor of the Gregorian calendar. At present, Israelis ‚Äî
except for a minority of the religiously observant ‚Äî conduct their private
and public life according to the Gregorian calendar, although the Hebrew
calendar is still widely acknowledged, appearing in public venues such as banks
(where it is legal for use on cheques and other documents, though only rarely
do people make use of this option) and on the mastheads of newspapers. The
Jewish New Year (Rosh Hashanah) is a two-day public holiday in Israel. However,
since the 1980s an increasing number of secular Israelis celebrate the
Gregorian New Year (usually known as "Silvester Night" ‚Äî "◊ú◊ô◊ú
◊°◊ô◊ú◊ë◊°◊ò◊®") on the night between 31 December and 1 January. Prominent
Rabbis have on several occasions sharply denounced this practice, but with no
noticeable effect on the secularist celebrants. [] The disparity between the
two calendars is especially noticeable with regard to commemoration of the
assassinated Prime Minister Yitzchak Rabin. The official Day of Commemoration,
instituted by a special Knesset law, is marked according to the Hebrew calendar
- on 12 Marcheshvan. However, left-leaning Israelis, who revere Rabin as a
martyr for the cause of peace and who are predominantly secular, hold their
commemoration on 4 November. In some years the two competing Rabin Memorial
Days are separated by as much as two weeks. Wall calendars commonly used in
Israel are hybrids. Most are organised according to Gregorian rather than
Jewish months, but begin in September, when the Jewish New Year usually falls,
and provide the Jewish date in small characters. Principles. There are three
qualities that distinguish one year from another: whether it is a leap year or
a common year, on which of four permissible days of the week the year begins,
and whether it is a deficient, regular, or complete year. Mathematically, there
are 24 (2√ó4x3) possible combinations, but only 14 of them are valid. Each of
these patterns is called a "keviyah" (Hebrew ◊ß◊ë◊ô◊¢◊î for "a setting" or "an
established thing"), and is encoded as a series of three Hebrew letters. Leap
years. The Jewish calendar is based on the Metonic cycle of 19 years, of which
12 are common (non-leap) years of 12 months and 7 are leap years of 13 months.
To determine whether a Jewish year is a leap year, one must find its position
in the 19-year Metonic cycle. This position is calculated by dividing the
Jewish year number by 19 and finding the remainder. For example, Jewish year
5771 divided by 19 results in a remainder of 14, indicating that it is year 14
of the Metonic cycle. Since there is no year 0, a remainder of 0 indicates that
the year is year 19 of the cycle. (See also Golden number (time).) Years 3, 6,
8, 11, 14, 17, and 19 the Metonic cycle are leap years. To assist in
remembering this sequence, some people use the mnemonic Hebrew word GUCHADZaT ,
where the Hebrew letters "gimel-vav-het aleph-dalet-zayin-tet" are used as
Hebrew numerals equivalent to 3, 6, 8, 1, 4, 7, 9. The "keviyah" merely records
whether the year is leap or common; ◊§ for "p'shutah", meaning simple and
indicating a common year, and ◊û indicating a leap year. Another memory aid
notes that intervals of the major scale follow the same pattern as do Jewish
leap years, with "do" corresponding to year 19 (or 0): a whole step in the
scale corresponds to two common years between consecutive leap years, and a
half step to one common year between two leap years. This connection with the
major scale is more remarkable in the context of 19 equal temperament. A
mathematical way to determine leap year is to calculate the remainder using the
following calculation: (7 √ó the Jewish year number + 1) / 19; if the remainder
is less than 7, the year is a leap year. Also, rounding the result of (7 √ó the
Jewish year number + 1) / 13 to the nearest whole number calculates a 0 for
leap years and 1 for common years. Rosh Hashanah postponement. To calculate the
day on which Rosh Hashanah falls, it is necessary to first calculate the molad
(lunar conjunction or new moon) of Tishrei, and then determine whether the
start of the year must be postponed. The molad can be calculated by multiplying
the mean length of a lunar month (29 days, 12 hours, and 793 parts) by the
elapsed time since another molad whose weekday is known. (There are 1080
"parts" in an hour, making one part equal to 31/3 seconds.) The molad tohu
began 2 days, 5 hours, and 204 parts after the beginning of the week. The rules
are complicated by the fact that the months subject to adjustment, Marcheshvan
and Kislev, are the eighth and ninth months of the ecclesiastical year while
Tishrei is the seventh month. This means that adjustments must be made in one
year in anticipation of the day of the week on which Rosh Hashanah will fall in
the next year, which may itself be affected by the day on which it will fall in
the third year, and so on. The process is further complicated by the need to
insert leap months in accordance with their own cycle. The first of these
(de·∏•iyyah molad zaken) is thought to be a relic of when the calendar was
established empirically (although there is some doubt); the second (de·∏•iyyah
lo ADU) is applied for religious reasons. At the innovation of the rabbis, the
mathematical calendar has been arranged to ensure that Yom Kippur does not fall
on a Friday or Sunday, and Hoshana Rabbah does not fall on Shabbat. These rules
have been instituted because Shabbat restrictions also apply to Yom Kippur, so
that if Yom Kippur were to fall on Friday, it would not be possible to make
necessary preparations for Shabbat (such as candle lighting). Similarly, if Yom
Kippur fell on a Sunday, it would not be possible to make preparations for Yom
Kippur because the preceding day is Shabbat. Additionally, the laws of Shabbat
override those of Hoshana Rabbah, so that if Hoshana Rabbah were to fall on
Shabbat certain rituals that are a part of the Hoshana Rabbah service (such as
carrying willows, which is a form of work) could not be performed. To prevent
Yom Kippur (10 Tishrei) from falling on a Friday or Sunday, Rosh Hashanah (1
Tishrei) cannot be a Wednesday or Friday. Likewise, to prevent Hoshana Rabbah
(21 Tishrei) from falling on a Saturday, Rosh Hashanah cannot be a Sunday. This
leaves only four days on which Rosh Hashanah can fall: Monday, Tuesday,
Thursday, and Saturday, which are referred as the "four gates." Each day is
associated with a number (its order in the week, starting with Sunday as 1),
and these numbers are associated with Hebrew letters. Therefore the "keviyah"
uses the letters ◊î,◊í,◊ë and ◊ñ (representing 2, 3, 5, and 7, for Monday,
Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday) to denote the starting day of the year.
Deficient, regular, and complete years. The postponement of the year is
compensated for by adding a day to the second month or removing one from the
third month. A Jewish common year can only have 353, 354, or 355 days. A leap
year is always 30 days longer, and so can have 383, 384, or 385 days. Whether a
year is deficient, regular, or complete is determined by the time between two
adjacent Rosh Hashanah observances and the leap year. While the "keviyah" is
sufficient to describe a year, a variant specifies the day of the week for the
first day of Pesach (Passover) in lieu of the year length. A Metonic cycle
equates to 235 lunar months in each 19-year cycle. This gives an average of
6939 days, 16 hours, and 595 parts for each cycle. But due to the Rosh Hashanah
postponement rules (preceding section) a cycle of 19 Jewish years can be either
6939, 6940, 6941, or 6942 days in duration. Since none of these values is
evenly divisible by seven, the Jewish calendar repeats exactly only following
36,288 Metonic cycles, or 689,472 Jewish years. There is a near-repetition
every 247 years, except for an excess of 50 minutes (905 parts). Days of week
of holidays. The period from 1 Adar (or Adar II, in leap years) to 29 Heshvan
contains all of the festivals specified in the Bible - Purim (14 Adar), Pesach
(15 Nisan), Shavuot (6 Sivan), Rosh Hashanah (1 Tishrei), Yom Kippur (10
Tishrei), Sukkot (15 Tishrei), and Shemini Atzeret (22 Tishrei). This period is
fixed, during which no adjustments are made. Measurement of hours. Every hour
is divided into 1080 "halakim" or parts. A part is 3‚Öì seconds or 1/18 minute.
The ultimate ancestor of the "helek" was a small Babylonian time period called
a "barleycorn", itself equal to 1/72 of a Babylonian "time degree" (1¬∞ of
celestial rotation). Actually, the barleycorn or "she" was the name applied to
the smallest units of all Babylonian measurements, whether of length, area,
volume, weight, angle, or time. The weekdays start with Sunday (day 1) and
proceed to Saturday (day 7). Since some calculations use division, a remainder
of 0 signifies Saturday. While calculations of days, months and years are based
on fixed hours equal to 1/24 of a day, the beginning of each "halachic" day is
based on the local time of sunset. The end of the Shabbat and other Jewish
holidays is based on nightfall ("Tzeth haKochabim") which occurs some amount of
time, typically 42 to 72 minutes, after sunset. According to Maimonides,
nightfall occurs when three medium-sized stars become visible after sunset. By
the 17th century this had become three second-magnitude stars. The modern
definition is when the center of the sun is 7¬∞ below the geometric (airless)
horizon, somewhat later than civil twilight at 6¬∞. The beginning of the
daytime portion of each day is determined both by dawn and sunrise. Most
"halachic" times are based on some combination of these four times and vary
from day to day throughout the year and also vary significantly depending on
location. The daytime hours are often divided into "Sha`oth Zemaniyoth" or
"Halachic hours" by taking the time between sunrise and sunset or between dawn
and nightfall and dividing it into 12 equal hours. The nighttime hours are
similarly divided into 12 equal portions, albeit a different amount of time
than the "hours" of the daytime. The earliest and latest times for Jewish
services, the latest time to eat Chametz on the day before Passover and many
other rules are based on "Sha`oth Zemaniyoth". For convenience, the modern day
using "Sha`oth Zemaniyoth" is often discussed as if sunset were at 6:00pm,
sunrise at 6:00am and each hour were equal to a fixed hour. For example,
"halachic" noon may be after 1:00pm in some areas during daylight saving time.
Within the Mishnah, however, the numbering of the hours starts with the "first"
hour after the start of the day. Worked example. Given the length of the year,
the length of each month is fixed as described above, so the real problem in
determining the calendar for a year is determining the number of days in the
year. In the modern calendar this is determined in the following manner. First,
one must determine whether each year is an ordinary or leap year by its
position in the 19-year Metonic cycle. Years 3, 6, 8, 11, 14, 17, and 19 are
leap years. Secondly, one must determine the number of days between the
starting Tishrei "molad" (TM1) and the Tishrei "molad" of the next year (TM2).
For calendar descriptions in general the day begins at 6 p.m., but for the
purpose of determining Rosh Hashanah, a "molad" occurring on or after noon is
treated as belonging to the next day (the second "de·∏•iyyah"). All months are
calculated as 29d, 12h, 44m, 3s long (MonLen). Therefore, in an ordinary year
TM2 occurs 12 √ó MonLen days after TM1. This is usually 354 calendar days after
TM1, but if TM1 is on or after 3:11:20 a.m. and before noon, it will be 355
days. Similarly, in a leap year, TM2 occurs 13 √ó MonLen days after TM1. This
is usually 384 days after TM1, but if TM1 is on or after noon and before 2:27:
16 p.m., TM2 will be only 383 days after TM1. In the same way, from TM2 one
calculates TM3. Thus the four natural year lengths are 354, 355, 383, and 384
days. However, because of the holiday rules, Rosh Hashanah cannot fall on a
Sunday, Wednesday, or Friday, so if TM2 is one of those days, Rosh Hashanah in
year 2 is postponed by adding one day to year 1 (the first "de·∏•iyyah"). To
compensate, one day is subtracted from year 2. It is to allow these adjustments
that the system allows 385-day years (long leap) and 353-day years (short
ordinary) besides the four natural year lengths. But how can year 1 be
lengthened if it is already a long ordinary year of 355 days or year 2 be
shortened if it is a short leap year of 383 days? That is why the third and
fourth "de·∏•iyyah"s are needed. If year 1 is already a long ordinary year of
355 days, there will be a problem if TM1 is on a Tuesday, as that means TM2
falls on a Sunday and will have to be postponed, creating a 356-day year. In
this case, Rosh Hashanah in year 1 is postponed from Tuesday (the third
"de·∏•iyyah"). As it cannot be postponed to Wednesday, it is postponed to
Thursday, and year 1 ends up with 354 days. On the other hand, if year 2 is
already a short year of 383 days there will be a problem if TM2 is on a
Wednesday. because Rosh Hashanah in year 2 will have to be postponed from
Wednesday to Thursday and this will cause year 2 to be only 382 days long. In
this case, year 2 is extended by one day by postponing Rosh Hashanah in year 3
from Monday to Tuesday (the fourth "de·∏•iyyah" ), and year 2 will have 383
days. Astronomic calculations. Synodic month - the molad interval. A "new moon"
(astronomically called a lunar conjunction and in Hebrew called a molad) is the
moment at which the sun and moon are aligned horizontally with respect to a
north-south line (technically, they have the same ecliptical longitude). The
period between two new moons is a synodic month. The actual length of a synodic
month varies from about 29 days 6 hours and 30 minutes (29.27 days) to about 29
days and 20 hours (29.83 days), a variation range of about 13 hours and 30
minutes. Accordingly, for convenience, a long-term average length called the
mean synodic month (also called the molad interval) is used. The mean synodic
month is formula_1 days, or 29 days, 12 hours, and 793 parts (44+1/18 minutes)
(i.e. 29.530594 days), and is the same value determined by the Babylonians in
the System B in about 300 BCE and was adopted by the Greek astronomer
Hipparchus in the 2nd century BCE and by the Alexandrian astronomer Ptolemy in
"Almagest" in the 2nd century CE (who cited Hipparchus as his source). Its
remarkable accuracy (less than one second from the true value) is thought to
have been achieved using records of lunar eclipses from the 8th to 5th
centuries BCE. This value is as close to the correct value of 29.530589 days as
it is possible for a value to come that is rounded off to whole parts (1/18
minute). The discrepancy makes the molad interval about 0.6 seconds too long.
Put another way, if the molad is taken as the time of mean conjunction at some
reference meridian, then this reference meridian is drifting slowly eastward.
If this drift of the reference meridian is traced back to the mid-4th century
CE, the traditional date of the introduction of the fixed calendar, then it is
found to correspond to a longitude midway between the Nile and the end of the
Euphrates. The modern molad moments match the mean solar times of the lunar
conjunction moments near the meridian of Kandahar, Afghanistan, more than 30¬∞
east of Jerusalem. Furthermore, due to the eccentricity of Earth's orbit,
series of shorter lunations alternate with series of longer lunations.
Consequently the actual lunar conjunction moments can range from 12 hours
earlier than to 16 hours later than the molad moment, in terms of Jerusalem
mean solar time. Furthermore, the discrepancy between the molad interval and
the mean synodic month is accumulating at an accelerating rate, since the mean
synodic month is progressively shortening due to gravitational tidal effects.
Measured on a strictly uniform time scale, such as that provided by an atomic
clock, the mean synodic month is becoming gradually longer, but since the tides
slow Earth's rotation rate even more, the mean synodic month is becoming
gradually shorter in terms of mean solar time. Seasonal drift. The mean Hebrew
calendar year is 365 days 5 hours 55 minutes and 25+25/57 seconds (365.2468
days) - computed as the molad/monthly interval of 29.530594 days √ó 235 months
in a 19-year metonic cycle √∑ 19 years per cycle. As the present-era mean
northward equinoctal year is 365 days 5 hours 49 minutes 1 second long
(365.2424 days), the Hebrew calendar has a "seasonal drift" in relation to the
tropical year of about a day every 224 years. In relation to the Gregorian
calendar, the mean Gregorian calendar year is 365 days 5 hours 49 minutes and
12 seconds (365.2425 days), and the drift of the Hebrew calendar in relation to
it is about a day every 231 years. Implications for Jewish ritual. Although the
molad of Tishrei is the only molad moment that is not ritually announced, it is
actually the only one that is relevant to the Hebrew calendar, for it
determines the provisional date of Rosh Hashanah, subject to the Rosh Hashanah
postponement rules. The other monthly molad moments are announced for mystical
reasons. With the moladot on average almost 100 minutes late, this means that
the molad of Tishrei lands one day later than it ought to in (100 minutes) √∑
(1440 minutes per day) = 5 of 72 years or nearly 7% of years! Therefore, the
seemingly small drift of the moladot is already significant enough to affect
the date of Rosh Hashanah, which then cascades to many other dates in the
calendar year and sometimes, due to the Rosh Hashanah postponement rules, also
interacts with the dates of the prior or next year. The molad drift could be
corrected by using a progressively shorter molad interval that corresponds to
the actual mean lunar conjunction interval at the original molad reference
meridian. Furthermore, the molad interval determines the calendar mean year, so
using a progressively shorter molad interval would help correct the excessive
length of the Hebrew calendar mean year, as well as helping it to "hold onto"
the northward equinox for the maximum duration. When the 19 - year intercalary
cycle was finalised in the 4th century CE the earliest Passover (in year 16 of
the cycle) coincided with the northward equinox, which means that Passover fell
near the "first" full moon after the northward equinox, or that the northward
equinox landed within one lunation before 16 days after the "molad" of "Nisan".
This is still the case in about 80% of years, but in about 20% of years
Passover is a month late by these criteria (as it was in Hebrew years 5765 and
5768, the 8th and 11th years of the 19-year cycle = Gregorian 2005 and 2008
CE). Presently this occurs after the "premature" insertion of a leap month in
years 8, 11, and 19 of each 19-year cycle, which causes the northward equinox
to land on exceptionally early Hebrew dates in such years. This problem will
get worse over time, and so beginning in Hebrew year 5817 (2057 CE), year 3 of
each 19-year cycle will also be a month late. Furthermore, the drift will
accelerate in the future as perihelion approaches and then passes the northward
equinox, and if the calendar is not amended then Passover will start to land on
or after the summer solstice around Hebrew year 16652 (12892 CE). (The exact
year when this will begin to occur depends on uncertainties in the future tidal
slowing of the Earth rotation rate, and on the accuracy of predictions of
precession and Earth axial tilt.) The seriousness of the spring equinox drift
is widely discounted on the grounds that Passover will remain in the spring
season for many millennia, and the text of the Torah is generally not
interpreted as having specified tight calendrical limits. On the other hand,
the mean southward equinoctial year length is considerably shorter, so the
Hebrew calendar has been drifting faster with respect to the autumn equinox,
and at least part of the harvest festival of Sukkot is already more than a
month after the equinox in years 1, 9, and 12 of each 19-year cycle; beginning
in Hebrew year 5818 (2057 CE), this will also be the case in year 4. (These are
the same year numbers as were mentioned for the spring season in the previous
paragraph, except that they get incremented at Rosh Hashanah.) This
progressively increases the probability that Sukkot will be cold and wet,
making it uncomfortable or impractical to dwell in the traditional "succah"
during Sukkot. The first winter seasonal prayer for rain is not recited until
"Shemini Atzeret", after the end of Sukkot, yet it is becoming increasingly
likely that the rainy season in Israel will start before the end of Sukkot. No
equinox or solstice will ever be more than a day or so away from its mean date
according to the solar calendar, while nineteen Jewish years average 6939d 16h
33m 03s compared to the 6939d 14h 26m 15s of nineteen mean tropical years. This
discrepancy has mounted up to six days, which is why the earliest Passover
currently falls around 27 March. "Rectifying" the Hebrew calendar. It has been
argued by some that, as the fixed arithmetic Hebrew calendar was established on
the authority of Hillel II, President of the Sanhedrin in Hebrew year 4119 (358
CE), only an equal authority (the modern Sanhedrin) can either amend it or
reinstate the observational Hebrew calendar. The attribution of the fixed
arithmetic Hebrew calendar solely to Hillel II has, however, been questioned by
a few authors, such as Sasha Stern, who claim that the calendar rules developed
gradually over several centuries. Given the importance in Jewish ritual of
establishing the accurate timing of monthly and annual times, some futurist
writers and researchers have considered whether a "corrected" system of
establishing the Hebrew date is required. The Hebrew calendar mean year is more
than 6 minutes and 25 seconds in excess of the northern hemisphere spring
equinox year, and has "drifted" an average of 7‚Äì8 days late relative to the
equinox relationship that it originally had. It is not possible, however, for
any individual Hebrew date to be a week or more "late", because Hebrew months
always begin within a day or two of the "molad" moment. What happens instead is
that the traditional Hebrew calendar "prematurely" inserts a leap month one
year before it "should have been" inserted, where "prematurely" means that the
insertion causes the spring equinox to land more than 30 days before the latest
acceptable moment, thus causing the calendar to run "one month late" until the
time when the leap month "should have been" inserted prior to the following
spring. This presently happens in 4 years out of every 19-year cycle (years 3,
8, 11, and 19), implying that the Hebrew calendar currently runs "one month
late" more than 21% of the time. To a minor degree the tardiness of the
calendar is also due to not correcting for the progressively shorter mean
astronomical lunation interval ‚Äî although presently this only accounts for a
little over six seconds of the yearly equinox drift, it more importantly
accounts for nearly two hours of "molad" drift relative to actual mean lunar
conjunctions, which is enough to cause "Rosh HaShanah" to start on the "wrong"
date in an appreciable number of years. Dr. Irv Bromberg has proposed a 353-
year cycle of 4366 months, which would include 130 leap months, along with use
of a progressively shorter "molad" interval, which would keep an amended fixed
arithmetic Hebrew calendar from drifting for more than seven millennia. It
takes about 3 centuries for the spring equinox to drift an average of th of a
"molad" interval earlier in the Hebrew calendar. That is a very important time
unit, because it can be cancelled by simply truncating a 19-year cycle to 11
years, omitting 8 years including three leap years from the sequence. That is
the essential feature of the 353-year leap cycle (). Religious questions abound
about how such a system might be implemented and administered throughout the
diverse aspects of the world Jewish community. References. 723-730.
