Hebrew language Hebrew () ( "", or ) is a West Semitic language of the
Afroasiatic language family. Culturally, it is considered by Jews and other
ethnic or religious groups as the language of the Jewish people, although other
Jewish languages had originated among diaspora Jews, and the Hebrew language
was also used by non-Jewish groups, such as the ethnically related Samaritans.
Modern Hebrew is one of the two official languages of Israel (the other being
Arabic), while Classical Hebrew is used for prayer or study in Jewish
communities around the world. The earliest examples of written Hebrew date from
the 10th century BCE to the late Second Temple period, after which the language
developed into Mishnaic Hebrew. Ancient Hebrew is also the liturgical tongue of
the Samaritans, while modern Hebrew or Arabic is their vernacular, though today
only about 700 Samaritans remain. As a foreign language it is studied mostly by
Jews and students of Judaism and Israel, archaeologists and linguists
specializing in the Middle East and its civilizations, by theologians, and in
Christian seminaries. The core of the Torah (the first five books of the Hebrew
Bible), and most of the rest of the Hebrew Bible, is written in Classical
Hebrew, and much of its present form is specifically the dialect of Biblical
Hebrew that scholars believe flourished around the 6th century BCE, around the
time of the Babylonian exile. For this reason, Hebrew has been referred to by
Jews as "" (), "The Holy Language", since ancient times. Naming. The modern
word "Hebrew" is derived from the word "ʕibri" (plural "ʕibrim") one of
several names for the Jewish people. It is traditionally understood to be an
adjective based on the name of Abraham's supposed ancestor, Eber ("ʕebr"
עבר in Hebrew) mentioned in Genesis 10:21. This name is possibly based upon
the root "ʕ-b-r" () meaning "to cross over". Interpretations of the term
"ʕibrim" link it to this verb; cross over and homiletical or the people who
crossed over the river Euphrates. In the Bible, the Hebrew language is called '
() because Judah (') was the surviving kingdom at the time of the quotation,
late 8th century BCE (Is 36, 2 Kings 18). In Isaiah 19:18, it is also called
the "Language of Canaan" (. History. Hebrew belongs to the Canaanite group of
languages. In turn the Canaanite languages are a branch of the Northwest
Semitic family of languages. Hebrew flourished as a spoken language in the
kingdoms of Israel and Judah during the 10th to 7th centuries BCE. Scholars
debate the degree to which Hebrew was a spoken vernacular in ancient times
following the Babylonian exile, when the predominant international language in
the region was Old Aramaic. Hebrew was nearly extinct as a spoken language by
Late Antiquity, but it continued to be used as a literary language and as the
liturgical language of Judaism, evolving various dialects of literary Medieval
Hebrew, until its revival as a spoken language in the late 19th century. Oldest
Hebrew inscriptions. In July 2008 Israeli archaeologist Yossi Garfinkel
discovered a ceramic shard at Khirbet Qeiyafa which he claimed may be the
earliest Hebrew writing yet discovered, dating around 3000 years ago. Hebrew
University archaeologist Amihai Mazar said that the inscription was “proto-
Canaanite" but cautioned that, "The differentiation between the scripts, and
between the languages themselves in that period, remains unclear,” and
suggested that calling the text Hebrew might be going too far. The Gezer
calendar also dates back to the 10th century BCE at the beginning of the
Monarchic Period, the traditional time of the reign of David and Solomon.
Classified as Archaic Biblical Hebrew, the calendar presents a list of seasons
and related agricultural activities. The Gezer calendar (named after the city
in whose proximity it was found) is written in an old Semitic script, akin to
the Phoenician one that through the Greeks and Etruscans later became the Roman
script. The Gezer calendar is written without any vowels, and it does not use
consonants to imply vowels even in the places where later Hebrew spelling
requires it. Numerous older tablets have been found in the region with similar
scripts written in other Semitic languages, for example Protosinaitic. It is
believed that the original shapes of the script go back to Egyptian
hieroglyphs, though the phonetic values are instead inspired by the acrophonic
principle. The common ancestor of Hebrew and Phoenician is called Canaanite,
and was the first to use a Semitic alphabet distinct from Egyptian. One ancient
document is the famous Moabite Stone written in the Moabite dialect; the Siloam
Inscription, found near Jerusalem, is an early example of Hebrew. Less ancient
samples of Archaic Hebrew include the ostraca found near Lachish which describe
events preceding the final capture of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar and the
Babylonian captivity of 586 BCE. Classical Hebrew. In its widest sense,
"Classical Hebrew" means the spoken language of ancient Israel flourishing
between the 10th century BCE and the turn of the 4th century CE. It comprises
several evolving and overlapping dialects. The phases of Classical Hebrew are
often named after important literary works associated with them. Sometimes the
above phases of spoken Classical Hebrew are simplified into "Biblical Hebrew"
(including several dialects from the 10th century BCE to 2nd century BCE and
extant in certain Dead Sea Scrolls) and "Mishnaic Hebrew" (including several
dialects from the 3rd century BCE to the 3rd century CE and extant in certain
other Dead Sea Scrolls). However, today, most Hebrew linguists classify Dead
Sea Scroll Hebrew as a set of dialects evolving out of Late Biblical Hebrew and
into Mishnaic Hebrew, thus including elements from both but remaining distinct
from either. By the start of the Byzantine Period in the 4th century CE,
Classical Hebrew ceases as a regularly spoken language, roughly a century after
the publication of the Mishnah, apparently declining since the aftermath of the
catastrophic Bar Kokhba War around 135 CE. Around the 6th century BCE, the Neo-
Babylonian Empire conquered the ancient Kingdom of Judah, destroying much of
Jerusalem and exiling its population far to the East in Babylon. During the
Babylonian captivity, many Israelites were enslaved within the Babylonian
Empire and learned the closely related Semitic language of their captors,
Aramaic. The Babylonians had taken mainly the governing classes of Israel while
leaving behind presumably more-compliant farmers and laborers to work the land.
Thus for a significant period, the Jewish elite became influenced by Aramaic.
(see below, Aramaic spoken among Israelites). After Cyrus the Great conquered
Babylon, he released the Jewish people from captivity. "The King of Kings" or
Great King of Persia, later gave the Israelites permission to return. As a
result, a local version of Aramaic came to be spoken in Israel alongside
Hebrew, also the Assyrian empire before that caused Israel to speak a variant
of Aramaic for trade, in Israel-Judea these languages co-mingled. The Greek Era
saw a brief ban on the Hebrew language until the period of the Hasmoneans. By
the beginning of the Common Era Aramaic was the primary colloquial language of
Samarian, Babylonian and Galileean Jews, and western and intellectual Jews
spoke Greek, but a form of so-called Rabbinic Hebrew continued to be used as a
vernacular in Judea until it was displaced by Aramaic, probably in the 3rd
century CE. Certain Sadducee, Pharisee, Scribe, Hermit, Zealot and Priest
classes maintained an insistence on Hebrew, and all Jews maintained their
identity with Hebrew songs and simple quotations from Hebrew texts. Other
opinions exist on the exact date range from the 4th century BCE to the end of
the Roman period. Jewish diaspora. While there is no doubt that at a certain
point, Hebrew was displaced as the everyday spoken language of most Jews, and
that its chief successor in the Middle East was the closely related Aramaic
language, then Greek, scholarly opinions on the exact dating of that shift have
changed very much. In the early half of the 20th century, most scholars
followed Geiger and Dalman in thinking that Aramaic became a spoken language in
the land of Israel as early as the beginning of Israel's Hellenistic Period in
the 4th century BCE, and that as a corollary Hebrew ceased to function as a
spoken language around the same time. Segal, Klausner, and Ben Yehuda are
notable exceptions to this view. During the latter half of the 20th century,
accumulating archaeological evidence and especially linguistic analysis of the
Dead Sea Scrolls has disproven that view. The Dead Sea Scrolls, uncovered in
1946-1948 near Qumran revealed ancient Jewish texts overwhelmingly in Hebrew,
not Aramaic. The Qumran scrolls indicate that Hebrew texts were readily
understandable to the average Israelite, and that the language had evolved
since Biblical times as spoken languages do. Recent scholarship recognizes that
reports of Jews speaking in Aramaic indicates a multi-lingual society, not
necessarily the primary language spoken. Alongside Aramaic, Hebrew co-existed
within Israel as a spoken language. Most scholars now date the demise of Hebrew
as a spoken language to the end of the Roman Period, or about 200 CE. It
continued on as a literary language down through the Byzantine Period from the
4th century CE. Many Hebrew linguists even postulate the survival of Hebrew as
a spoken language until the Byzantine Period, but some historians do not accept
this. The exact roles of Aramaic and Hebrew remain hotly debated. A trilingual
scenario has been proposed for the land of Israel. Hebrew functioned as the
local mother tongue with powerful ties to Israel's history, origins, and golden
age and as the language of Israel's religion; Aramaic functioned as the
international language with the rest of the Middle East; and eventually Greek
functioned as another international language with the eastern areas of the
Roman Empire. Communities of Jews (and non-Jews) are known, who immigrated to
Judea from these other lands and continued to speak Aramaic or Greek. According
to another summary, Greek was the language of government, Hebrew the language
of prayer, study and religious texts, and Aramaic was the language of legal
contracts and trade. There was also a geographic pattern: according to Spolsky,
by the beginning of the Common Era, "Judeo-Aramaic was mainly used in Galilee
in the north, Greek was concentrated in the former colonies and around
governmental centers, and Hebrew monolingualism continued mainly in the
southern villages and no man's land of Judea." In other words, "in terms of
dialect geography, at the time of the tannaim Palestine could be divided into
the Aramaic-speaking regions of Galilee and Samaria and a smaller area, Judaea,
in which Rabbinic Hebrew was used among the descendants of returning exiles."
In addition, it has been surmised that Koine Greek was the primary vehicle of
communication in coastal cities and among the upper class of Jerusalem, while
Aramaic was prevalent in the lower class of Jerusalem, but not in the
surrounding countryside. After the suppression of the Bar Kokhba revolt in the
2nd century CE, Judaeans were forced to disperse. Many relocated to Galilee, so
most remaining native speakers of Hebrew at that last stage would have been
found in the north. The Christian New Testament contains some clearly Aramaic
place names and quotes. Although the language of such Semitic glosses (and in
general the language spoken by Jews in scenes from the New Testament) is
usually referred to as "Hebrew"/"Jewish" in the text, this term often seems to
refer to Aramaic instead and is rendered accordingly in recent translations.
Nonetheless, many glosses can be interpreted as Hebrew as well; and it has been
argued that Hebrew, rather than Aramaic or Koine Greek, lay behind the
composition of the Gospel of Matthew. (See the Hebrew Gospel hypothesis or
Aramaic of Jesus for more details on Hebrew and Aramaic in the gospels.)
Mishnah and Talmud. The term "Mishnaic Hebrew" generally refers to the Hebrew
dialects found in the Talmud , excepting quotations from the Hebrew Bible. The
dialects organize into Mishnaic Hebrew (also called Tannaitic Hebrew, Early
Rabbinic Hebrew, or Mishnaic Hebrew I), which was a spoken language, and
Amoraic Hebrew (also called Late Rabbinic Hebrew or Mishnaic Hebrew II), which
was a literary language. The earlier section of the Talmud is the Mishnah that
was published around 200 CE, though many of the stories take place much
earlier, and was written in the earlier Mishnaic dialect. The dialect is also
found in certain Dead Sea Scrolls. Mishnaic Hebrew is considered to be one of
the dialects of Classical Hebrew that functioned as a living language in the
land of Israel. A transitional form of the language occurs in the other works
of Tannaitic literature dating from the century beginning with the completion
of the Mishnah. These include the halachic Midrashim (Sifra, Sifre, Mechilta
etc.) and the expanded collection of Mishnah-related material known as the
Tosefta . The Talmud contains excerpts from these works, as well as further
Tannaitic material not attested elsewhere; the generic term for these passages
is Baraitot. The dialect of all these works is very similar to Mishnaic Hebrew.
About a century after the publication of the Mishnah, Mishnaic Hebrew fell into
disuse as a spoken language. The later section of the Talmud, the Gemara ,
generally comments on the Mishnah and Baraitot in two forms of Aramaic.
Nevertheless, Hebrew survived as a liturgical and literary language in the form
of later Amoraic Hebrew, which sometimes occurs in the text of the Gemara.
Because as early as the Torah's transcription the Scribe has been the highest
position in Judaism, Hebrew was always regarded as the language of Israel's
religion, history and national pride, and after it faded as a spoken language,
it continued to be used as a "lingua franca" among scholars and Jews traveling
in foreign countries. After the 2nd century CE when the Roman Empire exiled
most of the Jewish population of Jerusalem following the Bar Kokhba revolt, the
Israelites adapted to the societies in which they found themselves, yet
letters, contracts, commerce, science, philosophy, medicine, poetry, and laws
continued to be written mostly in Hebrew, which adapted by borrowing and
inventing terms. Medieval Hebrew. After the Talmud, various regional literary
dialects of Medieval Hebrew evolved. The most important is Tiberian Hebrew or
Masoretic Hebrew, a local dialect of Tiberias in Galilee that became the
standard for vocalizing the Hebrew Bible and thus still influences all other
regional dialects of Hebrew. This Tiberian Hebrew from the 7th to 10th century
CE is sometimes called "Biblical Hebrew" because it is used to pronounce the
Hebrew Bible; however properly it should be distinguished from the historical
Biblical Hebrew of the 6th century BCE, whose original pronunciation must be
reconstructed. Tiberian Hebrew incorporates the remarkable scholarship of the
Masoretes (from "masoret" meaning "tradition"), who added vowel points and
grammar points to the Hebrew letters to preserve much earlier features of
Hebrew, for use in chanting the Hebrew Bible. The Masoretes inherited a
biblical text whose letters were considered too sacred to be altered, so their
markings were in the form of pointing in and around the letters. The Syriac
alphabet, precursor to the Arabic alphabet, also developed vowel pointing
systems around this time. The Aleppo Codex, a Hebrew Bible with the Masoretic
pointing, was written in the 10th century, likely in Tiberias, and survives to
this day. It is perhaps the most important Hebrew manuscript in existence.
During the Golden age of Jewish culture in Spain, important work was done by
grammarians in explaining the grammar and vocabulary of Biblical Hebrew; much
of this was based on the work of the grammarians of Classical Arabic. Important
Hebrew grammarians were Judah ben David Hayyuj, Jonah ibn Janah, and later (in
Provence) David Kimhi. A great deal of poetry was written, by poets such as
Dunash ben Labrat, Solomon ibn Gabirol, Judah ha-Levi and the two Ibn Ezras, in
a "purified" Hebrew based on the work of these grammarians, and in Arabic
quantitative or strophic meters. This literary Hebrew was later used by Italian
Jewish poets. The need to express scientific and philosophical concepts from
Classical Greek and Medieval Arabic motivated Medieval Hebrew to borrow
terminology and grammar from these other languages, or to coin equivalent terms
from existing Hebrew roots, giving rise to a distinct style of philosophical
Hebrew. This is used in the translations made by the Ibn Tibbon family.
(Original Jewish philosophical works were usually written in Arabic.) Another
important influence was Maimonides, who developed a simple style based on
Mishnaic Hebrew for use in his law code, the Mishneh Torah. Subsequent rabbinic
literature is written in a blend between this style and the Aramaized Rabbinic
Hebrew of the Talmud. Hebrew persevered through the ages as the main language
for written purposes by all Jewish communities around the world for a large
range of uses - not only liturgy, but also poetry, philosophy, science and
medicine, commerce, daily correspondence and contracts. There have been, of
course, many deviations from this generalization such as Bar Kokhba's letters
to his lieutenants, which were mostly in Aramaic, and Maimonides' writings,
which were mostly in Arabic; but overall, Hebrew did not cease to be used for
such purposes. This meant not only that well-educated Jews in all parts of the
world could correspond in a mutually intelligible language, and that books and
legal documents published or written in any part of the world could be read by
Jews in all other parts, but that an educated Jew could travel and converse
with Jews in distant places, just as priests and other educated Christians
could converse in Latin. Revival. Hebrew has been 'revived' several times as a
literary language, and most significantly by the Haskalah (Enlightenment)
movement of early and mid-19th century Germany. Near the end of that century
the Jewish activist Eliezer Ben-Yehuda, owing to the ideology of the national
revival ("Shivat Tziyon", later Zionism), began reviving Hebrew as a modern
spoken language. Eventually, as a result of the local movement he created, but
more significantly as a result of the new groups of immigrants known under the
name of the "Second Aliyah", it replaced a score of languages spoken by Jews at
that time. Those languages were Jewish dialects such as the Judeo-Spanish
language (also called Judezmo or Ladino), Yiddish, Judeo-Arabic, and Bukharian
language, or local languages spoken in the Jewish diaspora such as Russian,
Persian, and Arabic. The major result of the literary work of the Hebrew
intellectuals along the 19th century was a lexical modernization of Hebrew. New
words and expressions were adapted as neologisms from the large corpus of
Hebrew writings since the Hebrew Bible, or borrowed from Turkish and Arabic
(mainly by Eliezer Ben-Yehuda) and older Aramaic and Latin. Many new words were
either borrowed from or coined after European languages, especially English,
Russian, German, and French. Modern Hebrew became an official language in
British-ruled Palestine in 1921 (along with English and Arabic), and then in
1948 became an official language of the newly declared State of Israel. Hebrew
is the most widely spoken language in Israel today. In the Modern Period, from
the 19th century onward, the literary Hebrew tradition as pronounced in
Jerusalem revived as the spoken language of modern Israel, called variously
"Israeli Hebrew", "Modern Israeli Hebrew", "Modern Hebrew", "New Hebrew",
"Israeli Standard Hebrew", "Standard Hebrew", and so on. Israeli Hebrew
exhibits many features of Sephardic Hebrew from its local Jerusalemite
tradition but adapts it with numerous neologisms, borrowed terms (often
technical) from European languages and adopted terms (often colloquial) from
Arabic. The literary and narrative use of Hebrew was revived beginning with the
Haskalah (Enlightenment) movement. The first secular periodical in Hebrew,
"Hameassef" (The Gatherer), was published by Maskilim literati in Königsberg
(today's Kaliningrad) from 1783 onwards. In the mid-19th century, publications
of several Eastern European Hebrew-language newspapers (e.g. HaMagid, founded
in Lyck, Prussia, in 1856) multiplied. Prominent poets were Chaim Nachman
Bialik and Shaul Tchernichovsky; there were also novels written in the
language. The revival of the Hebrew language as a mother tongue was initiated
in the late 19th century by the efforts of Eliezer Ben-Yehuda. He joined the
Jewish national movement and in 1881 immigrated to Palestine, then a part of
the Ottoman Empire. Motivated by the surrounding ideals of renovation and
rejection of the diaspora "shtetl" lifestyle, Ben-Yehuda set out to develop
tools for making the literary and liturgical language into everyday spoken
language. However, his brand of Hebrew followed norms that had been replaced in
Eastern Europe by different grammar and style, in the writings of people like
Achad Ha-Am and others. His organizational efforts and involvement with the
establishment of schools and the writing of textbooks pushed the
vernacularization activity into a gradually accepted movement. It was not,
however, until the 1904-1914 Second Aliyah that Hebrew had caught real momentum
in Ottoman Palestine with the more highly organized enterprises set forth by
the new group of immigrants. When the British Mandate of Palestine recognized
Hebrew as one of the country's three official languages (English, Arabic, and
Hebrew, in 1922), its new formal status contributed to its diffusion. A
constructed modern language with a truly Semitic vocabulary and written
appearance, although often European in phonology, was to take its place among
the current languages of the nations. While many saw his work as fanciful or
even blasphemous (because Hebrew was the holy language of the Torah and
therefore some thought that it should not be used to discuss everyday matters),
many soon understood the need for a common language amongst Jews of the British
Mandate who at the turn of the 20th century were arriving in large numbers from
diverse countries and speaking different languages. A Committee of the Hebrew
Language was established. After the establishment of Israel, it became the
Academy of the Hebrew Language. The results of Ben-Yehuda's lexicographical
work were published in a dictionary ("The Complete Dictionary of Ancient and
Modern Hebrew"). The seeds of Ben-Yehuda's work fell on fertile ground, and by
the beginning of the 20th century, Hebrew was well on its way to becoming the
main language of the Jewish population of both Ottoman and British Palestine.
At the time, members of the Old Yishuv and a very few Hasidic sects, most
notably those under the auspices of Satmar, refused to speak Hebrew and spoke
only Yiddish. There still remains a sizable population in Jerusalem,
particularly in the Meah Shearim area, that still prefers to stick to Yiddish.
Modern Hebrew. Standard Hebrew, as developed by Eliezer Ben-Yehuda, was based
on Mishnaic spelling and Sephardi Hebrew pronunciation. However, the earliest
speakers of Modern Hebrew had Yiddish as their native language and often
brought into Hebrew idioms and literal translations from Yiddish. In Israel,
Modern Hebrew is currently taught in institutions called Ulpanim (singular:
Ulpan). There are government owned as well as private Ulpanim offering online
courses and face-to-face programs. Status. Modern Hebrew is, along with Arabic,
an official language of the State of Israel. The Soviet authorities considered
the use of Hebrew "reactionary" since it was associated with Zionism, and the
teaching of Hebrew at primary and secondary schools was officially banned by
the Narkompros (Commissariat of Education) as early as 1919, as part of an
overall agenda aiming to secularize education (the language itself did not
cease to be studied at universities for historical and linguistic purposes).
The official ordinance stated that Yiddish, being the spoken language of the
Russian Jews, should be treated as their only national language, while Hebrew
was to be treated as a foreign language. Hebrew books and periodicals ceased to
be published and were seized from the libraries, although liturgical texts were
still published until the 1930s. Despite numerous protests, a policy of
suppression of the teaching of Hebrew operated from the 1930s on. Later in the
1980s in the USSR, Hebrew studies reappeared due to people struggling for
permission to go to Israel (refuseniks). Several of the teachers were
imprisoned, for example, Ephraim Kholmyansky, Yevgeny Korostyshevsky and others
responsible for a Hebrew learning network connecting many cities of USSR.
Phonology. Biblical Hebrew had a typical Semitic consonant inventory, with
pharyngeal /ʕ ħ/, a series of "emphatic" consonants (possibly ejective, but
this is debated), lateral fricative /ɬ/, and in its older stages also uvular /
χ ʁ/. /χ ʁ/ merged into /ħ ʕ/ in later Biblical Hebrew, and /b ɡ d k p
t/ underwent allophonic spirantization to ɣ ð x f θ (known as begadkefat
spirantization). The earliest Biblical Hebrew vowel system contained the Proto-
Semitic vowels /a aː i iː u uː/ as well as /oː/, but this system changed
dramatically over time. By the time of the Dead Sea Scrolls, /ɬ/ had shifted
to /s/ in the Jewish traditions, though for the Samaritans it merged with /ʃ/
instead. (Elisha Qimron 1986. Hebrew of the Dead Sea Scrolls, 29). The Tiberian
reading tradition of the Middle Ages had the vowel system /a ɛ e i ɔ o u ă
ɔ̆ ɛ̆/, though other Medieval reading traditions had fewer vowels. A number
of reading traditions have been preserved in liturgical use. In Oriental
(Sephardi and Mizrahi) Jewish reading traditions, the emphatic consonants are
realized as pharyngealized, while the Ashkenazi (eastern European) traditions
have lost emphatics and pharyngeals, and show the shift of /w/ to /v/. The
Samaritan tradition has a complex vowel system which does not correspond
closely to the Tiberian systems. Modern Hebrew pronunciation developed from a
mixture of the different Jewish reading traditions, generally tending towards
simplification. Emphatic consonants have shifted to their ordinary
counterparts, /w/ to /v/, and [ɣ ð θ] are not present. Many Israelis merge /
ʕ ħ/ with /ʔ χ/, do not have contrastive gemination, and pronounce /r/ as a
uvular trill [ʀ] rather than an alveolar trill, as in many varieties of
Ashkenazi Hebrew. The consonants /tʃ dʒ/ have become phonemic due to loan
words, and /w/ has similarly been re-introduced. Hebrew grammar. Hebrew grammar
is partly analytic, expressing such forms as dative, ablative, and accusative
using prepositional particles rather than grammatical cases. However,
inflection plays a decisive role in the formation of the verbs and nouns. E.g.
nouns have a construct state, called "smikhut", to denote the relationship of
"belonging to": this is the converse of the genitive case of more inflected
languages. Words in smikhut are often combined with hyphens. In modern speech,
the use of the construct is sometimes interchangeable with the preposition
"shel", meaning "of". There are many cases, however, where older declined forms
are retained (especially in idiomatic expressions and the like), and "person"-
enclitics are widely used to "decline" prepositions. Morphology. Like all
Semitic languages, the Hebrew language exhibits a pattern of stems consisting
typically of "triliteral", or 3-consonant consonantal roots (2- and 4-consonant
roots also exist), from which nouns, adjectives, and verbs are formed in
various ways: e.g. by inserting vowels, doubling consonants, lengthening
vowels, and/or adding prefixes, suffixes, or infixes. Hebrew uses a number of
one-letter prefixes that are added to words for various purposes. These are
called inseparable prepositions or "Letters of Use" ("Hebrew: אותיות
השימוש, Otiyot HaShimush"). Such items include: the definite article "ha-
" () (="the"); prepositions "be-" () (="in"), "le-" () (="to"), "mi-" ()
(="from"; a shortened version of the preposition "min"); conjunctions "ve-" ()
(="and"), "she-" () (="that"), "ke-" () (="as", "like"). The vowel accompanying
each of these letters may differ from those listed above, depending on the
first letter or vowel following it. The rules governing these changes, hardly
observed in colloquial speech as most speakers tend to employ the regular form,
may be heard in more formal circumstances. For example, if a preposition is put
before a word which begins with a moving Shva, then the preposition takes the
vowel (and the initial consonant may be weakened): colloquial "be-kfar" (="in a
village") corresponds to the more formal "bi-khfar". The definite article may
be inserted between a preposition or a conjunction and the word it refers to,
creating composite words like "mé-ha-kfar" (="from the village"). The latter
also demonstrates the change in the vowel of "mi-". With "be" and "le", the
definite article is assimilated into the prefix, which then becomes "ba" or
"la". Thus *"be-ha-matos" becomes "ba-matos" (="in the plane"). Note that this
does not happen to "mé" (the form of "min" or "mi-" used before the letter
"he"), therefore "mé-ha-matos" is a valid form, which means "from the
airplane". Syntax. Like most other languages, the vocabulary of the Hebrew
language is divided into verbs, nouns, adjectives, and so on, and its sentence
structure can be analyzed by terms like object, subject, and so on. However,
speakers of languages such as English, French, Urdu or Persian may find the
structure of Hebrew sentences quite surprising. Writing system. Modern Hebrew
is written from right to left using the Hebrew alphabet, which is an abjad, or
consonant-only script of 22 letters. The ancient paleo-Hebrew alphabet is
similar to those used for Canaanite and Phoenician. Modern scripts are based on
the "square" letter form, known as "Ashurit" (Assyrian), which was developed
from the Aramaic script. A cursive Hebrew script is used in handwriting: the
letters tend to be more circular in form when written in cursive, and sometimes
vary markedly from their printed equivalents. The medieval version of the
cursive script forms the basis of another style, known as Rashi script. When
necessary, vowels are indicated by diacritic marks above or below the letter
representing the syllabic onset, or by use of "matres lectionis", which are
consonantal letters used as vowels. Further diacritics are used to indicate
variations in the pronunciation of the consonants (e.g. "bet"/"vet", "shin"/
"sin"); and, in some contexts, to indicate the punctuation, accentuation, and
musical rendition of Biblical texts (see Cantillation). Hebrew in Judaism.
According to some Jewish religious traditions, Hebrew was the language of the
creation. Likewise, Hebrew is considered to be the one language spoken by the
united mankind before the dispersion connected with the Tower of Babel.
According to Jewish esoteric teachings, the Hebrew letters are the lifeforce of
all things created, determining their essence. Liturgical use. Hebrew has
always been used as the language of prayer and study, and the following
pronunciation systems are found. Ashkenazi Hebrew, originating in Central and
Eastern Europe, is still widely used in Ashkenazi Jewish religious services and
studies in Israel and abroad, particularly in the Haredi and other Orthodox
communities. It was influenced by the Yiddish language. Sephardi Hebrew is the
traditional pronunciation of the Spanish and Portuguese Jews and Sephardi Jews
in the countries of the former Ottoman Empire. This pronunciation, in the form
used by the Jerusalem Sephardic community, is the basis of the Hebrew phonology
of Israeli native speakers. It was influenced by the Judezmo language. Mizrahi
(Oriental) Hebrew is actually a collection of dialects spoken liturgically by
Jews in various parts of the Arab and Islamic world. It was possibly influenced
by the Aramaic and Arabic languages, and in some cases by Sephardi Hebrew,
although some linguists maintain that it is the direct heir of Biblical Hebrew
and thus represents the true dialect of Hebrew. The same claim is sometimes
made for Yemenite Hebrew or "Temanit", which differs from other Mizrahi
dialects by having a radically different vowel system, and distinguishing
between different diacritically marked consonants that are pronounced
identically in other dialects (for example gimel and "ghimel".) These
pronunciations are still used in synagogue ritual and religious study, in
Israel and elsewhere, mostly by people who are not native speakers of Hebrew,
though some traditionalist Israelis are bi-dialectal. Many synagogues in the
diaspora, even though Ashkenazi by rite and by ethnic composition, have adopted
the "Sephardic" pronunciation in deference to Israeli Hebrew. However, in many
British and American schools and synagogues, this pronunciation retains several
elements of its Ashkenazi substrate, especially the distinction between tsere
and segol.
