Hellenistic religion Hellenistic religion is any of the various systems of
beliefs and practices of the people who lived under the influence of ancient
Greek culture during the Hellenistic period and the Roman Empire (c. 300 BCE to
300 CE). There was much continuity in Hellenistic religion: the Greek gods
continued to be worshiped, and the same rites were practiced as before. Change
came from the addition of new religions from other countries, such as including
the Egyptian god(esse)s of Isis and Serapis, and the Syrian gods of Atargatis
and of Hadad, which provided a new outlet for people seeking fulfillment in
both the present life and the afterlife. The worship of Hellenistic rulers was
also a feature of this period, most notably in Egypt, where the Ptolemies
adopted earlier pharaonic practice, and established themselves as god-kings.
Elsewhere rulers might receive divine status without the full status of a god.
Magic was practiced widely, and these too, were a continuation from earlier
times. Throughout the Hellenistic world, people would consult oracles, and use
charms and figurines to deter misfortune or to cast spells. Also developed in
this era was the complex system of astrology, which sought to determine a
person's character and future in the movements of the sun, moon, and planets.
The systems of Hellenistic philosophy, such as Stoicism and Epicureanism,
offered an alternative to traditional religion, even if their impact was
largely limited to the educated elite. Classical Greek religion. Central to
Greek religion in classical times were the twelve Olympian deities headed by
Zeus. Each god was honored with stone temples and statues, and sanctuaries
(sacred enclosures) were founded, which, although dedicated to a specific
deity, often contained statues commemorating other gods. The city-states would
conduct various festivals and rituals throughout the year, with particular
emphasis directed towards the patron god of the city, such as Athena at Athens,
or Apollo at Corinth. Religious practice would also involve the worship of
heroes, people who were regarded as semi-divine. Such heroes ranged from the
mythical figures in the epics of Homer to historical people such as the founder
of a city. At the local level, the landscape was filled with sacred spots and
monuments; for example, many statues of Nymphs were found near and around
springs, and the stylized figures of Hermes could often be found on street
corners. Magic was a central part of Greek religion and oracles would allow
people to determine divine will in the rustle of leaves; the shape of flame and
smoke on an altar; the flight of birds; the noises made by a spring; or in the
entrails of an animal. Also long established were the Eleusinian Mysteries,
associated with Demeter and Persephone. People were indoctrinated into mystery
religions through initiation ceremonies, which were traditionally kept
secret.These religions often had a goal of personal improvement, which would
also extend to the afterlife. Hellenistic religion. In the aftermath of the
conquests of Alexander the Great, Greek culture spread widely and came into
much closer contact with the civilizations of the Near East and Egypt. The most
significant changes to impact on Greek religion were the loss of independence
of the Greek city-states to Macedonian rulers; the importation of foreign
deities; and the development of new philosophical systems. Older surveys of
Hellenistic religion tended to depict the era as one of religious decline,
discerning a rise in scepticism, agnosticism and atheism, as well as an
increase in superstition, mysticism, and astrology. There is, however, no
reason to suppose that there was a decline in the traditional religion. There
is plenty of documentary evidence that the Greeks continued to worship the same
gods with the same sacrifices, dedications, and festivals as in the classical
period. New religions did appear in this period, but not to the exclusion of
the local deities, and only a minority of Greeks were attracted to them. New
religions of the period. The Egyptian religion which follows Isis was the most
famous of the new religions. The religion was introduced to Greece by Egyptian
priests, initially for the small Egyptian communities in the port cities of the
Greek world. Although the Egyptian religion found only a small audience among
the Greeks themselves, her popularity spread under the Roman empire, and
Diodorus Siculus wrote that the religion was known throughout almost the whole
inhabited world. Almost as famous was Serapis, a Greek religion despite the
Egyptian name, which was created in Egypt under the Ptolemaic dynasty. Serapis
was patronized by the Greeks who had settled in Egypt. This religion involved
initiation rites like the Eleusinian Mysteries. Strabo wrote of the Serapeion
at Canopus near Alexandria as being patronized by the most reputable men. The
religion of Atargatis (related to the Babylonian and Assyrian Ishtar and
Phoenician Ba`alat Gebal), a fertility- and sea goddess from Syria, was also
popular. By the 3rd century BCE her worship had spread from Syria to Egypt and
Greece, and eventually reached Italy and the west. The religion following
Cybele (or the "Great Mother") came from Phrygia to Greece and then to Egypt
and Italy, where in 204 BCE the Roman Senate permitted her worship. She was a
healing and protecting goddess, and a guardian of fertility and wild nature.
Another mystery religion was focused around Dionysus. Although rare in mainland
Greece, it was common on the islands and in Anatolia. The members were known as
Bacchants, and the rites had an orgiastic character. These newly introduced
religions and gods only had a limited impact within Greece itself; the main
exception was at Delos, which was a major port and trading center. The island
was sacred as the birthplace of Apollo and Artemis, and by the 2nd century BCE
was also home to the native Greek religions that follow Zeus, Athena, Dionysus,
Hermes, Pan, and Asclepius. But there were also cult centers for the Egyptian
Sarapis and Isis, and of the Syrian Atargatis and Hadad. By the 1st century BCE
there were additional religions that followed Ba'al and Astarte, a Jewish
Synagogue and Romans who followed the original Roman religions of gods like
Apollo and Neptune. Ruler cults. Another innovation in the Hellenistic period
was the institution of cults dedicated to the rulers of the Hellenistic
kingdoms. The first of these was established under Alexander, whose conquests,
power, and status had elevated him to a degree that required special
recognition. His successors continued his worship to the point where in Egypt
under Ptolemy I Soter, we find Alexander being honored as a god. Ptolemy's son
Ptolemy II Philadelphus proclaimed his late father a god, and made himself a
living god. By doing so, the Ptolemies were adapting earlier Egyptian ideas in
pharaonic worship. Elsewhere, practice varied; a ruler might receive divine
status without the full status of a god, as occurred in Athens in 307 BCE, when
Antigonus I Monophthalmus and Demetrius I Poliorcetes were honored as saviors
("soteres") for liberating the city, and, as a result, an altar was erected; an
annual festival was founded; and an office of the "priest of the Saviours" was
introduced. Temples dedicated to rulers were rare, but their statues were often
erected in other temples, and the kings would be worshiped as "temple-sharing
gods." Astrology and magic. There is ample evidence for the use of magic in
this period. Oracular shrines and sanctuaries were still popular. There is also
much evidence for the use of charms and curses. Symbols would be placed on the
doors of houses to bring good luck or deter misfortune for the occupants
within. Charms, often cut in precious or semi-precious stone, had protective
power. Figurines, manufactured from bronze, lead, or terracotta, were pierced
with pins or nails, and used to cast spells. Curse tablets made from marble or
metal (especially lead) were used for curses. Astrology - the belief that stars
and planets influence a person's future - arose in Babylonia, where it was
originally only applied to the king or nation. The Greeks, in the Hellenistic
era, elaborated it into the fantastically complex system of Hellenistic
astrology familiar to later times. Interest in astrology grew rapidly from the
1st century BCE onwards. Hellenistic philosophy. An alternative to traditional
religion was offered by Hellenistic philosophy. The most widespread of these
systems was Stoicism, which taught that life should be lived according to the
rational order which the Stoics believed governed the universe; human-beings
had to accept their fate as according to divine will, and virtuous acts should
be performed for their own intrinsic value. Its principal rival was
Epicureanism, which taught that the universe was subject to the random
movements of atoms, and life should be lived to achieve psychological
contentment and the absence of pain. Other philosophers such as the Cynics, who
expressed contempt for convention and material possessions, and the Academics
and Peripatetics, who studied the works of Plato and Aristotle, also
flourished. All of these philosophies, to a greater or lesser extent, sought to
accommodate traditional Greek religion, but the philosophers, and those who
studied under them, remained a small select group, limited largely to the
educated elite.
