Hell In many mythological, folklore and religious traditions, hell is a place
of eternal suffering and punishment in an afterlife, often after resurrection.
Religions with a linear divine history often depict hells as endless. Religions
with a cyclic history often depict a hell as an intermediary period between
incarnations. Typically these traditions locate hell under the Earth's external
surface and often include entrances to Hell from the land of the living. Other
afterlife destinations include Heaven, Purgatory, Paradise, and Limbo. Other
traditions, which do not conceive of the afterlife as a place of punishment or
reward, merely describe hell as an abode of the dead, a neutral place located
under the surface of Earth (for example, see sheol and Hades). Modern
understandings of hells often depict them abstractly, as a state of loss rather
than as fiery torture literally underground, but this view of the concept of a
hell can, in fact, be traced back into the ancient and medieval periods as
well. Hell is sometimes portrayed as populated with demons who torment those
dwelling there. Many are ruled by a death god such as Nergal, Hades, Hel, Enma
or the Devil. Etymology and Germanic mythology. The modern English word "Hell"
is derived from Old English "hel", "helle" (about 725 AD to refer to a nether
world of the dead) reaching into the Anglo-Saxon pagan period, and ultimately
from Proto-Germanic "*halja", meaning "one who covers up or hides something".
The word has cognates in related Germanic languages such as Old Frisian
"helle", "hille", Old Saxon "hellja", Middle Dutch "helle" (modern Dutch
"hel"), Old High German "helle" (Modern German "Hölle"), Danish, Norwegian and
Swedish "helvede"/"helvete" ("hel" + Old Norse "vitti", "punishment" whence the
Icelandic "" "hell"), and Gothic "halja". Subsequently, the word was used to
transfer a pagan concept to Christian theology and its vocabulary (however, for
the Judeo-Christian origin of the concept see Gehenna). The English word "hell"
has been theorized as being derived from Old Norse "hel" but the cognate does
appear in all the other languages and has a Proto-Germanic origin. Among other
sources, the "Poetic Edda", compiled from earlier traditional sources in the
13th century, and the "Prose Edda", written in the 13th century by Snorri
Sturluson, provide information regarding the beliefs of the Norse pagans,
including a being named Hel, who is described as ruling over an underworld
location of the same name. Religion, mythology, and folklore. Hell appears in
several mythologies and religions. It is commonly inhabited by demons and the
souls of dead people. A fable about hell which recurs in folklore across
several cultures is the allegory of the long spoons. Hell is often depicted in
art and literature, perhaps most famously in Dante's "Divine Comedy".
Punishments. Punishment in Hell typically corresponds to sins committed during
life. Sometimes these distinctions are specific, with damned souls suffering
for each sin committed (see for example Plato's myth of Er or Dante's "The
Divine Comedy"), but sometimes they are general, with condemned sinners
relegated to one or more chamber of Hell or to a level of suffering. In many
religious cultures, including Christianity and Islam, Hell is traditionally
depicted as fiery and painful, inflicting guilt and suffering. Despite these
common depictions of Hell as a place of fire, some other traditions portray
Hell as cold. Buddhist - and particularly Tibetan Buddhist - descriptions of
hell feature an equal number of hot and cold hells. Among Christian
descriptions Dante's "Inferno" portrays the innermost (9th) circle of Hell as a
frozen lake of blood and guilt. But cold also played a part in earlier
Christian depictions of hell, beginning with the Apocalypse of Paul, originally
from the early third century; the "Vision of Dryhthelm" by the Venerable Bede
from the seventh century; "St Patrick's Purgatory", "The Vision of Tundale" or
"Visio Tnugdali", and the "Vision of the Monk of Enysham", all from the twelfth
century; and the "Vision of Thurkill" from the early thirteenth century.
Polytheism. Ancient Egypt. With the rise of the cult of Osiris during the
Middle Kingdom the "democratization of religion" offered to even his humblest
followers the prospect of eternal life, with moral fitness becoming the
dominant factor in determining a person's suitability. At death a person faced
judgment by a tribunal of forty-two divine judges. If they had led a life in
conformance with the precepts of the Goddess Maat, who represented truth and
right living, the person was welcomed into the Two Fields. If found guilty the
person was thrown to a "devourer" and didn't share in eternal life. The person
taken by the devourer is subject first to terrifying punishment and then
annihilated. These depictions of punishment may have influenced medieval
perceptions of the inferno in hell via early Christian and Coptic texts.
Purification for those considered justified appears in the descriptions of
"Flame Island", where humans experience the triumph over evil and rebirth. For
the dammed complete destruction into a state of non-being awaits. but there is
no suggestion of eternal torture; the weighing of the heart in Egyptian
Mythology can lead to annihilation. Divine pardon at judgement always remained
a central concern for the Ancient Egyptians. Ancient Near East. The cultures of
Mesopotamia (including Sumeria, the Akkadian Empire, Babylonia and Assyria),
the Hittites and the Canaanites/Ugarits reveal some of the earliest evidence
for the notion of a Netherworld or Underworld. From among the few texts that
survive from these civilizations, this evidence appears in the "Epic of
Gilgamesh," the “Descent of Inanna to the Netherworld,” “Baal and the
Underworld,” the “Descent of Ishtar” and the “Vision of Kummâ.”
Greek. In classic Greek mythology, below Heaven, Earth, and Pontus is Tartarus,
or "Tartaros" (Greek Τάρταρος, deep place). It is either a deep, gloomy
place, a pit or abyss used as a dungeon of torment and suffering that resides
within Hades (the entire underworld) with Tartarus being the hellish component.
In the "Gorgias", Plato (c. 400 BC) wrote that souls were judged after death
and those who received punishment were sent to Tartarus. As a place of
punishment, it can be considered a hell. The classic Hades, on the other hand,
is more similar to Old Testament Sheol. Europe. The hells of Europe include
Breton Mythology's "Anaon", Celtic Mythology's "Uffern", Slavic mythology's
"Peklo", the hell of Sami mythology and Finnish "tuonela" ("manala"). Asia. The
hells of Asia include the Bagobo “Gimokodan” and Ancient Indian mythology's
“Kalichi" or "Naraka". In folklore among the Ainu people, hell is below
ground, and is described as an uninviting wet place reserved for sinful people.
Africa. African hells include Haida Mythology's “Hetgwauge” and the hell of
Swahili Mythology (kuzimu). Serer religion rejects the general notion of heaven
and hell. In Serer religion, acceptance by the ancestors who have long departed
is as close to heaven. Rejection and becoming a wandering soul is as close to
hell after one passes over. The souls of the dead must make their way to
"Jaaniw" (the sacred dwelling place of the soul). Only those who have lived
their lives on earth in accordance with Serer doctrines will be able to make
this necessary journey and thus accepted by the ancestors. Those who can't make
the journey become lost and wandering souls, but they do not burn in "hell
fire". Oceania. The Oceanic hells include Samoan Mythology's “O le nu'u-o-
nonoa” and the hells of Bangka Mythology and Caroline Islands Mythology.
Native American. The hells of the Americas include the Aztec religion's
“Mictlan”, Inuit religion's “Adlivun”, and the Yanomami religion's
“Shobari Waka”. In Mayan religion, "Xibalbá" is the dangerous underworld
of nine levels ruled by the demons "Vucub Caquix" and "Hun Came". The road into
and out of it is said to be steep, thorny and very forbidding. "Metnal" is the
lowest and most horrible of the nine Hells of the underworld, ruled by "Ah
Puch". Ritual healers would intone healing prayers banishing diseases to
"Metnal". Much of the Popol Vuh describes the adventures of the Maya Hero Twins
in their cunning struggle with the evil lords of "Xibalbá". The Aztecs
believed that the dead traveled to Mictlan, a neutral place found far to the
north. There was also a legend of a place of white flowers, which was always
dark, and was home to the gods of death, particularly Mictlantecutli and his
spouse Mictlantecihuatl, which means literally "lords of Mictlan". The journey
to Mictlan took four years, and the travelers had to overcome difficult tests,
such as passing a mountain range where the mountains crashed into each other, a
field where the wind carried flesh-scraping knives, and a river of blood with
fearsome jaguars. Abrahamic. Judaism. Early Judaism had no concept of Hell,
though the concept of an afterlife was introduced during the Hellenic period,
apparently from neighboring Hellenistic religions. It occurs for example in
Book of Daniel. Daniel 12:2 proclaims "And many of those who sleep in the dust
of the earth shall awake, Some to everlasting life, Some to shame and
everlasting contempt." Judaism does not have a specific doctrine about the
afterlife, but it does have a mystical/Orthodox tradition of describing
Gehenna. Gehenna is not Hell, but originally a grave and in later times a sort
of Purgatory where one is judged based on one's life's deeds, or rather, where
one becomes fully aware of one's own shortcomings and negative actions during
one's life. The Kabbalah explains it as a "waiting room" (commonly translated
as an "entry way") for all souls (not just the wicked). The overwhelming
majority of rabbinic thought maintains that people are not in Gehenna forever;
the longest that one can be there is said to be 12 months, however there has
been the occasional noted exception. Some consider it a spiritual forge where
the soul is purified for its eventual ascent to Olam Habah ("heb." עולם
הבא; "lit." "The world to come", often viewed as analogous to Heaven). This
is also mentioned in the Kabbalah, where the soul is described as breaking,
like the flame of a candle lighting another: the part of the soul that ascends
being pure and the "unfinished" piece being reborn. According to Jewish
teachings, hell is not entirely physical; rather, it can be compared to a very
intense feeling of shame. People are ashamed of their misdeeds and this
constitutes suffering which makes up for the bad deeds. When one has so
deviated from the will of God, one is said to be in gehinom. This is not meant
to refer to some point in the future, but to the very present moment. The gates
of teshuva (return) are said to be always open, and so one can align his will
with that of God at any moment. Being out of alignment with God's will is
itself a punishment according to the Torah. Christianity. The Christian
doctrine of hell derives from the teaching of the New Testament, where hell is
typically described using the Greek words "Tartarus" or "Hades" or the Hebrew
word "Gehenna". These three terms have different meanings and must be
recognized. The Roman Catholic Church defines Hell as "a state of definitive
self-exclusion from communion with God and the blessed." One finds themselves
in Hell as the result of dying in mortal sin without repenting and accepting
God's merciful love, becoming eternally separated from Him by one's own free
choice immediately after death. The Roman Catholic Church, many other Christian
churches, such as the Baptists and Episcopalians, and some Greek Orthodox
churches, Hell is taught as the final destiny of those who have not been found
worthy after the general resurrection and last judgment, where they will be
eternally punished for sin and permanently separated from God. The nature of
this judgment is inconsistent with many Protestant churches teaching the saving
comes from accepting Jesus Christ as their savior, while the Greek Orthodox and
Catholic Churches teach that the judgment hinges on both faith and works.
However, many Liberal Christians throughout Liberal Protestant, Anglican and
some Orthodox churches believe in Universal Reconciliation (see below) even
though it might contradict more evangelical views in their denomination. Some
modern Christian theologians subscribe to the doctrines of Conditional
Immortality. Conditional Immortality is the belief that the soul dies with the
body and does not live again until the resurrection. This is the view held by a
few Christian sects such as the Living Church of God, The Church of God
International, and Seventh Day Adventist Church. Annihilationism is the belief
that the soul is mortal unless granted eternal life, making it possible to be
destroyed in Hell. Jehovah's Witnesses hold that the soul ceases to exist when
the person dies and therefore that Hell (Sheol or Hades) is a state of non-
existence. In their theology, Gehenna differs from Sheol or Hades in that it
holds no hope of a resurrection. Tatarus is held to be the metaphorical state
of debasement of the fallen angels between the time of their moral fall
(Genesis chapter 6) until their post-millennial destruction along with Satan
(Revelation chapter 20). Universal Reconciliation is the belief that all human
souls (even demons and fallen angels) will be eventually reconciled with God
and admitted to Heaven. This view is held by some Unitarian-Universalists.
According to Emanuel Swedenborg’s Second Coming Christian revelation, hell
exists because evil people want it. They, not God, introduced evil to the human
race. Islam. Muslims believe in "jahannam" (in Arabic: جهنم) (which is
related to the Hebrew word "gehinnom" and resembles the versions of Hell in
Christianity). In the Qur'an, the holy book of Islam, there are literal
descriptions of the condemned in a fiery Hell, as contrasted to the garden-like
Paradise ("jannah") enjoyed by righteous believers. In addition, Heaven and
Hell are split into many different levels depending on the actions perpetrated
in life, where punishment is given depending on the level of evil done in life,
and good is separated into other levels depending on how well one followed God
while alive. The gate of Hell is guarded by Maalik who is the leader of the
angels assigned as the guards of hell also known as "Zabaaniyah". Although
generally Hell is often portrayed as a hot steaming and tormenting place for
sinners, there is one Hell pit which is characterized differently from the
other Hell in Islamic tradition. "Zamhareer" is the Hell of extreme coldness,
of unbearable blizzards, ice, and snow. The lowest pit of Hell is Hawiyah,
meant for those hypocrites who claimed aloud to believe in Allah and His
messenger but denounced both in their hearts. Hypocrisy is considered to be one
of the most dangerous sins, along with shirk. Bahá'í Faith. In the Bahá'í
Faith, the conventional descriptions of Hell and Heaven are considered to be
symbolic representations of spiritual conditions. The Bahá'í writings
describe closeness to God to be heaven, and conversely, remoteness from God as
hell. Eastern. Buddhism. In "Devaduta Sutta", the 130th discourse of the
Majjhima Nikaya, Buddha teaches about the hell in vivid detail. Buddhism
teaches that there are five (sometimes six) realms of rebirth, which can then
be further subdivided into degrees of agony or pleasure. Of these realms, the
hell realms, or "Naraka", is the lowest realm of rebirth. Of the hell realms,
the worst is "Avīci" or "endless suffering". The Buddha's disciple, Devadatta,
who tried to kill the Buddha on three occasions, as well as create a schism in
the monastic order, is said to have been reborn in the Avici Hell. However,
like all realms of rebirth, rebirth in the Hell realms is not permanent, though
suffering can persist for eons before being reborn again. In the Lotus Sutra,
the Buddha teaches that eventually even Devadatta will become a Pratyekabuddha
himself, emphasizing the temporary nature of the Hell realms. Thus, Buddhism
teaches to escape the endless migration of rebirths (both positive and
negative) through the attainment of Nirvana. The Bodhisattva Ksitigarbha,
according to the Ksitigarbha Sutra, made a great vow as a young girl to not
reach Nirvana until all beings were liberated from the Hell Realms or other
unwholesome rebirths. In popular literature, Ksitigarbha travels to the Hell
realms to teach and relieve beings of their suffering. Hinduism. Early Vedic
religion doesn't have a concept of Hell. Ṛg-veda mentions three realms, bhūr
(the earth), svar (the sky) and bhuvas or antarikṣa (the middle area, i.e.
air or atmosphere)). In later Hindu literature, especially the law books and
Puranas, more realms are mentioned, including a realm similar to Hell, called
naraka (in Devanāgarī: नरक). Yama as first born human (together with
his twin sister Yamī) in virtue of precedence becomes ruler of men and a judge
on their departure. Originally he resides in Heaven, but later, especially
medieval traditions, mention his court in naraka. In the law-books (smṛtis
and dharma-sūtras, like the Manu-smṛti) naraka is a place of punishment for
sins. It is a lower spiritual plane (called naraka-loka) where the spirit is
judged, or partial fruits of karma affected in a next life. In Mahabharata
there is a mention of the Pandavas and the Kauravas both going to Heaven.At
first Yudhisthir goes to heaven where he sees Duryodhana enjoying in heaven,
Indra tells him Duryodhana is in heaven as he did his Kshatriya duties, then he
shows Yudhisthir hell where it appears his brothers are but later its revealed
it was a test for Yudhisthir and his brothers and Kauravas both are in heaven
and both live happily in divine abode of gods. Hells are also described in
various Puranas and other scriptures. Garuda Purana gives a detailed account of
Hell, its features and enlists amount of punishment for most of the crimes like
a modern day penal code. It is believed that people who commit sins go to Hell
and have to go through punishments in accordance with the sins they committed.
The god Yamarāja, who is also the god of death, presides over Hell. Detailed
accounts of all the sins committed by an individual are kept by Chitragupta,
who is the record keeper in Yama's court. Chitragupta reads out the sins
committed and Yama orders appropriate punishments to be given to individuals.
These punishments include dipping in boiling oil, burning in fire, torture
using various weapons, etc. in various Hells. Individuals who finish their
quota of the punishments are reborn in accordance with their balance of karma.
All created beings are imperfect and thus have at least one sin to their
record; but if one has generally led a pious life, one ascends to svarga, a
temporary realm of enjoinment similar to Paradise, after a brief period of
expiation in Hell and before the next reincarnation according to the law of
karma. Jainism. In Jain cosmology, Naraka (translated as hell) is the name
given to realm of existence having great suffering. However, a Naraka differs
from the hells of Abrahamic religions as souls are not sent to Naraka as the
result of a divine judgment and punishment. Furthermore, length of a being's
stay in a Naraka is not eternal, though it is usually very long—measured in
billions of years. A soul is born into a Naraka as a direct result of his or
her previous karma (actions of body, speech and mind), and resides there for a
finite length of time until his karma has achieved its full result. After his
karma is used up, he may be reborn in one of the higher worlds as the result of
an earlier karma that had not yet ripened. Taoism. Ancient Taoism had no
concept of Hell, as morality was seen to be a man-made distinction and there
was no concept of an immaterial soul. In its home country China, where Taoism
adopted tenets of other religions, popular belief endows Taoist Hell with many
deities and spirits who punish sin in a variety of horrible ways. This is also
considered Karma for Taoism. Chinese folk beliefs. "Diyu" (; Japanese: 地獄,
"jigoku"; literally "earth prison") is the realm of the dead in Chinese
mythology. It is very loosely based upon the Buddhist concept of Naraka
combined with traditional Chinese afterlife beliefs and a variety of popular
expansions and re-interpretations of these two traditions. Ruled by Yanluo
Wang, the King of Hell, Diyu is a maze of underground levels and chambers where
souls are taken to atone for their earthly sins. Incorporating ideas from
Taoism and Buddhism as well as traditional Chinese folk religion, Diyu is a
kind of purgatory place which serves not only to punish but also to renew
spirits ready for their next incarnation. There are many deities associated
with the place, whose names and purposes are the subject of much conflicting
information. The exact number of levels in Chinese Hell - and their associated
deities - differs according to the Buddhist or Taoist perception. Some speak of
three to four 'Courts', other as many as ten. The ten judges are also known as
the 10 Kings of Yama. Each Court deals with a different aspect of atonement.
For example, murder is punished in one Court, adultery in another. According to
some Chinese legends, there are eighteen levels in Hell. Punishment also varies
according to belief, but most legends speak of highly imaginative chambers
where wrong-doers are sawn in half, beheaded, thrown into pits of filth or
forced to climb trees adorned with sharp blades. However, most legends agree
that once a soul (usually referred to as a 'ghost') has atoned for their deeds
and repented, he or she is given the Drink of Forgetfulness by Meng Po and sent
back into the world to be reborn, possibly as an animal or a poor or sick
person, for further punishment. Other. Zoroastrianism. Zoroastrianism has
historically suggested several possible fates for the wicked, including
annihilation, purgation in molten metal, and eternal punishment, all of which
have standing in Zoroaster's writings. Zoroastrian eschatology includes the
belief that wicked souls will remain in hell until, following the arrival of
three saviors at thousand-year intervals, Ahura Mazda reconciles the world,
destroying evil and resurrecting tormented souls to perfection. The sacred
Gathas mention a “House of the Lie″ for those “that are of an evil
dominion, of evil deeds, evil words, evil Self, and evil thought, Liars.”
However, the best-known Zoroastrian text to describe hell in detail is the Book
of Arda Viraf. It depicts particular punishments for particular sins—for
instance, being trampled by cattle as punishment for neglecting the needs of
work animals. Other descriptions can be found in the "Book of Scriptures
(Hadhokht Nask), Religious Judgments (Dadestan-i Denig)" and the "Book of the
Judgments of the Spirit of Wisdom (Mainyo-I-Khard)". Wicca. In Wicca, there is
no such thing as hell because Wiccans largely don't believe in the concept of
punishment or reward. Although Wiccan views differ among different Wiccan
denominations, Wiccans tend to prefer viewing their god or goddess as a gentle
deity. Literature. In his "Divina commedia" ("Divine comedy"; set in the year
1300), Dante Alighieri employed the concept of taking Virgil as his guide
through Inferno (and then, in the second canticle, up the mountain of
Purgatorio). Virgil himself is not condemned to Hell in Dante's poem but is
rather, as a virtuous pagan, confined to Limbo just at the edge of Hell. The
geography of Hell is very elaborately laid out in this work, with nine
concentric rings leading deeper into the Earth and deeper into the various
punishments of Hell, until, at the center of the world, Dante finds Satan
himself trapped in the frozen lake of Cocytus. A small tunnel leads past Satan
and out to the other side of the world, at the base of the Mount of Purgatory.
John Milton's "Paradise Lost" (1667) opens with the fallen angels, including
their leader Satan, waking up in Hell after having been defeated in the war in
heaven and the action returns there at several points throughout the poem.
Milton portrays Hell as the abode of the demons, and the passive prison from
which they plot their revenge upon Heaven through the corruption of the human
race. 19th century French poet Arthur Rimbaud alluded to the concept as well in
the title and themes of one of his major works, "A Season In Hell". Rimbaud's
poetry portrays his own suffering in a poetic form as well as other themes.
Many of the great epics of European literature include episodes that occur in
Hell. In the Roman poet Virgil's Latin epic, the "Aeneid", Aeneas descends into
Dis (the underworld) to visit his father's spirit. The underworld is only
vaguely described, with one unexplored path leading to the punishments of
Tartarus, while the other leads through Erebus and the Elysian Fields. The idea
of Hell was highly influential to writers such as Jean-Paul Sartre who authored
the 1944 play "No Exit" about the idea that "Hell is other people". Although
not a religious man, Sartre was fascinated by his interpretation of a Hellish
state of suffering. C.S. Lewis's "The Great Divorce" (1945) borrows its title
from William Blake's "Marriage of Heaven and Hell" (1793) and its inspiration
from the Divine Comedy as the narrator is likewise guided through Hell and
Heaven. Hell is portrayed here as an endless, desolate twilight city upon which
night is imperceptibly sinking. The night is actually the Apocalypse, and it
heralds the arrival of the demons after their judgment. Before the night comes,
anyone can escape Hell if they leave behind their former selves and accept
Heaven's offer, and a journey to Heaven reveals that Hell is infinitely small;
it is nothing more or less than what happens to a soul that turns away from God
and into itself. Piers Anthony in his series "Incarnations of Immortality"
portrays examples of Heaven and Hell via Death, Fate, Nature, War, Time, Good-
God, and Evil-Devil. Robert A. Heinlein offers a yin-yang version of Hell where
there is still some good within; most evident in his book . Lois McMaster
Bujold uses her five Gods 'Father, Mother, Son, Daughter and Bastard' in The
Curse of Chalion with an example of Hell as formless chaos. Michael Moorcock is
one of many who offer Chaos-Evil-(Hell) and Uniformity-Good-(Heaven) as equally
unacceptable extremes which must be held in balance; in particular in the Elric
and Eternal Champion series. Fredric Brown wrote a number of fantasy short
stories about Satan’s activities in Hell. Cartoonist Jimmy Hatlo created a
series of cartoons about life in Hell called "The Hatlo Inferno", which ran
from 1953 to 1958.
