Henotheism Henotheism (Greek "heis theos" "one god") is the belief and worship
of a single god while accepting the existence or possible existence of other
deities that may also be worshipped. The term was originally coined by
Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph von Schelling (1775–1854) to depict early stages of
monotheism, however Max Müller (1823–1900), a German philologist and
orientalist, brought the term into common usage. Müller made the term central
to his criticism of Western theological and religious exceptionalism (relative
to Eastern religions), focusing on a cultural dogma which held "monotheism" to
be both fundamentally well-defined and inherently superior to differing
conceptions of God. Variations. Variations on the term have been "inclusive
monotheism" and "monarchical polytheism", designed to differentiate differing
forms of the phenomenon. Related terms are monolatrism and kathenotheism, which
are typically understood as sub-types of henotheism. The latter term is an
extension of "henotheism", from ("kath' hena theon") —"one god at a time".
Henotheism is similar but less exclusive than monolatry because a monolator
worships only one god (denying that other gods are worthy of worship), while
the henotheist may worship any within the pantheon, depending on circumstances,
although they usually will worship only one throughout their life (barring some
sort of conversion). In some belief systems, the choice of the supreme deity
within a henotheistic framework may be determined by cultural, geographical,
historical or political reasons. Henotheism in various religions. Classical
Greco-Roman. The Neoplatonic philosopher Plotinus taught that above the gods of
traditional belief was "The One" and polytheist grammarian Maximus of Madauros
even stated that only a mad person would deny the existence of the supreme God.
Hinduism. Contemporary Hinduism is mostly monistic, or in some instances
monotheistic (see Hindu views on monotheism). The concept of Brahman implies a
"transcendent and immanent" reality, which different schools of thought
variously interpret as personal, impersonal or transpersonal. With the rise of
Shaivism and Vaishnavism in the early centuries of the Common era, Hinduism is
generally monistic and henotheistic: there is practically a consensus that
there is a supreme, absolute, and omnipresent divine entity. Of the four major
sects, Shaivism, Vaishnavism, and Shaktism each regard only one specific Indic
deity (Shiva, Vishnu, or Shakti) as the supreme being and principal object of
worship, whereas all other divinities are considered merely "sub-gods" or
manifestations of it. Smartism is also monistic, but does not single out one
specific Indic deity but a pentad of gods - the "Panchayatana", which includes
Shiva, Vishnu, Surya, Devi, and Ganesha. The multitude of deities, or Devas, of
the historical Vedic religion have a subordinate and secondary status vis-a-vis
the One Supreme God, a status that some authors have even tried to express by
comparing it to that of Western demigods or angels; Prakashanand Saraswati, in
"The true history and the religion of India", prefers the term "celestial
gods". The Rigveda was the basis for Max Müller's description of henotheism in
the sense of a polytheistic tradition striving towards a formulation of The One
("ekam") Divinity aimed at by the worship of different cosmic principles. From
this mix of monism, monotheism and naturalist polytheism Max Müller decided to
name the early Vedic religion henotheistic. A prime example of the monistic
aspects of the late Rigveda is the Nasadiya sukta, a hymn describing creation:
"That One breathed by itself without breath, other than it there has been
nothing." Christianity. Some Christians believe in the spiritual beings angels
and demons that are ontologically inferior to God. Christian churches maintain
such beings are distinct from "gods", even though some churches authorize
supplication, prayer and veneration of heavenly beings, angels, and saints,
Christians who died in a state of grace and are believed to be in Heaven. This
acknowledgment of heavenly beings during Christian prayer is practiced in
Catholicism, Anglicanism, Oriental Orthodoxy, Eastern Orthodoxy. and some parts
of Lutheranism. Such churches teach these supernatural beings do not possess
any power independent of God, and maintain that veneration is properly limited
to intercession with God (that is, praying to God on behalf of the petitioner).
In this view any miracles resulting from the veneration of heavenly beings are
fully attributable to God alone, and not through the powers of lesser beings.
The honor given to these beings is defined in Catholic theology as "dulia", or
veneration, whereas adoration or worship ("latria") is reserved for the Trinity
alone. To Christian monotheists, such formalized worship of an angelic or
beatified figure as is present in Hinduism reflects the heresy of polytheism,
henotheism, or monolatry. The majority of Protestant denominations further
maintain that veneration of saints involves an act of essential worship
dissonant with Christian salvation, holding that philosophical distinctions
between "dulia" and "latria" are indistinguishable in practice. One of the five
solas of the Protestant reformation is Soli Deo gloria, or "glory to God
alone". Mormonism. Mormons worship the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, "in
the name of" Jesus Christ (the Son of God), and by the guidance of the Holy
Spirit. Each is acknowledged to be a member of the Godhead and to be God.
Mormonism also teaches that people can be joint-heirs with Jesus Christ,
eventually becoming gods themselves. In contrast to other branches of
Christianity, Mormon theology considers God the Father, God the Son, and God
the Holy Spirit to be three separate gods united in will and purpose, (see
social trinitarianism) as opposed to the orthodox view of three "hypostases"
sharing in one Divine nature or essence ("ousia"), with the three members of
the Godhead co-eternal and co-equal, together adored (worshiped, given
"latria") and glorified. Judaism. Modern Rabbinical Judaism is monotheistic,
but its Canaanite religion antecedent in ancient Israel and Judah (10th to 7th
centuries BC) was henotheistic. For example, the Moabites worshipped the god
Chemosh, the Edomites, Qaus, both of whom were part of the greater Canaanite
pantheon, headed by the chief god, El. The Canaanite pantheon consisted of El
and Asherah as the chief deities, with 70 sons who were said to rule over each
of the nations of the earth. These sons were each worshiped within a specific
region. K. L. Noll states that "the Bible preserves a tradition that Yahweh
used to 'live' in the south, in the land of Edom" and that the original god of
Israel was El Shaddai. Several Biblical stories allude to the belief that the
Canaanite gods all existed and possessed the most power in the lands that
worshiped them or in their sacred objects; their power was real and could be
invoked by the people who patronised them. There are numerous accounts of
surrounding nations of Israel showing fear or reverence for the Israelite God
despite their continued polytheistic practices. For instance, in 1 Samuel 4,
the Philistines fret before the second battle of Aphek when they learn that the
Israelites are bearing the Ark of the Covenant, and therefore Yahweh, into
battle. In 2 Kings 5, the Aramean general Naaman insists on transporting
Israelite soil back with him to Syria in the belief that only then will Yahweh
have the power to heal him. The Israelites were forbidden to worship other
deities, but according to some interpretations of the Bible, they were not
fully monotheistic before the Babylonian Captivity. Mark S. Smith refers to
this stage as a form of monolatry. Smith argues that Yahweh underwent a process
of merging with El and that acceptance of cults of Asherah was common in the
period of the Judges. 2 Kings 3:27 has been interpreted as describing a human
sacrifice in Moab that led the invading Israelite army to fear the power of
Chemosh. According to the Five Books of Moses, Abraham is revered as the one
who overcame the idol worship of his family and surrounding people by
recognizing the Hebrew God and establishing a covenant with him and creating
the foundation of what has been called by scholars "Ethical Monotheism". The
first of the Ten Commandments can be interpreted to forbid the Children of
Israel from worshiping any other god but the one true God who had revealed
himself at Mount Sinai and given them the Torah, however it can also be read as
henotheistic, since it states that they should have "no other gods before me."
The commandment itself does not affirm or deny the existence of other deities
"per se". Nevertheless, as recorded in the Tanakh ("Old Testament" Bible), in
defiance of the Torah's teachings, the patron god YHWH was frequently
worshipped in conjunction with other gods such as Baal, Asherah, and El. Over
time, this tribal god may have assumed all the appellations of the other gods
in the eyes of the people. The destruction of the Jewish Temple in Jerusalem
and the exile to Babylon was considered a divine reprimand and punishment for
the mistaken worship of other deities. By the end of the Babylonian captivity
of Judah in the Tanakh, Judaism is strictly monotheistic. There are nonetheless
seeming elements of "polytheism" in certain biblical books, such as in Daniel's
frequent use of the honorific "God of gods" and especially in the Psalms.
Jewish scholars were aware of this, and expressed the opinion that although the
verse can be understood wrongly, God was not afraid to write it in the Torah.
However, the word "God" in Hebrew ("Elohim") is also a plural, meaning
"powerful ones" or "rulers". This is true in Hebrew as well as other related
Canaanite languages. So "Elohim" could refer to any number of "rulers", such as
angels, false gods (as defined by Torah), or even human holders of power
including rulers or judges within Israel, as described in , without violating
the parameters of monotheism. Some scholars believe that describes the moment
when YHWH first tells Moses that he is the same god as El, the supreme being.
This could be the recounting, in mythical form, of Israel's conversion to
monotheism. Islam. The majority of inhabitants of Pre-Islamic Arabia were
henotheists. The Qur'anic term for their religious doctrine is "shirk" (i.e.,
"sharing"); it describes them as "mushrikin" (i.e., those who believe in God,
but "share" other Gods in divinity). Pre-Islamic Arabs believed in a supreme
God, and the word they used for him ("Allah") is the same one used in Islam.
But they did believe in lesser gods too. The unequivocal monotheism of Islam
(often described as the foundation of the religion and its most fundamental
article of faith) arose as a reaction to this belief system. Of course, "shirk"
is a very pejorative term in Islam, and is considered one of (if not) the
gravest of sins. The Qur'an (Al-Nisa: 48) says that God can forgive anything
except shirk. Islam teaches the belief in angels who always act on the command
of the supreme God, most prominently the archangels Jibrail, Mikail, Israfil
and Azrail. There also exists the belief in jinns, spiritual beings that can
have either positive or negative dispositions towards God and humans, and who
at rare times intervene in human lives. Islam, however, does not allow their
followers intercession with jinns, angels, or proclaimed saints. Invocations
and prayers are only permissible when they are directed towards the supreme
God.. Egyptian religions. While the ancient Egyptian beliefs usually recognized
many gods, worship was often focused primarily upon a supreme deity, and this
focus also changed from time to time. When Amenhotep IV became Pharaoh (circa
1353 BC), the supreme deity was considered to be Amun-Ra (itself the result of
an earlier rise to prominence of the cult of Amun, resulting in Amun becoming
merged with the sun god Ra). Gradually, the new pharaoh shifted the focus to
the god Aten, eventually declaring that Aten was not merely the supreme god,
but the only god. He changed his own name to "Akhenaten" and eventually ordered
removal from the temples of the name Amun (as well as references to the plural
'gods'). After his death, the prior religious establishment was restored to
power, and Amun-Ra once again became supreme, among many lesser deities. Dacian
and Thracian religions. In ancient Dacia the cult of Zalmoxis had grown into a
wide spread henotheistic religion by the seventh century BC. Even though the
Dacians had many other deities Zalmoxis was regarded as "the one true god" by
most Dacians and many Thracians. During King Burebista's reign the year of
Zalmoxis' death was marked as the first day of the Dacian calendar. Henotheism
and monolatry. Henotheism is closely related to the theistic concept of
monolatry, which is also the worship of one god among many. The primary
difference between the two is that henotheism is the worship of one god, not
precluding the existence of others who may also be worthy of praise, while
Monolatry is the worship of one god who alone is worthy of worship, though
other gods are known to exist.
