Herem (war or property) Herem or cherem (Hebrew: חרם, "ḥērem"), as used
in the Tanakh, means ‘devote’ or ‘destroy’. It is also referred to as
the ban. The term has been explained in different ways by scholars. It has been
defined as "a mode of secluding, and rendering harmless, anything imperilling
the religious life of the nation," or "the total destruction of the enemy and
his goods at the conclusion of a campaign," or "uncompromising consecration of
property and dedication of the property to God without possibility of recall or
redemption. J. A. Thompson suggests that "herem" meant that in the hour of
victory all that would normally be regarded as booty, including the inhabitants
of the land, was to be devoted to God. Thus would every harmful thing be burned
out and the land purified. Etymology. The word comes from the semitic root "H-
R-M". In the masoretic text of the Tanakch the verb form occurs 51 times, while
the noun occurs 28 times. Although the word itself simply means devotion to God
(and is used this way in Leviticus 27:28), it most often refers to "a ban for
utter destruction". There is also a homonym, "herem", meaning fisherman's net,
which occurs 9 times in the masoretic text and is traditionally regarded as
etymologically unrelated, according to Gesenius and Brown Driver Briggs
Lexicons and older sources. English translation. This idea first appears in
Numbers 21:2, and is translated in a variety of ways in English translations:
Sources. The word is often used in the Book of Joshua, where cities such as
Jericho and Ai came under "herem". This meant they had to be completely
destroyed, except for "the silver and gold and the articles of bronze and iron"
which were to go into "YHWH's treasury" (Joshua 6:19). The following chapter
describes how Achan kept back some items for himself, and was executed by
stoning. Indeed, Achan is himself described as something "devoted to
destruction" (Joshua 7:12). Deuteronomy 20 also names six people groups who
were to be under the ban: the Hittites, Amorites, Canaanites, Perizzites,
Hivites and Jebusites. This has led to the conquest of Canaan being referred to
as genocide. For example, Ra'anan Boustan calls this "a thoroughly violent
commandment" which "in modern terms would be characterized as genocide." The
concept of "herem" also appears in 1 Samuel 15, where Saul "totally destroyed"
(verse 8, NIV) the Amalekites with the sword, but spared their king, Agag, and
kept "the best of the sheep and cattle, the fat calves and lambs—everything
that was good." For this, Saul is rebuked by Samuel, who reminds him that God
had commanded him to "completely destroy" the Amalekites (verse 15). Samuel
"hacked Agag to pieces" himself (verse 33, ESV). Most scholars conclude that
the biblical accounts of extermination are exaggerated, fictional, or
metaphorical. In the archaeological community, the Battle of Jericho is very
thoroughly studied, and the consensus of modern scholars is that the story of
battle and the associated extermination are a pious fiction and did not happen
as described in the Book of Joshua. For example, the Book of Joshua describes
the extermination of the Canaanite tribes, yet at a later time, suggests that
the extermination was not complete. The word "herem" is the last word of the
prophetic books of the Hebrew Bible: "...lest I come and strike the land with a
decree of utter destruction" (Malachi 4:6, ESV). Meaning and significance.
William Dumbrell suggests that "the ban appears to have been conceived as an
acknowledgment of Yahweh's help." He also notes that "everything likely to
contaminate Israel religiously" was destroyed, and thus the institution of the
ban was "designed not to counter a military threat but to counter a religious
threat." Similarly, Balchin argues that "drastic action was required to keep
Israel in holy existence." Lilley argues that "Israel, like other contemporary
societies, did not recognise any distinction between sacred and secular war,"
and that "holy war" is not a biblical term, "but one invented or at least
appropriated by commentators." Lilley goes on to suggest that essence of the
idea of "herem" is an "irrevocable renunciation of any interest" in the object
'devoted', and thus "so far as persons are concerned, the options of
enslavement and treaty are not available." He contests the idea that it always
involved things imperilling the religious life of the nation, arguing that
these things "were to be destroyed out of hand, not given to the sanctuary."
Longman and Reid suggest that we should see "herem" as a "sacrifice of the
occupants of Canaan in the interest of securing the purity of the land." The
concept of "herem" was not unique to Israel. The Mesha Stele contains a
statement by King Mesha of Moab that he captured the town of Nebo and killed
all seven thousand people there, "for I had devoted them to destruction for
(the god) Ashtar-Chemosh." Ethical issues. Theologians and other scholars have
commented on the apparent ethical and moral dilemmas posed by the wars of
extermination, particularly the killing of women and children. Maimonides
applies the rules from Deuteronomy 20:10 (the rules governing discretionary
wars) to the war on the Canaanite nation, and suggests that the commandment to
exterminate the Canaanites was not absolute. He writes that Joshua gave the
Canaanites three options: to flee, to remain and make peace with the
Israelites, or to fight. Rabbi Gunther Plaut asserted that the Torah, itself,
never addresses the morality of the wars of extermination. Biblical scholar
Sidney Hoenig discussed the "brutality" in the book of Joshua, but concluded
that the "battle is only in honor of God". The Mennonite scholar John Howard
Yoder suggests that the concept of "herem" was unique in relation to the
morality of the time not in its violence, but in ensuring that "war does not
become a source of immediate enrichment through plunder", and hence was the
beginning of a trajectory that would lead ultimately to the teaching of
nonviolence. Scholars Ian Lustick and Leonard B. Glick quote Shlomo Aviner as
saying "from the point of view of mankind's humanistic morality we were in the
wrong in the land from the Canaanites. There is only one catch. The command of
God ordered us to be the people of the Land of Israel". Scholar Carl Ehrlich
states that Jewish commentators have tended to be silent regarding the morality
of the violence in the Book of Joshua. Prominent atheist Richard Dawkins
asserts that the commandments to exterminate are immoral. Some scholars claim
that collective punishment, particularly punishment of descendants for
transgressions committed by ancestors, is common in the Jewish Bible--a view
based primarily on repeated descriptions (with slightly varied wording) of God
as "a jealous God, punishing the children for the sin of the fathers to the
third and fourth generation . . . but showing love to a thousand {generations}
of those who love me and keep my commandments" As genocide. Several scholars
and commentators have characterized the wars of extermination as genocide.
Scholar Pekka Pitkanen asserts that Deuteronomy involves "demonization of the
opponent" which is typical of genocide, and he asserts that the genocide of the
Canaanites was due to unique circumstances, and that "the biblical material
should not be read as giving license for repeating it." Scholar Philip Jenkins
characterizes the warfare of the Bible as genocidal, and considers the laws of
warfare in the Qu'ran to be more humane than the Biblical rules. Justifications
and rationalizations. Several justifications and explanations for the extreme
violence associated with the wars of extermination have been offered, some
found in the Jewish Bible, others provided by Rabbinic commentators, and others
hypothesized by scholars. In God tells the Israelites to exterminate the
Canaanite nations, "otherwise, they will teach you to follow all the detestable
things they do in worshiping their gods, and you will sin against the lord your
God". Another reason, justifying the war against the Midianites, was revenge
for Midian's role in Israel's apostate behavior during the Heresy of Peor ().
Another justification is that the Canaanites were sinful, depraved people, and
their deaths were punishments (). Another justification for the exterminations
is to make room for the returning Israelites, who are entitled to exclusive
occupation of the land of Canaan: the Canaanite nations were living in the land
of Israel, but when the Israelites returned, the Canaanites were expected to
leave the land. In Talmudic commentary, the Canaanite nations were given the
opportunity to leave, and their refusal to leave "lay the onus of blame for the
conquest and Joshua's extirpation of the Canaanites at the feet of the
victims." Another explanation of the exterminations is that God gave the land
to the Canaanites only temporarily, until the Israelites would arrive, and the
Canaanites extermination was punishment for their refusal to obey God's desire
that they leave. Another Talmudic explanation - for the wars in the Book of
Joshua - was that God initiated the wars as a diversionary tactic so Israelites
would not kill Joshua after discovering that Joshua had forgotten certain laws.
Some scholars trace the extermination of the Midianites to revenge for the fact
that Midianites were responsible for selling Joseph into slavery in Egypt ().
Association with violent attitudes in the modern era. Some analysts have
associated the biblical commandments of extermination with violent attitudes in
modern era. According to Ian Lustick, leaders of the Jewish fundamentalist
movement Gush Emunim, such as Hanan Porat, consider the Palestinians to be like
Canaanites or Amalekites, and suggest that infers a duty to make merciless war
against Arabs who reject Jewish sovereignty. Atheist commentator Christopher
Hitchens discusses the association of the "obliterated" tribes with modern
troubles in Palestine. Biblical scholar Niels Peter Lemche asserts that
European colonialism in the nineteenth century was ideologically based on the
biblical narratives of conquest and extermination. He also states that European
Jews who migrated to Palestine relied on the biblical ideology of conquest and
extermination, and considered the Arabs to be Canaanites. Scholar Arthur Grenke
claims that the view or war expressed in Deuteronomy contributed to the
destruction of Native Americans and to the destruction of European Jewry.
Scholar Nur Masalha writes that the "genocide" of the extermination
commandments has been "kept before subsequent generations" and served as
inspirational examples of divine support for slaughtering enemies. Scholar
Ra'anan S. Boustan asserts that militant Zionists have identified modern
Palestinians with Canaanites, and hence as targets of violence mandated in Deut
20:15-18. Scholar Leonard B. Glick states that Jewish fundamentalists in
Israel, such as Shlomo Aviner, consider the Palestinians to be like biblical
Canaanites, and that some fundamentalist leaders suggest that they "must be
prepared to destroy" the Palestinians if the Palestinians do not leave the
land. Scholar Keith Whitelam asserts that the Zionist movement has drawn
inspiration from the biblical conquest tradition, and Whitelam draws parallels
between the "genocidal Israelites" of Joshua and modern Zionists. Contrary
views. Wars of extermination are of historical interest only, and do not serve
as a model within Judaism. A formal declaration that the “seven nations”
are no longer identifiable was made by Joshua ben Hananiah, around the year 100
CE. Scholar Moshe Greenberg asserts that the laws of extermination applied only
to the extinct tribes, and only to their contemporary generations of
Israelites. Scholar Carl Ehrlich states the biblical rules of extermination
provide guidance to modern Israelis not for genocidal purposes, but rather
simply as models for reclaiming the land of Israel.
