Herem (priestly gift) In the Tanakh, the term herem (Hebrew ×—Öµ×¨Ö¶×) is
used, among other meanings, for an object or real property to be devoted to
God, with God authorizing a "kohen" (Jewish priest) to be its receiving agent.
Twenty-four kohanic gifts. In Torah law, the positive commandment of a devoted
thing is applied to the "gifts of the priesthood" (Hebrew ××ª× ×•×ª ×›×”×•× ×”
"matnat kehuna") which entails giving "devoted estate" or "devoted properties"
to a kohen. The gift of "devoted things" is listed as one of the twenty-four
kohanic gifts and, of those twenty four, as one of ten gifts given to the
priest even outside the land of Israel (Tosefta Challah 2:8, Talmud Bavli
Hullin). The nuances and complex specifics of the "priestly gifts" ("matnat
kehuna") and law on "devoted things" ("herem") are deemed by Chazal as one of
eight pillars of Torah law that are "principles of Halakha". See Tosefta to
Hagigah 1:11 for a list of all eight. Etymology. In Hebrew language the
adjective "herem" (Hebrew ×—Öµ×¨Ö¶×) means "devoted thing" or "thing devoted
to destruction". The term is used 29 times in the masoretic text of the Tanakh.
An unrelated homonym, the noun "herem" meaning "fisherman's net" (also
×—Öµ×¨Ö¶×), is used a further 9 times. The adjective "herem" and the associate
verb "haram" "devote" come from the semitic root á¸¤-R-M with cognates in the
Syriac language and the Arabic language. The word "devoted" ("herem") is
understood by Maimonides as a "complete and total transition" from one status
to another. The Targums define the word as a complete separation (Jerusalem
Targum to Numbers 18:13, and Targum Yonathan to Isaiah 43:28). According to
Samuel ben Meir this is the complete transition of an estate or object from
"hullin" (mundane) status to that of "kodesh" (holy). Sources. The second
source, unlike the first, explicitly instructs that the devoted thing be given
to the priest; In reconciling the two seemingly starkly differing instructions,
Chazal explained the two verses as detailing "two" types of devoted things; the
former being "hermei gavoah" (devoted things specifically consecrated by its
owner to the Temple in Jerusalem) whilst the latter as "hermei kohanim",
devoted things to be given the priest, as the estate or object was not
designated by its owner to the Temple in Jerusalem. "Devoted property" in the
territory of Joseph. Torah commentaries to the verse "And Eleazar the son of
Aaron died and they buried him in at Givath the hill of Phinehas his son that
was given to him in the mountain of Ephraim {Joshua 24:33) describe that the
tribe of Joseph desired the merit that Eleazar the high priest should be buried
in their territory. Thus, at the time of his demise designated Gibeah Phinehas
(modern Awarta) as a "herem" estate; that is to be given the priests currently
in duty as per the priestly divisions) and calculated to publicize the herem
designation during the division cycle when Phinehas was in service, thus
increasing the likelihood of Phinehas burying his father in the "herem"
property, which ultimately happened (Meir Leibush ben Yehiel Michal on Joshua
24:33). Sifre. The Sifre (Hebrew ×¡Ö´×¤Ö°×¨Öµ×™ "siphrÄ“y", halakhic midrash to
Numbers) attributes this particular priestly gift to the merit of Jochebed who
deserved to be the mother of the priesthood, by mothering Aaron, due to her
rescuing the infants of Israel from the pharaonic decree of infanticide of
Israelite newborns; Sifra. The Sifra (Aramaic: ×¡Ö´×¤Ö°×¨Ö¸× "siphra", the
Halakic midrash to Leviticus) describes the commandment to devote things as
enabling the Israelite to do perform a commandment with objects that otherwise
do not have a commandment attached to them. For example a non-kosher animal
other than the firstborn of a donkey, by way of the Israelite making his
possession thereof "devoted" ("herem"), he elevates it to "holy" ("kedushah")
(Sifra 42b as quoted in Midrash HaGadol to Leviticus 8:25). Maimonides, in his
"Mishneh Torah," describes the act of creating a "devoted" estate a worthy act
since it goes against the sin of miserhood. In addition, he also categorizes
the initiation of devoted goods by an Israelite as an act of respect and honor
to the God of Israel. Another quality describing the remedy of the devoted gift
to the priest is described by the 14th Century "Raya Mehemna", a conversation
between Moses and Elijah found as an addition to the Zohar, as rectifying and
healing the negative emotion of anger the initiator of a devotion of property
may possess. Undesignated devoted things. Opinions differ as to the designation
of undesignated devoted things ("stam herem") in cases where the initiator of a
devotion of property does not designate his property as consecrated to the
temple in Jerusalem or the priests. Maimonides opines that this undesignated
herem be given the priests by default. Maimonides further states that
undesignated devoted property is considered mundane ("hullin") and may be used
by the priests for personal use. This is in contrast to the case where the
person does designate his devoted property to be given the priests, where the
said devoted property retains a holy ("kodesh") state and cannot be itemized
for personal use. Dispension to the mishmaroth. An additional detail of
allocation of devoted property is dependent on the type of object devoted;
whether it is real estate or goods. According to "rav" Sheshet, as cited in the
Talmud, devotion of real estate is considered one of the four priestly gifts
that is divided amongst the serving priestly division ("mishmar kehuna"), while
tangible devoted goods are appropriated even to the individual priest not
currently in active temple service (Y.Hallah 27b). In modern times. In the
diaspora. Considering that the gift of devoted property is listed as one of the
ten priestly gifts that can be given to a priest outside of Jerusalem (similar
to the Pidyon HaBen and the giving of the shoulder, cheeks and maw), some
"poskim" have noted that both types of devoted things, both real estate and
goods, are designated and given to the priest of the beth din's choice. Solomon
Luria is of the opinion that the dedicator of devoted goods is required to
specify that the property or items be given to a priest in order for a priest
to be eligible as the recipient. In terms of the beth-din choosing an eligible
kohen, Rabbi Luria opines that The status quo Kohen is sufficient to be the
recipient of a devoted item and it to be "mundane" ("hullin").
