Heresy Heresy is any belief or theory that is strongly at variance with
established beliefs or customs. Heresy is distinct from both apostasy, which is
the explicit renunciation of one's religion, principles or cause, Heresy is
usually used to discuss violations of religious or traditional laws or legal
codes, although it is used by some political extremists to refer to their
opponents. It carries the connotation of behaviors or beliefs likely to
undermine accepted morality and cause tangible evils, damnation, or other
punishment. In some religions, it also implies that the heretic is in alliance
with the religion's symbol of evil, such as Satan or chaos. In certain
historical Christian, Jewish, and some modern cultures, espousing ideas deemed
heretical was punishable by law. Etymology. Heresy is any belief or theory that
is strongly at variance with established beliefs or customs. The term "" is
from Greek originally meant "choice", but also referred to that process whereby
a young person would examine various philosophies to determine how to live
one's life. The word "heresy" is usually used within a Christian, Jewish, or
Islamic context, and implies slightly different meanings in each. The founder
or leader of a heretical movement is called a heresiarch, while individuals who
espouse heresy or commit heresy are known as heretics. Heresiology is the study
of heresy. Christianity. The use of the word "heresy" was given wide currency
by Irenaeus in his tract "Contra Haereses" ("Against Heresies") to describe and
discredit his opponents during the early centuries of the Christian community.
He described the community's beliefs and doctrines as orthodox (from , "orthos"
"straight" + , "doxa" "belief") and the Gnostics' teachings as heretical. He
also pointed out the concept of apostolic succession to support his arguments.
Constantine the Great, who along with Licinius had decreed toleration of
Christianity in the Roman Empire with the Edict of Milan, and the first
baptized Roman Emperor, set precedent for later policy. By Roman law the
Emperor was Pontifex Maximus, the high priest of the College of Pontiffs
("Collegium Pontificum)" of all recognized religions in ancient Rome.
Constantine established Christian orthodoxy by ecumenical councils and enforced
orthodoxy by Imperial authority. The Cathar Crusade was initiated by the Roman
Catholic Church to eliminate the Cathar heresy in Languedoc. Heresy was a major
justification for the Inquisition ("Inquisitio Haereticae Pravitatis", Inquiry
on Heretical Perversity) and for the European wars of religion associated with
the Protestant Reformation. A few early modern scientists were accused of
heresy by the Catholic Church. Giordano Bruno, who believed that the universe
contained numerous suns, planets, and worlds similar to Earth, and that other
such worlds could contain sentient beings, was condemned as a heretic by the
Church and burned at the stake. Some sources claim that Bruno's scientific
views motivated his prosecution, but other sources say that only his
theological views motivated it, in particular, "that Christ was not God but
merely an unusually skillful magician, that the Holy Ghost is the soul of the
world, that the Devil will be saved, etc." Galileo Galilei was also brought
before the Inquisition for heresy, but recanted and was condemned to house
arrest (where he spent the rest of his life) instead of being burnt at the
stake. Eastern Christianity. In Eastern Christianity heresy most commonly
refers to those beliefs declared to be heretical by the first seven Ecumenical
Councils. Since the Great Schism and the Protestant Reformation, various
Christian churches have also used the concept in proceedings against
individuals and groups deemed to be heretical by those churches. Christian
heresy in the modern era. Although less common than in the medieval period,
formal charges of heresy within Christian churches still occur. Key issues in
the Protestant churches have included modern biblical criticism, the nature of
God, and the acceptability of gay clergy. The Catholic Church, through the
Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith, appears to be particularly
concerned with academic theology. Perhaps due to the many modern negative
connotations associated with the term heretic, such as the Spanish inquisition,
the term is used less often today. There are however, some notable exceptions:
see for example Rudolf Bultmann and the character of debates over ordination of
women and gay priests. The subject of Christian heresy opens up broader
questions as to who has a monopoly on spiritual truth, as explored by Jorge
Luis Borges in the short story "The Theologians" within the compilation
"Labyrinths". Islam. Many in the two main bodies of Islam—Sunnis and the
Shi'as—have regarded the other as heretical. Groups like the Ismailis, the
Hurufiya, the Alawis, the Bektashi and the Sufis have been regarded as
heretical by many, such as the ultra-conservative Salafi. Although Sufism is
often though not completely accepted as valid by Shi'a and many Sunnis, the
relatively recent movement of Wahhabism view it as heretical. Starting in
medieval times, Muslims began to refer to heretics and those who antagonized
Islam as "zindiqs", the charge being punishable by death. Medieval Muslim
scholars and philosophers such as Avicenna and Averroes were condemned as
heretics. Judaism. Orthodox Judaism. Orthodox Judaism considers views on the
part of Jews which depart from the traditional Jewish principles of faith to be
heretical. In addition, the more right-wing groups within Orthodox Judaism hold
that all Jews who reject the simple meaning of Maimonides's 13 principles of
Jewish faith are heretics. As such, most of Orthodox Judaism considers Reform
and Reconstructionist Judaism to be heretical movements, and regards most of
Conservative Judaism as heretical. The liberal wing of Modern Orthodoxy is more
tolerant of Conservative Judaism, particularly its right wing, as there is some
theological and practical overlap between these groups. Other religions.
Hinduism ignored or absorbed its heretics. In chapter XVI, the Bhagavad-Gita
makes passing reference to heretics (as the Unheavenly). Buddhist literature
mentions a wrathful conquest of Buddhist heretics (see Padmasambhava) and a
Buddhist theocracy once existed, but Buddhism doesn't accept the use of
violence. Neo-Confucian heresy has been described. The act of using Church of
Scientology techniques in a form different than originally described by Hubbard
is referred to within Scientology as "squirreling" and is said by
Scientologists to be "high treason". The Religious Technology Center has
prosecuted breakaway groups that have practiced Scientology outside the
official Church without authorization. Non-religious usage. In a secular,
multi-polar world, the term heresy has lost utility outside of a well-defined
(usually religious) context. While heresy is pejorative in a religious context
and in some political contexts, it may be complimentary in other contexts where
innovation is more welcome. Today, heresy can be without a religious context as
the holding of ideas that are in fundamental disagreement with the "status quo"
in any practice and branch of knowledge. Scientist/author Isaac Asimov
considered heresy as an abstraction, mentioning religious, political,
socioeconomic and scientific heresies. He divided scientific heretics into
endoheretics (those from within the scientific community) and exoheretics
(those from without). Characteristics were ascribed to both and examples of
both kinds were offered. Asimov concluded that science orthodoxy defends itself
well against endoheretics (by control of science education, grants and
publication as examples), but is nearly powerless against exoheretics. He
acknowledged by examples that heresy has repeatedly become orthodoxy. The
revisionist paleontologist Robert T. Bakker, who published his findings as "The
Dinosaur Heresies", treated the mainstream view of dinosaurs as dogma. He is an
example of a recent scientific endoheretic. Immanuel Velikovsky is an example
of a recent scientific exoheretic; He did not have appropriate scientific
credentials or publish in scientific journals. While the details of his work
are in scientific disrepute, the concept of catastrophic change (extinction
event and punctuated equilibrium) has gained acceptance in recent decades. The
term heresy is also used as an ideological pigeonhole for contemporary writers
because, by definition, heresy depends on contrasts with an established
orthodoxy. For example, the tongue-in-cheek contemporary usage of heresy, such
as to categorize a "Wall Street heresy" a "Democratic heresy" or a "Republican
heresy", are metaphors which invariably retain a subtext that links orthodoxies
in geology or biology or any other field to religion. These expanded metaphoric
senses allude to both the difference between the person's views and the
mainstream and the boldness of such a person in propounding these views.
