Herem (censure) Herem (or Chērem חרם), is the highest ecclesiastical
censure in the Jewish community. It is the total exclusion of a person from the
Jewish community. It is a form of shunning, and is similar to excommunication
in the Catholic Church. Cognate terms in other Semitic languages include the
Arabic term "" (forbidden, taboo, off-limits, sacred or immoral), and the
Ethiopic "`irm" (meaning accursed). The most famous case of a herem is that of
Spinoza, the seventeenth century philosopher. Also, Leon Trotsky and Grigory
Zinoviev became subject of herem. Sometime in 1918, while Ukraine was under
German occupation, the rabbis of Odessa pronounced herem against Trotsky,
Zinoviev, and other Jewish Bolshevik leaders in the synagogue. Summary.
Although developed from the Biblical ban, excommunication, as employed by the
Rabbis during Talmudic times and during the Middle Ages, it became a rabbinic
institution, the object of which was to preserve Jewish solidarity. A system of
laws was gradually developed by Rabbis, by means of which this power was
limited, so that it became one of the modes of legal punishment by rabbinic
courts. While it did not entirely lose its arbitrary character, since
individuals were allowed to pronounce the ban of excommunication on particular
occasions, it became chiefly a legal measure resorted to by a judicial court
for certain prescribed offenses. Etymology and cognate terms. The three terms
"herem (censure)", excommunication, "herem (war or property)" the devotion of
enemies by annihilation in the Tanakh, and "herem (priestly gift)" the devotion
of property to a kohen, are all three variant English transliterations of the
same Hebrew noun. This noun comes from the semitic root Ḥ-R-M. There is also
an identically spelled (homonym) Hebrew noun "herem", fisherman's net, which
appears 9 times in the masoretic text of the Tanakh but has no etymological
connection to "herem" as devoted objects. The Talmudic usage of "herem", for
excommunication, can be distinguished from the usage of "herem" described in
the Tanakh in the time of Joshua and the early Hebrew monarchy, which was the
practice of consecration by total annihilation at the command of Yahweh carried
out against peoples such as the Midianites, the Amalekites, and the entire
population of Jericho. The neglect of Saul to carry out such a command as
delivered by Samuel resulted in the selection of David as his replacement. In
the Talmud, twenty-four offenses. For all practical purposes, most of these
conditions no longer were considered as grounds for a ban since the end of the
Talmudic era, around 600 CE. The niddui. The "niddui" ban was usually imposed
for a period of seven days (in Israel thirty days). If inflicted on account of
money matters, the offender was first publicly warned ("hatra'ah") three times,
on Monday, Thursday, and Monday successively, at the regular service in the
synagogue. During the period of niddui, no one except the members of his
immediate household was permitted to associate with the offender, or to sit
within four cubits of him, or to eat in his company. He was expected to go into
mourning and to refrain from bathing, cutting his hair, and wearing shoes, and
he had to observe all the laws that pertained to a mourner. He could not be
counted in the number necessary for the performance of a public religious
function. If he died, a stone was placed on his hearse, and the relatives were
not obliged to observe the ceremonies customary at the death of a kinsman, such
as the tearing of garments, etc.. It was in the power of the court to lessen or
increase the severity of the niddui. The court might even reduce or increase
the number of days, forbid all intercourse with the offender, and exclude his
children from the schools and his wife from the synagogue, until he became
humbled and willing to repent and obey the court's mandates. According to one
opinion, the apprehension that the offender might leave the Jewish fold on
account of the severity of the excommunication did not prevent the court from
adding rigor to its punishments so as to maintain its dignity and authority
(Shulkhan Arukh, Yoreh De'ah, 334, 1, Rama's gloss, citing "Sefer Agudah").
This opinion is vehemently contested by the Taz (ibid.), who cites earlier
authorities of the same opinion (Maharshal; Maharam; Mahari Mintz) and presents
proof of his position from the Talmud. Additionally, the Taz notes that his
edition of the "Sefer Agudah" does not contain the cited position. The herem.
If the offense was in reference to monetary matters, or if the punishment was
inflicted by an individual, the laws were more lenient, the chief punishment
being that men might not associate with the offender. At the expiration of the
period the ban was raised by the court. If, however, the excommunicate showed
no sign of penitence or remorse, the niddui might be renewed once and again,
and finally the "herem," the most rigorous form of excommunication, might be
pronounced. This extended for an indefinite period, and no one was permitted to
teach the offender or work for him, or benefit him in any way, except when he
was in need of the bare necessities of life. The nezifah. A milder form than
either niddui or herem was the "nezifah" ban. This ban generally only lasted
one day. During this time the offender dared not appear before him whom he had
displeased. He had to retire to his house, speak little, refrain from business
and pleasure, and manifest his regret and remorse. He was not required,
however, to separate himself from society, nor was he obliged to apologize to
the man whom he had insulted; for his conduct on the day of nezifah was
sufficient apology. But when a scholar or prominent man actually pronounced the
formal niddui on one who had slighted him, all the laws of niddui applied. This
procedure was, however, much discouraged by the sages, so that it was a matter
of proper pride for a rabbi to be able to say that he had never pronounced the
ban of excommunication. Maimonides concludes with these words the chapter on
the laws of excommunication:("Mishneh Torah", Talmud Torah, vii. 13). Since the
Enlightenment. Except in rare cases in the Haredi and Chassidic communities,
"herem" stopped existing after The Enlightenment, when local Jewish communities
lost their political autonomy, and Jews were integrated into the gentile
nations in which they lived. In 1918, the Rabbinical Council of Odessa, Russia
(now in Ukraine), declared "herem" on Leon Trotsky and several other Jewish
members of the Bolshevik movement. In 2004, however, the High Court of South
Africa upheld a herem against a Johannesburg businessman because he refused to
pay his former wife alimony as ordered by a beth din. As distinct from Catholic
Church excommunication. The herem may best be compared to the now-defunct
excommunication "vitandus." It is important to avoid confusing it with the
Catholic excommunication as it is normally practiced to-day based on the word
"excommunication", as the current Catholic practice favors maintaining some
relationship with the excommunicant whereas the herem is more akin to
"shunning" as practiced by Anabaptists and some of their descendant
communities. It is likewise important to note, however, the extreme rarity of
the herem in modern Jewish life. Today it is almost exclusively imposed in
cases where a spouse refuses to give a divorce, which prevents remarriage and
which is sufficiently grievous that Maimonides suggested beating a divorce-
refusing husband into granting one). With respect to the list of offenses
theoretically resulting in excommunication Max Weber emphasizes the importance
of focusing on the actual results of religious belief rather than official
claims. That such-and-such offense is listed in the Code of Canon Law or the
Shulchan Aruch as punishable by excommunication is of some historical and
perhaps theological interest but in terms of understanding actual religious
life such laws are interesting only insofar as they were actually enforced.
