Heterodoxy Heterodoxy in a religious sense means "any opinions or doctrines at
variance with an official or orthodox position". Under this definition,
heterodoxy is similar to unorthodoxy, while the adjective "heterodox" could be
applied to a dissident. Heterodoxy is also an ecclesiastical term of art,
defined in various ways by different religions and churches. For example, in
the Roman Catholic and Eastern Orthodox churches heterodoxy may describe
beliefs that differ from strictly orthodox views but that fall short of heresy.
Ecclesiastic usage. Eastern Orthodoxy. In the Eastern Orthodox Church, the term
is used to refer to Christian churches not belonging to the Eastern Orthodox
communion and holding doctrines different from those of Orthodox Christianity.
Also, it is used for any idea, thought, dogma, principle or lifestyle that is
in conflict with the Orthodox Faith. In general, this term is used in two
distinct cases: 1. Whenever Eastern Orthodoxy wants to classify something
different, but not as different or thought to be as erroneous as heresy; 2.
Whenever Eastern Orthodoxy wants, for any reason, to abstain from the use of
the word heresy. Roman Catholicism. Heterodoxy in the Roman Catholic Church
refers to views that differ from strictly orthodox views, but retain sufficient
faithfulness to the original doctrine to avoid heresy. Many Roman Catholics
profess some heterodox views, either on doctrinal or social issues. For
example, the orthodox Catholic position on unbaptized infants is that their
fate is uncertain, and "the Church can only entrust them to the mercy of God"
(Catechism of the Catholic Church 1261). A heterodox Catholic might profess the
belief that unbaptized infants are allotted to purgatory and then offered the
option to accept or deny salvation by God at their judgment. The belief is not
orthodox, as the Church does not profess a belief as to what happens to
unbaptized infants; however, it is also not heresy, as the Church accepts that
such a scenario "might" be possible. Protestantism. Many Protestants, such as
Lutherans, use the term "heterodox" to describe Christian teachings which are
not in agreement with their understanding of scripture. Thus, other Christian
(Catholic, Orthodox or Protestant) denominations with different teachings which
are not heretical are considered heterodox. For example, the Catholic belief
that the mother of Christ was born without original sin and remained a virgin
throughout the rest of her life would be heterodox under this logic. Other
usage. The term "heterodox" is occasionally used by some Christians to refer to
themselves when they are in disagreement with orthodox understandings, but
voice this disagreement while still maintaining the overall value of the
tradition. The heterodox Christian therefore remains in the tradition and
attempts to stimulate constructive dialog around issues with which they
disagree. In 1912, a group of women, called the Heterodoxy, begin to meet as a
feminist luncheon group. This group for "unorthodox women" included many
prominent lesbians and would meet regularly until the 1940s in Greenwich
Village. Islam. The Arabic word "ghulat" is used by Muslims for beliefs
perceived as being extremely heterodox (more in line with the Christian use of
the word "heresy"). In particular, the term is used by mainstream Muslims to
describe the beliefs of minority Muslim groups who ascribe divine
characteristics to a member of Prophet Muhammad's family (especially Ali) or
the early companions of the Prophet such as Salman the Persian. The assumption
is that the groups thus described have gone too far and have come to associate
them with God ("shirk"). Sunni and Shia Islam Muslims see each other as
heterodox, differing in practice mainly on matters of jurisprudence or "fiqh",
splitting historically on the matter of the succession of Ali to the caliphate
by Muawiyah. A third and much smaller movement is Ibadi, which differ from both
of these groups on a few key points. Several ultra-orthodox groups such as the
Wahhabis, in turn, see themselves as the only truly orthodox groups within
Islam. The Shia Ismailis, who in turn split from the Shia mainstream of
Twelvers over another succession dispute, have subsumed several groups which
the majority of Muslims view as heterodox, such as the Seveners, and gnostic-
influenced Alawites, and many other sects and subsects. The gnostic-influenced
Druze sect has also been affiliated with the Ismailis, but some of its
followers go so far as to see it as a distinct religion altogether. The Sufis,
divided into many sects and orders, incorporate many mystical doctrines and
rituals into Islam, but many also consider themselves Shi'i or Sunnis. Another
Shia group, influenced heavily by the Sufis, Turkic religion and other mystical
movements, is that of the Alevi. Historical groups viewed as highly heterodox
by most Muslims include the Kharijites, who took a third view on Ali's
succession (and are today succeeded by the Ibadi), the Mu'tazilites, who most
famously asserted that the Qur'an was created, a view which enjoyed Caliphal
approval before the time of Mutawakkil, the Qarmatians, a branch of the
Seveners within Ismaili Islam who took control of much of the Arabian peninsula
in the 9th and 10th century, practiced vegetarianism, took control of the Well
of Zamzam and the Ka'bah, and the Hashashin or Assassins, another Ismaili
group, famous for their reclusive lifestyle, manners of indoctrination and
assassinations in the years after the First Crusade. According to Philip Hitti,
during the Umayyad and Abbasid caliphates there was a marked tendency among
several quite unrelated heterodox groups to affiliate themselves with the
Shiites, particularly the Ismailis, in a general feeling of heterodox
solidarity in a Sunni-controlled empire. The cause of the Alids thus became a
rallying point for a diverse range of heterodox Islamic movements. The view
that Ali was divine, though never mainstream within Shiism, is attested in the
early centuries of Islam. Two more recent movements seen as particularly at
odds with the majority Muslim view are the Ahmadiyya and Nation of Islam
movements. Many followers of the former consider its 19th-century founder,
Mirza Ghulam Ahmad, to have been a prophet, as well as such other religious
figures as Krishna and Buddha, despite the mainstream Muslim view that Muhammad
was the last. Both Ahmadi denominations consider Ahmad to have been the Mahdi
and second coming of Jesus. The Nation of Islam is a black supremacist movement
which acknowledges its 20th-century founder, Wallace Fard Muhammad, as an
incarnation of Allah, a view most Muslims consider shirk (polytheism). Babism
(most followers of which came to follow Baha'u'llah and became the Baha'is) is
viewed by many non-followers as originally having been a highly divergent
movement within the Twelver Ismailism practiced in 19th-century Persia. Beyond
heterodoxy, many elements of Islam have been incorporated into distinct belief
systems several times, most specifically into Sikhism and the Baha'i Faith,
whose predecessor movement was Babism. As a more unusual example, several
Thuggee were self-reportedly Muslims, and according to William Sleeman equated
the Hindu goddess Kali with Fatima, a daughter of Muhammad. Political usage
against religion. China. In late 1999 legislation was created in China to
outlaw "heterodox religions". This was applied retroactively to Falun Gong, a
spiritual practice introduced to the public in China by Li Hongzhi (李洪志)
in 1992. Non-ecclesiastic usage. Heterodox economics refers to schools of
economic thought that are considered outside of mainstream orthodox economics.
Heterodox economics refers to a variety of separate unorthodox approaches or
schools such as institutional, post-Keynesian, socialist, Marxian, feminist,
Austrian, ecological, and social economics among others.
