Hiram Abiff Hiram Abiff (other spellings "Huram", "Abif", and "Huram-Abi"; also
known as "the Widows's Son") is a character who figures prominently in an
allegorical play that is presented during the third degree of Craft
Freemasonry. In this play, Hiram is presented as being the chief architect of
King Solomon's Temple, who is murdered by three ruffians during an unsuccessful
attempt to force him to divulge the Master Masons' secret password. It is
explained in the lecture that follows this play that the story is a lesson in
fidelity to one's word, and in the brevity of life. Numerous scholars, both
Masonic and non-Masonic, have speculated that the character may have been based
upon one or more Hirams that appear in the Bible. The Masonic Legend of Hiram
Abiff. The tale of Hiram Abiff as passed down in Masonic Lodges underpins the
third degree. It starts with his arrival in Jerusalem, and his appointment by
Solomon as chief architect and master of works at the construction of his
temple. As the temple is nearing completion, three fellowcraft masons from the
workforce ambush him as he is alone in the building, demanding the secrets of a
master mason. Hiram is challenged by each in turn, and at each refusal to
divulge the information his assailant strikes him with a mason's tool
(differing between jurisdictions). He is injured thus at the South and North
entrances (leading to the ante-rooms in the wooden construction surrounding the
temple proper), and finally at the main entrance in the East he is struck dead.
His murderers hide his body under a pile of rubble, returning at night to move
the body outside the city, where they bury it in a shallow grave marked with a
sprig of acacia. As the Master is missed the next day, Solomon sends out a
group of fellowcraft masons to search for him. The loose acacia is accidentally
discovered, and the body exhumed to be given a decent burial. The hiding place
of the "three ruffians" is also discovered, and they are brought to justice.
Solomon informs his workforce that the secrets of a master mason are now lost,
and replaces them with the gestures and ejaculations of the masons who
discovered his body. Such is the general legend as related in the Anglo-
American jurisdictions. In Continental Freemasonry the tale is slightly
different: a large number of master masons (not just Hiram) are working on the
Temple, and the three ruffians are seeking the passwords and signs that will
give them a higher wage. The result is the same, but this time it is master
masons who find the body. The secrets are not lost, but Solomon orders them
buried under the Temple, inscribed on Hiram's grave, and the same substitution
is made as a mark of respect. The secrets "lost" in the other tradition are
here given to new master masons as part of their ritual. In this version, Hiram
is often renamed Adoniram. Other accounts of a Biblical Hiram. Flavius Josephus
in his Antiquities of the Jews (Chapter 8:76) refers to Hiram as
τεχνίτης, artificer, craftsman. "Now Solomon sent for an artificer out
of Tyre, whose name was Hiram: he was by birth of the tribe of Naphtali, on his
mother's side (for she was of that tribe); but his father was Ur, of the stock
of the Israelites." The most elaborate version of the legend occurs in Gérard
de Nerval's 1851 account, Voyage en Orient, where he relates the tale,
inserting all the masonic passwords, as part of the story of the Queen of the
Morning and "Soliman", Prince of the Genii. This is an elaboration of the
second version above, where the Master Craftsman is named Adoniram. Before his
death, he undergoes mystical adventures as his tale is interwoven with that of
Solomon and Balkis, the Queen of Sheba. The ruffians who kill him are under the
instruction of Solomon himself. De Nerval relates the story as having been told
in an Eastern coffee house over a two week period. A similar account is given
in Heckethorn's "The Secret Societies of all Ages and Countries", where Solomon
plots to destroy Hiram because of the mutual love between Hiram and the Queen
of Sheba. Other theories. According to authors Robert Lomas and Christopher
Knight, Hiram Abiff would have been Egyptian king Seqenenre Tao II, who met an
extremely similar death. This idea is dismissed by most Masonic scholars. In
his book The Sufis, the Afghan scholar Idries Shah suggested that Dhul-Nun al-
Misri might have been the origin of the character Hiram Abiff in the
Freemasonic Master Mason ritual. The link, he believes, was through the Sufi
sect Al-Banna ("The Builders") who built the Al-Aqsa Mosque and the Dome of the
Rock in Jerusalem. This fraternity could have influenced some early masonic
guilds which borrowed heavily from the Oriental architecture in the creation of
the Gothic style.
