History of ancient Israel and Judah Israel and Judah were related Iron Age
kingdoms of the ancient Levante. The Kingdom of Israel emerged as an important
local power by the 9th century BCE before falling to the Neo-Assyrian Empire in
722¬ BCE. Israel's southern neighbor, the Kingdom of Judah, emerged in the 8th
century and enjoyed a period of prosperity as a client-state of first Assyria
and then Babylon before a revolt against the Neo-Babylonian Empire led to its
destruction in 586¬ BCE. Following the fall of Babylon to the Persian king
Cyrus the Great, 539¬ BCE, some Judean exiles returned to Jerusalem,
inaugurating the formative period in the development of a distinctive Judahite
identity in the Persian province of Yehud. Yehud was absorbed into the
subsequent Hellenistic kingdoms that followed the conquests of Alexander the
Great, but in the 2nd century BCE the Judaeans revolted against the Hellenist
Seleucid Empire and created the Hasmonean kingdom. This, the last nominally
independent Judean kingdom, came to an end in 63¬ BCE with its conquest by
Rome. Sources. The sources for the history of ancient Israel and Judah can be
broadly divided into the biblical narrative (the Hebrew Bible, Deuterocanonical
and non-biblical works for the later period) and the archaeological record. The
latter can again be divided between epigraphy (written inscriptions, both from
Israel and other lands including Mesopotamia and Egypt) and the material record
(everything else). The biblical narrative. The Hebrew Bible contains "sagas,
heroic epics, oral traditions, annals, biographies, narrative histories,
novellae, "belles lettres", proverbs and wisdom-sayings, poetry, prophecy,
apocalyptic, and much more ... the whole finally woven into a composite, highly
complex literary fabric sometime in the Hellenistic era." The archaeological
record. By the 1920s, the idea of an Israelite conquest of Canaan - the story
of the book of Joshua - was not supported by the archaeological record. The
response of the time was to propose that the main biblical idea was still
correct, but that the Israelites entered Canaan peacefully instead of through
conquest. Later, this compromise was abandoned, and the Israelites were
interpreted to be indigenous Canaanites. The revision of Israelite origins has
implications for Israelite religion: whereas the Bible had depicted them as
monotheists from the beginning, the new understanding is that they were
polytheists who harboured a small and ultimately successful group of
monotheistic revolutionaries. The new understanding, even if it recognised the
Israelites as Canaanites by origin, still treated the post-Conquest biblical
story as real history. But eventually this came under challenge. The most
radical reconstruction states that the Jews originated as a "mixed multitude"
of settlers sent to Jerusalem by the Persians, where they concocted a past for
themselves. There are few scholars who believe this, but it demonstrates how
the paradigm has shifted. Dating of remains to the biblical history is made
difficult by the Bible's lack of datable events and its unreliable internal
chronology; the interpretation of remains has been influenced by religious and
nationalistic arguments, as evidenced by arguments over burials from the
highland settlement phase; and no material remains have been found which can
reliably separate Israelite from non-Israelite (Canaanite) sites in the
earliest period. Late Bronze Age Background (1600¬ BCE - 1200¬ BCE). The
eastern Mediterranean seaboard ‚Äì the Levant ‚Äì stretches 400 miles north to
south from the Taurus Mountains to the Sinai desert, and 70 to 100 miles east
to west between the sea and the Arabian desert. The coastal plain of the
southern Levant, broad in the south and narrowing to the north, is backed in
its southernmost portion by a zone of foothills, the Shephelah; like the plain
this narrows as it goes northwards, ending in the promontory of Mount Carmel.
East of the plain and the Shephelah is a mountainous ridge, the "hill country
of Judah" in the south, the "hill country of Ephraim" north of that, then
Galilee and the Lebanon mountains. To the east again lie the steep-sided valley
occupied by the Jordan River, the Dead Sea, and the wadi of the Arabah, which
continues down to the eastern arm of the Red Sea. Beyond the plateau is the
Syrian desert, separating the Levant from Mesopotamia. To the southwest is
Egypt, to the northeast Mesopotamia. "The Levant thus constitutes a narrow
corridor whose geographical setting made it a constant area of contention
between more powerful entities". Canaan in the Late Bronze Age was a shadow of
what it had been centuries earlier: many cities were abandoned, others shrank
in size, and the total settled population was probably not much more than a
hundred thousand. Settlement was concentrated in cities along the coastal plain
and along major communication routes; the central and northern hill country
which would later become the biblical kingdom of Israel was only sparsely
inhabited although letters from the Egyptian archives indicate that Jerusalem
was already a Canaanite city-state recognising Egyptian overlordship.
Politically and culturally it was dominated by Egypt, each city under its own
ruler, constantly at odds with its neighbours, and appealing to the Egyptians
to adjudicate their differences. The Canaanite city-state system broke down at
the end of the Late Bronze period, and Canaanite culture was then gradually
absorbed into that of the Philistines, Phoenicians and Israelites. The process
was gradual rather than swift: a strong Egyptian presence continued into the
12th century BCE, and, while some Canaanite cities were destroyed, others
continued to exist in Iron I. Iron Age I (1200¬ BCE - 1000¬ BCE). The name
Israel first appears in the stele of the Egyptian pharaoh Merneptah c.
1209¬ BCE, "Israel is laid waste and his seed is no more." This "Israel" was a
cultural and probably political entity of the central highlands, well enough
established to be perceived by the Egyptians as a possible challenge to their
hegemony, but an ethnic group rather than an organised state; Archaeologist
Paula McNutt says: "It is probably ... during Iron Age I a population began to
identify itself as 'Israelite'," differentiating itself from its neighbours via
prohibitions on intermarriage, an emphasis on family history and genealogy, and
religion. In the Late Bronze Age there were no more than about 25 villages in
the highlands, but this increased to over 300 by the end of Iron I, while the
settled population doubled from 20,000 to 40,000. The villages were more
numerous and larger in the north, and probably shared the highlands with
pastoral nomads who left no remains. Archaeologists and historians attempting
to trace the origins of these villagers have found it impossible to identify
any distinctive features that could define them as specifically Israelite ‚Äì
collared-rim jars and four-room houses have been identified outside the
highlands and thus cannot be used to distinguish Israelite sites, and while the
pottery of the highland villages is far more limited than that of lowland
Canaanite sites, it develops typologically out of Canaanite pottery that came
before. Israel Finkelstein proposed that the oval or circular layout that
distinguishes some of the earliest highland sites, and the notable absence of
pig bones from hill sites, could be taken as a marker of ethnicity, but others
have cautioned that these can be a "common-sense" adaptation to highland life
and not necessarily revelatory of origins. Other Aramaean sites also
demonstrate a contemporary absence of pig remains at that time, unlike earlier
Canaanite and later Philistine excavations. Modern scholars therefore see
Israel arising peacefully and internally in the highlands. Iron Age II
(1000¬ BCE - 550¬ BCE). Unusually favourable climatic conditions in the first
two centuries of Iron Age II brought about an expansion of population,
settlements and trade throughout the region. In the central highlands this
resulted in unification in a kingdom with the city of Samaria as its capital,
possibly by the second half of the 10th century BCE when an inscription of the
Egyptian pharaoh Shoshenq I, the biblical Shishak, records a series of
campaigns directed at the area. Israel had clearly emerged by the middle of the
9th century BCE, when the Assyrian king Shalmaneser III names "Ahab the
Israelite" among his enemies at the battle of Qarqar (853). At this time Israel
was apparently engaged in a three-way contest with Damascus and Tyre for
control of the Jezreel Valley and Galilee in the north, and with Moab, Ammon
and Damascus in the east for control of Gilead; the Mesha stele (c. 830), left
by a king of Moab, celebrates his success in throwing off the oppression of the
"House of Omri" (i.e. Israel). It bears what is generally thought to be the
earliest extra-biblical Semitic reference to the name "Yahweh" (YHWH), whose
temple goods were plundered by Mesha and brought before his own god Kemosh.
French scholar Andr√© Lemaire has reconstructed a portion of line 31 of the
stele as mentioning the "House of David"., The Tel Dan stele (c. 841) tells of
the death of a king of Israel, probably Jehoram, at the hands of a king of Aram
Damascus. A century later it came into increasing conflict with the expanding
neo-Assyrian empire, which first split its territory into several smaller units
and then destroyed its capital, Samaria (722). Both the biblical and Assyrian
sources speak of a massive deportation of people from Israel and their
replacement with settlers from other parts of the empire ‚Äì such population
exchanges were an established part of Assyrian imperial policy, a means of
breaking the old power structure - and the former Israel never again became an
independent political entity. Judah emerged somewhat later than Israel,
probably during the 9th century BCE, but the subject is one of considerable
controversy and there is no definite answer. Surface surveys indicate that
during the 10th and 9th centuries BCE the southern highlands had been divided
between a number of centres, none with clear primacy. During the reign of
Hezekiah, between c. 715 and 686¬ BCE, a notable increase in the power of the
Judean state can be observed. This is reflected by archaeological sites and
findings such as the Broad Wall, defensive city wall in Jerusalem, Hezekiah's
Tunnel, an aqueduct designed to provide Jerusalem with water during an
impending siege by the Assyrians, led by Sennacherib. Siloam Inscription,
lintel inscription, found over the doorway of a tomb, has been ascribed to his
comptroller Shebna. LMLK seals on storage jar handles, excavated from strata
formed by Sennacherib's destruction as well as immediately above that layer
suggesting they were used throughout his 29-year reign, and Bullae from sealed
documents, some that belonged to Hezekiah himself, while others name his
servants. King Ahaz's Seal which is a piece of reddish-brown clay that belonged
to King Ahaz of Judah, who ruled from 732 to 716¬ BCE. The seal contains not
only the name of the king, but the name of his father, King Yehotam. In
addition, Ahaz is specifically identified as "king of Judah." The Hebrew
inscription, which is set on three lines, reads as follows: "l'hz*y/hwtm*mlk*/
yhdh", which translates as "belonging to Ahaz (son of) Yehotam, King of Judah.
In the 7th century Jerusalem grew to contain a population many times greater
than before and achieved clear dominance over its neighbours. This occurred at
the same time that Israel was being destroyed by Assyria, and was probably the
result of a cooperative arrangement with the Assyrians to establish Judah as an
Assyrian vassal controlling the valuable olive industry. Judah prospered as an
Assyrian vassal state, despite a disastrous rebellion against Sennacherib), but
in the last half of the 7th century BCE Assyria suddenly collapsed, and the
ensuing competition between the Egyptian and Neo-Babylonian empires for control
of Palestine led to the destruction of Judah in a series of campaigns between
597 and 582. Babylonian period. Babylonian Judah suffered a steep decline in
both economy and population and lost the Negev, the Shephelah, and part of the
Judean hill country, including Hebron, to encroachments from Edom and other
neighbours. Jerusalem, while probably not totally abandoned, was much smaller
than previously, and the town of Mizpah in Benjamin in the relatively unscathed
northern section of the kingdom became the capital of the new Babylonian
province of Yehud Medinata. (This was standard Babylonian practice: when the
Philistine city of Ashkalon was conquered in 604, the political, religious and
economic elite (but not the bulk of the population) was banished and the
administrative centre shifted to a new location). There is also a strong
probability that for most or all of the period the temple at Bethel in Benjamin
replaced that at Jerusalem, boosting the prestige of Bethel's priests (the
Aaronites) against those of Jerusalem (the Zadokites), now in exile in Babylon.
The Babylonian conquest entailed not just the destruction of Jerusalem and its
temple, but the liquidation of the entire infrastructure which had sustained
Judah for centuries. The most significant casualty was the state ideology of
"Zion theology," the idea that the god of Israel had chosen Jerusalem for his
dwelling-place and that the Davidic dynasty would reign there forever. The fall
of the city and the end of Davidic kingship forced the leaders of the exile
community ‚Äì kings, priests, scribes and prophets ‚Äì to reformulate the
concepts of community, faith and politics. The exile community in Babylon thus
became the source of significant portions of the Hebrew Bible: Isaiah 40‚Äì55,
Ezekiel, the final version of Jeremiah, the work of the Priestly source in the
Pentateuch, and the final form of the history of Israel from Deuteronomy to 2
Kings Theologically, they were responsible for the doctrines of individual
responsibility and universalism (the concept that one god controls the entire
world), and for the increased emphasis on purity and holiness. Most
significantly, the trauma of the exile experience led to the development of a
strong sense of identity as a people distinct from other peoples, and increased
emphasis on symbols such as circumcision and Sabbath-observance to maintain
that separation. The concentration of the biblical literature on the experience
of the exiles in Babylon disguises the fact that the great majority of the
population remained in Judah, and for them life after the fall of Jerusalem
probably went on much as it had before. It may even have improved, as they were
rewarded with the land and property of the deportees, much to the anger of the
exile community in Babylon. The assassination of the Babylonian governor around
582 by a disaffected member of the former royal house of David provoked a
Babylonian crackdown, possibly reflected in the Book of Lamentations, but the
situation seems to have soon stabilised again. Nevertheless, the unwalled
cities and towns that remained were subject to slave raids by the Phoenicians
and intervention in their internal affairs from Samaritans, Arabs and
Ammonites. Persian period. When Babylon fell to the Persian Cyrus the Great in
539¬ BCE, Judah (or Yehud medinata, the "province of Yehud") became an
administrative division within the Persian empire. Cyrus was succeeded as king
by Cambyses, who added Egypt to the empire, incidentally transforming Yehud and
the Philistine plain into an important frontier zone. His death in 522 was
followed by a period of turmoil until Darius the Great seized the throne in
about 521. Darius introduced a reform of the administrative arrangements of the
empire including the collection, codification and administration of local law
codes, and it is reasonable to suppose that this policy lay behind the
redaction of the Jewish Torah. After 404 the Persians lost control of Egypt,
which became Persia's main rival outside Europe, causing the Persian
authorities to tighten their administrative control over Yehud and the rest of
the Levant. Egypt was eventually reconquered, but soon afterward Persia fell to
Alexander the Great, ushering in the Hellenistic period in the Levant. Yehud's
population over the entire period was probably never more than about 30,000,
and that of Jerusalem no more than about 1,500, most of them connected in some
way to the Temple. According to the biblical history, one of the first acts of
Cyrus, the Persian conqueror of Babylon, was to commission the Jewish exiles to
return to Jerusalem and rebuild the Temple, a task which they are said to have
completed c. 515. Yet it was probably only in the middle of the next century,
at the earliest, that Jerusalem again became the capital of Judah. The Persians
may have experimented initially with ruling Yehud as a Dividic client-kingdom
under descendants of Jehoiachin, but by the mid‚Äì5th century BCE Yehud had
become in practice a theocracy, ruled by hereditary High Priests and a Persian-
appointed governor, frequently Jewish, charged with keeping order and seeing
that tribute was paid. According to the biblical history Ezra and Nehemiah
arrived in Jerusalem in the middle of the 5th century BCE, the first empowered
by the Persian king to enforce the Torah, the second with the status of
governor and a royal mission to restore the walls of the city. The biblical
history mentions tension between the returnees and those who had remained in
Yehud, the former rebuffing the attempt of the "peoples of the land" to
participate in the rebuilding of the Temple; this attitude was based partly on
the exclusivism which the exiles had developed while in Babylon and, probably,
partly on disputes over property. The careers of Ezra and Nehemiah in the 5th
century BCE were thus a kind of religious colonisation in reverse, an attempt
by one of the many Jewish factions in Babylon to create a self-segregated,
ritually pure society inspired by the prophesies of Ezekiel and his followers.
The Persian era, and especially the period 538‚Äì400, laid the foundations of
later Jewish and Christian religion and the beginnings of a scriptural canon.
Other important landmarks include the replacement of Hebrew by Aramaic as the
everyday language of Judah (although it continued to be used for religious and
literary purposes), and Darius's reform of the administrative arrangements of
the empire, which may lie behind the redaction of the Jewish Torah. The Israel
of the Persian period included descendants of the inhabitants of the old
kingdom of Judah, returnees from the Babylonian exile community, Mesopotamians
who had joined them or had been exiled themselves to Samaria at a far earlier
period, Samaritans and others. Hellenistic period. On the death of Alexander
the Great (322) his generals divided the empire between them. Ptolemy I, the
ruler of Egypt, seized Palestine, but his successors lost it to the Seleucids
of Syria in 198. At first relations between the Seleucids and the Jews were
cordial, but the attempt of Antiochus IV Epiphanes (174‚Äì163) to impose
Hellenic culture sparked a national rebellion, which ended in the expulsion of
the Syrians and the establishment of an independent Jewish kingdom under the
Hasmonean dynasty. Some modern commentators see this period as a civil war
between hellenized and orthodox Jews. The Hasmonean kingdom was a conscious
attempt to revive the Judah described in the Bible: a Jewish monarchy ruled
from Jerusalem and stretching over all the territories once ruled by David and
Solomon. In order to carry out this project the Hasmoneans forcibly converted
to Judaism the one-time Moabites, Edomites and Ammonites, as well as the lost
kingdom of Israel. Some scholars argue that a "Jewish biblical canon" was fixed
by the Hasmonean dynasty. In 63¬ BCE the Roman general Pompey conquered
Jerusalem and made the Jewish kingdom a client of Rome. In 40‚Äì39, Herod the
Great was appointed King of the Jews by the Roman Senate, and in 6¬ CE the last
ethnarch of Judea was deposed by the emperor Augustus and his territories were
combined with Idumea and Samaria and annexed as Iudaea Province under direct
Roman administration. The name Judea (Iudaea) was removed after the revolt of
Simon Bar Kochba in 135¬ CE, after which the area was called Syria Palaestina,
(Greek: Œ Œ±ŒªŒ±ŒπœÉœÑŒØŒΩŒ∑, Palaistinƒì; Latin: Palaestina.) Religion. Iron
Age Yahwism. The development of Israelite monotheism was a gradual process
which began with the normal beliefs and practices of the ancient world. The
religion of the Israelites of Iron Age I, like the Canaanite faith from which
it evolved and many other Ancient Near Eastern religions, was based on the cult
of the ancestors and the worship of family gods (the "gods of the fathers").
The major deities were not numerous ‚Äì El, Asherah, and Yahweh, with Baal as a
fourth god, and perhaps Shamash (the sun) in the early period. By the early
monarchy El and Yahweh had become unified and Asherah did not continue as a
separate state cult, although she continued to be popular at a community level
until Persian times. Yahweh, later the national god of both Israel and Judah
seems to have originated in Edom and Midian in southern Canaan, and may have
been brought north to Israel by the Kenites and Midianites at an early stage.
With the emergence of monarchy at the beginning of Iron Age II the king
promoted his own family god, Yahweh, as the god of the kingdom, but beyond the
royal court religion continued to be both polytheistic and family-centered, as
it was also for other societies in the Ancient Near East. There is a general
consensus among scholars that the first formative event in the emergence of the
distinctive religion described in the Bible was triggered by the destruction of
Israel by Assyria in c.722¬ BCE. Refugees came south to Judah, bringing with
them laws and a Prophetic tradition that Yahweh was the only god who should be
served. These beliefs were adopted by the "people of the land", meaning the
landed families who provided the administrative class of the kingdom, and in
640¬ BCE these circles were decisive in placing on the throne the eight-year-
old Josiah. Judah at this time was a vassal of Assyria, but Assyrian power
collapsed in the 630s, and in around 622 Josiah and the Deuteronomists, as the
circle around him are called by modern scholars, launched a bid for
independence expressed as loyalty to "Yahweh alone" and the law-code in the
book of Deuteronomy, written in the form of a treaty between Judah and Yahweh
to replace the vassal-treaty with Assyria. The earliest Israelite inscription
found, relating to Yahveh as the redeemer of Jerusalem, dates to 7th century
BCE. Beit Lehi also contains the oldest known Hebrew writing of the word
‚ÄúJerusalem‚Äù It's written as the inscription ‚ÄúI am YHWH thy Lord. I will
accept the cities of Judah and I will redeem Jerusalem‚Äù and ‚ÄúAbsolve us oh
merciful God. Absolve us oh YHWH." According to the theology of the
Deuteronomists the terms of the treaty with Yahweh were that he would preserve
both the city and the king in return for their worship and obedience to the
law-code. The destruction of Jerusalem, the Temple, and the Davidic dynasty by
Babylon in 587/586¬ BCE was therefore a deeply traumatic event, and led to much
theological reflection on the meaning of the national tragedy. The solution,
set out in the series of history books from Joshua and Judges to Samuel and
Kings, was to interpret the Babylonian destruction as divinely-ordained
punishment for the failure of the kings, both before and after Josiah to
worship Yahweh alone. Second Temple Judaism. The Second Temple period
(520¬ BCE-70¬ CE) differed in significant ways from what had gone before. A
number of scholars believe that Monotheism emerged among the priests of the
Temple establishment during the seventh and sixth centuries BCE, as did beliefs
regarding angels and demons. It was at this time that the Torah was written,
circumcision and Sabbath-observance became symbols of Jewish identity, and the
institution of the synagogue became increasingly important. See also.

