Unfulfilled Christian religious predictions This article lists predictions of
notable religious figures that failed to come about in the specified time
frame. They are listed according to the religious groups of which they were
members. Predictions by members of mainstream churches. Adventism, Millerism.
Adventism has its roots in the teachings of a Baptist preacher by the name of
William Miller. He first predicted the Second Advent of Jesus Christ would
occur before March 21, 1844. When this date passed a new date was predicted,
April 18, 1844. Again the date passed and another Millerite, Samuel S. Snow,
derived the date of October 22, 1844. The un-fulfillment of these predictions
has been named the Millerite Great Disappointment. Anabaptist Church. Certain
Anabaptists of the early sixteenth century believed that the Millennium would
occur in 1533. Another source reports: "When the prophecy failed, the
Anabaptists became more zealous and claimed that two witnesses (Enoch and
Elijah) had come in the form of Jan Matthys and Jan Bockelson; they would set
up the New Jerusalem in Münster. Münster became a frightening dictatorship
under Bockelson's control. Although all Lutherans and Catholics were expelled
from that city, the millennium never came." Anglican Church. In volume II of
"The Prophetic Faith of Our Fathers", author Leroy Edwin Froom tells us about a
prominent Anglican prelate, who made a relevant prediction: "Edwin Sandys
(1519–1588), Archbishop of York and Primate of England was born in
Lancashire... Sandys says, 'Now, as we know not the day and time, so let us be
assured that this coming of the Lord is near. He is not slack, as we do count
slackness. That it is at hand, it may be probably gathered out of the
Scriptures in diverse places. The signs mentioned by Christ in the Gospel which
should be the foreshewers of this terrible day, are almost all fulfilled.'"
Assemblies of God Church. During World War I, "The Weekly Evangel", an official
publication of the Assemblies of God, carried this prediction: "We are not yet
in the Armageddon struggle proper, but at its commencement, and it may be, if
students of prophecy read the signs aright, that Christ will come before the
present war closes, and before Armageddon...The war preliminary to Armageddon,
it seems, has commenced." Other editions speculated that the end would come no
later than 1934 or 1935. Calvary Chapel. This same viewpoint was published by
the popular Pastor Hal Lindsey in his widely published book "The Late Great
Planet Earth". Lutheran Church. The founder of the Lutheran Church was the
reformer, Martin Luther (1483–1546 A.D.). According to one authority, Luther
ventured to predict: "For my part, I am sure that the Day of Judgement is just
around the corner. It doesn't matter that we don't know the precise day...
perhaps someone else can figure it out. But it is certain that time is now at
an end." Another author says: "In all of [Luther's] work there was a sense of
urgency for the time was short... the world was heading for Armageddon in the
war with the Turk." Luther is quoted as expecting the end within 300 years Even
after Luther's death in 1546, Lutheran leaders kept up the claim of the
nearness of the end. About the year 1584, a zealous Lutheran named Adam
Nachenmoser wrote the large volume 'Theologicum' in which he predicted: ""In
1590 the Gospel would be preached to all nations and a wonderful unity would be
achieved. The last days would then be close at hand."" Nachenmoser offered
numerous conjectures about the date; 1635 seemed most likely. Mennonites.
Russian Mennonite minister Claas Epp, Jr. predicted that Christ would return on
March 8, 1889, and, when that date passed uneventfully, 1891. Presbyterian
Church. Thomas Brightman, who lived from 1562 to 1607, has been called "one of
the fathers of Presbyterianism in England." He predicted that "between 1650 and
1695 would see the conversion of the many Jews and a revival of their nation in
Palestine...the destruction of the Papacy...the marriage of the Lamb and his
wife." This did not happen. Christopher Love who lived from 1618–1651 was a
bright graduate of Oxford and a strong Presbyterian. Love predicted that: (1)
Babylon would fall in 1758 (2) God's anger against the wicked would be
demonstrated in 1759 and (3) in 1763 there would occur a great earthquake all
over the world. Roman Catholic Church. According to the "Catholic
Encyclopedia", Saint Malachy (d. 1148) is said to have foretold that Ireland
would be subject to England for 700 years: ".. his beloved native isle would
undergo at the hands of England oppression, persecution, and calamities of
every kind, during a week of centuries; but that she would preserve her
fidelity to God and to His Church amidst all her trials. At the end of seven
centuries she would be delivered from her oppressors (or oppressions), who in
their turn would be subjected to dreadful chastisements.." In 1869, 700 years
after the Norman invasion of Ireland began, Ireland was still a part of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, though an independent Irish state
would be created fifty years later. When in 1525 Martin Luther, an ex-monk,
married Catharina von Bora, an ex-nun, his enemies said that their offspring
would fulfill an old tradition that the Antichrist would be the son of such a
union. Erasmus remarked that the tradition could apply to thousands of such
children. In 1771 Bishop Charles Walmesley published, under the nom de plume of
"Signor Pastorini", his "General History of the Christian Church from Her Birth
to Her Final Triumphant State in Heaven Chiefly Deduced from the Apocalypse of
St. John the Apostle and Evangelist". In it he attributed to what he called the
fifth age of the Church a duration of 300 years, beginning with the Protestant
Reformation in 1520 or 1525. This was widely interpreted as predicting the
downfall of Protestantism by 1825. In fact, just four years later, the Roman
Catholic Relief Act 1829 brought to a culmination the process of Catholic
Emancipation throughout the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland.
Predictions by other groups. Jehovah's Witnesses. Charles Taze Russell, the
first president of the Watch Tower Society, calculated 1874 as the year of
Christ's Second Coming, and taught that Christ was invisibly present and ruling
from the heavens since that year. Russell proclaimed Christ's invisible return
in 1874, the resurrection of the saints in 1875, and predicted the end of the
"harvest" and the Rapture of the saints to heaven for 1878, and the final end
of "the day of wrath" in 1914. 1874 was considered the end of 6,000 years of
human history and the beginning of judgment by Christ. A 1917 Watch Tower
Society publication predicted that in 1918, God would begin to destroy churches
and millions of their members. J.F. Rutherford, who succeeded Russell as
president of the Watch Tower Society, predicted that the Millennium would begin
in 1925, and that biblical figures such as Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and David
would be resurrected as "princes". The Watch Tower Society bought property and
built a house, Beth Sarim, in California for their return. From 1966,
statements in Jehovah's Witness publications raised strong expectations that
Armageddon would arrive in 1975. In 1974 Witnesses were commended for selling
their homes and property to "finish out the rest of their days in this old
system" in full time preaching. In 1976 "The Watchtower" advised those who had
been "disappointed" by the failure of the predictions for 1975 to adjust their
viewpoint because their understanding had been "based on wrong premises", but
four years later the Watch Tower Society admitted its responsibility in
building up hope regarding 1975. Mormonism. Joseph Smith, founder of the Mormon
faith, made several dozen prophecies during his lifetime, many of which are
recorded in the sacred texts of the Mormon faith. The prophecies included
predictions of the Civil War, the fall of the U. S. government, the coming of
Jesus, and several less significant predictions. Church apologists cite many
prophecies that they claim came true, and church critics cite many prophecies
that they claim did not come true.
