English translations of the Bible Partial translations of the Bible into
languages of the English people can be traced back to the end of the 7th
century, including translations into Old English and Middle English. More than
450 versions have been created over time. Old English. Although John Wycliff is
often credited with the first translation of the Bible into English, there
were, in fact, many translations of large parts of the Bible centuries before
Wycliff's work. The English Bible was first translated from the Latin Vulgate
into Old English by a few select monks and scholars. Such translations were
generally in the form of prose or as interlinear glosses (literal translations
above the Latin words). Very few complete translations existed during that
time. Rather, most of the books of the Bible existed separately and were read
as individual texts. Thus, the sense of the Bible as history that often exists
today did not exist at that time. Instead, a more allegorical rendering of the
Bible was more common and translations of the Bible often included the
writer’s own commentary on passages in addition to the literal translation.
Toward the end of the 7th century, the Venerable Bede began a translation of
scripture into Old English (also called Anglo-Saxon). Aldhelm (c. 639–709)
translated the complete Book of Psalms and large portions of other scriptures
into Old English. In the 10th century an Old English translation of the Gospels
was made in the Lindisfarne Gospels: a word-for-word gloss inserted between the
lines of the Latin text by Aldred, Provost of Chester-le-Street. This is the
oldest extant translation of the Gospels into the English language. The "Wessex
Gospels" (also known as the "West-Saxon Gospels") are a full translation of the
four gospels into a West Saxon dialect of Old English. Produced in
approximately 990, they are the first translation of all four gospels into
English without the Latin text. In the 11th century, Abbot Ælfric translated
much of the Old Testament into Old English. The "Old English Hexateuch" is an
illuminated manuscript of the first six books of the Old Testament without
lavish illustrations and including a translation of the Book of Judges in
addition to the 5 books of the Pentateuch. Middle English. The Ormulum is in
Middle English of the 12th century. Like its Old English precursor from
Ælfric, an Abbot of Eynsham, it includes very little Biblical text, and
focuses more on personal commentary. This style was adopted by many of the
original English translators. For example the story of the Wedding at Cana is
almost 800 lines long, but fewer than 40 lines are the actual translation of
the text. An unusual characteristic is that the translation mimics Latin verse,
and so is similar to the better known and appreciated 14th century English
poem, Cursor Mundi. Richard Rolle (1290–1349) wrote an English Psalter. Many
religious works are attributed to Rolle, but it has been questioned how many
are genuinely from his hand. Many of his works were concerned with personal
devotion, and some were used by the Lollards. The 14th century theologian John
Wycliffe is credited with translating what is now known as Wyclif's Bible,
though it is not clear how much of the translation he himself did. This
translation came out in two different versions. The earlier text is
characterised by a strong adherence to the word order of Latin, and might have
been difficult for the layperson to comprehend. The later text made more
concessions to the native grammar of English. Early Modern English. Early
Modern English Bible translations are those translations of the Bible which
were made between about 1500 and 1800, the period of Early Modern English. This
was the first major period of Bible translation into the English language. It
began with the dramatic introduction of the Tyndale Bible. The early 16th
century Tyndale Bible differs from the others since Tyndale used the Greek and
Hebrew texts of the New Testament (NT) and Old Testament (OT) in addition to
Jerome’s Latin translation. Tyndale is also unique in that he was the first
of the Middle English translators to use the printing press to help distribute
several thousand copies of this translation throughout England. It included the
first "authorised version", known as the Great Bible (1539); the Geneva Bible
(1560), notable for being the first Bible divided into verses, and the Bishop's
Bible (1568), which was an attempt by Elizabeth I to create a new authorised
version. It also included the Douay-Rheims Bible (NT in 1582, OT during 1609-
1610), and the landmark Authorized King James Version of 1611. The Douay-Rheims
Bible was the first complete Roman Catholic Bible in English. It is called
Douay-Rheims because the New Testament portion was first completed in Rheims,
France, in 1582, followed by the Old Testament, finished in 1609-1610 in Douay
(or Douai), France. In this version, the 14 books of the Old Testament
Apochrypha are mingled with the other books, rather than kept separate in an
appendix. Modern English. Early English Bibles were generally based on Greek
texts or Latin translations. Modern English translations of the Bible are based
on a wider variety of manuscripts in the original languages (Greek and Hebrew).
The translators put much scholarly effort into cross-checking the various
sources such as the Septuagint, Textus Receptus, and Masoretic Text. Relatively
recent discoveries such as the Dead Sea scrolls provide additional reference
information. There is some controversy over which texts should be used as a
basis for translation, as some of the alternate sources do not include phrases
(or sometimes entire verses) which are found only in the Textus Receptus. Some
say the alternate sources were poorly representative of the texts used in their
time, whereas others claim the Textus Receptus includes passages that were
added to the alternate texts improperly. These controversial passages are not
the basis for disputed issues of doctrine, but tend to be additional stories or
snippets of phrases. Many modern English translations, such as the New
International Version, contain limited text notes indicating where differences
occur in original sources. A somewhat greater number of textual differences are
noted in the New King James Bible, indicating hundreds of New Testament
differences between the Nestle-Aland, the Textus Receptus, and the Hodges
edition of the Majority Text. The differences in the Old Testament are less
well documented, but do contain some references to differences between
consonantal interpretations in the Masoretic Text, the Dead Sea Scrolls, and
the Septuagint. Even with these hundreds of differences, however, a more
complete listing is beyond the scope of most single volume Bibles (see Critical
Translations below). Individual translations. While most translations are made
by committees of scholars in order to avoid bias or idiosyncrasy, translations
are sometimes made by individuals. The translation of J.B. Phillips, J.N.
Darby's Darby Bible, R.A. Knox, Gerrit Verkuyl's Berkeley Version, and Eugene
H. Peterson's The Message are largely the work of individual translators. Other
notable scholars, such as Robert Alter and N. T. Wright have translated
portions of the Bible in light of their understanding of the ancient languages
and cultures. Alternative approaches.  Single source translations. While most
translations attempt to synthesize the various texts in the original languages,
some translations also translate one specific textual source, generally for
scholarly reasons. A single volume example for the Old Testament is "The Dead
Sea Scrolls Bible" (ISBN 0-06-060064-0) by Martin Abegg, Peter Flint and Eugene
Ulrich. "The Comprehensive New Testament" (ISBN 0-9778737-1-4) by T. E. Clontz
and J. Clontz presents a scholarly view of the New Testament text by conforming
to the Nestle-Aland 27th edition and extensively annotating the translation to
fully explain different textual sources and possible alternative translations.
"A Comparative Psalter" (ISBN 0-19-529760-1) edited by John Kohlenberger
presents a comparative diglot translation of the Psalms of the Masoretic Text
and the Septuagint, using the Revised Standard Version and the New English
Translation of the Septuagint. Jewish translations. Jewish English Bible
translations are modern English Bible translations that include the books of
the Hebrew Bible (Tanakh) according to the masoretic text, and according to the
traditional division and order of Torah, Nevi'im, and Ketuvim. Jewish
translations often also reflect traditional Jewish interpretations of the
Bible, as opposed to the Christian understanding that is often reflected in
non-Jewish translations. For example, Jewish translations translate עלמה
"‘almâh" in as "young woman", while many Christian translations render the
word as "virgin". While modern biblical scholarship is similar for both
Christians and Jews, there are distinctive features of Jewish translations,
even those created by academic scholars. These include the avoidance of
Christological interpretations, adherence to the Masoretic Text (at least in
the main body of the text, as in the new Jewish Publication Society (JPS)
translation) and greater use of classical Jewish exegesis. Some translations
prefer names transliterated from the Hebrew, though the majority of Jewish
translations use the Anglicized forms of biblical names. The first English
Jewish translation of the Bible into English was by Isaac Leeser in the 19th
century. The JPS produced two of the most popular Jewish translations, namely
the JPS "The Holy Scriptures" of 1917 and the NJPS "Tanakh" (first printed in a
single volume in 1985, second edition in 1999). Since the 1980s there have been
multiple efforts among Orthodox publishers to produce translations that are not
only Jewish, but also adhere to Orthodox norms. Among these are The Living
Torah and Nach by Aryeh Kaplan and others, the Torah and other portions in an
ongoing project by Everett Fox, and the ArtScroll Tanakh. Popularity. The
"Christian Booksellers Association" list the most popular versions of the Bible
sold by their members (in the US). In 2007 the New International Version was
the most popular, followed by the New King James Version and the King James
Version More current data can be found in the "External links" section, which
typically reflects the above rankings. Amazon lists the top ten in current
sales in the USA (as of 8/17/2009) to be the NAB, NRSV, NIV, KJV, The Message,
NASB, NLT, RSV, The Amplified Bible, and the Orthodox Study Bible. Sales are
affected by denomination and religious affiliation (e.g. the most popular
Jewish version would not compete with rankings of a larger audience). Sales
data can be affected by the method of marketing. Some translations are directly
marketed to denominations or local churches, and many 'Christian Booksellers'
only offer Protestant Bibles, so Catholic and Orthodox Bibles may not appear as
high on the Christian Bookseller's Association rank.
