History of Christianity The history of Christianity concerns the Christian
religion, its followers and the Church with its various denominations, from the
first century to the present. Christianity was founded in the 1st century in
the Levant region of the Middle East by Jesus Christ of Nazareth (Matthew 16:
18) Jesus of Nazareth as prophesied in the Old Testament (Micah 5:2-5) to be
the Christ or chosen one of God. The fathers of Christianity included those who
had been disciples of Jesus such as Peter, Matthew, James and John, as well as
others who may never have met him but were either influenced by accounts of his
teachings such as the Gospel writers Mark and Luke, or described having
spiritual revelations of his divine nature, such as Paul of Tarsus who actively
encouraged the founding of Christian communities or "churches" after his
conversion. Christianity spread initially from Jerusalem throughout the Near
East, into places such as Syria, Assyria, Mesopotamia, Phoenicia, Asia Minor,
Jordan and Egypt. In the 4th century it was successively adopted as the state
religion by Armenia in 301, Georgia in 319, the Aksumite Empire in 325, and the
Roman Empire in 380. It became common to all of Europe in the Middle Ages and
expanded throughout the world during Europe's Age of Exploration from the
Renaissance onwards to become the world's largest religion. Throughout its
history, Christianity has weathered persecutions, schisms and theological
disputes that have resulted in many distinct churches. The largest branches of
Christianity are the Roman Catholic, Eastern Orthodox, Anglican, and Protestant
churches. Early Christianity (c.33–325). During its early history,
Christianity grew from a 1st-century Jewish following to a religion that
existed across the entire Greco-Roman world and beyond. Early Christianity may
be divided into 2 distinct phases: the apostolic period, when the first
apostles were alive and led the Church, and the post-apostolic period, when an
early episcopal structure developed, and persecution was periodically intense.
The Roman persecution of Christians ended in AD 313 under the reign of
Constantine the Great, who in 325 prompted the First Council of Nicaea, the
beginning of the period of the First seven Ecumenical Councils. Apostolic
Church. The Apostolic Church was the community led by the apostles, and to some
degree, Jesus' relatives. In his "Great Commission", the resurrected Jesus
commanded that his teachings be spread to all the world. While the historical
reliability of the Acts of the Apostles is disputed by critics, the "Acts of
the Apostles" is the major primary source of information for this period. Acts
gives a history of the Church from this commission in to the spread of the
religion among the gentiles and the eastern Mediterranean by Paul and others.
The first Christians were essentially all ethnically Jewish or Jewish
Proselytes. In other words, Jesus preached to the Jewish people and called from
them his first disciples, see for example Matthew 10. However, the "Great
Commission" is specifically directed at "all nations," and an early difficulty
arose concerning the matter of Gentile (non-Jewish) converts as to whether they
had to "become Jewish" (usually referring to circumcision and adherence to
dietary law), as part of becoming Christian. Circumcision in particular was
considered repulsive by Greeks and Hellenists while circumcision advocates were
labelled "Judaisers", see Jewish background to the circumcision controversy for
details. The actions of Peter, at the conversion of Cornelius the Centurion,
seemed to indicate that circumcision and food laws did not apply to gentiles,
and this was agreed to at the apostolic Council of Jerusalem. Related issues
are still debated today. The doctrines of the apostles brought the Early Church
into conflict with some Jewish religious authorities. This eventually led to
their expulsion from the synagogues, according to one theory of the Council of
Jamnia. Acts records the martyrdom of the Christian leaders, Stephen and James
of Zebedee. Thus, Christianity acquired an identity distinct from Rabbinic
Judaism, but this distinction was not recognised all at once by the Roman
Empire, see Split of early Christianity and Judaism for details. The name
"Christian" (Greek ) was first applied to the disciples in Antioch, as recorded
in Acts 11:26. Some contend that the term "Christian" was first coined as a
derogatory term, meaning "little Christs", and was meant as a mockery, a term
of derision for those that followed the teachings of Jesus. Early Christian
beliefs and creeds. The sources for the beliefs of the apostolic community
include the Gospels and New Testament epistles. The very earliest accounts of
belief are contained in these texts, such as early Christian creeds and hymns,
as well as accounts of the Passion, the empty tomb, and Resurrection
appearances; some of these are dated to the 30s or 40s CE, originating within
the Jerusalem Church. Post-Apostolic Church. The post-apostolic period concerns
the time after the death of the apostles (roughly 100 AD) until persecutions
ended with the legalisation of Christian worship under Constantine the Great.
Persecutions. From the beginning, Christians were subject to various
persecutions. This involved even death for Christians such as Stephen () and
James, son of Zebedee (). Larger-scale persecutions followed at the hands of
the authorities of the Roman Empire, beginning with the year 64, when, as
reported by the Roman historian Tacitus, the Emperor Nero blamed them for that
year's great Fire of Rome. According to Church tradition, it was under Nero's
persecution that Peter and Paul were each martyred in Rome. Similarly, several
of the New Testament writings mention persecutions and stress endurance through
them. For 250 years Christians suffered from sporadic persecutions for their
refusal to worship the Roman emperor, considered treasonous and punishable by
execution. Why did Christianity succeed? In spite of these at-times intense
persecutions, the Christian religion continued its spread throughout the
Mediterranean Basin. There is no agreement on an explanation of how
Christianity managed to spread so successfully prior to the Edict of Milan and
the establishment of Christianity as the state religion of the Roman Empire.
For some Christians, the success was simply the natural consequence of the
truth of the religion and the hand of Providence. However, similar explanations
can be claimed for the spread of Islam and Buddhism—yet none of them are
historical explanations. In "The Rise of Christianity", Rodney Stark argues
that Christianity triumphed over paganism chiefly because it improved the lives
of its adherents in various ways. Another factor, more recently pointed out,
was the way in which Christianity combined its promise of a general
resurrection of the dead with the traditional Greek belief that true
immortality depended on the survival of the body, with Christianity adding
practical explanations of how this was going to actually happen at the end of
the world. For Mosheim the rapid progression of Christianity was explained by
two factors: translations of the New Testament and the Apologies composed in
defence of Christianity. Edward Gibbon, in his classic "The History of the
Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire", discusses the topic in considerable
detail in his famous Chapter Fifteen, summarizing the historical causes of the
early success of Christianity as follows: "(1) The inflexible, and, if we may
use the expression, the intolerant zeal of the Christians, derived, it is true,
from the Jewish religion, but purified from the narrow and unsocial spirit
which, instead of inviting, had deterred the Gentiles from embracing the law of
Moses. (2) The doctrine of a future life, improved by every additional
circumstance which could give weight and efficacy to that important truth. (3)
The miraculous powers ascribed to the primitive church. (4) The pure and
austere morals of the Christians. (5) The union and discipline of the Christian
republic, which gradually formed an independent and increasing state in the
heart of the Roman empire."Gibbon, Edward, "History of the Decline and Fall of
the Roman Empire", Chapter Fifteen. in 6 volumes at the
