Historical episcopate The episcopate is the collective body of all bishops of a
church. The term is also used to refer to the status or term in office of an
individual bishop. In the Roman Catholic, Anglican, Eastern Orthodox, Eastern
Rite Catholic, Oriental Orthodox, Old-Catholic, Moravian Church, and
Independent Catholic churches as well as in the Assyrian Church of the East, it
is held that only a person in Apostolic Succession, a line of succession of
bishops dating back to the Apostles, can be a bishop, and only such a person
can validly ordain Christian clergy. The succession must be transmitted from
each bishop to a successor by the rite of Holy Orders. Bishops in valid
Apostolic Succession compose the historical episcopate. Bishops of the
Evangelical Lutheran Church in America also claim to be ordained through the
laying on of hands of bishops in the apostolic succession. The Roman Catholic
Church holds that a bishop's consecration is valid if the sacrament of Holy
Orders is validly administered with the intention of doing what the Church does
by ordination and according to a valid sacramental form, and if the
consecrating bishop's orders are valid, regardless of whether the rite takes
place within or outside of the Roman Catholic Church. Thus, Roman Catholics
recognize the validity of the episcopacy of Eastern Orthodox, Oriental
Orthodox, Assyrian Church of the East and Old Catholic bishops, but the
situation is less clear regarding Anglican bishops and Independent Catholic
bishops (see Episcopi vagantes). The Eastern Orthodox Church's view has been
summarised as follows: "While accepting the canonical possibility of
recognising the existence (υποστατόν) of sacraments performed outside
herself, (the Eastern Orthodox Church) questions their validity
(έγκυρον) and certainly rejects their efficacy (ενεργόν)"; and it
sees "the canonical recognition (αναγνώρισις) of the validity of
sacraments performed outside the Orthodox Church (as referring) to the validity
of the sacraments only of those who join the Orthodox Church (individually or
as a body)." This applies to the validity and efficacy of the ordination of
bishops and the other sacraments, not only of the Independent Catholic
Churches, but also of all other Christian Churches, including the Roman
Catholic Church, Oriental Orthodoxy, and the Assyrian Church of the East. The
Eastern Orthodox position on Anglican orders (in the hypothesis of Anglican
bishops joining the Orthodox Church individually or as a body) is
controversial, involving disagreements among national churches, theologians,
and bishops. Because of changes in the Ordinal (the rites of Holy Orders) under
King Edward VI, the Roman Catholic Church does not fully recognize all Anglican
Holy Orders as valid, but the latter are recognized (and participated in) by
Old Catholics, whose Holy Orders are considered valid by Rome. Lutheran and
other episcopally ordered Protestant successions are not recognized by Roman
Catholics. The Anglican Church does not recognise the orders of non-episcopal
denominations. More than 91% of the world's more than 5,000 living Western
bishops trace their episcopal lineage back to 16th century bishop Scipione
Cardinal Rebiba. In the early 18th century, Pope Benedict XIII, whose orders
descended from Rebiba, personally consecrated at least 139 bishops for various
important European sees, including those in Germany, France, England and the
New World. These bishops in turn largely consecrated new bishops only in their
respective countries, effectively erasing other episcopal lines.
