Holocaust theology Holocaust theology (from the Greek "": "hólos", "whole" and
"kaustós", "burnt"), refers to a body of theological and philosophical debate
and reflection, and related literature, primarily within Judaism, that attempts
to come to grips with various conflicting views about the role of God in the
universe and the human world in light of the Holocaust of the late 1930s and
1940s when approximately 11 million people, including 6 million Jews, were
subjected to genocide by the Nazi regime and its allies. "Holocaust theology"
is also referred to as ""Theologie nach Auschwitz"" (German: "Theology after
Auschwitz" or "Post-Auschwitz Theology"), due to the common practice of using
"Auschwitz" to represent the Holocaust as a whole. Judaism, Christianity, and
Islam have traditionally taught that God is omniscient (all-knowing),
omnipotent (all-powerful), and omnibenevolent (all-good) in nature. However,
these claims seem to be in jarring contrast with the fact that there is much
evil and suffering in the world. Perhaps the most difficult question that
monotheists have confronted is how one can reconcile this view of God with the
existence of evil and suffering. This fundamental inquiry is known as the
problem of evil. Within all of the monotheistic faiths many answers
(theodicies) have been proposed. Although in light of the magnitude of
depravity seen in the Holocaust, many people have re-examined classical views
on this subject. A common question is, "How can people still have any kind of
faith after the Holocaust?" Jewish theological responses: Background to the
diversity of views. The variety of theological responses that Jews have
articulated about the Holocaust, can be related to wider traditions of thought.
In order to understand their views in context, it is helpful to see the breadth
and scope of traditional Jewish theodicies of evil, as well as to describe the
roots of Modern and Post-Modern revisionist Jewish philosophical views. The
classic tradition of Jewish scholarship and spirituality, embodied in its
historic texts, comprises many interpretations of Biblical and Rabbinic
Judaism. They vary from legal, imaginative and philosophical endeavours, to
esoteric mystical theologies. Together they form a scholarly culture that the
Jews carried and evolved, through their historic journeys. This tradition of
thought developed from its own sources, and also sometimes through intellectual
encounters with other traditions, giving and receiving ideas in turn. The
revealed theology of Judaism, affected Western thought through its adapted
forms in Christianity. Meanwhile, the other source of Western culture, arose
from humanistic philosophy of Ancient Greece, based on independent thought from
first principles. When the Jewish community was granted social rights after the
Enlightenment, they developed their own religious and philosophical responses
to Modern thought. These varied from re-commitment and reinterpretation of
traditional observance, through synthesising embraces of the best of both
worlds, to radical or revisionist reassessments of historical Judaism. In each
of these approaches, new creativity emerged, with new theological and
philosophical interpretations. Hasidic Philosophy developed Jewish mysticism in
new ways. Litvish Orthodoxy formed new approaches to Talmudic scholarship and
Mussar (Ethical introspection). Both of these Eastern European civilizations
continued the theoretical interpretation of Lurianic Kabbalah, which underpins
Haredi Jewish belief until today. Modern Orthodox Judaism thinkers
reinterpreted Judaism in the language of modern secular philosophy and
scholarship. The Haskalah gave birth to critical, academic approaches to
Judaism, beginning with the 19th Century German "Wissenschaft des Judentums"
("Science of Judaism") movement. Theologians from non-Orthodox Jewish
denominations expressed a range of revisionist views of Jewish spirituality and
scholarship. New schools, such as Jewish existentialism, could find new meaning
in Revelation, outside of Orthodox Judaism. Historical developments of Jewish
thought could rediscover new meaning in earlier traditions. The early scholars
of the Haskalah (Jewish Enlightenment movement) rejected the mystical in
Judaism, in common with the secular Western thought of their time, and their
personal wish to leave behind the Shtetl. This tendency was shared with the
prevalent values of the Western secular Enlightenment of their time, that
sought to rationalise Revelation. The philosophical father of Haskalah, Moses
Mendelssohn, could seek therefore to remove the mystical dimensions of Jewish
spirituality. The birth of academic scholarship of Kabbalah under Gershom
Scholem, and the search for deeper Jewish spirituality, in the 20th Century,
rediscovered Jewish mysticism for Jews of all denominations today. New
movements of Jewish Renewal and Neo-Hasidism, could find spiritual and
philosophical insights from Jewish mysticism, outside of Orthodoxy. This
likewise reflects wider currents of thought in Western society, from the non-
mechanistic and neo-mystical aspects of 20th Century Science and Mathematics,
to philosophical and artistic interest in the values of cultural identity.
Orthodox Jewish responses. Haredi views. The Haredi Jewish world may seem more
monolithic to outsiders than its diversity and historical roots actually
entail. The Haredi world today is a product of different Eastern European
Jewish traditions, as they accommodated, or reacted against, their encounter
with modern thought and society. Broadly, there are two different sources to
traditional Eastern European Jewish civilisation: Firstly, the continuation of
Talmudic centred scholarship, augmented by Kabbalah for a reserved elite, known
as Lithuanian Orthodoxy, saw itself as continuing and protecting the
traditional forms of Jewish worship through advanced study. Secondly, the
populist, mystical Jewish revival of Hasidism, that began in 18th century
Ukraine, and later spread across other areas, celebrated sincerity above
learning as a path to God, and embraced the common folk. As Hasidism developed,
its leaders synthesised it with traditional learning, while the Lithuanian
world came to be called Mitnagdim(Opponents), for their pious opposition to the
Hasidic restructuring of Jewish thought and society. As both traditions
encountered the secularising forces of Haskalah(Enlightenment), and political
Socialism and Zionism, they reacted with a diversity of views, that today
influence their different forms of Jewish thought and life. This influential
range of historical traditions, in forming the diversity of Haredi Judaism
today, has given rise to a range of theological responses to the Holocaust. At
heart lies the issue of whether the tragedy of the Holocaust, is different in
nature to the preceding millennia of Jewish persecution. Traditional Biblical,
Rabbinic and Kabbalistic thought has offered theological explanations for
previous tragedies, from the reaction of the Prophets to Nebuchadnezzar's
destruction of Jerusalem and exile of the nation, to the Medieval Pogroms of
Christendom. Because Haredi Judaism accords unique status to traditional Jewish
thought, while downplaying the need to look to secular disciplines, it seeks
theological answers from faithful reinterpretations of Judaism alone. In
general, most views in the Haredi world tends to see the Holocaust in line with
previous Rabbinic approaches, though there are notable and important
exceptions. For those who take the traditional approach, they suggest
theological explanations that might give a reason for the calamity, or a
contributory reason, in accordance with the traditional Jewish worldview. In an
age without open prophecy, it is questionable whether speculative
interpretations like this are valid, if not obscene in view of the enormity of
the Holocaust, though their proponents have sometimes been great figures in
traditional Judaism. In traditional thought, the sufferings of the people of
Israel, have deeper ethical and mystical causes, and require collective soul
searching and return to God. It should be emphasised, to contextualise this
idea, that in traditional thought, even the harsh decrees of God are hidden
blessings, rather than merely punishments, a theme especially emphasised in
Jewish mysticism. Those who see traditional types of explanation, would point
to previous tragedies in Jewish history, that in their time had enormous
destruction and hardship, such as the massive loss of life in Judea under Titus
and Hadrian. They would also refer to the dire warnings in Leviticus and
Deuteronomy, called the sections of "Tochecha" (Warnings) for rebelliousness,
alongside blessings for faithfulness, that are only chanted in an undertone,
when read aloud in the annual cycle of reading. For those within Haredi
Judaism, who favour ascribing causes, some blame the Holocaust on the
abandonment of many European Jews of traditional Judaism, and their embrace of
other ideologies such as Socialism, Zionism, or various non-Orthodox Jewish
movements. Others suggest that God allowed the Nazis to persecute the Jews
because Orthodox European Jews did not do enough to fight these trends, or did
not support Zionism. In this Haredi theodicy, the Jews of Europe were no longer
protected by the Torah and faith, and the actions of God which allowed this
were righteous and just. Those who propose views like this, would see their
suggested causes as contributory triggers, while in a time of judgement all the
community suffers, whether innocent or guilty. Ideas such as this, that can
seem alien to non-Orthodox thought, have a context that softens their
harshness. The Talmud has a legal discussion of the nature of innocence and
guilt. The rare "Apikorus" (Heretic), is contrasted with the "Tinnuk Shenishba"
(Innocent captive brought up without knowledge of Judaism). Many Halachic
authorities have decided that secular Jews today are figuratively in the second
category, and should be encouraged with love to discover Judaism. If indeed,
earlier generations were guilty of rejecting Jewish observance, this argument
would apply to generations from the 19th century onwards. Those who see the
Holocaust as the unfolding of God's attribute of Judgement, might say that the
guilt accumulated for a few generations. More hidden Kabbalistic doctrines,
involved in the "Mysteries of Creation", such as "Gilgulim" (Reincarnation),
would also contribute processes. For Haredi proponents of causes, nonetheless,
it should be emphasised that such views usually fit within an appreciation of
the fundamental and essential processes of Divine love. Mnachem Risikoff.
Another early voice who ultimately rejected the idea that the Holocaust was
divine punishment, with Hitler as an instrument in a greater plan, was Rabbi
Mnachem HaKohen Risikoff. When Rav Kook died in 1935, Risikoff—with "a
presentiment of the catastrophe" yet to come -- published a eulogy in which he
put forth his belief that Kook might have been taken early to spare him from
even worse times to come. His writings reveal his struggle to accept the idea
that the Holocaust was punishment for sin, and a call to repentance—and early
on considered that Hitler might be part of a divine plan. But he ultimately
wrote that it was not possible to accept this idea, because such extreme
suffering could never come from God, for God acted according to Torah Risikoff
may have been unique in terms of Holocaust theology regarding the role of the
levitical tribe. In his writings, especially in his book, "HaKohanim
vHaLeviim", "The Priests and the Levites" (New York:1940), he stressed that
members of these groups exist in the realm between history (below) and
redemption (above), and were called upon to take leading roles in a call to
prayer, repentance, and action that would help bring an end to suffering. His
writings reflected a combination of what has been called meta-history (ultimate
redemption) and history, including the idea that part of the problem on earth
was dishonesty not only among individuals, but also among nations. For example,
he wrote that governments of a number of nations had promised Austria and
Czechoslovakia that they would come to their defense if the need arose, but
they ultimately broke their promises. He "distilled metahistory into history
with his program for priestly action to mediate redemption." Haredi theological
"tendencies". The various historic traditions behind the diversity of Haredi
approaches, have given rise to different theological tendencies. Modern
Orthodox Jewish views. Most Modern Orthodox Jews reject the idea that the
Holocaust was God's fault. Modern Orthodox rabbis such as Joseph Soloveitchik,
Norman Lamm, Randalf Stolzman, Abraham Besdin, Emanuel Rackman, Eliezer
Berkovits and others have written on this issue; many of their works have been
collected in a volume published by the Rabbinical Council of America:
"Theological and Halakhic Reflections on the Holocaust" (edited by Bernhard H.
Rosenberg and Fred Heuman, Ktav/RCA, 1992). Works of important Jewish
theologians. Richard Rubenstein. Prof. Richard Rubenstein's original piece on
this issue, "After Auschwitz", held that the only intellectually honest
response to the Holocaust is the rejection of God, and the recognition that all
existence is ultimately meaninglessness. There is no divine plan or purpose, no
God that reveals His will to mankind, and God does not care about the world.
Man must assert and create his own value in life. This view has been rejected
by Jews of all religious denominations, but his works were widely read in the
Jewish community in the 1970s. Since that time Rubenstein has begun to move
away from this view; his later works affirm a form of deism in which one may
believe that God may exist as the basis for reality and some also include
Kabbalistic notions of the nature of God. Emil Fackenheim. Emil Fackenheim is
known for his understanding that people must look carefully at the Holocaust,
and to find within it a new revelation from God. For Fackenheim, the Holocaust
was an "epoch-making event". In contrast to Richard Rubenstein's most well-
known views, Fackenheim holds that people must still affirm their belief in God
and God's continued role in the world. Fackenheim holds that the Holocaust
reveals unto us a new Biblical commandment, "We are forbidden to hand Hitler
posthumous victories". He said that rejecting God because of the Holocaust was
like giving in to Hitler. Ignaz Maybaum. In a rare view that has not been
adopted by any sizable element of the Jewish or Christian community, Ignaz
Maybaum has proposed that the Holocaust is the ultimate form of vicarious
atonement. The Jewish people become in fact the "suffering servant" of Isaiah.
The Jewish people suffer for the sins of the world. In his view: "In Auschwitz
Jews suffered vicarious atonement for the sins of mankind." Eliezer Berkovits.
Rabbi Eliezer Berkovits (1908–1992) holds that man's free will depends on
God's decision to remain hidden. If God were to reveal himself in history and
hold back the hand of tyrants, man's free will would be rendered non-existent.
This is a view that is loosely based on the kabbalistic concept of "nahama
d'kissufa" (lit. "bread of shame")- the idea that greater satisfaction is
achieved when one becomes deserving of a blessing rather than when it is given
as a gift. Kabbala teaches that this is one of the reasons God created man with
free will and with obligations, and that in order to maintain that free will,
God reduces the extent to which he manifests himself in the world ("tzimtzum").
Many of Berkovits' books will be republished by the Eliezer Berkovits Institute
for Jewish Thought under the auspices of Shalem Center, Jerusalem. Harold
Kushner, William Kaufman and Milton Steinberg. Rabbis Harold Kushner, William
E. Kaufman, Milton Steinberg believe that God is not omnipotent, and thus is
not to blame for mankind's abuse of free will. Thus, there is no contradiction
between the existence of a good God and the existence of massive evil by part
of mankind. It is claimed that this is also the view expressed by some
classical Jewish authorities, such as Abraham ibn Daud, Abraham ibn Ezra, and
Gersonides. David Weiss Halivni. Prayer in the Shoah. From: Judaism: A
Quarterly Journal of Jewish Life and Thought Irving Greenberg. Rabbi Irving
Greenberg is a Modern Orthodox rabbi who has written extensively on how the
Holocaust should affect Jewish theology. Greenberg has an Orthodox
understanding of God. Like many other Orthodox Jews, he does not believe that
God forces people to follow Jewish law; rather he believes that Jewish law is
God's will for the Jewish people, and that Jews should follow Jewish law as
normative. Greenberg's break with Orthodox theology comes with his analysis of
the implications of the Holocaust. He writes that the worst thing that God
could do to the Jewish people for failing to follow the law is Holocaust-level
devastation, yet this has already occurred. Greenberg is not claiming that God
did use the Holocaust to punish Jews; he is just saying that if God chose to do
so, that would be the worst possible thing. There really is not anything worse
that one could do. Therefore, since God cannot punish us any worse than what
actually has happened, and since God does not force Jews to follow Jewish law,
then we cannot claim that these laws are enforceable on us. Therefore he argues
that the covenant between God and the Jewish people is effectively broken and
unenforceable. Greenberg notes that there have been several terrible
destructions of the Jewish community, each with the effect of distancing the
Jewish people further from God. According to rabbinic literature, after the
destruction of the first Temple in Jerusalem and the mass-killing of
Jerusalem's Jews, the Jews received no more direct prophecy. After the
destruction of the second Temple in Jerusalem and the mass-killing of
Jerusalem's Jews, the Jews no longer could present sacrifices at the Temple.
This way of reaching God was at an end. After the Holocaust, Greenberg
concludes that God does not respond to the prayers of Jews anymore. Thus, God
has unilaterally broken his covenant with the Jewish people. In this view, God
no longer has the moral authority to command people to follow his will.
Greenberg does not conclude that Jews and God should part ways; rather he holds
that we should heal the covenant between Jews and God, and that the Jewish
people should accept Jewish law on a voluntary basis. His views on this subject
have made him the subject of much criticism within the Orthodox community. Elie
Wiesel. Elie Wiesel is a Hungarian-born Jewish-American writer, professor,
political activist, Nobel Laureate, and Holocaust survivor. He is the author of
57 books, including Night, a work based on his experiences as a prisoner in the
Auschwitz, Buna, and Buchenwald concentration camps. Wiesel's 1979 play The
Trial of God is about a trial in which God is the defendant, and is reportedly
based on events that Wiesel himself witnessed as a teenager in Auschwitz. Over
the course of the trial, a number of arguments are made, both for and against
God's guilt. Post-Holocaust and child abuse theology. David R. Blumenthal in
his book "Facing the Abusing God" (1993) has drawn on data from the field of
child abuse and has proposed "worship of God through protest" as a legitimate
response of survivors of both the Holocaust and child abuse. Another writer
addressing survivors of the Holocaust and child abuse is John K. Roth, whose
essay "A Theodicy of Protest" is included in Encountering Evil: Live Options in
Theodicy (1982). Works of important Christian theologians. Jürgen Moltmann. In
"The Crucified God" Jürgen Moltmann speaks of how in a “theology after
Auschwitz” the traditional notion of God needed to be completely revised. The
traditional notion of an impassible “unmoved mover” had died in those camps
and was no longer tenable. Moltmann proposes instead a “crucified God” who
is both a “suffering” and “protesting” God. That is, God is not
detached from suffering but willingly enters into human suffering in
compassion. This is in contrast both with the move of theism to justify God's
actions and the move of atheism to accuse God. Moltmann's “Trinitarian
theology of the cross” instead says that God is a protesting God who opposes
the 'Gods of this world' of power and domination by entering into human pain
and suffering on the cross and on the gallows of Auschwitz. Moltmann's
“theology of the cross” was later developed into "Liberation Theologies"
from suffering people under Stalinism in Eastern Europe and military
dictatorships in South America and South Korea. Pope Benedict XVI. Most
coverage of the address was positive, with praise from Italian and Polish
rabbis. The Simon Wiesenthal Center called the visit "historic", and the
address and prayers "a repudiation of antisemitism and a repudiation of
those... who refer to the Holocaust as a myth". Criticisms. Jewish criticisms.
A few Jewish commentators have objected to what they perceived as a desire to
"Christianize" the Holocaust. Edith Stein's (a German nun who converted from
Judaism in 1922 and was killed in Auschwitz) status as a martyr has been
somewhat controversial due to the question of whether she was killed for her
faith or ethnicity. Many Jews view the claim of conferring of martyrdom on
Stein as an act of appropriation of the Holocaust, holding that Stein was
targeted by the Nazis for her Jewish ethnicity, not for her conversion to
Catholicism. This concern of "appropriation" is not unique, with similar
criticisms having been raised about Catholic narratives regarding other convert
victims of the Holocaust—"making it seem that the Church, not the Jewish
people, was the primary victim of Nazi genocide". The conflict over the
Auschwitz cross near Auschwitz I typifies these controversies, as Auschwitz is
also the site of the martyrdom (according to the Catholic Church) of saints
such as Maximilian Kolbe. Christian criticisms. Certain Christian theologians
have also criticized a tendency to "historicize" and "dogmatize" certain
political or secular events such as the Shoah which are not part of theology as
traditionally understood, that is, theology as a hermeneutic of the deposit of
faith and of divine revelation, and not theology as sociology, philosophy,
history or politics. For instance, during the Williamson affair, Monsignor
Robert Wister publicly declared that the negationist comments made by the
controversial SSPX bishop might be "offensive and erroneous" but "not a heresy"
and "not an excommunicable offense", calling Williamson "not a heretic, but ...
a liar". This view notably appears in the CDF's Dominus Iesus, which stresses
the “fullness and definitiveness of the revelation of Jesus Christ”, as
opposed to alternative notions on progressive revelation.
