Holy Synod In several of the autocephalous Eastern Orthodox churches and
Eastern Catholic Churches, the patriarch or head bishop is elected by a group
of bishops called the Holy Synod. For instance, the Holy Synod is a ruling body
of the Georgian Orthodox and Apostolic Church. In Oriental Orthodoxy the Holy
Synod is the highest authority in the church and it formulates the rules and
regulations regarding matters of church organisation, faith, and order of
service. Early synods. The principle of summoning a synod or council of
ecclesiastical persons to discuss some grave question affecting the Church goes
back, of course, to the very beginning of her history. Since the day when the
Apostles met at Jerusalem to settle whether Gentile converts were to keep the
Old Law (Acts 15:6–29), it had been the custom to call together such
gatherings as occasion required. Bishops summoned synods of their clergy,
metropolitans and patriarchs summoned their suffragans, and then since 325
there was a succession of those greatest synods, representing the whole
Catholic world, that are known as general councils. The Russian Holy Synod. The
Most Holy Synod or Most Holy Governing Synod (Святейший
Правительствующий Синод) was a congregation of Orthodox
church leaders in Russia. It was established by Peter the Great, Stefan
Yavorsky and Feofan Prokopovich in January 1721 to replace the Patriarchate of
Moscow. It was abolished following the February Revolution of 1917 and replaced
with a restored patriarchate under Tikhon of Moscow. In modern Russia the Holy
Synod of the Russian Orthodox Church is the highest governing body of the
Russian Orthodox Church between Sobors. It is headed by the Patriarch of Moscow
and all the Rus'. The Greek Holy Synod. The first other Orthodox Church to
imitate the Russian Government by synod was that of Greece. The national
assemblies of free Greece in 1822 and 1827 began the process of making their
Church independent of the Patriarch of Constantinople. In 1833 the Greek
Parliament formally rejected the patriarch's authority and set up a Holy
Directing Synod in exact imitation of Russia. After much dispute the patriarch
gave in and acknowledged the Greek synod, in 1850. Since then, the Church of
Greece has been governed by a Holy Synod exactly as was the Church of Russia. A
law in 1852 regulated its rights and duties. It met at Athens under the
presidency of the Metropolitan of Athens. Four other bishops were appointed by
the Government as members for a year by vote. The members took an oath of
fidelity to the king and government. Their deliberations were controlled by a
royal commissioner, who was a layman chosen by government, just as the Russian
oberprocuror. No act was valid without the commissioner's assent. There were
also secretaries, writers, and a servant all appointed by the State. The Holy
Synod was the highest authority in the Greek Church and had the same rights and
duties as its Russian model, and was named in the liturgy instead of a
patriarch. After the proclamation of the Greek Republic in 1924, royal control
of the Holy Synod naturally ceased, and with the elevation of the Metropolitan
of Athens to an Archbishophric in 1932, the Archbishop began to be named in
liturgies. Today, supreme authority is vested in the synod of all the diocesan
bishops, who all have metropolitical status (the Hierarchy of the Church of
Greece) under the presidency of the Archbishop of Athens and all Greece. This
synod deals with general church questions. The Standing Synod is under the same
presidency, and consists of the Primate and 12 bishops, each serving for one
term on a rotating basis and deals with details of administration. Serbian Holy
Synod. The Serbian Orthodox Church is governed by a five-member Holy Synod. The
patriarch is a permanent member, while the other four are bishops elected for
two-year terms by the "holy assembly of bishops", a body that represents all
the metropolitans and other bishops of the church. The Coptic Holy Synod. The
Holy Synod of the Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria is the highest authority
in the Church of Alexandria and it formulates the rules and regulations
regarding matters of church's organisation, faith, service's order. The Synod
is chaired by the Patriarch of Alexandria and the members are the Church's
Metropolitans, Bishops, Chorbishops and the Patriarchal Vicar for Alexandria.
Eastern Catholic Churches. The Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches
distinguishes between a patriarchal church's standing synod and a synod of its
bishops. The standing synod consists of the patriarch and four bishops
appointed for a five-year term. Of these four, three are elected by the
patriarchal church's synod of bishops and one is appointed by the patriarch,
while another four are designated in the same way to replace any member who is
impeded. A synod of all the church's ordained bishops is called when a decision
is required on a question that only it is authorized to decide, or when the
patriarch, with the agreement of the standing synod, judges it to be necessary,
or when at least one third of the bishops request that it be held to consider
some specific matter. In addition, the canon law of some patriarchal churches
requires that it be convoked at predetermined intervals. Similar rules govern
Eastern Catholic Churches headed not by a patriarch but by a major archbishop.
