Holy day of obligation Latin Catholic Church. The number of holy days of
obligation was once much greater. With the motu proprio "Supremi disciplinae"
of 2 July 1911, Pope Pius X reduced the number of such non-Sunday holy days
from 36 to 8 (the above 10 minus the feasts of the Body and Blood of Christ and
Saint Joseph). The present list was established in 1917. In many countries the
bishops had obtained, even before the time of Pope Pius X, the Holy See's
approval to diminish the number of non-Sunday holy days of obligation, making
it far less than 36. Today too, Episcopal Conferences have availed themselves
of the authority granted them in law to reduce the number below the ten
mentioned above. Non-Sunday holy days of obligation all have the rank of
solemnity. Accordingly, if in Ordinary Time one of them falls on a Sunday, the
Sunday celebration gives way to it; but the Sundays of Advent, Lent and
Eastertide take precedence over all solemnities, which are then transferred to
another day. Latin-Rite observance by country. In Vatican City, but not in the
rest of the Diocese of Rome, Sundays and all ten days listed in canon 1246 are
observed as holy days of obligation. This is also the case in the Swiss canton
of Ticino, but perhaps nowhere else. Some countries have as holy days of
obligation feasts that are not among those listed in canon 1246. Ireland has
Saint Patrick's Day. Germany has St. Stephen on the "Second Christmas Day" (26
December), Easter Monday and Pentecost Monday (Whit Monday). If they are thus
assigned to a Sunday, they are not included in the following national lists of
holy days of obligation, since "in every country all Sundays are holy days of
obligation". Germany. The solemnities of Saint Joseph, Saints Peter and Paul
and the Immaculate Conception of Mary are observed nowhere in Germany as holy
days of obligation. The attributes "holy day of obligation" and "public
holiday" coincide; thus, not only dioceses have different ones but even in
districts of the same diocese, the law is different; practically, it depends on
which Bundesland, not which diocese you are in. In addition, Good Friday, which
is another public holiday, is in practice, though not by Church law, celebrated
in a way similar to the holy days of obligation, with attendance at the
liturgical service, which on that day is distinct from celebration of Mass.
Austria, Switzerland and German-speaking areas in neighbouring countries have
similar rules. Greece. Instead of being transferred to the following Sunday,
the Ascension of Our Lord, though not a holy day of obligation in Greece, is
kept on the Thursday of the sixth week of Easter, in order to celebrate it on
the same day as the Orthodox Church of Greece. Philippines. All the other Holy
days of Obligation are either dispensed or transferred to the succeeding
Sunday. United States. Note 1: However, when 1 January (Solemnity of Mary,
Mother of God), 15 August (Feast of the Assumption), or 1 November (Solemnity
of All Saints) falls on a Saturday or on a Monday, the precept to attend Mass
on that date is . Note 2: In Hawaii, in 1992, the Bishop of Honolulu, pursuant
to an indult from the Holy See, established the Feast of the Immaculate
Conception and Christmas as the only Holy Days of Obligation to be observed in
the state.
