Holy card In the Catholic tradition, holy cards or prayer cards are small,
devotional pictures mass-produced for the use of the faithful. They typically
depict a religious scene or a saint in an image about the size of a playing
card. The reverse typically contains a prayer, some of which promise an
indulgence for its recitation. The circulation of these cards is an important
part of the visual folk culture of Roman Catholics. Old master prints. Old
master prints, nearly all on religious subjects, served many of the same
functions as holy cards, especially the cheaper woodcuts; the earliest dated
surviving example is from 1423, probably from southern Germany, and depicts
Saint Christopher, with handcolouring, it is found as part of the binding of a
manuscript of the "Laus Virginis" (1417) which belongs to the John Rylands
Library, Manchester. Later engraving or etching were more commonly used. Some
had elaborate borders of paper lace surrounding the images; these were called
"dévotes dentelles" in France. Lithography. The invention of colour
lithography made it possible to reproduce coloured images cheaply, leading to a
much broader circulation of the cards. An early centre of their manufacture was
in the environs of the Church of St Sulpice in Paris; the lithographed images
made there were done in delicate pastel colours, and proved extremely
influential on later designs. Belgium and Germany also became centres of the
manufacture of holy cards, as did Italy in the twentieth century. Catholic
printing houses (such as Maison de la Bonne Presse in France and Ars Sacra in
Germany) produced large numbers of cards, and often a single design was printed
by different companies in different countries. Special types of cards. Special
holy cards are printed for Roman Catholics to be distributed at funerals; these
are "In memoriam cards", with details and often a photograph of the person whom
they commemorate as well as prayers printed on the back. Other specialized holy
cards record baptisms, confirmations, and other religious anniversaries. Others
are not customized, and are circulated to promote the veneration of the saints
and images they bear. At the end of the nineteenth century, some Protestants
attempted to answer these Roman Catholic images with similar images of their
own. They produced "Bible cards" or "Sunday school cards", with lithographed
illustrations depicting Bible stories and parables, more modern scenes of
religious life or prayer, or sometimes just a Biblical text illuminated by
calligraphy; these were linked to Biblical passages that related to the image.
The reverse typically held a sermonette instead of a prayer. Imagery here was
always the servant of text, and as such these Protestant cards tended to be
replaced by tracts that emphasized message instead of imagery, and were
illustrated with cartoon-like images if they were illustrated at all. Irish law
of 2009. In Ireland cards are sold certifying that a Mass has been said for the
benefit of sick or dead people, and are typically given to the family of the
sick or dead person. Disputes arose over the validity of cards issued by
priests living outside Ireland. Section 99 of the 2009 Charities Act regulates
sales of Mass Cards, which can only be sold "pursuant to an arrangement" with a
"recognised person", such as a Bishop, without stipulating whether that person
had to be resident in Ireland or not. A court challenge to the new law by a
business that sold 120,000 cards a year failed in late 2009. A breach of the
law can result in a 10-year prison sentence or a €300,000 fine.
