Holy Spirit Holy Spirit is a term found in English translations of the Bible,
but understood differently among the Abrahamic religions. While the general
concept of a "Spirit" that permeates the cosmos is a general feature of most
religions (e.g. Brahman in Hinduism and Tao in Taoism and Great Spirit among
Indigenous peoples of the Americas), the term "Holy Spirit" specifically refers
to the beliefs held in the Abrahamic religions. For the majority of Christians,
the belief in the Holy Trinity implies the existence of three distinct Holy
Persons: God the Father, God the Son and God the Holy Spirit being One Eternal
"Triune God". This doctrine and designation, however, are not shared by all
Christian denominations, or the other Abrahamic religions. Christianity. For
the majority of Christians, the "Holy Spirit" (prior English language usage:
the Holy Ghost from Old English "gast", “spirit”) is the third person of
the Holy Trinity—Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, and is Almighty God. The Holy
Spirit is seen by mainstream Christians as one Person of the Triune God, who
revealed His Holy Name YHWH to his people Israel, sent His Eternally Begotten
Son Jesus to save them from God's wrath, and sent the Holy Spirit to sanctify
and give life to his Church. The Triune God manifests as three "Persons" (Greek
"hypostases"), in One Divine Being (Greek: Ousia), called the Godhead, the
Divine Essence of God. Judaism. The term "holy spirit" only occurs three times
in the Hebrew Bible. (Found once in Psalm 51:11 and twice in Isaiah 63:10,11)
Although, the term "spirit" in the Hebrew Scriptures, in reference to "God's
spirit", does occur more times. In Judaism, God is One, the idea of God as a
duality or trinity among gentiles may be Shituf (or "not purely monotheistic").
The term Ruach HaKodesh (Holy Spirit) is found frequently in Talmudic and
Midrashic literature. In some cases it signifies prophetic inspiration, while
in others it is used as a hypostatization or a metonym for God. The Rabbinic
“Holy Spirit,” has a certain degree of personification, but it remains,
“a quality belonging to God, one of his attributes” and not, as in
mainstream Christianity, representative of “any metaphysical divisions in the
Godhead.” In Judaism, the references to "The Spirit of God", Ruach HaKodesh,
The Holy Spirit of "YHWH", abound, however it has rejected any idea of The
Eternal God as being either Dual or Triune. The term "ruach ha-kodesh" (Hebrew:
רוח הקודש, "holy spirit" also transliterated ruah ha-qodesh) occurs
once in Psalm 51:11 and also twice in the Book of Isaiah Those are the only
three times that the precise phrase "ruach hakodesh" is used in the Hebrew
Scriptures, although the noun "ruach" (רוח, literally "breath" or "wind") in
various combinations, some referring to God's "spirit", is used often. The noun
"ruach," much like the English word breath, can mean either wind or some
invisible moving force. However, Shekinah is derived from the Hebrew verb
שכן. In Biblical Hebrew the word means literally "to settle," "inhabit," or
"dwell," which suggests the concept of a Holy Spirit, and is used frequently in
the Hebrew Bible. (See Exodus 40:35, "Moses could not enter the Tent of
Meeting, for the cloud rested ["shakhan"] upon it, and the glory of the Lord
filled the Tabernacle." See also e.g. Genesis 9:27, 14:13, Psalms 37:3,
Jeremiah 33:16), as well as the weekly Shabbat blessing recited in the Temple
in Jerusalem ("May He who causes His name to dwell ["shochan"] in this House,
cause to dwell among you love and brotherliness, peace and friendship"). Islam.
In Islam, the Holy Spirit (Arabic: الروح القدس "al-Ruh al-Qudus",
"the-Spirit the-Holy") is mentioned several times in the Qur'an, where it acts
as an agent of divine action or communication. In Hadith it is commonly
identified with the angel Gabriel (Arabic "Jibreel"). The Spirit (الروح
"al-Ruh", without the adjective "holy") is also used as the creative spirit
from God by which God enlivened Adam, and inspired the angels and the prophets.
The belief in Trinity, as it is defined in the Qur'an, is explicitly forbidden
by the Qur'an and called a grave sin. The same applies to any idea of the
duality of God (Allah). Though grammatical gender has no bearing on actual
gender in non-personal nouns, the term holy spirit translates in and is used in
the masculine form in all the Qur'an. In Arabic language the word "Holy Spirit"
does not translate as سكينة Sakinah used in a feminine term. The term
sakinah means state of relaxation. Bahá'í Faith. The Bahá'í Faith has the
concept of the "Most Great Spirit", seen as the bounty of God. It is usually
used to describe the descent of the Spirit of God upon the messengers/prophets
of God, which are known as Manifestations of God, and include among others
Jesus, Muhammad and Bahá'u'lláh. In Bahá'í believe the Holy Spirit is the
conduit through which the wisdom of God becomes directly associated with his
messenger, and it has been described variously in different religions such as
the burning bush to Moses, the sacred fire to Zoroaster, the dove to Jesus, the
angel Gabriel to Muhammad, and the maid of heaven to Bahá'u'lláh. The
Bahá'í view rejects the idea that the Holy Spirit is a partner to God in the
Godhead, but rather is the pure essence of God's attributes.
