Holy water Holy water is water that, in Catholicism, Anglicanism, Eastern
Orthodoxy, Lutheranism, Oriental Orthodoxy, and some other churches, has been
sanctified by a priest for the purpose of baptism; the blessing of persons,
places, and objects; or as a means of repelling evil. The use for baptism and
spiritual cleansing is common among several religions, from Christianity to
Sikhism and Hinduism. The use of holy water as a sacramental for protection
against evil is almost exclusive to Roman Catholics. In Christianity. History.
The use of holy water in the earliest days of Christianity is attested to only
in somewhat later documents. The Apostolic constitutions which go back to about
the year 400, attribute to the precept of using holy water to Apostle Matthew.
Hence the first historical testimony goes back to the fifth century. However,
it is plausible that, in the earliest Christian times, water was used for
expiatory and purificatory purposes, in a way analogous to its employment under
the Jewish Law. Yet, in many cases, the water used for the Sacrament of Baptism
was flowing water, sea or river water, and it could not receive the same
blessing as that contained in the baptisteries. Use and storage. Holy water is
used as a sacramental in the baptismal ceremony. Holy water is kept in the
"font", which is typically located at the entrance to the church (or sometimes
in a separate room or building called a baptistery); its location at the
entrance serves as a reminder of the centrality of baptism as the primary rite
of initiation into the Christian faith. Smaller vessels, called "stoups", are
usually placed at the entrances of the church. In recent years, with the
concerns over influenza, new holy water machines that work like an automatic
soap dispenser have become popular. In the Middle Ages the power of holy water
was considered so great fonts had locked covers to prevent the theft of holy
water for unauthorized magic practices: the Constitutions of Archbishop Edmund
Rich (1236) prescribe that ""Fonts are to be kept under lock and key, because
of witchcraft ("sortilegia"). Similarly the chrism and sacred oil are kept
locked up."". Proper disposal. In Catholicism, holy water, as well as water
used during the washing of the priest's hands at mass, is not allowed to be
disposed of in regular plumbing. Roman Catholic churches will usually have a
special basin (a Sacrarium) that leads directly into the ground for the purpose
of proper disposal. A hinged lid is kept over the holy water basin to
distinguish it from a regular sink basin, which is often just beside it. Items
that contain holy water are separated, drained of the holy water, and then
washed in a regular manner in the adjacent sink. Hygiene. Holy water fonts have
been identified as a potential source of bacterial and viral infection.
Bacteriologists found staphylococci, streptococci, coli bacilli, Loeffler's
bacillus, and other bacteria in samples of holy water taken from a church in
Sassari, Italy in the late 1800s. More recently, in a study performed in 1995,
thirteen samples were taken when a burn patient acquired a bacterial infection
after exposure to holy water. The samples were shown to have a "wide range of
bacterial species," some of which could cause infection in humans. During the
swine flu epidemic of 2009, Bishop John Steinbock of Fresno, California
recommended that "water should not be in the fonts" due to fear of spreading
infections. Also in response to the swine flu, an automatic, motion-detecting
holy water dispenser was invented and installed in an Italian church. Christian
traditions. Catholics. Sanctification. As a reminder of baptism, Catholics dip
their fingers in the holy water and make the sign of the cross when entering
the church. The liturgy may begin on Sundays with the Rite of Blessing and
Sprinkling Holy Water, in which holy water is sprinkled upon the congregation;
this is called "aspersion", from the Latin, asperges ("to sprinkle"). This
ceremony dates back to the ninth century. An "aspergill" or "aspergillum" is a
brush or branch used to sprinkle the water. An "aspersorium" is the vessel
which holds the holy water and into which the aspergillum is dipped, though
elaborate Ottonian examples are known as "situlae". Blessed salt may be added
to the water "where it is customary." Asperges is the name given to the rite of
sprinkling a congregation with holy water. The name comes from the first word
in the 9th verse of Psalm 51 in the Latin translation, the Vulgate, which is
sung during the Traditional form of the rite, except during Eastertide. This
use of holy water and making a sign of the cross when entering a church
reflects a renewal of baptism, a cleansing of venial sin, as well as providing
protection against evil. It is sometimes accompanied by the following prayer:
"By this Holy water and by your Precious Blood, wash away all my sins O Lord".
Some Catholics believe that water from specific shrines such as the Lourdes
Spring are means by which God chooses to bring healing. This water,
technically, is not holy water in the same sense as traditional holy water
since it has not been consecrated by a priest or bishop. Protection against
evil. Catholic saints have written about the power of holy water as a force
that repels evil. Saint Teresa of Avila, a Doctor of the Church who reported
visions of Jesus and Mary, was a strong believer in the power of holy water and
wrote that she used it with success to repel evil and temptations. She wrote:
Teresa of Avila, 2008 "Life of St. Teresa of Jesus" ISBN 1-60680-041-8 page 246
In "Holy Water and Its Significance for Catholics" Henry Theiler states that in
addition to being a strong force in repelling evil, holy water has the twofold
benefit of providing grace for both body and soul. The new Rituale Romanum
excludes the exorcism prayer on the water. Exorcized salt used to be added to
the holy Water as well. Priests can now use the older form if they wish
according to Summorum Pontificum, an apostolic letter by Pope Benedict the
16th. Eastern Christians. Among Eastern Orthodox and Eastern-Rite Catholic
Christians, holy water is used frequently in rites of blessing and exorcism,
and the water for baptism is always sanctified with a special blessing. There
are two rites for blessing holy water: the "Great Blessing of Waters" which is
held on the Feast of Theophany, and the "Lesser Blessing of Waters" which is
conducted according to need during the rest of the year. Both forms are based
upon the Rite of Baptism. Certain feast days call for the blessing of Holy
Water as part of their liturgical observance. Although Eastern Orthodox do not
normally bless themselves with holy water upon entering a church like Catholics
do, a quantity of holy water is typically kept in a font placed in the narthex
(entrance) of the church, where it is available for anyone who would like to
take some of it home with them. Often, when objects are blessed in the church
(such as the palms on Palm Sunday, Icons or sacred vessels) the blessing is
completed by a triple sprinkling with holy water using the words, "This ("name
of item") is blessed by the sprinkling of this holy water, in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit." Throughout the centuries,
there have been many springs of water that have been believed by members of the
Orthodox Church to be miraculous. Some still flow to this day, such as the one
at Pochaev Lavra in Ukraine, and the Life-Giving Spring of the Theotokos in
Constantinople (commemorated on Bright Friday). Anglicans. "Holy water" is not
a term used in Church of England rites, although font water is sanctified in
the Church of England Anglican Baptism Rite. In contrast, the Episcopal Church
(United States) does expressly mention the optional use of holy water in some
recent liturgies of blessing. More generally, the use of water within High
Church Anglicanism or Anglo-Catholicism adheres closely to Roman Catholic
practice. In many High Church Anglican churches baptismal water is used for the
asperges. Stoups with sanctified water are sometimes found near the doors of
High Church Anglican churches for the faithful to use in making the sign of the
cross upon entering the church. Methodists and Lutherans. The use of holy water
within Methodism and Lutheranism is for the baptism of infants and new members
of the church. The water is believed to be blessed by God, as it is used in a
sacrament. The water is applied to the forehead of the laity being baptised and
the clergyperson performs the sign of the cross. Lutherans tend to have holy
water fonts at the entrance of the church. In non-Christian religions. In
Ancient Greek religion, a holy water called "chernips" was created when
extinguishing in it a torch from a religious shrine. In Greek religion,
purifying people and locations with water was part of the process of
distinguishing the sacred from the profane. In Jewish law, the Torah mentions
using holy water in a test for the purity of a wife accused of marital
infidelity. A ritual would be performed involving the drinking of holy water.
If she participated in the ritual, and she was guilty, she is supposedly cursed
to miscarry any pregnancy. If she is still able to bear children, then she is
presumed innocent. Sikhs use the term () for the holy water used in the baptism
ceremony known as "Amrit Sanskar" or "Amrit Chhakhna". In Wicca and other
ceremonial magic traditions, although the term "holy water" is not normally
used, a similar substance is produced when salt is mixed with water. It is
consecrated and used in many religious ceremonies and rituals. Bathing in holy
water is a key element in Hinduism and the Ganges is considered the holiest
Hindu river. Although the term "holy water" is not used, the idea of "blessed
water" is used among Buddhists. Water is put in to a new pot and kept near a
Paritrana ceremony, a blessing for protection. Thai 'Lustral water' can be
created in a ceremony in which the burning and extinction of a candle above the
water represents the elements of earth, fire, and air. This water is later
given to the people to be kept in their home. Not only water but also oil and
strings are blessed in this ceremony. Bumpa, a ritual object, is one of the
Ashtamangala, used for storing sacred water sometimes, symbolizing wisdom and
long life in Vajrayana Buddhism. The drinking of "healing water" ("āb-
i shifā") is a practice in various denominations of Shi’a Islam. In the
tradition of the Twelver Shi’a, many dissolve the dust of sacred locations
such as Karbala ("khāk-i shifa") and Najaf and drink the water ("āb-
i shifā") as a cure for illness, both spiritual and physical. The Ismaili
tradition involves the practice of drinking water blessed by the Imam of the
time. This water is taken in the name of the Imam and has a deep spiritual
significance. This is evident from the names used to designate the water,
including light ("nūr") and ambrosia ("amṛt, amī, amīras, amījal"). This
practice is recorded from the 13th and 14th centuries and continues to the
present day. The ceremony is known as "ghat-pat" in South Asia. Unofficial
uses. Holy water has also been believed to ward off or act as a weapon against
mythical evil creatures, such as vampires. In eastern Europe, one harboring
this belief might sprinkle holy water onto the corpse of a suspected vampire in
order to destroy it or render it inert. Thereafter, the concept proliferated
into fiction about such creatures. Gallery. File:ND de Fourvière Intérieur
250709 03.jpg|Basilica of Notre-Dame de Fourvière, Lyon, France File:Smf,
acquasantiera inizio Xv sec 02.JPG|Florence Cathedral File:Chiesa di Santa
Maria a Cintoia (Florence) - Facade - Stoup.jpg|Church of Santa Maria a
Cintoia, Florence, Italy. File:Salzburg Kajetanerkirche
Weihwasserbecken.jpg|Church of Saints Saint Cajetan and Maximillian, Salzburg,
Austria
