House church House church, or "home church", () or in Mainland China () is used
to describe an independent assembly of Christians who gather in a home.
Sometimes this occurs because the group is small, and a home is the most
appropriate place to gather, as in the beginning phase of the British New
Church Movement. Sometimes it is because the group is a member of an
underground Christian movement, which is otherwise banned from meeting, as in
China. Some recent Christian writers have supported the view that the Christian
Church should meet in houses, and have based the operation of their communities
around multiple small home meetings. They claim that this approach is
preferable to public meetings in dedicated buildings because it is a more
effective way of building community and it helps the group to engage in
outreach more naturally. Some believe small churches were a deliberate
apostolic pattern in the first century and intended by Christ. Cell churches
are usually associated with larger churches: they also meet in homes and share
some characteristics of house churches. They are not normally considered to be
a house church, as they are not self-governing. Some within the house church
movement (associated with Wolfgang Simson, Frank Viola and others) consider the
term "house church" to be a misnomer, asserting that the main issue for
Christians who practice their faith in this manner is not the house but the
type of meeting that takes place. Other titles which may be used to describe
this movement are "simple church" "relational church," "primitive church,"
"body life," "organic church," or "biblical church." However all of the
practices implied by these terms are shared with many other churches outside
the movement. Early Christian house churches. The first house church is
recorded in , where the disciples of Jesus met together in the "Upper Room" of
a house, traditionally believed to be where the Cenacle is today. For the first
three centuries of the church, known as Early Christianity, Christians
typically met in homes, if only because intermittent persecution (before the
Edict of Milan in 313) did not allow the erection of public church buildings.
Clement of Alexandria, an early church father, wrote of worshipping in a house.
The Dura-Europos church, a private house in Dura-Europos in Syria, was
excavated in the 1930s and was found to be used as a Christian meeting place in
AD 232, with one small room serving as a baptistry. At many points in
subsequent history, various Christian groups worshipped in homes, often due to
persecution by the state church or the civil government. Structure and
organization. Some assemblies have a conventional leadership structure; others
have none. A commonly held belief in the modern-day house church "movement" is
that the Protestant Reformation did not go far enough to demonstrate a New
Testament belief in the "priesthood of all believers" and that Jesus Christ
alone is the Head of the Church, and the believers the body. The absence of
hierarchical leadership structures in many house churches, while often viewed
by the Protestant church at large as a sign of anarchy or rebelliousness to
authority, is viewed by many in the house church movement to be the most viable
way to come under true spiritual authority of love, relationships, and the
visible dominion of Jesus Christ as Head of his own bride (i.e. the church).
This does not mean that they reject all leadership, however. Many house
churches develop elders and deacons who serve the members. Some house churches
also accept ministry from church planters and itinerant workers whom they
consider to be apostles. Many house church gatherings are free, informal, and
sometimes include a shared meal. Participants hope that everyone present will
feel free to contribute to the gathering as and when they sense the leading of
the Holy Spirit to do so. Leadership structures range from no official leaders,
to a plurality of appointed elders. There is a deliberate attempt within most
house churches to minimize the leadership of any one person. Having a lone
pastor is generally considered unscriptural and such meetings prefer an openly
plural responsibility of leadership. The house church movement today also owes
much of its networking and exchange of information to the use of the Internet;
HC is generally used as an abbreviation for "House Church" and IC is used to
designate "Institutional Church", which is the generalized term for more
traditional church structures, including a church building and/or sermon-
centered church services directed by a pastor or minister. More recently local
networks of house churches have begun to form, with gatherings of house
churches in an area getting together periodically for celebrations. Modern
revival. The origins of the so-called house church movement are varied. In
North America and the UK particularly, it is often viewed as a development and
logical extension of the 'Brethren' or Plymouth Brethren movement both in
doctrine and practice where many individuals and assemblies have adopted new
approaches to worship and governance, while others recognise a relationship to
the Anabaptists, Quakers, Amish, Hutterites, Mennonites, Moravians, Methodists,
and the much earlier Waldenses and Priscillianists. Another perspective sees
the house church movement as a re-emergence of the move of the Holy Spirit
during the Jesus Movement of the 1970s in the USA or the worldwide Charismatic
Renewal of the late 1960s and 1970s. Others see it as a return to a New
Testament church restorationist paradigm and a restoration of God's eternal
purpose and the natural expression of Christ on the earth, urging Christians to
return from hierarchy and rank to practices described and encouraged in
Scripture. Relationship to Established Churches, Missions Groups and society.
Historically, there have been tensions between house church movements (along
with other restoration and revival movements) and traditional churches.
Therefore, many house churches do not have formal links to larger Christian
organizations as a matter of principle. (A home group / bible study which is
connected with a denomination is usually referred to as a cell church.)
Recently, however, a number of established Christian denominations and mission
organizations have officially supported efforts to develop house church
networks. These include the following: The Free Methodist Church in Canada, The
Foursquare Gospel Church of Canada, The Evangelical Fellowship of Canada, The
Presbyterian Church in Canada, Partners in Harvest, The Southern Baptist
Convention (USA), Dove Christian Fellowship International, DAWN Ministries
(Discipling a Whole Nation), The Progressive Christian Alliance, and Youth With
A Mission (YWAM), Eternal Grace, and the recently launched Underground Churches
among others. In a social sense, the movement towards house churches may be
linked to other social movements as well, such as the "emerging church
movement", missional living, the parachurch movement, and perhaps even larger
social phenomena such as panocracy and intentional living movements. House
Church Movement. Today, the spread of house churches is largely found in
countries such as China, Vietnam, India, Cuba, Brazil and African nations, but
they are also seen in small, but growing, numbers in the Philippines, Europe,
and North America.
