Human sacrifice Human sacrifice is the act of killing one or more human beings
as part of a religious ritual ("ritual killing"). Its typology closely
parallels the various practices of ritual slaughter of animals and of religious
sacrifice in general. Human sacrifice has been practised in various cultures
throughout history. Victims were typically ritually killed in a manner that was
supposed to please or appease gods, spirits or the deceased, for example as a
propitiatory offering, or as a retainer sacrifice when the King's servants are
killed in order for them to continue to serve their master in the next life.
Closely related practices found in some tribal societies are cannibalism and
headhunting. By the Iron Age, with the associated developments in religion (the
Axial Age), human sacrifice was becoming less common throughout the Old World,
and came to be looked down upon as barbaric in pre-modern times (Classical
Antiquity). Blood libel is a false charge of ritual killing. Capital punishment
has been described by an advocate as a 'thinly disguised manifestation of the
ritualized killing of people'. Death by burning historically has aspects of
both human sacrifice (Wicker Man, Tophet) and capital punishment (Brazen bull,
"tunica molesta"). Detractors of the death penalty may consider all forms of
capital punishment as secular variants of human sacrifice. Similarly, lynching,
pogroms and genocides are sometimes interpreted as human sacrifice following
Theodor W. Adorno. In modern times, even the practice of animal sacrifice has
virtually disappeared from all major religions (or has been re-cast in terms of
ritual slaughter), and human sacrifice has become extremely rare. Most
religions condemn the practice, and present-day secular laws treat it as
murder. In a society which condemns human sacrifice, the term ritual murder is
used. In India, Sati, the immolation of a widow on her husband's funeral pyre,
continued well into the 19th century, but is now very rare. Evolution and
context. The idea of human sacrifice has its roots in deep prehistory, in the
evolution of human behaviour. Mythologically, it is closely connected, or even
fundamentally identical with animal sacrifice. Walter Burkert has argued for
such a fundamental identity of animal and human sacrifice in the connection of
a hunting hypothesis which traces the emergence of human religious behaviour to
the beginning of behavioural modernity in the Upper Paleolithic (roughly 50,000
years ago). Human sacrifice has been practised on a number of different
occasions and in many different cultures. The various rationales behind human
sacrifice are the same that motivate religious sacrifice in general. Human
sacrifice is intended to bring good fortune and to pacify the gods, for example
in the context of the dedication of a completed building like a temple or
bridge. There is a Chinese legend that there are thousands of people entombed
in the Great Wall of China. In ancient Japan, legends talk about "hitobashira"
("human pillar"), in which maidens were buried alive at the base or near some
constructions to protect the buildings against disasters or enemy attacks. For
the re-consecration of Great Pyramid of Tenochtitlan in 1487, the Aztecs
reported that they killed about 80,400 prisoners over the course of four days.
According to Ross Hassig, author of "Aztec Warfare", "between 10,000 and 80,400
persons" were sacrificed in the ceremony. Human sacrifice can also have the
intention of winning the gods' favour in warfare. In Homeric legend, Iphigeneia
was to be sacrificed by her father Agamemnon for success in the Trojan War.
According to the Bible, Jephthah vowed to sacrifice the first creature to come
out of his house to meet him if he won the battle against the Ammonites. Judges
11:30-31; "And Jephthah vowed a vow unto the Lord, and said, If thou shalt
without fail deliver the children of Ammon into mine hands, Then it shall be,
that whatsoever cometh forth of the doors of my house to meet me, when I return
in peace from the children of Ammon, shall surely be the Lord's, and I will
offer it up for a burnt offering." Ironically his daughter was the first to
come out and meet him. Judges 11:34; "And Jephthah came to Mizpeh unto his
house, and, behold, his daughter came out to meet him with timbrels and with
dances: and she was his only child; beside her he had neither son nor
daughter." In some notions of an afterlife, the deceased will benefit from
victims killed at his funeral. Mongols, Scythians, early Egyptians and various
Mesoamerican chiefs could take most of their household, including servants and
concubines, with them to the next world. This is sometimes called a "retainer
sacrifice", as the leader's retainers would be sacrificed along with their
master, so that they could continue to serve him in the afterlife. Another
purpose is divination from the body parts of the victim. According to Strabo,
Celts stabbed a victim with a sword and divined the future from his death
spasms. Headhunting is the practice of taking the head of a killed adversary,
for ceremonial or magical purposes, or for reasons of prestige. It was found in
many pre-modern tribal societies. Human sacrifice may be a ritual practised in
a stable society, and may even be conductive to enhance societal bonds (see
Sociology of religion), both by creating a bond unifying the sacrificing
community, and in combining human sacrifice and capital punishment, by removing
individuals that have a negative effect on societal stability (criminals,
religious heretics, foreign slaves or prisoners of war). But outside of civil
religion, human sacrifice may also result in outbursts of "blood frenzy" and
mass killings that destabilise society. Thus, the Thuggee cult that plagued
India was devoted to Kali, the goddess of death and destruction. According to
the "Guinness Book of Records" the Thuggee cult was responsible for
approximately 2 million deaths. The bursts of capital punishment during
European witch-hunts, or during the French Revolutionary Reign of Terror show
similar sociological patterns (see also Moral panic). Many cultures show traces
of prehistoric human sacrifice in their mythologies and religious texts, but
ceased the practice before the onset of historical records. The story of
Abraham and Isaac (Genesis 22) is an example of an etiological myth explaining
the abolition of human sacrifice. Similarly, the Vedic "Purushamedha"
(literally "human sacrifice") is already a purely symbolic act in its earliest
attestation. According to Pliny the Elder, human sacrifice in Ancient Rome was
abolished by a senatorial decree in 97 BCE, although by this time the practice
had already become so rare that the decree was mostly a symbolic act. Human
sacrifice once abolished is typically replaced by either animal sacrifice, or
by the "mock-sacrifice" of effigies, such as the Argei in ancient Rome. History
by region. Ancient Near East. Ancient Egypt. There may be evidence of retainer
sacrifice in the early dynastic period at Abydos, when on the death of a King
he would be accompanied with servants, and possibly high officials, who would
continue to serve him in eternal life. The skeletons that were found had no
obvious signs of trauma, leading to speculation that the giving up of life to
serve the King may have been a voluntary act, possibly carried out in a drug
induced state. At about 2800 BCE any possible evidence of such practices
disappeared, though echoes are perhaps to be seen in the burial of statues of
servants in Old Kingdom tombs. Mesopotamia. Retainer sacrifice was practised
within the royal tombs of ancient Mesopotamia. Courtiers, guards, musicians,
handmaidens and grooms died, presumed to have taken poison. A new examination
of skulls from the royal cemetery at Ur, discovered in Iraq almost a century
ago, appears to support a more grisly interpretation of human sacrifices
associated with elite burials in ancient Mesopotamia than had previously been
recognized, say archaeologists. Palace attendants, as part of royal mortuary
ritual, were not dosed with poison to meet death serenely. Instead, a sharp
instrument such as a pike was driven into their heads. Levant. References in
the Bible point to an awareness of human sacrifice in the history of ancient
near-eastern practice. During a battle with the Israelites the king of Moab
gives his firstborn son and heir as a whole burnt offering ("olah", as used of
the Temple sacrifice) (2 Kings 3:27). In Genesis 22 as well as the Qur'an,
there is a story about Abraham's binding of Isaac, although in the Qur'an the
name of the son is not mentioned and assumed to be Ismail. In the Bible's
version of the story, God tests Abraham by asking him to present his son,
Isaac, as a sacrifice on Mount Moriah. No reason is given within the text.
Abraham agrees to this command without arguing. The story ends with an angel
stopping Abraham at the last minute and making Isaac's sacrifice unnecessary by
providing a ram, caught in some nearby bushes, to be sacrificed instead. Many
Bible scholars have suggested this story's origin was a remembrance of an era
when human sacrifice was abolished in favour of animal sacrifice. Another
instance of human sacrifice mentioned in the Bible is the sacrifice of
Jephthah's daughter in Judges 11. Jephthah vows to sacrifice to God whatsoever
comes to greet him at the door when he returns home if he is victorious. The
vow is stated in Judges 11:31 as ""Then it shall be, that whatsoever cometh
forth of the doors of my house to meet me, when I return in peace from the
children of Ammon, shall surely be the Lord's, and I will offer it up for a
burnt offering."" When he returns from battle, his virgin daughter runs out to
greet him. She begs for, and is granted, "two months to roam the hills and weep
with my friends", after which "he did to her as he had vowed." According to the
commentators of the rabbinic Jewish tradition, Jepthah's daughter was not
sacrificed, but was forbidden to marry and remained a spinster her entire life,
fulfilling the vow that she would be devoted to the Lord. Phoenicia. According
to Roman and Greek sources, Phoenicians and Carthaginians sacrificed infants to
their gods. The bones of numerous infants have been found in Carthaginian
archaeological sites in modern times but the subject of child sacrifice is
controversial. In a single child cemetery called the Tophet by archaeologists,
an estimated 20,000 urns were deposited. Plutarch, however claims that the
children were already dead at the time, having been killed by their parents,
whose consent—as well as that of the children—was required; Tertullian
explains the acquiescence of the children as a product of their youthful
trustfulness. The accuracy of such stories is disputed by some modern
historians and archaeologists. Europe. Neolithic Europe. There is
archaeological evidence of human sacrifice in Neolithic to Eneolithic Europe.
Retainer sacrifices seem to have been common in early Indo-European religion.
For example, the Luhansk sacrificial site shows evidence of human sacrifice in
the Yamna culture. Greco-Roman antiquity. Allusions to human sacrifice are
found in classical mythology. The "deus ex machina" salvation in some versions
of Iphigeneia (who was about to be sacrificed by her father Agamemnon) and her
replacement with a deer by the goddess Artemis, may be a vestigial memory of
the abandonment and discrediting of the practice of human sacrifice among the
Greeks in favour of animal sacrifice. Many scholars have suggested a possible
analogy with the story of Isaac's attempted sacrifice by his father Abraham in
the Bible, which was also stopped at the last minute (though it had first been
encouraged) by divine intervention. The Romans practised various forms of human
sacrifice; from Etruscans (or, according to other sources, Sabellians), they
adopted the original form of gladiatorial combat where the victim was slain in
a ritual battle. During the early republic, criminals who had broken their
oaths or defrauded others were sometimes "given to the gods" (that is, executed
as a human sacrifice). The "Rex Nemorensis" was an escaped slave who became
priest of the goddess Diana at Nemi by killing his predecessor. Prisoners of
war were buried alive as offerings to Manes and "di inferi" (gods of the
underworld). Archaeologists have found sacrificial victims buried in building
foundations. Ordinarily, deceased Romans were cremated rather than buried.
Captured enemy leaders, after the victorious general's triumph, would be
ritually strangled in front of a statue of Mars, the war god. Dionysius of
Halicarnassus refers to a sacrifice of Argei in the Vestal ritual that might
have originally included sacrifice of old men. According to Pliny the Elder,
human sacrifice was formally banned during the consulship of Publius Licinius
Crassus and Gnaeus Cornelius Lentulus in 97 BCE, although by this time it was
so rare that the decree was largely symbolic. Most of the rituals turned to
animal sacrifice like "taurobolium" or became merely symbolic. A Roman general
might bury a statue of his likeness to thank the gods for victory. However,
activities with a ritual origin and similarities to human sacrifice, such as
the gladiatorial games and some forms of execution, continued for many years,
and grew in popularity. Celts. According to Roman sources, Celtic Druids
engaged extensively in human sacrifice. He also describes how they built wicker
figures that were filled with living humans and then burned. Different gods
reportedly required different kinds of sacrifices. Victims meant for Esus were
hanged, those meant for Taranis and those for Teutates drowned. Some, like the
Lindow Man, may have gone to their deaths willingly. Archaeological evidence
from the British Isles seems to indicate that human sacrifice may have been
practised, over times long pre-dating any contact with Rome. Human remains have
been found at the foundations of structures from the Neolithic time to the
Roman era, with injuries and in positions that argue for their being foundation
sacrifices. Skeletons belonging to as many as 150 people and dating back to
about the time of the Roman conquest were discovered in Alveston, England.
Ritualised decapitation survives in the archaeological record such as the
example of 12 headless corpses at the French late Iron Age sanctuary of
Gournay-sur-Aronde. Germanic peoples. Human sacrifice was not a particularly
common occurrence among the Germanic peoples, being resorted to in exceptional
situations arising from crises of an environmental (crop failure, drought,
famine) or social (war) nature, often thought to derive at least in part from
the failure of the king to establish and/or maintain prosperity and peace
("árs ok friðar") in the lands entrusted to him. In later Scandinavian
practice, human sacrifice appears to have become more institutionalised, and
was repeated as part of a larger sacrifice on a periodic basis (according to
Adam of Bremen every nine years). Evidence of Germanic practices of human
sacrifice predating the Viking Age depend on archaeology and on a few scattered
accounts in Greco-Roman ethnography. For example, Tacitus reports Germanic
human sacrifice to (what he interprets as) Mercury, and to Isis specifically
among the Suebians. Jordanes reports how the Goths sacrificed prisoners of war
to Mars, suspending the severed arms of the victims from the branches of trees.
By the 10th century, Germanic paganism had become restricted to Scandinavia.
One account by Ahmad ibn Fadlan as part of his account of an embassy to the
Volga Bulgars in 921 claims that Norse warriors were sometimes buried with
enslaved women with the belief that these women would become their wives in
Valhalla. In his description of the funeral of a Scandinavian chieftain, a
slave volunteers to die with a Norseman. After ten days of festivities, she is
stabbed to death by an old woman, a sort of priestess who is referred to as
Völva or "Angel of Death", and burnt together with the deceased in his boat.
This practice is evidenced archaeologically, with many male warrior burials
(such as the ship burial at Balladoole on the Isle of Man, or that at Oseberg
in Norway) also containing female remains with signs of trauma. According to
Adémar de Chabannes, just before his death in 932 or 933 Rollo (founder and
first ruler of the Viking principality of Normandy) practised human sacrifices
to appease the pagan gods, and at the same time made gifts to the churches in
Normandy. Adam von Bremen recorded human sacrifices to Odin in 11th-century
Sweden, at the Temple at Uppsala, a tradition which is confirmed by "Gesta
Danorum" and the Norse sagas. According to the Ynglinga saga, king Domalde was
sacrificed there in the hope of bringing greater future harvests and the total
domination of all future wars. The same saga also relates that Domalde's
descendant king Aun sacrificed nine of his own sons to Odin in exchange for
longer life, until the Swedes stopped him from sacrificing his last son, Egil.
Heidrek in the Hervarar saga agrees to the sacrifice of his son in exchange for
the command over a fourth of the men of Reidgotaland. With these, he seizes the
entire kingdom and prevents the sacrifice of his son, dedicating those fallen
in his rebellion to Odin instead. Slavic peoples. Sixth century Byzantine
emperor Mauricius's Strategikon wrote of the Slavs: In the 10th century,
Persian explorer Ahmad ibn Rustah described funerary rights for the Rus
including the sacrifice of a young female slave. Leo the Deacon describes
prisoner sacrifice by the Rus lead by Sviatoslav during the Russo-Byzantine War
"in accordance with their ancestral custom." According to the 12th century
Russian Primary Chronicle, prisoners of war were sacrificed to the supreme
Slavic deity Perun. Sacrifices to pagan gods, along with paganism itself, were
banned after the Baptism of Rus by Prince Vladimir I in the 980s. Archeological
findings indicate that the practice may have been widespread, at least among
slaves, judging from mass graves containing the cremated fragments of a number
of different people. China. The ancient Chinese are known to have made
sacrifices of young men and women to river deities, and to have buried slaves
alive with their owners upon death as part of a funeral service. This was
especially prevalent during the Shang and Zhou Dynasties. During the Warring
States period, Ximen Bao of Wei demonstrated to the villagers that sacrifice to
river deities was actually a ploy by crooked priests to pocket money. In
Chinese lore, Ximen Bao is regarded as a folk hero who pointed out the
absurdity of human sacrifice. The sacrifice of a high-ranking male's slaves,
concubines or servants upon his death (called "Xun Zang" 殉葬 or "Sheng Xun"
生殉) was a more common form. The stated purpose was to provide companionship
for the dead in the afterlife. In earlier times the victims were either killed
or buried alive, while later they were usually forced to commit suicide.
Funeral human sacrifice was widely practiced in the ancient Chinese state of
Qin. According to the "Records of the Grand Historian" by Han Dynasty historian
Sima Qian, the practice was started by Duke Wu, the tenth ruler of Qin, who had
66 people buried with him in 678 BC. The fourteenth ruler Duke Mu had 177
people buried with him in 621 BC, including three senior government officials.
Afterwards the people of Qin wrote the famous poem "Yellow Bird" to condemn
this barbaric practice, later compiled in the Confucian "Classic of Poetry".
The tomb of the eighteenth ruler Duke Jing of Qin, who died in 537 BC, has been
excavated. More than 180 coffins containing the remains of 186 victims were
found in the tomb. The practice would continue for nearly three centuries until
Duke Xian of Qin abolished it in 384 BC. Modern historian Ma Feibai considers
the significance of Duke Xian's abolition of human sacrifice to Chinese history
comparable to that of Abraham Lincoln's abolition of slavery to American
history. After the abolition by Duke Xian, funeral human sacrifice became
relatively rare throughout the central parts of China. However, the Hongwu
Emperor of the Ming Dynasty revived it in 1395 when his second son died and two
of the prince's concubines were sacrificed. In 1464, the Zhengtong Emperor in
his will forbade the practice for Ming emperors and princes. Human sacrifice
was also practised by the Manchus. Following Nurhaci's death, his wife, Lady
Abahai, and his two lesser consorts committed suicide. During the Qing Dynasty,
sacrifice of slaves was banned by the Kangxi Emperor in 1673. Tibet. Human
sacrifice, including cannibalism, was thought practiced in Tibet prior to the
arrival of Buddhism in the 7th century. The prevalence of human sacrifice in
medieval Buddhist Tibet is less clear. The Lamas, as professing Buddhists,
could not condone blood sacrifices, and they replaced the human victims with
effigies made from dough. This replacement of human victims with effigies is
attributed to Padmasambhava, a Tibetan saint of the mid-8th century, in Tibetan
tradition. Nevertheless, there is some evidence that outside of lamaism, there
were practices of tantric human sacrifice which survived throughout the
medieval period, and possibly into modern times. The 15th-century Blue Annals,
a seminal document of Tibetan Buddhism, reports upon how in Tibet the so-called
"18 robber-monks" slaughtered men and women for their tantric ceremonies. Based
on this evidence, Grunfeld (1996) concludes that it cannot be ruled out that
isolated instances of human sacrifice did survive in remote areas of Tibet
until the mid-20th century, but they must have been rare enough to have left no
more traces than the evidence cited above. India. The earliest evidence for
human sacrifice in the Indian subcontinent dates back to the Bronze Age Indus
Valley Civilization. An Indus seal from Harappa depicts the upside-down nude
female figure with legs outspread and a plant issuing from the womb. The
reverse side of the seal depicts a man holding a sickle and a woman seated on
the ground in a posture of prayer. Many scholars interpret this scene as a
human sacrifice in honor of the Mother-Goddess. Regarding possible Vedic
mention of human sacrifice, the prevailing 19th-century view, associated above
all with Henry Colebrooke, was that human sacrifice had little scriptural
warrant, and did not actually take place. Those verses which referred to
"purushamedha" were meant to be read symbolically or as a "priestly fantasy".
However, Rajendralal Mitra published a defence of the thesis that human
sacrifice, as had been practised in Bengal, was a continuation of traditions
dating back to Vedic periods. Hermann Oldenberg held to Colebrooke's view; but
Jan Gonda underlined its disputed status. Human and animal sacrifice became
less common during the post-Vedic period, as "ahimsa" (non-violence) became
part of mainstream religious thought. This may correspond to the impact of
Sramanic religions such as Buddhism and Jainism. The Chandogya Upanishad
(3.17.4) includes ahimsa in its list of virtues. It was agreed even by
Colebrooke, however, that by the Puranic period—at least at the time of the
writing of the Kalika-Purana, human sacrifice was accepted. The Kalika Purana
was composed in Northeast India in the 11th century. The text states that blood
sacrifice is only permitted when the country is in danger and war is expected.
According to the text, the performer of a sacrifice will obtain victory over
his enemies. In the medieval period, it became increasingly common. In the 7th
century, Banabhatta, in a description of the dedication of a temple of
Chandika, describes a series of human sacrifices; similarly, in the 9th
century, Haribhadra describes the sacrifices to Chandika in Orissa. It was
"more common" in South India. The town of Kuknur in North Karnataka there
exists an ancient Kali temple, built around the 8-9th century AD, which has a
history of human sacrifices. Human sacrifices were carried out in connection
with the worship of Shakti until approximately the early modern period, and in
Bengal perhaps as late as the early 19th century. Although not accepted by
larger section of Hindu culture, certain tantric cults performed human
sacrifice until around the same time, both actual and symbolic; it was a highly
ritualised act, and on occasion took many months to complete. Verse 19 of the
Karpuradistotram (Hymn to Kali) lists humans as one of the species that are
acceptable for sacrifice to the goddess. However, in 1922, Sir John George
Woodroffe published a commentary on the Karpuradistotram by the Kaula
commentator Swami Vimalananda. In it, he writes that the sacrificial animals
listed in verse 19 are merely symbols for the six enemies, with "man"
representing pride. He also states that the age of material sacrifice had long
since passed away. Thuggees, tuggees or thugs, were a religious cult devoted to
Kali and an organized gang of professional assassins who traveled in groups
across India for several hundred years. They were first mentioned in the
Ẓiyāʾ-ud-Dīn Baranī () dated around 1356. In the 1830s they were targeted
by William Bentinck, along with his chief captain William Henry Sleeman, for
eradication. They were seemingly destroyed by this effort. Thugs would join
travellers and gain their confidence. This would allow them to then surprise
and strangle them by tossing a handkerchief or noose around their necks. The
killings were performed in honour of the goddess Kali and were very
ritualistic. They would then rob the bodies of valuables and bury them. This
led them to also be called Phansigar (), a term more commonly used in southern
India. The Khonds, an aboriginal tribe of India, inhabiting the tributary
states of Orissa and Andhra Pradesh, became notorious, on the British
occupation of their district about 1835, from the prevalence and cruelty of the
human sacrifices they practised. The Deori community has a notable culture and
tradition which is a hidden treasure for the sociologists. The Deoris represent
the class “priest”-a section of the whole Chutia community (now in Assam,
India). In the first two decades of the 13th century, before the arrival of the
Ahom, Deoris used to make a Narbali (human sacrifice) in terms to win the war,
battle and to prevent the villagers from the evil atmosphere like floods,
drought etc. This practice make them pure owing to satisfy the supreme Goddess.
Only the class of Patorganya people were eligible for sacrificing. Pacific. In
Ancient Hawaii, a luakini temple, or luakini heiau, was a Native Hawaiian
sacred place where human and animal blood sacrifices were offered. "Kauwa", the
outcast or slave class, were often used as human sacrifices at the "luakini
heiau". They are believed to have been war captives, or the descendents of war
captives. They were not the only sacrifices; law-breakers of all castes or
defeated political opponents were also acceptable as victims. The people of
Fiji practised widow-strangling. When Fijians adopted Christianity, widow-
strangling was abandoned. Pre-Columbian Americas. Some of the most famous forms
of ancient human sacrifice were performed by various Pre-Columbian
civilizations in the Americas that included the sacrifice of prisoners as well
as voluntary sacrifice. Friar Marcos de Niza (1539) writing of the
"Chichimecas": that from time to time "they of this valley cast lots whose luck
(honour) it shall be to be sacrificed, and they make him great cheer, on whom
the lot falls, and with great joy they crown him with flowers upon a bed
prepared in the said ditch all full of flowers and sweet herbs, on which they
lay him along, and lay great store of dry wood on both sides of him, and set it
on fire on either part, and so he dies" and "that the victim took great
pleasure" in being sacrificed. North America. The Mixtec players of the
Mesoamerican ballgame were sacrificed when the game was used to resolve a
dispute between cities. The rulers would play a game instead of going to
battle. The losing ruler would be sacrificed. The ruler "Eight Deer" was
considered a great ball player and won several cities this way, until he lost a
ball game and was sacrificed. Maya. The Maya held the belief that cenotes or
limestone sinkholes were portals to the underworld and sacrificed human beings
and tossed them down the cenote to please the water god Chaac. The most notable
example of this is the "Sacred Cenote" at Chichén Itzá where extensive
excavations have recovered the remains of 42 individuals, half of them under
twenty years old. Only in the Post-Classic era did this practice become as
frequent as in central Mexico. In the Post-Classic period, the victims and the
altar are represented as daubed in a hue now known as Maya Blue, obtained from
the añil plant and the clay mineral palygorskite. Aztec. The Aztecs were
particularly noted for practicing human sacrifice on a large scale; an offering
to Huitzilopochtli would be made to restore the blood he lost, as the sun was
engaged in a daily battle. Human sacrifices would prevent the end of the world
that could happen on each cycle of 52 years. In the 1487 re-consecration of the
Great Pyramid of Tenochtitlan some estimate that 80,400 prisoners were
sacrificed though numbers are difficult to quantify as all obtainable Aztec
texts were destroyed by Christian missionaries during the period 1528–1548.
According to Ross Hassig, author of "Aztec Warfare", "between 10,000 and 80,400
people" were sacrificed in the ceremony. The old reports of numbers sacrificed
for special feasts have been described as "unbelievably high" by some authors
and that on cautious reckoning, based on reliable evidence, the numbers would
have been in the hundreds for yearly feasts in Tenochtitlan. The real number of
sacrificed victims during the 1487 consecration is unknown. Michael Harner, in
his 1997 article "The Enigma of Aztec Sacrifice", estimates the number of
persons sacrificed in central Mexico in the 15th century as high as 250,000 per
year. Fernando de Alva Cortés Ixtlilxochitl, a Mexica descendant and the
author of "Codex Ixtlilxochitl", claimed that one in five children of the
Mexica subjects was killed annually. Victor Davis Hanson argues that an
estimate by Carlos Zumárraga of 20,000 per annum is more plausible. Other
scholars believe that, since the Aztecs always tried to intimidate their
enemies, it is more likely that they could have inflated the number as a
propaganda tool. Tlaloc would require weeping boys in the first months of the
Aztec calendar to be ritually murdered. Sacrifices to Xipe Totec were bound to
a post and shot full of arrows. The dead victim would be skinned and a priest
would use the skin. Earth mother Teteoinnan required flayed female victims. US
/ Canada. The Pawnee practised an annual Morning Star Ceremony, which included
the sacrifice of a young girl. Though the ritual continued, the sacrifice was
discontinued in the 19th century. The Iroquois are said to have occasionally
sent a maiden to the Great Spirit. The Southern Cult or Mound Builders, of the
Southeastern United States may have also practised human sacrifice, as some
artifacts have been interpreted as depicting such acts. Early European
explorers reported witnessing mass human sacrifices. The torture of war
captives by the tribes of the Eastern Woodlands cultural region also seems to
have had sacrificial motivations. See Captives in American Indian Wars South
America. The Incas practiced human sacrifice, especially at great festivals or
royal funerals where retainers died to accompany the dead into the next life.
The Moche of Northern Peru sacrificed teenagers en masse, as archaeologist
Steve Bourget found when he uncovered the bones of 42 male adolescents in 1995.
The study of the images seen in Moche art has enabled researchers to
reconstruct the culture's most important ceremonial sequence, which began with
ritual combat and culminated in the sacrifice of those defeated in battle.
Dressed in fine clothes and adornments, armed warriors faced each other in
ritual combat. In this hand-to-hand encounter the aim was to remove the
opponent's headdress rather than kill him. The object of the combat was the
provision of victims for sacrifice. The vanquished were stripped and bound,
after which they were led in procession to the place of sacrifice. The captives
are portrayed as strong and sexually potent. In the temple, the priests and
priestesses would prepare the victims for sacrifice. The sacrificial methods
employed varied, but at least one of the victims would be bled to death. His
blood was offered to the principal deities in order to please and placate them.
The Inca of Peru also made human sacrifices. As many as 4,000 servants, court
officials, favorites, and concubines were killed upon the death of the Inca
Huayna Capac in 1527, for example. A number of mummies of sacrificed children
have been recovered in the Inca regions of South America, an ancient practice
known as capacocha. The Incas performed child sacrifices during or after
important events, such as the death of the Sapa Inca (emperor) or during a
famine. West Africa. Human sacrifice was common in West African states up to
and during the 19th century. The Annual customs of Dahomey was the most
notorious example, but sacrifices were carried out all along the West African
coast and further inland. Sacrifices were particularly common after the death
of a King or Queen, and there are many recorded cases of hundreds or even
thousands of slaves being sacrificed at such events. Sacrifices were
particularly common in Dahomey, in the Benin Empire, in what is now Ghana, and
in the small independent states in what is now southern Nigeria. According to
R. J. Rummel, "Just consider the Grand Custom in Dahomey: When a ruler died,
hundreds, sometimes even thousands, of prisoners would be slain. In one of
these ceremonies in 1727, as many as 4,000 were reported killed. In addition,
Dahomey had an Annual Custom during which 500 prisoners were sacrificed." In
the northern parts of West Africa, human sacrifice had become rare early as
Islam became more established in these areas such as the Hausa States. Human
sacrifice was officially banned in the remainder of West African states only by
coercion, or in some cases annexation, by either the British or French. An
important step was the British coercing the powerful Egbo secret society to
oppose human sacrifice in 1850. This society was powerful in a large number of
states in what is now south-eastern Nigeria. Nonetheless, human sacrifice
continued, normally in secret, until West Africa came under firm colonial
control. The "Leopard men" were a West African secret society active into mid-
1900s that practised cannibalism. In theory, the ritual cannibalism would
strengthen both members of the society as well as their entire tribe. In
Tanganyika, the "Lion men" committed an estimated 200 murders in a single
three-month period. Prohibition in major religions. Judaism. Current religious
thinking views the "Akedah" as central to the replacement of human sacrifice;
while some Talmudic scholars assert the replacement was the sacrifice of
animals at the Temple—using Exodus 13:2–12f; 22:28f; 34:19f; Numeri 3:1ff;
18:15; Deuteronomy 15:19—others view that as superseded by the symbolic
"pars-pro-toto" sacrifice of circumcision. Leviticus 20:2 and Deuteronomy 18:10
specifically outlaw the giving of children to Moloch, making it punishable by
stoning; the Tanakh subsequently denounces human sacrifice as barbaric customs
of Baal worshippers (e.g. Psalms 106:37ff). Judges chapter 11 contains a story
in which a Judge named Jephthah makes a vow to God to sacrifice the first thing
that comes out of the door of his house in exchange for God's help with a
military battle against the Ammonites. Much to his dismay, his only daughter
greeted him upon his triumphant return. Judges 11:39 states that Jephthah kept
his vow. According to the commentators of the rabbinic Jewish tradition,
Jepthah's daughter was not sacrificed, but was forbidden to marry and remained
a spinster her entire life, fulfilling the vow that she would be devoted to the
Lord. The 1st-century CE Jewish historian Flavius Josephus, however, understood
this to mean that Jephthah burned his daughter on Yahweh's altar, whilst
pseudo-Philo, late first century CE, wrote that Jephthah offered his daughter
as a burnt offering because he could find no sage in Israel who would cancel
his vow. Christianity. In Christianity, the belief developed that the story of
Isaac's binding and of Jepthah's virgin daughter were foreshadowing for the
sacrifice of Jesus, whose sacrifice and resurrection allowed the sins of
mankind to be washed away. There is a tradition that the site of the binding of
Isaac, Moriah, was also the city of Jesus's future crucifixion. The beliefs of
most Christian denominations hinge upon the substitutionary atonement of the
sacrifice of Jesus, which is necessary for salvation in the afterlife. Each
individual person must participate in, and/or receive the benefits of, this
sacrifice for the atonement of their sins. Early Christian sources explicitly
described this event as a sacrificial offering, with Jesus in the role of both
priest and victim, although starting with the Enlightenment, some writers, such
as John Locke, have disputed the model of Jesus' death as a propitiatory
sacrifice. Eastern Orthodox and Roman Catholic Christians believe that this
sacrifice is made present in the sacrament of the Eucharist. In this tradition,
bread and wine, offered in a liturgical ritual, transforms into the "Real
Presence," (the literal Body and Blood of Jesus Christ). Receiving the
Eucharist is a central part of the religious life of Catholic and Orthodox
Christians. Most Protestant traditions do not share the belief in the Real
Presence but otherwise are varied, for example, they may believe that in the
bread and wine, Christ is present only spiritually, not in the sense of a
change in substance (Methodism) or that the bread and wine of communion are a
merely symbolic reminder (Baptist). Although early Christians in the Roman
Empire were accused of being cannibals, practices such as human sacrifice were
abhorrent to them. Islam. The Qur'an strongly condemns human sacrifice, as a
"grave error and sinful act" and an "ignorant, foolish act of those that have
gone astray", and speaks of how the "heathens were deluded by their deities to
kill their own children". Eastern religions. Many traditions of Eastern
religions (Buddhism and Jainism) embrace the doctrine of "ahimsa" (non-
violence) which imposes vegetarianism and outlaws animal as well as human
sacrifice. In the case of Buddhism, both "bhikkhus" (monks) and "bhikkhunis"
(nuns) were forbidden to take life in any form as part of the monastic code,
while non-violence was promoted among laity through encouragement of the Five
Precepts. Across the Buddhist world both meat and alcohol are strongly
discouraged as offerings to a Buddhist altar, with the former being synonymous
with sacrifice, and the latter a violation of the Five Precepts. In Hinduism,
the principle of "ahimsa" was prescribed as early as in the Maurya period "Manu
Smrti". The same text, however, also exempts religious sacrifice from the
notion of "violence" since the victim of the sacrifice was taken to benefit
from the act as it would be reborn in a higher position. In modern Hinduism
slaughter according to the rituals permitted in the Puranic scriptures has
virtually disappeared. In the 19th and 20th centuries, prominent figures of
Indian spirituality such as Swami Vivekananda, Ramana Maharshi, Swami Sivananda
and A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami emphasised the importance of ahimsa. Allegations
of human sacrifice. Allegations of human sacrifice have been made against the
Jews generally in the form of accusations of child cannibalism or desecrating
the eucharist. Groups that have had such accusations leveled against them
include blood libel against the Jews by Apion in the 30s CE, Christians in the
Roman empire later allegations of a Jewish conspiracy and the witch hunts of
the 16th and 17th centuries. In the 20th century, blood libel accusations re-
emerged as part of the satanic ritual abuse moral panic. The People's Republic
of China as well as Chinese nationalists in the Republic of China in their
effort to discredit Tibetan lamaism make frequent and emphatic reference to the
historical human sacrifice in Tibet, portraying the 1950 People's Liberation
Army invasion of Tibet as an act of humanitarian intervention. According to
Chinese sources, in the year 1948, 21 individuals were murdered by state
sacrificial priests from Lhasa as part of a ritual of enemy destruction,
because their organs were required as magical ingredients. The "Tibetan
Revolutions Museum" established by the Chinese in Lhasa has numerous morbid
ritual objects on display to illustrate these claims. In Taiwan, Li Ao in his
TV talk show in 2006 claimed that the Dalai Lama had commanded human
sacrifices, asking his followers to "tear out human skin" for "some religious
ceremony". Most of the human remains that the Chinese exhibit as gruesome
evidence of Tibetan human sacrifice are in fact body parts of people who died
of natural causes which were collected after sky burial and preserved as
relics. Contemporary human sacrifice. India. Human sacrifice is illegal in
India. But a few cases do occur in remote and underdeveloped regions of the
country, where modernity has not penetrated well and tribal/semi-tribal groups
adhere to cultural practices as they did over the course of millennia.
According to the "Hindustan Times", there was an incident of human sacrifice in
western Uttar Pradesh in 2003. Similarly, police in Khurja reported "dozens of
sacrifices" in the period of half a year in 2006. The Supreme Court of India
habitually issues the death penalty to those found guilty of practising human
sacrifice. Sub-Saharan Africa. Human sacrifice, in the context of religious
ritual, still occurs in other traditional religions, for example in muti
killings in Eastern Africa. Human sacrifice is no longer officially condoned in
any country, and such cases are regarded as murder. In January, 2008, Milton
Blahyi of Liberia confessed being part of human sacrifices which "included the
killing of an innocent child and plucking out the heart, which was divided into
pieces for us to eat." He fought against Charles Taylor's militia. In August
2004, a muti killing took place in Ireland; the headless corpse of a Malawi
woman was found near Piltown, County Kilkenny. Chile. A 1989 book by
investigative journalist Patrick Tierney documents a modern ritual human
sacrifice during the devastating earthquake and tsunami of 1960 by a Machi of
the Mapuche in the Lago Budi community. The victim, 5-year-old José Luis
Painecur, had his arms and legs removed by Juan Pañán and Juan José Painecur
(the victim's grandfather), and was stuck into the sand of the beach like a
stake. The waters of the Pacific Ocean then carried the body out to sea. The
sacrifice was rumoured to be at the behest of local machi, Juana Namuncurá
Añen. The two men were charged with the crime and confessed, but later
recanted. They were released after two years. A judge ruled that those involved
in these events had "acted without free will, driven by an irresistible natural
force of ancestral tradition." The story is also mentioned in a "Time" magazine
article from that year, although with much less detail. Ritual murder. Ritual
killings perpetrated by individuals or small groups within a society that
denounces them as simple murder are difficult to classify as either "human
sacrifice" or mere pathological homicide because they lack the societal
integration of sacrifice proper. The instances closest to "ritual killing" in
the criminal history of modern society would be pathological serial killers
such as the Zodiac Killer, and mass suicides with doomsday cult background,
such as the Peoples Temple, Movement for the Restoration of the Ten
Commandments of God, Order of the Solar Temple or Heaven's Gate incidents.
Other examples include the "Matamoros killings" attributed to Mexican cult
leader Adolfo Constanzo and the "Superior Universal Alignment" killings in
1990s Brazil. In fiction. Human sacrifice has a history as a topic in
literature, opera, video games, and cinema. A recurrent theme in the Classics,
it returns to prominence in European imagination with the Spanish accounts of
the Aztec rituals. Derek Hughes in "Culture and Sacrifice" traces the topic's
iterations through the works of Shakespeare, Dryden and Voltaire, and its
central position in the operatic tradition from Mozart to Wagner and into 20th
century works such as those of D.H. Lawrence. "The Lottery" is a 1948 short
story that caused controversy in the United States. "The Wicker Man" is a 1973
British film on the topic. In Rosemary Sutcliff's 1977 historical novel "Sun
Horse, Moon Horse", the main character accepts a duty as a sacrificial king and
lays down his life for the redemption of his people, while inaugurating the
creation of the Uffington White Horse. Most of the plot of The Beatles' film
"Help!" deals (in a humorous way) with a group that practises human sacrifice
trying to kill Ringo Starr because he is wearing the sacrificial ring. In
"Tintin: Prisoners of the Sun" the Inca leader comes close to sacrificing
Tintin, Captain Haddock, and Professor Calculus on a pyre to be set alight with
parabolic mirrors. This was for Calculus having committed sacrilege for wearing
the bracelet of Rascar Capac. In the 1984 film "Indiana Jones and the Temple of
Doom", high priest Mola Ram sacrifices men by magically removing their heart
with one hand and lowering them in boiling lava. One sacrifice is shown, in
which the victim's amputated heart spontaneously combusts when the victim hits
the lava. In Mel Gibson's 2006 film "Apocalypto", human sacrifice is done to
appease the gods. In the Dan Brown novel "The Lost Symbol", the book's main
antagonist Mal'akh, prepares himself for the human sacrifice throughout the
story, believing that it is his great destiny to lead the forces of evil. In
the two fantasy series the Belgariad and the Malloreon by David Eddings, human
sacrifice of a type similar to that of the Aztecs is practiced by men of the
Angarak race in devotion to their god Torak. In , Human Sacrifice is a
recurring element in several side quests involving the infamous Daedric
Princes. The most infamous of these is a quest given by the Daedric Prince
Boethiah where the Dragonborn must sacrifice one of his or her followers in
order to progress further into the quest and the Daedric Prince Molag Bol
requires the player to sacrifice a corrupt priest by murdering him with a
rusted mace once he is caught in one of Molag Bol's traps.
