Hymn A hymn is a type of song, usually religious, specifically written for the
purpose of praise, adoration or prayer, and typically addressed to a deity or
deities, or to a prominent figure or personification. The word "hymn" derives
from Greek ("hymnos"), which means "a song of praise." Collections of hymns are
known as hymnals or hymnbooks. Origins. Ancient hymns include the Egyptian
"Great Hymn to the Aten", composed by Pharaoh Akhenaten; the "Vedas", a
collection of hymns in the tradition of Hinduism; and the Psalms, a collection
of songs from Judaism. The Western tradition of hymnody begins with the Homeric
Hymns, a collection of ancient Greek hymns, the oldest of which were written in
the 7th century BC, praising deities of the ancient Greek religions. Surviving
from the 3rd century BC is a collection of six literary hymns () by the
Alexandrian poet Callimachus. Patristic writers began applying the term , or
"hymnus" in Latin, to Christian songs of praise, and frequently used the word
as a synonym for "psalm". Christian hymnody. Originally modeled on the Psalms
and other poetic passages (commonly referred to as "canticles") in the
Scriptures, Christian hymns are generally directed as praise to the
monotheistic God. Many refer to Jesus Christ either directly or indirectly.
Since the earliest times, Christians have sung "psalms and hymns and spiritual
songs", both in private devotions and in corporate worship (; ; ; ; ; cf. ; ).
One definition of a hymn is "...a lyric poem, reverently and devotionally
conceived, which is designed to be sung and which expresses the worshipper's
attitude toward God or God's purposes in human life. It should be simple and
metrical in form, genuinely emotional, poetic and literary in style, spiritual
in quality, and in its ideas so direct and so immediately apparent as to unify
a congregation while singing it". Christian hymns are often written with
special or seasonal themes and these are used on holy days such as Christmas,
Easter and the Feast of All Saints, or during particular seasons such as Advent
and Lent. Others are used to instill reverence to the Holy Bible or to
celebrate Christian practices such as the eucharist or baptism. Some hymns
praise or address individual saints, particularly the Blessed Virgin Mary; such
hymns are particularly prevalent in Catholicism, Eastern Orthodoxy and to some
extent "High Church" Anglicanism. A writer of hymns is known as a "hymnist" or
"hymnodist", and the practice of singing hymns is called "hymnody"; the same
word is used for the collectivity of hymns belonging to a particular
denomination or period (e.g. "nineteenth century Methodist hymnody" would mean
the body of hymns written and/or used by Methodists in the 19th century). A
collection of hymns is called a "hymnal" or "hymnary". These may or may not
include music. A student of hymnody is called a "hymnologist", and the
scholarly study of hymns, hymnists and hymnody is hymnology. The music to which
a hymn may be sung is a hymn tune. In many Evangelical churches, traditional
songs are classified as hymns while more contemporary worship songs are not
considered hymns. The reason for this distinction is unclear, but according to
some it is due to the radical shift of style and devotional thinking that began
with the Jesus movement and Jesus music. Music and accompaniment. In ancient
and medieval times, stringed instruments such as the harp, lyre and lute were
used with psalms and hymns. Since there is a lack of musical notation in early
writings, the actual musical forms in the early church can only be surmised.
During the Middle Ages a rich hymnody developed in the form of Gregorian chant
or plainsong. This type was sung in unison, in one of eight church modes, and
most often by monastic choirs. While they were written originally in Latin,
many have been translated; a familiar example is the 4th century "Of the
Father's Heart Begotten" sung to the 11th century plainsong "Divinum
Mysterium". Western church. Later hymnody in the Western church introduced
four-part vocal harmony as the norm, adopting major and minor keys, and came to
be led by organ and choir. It shares many elements with classical music. Today,
except for choirs, more musically inclined congregations and "a cappella"
congregations, hymns are typically sung in unison. In some cases complementary
full settings for organ are also published, in others organists and other
accompanists are expected to transcribe the four-part vocal score for their
instrument of choice. To illustrate Protestant usage, in the traditional
services and liturgies of the Methodist churches, which are based upon Anglican
practice, hymns are sung (often accompanied by an organ) during the
processional to the altar, during the receiving of the Eucharist, during the
recessional, and sometimes at other points during the service. These hymns can
be found in the United Methodist Hymnal. The Doxology is also sung after the
tithes and offerings are brought up to the altar. Contemporary Christian
worship, as often found in Evangelicalism and Pentecostalism, may include the
use of contemporary worship music played with electric guitars and the drum
kit, sharing many elements with rock music. Other groups of Christians have
historically excluded instrumental accompaniment, citing the absence of
instruments in worship by the church in the first several centuries of its
existence, and adhere to an unaccompanied "a cappella" congregational singing
of hymns. These groups include the 'Brethren' (often both 'Open' and
'Exclusive'), the Churches of Christ, Mennonites, Primitive Baptists, and
certain Reformed churches, although during the last century or so, several of
these, such as the Free Church of Scotland have abandoned this stance. Eastern
church. Eastern Christianity (the Eastern Orthodox, Oriental Orthodox and
Eastern Catholic churches) have a very rich and ancient hymnographical
tradition. Eastern chant is almost always a cappella, and instrumental
accompaniment is rare. The central form of chant in the Eastern Orthodoxy is
Byzantine Chant, which is used to chant all forms of liturgical worship.
Exceptions include the Coptic Orthodox tradition which makes use of the
sistrum, and the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church, which also uses drums,
cymbals and other instruments on certain occasions. The development of
Christian hymnody. Thomas Aquinas, in the introduction to his commentary on the
Psalms, defined the Christian hymn thus: ""Hymnus est laus Dei cum cantico;
canticum autem exultatio mentis de aeternis habita, prorumpens in vocem"." ("A
hymn is the praise of God with song; a song is the exultation of the mind
dwelling on eternal things, bursting forth in the voice.") The Protestant
Reformation resulted in two conflicting attitudes to hymns. One approach, the
regulative principle of worship, favoured by many Zwinglians, Calvinists and
some radical reformers, considered anything that was not directly authorised by
the Bible to be a novel and Catholic introduction to worship, which was to be
rejected. All hymns that were not direct quotations from the Bible fell into
this category. Such hymns were banned, along with any form of instrumental
musical accompaniment, and organs were ripped out of churches. Instead of
hymns, biblical psalms were chanted, most often without accompaniment, to very
basic melodies. This was known as exclusive psalmody. Examples of this may
still be found in various places, including in some of the Presbyterian
churches of western Scotland. The other Reformation approach, the normative
principle of worship, produced a burst of hymn writing and congregational
singing. Martin Luther is notable not only as a reformer, but as the author of
many hymns including "Ein feste Burg ist unser Gott" ("A Mighty Fortress Is Our
God"), which is sung today even by Catholics, and "Gelobet seist du, Jesu
Christ" ("Praise be to You, Jesus Christ") for Christmas. Luther and his
followers often used their hymns, or chorales, to teach tenets of the faith to
worshipers. The first Protestant hymnal was published in Bohemia in 1532 by the
Unitas Fratrum. Count Zinzendorf, the Lutheran leader of the Moravian Church in
the 18th century wrote some 2,000 hymns. The earlier English writers tended to
paraphrase biblical texts, particularly Psalms; Isaac Watts followed this
tradition, but is also credited as having written the first English hymn which
was not a direct paraphrase of Scripture. Watts (1674–1748), whose father was
an Elder of a dissenter congregation, complained at age 16, that when allowed
only psalms to sing, the faithful could not even sing about their Lord, Christ
Jesus. His father invited him to see what he could do about it; the result was
Watts' first hymn, "Behold the glories of the Lamb." Found in few hymnals
today, the hymn has eight stanzas in common meter and is based on Revelation 5:
6, 8, 9, 10, 12. Relying heavily on Scripture, Watts wrote metered texts based
on New Testament passages that brought the Christian faith into the songs of
the church. Isaac Watts has been called "the father of English hymnody," but
Erik Routley sees him more as "the liberator of English hymnody," because his
hymns, and hymns like them, moved worshipers beyond singing only Old Testament
psalms, inspiring congregations and revitalizing worship. Later writers took
even more freedom, some even including allegory and metaphor in their texts.
Wesley's contribution, along with the Second Great Awakening in America led to
a new style called gospel, and a new explosion of sacred music writing with
Fanny Crosby, Lina Sandell, Philip Bliss, Ira D. Sankey, and others who
produced testimonial music for revivals, camp meetings, and evangelistic
crusades. The tune style or form is technically designated "gospel songs" as
distinct from hymns. Gospel songs generally include a refrain (or chorus) and
usually (though not always) a faster tempo than the hymns. As examples of the
distinction, "Amazing Grace" is a hymn (no refrain), but "How Great Thou Art"
is a gospel song. During the 19th century the gospel-song genre spread rapidly
in Protestantism and, to a lesser but still definite extent, in Roman
Catholicism; the gospel-song genre is unknown in the worship "per se" by
Eastern Orthodox churches, which rely exclusively on traditional chants (a type
of hymn). The Methodist Revival of the 18th century created an explosion of
hymn-writing in Welsh, which continued into the first half of the 19th century.
The most prominent names among Welsh hymn-writers are William Williams
Pantycelyn and Ann Griffiths. The second half of the 19th century witnessed an
explosion of hymn tune composition and choir singing in Wales. Along with the
more classical sacred music of composers ranging from Mozart to Monteverdi, the
Catholic Church continued to produce many popular hymns such as Lead, Kindly
Light, Silent Night, O Sacrament Divine and Faith of our Fathers. Many churches
today use contemporary worship music which includes a range of styles often
influenced by popular music. This often leads to some conflict between older
and younger congregants (see contemporary worship). This is not new; the
Christian pop music style began in the late 1960s and became very popular
during the 1970s, as young hymnists sought ways in which to make the music of
their religion relevant for their generation. This long tradition has resulted
in a wide variety of hymns. Some modern churches include within hymnody the
traditional hymn (usually describing God), contemporary worship music (often
directed to God) and gospel music (expressions of one's personal experience of
God). This distinction is not perfectly clear; and purists remove the second
two types from the classification as hymns. It is a matter of debate, even
sometimes within a single congregation, often between revivalist and
traditionalist movements. American developments. African-Americans developed a
rich hymnody from spirituals during times of slavery to the modern, lively
black gospel style. The first influences of African American Culture into hymns
came from Slave Songs of the United States a collection of slave hymns complied
by William Francis Allen who had difficulty pinning them down from the oral
tradition, and though he succeeded, he points out the awe inspiring effect of
the hymns when sung in by their originators. Thanks to Thomas Symmes a new idea
of how to sing hymns spread throughout the churches in which anyone would sing
a hymn any way they felt led to; this was opposed by the views of Symmes
colleagues who felt it was "like Five Hundred different Tunes roared out at the
same time." William Billings, a singing school teacher, created the first tune
book with only American born compositions. Within his books, Billings did not
put as much emphasis on "common measure" which was the typical way hymns were
sung, but he attempted "to have a Sufficiency in each measure". Boston's Handel
and Haydn Society aimed at raising the level of church music in America,
publishing their "Collection of Church Music". In the late 19th century Ira D.
Sankey and Dwight L. Moody developed the relatively new subcategory of Gospel
hymns. Hymn metres. The "metre" indicates the number of syllables for the lines
in each stanza of a hymn. This provides a means of marrying the hymn's text
with an appropriate hymn tune for singing. In practice many hymns conform to
one of a relatively small number of metres (syllable count and stress
patterns). Care must be taken, however, to ensure that not only the metre of
words and tune match, but also the stresses on the words in each line.
Technically speaking an iambic tune, for instance, cannot be used with words
of, say, trochaic metre. The metre is often denoted by a row of figures besides
the name of the tune, such as "87.87.87", which would inform the reader that
each verse has six lines, and that the first line has eight syllables, the
second has seven, the third line eight, etc. The metre can also be described by
initials; L.M. indicates long metre, which is 88.88 (four lines, each eight
syllables long); S.M. is short metre (66.86); C.M. is common metre (86.86),
while D.L.M., D.S.M. and D.C.M. (the "D" stands for double) are similar to
their respective single metres except that they have eight lines in a verse
instead of four. External links. The links below are restricted to either
material that is historical or resources that are non-denominational or inter-
denominational. Denomination-specific resources are mentioned from the relevant
denomination-specific articles.
