Hyper-Calvinism The term Hyper-Calvinism is used in the writings of Iain
Murray, Curt Daniel, Peter Toon and others who seek to defend an offer of
salvation for all who hear the gospel and a universal duty upon all to receive
the salvation offered. The controversy over indiscriminate gospel offers and
duty-faith historically arose from within the Calvinist tradition among the
early English Particular Baptists in the mid 18th century. It can be seen in
the teachings of men like Joseph Hussey (d. 1726), John Skepp (d. 1721), Lewis
Wayman (d. 1764), John Brine (d. 1765), William Gadsby (d. 1844) and John Gill
(d. 1771). It became widespread among the English Particular Baptists of that
day, though some Particular Baptists disagreed with the views of Wayman, Skepp,
and Brine. Opposition to duty-faith and indiscriminate gospel offers had a
large influence among the particular baptist denominations during the 18th and
19th centuries. In more modern times, these views have been preserved among the
Gospel Standard or Strict Baptists churches and certain Primitive Baptist
churches. Definition. Peter Toon notes that the expression "Hyper-Calvinism"
came to be generally used in the 19th century. "The terms ‘False Calvinism’
and ‘High Calvinism’ were used in the latter part of the 18th century to
describe what we have described as ‘Hyper-Calvinism’. It was only in the
19th century that the expression Hyper-Calvinism came to be generally used to
describe the same doctrinal system which some people in the 18th century called
High Calvinism." Some writers define Hyper-Calvinism as a denial of the need or
desirability to present a universal call to repent and believe the gospel.
Other writers describe it in terms of emphasis. Denial of a universal call to
repent and believe the gospel. Iain MurrayIain Murray, The Forgotten Spurgeon
(Banner of Truth, 1998), p. 47. source David Engelsma "Hyper-Calvinism is the
denial that God in the preaching of the gospel calls everyone who hears the
preaching to repent and believe. It is the denial that the church should call
everyone in the preaching. It is the denial that the unregenerated have a duty
to repent and believe. It manifests itself in the practice of the preacher’s
addressing the call of the gospel, "repent and believe on Christ crucified,"
only to those in his audience who show signs of regeneration and, thereby, of
election, namely, some conviction of sin and some interest in salvation." Peter
Toon Peter Toon states that Hyper-Calvinism "made no distinction between the
secret and revealed will of God, and tried to deduce the duty of men from what
it taught concerning the secret, eternal decrees of God. This led to the notion
that grace must only be offered to those for whom it was intended." Description
in terms of emphasis. Curt Daniel Curt Daniel defines Hyper-Calvinism as
"...that school of supralapsarian Five Point Calvinism which so stresses the
sovereignty of God by overemphasizing the secret over the revealed will and
eternity over time, that it minimizes the responsibility of Man, notably with
respect to the denial of the word ‘offer’ in relation to the preaching of
the Gospel of a finished and limited atonement, thus undermining the universal
duty of sinners to believe savingly with assurance that the Lord Jesus Christ
died for them."... it is the rejection of the word offer in connection with
evangelism for supposedly Calvinistic reasons... the only real and tangible
thing which differentiates the Hyper from the High-Calvinist is the word
offer." Historic definition of the term. Despite the doctrine of limited
atonement being taught in a common Calvinist creed known as Canons of Dort
(1619) the term "Hyper-Calvinism" in previous generations has been used to
define those who reject universal atonement or a general design in the death of
Christ. George Croft (1825) "Should it be asked, whether all Calvinists differ
from Arminians, only in reference to effectual grace and perseverance, it is
frankly acknowledged, that there are some who differ from them in other points.
These persons are generally styled High-Calvinists, or Hyper-Calvinists. Hyper
signifies above, and Hyper-Calvinists are so called, because their system is
above genuine Calvinism. The Hyper-Calvinist holds the particular design of
Christ's death, but denies its general design; whereas moderate or modern
Calvinists, as they are called, hold both." A Protestant dictionary (1904)A
Protestant dictionary by Charles Henry Hamilton Wright, Charles Neil, 1904
[http://books.google.com/
books?id=B4eFbRYVc94C&pg=PA575&dq=hyper+calvinism+limited+atonement&hl=en&ei=qQNFTajCCIa-
sAOGoJnzCg&sa=X&oi=book_result&ct=result&resnum=1&ved=0CCYQ6AEwADgU#v=onepage&q&f=false]
Doctrine. The Gospel Standard Articles of Faith. "We believe that the eternal
redemption which Christ has obtained by the shedding of His blood is special
and particular; that is to say, that it was intentionally designed only for the
Elect of God, the Sheep of Christ, who therefore alone share in the special and
peculiar blessings thereof." (ARTICLE 6, PARTICULAR REDEMPTION) "We believe
that the invitations of the Gospel, being spirit and life, are intended only
for those who have been made by the blessed Spirit to feel their lost state as
sinners and their need of Christ as their Saviour, and to repent of and forsake
their sins." (ARTICLE 24, GOSPEL INVITATIONS) "We deny that Christ died for all
mankind." (ARTICLE 25, UNIVERSAL REDEMPTION DENIED) "We deny duty faith and
duty repentance – these terms signifying that it is every man’s duty to
spiritually and savingly repent and believe. We deny also that there is any
capability in man by nature to any spiritual good whatever. So that we reject
the doctrine that men in a state of nature should be exhorted to believe in or
turn to God." (ARTICLE 26, DUTY FAITH AND DUTY REPENTANCE DENIED) "We deny that
the Holy Spirit ever enlightens the non-elect, to make them capable at all of
receiving grace." (ARTICLE 27, THE NON-ELECT INCAPABLE OF RECEIVING GRACE) "We
reject the doctrine called “Baxterianism”; that is to say, that while all
the elect shall assuredly be saved, there is a residuum of grace in Christ for
the rest, or any of the rest, if they will only accept it." (ARTICLE 28,
BAXTERIANISM DENIED) "While we believe that the Gospel is to be preached in or
proclaimed to all the world, as in Mark 16. 15, we deny offers of grace; that
is to say, that the gospel is to be offered indiscriminately to all." (ARTICLE
29, INDISCRIMINATE OFFERS OF GRACE DENIED) Duty-faith in relation to Adam.
Wayman contends that saving faith was not in the power of man at his best
before the fall and therefore makes the following deduction, "What Adam had, we
all had in him; and what Adam lost, we all lost in him, and are debtors to God
on both accounts; but Adam had not the faith of God's elect before the fall,
and did not lose it for his posterity; therefore they are not debtors to God
for it while in unregeneracy" John Brine gives some insight into Wayman's
statement. Brine taught that every duty incumbent on Adam in his unfallen state
he also had the ability to perform, and this duty extends to all men in their
fallen state regardless of their lack of ability. Brine maintained that a lack
of ability does not release a man from duty (with which most Calvinists would
agree), but he sees salvation in a different category because, "with respect to
special faith in Christ, it seems to me that the powers of man in his perfected
state were not fitted and disposed to that act" William Styles reasoned that if
saving faith was a duty in the law, it must have been a duty upon Adam to trust
in the blood and righteousness of Christ while in a state of innocency. "If
spiritual Faith is a natural duty—namely, if it is obligatory on account of
the relation in which men stand to God as creatures to their Creator—it is
commanded by the Moral Law, and it was incumbent on Adam as much as on any of
his posterity. That it is not commanded by the Moral Law is admitted—or if
denied involves absurdity. Faith is the trust of a sinner as such in the blood
and righteousness of Jesus Christ. If, then, spiritual Faith is a creature
duty, it was incumbent on Adam in a state of innocency to trust as a sinner in
the redemptive work of Christ. For which none contend." Duty-faith in relation
to the atonement of Christ. Interactions with Arminianism. Many Calvinistic
ministers defended the doctrine of particular redemption by denying the
Arminian view of duty faith. The Arminian Daniel Whitby opposed the doctrine of
particular redemption because of duty faith. He wrote, "Now if it were the
duty, even of them who perish under the preaching of the gospel, to own Christ
as their Saviour, and to believe to the salvation of their souls, it follows
either that it is, and, in all generations since our Saviour's coming, was,
their duty to believe a lie, and to apply that to them which belonged not to
them; or that Christ's death might truly have been applied to, and therefore
was most certainly intended for, the salvation of those souls that perish." A
defense of duty faith arose from the Arminians who considered the doctrine of
limited atonement to be inconsistent with the universal offer and duty-faith.
Albert Barnes reasoned against the Calvinistic view of the atonement when he
wrote, "...all consistent preaching must be based on the supposition that no
one can be saved except the elect for whom Christ died, and all offers of
salvation made to others must be based on falsehood and insincerity... all
offers of salvation made to those for whom Christ did not bear the penalty of
the law must be based on falsehood and insincerity." Many Calvinistic ministers
answered these common arguments by refuting the Arminian view of duty faith and
the free offer of redemption. They reasoned that if duty faith and the free
offer are true: 1. God may be charged with offering a lie and commanding souls
to receive the blessings of this lie by faith. 2. The doctrine of particular
and limited atonement must be inconsistent with the free offer and duty faith.
W. Kitchen reasoned that duty faith would imply a universal design in the
atonement. He wrote, "Duty-faith, then, calls upon every one who hears the
gospel to exercise a faith which at once gives him the warrant to believe, and
will ultimately give him to know, that Jesus loved him and gave himself for
him..." Albert Barnes rejected the doctrine of limited atonement by rejecting
the literal payment for sin in Christ's death. He wrote, "If it were a literal
payment of a debt; for a payment of a debt could not be general; that is, the
payment of a specific sum of money due to another would not be a transaction of
such a nature that a third person could avail himself of that payment as a
reason why he should be discharged from the obligation of paying a claim on
him." Many Calvinistic ministers have defended the doctrine of limited
atonement by defending the doctrine of a literal payment for the sins of the
elect by the atonement of Jesus Christ. "While cheerfully admitting the
sufficiency of Immanuel’s death to have redeemed all mankind, had all the
sins of the whole human species been equally imputed to him; and had he, as the
Universal Representative, sustained that curse of the law which was due to all
mankind; yet we cannot perceive any solid reason to conclude, that his
propitiatory sufferings are sufficient for the expiation of sins which he did
not bear, or for the redemption of sinners whom he did not represent, as a
sponsor, when he expired on the cross. For the substitution of Christ, and the
imputation of sin to him, are essential to the scriptural doctrine of
redemption by our adorable Jesus.–We may, therefore, safely conclude, that
our Lord’s voluntary substitution, and redemption by his vicarious death, are
both of them limited to those, for whom he was made sin–for whom he was made
a curse–and for whose deliverance from final ruin, he actually paid the price
of his own blood." Interactions with Andrew Fuller and Neonomianism. Andrew
Fuller was a minister among the particular baptist who is well known for
defending duty-faith and the free offer. Andrew Fuller sought to reconcile the
free offer with particular redemption by teaching that there was a universal
sufficiency in the atonement. He writes, "In short, we must either acknowledge
an objective fulness in Christ's atonement, sufficient for the salvation of the
whole world to believe in Him; or, in opposition to the Scripture and common
sense, confine our invitation to believe, to such persons as have believed
already." However, Andrew Fuller's view was rejected by many Calvinistic
ministers. Many considered his arguments to be Neonomianism. William Rushton
replied to Andrew Fuller's statement by writing, "This is the marrow of what
has been called Neonomianism; which doctrine, as to substance, is taught in the
writings of Mr. Baxter, of the Arminians, and of the most learned of the Roman
Catholics... All the efficacy unto justification which Mr. Fuller allows to the
obedience and death of Christ is, that the Redeemer merited this great blessing
for us, on the conditions of our believing the gospel; or, in other words, that
the blood of Christ hath merited salvation for us, on milder terms than those
required by the law of works... The conditional sufficiency for the
justification of the whole world, which Mr. Fuller ascribes to the work of
Christ, places all the efficacy thereof in the act of believing." The
controversy was not only over duty faith and the free offer, but it was also
over the intention and purpose of the atonement. If it could be proved by the
Arminians that the atonement was designed to provide the opportunity of
redemption for all men universally, then the atonement would not be
inconsistent with duty faith and the free offer. Andrew Fuller writes, "If the
atonement of Christ were considered as the literal payment of a debt, it might,
for aught I know, be inconsistent with indefinite invitations." John Stevens
made an open reply to Andrew Fuller's book by writing an entire book addressing
Andrew Fuller's statements. John Stevens put forth this argument, "It has been,
and still is, thought to be very inconsistent and absurd, to suppose that God
can have made it the duty of any man to believe in Christ for the salvation of
his soul, or, that he can have promised salvation to him on his so believing,
when all the while his salvation was not the end for which he died." Many have
considered Andrew Fuller's teaching to be rooted in Neonomianism. Fuller
expressed such views in these words, "Yet, to speak of sins as being pardoned
before they are repented of, or even committed, is not only to maintain that on
which the Scriptures are silent, but to contradict the current language of
their testimony. If all our sins, past, present, and to come, were actually
forgiven, either when Christ laid down his -life, or even on our first
believing, why did David speak of 'confessing his transgression," and of God
"forgiving his iniquity?" Historical Understanding of Duty-faith and the Law of
Works. For John Brine and others, the argument against duty faith focuses on
understanding the difference between works of the law and faith in Christ unto
salvation. John Brine writes, "The Law is not of Faith: It doth not present the
Object of Faith, that all will allow. Nor doth it direct to the Act of Faith in
Christ, as a Saviour. The Law, as a Covenant, requires Obedience, in order to
Acceptance, and receiving the promised Reward. Do and live is the Language of
it, but not believe and be saved: Yea, it is so far from requiring Faith in
Christ for Salvation, that it allows not the Subject of it to hope for
Deliverance from Misery." In short, if it could be proven that the law does
command sinners to trust in Christ as their savior, then John Brine's argument
would not be able to support the denial of duty faith. Many Calvinists opposed
duty faith because it teaches that saving faith is a duty commanded in the Law
of works, as Job Hupton writes, "While the two covenants are distinct, the
things belonging to the one, must be kept separate from those pertaining to the
other. The blessings of that of grace cannot, with the least shadow of
propriety, be said to be the duties of that of works." The Orthodox Position of
the Reformed Calvinists. John Calvin. He invites to himself both the reprobate
and the elect in commonCalvin, Psalms 16:7. Offered to all the worldJohn
Calvin, Sermons on Isaiah’s Prophecy of the Death and Passion of Christ, 52:
12, p., 140-1. Their unbelief prevents themJohn Calvin, Hebrews 9:28.
Confessions and Catechisms. The Westminster StandardsWestminster Confession of
Faith VII/III source; Larger Catechism Ans. 32, 63, 68 source; Shorter
Catechism Ans. 31 and 86 source. The Larger Catechism leaves no room for doubt
that the word is used in reference to non-elect persons; "...who, for their
wilful neglect and contempt of grace offered to them, being justly left in
their unbelief, do never truly come to Jesus Christ" (Larger Catechism Ans.
68). Question & Answers on the Shorter CatechismJohn Brown, Questions & Answers
on the Shorter Catechism, 1796 source Quotes from teachers who opposed duty-
faith and the free offer. Answering duty-faith. Christopher NessChristopher
Ness (1621–1705) (An Antidote Against Arminianism by Christopher Ness source
J.H. GosdenCommentary on the Gospel Standard Baptist Articles of Faith by J.H.
Gosden source William StylesWilliam Styles, A Manual of Faith and Practice,
source Benjamin TaylorBenjamin Taylor, Deceiving the Souls of Thousands, 1875
source John ForemanJohn Foreman, Duty Faith, 1860 source William
HuntingtonWilliam Huntington, Excommunication [http://williamhuntington.net/
Works/Volume11/11002.htm source John Gill (John Gill, The Body of Divinity: Of
the Gospel source) Answering indiscriminate offers. Robert HawkerRobert Hawker,
Commentary from Philippians 4 source John BrineThe Sermons of John Brine -
Sermon 9: A Refutation of Arminian Principles, John Brine, 1743 source John
GillSermon 7: THE DOCTRINE OF PREDESTINATION STATED, AND SET IN THE SCRIPTURE
LIGHT, John Gill source William TantWilliam Tant, On offering the Gospel, 1837
source
