Iconoclasm Iconoclasm is the deliberate destruction of religious icons and
other symbols or monuments, usually with religious or political motives. It is
a frequent component of major political or religious changes. The term
encompasses the more specific destruction of images of a ruler after his death
or overthrow ("damnatio memoriae"), for example, following Akhenaten's death in
Ancient Egypt. People who engage in or support iconoclasm are called
"iconoclasts", a term that has come to be applied figuratively to any
individual who challenges established dogma or conventions. Conversely, people
who revere or venerate religious images are (by iconoclasts) called
"iconolaters". In a Byzantine context, they are known as "iconodules", or
"iconophiles". Iconoclasm may be carried out by people of a different religion,
but is often the result of sectarian disputes between factions of the same
religion. In Christianity, iconoclasm has generally been motivated by people
who adopt a literal interpretation of the Ten Commandments, which forbid the
making and worshipping of "graven images or any likeness of anything". The
degree of iconoclasm among Christian sects has varied greatly. Byzantine
iconoclasm. In the Byzantine Empire, iconoclasm began with Emperor Leo III. The
religious conflict created political and economic divisions in Byzantine
society. It was generally supported by the Eastern, poorer, non-Greek peoples
of the Empire who had to deal frequently with raids from Arab lands. On the
other hand, the wealthier Greeks of Constantinople, and also the peoples of the
Balkan and Italian provinces, strongly opposed iconoclasm. Within the Byzantine
Empire, which included both Christians and Muslims, the government had likely
been adopting Christian images more frequently. One notable change came in 695,
when Justinian II's government added a full-face image of Christ on the obverse
of imperial gold coins. The change caused the Caliph Abd al-Malik to stop his
earlier adoption of Byzantine coin types. He started a purely Islamic coinage
with lettering only. A letter by the patriarch Germanus written before 726 to
two Iconoclast bishops says that "now whole towns and multitudes of people are
in considerable agitation over this matter" but there is little written
evidence of the debate. The first iconoclastic period: 730‚Äì787. Sometime
between 726 and 730, the Byzantine Emperor Leo III the Isaurian began the
iconoclast campaign. He ordered the removal of an image of Jesus prominently
placed over the Chalke gate, the ceremonial entrance to the Great Palace of
Constantinople, and its replacement with a cross. Some of those assigned to the
task were murdered by a band of iconodules. Over the years conflict developed
between those who wanted to use the images, claiming that they were "icons" to
be "venerated", and the purists who claimed they were simply idols. Pope
Gregory III "convoked a synod in 730 and formally condemned iconoclasm as
heretical and excommunicated its promoters. The papal letter never reached
Constantinople as the messengers were intercepted and arrested in Sicily by the
Byzantines." The Byzantine Emperor Constantine V convened the Council of Hieria
in 754. The 338 bishops assembled concluded, "the unlawful art of painting
living creatures blasphemed the fundamental doctrine of our salvation--namely,
the Incarnation of Christ, and contradicted the six holy synods. . . . If
anyone shall endeavour to represent the forms of the Saints in lifeless
pictures with material colours which are of no value (for this notion is vain
and introduced by the devil), and does not rather represent their virtues as
living images in himself, etc. . . . let him be anathema." This Council claimed
to be the legitimate "Seventh Ecumenical Council." Views in Byzantine
iconoclasm. The chief theological opponents of iconoclasm were the monks Mansur
(John of Damascus), who, living in Muslim territory as advisor to the Caliph of
Damascus, was far enough away from the Byzantine emperor to evade retribution,
and Theodore the Studite, abbot of the Stoudios monastery in Constantinople.
John declared that he did not venerate matter, "but rather the creator of
matter." However he also declared, "But I also venerate the matter through
which salvation came to me, as if filled with divine energy and grace." He
includes in this latter category the ink in which the gospels were written as
well as the paint of images, the wood of the Cross, and the body and blood of
Jesus. Muslim iconoclasm. Within Muslim history, the act of removing idols from
the Ka'ba in Mecca is considered by all believers to be of great symbolic and
historical importance. In general, Muslim societies have avoided the depiction
of living beings (animals and humans) within such sacred spaces as mosques and
madrasahs. This opposition to figural representation is not based on the
Qur'an, but rather on various traditions contained within the Hadith. The
prohibition of figuration has not always extended to the secular sphere, and a
robust tradition of figural representation exists within Muslim art. However,
western authors have tended to perceive "a long, culturally determined, and
unchanging tradition of violent iconoclastic acts" within Islamic society.
Start of iconoclasm. The first act of Muslim iconoclasm was committed by
Muslims in 630, when the various statues of Arabian deities housed in the Kaaba
in Mecca were destroyed. There is a tradition that Muhammad spared a fresco of
Mary and Jesus. This act was intended to bring an end to the idolatry which, in
the Muslim view, characterized Jahiliyya. The destruction of the idols of Mecca
did not, however, determine the treatment of other religious communities living
under Muslim rule after the expansion of the caliphate. Most Christians under
Muslim rule, for example, continued to produce icons and to decorate their
churches as they wished. A major exception to this pattern of tolerance in
early Islamic history was the "Edict of Yazƒ´d," issued by the Umayyad caliph
Yazid II in 722‚Äì723. This edict ordered the destruction of crosses and
Christian images within the territory of the caliphate. Researchers have
discovered evidence that the order was followed, particularly in present-day
Jordan, where archaeological evidence shows the removal of images from the
mosaic floors of some, although not all, of the churches that stood at this
time. But, Yazƒ´d's iconoclastic policies were not continued by his successors,
and Christian communities of the Levant continued to make icons without
significant interruption from the sixth century to the ninth. Historical acts
of iconoclasm. The missing nose on the Great Sphinx of Giza is attributed to
iconoclasm by a Sufi Muslim fanatic in the mid-1300s. Despite a religious
prohibition against destroying or converting houses of worship, certain
conquering Muslim armies have used local temples or houses of worship as
mosques. An example is Hagia Sophia in Istanbul (formerly Constantinople),
which was converted into a mosque in 1453. Most icons were desecrated whilst
the rest were covered with plaster. In the 1920s, Hagia Sophia was converted to
a museum, and the restoration of the mosaics was undertaken by the American
Byzantine Institute beginning in 1932. More dramatic cases of iconoclasm by
Muslims are found in parts of India where Hindu and Buddhist temples were razed
and mosques erected in their place (for example, the Qutub Complex and Babri
Mosque). Another notable iconoclast was Mughal ruler Aurangzeb (reigned
1658‚Äì1707), who destroyed the famous Hindu temples at Varanasi and Mathura.
Recent events. Certain Muslim denominations continue to pursue iconoclastic
agendas. There has been much controversy within Islam over the recent and
apparently on-going destruction of historic sites by Mecca's Wahhabist
authorities, prompted by the fear they could become the subject of "idolatry".
A recent act of iconoclasm was the 2001 destruction of the giant Buddhas of
Bamyan by the then Taliban government of Afghanistan. The act generated world-
wide protests and was not supported by other Muslim governments and
organizations. It was widely perceived in the Western media as a result of the
Muslim prohibition against figural decoration. Such an account overlooks "the
coexistence between the Buddhas and the Muslim population that marveled at them
for over a millennium" before their destruction. The Buddhas had twice in the
past been attacked by Nadir Shah and Aurengzeb. According to the art historian
F.B. Flood, analysis of the Taliban's statements regarding the Buddhas suggest
that their destruction was motivated more by political than by theological
concerns. Taliban spokespeople have given many different explanations of the
motives for the destruction. In 2005, the Muhammad cartoon controversy sparked
worldwide controversy and rioting. In December 2010, a group of iconoclasts
were arrested as they were about to attack the Jyllands-Posten newspaper's
office. During the Tuareg rebellion of 2012, the radical Islamist militia Ansar
Dine destroyed various ancient Sufi shrines from the 15th and 16th century in
the city of Timbuktu, Mali. Reformation iconoclasm. Some of the Protestant
reformers, in particular Andreas Karlstadt, Huldrych Zwingli and John Calvin,
encouraged the removal of religious images by invoking the Decalogue's
prohibition of idolatry and the manufacture of graven (sculpted) images of God.
As a result, individuals attacked statues and images, and others were lost
during unauthorised iconoclastic riots. However, in most cases, civil
authorities removed images in an orderly manner in the newly reformed
Protestant cities and territories of Europe. Significant iconoclastic riots
took place in Zurich (in 1523), Copenhagen (1530), M√ºnster (1534), Geneva
(1535), Augsburg (1537), Scotland (1559), and Saintes and La Rochelle (1562).
The Seventeen Provinces (now the Netherlands, Belgium and parts of Northern
France) were disrupted by widespread Protestant iconoclasm in the summer of
1566. This is called the "Beeldenstorm" and began with the destruction of the
statuary of the Monastery of Saint Lawrence in Steenvoorde after a
""Hagenpreek"", or field sermon, by Sebastiaan Matte. Hundreds of other attacks
included the sacking of the Monastery of Saint Anthony after a sermon by Jacob
de Buysere. The "Beeldenstorm" marked the start of the revolution against the
Spanish forces and the Catholic Church. The Iconoclast belief was causing havoc
throughout Europe, and in 1523, specifically due to the Swiss reformer Huldrych
Zwingli, a vast amount of his followers viewed themselves as being involved in
a spiritual community that in matters of faith should obey neither the visible
Church nor lay authorities. According to author R.W Scribner: Lord what work
was here! What clattering of glasses! What beating down of walls! What tearing
up of monuments! What pulling down of seats! What wresting out of irons and
brass from the windows! What defacing of arms! What demolishing of curious
stonework! What tooting and piping upon organ pipes! And what a hideous triumph
in the market-place before all the country, when all the mangled organ pipes,
vestments, both copes and surplices, together with the leaden cross which had
newly been sawn down from the Green-yard pulpit and the service-books and
singing books that could be carried to the fire in the public market-place were
heaped together.' Protestant Christianity was not uniformly hostile to the use
of religious images. Martin Luther, initially hostile, came round to the view
that Christians should be free to use religious images as long as they did not
worship them in place of God. Lutheran scholar Jeremiah Ohl writes: Iconoclasm
against Hindus. During Muslim conquest. Records from the campaign recorded in
the Chach Nama record temple demolitions during the early 8th century, when the
Umayyad governor of Damascus, Hajjaj, mobilized an expedition of 6,000 cavalry
under Muhammad bin-Qasim in 712 CE. Sult√£n Sikandar Butshikan of Kashmir (AD
1389‚Äì1413) ordered the breaking of all "golden and silver images". The
Tarikh-i-Firishta states: "After the emigration of the Bramins, Sikundur
ordered all the temples in Kashmeer to be thrown down. Having broken all the
images in Kashmeer, (Sikandar) acquired the title of ‚ÄòDestroyer of Idols‚Äô".
In 725 Junayad, the Arab governor of Sind, sent his armies to destroy the
second Somanath temple. In 1024 AD, the temple was once again destroyed by
Mahmud Ghazni who raided the temple from across the Thar Desert. The temple was
rebuilt by the Gujjar Paramara King Bhoj of Malwa and the Solanki king Bhima of
Gujarat (Anhilwara) or Patan between 1026 and 1042. The wooden structure was
replaced by Kumarpal (r. 1143‚Äì72), who built the temple of stone. In 1296 AD,
the temple was once again destroyed by Sultan Allauddin Khilji's army.
According to Taj-ul-Ma'sir of Hasan Nizami, Raja Karan of Gujarat was defeated
and forced to flee, "fifty thousand infidels were dispatched to hell by the
sword" and "more than twenty thousand slaves, and cattle beyond all calculation
fell into the hands of the victors". The temple was rebuilt by Mahipala Deva,
the Chudasama king of Saurashtra in 1308 AD and the Linga was installed by his
son Khengar sometime between 1326 and 1351 AD. In 1375 AD, the temple was once
again destroyed by Muzaffar Shah I, the Sultan of Gujarat. In 1451 AD, the
temple was once again destroyed by Mahmud Begda, the Sultan of Gujarat. In 1701
AD, the temple was once again destroyed by Mughal Emperor Aurangzeb. Aurangzeb
built a mosque on the site of the Somnath temple, using some columns from the
temple, whose Hindu sculptural motifs remained visible. Mahmud of Ghazni was an
Afghan Sultan who invaded the Indian subcontinent during the early 11th
century. His campaigns across the gangetic plains are often cited for their
iconoclastic plundering and destruction of temples such as those at Mathura and
he looked upon their destruction as an act of ""jihad"". He sacked the second
Somnath Temple in 1026, and looted it of gems and precious stones and the
famous Shiva lingam of the temple was destroyed . Historical records compiled
by Muslim historian Maulana Hakim Saiyid Abdul Hai attest to the iconoclasm of
Qutb-ud-din Aybak. The first mosque built in Delhi, the "Quwwat al-Islam" was
built after the demolition of the Hindu temple built previously by Prithvi Raj
and certain parts of the temple were left outside the mosque proper. This
pattern of iconoclasm was common during his reign, although an argument goes
that such iconoclasm was motivated more by politics than by religion. Another
ruler of the sultanate, Shams-ud-din Iltutmish, conquered and subjugated the
Hindu pilgrimage site Varanasi in the 11th century and he continued the
destruction of Hindu temples and idols that had begun during the first attack
in 1194. No aspect of Aurangzeb's reign is more cited ‚Äì or more controversial
‚Äì than the numerous desecrations and even the destruction of Hindu temples.
During his reign, tens of thousands of temples were desecrated: their facades
and interiors were defaced and their murtis (divine images) looted. In many
cases, temples were destroyed entirely; in numerous instances mosques were
built on their foundations, sometimes using the same stones. Among the temples
Aurangzeb destroyed were two that are most sacred to Hindus, in Varanasi and
Mathura. In both cases, he had large mosques built on the sites. The Kesava Deo
temple in Mathura, marked the place that Hindus believe was the birthplace of
Shri Krishna. In 1661 Aurangzeb ordered the demolition of the temple, and
constructed the Katra Masjid mosque. Traces of the ancient Hindu temple can be
seen from the back of the mosque. Aurangzeb also destroyed what was the most
famous temple in Varanasi ‚Äì the Vishwanath Temple. The temple had changed its
location over the years, and in 1585 Akbar had authorized its location at Gyan
Vapi. Aurangzeb ordered its demolition in 1669 and constructed a mosque on the
site, whose minarets stand 71 metres above the Ganges. Traces of the old temple
can be seen behind the mosque. Centuries later, emotional debate about these
wanton acts of cultural desecration continues. Aurangzeb also destroyed the
Somnath temple in 1706. Hindu nationalists claim that Mughals destroyed the Ram
Mandir in Ayodhya, located at the birthplace of Rama, and built the Babri
Masjid on the holy site, which has since been a source of tension between the
Hindu and Muslim communities. Writer Fernand Braudel wrote in "A History of
Civilizations" (Penguin 1988/1963, pp.¬ 232‚Äì236), Islamic rule in India as a
""colonial experiment"" was ""extremely violent"", and ""the Muslims could not
rule the country except by systematic terror. Cruelty was the norm ‚Äì
burnings, summary executions, crucifixions or impalements, inventive tortures.
Hindu temples were destroyed to make way for mosques. On occasion there were
forced conversions. If ever there were an uprising, it was instantly and
savagely repressed: houses were burned, the countryside was laid waste, men
were slaughtered and women were taken as slaves."" C. K. Kareem also notes that
Tippu Sultan issued an edict for the destruction of Hindu temples in Kerala. In
a two-volume book by Sita Ram Goel, Arun Shourie, Harsh Narain, Jay Dubashi and
Ram Swarup, Hindu Temples ‚Äì What Happened to Them, includes a list of 2000
mosques that it is claimed were built on Hindu temples in the first volume,
which it is asserted is based primarily on the books of Muslim historians of
the period or the inscriptions of the mosques. The second volume excerpts from
medieval histories and chronicles and from inscriptions concerning the
destruction of Hindu, Jain and Buddhist temples. The authors claim that the
material presented in this book are only the tip of an iceberg. During Goa
inquisitions. I hereby order that in any area owned by my master, the king,
nobody should construct a Hindu temple and such temples already constructed
should not be repaired without my permission. If this order is transgressed,
such temples shall be, destroyed and the goods in them shall be used to meet
expenses of holy deeds, as punishment of such transgression. In 1567 the
campaign of destroying temples in Bardez met with success. At the end of it 300
Hindu temples were destroyed. In 1583 Hindu temples at Assolna and Cuncolim
were destroyed through army action. "The fathers of the Church forbade the
Hindus under terrible penalties the use of their own sacred books, and
prevented them from all exercise of their religion. They destroyed their
temples, and so harassed and interfered with the people that they abandoned the
city in large numbers, refusing to remain any longer in a place where they had
no liberty, and were liable to imprisonment, torture and death if they
worshipped after their own fashion the gods of their fathers." wrote Filippo
Sassetti, who was in India from 1578 to 1588. An order was issued in June 1684
eliminating the Konkani language and making it compulsory to speak Portuguese
language. Following that law all the symbols of non-Christian sects were
destroyed and the books written in local languages were burnt. Contemporary
iconoclasm against Hindus. In India. In June 2010, large-scale violence was
reported in the Sangli town and also in Sangli district. In the melee, members
of the minority community are said to have thrown stones inside a Ganesh
mandal. The Maharashtra Police on Sunday arrested Mainuddin Shamsuddin Bagwan
of the Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) on charges of ‚Äúcommitting acts for
creating communal tension and encouraging destruction of peace‚Äù under
Sections 143, 147, 149, 295, 153, 427, 120 of the Indian Penal Code, and
Section 135 of the Mumbai Police Act. The 2010 Deganga riots began on 6
September when mobs resorted to arson and violence over a disputed structure at
Deganga, Kartikpur and Beliaghata under the Deganga police station area. The
violence began late in the evening and continued throughout the night into the
next morning. The violence finally calmed down on 9 September after hundreds of
business establishments and residences were looted, destroyed and burnt, dozens
of people were severely injured and several places of worship desecrated and
vandalized. In June 2011 at Asansol Market area, a Hindu temple, under
construction led by Bastim Bazaar Sarbojanin Durga Puja Committee was and
approved by ADM on 12 April 2011, was attacked by an Islamic mob. In
Bangladesh. In Bangladesh atrocities including targeted attacks against temples
and open theft of Hindu property have increased sharply in recent years after
the Jamat-e-Islami joined the coalition government led by the Bangladesh
National Party. Hindu temples in Bangladesh have also been vandalised. On the
February 6, 2010, Sonargaon temple in Narayanganj district of Bangladesh was
destroyed by Islamic fanatics. In Pakistan. Several Hindu temples have been
destroyed in Pakistan. A notable incident was the destruction of the Ramna Kali
Mandir in former East Pakistan. The temple was bulldozed by the Pakistan Army
on March 27, 1971.The Dhakeshwari Temple was severely damaged during the Indo-
Pakistani War of 1971, and over half of the temple's buildings were destroyed.
In a major disrespect of the religion, the main worship hall was taken over by
the Pakistan Army and used as an ammunitions storage area. Several of the
temple custodians were tortured and killed by the Army though most, including
the Head Priest, fled first to their ancestral villages and then to India and
therefore escaped death. In 2006, the last Hindu temple in Lahore was destroyed
to pave the way for construction of a multi-storied commercial building. The
temple was demolished after officials of the Evacuee Property Trust Board
concealed facts from the board chairman about the nature of the building. When
reporters from Pakistan-based newspaper Dawn tried to cover the incident, they
were accosted by the henchmen of the property developer, who denied that a
Hindu temple existed at the site. Several political parties in Pakistan have
objected to this move, such as the Pakistan People's party and the Pakistani
Muslim League-N. The move has also evoked strong condemnation in India from
minority bodies and political parties, including the Bharatiya Janata Party
(BJP), the Congress Party, as well as Muslim advocacy political parties such as
the All India Muslim Majlis-e-Mushawarat. A firm of lawyers representing the
Hindu minority has approached the Lahore High Court seeking a directive to the
builders to stop the construction of the commercial plaza and reconstruct the
temple at the site. The petitioners maintain that the demolition violates
section 295 of the Pakistan Penal Code prohibiting the demolition of places of
worship. On June 29, 2005, following the arrest of an illiterate Christian
janitor on allegations of allegedly burning Qur'an pages, a mob of between 300
and 500 Muslims destroyed a Hindu temple and houses belonging to Christian and
Hindu families in Nowshera. Under the terms of a deal negotiated between
Islamic religious leaders and the Hindu/Christian communities, Pakistani police
later released all previously arrested perpetrators without charge. In
Malaysia. Between April to May 2006, several Hindu temples were demolished by
city hall authorities in the country, accompanied by violence against Hindus.
On April 21, 2006, the Malaimel Sri Selva Kaliamman Temple in Kuala Lumpur was
reduced to rubble after the city hall sent in bulldozers. Many Hindu advocacy
groups have protested what they allege is a systematic plan of temple cleansing
in Malaysia. The official reason given by the Malaysian government has been
that the temples were built "illegally". However, several of the temples are
centuries old. On May 11, 2006, armed city hall officers from Kuala Lumpur
forcefully demolished part of a 60-year-old suburban temple that serves more
than 1,000 Hindus. In Saudi Arabia. On March 24, 2005, Saudi authorities
destroyed religious items found in a raid on a makeshift Hindu shrine found in
an apartment in Riyadh. In Fiji. In Fiji according to official reports, attacks
on Hindu institutions increased by 14% compared to 2004. This intolerance of
Hindus has found expression in anti-Hindu speeches and destruction of temples,
the two most common forms of immediate and direct violence against Hindus.
Between 2001 and April 2005, one hundred cases of temple attacks have been
registered with the police. The alarming increase of temple destruction has
spread fear and intimidation among the Hindu minorities and has hastened
immigration to neighboring Australia and New Zealand. organized religious
institutions, such as the Methodist Church of Fiji, have repeatedly called for
the creation of a theocratic Christian State and have propagated anti-Hindu
sentiment. State favoritism of Christianity, and systematic attacks on temples,
are some of the greatest threats faced by Fijian Hindus. Despite the creation
of a human rights commission, the plight of Hindus in Fiji continues to be
precarious. Chinese iconoclasm. During the Northern Expedition, in 1926 in
Guangxi, Kuomintang Muslim General Bai Chongxi led his troops in destroying
Buddhist temples and smashing idols, turning the temples into schools and
Kuomintang party headquarters. It was reported that almost all of Buddhist
monasteries in Guangxi were destroyed by Bai in this manner. The monks were
removed. Bai led a wave of anti-foreignism in Guangxi, attacking American,
European, and other foreigners and missionaries, and generally making the
province unsafe for foreigners. Westerners fled from the province, and some
Chinese Christians were also attacked as imperialist agents. The three goals of
the movement were anti-foreignism, anti-imperialism, and anti-religion. Bai led
the anti-religious movement against superstition. Muslims do not believe in
polytheism (see shirk (Islam)) and his religion may have influenced Bai to take
action against the images in the temples and the practices denounced as
superstitious in the campaign. Huang Shaoxiong, also a Kuomintang member of the
New Guangxi clique, supported Bai's campaign. Huang was not a Muslim, and the
anti-religious campaign was agreed upon by all Guangxi Kuomintang members.
