Iconostasis In Eastern Christianity an iconostasis (plural: iconostases) is a
wall of icons and religious paintings, separating the nave from the sanctuary
in a church. "Iconostasis" also refers to a portable icon stand that can be
placed anywhere within a church. The iconostasis evolved from the Byzantine
templon, a process complete by the fifteenth century. A direct comparison for
the function of the main iconostasis can be made to the layout of the great
Temple in Jerusalem. That Temple was designed with three parts. The holiest and
inner-most portion was that where the Ark of the Covenant was kept. This
portion, the Holy of Holies, was separated from the second larger part of the
building's interior by a curtain, the "veil of the temple". Only priests were
allowed to enter the Holy of Holies. The third part was the entrance court.
This architectural tradition for the two main parts can be seen carried forward
in Christian churches and is still most demonstratively present in Eastern
Orthodox churches where the iconostatsis divides the altar, the Holy of Holies
containing the concecrated Eucharist - the manifestation of the New Covenant,
from the larger portion of the church accessible to the faithful. In the
Eastern Orthodox tradition only men can enter the altar portion behind the
iconostasis. The word comes from the Greek ("eikonostási(-on)", still in
common use in Greece and Cyprus), which means "icon stand". Location. The nave
is the main body of the church where most of the worshippers stand, and the
sanctuary is the area around the altar, east of the nave. The sanctuary is
usually one to three steps higher than the nave. The Iconostasis does not sit
directly on the edge of the sanctuary, but is usually set a few feet back from
the edge of the top step. This forms a walkway in front of the iconostasis for
the clergy, called a soleas. In the very center of the soleas is an extension
(or thrust), often rounded, called the ambon, on which the deacon will stand to
give litanies during the services. The iconostasis, though often tall, rarely
touches the ceiling. Acoustically, this permits the ekphoneses (liturgical
exclamations) of the clergy to be heard clearly by the faithful. In small,
modern churches the iconostasis may be completely absent: in such cases it is
replaced by a few small icons on analogia (lecterns), forming a virtual divide.
The iconostasis typically has three openings or sets of doors: the "Beautiful
Gates" or "Holy Doors" in the center, and the North and South Doors to either
side. The Beautiful Gates are sometimes called the "Royal Doors", but that name
more properly belongs to the central doors connecting the narthex, or porch, to
the nave. They remain shut whenever a service is not being held. Modern custom
as to when they should be opened during services varies depending upon
jurisdiction and local custom. The North and South Doors are often called
"Deacons' Doors" because the deacons use them frequently. Icons of sainted
deacons are often depicted on these doors (particularly St. Stephen the
Protomartyr and St. Ephrem the Syrian). Alternatively, they may be called
"Angels' Doors", and the Archangels Michael and Gabriel are often depicted
there. The South Door is typically the "entrance" door, and Michael is depicted
there because he is the "Defender"; the North Door is the "exit", and Gabriel
is depicted here because he is the "Messenger" of God. These doors may also be
casually referred to as the "side doors". There are some exceptions where both
the side doors depict Archangel Michael. The most notable exception is of the
church of Saint George (Aghios Georgios) inside the Ecumenical Patriarchate of
Constantinople (in today's Istanbul). In many monastery churches and chapels
(though often not in the Katholikon, the monastery's main church) one may find
iconostases with only two doors: the Holy Doors and the North Door. These
churches are used for simpler monastic observances when only a hieromonk would
be serving alone. Since the priest seldom uses the South Door when he is
serving the Divine Liturgy, the chapel can be made smaller by omitting that
door. Placement of icons. Occasionally one may find yet more tiers of smaller
icons depicting saints of specially fervent local devotion. It is also not
uncommon to find an icon of the "Mystical Supper", which depicts the Last
Supper, and by extension the Communion of Saints in the Kingdom of God,
somewhere above the Beautiful Gates. The Sovereign tier is always present, but
all the others may be omitted. Preference is given to the Deisis or the Feasts
tiers if only some of them can be included. Only the largest and most elaborate
iconostases include all five. Rubrics. There are rules regarding who may enter
or leave the sanctuary (altar), and by which door. Neither the Beautiful Gates
(Holy/Tsar doors - central doors)) nor the space between them and the altar
table may be used by laity under any circumstances, although infants are either
carried into the altar through them in the "churching" rite if they are boys,
or if they are girls, the infant is simply presented at the doors. Bishops may
enter through the Beautiful Gates at any time; priests and deacons may do so
only at specific times during the services when the Gates are open (but during
Bright Week they always enter and exit through them). All others enter the
sanctuary through the side doors. In a convent only the abbess and elder nuns
are permitted to enter the sanctuary(altar), and only by the side doors. The
abbess may enter at any time, but the other nuns need a blessing to enter. Male
members of the laity who are usually allowed to enter the sanctuary include
those involved in the running of the particular church, i.e. cantors and
choristers, altar servers/acolytes, church keepers and vestrymen, etc. Entering
the sanctuary for no good reason or without a blessing is forbidden even if no
religious service is being held at the time. In the Romanian tradition, on the
day of the consecration of the altar in the church, the laity, including women,
are permitted to enter and venerate the altar up until the beginning of the
Vespers of Consecration. These guidelines were developed over the course of
many centuries, with both theologically symbolic and practical reasons for
them. Theological implications. The Iconostasis does not really "separate" the
nave from the Holy of Holies; rather, it brings them together. The Iconostasis
is the link between heaven (the Holy of Holies) and the nave (The Holy Place).
Therefore everything is symbolic upon the Iconostasis. The Icons of Christ the
Theotokos and various saints and feasts are there because Christ, the
Theotokos, the saints etc., lead us and guide us into the Holy of Holies.
Therefore the personages on the Icons upon the Iconostasis guide us into
heaven, and therefore the Iconostasis connects not separates. The Icons upon
the Iconostasis also are windows and bridges into heaven (although all icons,
no matter where, are windows and bridges into heaven). Therefore, in a sense
the Iconostasis represents Christ, who is the connection, the door, between
both realms. The perfect explanation for the Iconostasis, and its uniting
purpose, is seen in Hebrews 10:19-20, ""Therefore, brethren, since we have
confidence to enter the sanctuary by the blood of Jesus, by the new and living
way which he opened for us through the curtain, that is through his flesh.""
Evolution. Archaeological evidence from the St. John of Stoudios monastery in
Constantinople suggests that the Iconostasis evolved from the early templon. A
basilica dedicated to John the Baptist was built in 463 AD. In it the chancel
barrier surrounded the altar in a π shape, with one large door facing the nave
and two smaller doors on the other sides. Twelve piers held chancel slabs of
about 1.6 meters in length. The height of the slabs is not known. The chancel
barrier was not merely a low parapet (a short wall); remains of colonnettes
have been found, suggesting that the barrier carried an architrave on top of
the columns. In early churches, including the "Great Church" Hagia Sophia in
Constantinople, the altar, at least in large churches, was under a ciborium
("ciborion": κιβωριου in Greek), usually a structure with four columns
and a domed canopy. This had curtains on rods on all four sides, which were
closed for sections of the liturgy, as is still performed in the Coptic and
Armenian churches. a comparison with the biblical Veil of the Temple was
intended. The small domed structures, usually with red curtains, that are often
shown near the writing saint in early Evangelist portraits, especially in the
East, represent a ciborium, as do the structures surrounding many manuscript
portraits of medieval rulers. As the iconostasis grew, the ciborium declined,
although some late examples, by now invisible to the congregation, were
produced. The templon gradually replaced all other forms of chancel barriers in
Byzantine churches in the 6th, 7th, and 8th centuries except in Cappadocia.
Sacred tradition ascribes the invention of the solid iconostasis to Saint Basil
the Great. As late as the 10th century, a simple wooden chancel barrier
separated the apse from the nave in the rock-cut churches in Derinkuyu, though
by the late 11th century, the templon had become standard. This may have been
because of the veneration and imitation of the Great Church Hagia Sophia in
Constantinople, though the columnar form of chancel barrier does predate Hagia
Sophia. In recent years, especially in the diaspora, there has been a
liturgical movement favouring a more open style of Iconostasis. These
Iconostases may be only one or two tiers, with a wide opening for the royal
doors. The rood screens or pulpitums that most Roman Catholic large churches
and cathedrals in many parts of Europe had acquired by late medieval times
occupied a similar position between chancel and nave but had a different
function. The choir was usually east of the screen. Many survive, often most
completely in Scandinavia, and more were built in the Gothic Revival,
particularly in Anglican churches in England. In examples in wood painted
panels typically only went up to about waist height, with a section with wooden
tracery above allowing a view through, and then a large carved beam supporting
a rood cross crucifix, often life-size, above. Larger churches had stone
screens, which might impede virtually all view by the congregation. Oriental
Christianity. The Oriental Orthodox churches which follow non-Byzantine rites
differ among themselves about the use of the iconostasis. The Armenian and
Syriac churches often use a curtain, but not a solid iconostasis. The Coptic
and Ethiopian churches use an iconostasis often made of latticework, so that it
is semi-transparent. The name in Greek for the Sanctuary is Ἱερόν
Βῆμα ("Hieron Vema", see Bemah), in Russian it is called Сватий
Олтар ("Svatiy Oltar"), an in Romanian it is called "Sfântul Altar". The
Eastern Orthodox Church has received the Tradition of the Holy of Holies in the
Temple area. The Holy Table (altar) in an Orthodox church is in a restricted
area behind the iconostasis (icon screen). The entire area behind the
iconostasis is known as the "Altar" or the "Holy Place", and corresponds
directly to the Holy of Holies in the Jerusalem Temple. The iconostasis is
usually punctuated by three doors, the middle one being the Holy Doors or Royal
Doors (sometimes, in very small chapels, there will only be one side door).
There will also be a veil behind the Holy Doors, usually embroided with the
symbol of the Cherubim or a cross. Only Orthodox clergy or those who have
permission to do so may enter the holy space behind the iconostasis. Bishops,
priests and deacons are allowed to enter the Royal Doors, but only at specific
times during the services; and they alone may stand in front of the Holy Table,
or touch it. All others are forbidden to touch the Holy Table and must walk
round behind it when serving. At the churching of Orthodox children when they
are 40 days old, if a male child has been baptized he will be brought inside
the Sanctuary by the priest; the female child is instead placed in front of the
icon of the Theotokos on the iconostasis. Anyone lower in rank than a deacon
must receive a blessing from the priest before he enters the Holy Place.
Historically the only exceptions to the rule of non clerical males being
forbidden to stand before the Holy Table have been the Russian Tsars on the day
of their coronation. After his anointing, the new Tsar would be escorted
through the Holy Doors to a small table set near the Holy Table, and there he
would be given Holy Communion by the Metropolitan of Moscow in the same manner
as priests. For the most part, women are forbidden to enter the sanctuary, with
the exception of elderly nuns who may be blessed to assist the priest during
services, and an abbess in her own monastery, who is free to enter at any time.
No one, male or female, typically is allowed to enter the sanctuary without
good reason. References. Efhalia Rentetzi," Le iconostasi delle chiese greche
in Italia", http://www.apostoliki-diakonia.gr/index_it.asp, Athens 2008
