Idolatry Idolatry is a pejorative term for the worship of an idol, a physical
object such as a cult image, as a god, or practices believed to verge on
worship, such as giving undue honour and regard to created forms other than
God. In all the Abrahamic religions idolatry is strongly forbidden, although
views as to what constitutes idolatry may differ within and between them. In
other religions the use of cult images is accepted, although the term
"idolatry" is unlikely to be used within the religion, being inherently
disapproving. Which images, ideas, and objects constitute idolatry is often a
matter of considerable contention, and within all the Abrahamic religions the
term may be used in a very wide sense, with no implication that the behaviour
objected to actually consists of the religious worship of a physical object.
Behaviour considered idolatrous or potentially idolatrous may include the
creation of any type of image of the deity, or of other figures of religious
significance such as prophets, saints, and clergy, the creation of images of
any person or animal at all, and the use of religious symbols, or secular ones.
In addition, theologians have extended the concept to include giving undue
importance to aspects of religion other than God, or to non-religious aspects
of life in general, with no involvement of images specifically. For example,
the "Catechism of the Catholic Church" states: "Idolatry not only refers to
false pagan worship. Man commits idolatry whenever he honours and reveres a
creature in place of God, whether this be gods or demons (for example
satanism), power, pleasure, race, ancestors, the state, money etc." The
avoidance of the use of images for religious reasons is called aniconism, which
has been an aspect of all major religions at times, some much more consistently
than others. The destruction of religious images within a culture is called
iconoclasm, of which there have been many major episodes in history. Etymology.
The word "idolatry" comes (by haplology) from the Greek word " eidololatria"
from εἰδωλολάτρης from " eidolon", "image" or "figure", and "
latris", "worshipper" or "λατρεύειν latreuein", "to worship" from
"λάτρον latron" "payment". Although the Greek appears to be a loan
translation of the Hebrew phrase "avodat elilim", which is attested in rabbinic
literature (e.g., bChul., 13b, Bar.), the Greek term itself is not found in the
Septuagint, Philo, Josephus, or in other Hellenistic Jewish writings. It is
also not found in (pre-Christian) Greek literature. In the New Testament, the
Greek word is found only in the letters of Paul, 1 Peter, 1 John, and
Revelation, where it has a derogatory meaning, as one of the vices. It is also
found in the Didache and the Apostolic Decree includes a prohibition from the
"pollution of idols". Hebrew terms for idolatry include "avodah zarah" (foreign
worship) and "avodat kochavim umazalot" (worship of planets and
constellations). In current context, however, idolatry is not limited to
religious concepts. It can also refer to a social phenomenon where false
perceptions are created and worshipped, or even used as a term in the
entertainment industry. Hinduism. Hinduism grants equal status to all forms of
worship and therefore it neither prescribes nor proscribes worship of images
(murti) or "idols". 'Allegory' is a key element of Hindu religion and modern
day experts in Communications and Business Communications recognise how
superior it is as a concept to represent abstract ideas. Each attribute of the
God as imagined by the devotee is depicted in form of a deity such as purity
and potency in Linga, fierce ruthlessness towards evil in Durga, cosmic force
in Vishnu, amenable kindness and auspiciousness in Ganesha, extreme and
indomitable power and pride in Kumara, 100% victory in Hanuman (Hanuman was the
flag symbol of Arjuna and was sitting atop Arjuna's chariot throughout the 18
days of the Kurukshetra war). The multiple heads or limbs of Lord Vishnu or
Goddess Durga often seen in Hindu art, for example, would be intended to
represent divine omniscience and omnipotence, whereas the use of an animal
icons for vehicle would seek to allegorically represent particular abstract
qualities associated with that animal/bird such as astuteness, agility or
power. Gestures (mudra) the hand or the holding of a certain object are also
heavily weighted with meaning. Certain tenets such as non-violence and search
for God in all beings living and non-living led to depiction of several other
forms. Each individual icon thus becomes to the Hindu worshiper a complex
statement of faith and every detail may be a focus of meditation and spiritual
insight. To fully equate the divine with its icons or murtis would be a
misinterpretation of the Hindu concept of divine reality. The argument of
scholars of Abrahamic faiths is that any attempt to represent Him will only
fall short since there is nothing equal to him and that such representations
should not be worshipped. Further they opine that it is He that gives a certain
creation / creature a certain set of qualities and making gods out of them is
insulting the Creator. In the same way, Veda-centric Hindu reformist movements
in the 18th - 19th centuries such as the Brahmo Samaj and Arya Samaj, were also
highly critical of image worship like the Semitic religions and called for a
return to the ancient Vedic and Upanishadic teachings. Modern academic view is
that in the Vedic period that preceded this, worship was primarily centred
around the open-air fire altar (yajna-kunda) and no physical representations of
the divine were used. A text in the Shukla Yajur-veda (32.3) reads, “Of Him
there is no likeness (pratima), whose glory is infinite”. The Upanishads,
which form the philosophical ‘conclusions’ (vedAnta) of the Vedas,
repeatedly stress the formlessness ("nirākāra", no material form) and
unimaginable nature of God, and advise the aspirant to realise the divine
presence inwardly. However by the time of Bhagavata Purana, meditation was
recommended along with and worship of pratima (murti) with the understanding
that it is not an ordinary material object. The Hindu sages closed their eyes
and meditated silently (forms of Skt. tapasya and Skt. sadhana) - they did not
need enclosures/buildings, nor even words or mental images for their
meditation. But these sages did not abuse any one's murtis or call its worship
a sin. They recognized it as an approach/stage in an individual's sincere
spiritual progress guided by the principles of Dharma. As Swami Vivekananda
said, "Would it be right for an old man to say that childhood is sin or youth
is sin? ... Just because a few have passed by ignorance and attained knowledge,
they cannot ignore that there are innumerable who haven’t tried at all. It is
to be noted that in a man's journey of life, he is ever learning, some men are
more literate, some are less; so is the case with some communities of our
society against others (this dichotomy is common to all countries). The bottom
line is: - If Vedanta truly epitomises the state of learnedness, in achieving
this spiritual progress "the first stage for a layman is the external/material
worship; struggling to rise high, mental prayer is the next stage, but the
highest stage is when the divine has been realized" Unity in variety is the
scheme of nature, and the Hindu has recognized it and practised ever since the
yore through his equanimity to all and universal tolerance". This conscious
Hindu recognition and the respect for different approaches to sincere worship
proved useful to Jews who migrated to India (for trading or fleeing persecution
by other anti-idolatrous Abrahamical religions) and thrived for many hundreds
of years before moving back to Israel in 1948. Thus for the common masses, Now
that Vedanta is recognised as the summit of spirituality, one should learn what
the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad discusses on the essence of Vedanta. The dialogue
between Rishi Yajnavalkya and his wife, Maitreyi, elaborates the essence of
Vedanta. The three recognized states to the path of Self-realization are:
Sravana, Manana and Nididhyasana. 'Sravana' is the discourse of scriptures from
a qualified Guru. 'Manana' means constant reflection upon what has been learnt
so that intellectual conviction may be produced in the mind. Finally,
'Nididhyasana' implies meditation that helps to cause a direct realization of
the unity of things in God. Knowledge should lead to experience; intellectual
conviction should result in perception (pravritti). That is why meditation
comes in the last stage of the spiritual journey. Again the scriptures insist
that successful completion of the states is neither necessary nor sufficient
for Self-realization. Striving for Moksha (salvation) i.e. one-ness with the
universal soul (Brahman) is the ultimate goal of Impersonalist. One should try
to understand supreme person through worship (Bhakti yoga) or meditation (Raja
Yoga), or by performing one's duties well (Karma Yoga) or pursuing the
intellectual path (Jnana Yoga) is the goal of (Devotees) or (Personalist). A.
C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada translates Lord Krishna's divine words from
Bhagavad Gita, "Be steadfast in yoga (yoga-sthaḥ), O Arjuna, perform your
duty (kuru karmani) and abandon all attachment (sangam) to success or failure
(siddhy-asiddhyoḥ). Such evenness of mind (samatvam) is called yoga." The
Hindus believe with regard to God that he is one, eternal, without beginning
and end, acting by free-will, almighty, all-wise, living, giving life, ruling,
preserving; one who in his sovereignty is unique, beyond all likeness and
unlikeness, and that he does not resemble anything nor does anything resemble.
Although Vedas describe God as a power beyond imagination and that individuals
should pursue a path of enlightenment / Vedanta, the truth however is, they do
not reject Idol Worship. In Puja Vidhaan/Prakriya, there is a host of
procedures such as (1).Suchi i.e. cleanliness, use of silks, (2). Muhurat i.e.
Auspicious Timing (3).Guru vandanam(4).Symbols such as wearing preferably
silks, donning tilak or decoration of the pooja griha and mandir with lights,
flowers & rangoli (5). Solemnising the deity - avaahana (invitation), sthaapan
(installation) and puja (worship). (3). Use of 'puja dravya' such as ganga jal,
akshata, kumkum, turmeric, panchamrita et., (6).Invocation through mantras or
dhyanam i.e. silent meditation (7).'kirtans / bhajans' i.e. transcendental
experience (7). Gifts to friends & relatives and Charity to the poor. Inter
alia, the idol becomes an interface with the God - although He is formless the
devotee can conjure the Lord of his definition in all his grandeur, power and
divine attributes like karuna and kripa. That 'He' is formless is known to
every Hindu but idol worship is one of the several ingredients of Bhakti to
enable mortal beings of different backgrounds and limitations to approach and
experience Him the one Supreme Being. Thus as Christopher John Fuller,
Professor of anthropology at London School of Economics notes that an image
cannot be equated with a deity and the object of worship is the deity whose
power is inside the image, and the image is not the object of worship itself.
The misleading notion that Hinduism is fundamentally idolatrous was addressed
in the context of Abrahamic religions by the 11th century Muslim scholar Al-
Biruni. Al-Biruni rejected the notion and established that Hindus do not
necessarily need anthropomorphisms, but the crowd and the members of the single
sects use them most extensively. Al-Biruni wrote that the Hindus believe with
regard to God that He is one, eternal, without beginning and end, acting by
free-will, almighty, all-wise, living, giving life, ruling, preserving; one who
in his sovereignty is unique, beyond all likeness and unlikeness, and that he
does not resemble anything nor does anything resemble Him. From a historical
perspective, image worship (Murti-PujA) is an ancient tradition as a small part
within the overall Hindu tradition, with the oldest extant images of the
classical Pauranik deities allegedly dating to Ramayana when Rama worshipped
Lord Shiva at Rameswaram. Other early archaeological finds include idols of the
Gupta period (c. 3rd to 7th centuries CE). Although Hinduism is commonly
represented by such anthropomorphic religious icons such as murtis, aniconism
is equally represented with such abstract symbols of God such as the Shiva
linga and the saligrama. Furthermore, Hindus have found it easier to focus on
anthropomorphic icons, as Lord Krishna said in the Bhagavad Gita, Chapter 12,
Verse 5 Christianity. The Christian view of idolatry may generally be divided
into two general categories, the Catholic/Orthodox view (which accepts the use
of religious icons and other images) and the Protestant view. Fundamentalist
Protestants still often accuse these other Christians of idolatry, iconolatry,
and even paganism for failing to "cleanse their faith" of the use of images; in
the Protestant Reformation such language was common to all Protestants. Puritan
groups adopted a view similar to Judaism (as a result they were accused of
Judaizing), denouncing all forms of religious objects, whether in three
dimensional or two dimensional form, including even a plain cross. The problem
springs from differences in interpretation of the Ten Commandments. "You shall
have no other gods before me. You shall not make for yourself a graven image,
or any likeness of anything that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth
beneath, or that is in the water under the earth; you shall not bow down to
them or serve them; for I the Lord your God am a jealous God, visiting the
iniquity of the fathers upon the children to the third and the fourth
generation of those who hate me, but showing steadfast love to thousands of
those who love me and keep my commandments." (RSV Exodus 20:3-6). The Roman
Catholic and particularly the Orthodox Churches cite St. John of Damascus' work
"On the Divine Image" to defend the use of icons. He wrote in direct response
to the Byzantine iconoclasm that began in the eighth century by the Byzantine
emperor Leo III and continued by his successor Constantine V. St. John
maintains that depicting the invisible God is indeed wrong, but he argues that
the incarnation, where "the Word became flesh" (John 1:14), indicates that the
invisible God became visible, and as a result it is permissible to depict Jesus
Christ. He argues: "When He who is bodiless and without form... existing in the
form of God, empties Himself and takes the form of a servant in substance and
in stature and is found in a body of flesh, then you draw His image..." He also
observes that in the Old Testament, images and statues were not absolutely
condemned in themselves: examples include the images of cherubim over the Ark
of the Covenant () which God instructed Moses to make, the embroidered figures
of cherubim angels which God told Moses to make on the curtain which separated
the Holy of Holies in the Tabernacle tent (), or the bronze serpent mentioned
in the book of Numbers. He defends external acts of honour towards icons,
arguing that there are "different kinds of worship" and that the honour shown
to icons differs entirely from the adoration of God. He continues by citing Old
Testament examples of forms of "honour": "Jacob bowed to the ground before
Esau, his brother, and also before the tip of his son Joseph's staff (Genesis
33:3). He bowed down, but did not adore. Joshua, the Son of Nun, and Daniel
bowed in veneration before an angel of God () but they did not adore him. For
adoration is one thing, and that which is offered in order to honour something
of great excellence is another". He cites St. Basil who asserts, "the honour
given to the image is transferred to its prototype". St. John argues therefore
that venerating an image of Christ does not terminate at the image itself - the
material of the image is not the object of worship - rather it goes beyond the
image, to the prototype. Catholic and Orthodox Christians use religious objects
such as statues, Crosses, Icons, incense, the Gospel, Bible, candles and
religious vestments. Icons are mainly in two- but rarely in three-dimensional
form. These are in dogmatic theory venerated as objects filled with God's grace
and power -- (therefore Eastern Orthodoxy declares they are not "hollow forms"
or cult images). Evidence for the use of these is found in the Old Testament
and in Early Christian worship. For example, the veneration of the tombs and
statues of martyrs was common among early Christian communities. In 397 St.
Augustine of Hippo, in his Confessions 6.2.2, tells the story of his mother
making offerings for the statues and tombs of martyrs. This is a very early
form of Christianity, as the Biblical Canon had only been adopted about 30
years previously at the Council of Laodicea, however see Development of the
Christian biblical canon for details. The offering of veneration in the form of
"latria" (the veneration due God) is doctrinally forbidden by the Orthodox
Church; however veneration of religious pictures or Icons in the form of
"dulia" is not only allowed but obligatory. Some outside observers find it
difficult to distinguish these two levels of veneration in practice, but the
distinction is maintained and taught by believers in many of the hymns and
prayers that are sung and prayed throughout the liturgical year. In Orthodox
apologetics for icons, a similarity is asserted between icons and the
manufacture by Moses (under God's commandment) of the Bronze Snake, which was,
Orthodoxy says, given the grace and power of God to heal those bitten by real
snakes. "And Moses made a serpent of brass, and put it upon a pole, and it came
to pass, that if a serpent had bitten any person, when he beheld the serpent of
brass, they lived"(Numbers 21:9). Another similarity is declared with the Ark
of the Covenant described as the ritual object above which Yahweh was present
(Numbers 10:33-36); or the burning bush which, according to Exodus, God spoke
Moses through; or the Ten Commandments which were the Word of God ("Dabar
Elohim") in tablet form. These inanimate objects became a medium by which God
worked to teach, speak to, encourage and heal the Hebrew faithful. Veneration
of icons through "proskynesis" was codified in the Seventh Ecumenical Council
during the Byzantine Iconoclast controversy, in which St. John of Damascus was
pivotal. Icon veneration is also practiced in the Catholic Church, which
accepts the declarations of the Seventh Ecumenical Council, but it is practiced
to a lesser extent, since Latin-rite Catholics today do not usually prostrate
and kiss icons, and the Second Vatican Council enjoined moderation in the use
of images. Eastern-rite Catholics still use icons in their Divine Liturgy,
however. Some Protestant groups avoid the use of images in any context
suggestive of veneration. Religious images are common in Catholic, Orthodox
churches. The use of some religious images and symbols, for example in printed
matter, is now more common among many modern Protestant groups than was the
case in the 16th century, but large publicly displayed images, except the
cross, are rare. Many Conservative Christians avoid any use of religious
images, even for inspiration, as idolatry. Islam. In Islam, "širk" () is the
sin of idolatry or polytheism. It refers to the deification of anyone or
anything other than the singular God. "Shirk" is also associating partners with
him, giving his characteristics to others beside him, or not believing in his
characteristics. Within Islam, "širk" is an unforgivable crime; God may
forgive any sin except for committing "širk". It is the vice that is opposed
to the virtue of "tawhid", literally "declaring which is one", often translated
into the English term monotheism. As in the other Abrahamic religions, in
practice the term has been greatly extended and may be used very widely within
Islam to describe behaviour that is deprecated, including the use of images in
a way that is seen as un-Islamic, but does not literally constitute worship.
Jewish thought. Judaism strongly prohibits any form of idolatry, and holds that
idolatry is not limited to the worship of a statue or picture itself, but also
includes worship of the Almighty Himself with the use of mediators and/or any
artistic representations of God such as "Jesus on the Cross". According to this
understanding, even if one directs his worship to the Almighty Himself and not
to a statue, picture, or some other created thing, but yet he uses a created
thing as a representation of the Almighty in order to assist in his worship of
the Almighty, this is also considered a form of idolatry. In fact, Maimonides
explains in chapter 1 of Hilkhot Avodat Kokhavim (Avoda Zarah) in the Mishneh
Torah that this is one of the ways that idolatry began. While such scholars as
Rabbi Saadia Gaon, Rabbi Bahya ibn Paquda, and Rabbi Yehuda Halevi elaborated
on proper monotheism and the issues of idolatry, without a doubt Rabbi Moshe
ben Maimon (Maimonides) was the most thorough in his elucidation of monotheism
and the problems of idolatry. This is seen in his work known as the Mishnah
Torah, in the Guide for the Perplexed, and in the various shorter writings he
composed. In the Mishnah Torah, intended to be a complete compilation of
Talmudic law, the theme of proclaiming the Unity of the Creator and eradication
of idolatry is not limited to the sections specified for these topics. Rather,
it permeates every section of the work as the purpose and foundation of the
entire Torah. In the Guide for the Perplexed, Maimonides so clarifies his
understanding of monotheism and idolatry that in its light even certain Jewish
communities of his time, and today, become suspect of idolatry. This was the
core reason for his controversy, even more so than the issue of philosophy. In
short, the proper Jewish definition of idolatry is to do an act of worship
toward any created thing, to believe that a particular created thing is an
independent power, or to make something a mediator between ourselves and the
Almighty. These laws are codified in the Mishneh Torah, mainly in the section
called Hilkhot Avodat Kokhavim (Avodah Zarah) — The Laws of Strange Worship
(Idolatry). It is considered a great insult to God to worship one of His
creations instead of Him or together with Him. According to the Noahide Laws,
the 7 laws which Jews believe to be binding on the non-Jewish world, the non-
Israelite nations are also Forbidden to worship anything other than the
Absolute Creator. One can find this in Hilkhot Melakhim u'Milhhamotehem (Laws
of Kings and their Wars) chapter 9 in the Mishneh Torah. Judaism holds that any
beliefs or practices which significantly interfere with a Jew's relationship
with God may, at some point, be deemed idolatry. In the Torah. Image worship
existed in the time of Jacob, from the account of Rachel taking images along
with her on leaving her father's house, which is given in the Book of Genesis.
According to the midrash Genesis Rabba, Abraham's father, Terah, was both an
idol manufacturer and worshipper. It is recounted in both traditional Jewish
texts and in the Quran that when Abraham discovered the true God, he destroyed
his father's idols. The commandments in the Hebrew Bible against idolatry
forbade the adoption of the beliefs and practices of the pagans who lived
amongst the Israelites at the time, especially the religions of ancient Akkad,
Mesopotamia, and Egypt. Some of these pagan religions, it is claimed in the
Bible, had a set of practices which were prohibited under Jewish law, such as
sex rites, cultic male and female prostitution, passing a child through a fire
to Molech, and child sacrifice. In a number of places, the Hebrew Bible makes
clear that God has no shape or form, and is utterly incomparable; thus no idol,
image, idea, or anything comparable to creation could ever capture God's
essence. For example, when the Israelites are visited by God in , they see no
shape or form. Many verses in the Bible use anthropomorphisms to describe God,
(e.g. God's mighty hand, God's finger, etc.) but these verses have always been
understood as poetic images rather than literal descriptions. This is reflected
in which says, “And I have spoken unto the prophets, and I have multiplied
visions, and by the hand of the prophets I use similes.” The Bible records a
struggle between the prophet's attempt to spread pure monotheism, and the
tendency of some people, especially rulers such as Ahab, to accept or to
encourage others into polytheistic or idolatrous beliefs. The patriarch Abraham
was called to spread the true knowledge of God, but the prophetic books still
reflect a continuing struggle against idolatry. For example, the Biblical
prophet Jeremiah complains: "According to the number of thy cities are thy
gods, O Judah" (). The Bible has many terms for idolatry, and their usage
represents the horror with which they filled the writers of the Bible of Jewish
faith maintain that the Torah is the eternally binding word of God. Thus idols
are stigmatized "non-God" (; ), "things of naught" ( et passim), "vanity" (),
"iniquity" (), "wind and confusion" (), "the dead" (), "carcasses" (; , "a lie"
( et passim), and similar epithets. Pagan idols are described as being made of
gold, silver, wood, and stone. They are described as being only the work of
men's hands, unable to speak, see, hear, smell, eat, grasp, or feel, and
powerless either to injure or to benefit () Idols were either designated in
Hebrew by a term of general significance, or were named according to their
material or the manner in which they were made. They were said to have been
placed upon pedestals and fastened with chains of silver or nails of iron, lest
they should fall over or be carried off (, ; ; ), and they were also clothed
and colored (; ; ). At first the gods and their images were conceived of as
identical; but in later times a distinction was drawn between the god and the
image. Nevertheless it was customary to take away the gods of the vanquished (,
, ; , ; ; ), and a similar custom is frequently mentioned in the cuneiform
texts. Idolatry as a negative stereotyping process. Yehezkel Kaufman (1960) has
suggested that when God gave commandments regarding idolatry he meant it to be
understood in its most literal form: according to the Bible, most idolaters
really believed that their idols were gods, and Kaufman holds that this is an
error in assuming that all idolatry was of this type, when in some cases, idols
may have only been representations of gods. Kaufman writes that "We may perhaps
say that the Bible sees in paganism only its lowest level, the level of mana-
beliefs...the prophets ignore what we know to be authentic paganism (i.e., its
elaborate mythology about the origin and exploits of the gods and their
ultimate subjection to a meta-divine reservoir of impersonal power representing
Fate or Necessity.) Their Biblical author's whole condemnation revolves around
the taunt of fetishism." However, Kaufman holds that in some places idolaters
worshipped gods and spirits that existed independently of idols, and not the
forms of the idols themselves. For instance, in a passage in 1 Kings 18:27, the
Hebrew prophet Elijah challenges the priests of Baal atop of Mount Carmel to
persuade their god to perform a miracle, after they had begun to try to
persuade the Jews to take up idolatry. The pagan priests beseeched their god
without the use of an idol, which in Kaufman's view, indicates that Baal was
not an idol, but rather one of the polytheistic gods that merely could be
worshipped through the use of an idol. Sikhism. The Guru Granth Sahib, the
central scripture and Guru of Sikhs, strongly rejects idolatry. Idolatry is
also rejected by the Dasam Granth a scripture by the tenth Guru, Guru Gobind
Singh, and within numerous "rehatnamas" (documents codifying the code of
conduct of the Sikh religion), such as the Sikh Rehat Maryada and the Budha Dal
Rehatnama. Sikhism criticises the practice of using idols to represent God and
pray to him, and instead puts forward that the shabad, the word of God, is his
"true" "murti" (deific representation), meaning that true prayer and worship of
God is through meditation. The rejection of idol worship is demonstrated in
Guru Granth Sahib Ji: "Worshipping their idols, the Hindus die; the Muslims die
bowing their heads." (Ang 556). In practice images of human figures of
religious significance, such as the Sikh gurus, are common in modern Sikhism,
and the Sikh attitude to non-religious images is generally relaxed. False idol.
False idol, interpreted literally, is a phrase meaning a cult image or object
considered idolatrous from the perspective of the speaker. For example, Moses
considered the golden calf a false idol upon his return with the tablets of
stone, as described in Exodus chapter 32. The sometimes negative connotations
of "idol" can make "false idol" sound like a tautological figure of speech.
