Ifá Ifá refers to the system of divination and the verses of the literary
corpus known as the Odú Ifá. Yoruba religion identifies Orunmila as the Grand
Priest; as that which revealed Oracle divinity to the world. Such is his
association with the Oracle divinity; in some instances, the term "Orunmila" is
used interchangeably with Ifá. Originating in West Africa in the form of a
stringent Yoruba philosophy; celebrated in traditional African medicine,
Santería (referred to as Lukumi), Candomblé, West African & Diaspora Vodou,
and similarly in Orisa'Ifa lineages all over the globe. Yorùbá canon. In the
Yoruba religion, divination gives priests unreserved access to the teachings of
Orunmila. Esu, is seen as being in charge of justice and order and the
transportation of ebos. Esu is the one said to lend authority ("ase") to the
oracle during provision of direction and or clarification of counsel. Esu is
also the one that holds the keys to ones Ire (blessings), thus acts as Oluwinni
(ones Creditor), he can grant Ire or remove it read more about this Yoruba
concept of Oluwinni here. Ifa divination rites are claimed to provide an avenue
of communication to the spiritual realm and the intent of ones destiny. Togo
canon. In Togo, Ifá is known as Afa, where the Vodou deities come through and
speak. In many of their Egbes, it is "Alaundje" who is honored as the first
Bokono to have been taught how to divine the destiny of humans using the holy
system of Afa. International recognition. The Ifa Divination system was added
in 2005 by UNESCO to its list of the "Masterpieces of the Oral and Intangible
Heritage of Humanity". Divination. Performing Ifa divination is called Ifa dida
or idafa (ounte ale). Ifa dida / Idafa is performed by a Babalawo or Iyalawo or
iyanifa (an initiated priest or priestess). "Babalawo" can be translated as
"father of the secrets" while "Iyalawo" {mother of secret} or sometimes
"Iyanifa" means "mother that has Ifa(i.e. its blessing)". The babalawo or
iyanifa provides insights about the current circumstances impacting the life of
a person requesting this information and provides any necessary information to
aid the individual. Awo is a reference for devotees in Orisa worship. It
includes Babalawos, Iyalawo, Iyanifas, Babalorishas, Iyalorishas and even
uninitiated devotees. Traditionally, women have not been initiated into Ifa
priesthood, according to the teaching which allows them only a single Ikin. In
the USA a small sect of worshipers has initiated women into Ifa. These
initiations are however only recognized by that group. Occasions. Ifa
divination (also called consultation) is performed for many proposes and a host
of occasions, the purposes and occasions is what determines the instrument used
in the divination sessions. Divination is often performed for lesser reasons
such as "regular check up" to life-changing occasions such as marriage or child
birthing etc., divination can also be performed for a group (small / large) or
community (the first examples are more likely for a person, couple, parents or
family). On occasion when it is performed for the community or society it takes
on another significance. Below we will list and discuss major occasions
divination is performed and give some feedback and examples of each, in
application and practice. Etiquette. Initiation into Ifa requires rigorous
study. A Babalawo must learn and understand each of the 256 chapters (Odu) of
Ifa. The minimum of four verses will of necessity include ebos and ooguns
(medicine) that are embedded and relevant to each of the verses, plus other
issues that complement divination. An accomplished Babalawo must know about ten
verses of each of the 256 chapters of Ifa (256 Odu Ifa). Regardless of gender,
whoever aspires to practice Ifa must have this qualification. In essence, Ifa
practice does not preclude a woman provided such woman acquires the required
qualification. Odu — a special Orisa — can only be received by a Babalawo
who decides to perform the special initiation that will allow him access to
Odu. In essence, initiation into Ifa is the first step towards initiation into
Odu. A woman cannot be initiated into Odu. This is because since she already
has a womb, she has no need to receive Odu. It can be said to be redundant.
Character Traits of an Awo: Orunmila demands humility from his priests and
priestesses, therefore, a Babalawo should be an embodiment of patience, good
character, honesty, and humility. On the other hand, in Cuba and parts of
Nigeria such as Ode Remo, Ijebuland and Ibadan (and Ile Ife up until at least
1992), the position of the Iyanifa as a divining priestess of Ifa is hotly
contested on the grounds that in the Ifa Odus Ogunda Ka, Irete Intelu and Oshe
Yekun, no one can become a full Awo Ifa without the presence of Odun, and in
the Odu Ifa Irete Ntelu (Irete Ogbe), Odun herself says that she would only
marry Orunmila if he promised not to permit women to be in the same room as
her. Also, Dr. Ikulomi Djisovi Eason reports that in Ile Ife, widely considered
Ifá's capital among traditional Yoruba, did not initiate women as late as
1992. These views appear to be confirmed by books published in Nigeria as far
back as the 19th century. For instance, the eminent Yoruba author James Johnson
wrote in one of the most detailed early descriptions of Ifa that "Whenever this
should be the case, a woman would receive from a Babalawo only one Ikin or
Consecrated Palm nut called Eko, which she would carry about her body for her
protection, and whenever divination should recommend and prescribe to her
sacrifice to Ifa, she would, for the time being, hand over her Eko either to
her husband or to her brother, or any other male relative according to
prescription, who would include it in his own Ikins for the purpose of the
worship and sacrifice in which she would participate." William Bascom, the
foremost academic authority on Ifa up until the time of his death, also stated
that "only men can become babalawo" and that he never encountered a single
female Ifa priest acting as a diviner during any of his extensive field studies
in the cities of Ife, Igana, Meko, Oyo, Ilesa, Abeokuta, Osogbo, Sagamu, Ilara,
Ondo, Ijebu Ode or Ekiti in Yorubaland in 1937-38, 1950–51, in 1960 and 1965,
nor did any of his informants mention such a thing. Sources from Yorubaland
going back to the mid-19th century clearly state that only men can become Ifa
diviners. The idea that any woman's womb is the equivalent of Odu, the force
that created the universe, is not a tenable one to traditionalists. This is the
theological equivalent to a man who might want to claim to be a Babalawo
without initiation due to the virtue of having male genitalia as does the
Orisha Orunmila. Apetebi is a title given to the wife of a Babalawo. Apetebi is
the name Orunmila gave to his wife, whom he cured from leprosy before giving
birth to his child. This is from the Sacred Odu Ifa Obara Ogunda. Iyanifa is
the title of an initiated female priestess of IFA, but can mean several other
things as well depending on region and tradition. Process. The (opon Ifa) or
tray and (iroke Ifa) or tapper are used in Ifa divination, a central ritual
within Ifa tradition. This tray, adorned with carved images and dusted with
powder, serves as the template on which sacred signs ("odu") related to the
personal concerns of a diviner's client are traced as the point of departure
for analysis. In contrast to those transitory signs, the more permanent
backdrop of the carved motifs on the tapper and tray constitutes an artistic
exegesis of the forces that shape human experience and the universal needs
fulfilled by such quests for enlightenment. To initiate the ritual, the
"babalawo"/"iyanifa" places the tray in front of him and taps rhythmically on
it with the pointed end of the tapper, invoking the presence of Orunmila, past
diviners, and other Orisa. There are a variety of Ikin (sacred palm nuts) that
are available, but only four "eyes" ikin must be used for ifa divination. The
Ikin (sacred palm nuts) are grouped in one hand, then the diviner attempts to
shift them all to his/her other hand at once, and counts the remaining Ikin
left, hopefully to discover that either one or two remain. (Odu, which are the
foundation of the binary data, can only be marked with either one or two palm
nuts, remaining in the diviner's original hand. As this process goes on, the
diviner marks single or double marks in wood powder spread on his divination
tray until he or she has created one of the 256 "odu" that are available. Each
of these "odu" is associated with a traditional set of Ese (poetic tutorials),
often relating to Yoruba religion, which explain their divinatory meaning.
These tutorials represent thousands of years of observation and are filled with
predictions, and both mundane and spiritual prescriptions that resolve issues
found in that Odu. Within Ifa, Believers find all the knowledge of the world
past, present. and future. After obtaining the Odu that governs a situation or
event, the diviner then determines whether the Odu comes with Ire (signifies
good outcome; good times; good news; good luck; e.t.c) or Ibi (which could be
viewed as obstacles or impediments to success). After this process the diviner
now determines appropriate offerings, spiritual disciplines and/or behavioral
changes that are Ọwọ̀n - necessary to bring, keep or compel success for
the person receiving divinatory counsel. Odù Ifá. There are sixteen major
books in Odu Ifa literary corpus. When combined there are total of 256 Odu (a
collection of sixteen, each of which has sixteen alternatives ⇔ 16^2, or 4^4)
believed to reference all situations, circumstances, actions and consequences
in life based on the uncountable ese (poetic tutorials) relative to the 256 Odu
coding. These form the basis of traditional Yoruba spiritual knowledge and are
the foundation of all Yoruba divination systems. Where I is an odd count or a
"heads" result, and II is an even count or a "tails" result, the sixteen basic
patterns and their Yoruba names are set forth in the sidebar (this is only one
way of ordering them, this changes depending on area within Nigeria, or the
diaspora. An alternative order used in Ibadan, and Cuba is: Ejiogbe, Oyekun
meji, Iwori Meji, Idi Meji, Irosun Meji, Oworin Meji, Obara Meji, Okanran Meji,
Ogunda Meji, Osa Meji, Ika Meji, Oturupon Meji, Otura Meji, Irete Meji, Oshe
Meji, Ofun Meji. Heepa Odu! This is important to note as it changes the
outcomes of certain parts of the reading). The "babalawo" recites a series of
poems with proverbs and stories from the Ifa poetry that go with that choice.
The final interpretation is made by the person seeking guidance, who decides
how the verses that the "babalawo" has recited should be applied to the problem
at hand. (This may be one style, however other schools of thought with Ifa have
the Diviner interpreting what Ifa says and not simply chanting and leaving it
to the client) Though the number of symbols is different, the Chinese I Ching
divination system also bears some resemblance to Ifa divination. Like the I
Ching, Ifa combines a large body of wisdom literature with a system for
selecting the appropriate passages from it. Unlike the I Ching, however, Ifa
poetry is not written down but passed down orally from one "babalawo" to
another. Today, there are many texts that are designed to help Babalawos to
learn and retain the huge corpus of knowledge. Belief. Believers deem Ifa as
being nothing but the "truth"; functioning to the devoted as not only a system
of guidance, but one that fuses way of living with the psychological, providing
them with a legitimate course of action that is genuine and unequivocal.
Glossary. "Ifá invest with me," "As Éjìwòrì invested interest in his
protégée," "Ifá smile upon me,". Names. Ifa priests, devotees, celebrants
and believers sometimes inherit names related to the divinity; typically, but
not necessarily, beginning with the term ‘Ifa’, like Ifadairo, Ifabiyi,
Ifadare, Ifabunmi, etc. The first "I" in these names may be omitted to form
Fadairo, Fabiyi, Fadare, Fabunmi, Falola, etc. The prefix "Awo" is also used in
names ascribing Ifa or the fellowship - Awolalu, Awodele, Awolowo, Awosika,
etc. Same applies to Odu, with Odufora, Odutola, Odugbemi etc.
