Incarnation Incarnation literally means "embodied in flesh" or "taking on
flesh". It refers to the conception and birth of a sentient creature (generally
a human) who is the material manifestation of an entity, god or force whose
original nature is immaterial. In its religious context the word is used to
mean the descent from Heaven of a god, or divine being in human/animal form on
Earth. Ancient Egypt. The Pharaohs of Ancient Egypt were sometimes said to be
incarnations of the gods Horus and Ra. Bahá'í. In the Bahá'í Faith, God is
described as a single, imperishable God, the creator of all things, including
all the creatures and forces in the universe. The connection between God and
the world is that of the creator to his creation. God is understood to be
independent of his creation, and that creation is dependent and contingent on
God. God, however, is not seen to be incarnated into this world and is not seen
to be part of creation as he cannot be divided and does not descend to the
condition of his creatures. Instead, in the Bahá'í understanding, the world
of creation from God, in that all things have been realized by him and have
attained to existence. The Bahá'í concept of the intermediary between God and
humanity is expressed in the term Manifestation of God, which are a series of
personages, such as Jesus and Bahá'u'lláh, who reflect the attributes of the
divine into the human world for the progress and advancement of human morals
and civilization. In expressing God's intent, these Manifestations are seen to
establish religion in the world. The Manifestations of God are also not seen as
an incarnation of God, but are instead understood to be like a perfect mirror
reflecting the attributes of God onto this material world. Buddhism. In the
teaching of the Buddha sentient beings incarnate due to the psychological
factors of ignorance, craving and clinging which results in the phenomenon of
becoming and rebirth. To be born human is considered a great privilege because
unlike other mammals even a person of average intelligence with sufficient
effort and proper guidance can walk the path of dharma and become liberated
from the cycle of rebirth. The motive force in the process of material
incarnation and becoming (popularly known as 'life') is attachment to and
identification with matter. This ignorance gives rise to the volitional factors
which are called sankharas. These sankharas through the infinite possibilities
of worldly desires propel the human being through the pattern of repeated birth
and death until the dawning of wisdom (awakening) brings about the desire for
liberation. According to Buddha's teaching the soul (as that structure of
sankharas that gives rise to incarnation and animates the body during 'life')
is not a fixed entity but in a state of constant flux - being modified over
time by actions of body, speech and mind. The constant transmutation and
interdependence of phenomena mean that nothing can be said in terms of ultimate
truth to have a fixed identity. This is the doctrine of "anatta", the no-self
doctrine applying to all phenomena ("see" "Three marks of existence").
Liberation in Buddhism is achieved when the stock of accumulated sankharas
buried in the unconscious have been dissolved through the practise of the Noble
Eightfold Path, a path leading to the experience called enlightenment ("Bodhi"
in Sanskrit and Pali). At enlightenment all the causes for future rebirth have
been deleted and the sage abides in a state of being called "deathlessness"
(Amaravati or Amrta). Such a one - called an arahant or Buddha is no longer
destined for reincarnation after death. In Tibetan Buddhism, an enlightened
spiritual teacher (lama) may choose to reincarnate after death in order to
continue to help people. Such a teacher is called a "tulku". Christianity. The
Incarnation of Christ is a central Christian doctrine that God became flesh,
assumed a human nature, and became a man in the form of Jesus Christ, the Son
of God and the second person of the Trinity. This foundational Christian
position holds that the divine nature of the Son of God was perfectly united
with human nature in one divine Person, Jesus, making him both truly God and
truly man. The theological term for this is hypostatic union: the Second Person
of the Holy Trinity, God the Son, became flesh when he was miraculously
conceived in the womb of the Virgin Mary. Biblical passages traditionally
referenced in connection with the doctrine of the Incarnation include ,
Colossians 2:9, and . Hinduism. In Hinduism, incarnation generally refers to an
Avatar of Vishnu, the preserver in the Trimurti. Collectively, the 10 avatars
of Vishnu are known as the dashavatara. Ganesha and Shiva also have avatars.
Islam. Mainstream Islam. Mainstream Islam completely rejects the doctrine of
the incarnation of God in any form, as the concept is defined as Shirk. In
mainstream Islam God is one and "neither begets nor is begotten". Islam
specifically rejects the Christian idea of Jesus as a divine incarnation, but
rather Jesus is seen as a prophet ("nabī") and messenger ("rasūl") of God.
The Qur'anic text itself seems to fully reject this concept according to
mainstream interpretations. Sunnism is the most prominent sect to hold this
belief. Shia. Although most Shiites do not hold the view that Muhammad's son-
in-law Imam Ali was God incarnate, a variety of heterodox Shiite sects
collectively called Ghulat (for "exagerated") - such as the Alevi, Alawi, Ahl-
e Haqq, and more arguably the Bektashi - believe that Imam Ali was God. This
view is vigorously rejected by both Sunnis and non-Ghulati Shiites. The major
conflict source between Sunnis and Shias is the Shias' believing Imam Ali to be
the real caliph after Muhammad and accepting 12 "imans" as heirs of his
""welayah"" (rule). However, the Wahabi Muslims defend that some tales about
shias incarnation create division between Shias and sunnis (both of whom they
call brothers in the Quran). They also accuse the Shias of worshiping metals
and woods (in fact the Shias only use them as ""tabarrok"" ("blesseds"/"blessed
things"), just like "Hazrate Zahra" had used "tabarrok" first. In Shia
philosophy, tabarrok is for showing your love to ""ahle beit"" ("household",
the community of the devotees of Ali and Fatima) and requesting ""shafa'at""
(healing) from them because they believe that "ahle beyt" where the best God
created and they use this method to have a better connection to Allah or to
request ""maghferat"" (forgiveness) from God when they want to atone for sins
and believe its an easier approach. Ismailism. The Aga Khan is the Imam
(spiritual leader) of the Ismailis who believe that he possesses the Light Of
God ("Noor") within him and is therefore God's designated repository of His
Word, the Quran. As such only he fully knows the Quran in its complete context
in which it was revealed to Prophet Mohammad over a span of 22 long and hard
years. The Ismailis contend that to read the Quran without knowing the context
(circumstance) under which each and every Ayat (verse) was delivered to Prophet
Mohammed, is simply to be lead astray. There is a Hadith of the Prophet
stating, "Ali and I are from the same "Noor"". The Aga Khan being the direct
descendant of Prophet Mohammad through Imam Ali and Fatima-taz-Zahara (the
daughter of Prophet Mohammad and wife of Imam Ali), the Noor has been passed
down through them to him. The Noor is an aspect of the Ismaili belief in the
concept of God's incarnation as a human being living "incognito" among human
beings on this earth. See Imamah (Ismaili doctrine) for a complete and
referenced article on Ismaili beliefs. Nation of Islam. The founder of the US-
based black nationalist Nation of Islam, Wallace Fard Muhammad, is believed by
followers to be an incarnation of God, also considered to be the Messiah of
Christianity and Mahdi of Islam. Judaism. Mainstream Judaism totally rejects
any doctrine of an incarnation of God and absolutely rejects any concept of an
incarnation of God in any form. Jews especially rejected vehemently - even
under penalty of death or threats of torture - the Christian idea of Jesus as a
divine incarnation of God, and neither see Jesus as a Prophet nor Messiah.
However, some Hasidim believe in a somewhat similar concept. Rabbi Menachem
Mendel Schneerson, a prominent Hasidic leader, said that the Rebbe is God's
essence itself put into a body of a Tzaddik. While many other Jews find this
idea highly controversial, panentheism, i.e. considering everything and
everyone as manifestations of God, is the accepted mainstream Hasidic and
Kabbalistic doctrine. The Kabbalah has an idea of "gilgul" (reincarnation) as
part of the soul's journey to achieve perfection. Rastafari. The Rastafari
movement views Haile Selassie I as God incarnate, who has come the second time
as a deliverer. Serer religion. Serer religion rejects any notion of an
incarnation or manifestation of "Roog" (the supreme deity in Serer religion),
called Koox among the Cangin. However, the reincarnation ("ciiɗ") of the
ancient Serer saints and ancestral spirits, called "Pangool", is a well held
principle in Serer religion. These Pangool (singular : "Fangool") act as
intermediaries between the living world and the Devine. When the Serers speak
of incarnation, it is these Pangool they refer to, who are themselves holy by
virtue of their intercession with the Divine.
