Increase Mather Increase Mather (June 21, 1639 – August 23, 1723) was a major
figure in the early history of the Massachusetts Bay Colony and Province of
Massachusetts Bay (now the Commonwealth of Massachusetts). He was a Puritan
minister who was involved with the government of the colony, the administration
of Harvard College, and most notoriously, the Salem witch trials. He was the
son of Richard Mather, and the father of Cotton Mather, both influential
Puritan ministers. Biography. Early life. Mather was born in Dorchester,
Massachusetts on June 21, 1639 to Rev. Richard Mather and Kathrine Holt Mather
following their participation in the Great Migration from England due to
nonconformity with the Church of England. He was the youngest of six brothers,
the others being: Samuel, Nathaniel, Eleazar, Joseph, and Timothy. Three of his
brothers (Samuel, Nathaniel and Eleazar) also became ministers. Education. In
1651 Mather was admitted to Harvard University where he roomed with and studied
under John Norton. When he graduated (1656) with a B.A., he began to train for
the ministry and gave his first sermon on his eighteenth birthday. He quickly
left Massachusetts and went to Ireland, where he studied at Trinity College in
Dublin for an M.A.. He graduated in 1659 and spent the next 3 years as a
chaplain attached to a garrison in the Channel Islands During his time at
Trinity College he was licensed as a Commonwealth Minister by Oliver Cromwell
to the joint charge of St. Tida's Church at Ballyscullion and St. Swithan's
Church in Magherafelt. On Cromwell's death in 1659 his joint charge at these
South Londonderry churches was quickly severed by the new authorities. Harvard
was later to award him the first honorary degree in the New World, becoming a
Doctor of Sacred Theology, in 1692. Establishing himself in Massachusetts. In
1661, with the advent of the English Restoration and resurgence of Anglicanism,
Increase returned to Massachusetts, where he married Maria Cotton. She was his
stepsister by virtue of his father's marriage to Sarah Hankredge, the widow of
John Cotton and mother of Maria. She gave birth to Cotton Mather in February,
1663. He published in 1676 "A Brief History of the War with the Indians in New-
England", a contemporary account of King Philip's War. He was ordained as
minister of the North Church, whose congregation included many of the upper
class and governing class, on May 27, 1664. He held this post until he died. By
virtue of his position he quickly became one of the most influential people in
the colony, both religiously and politically. Harvard. On June 11, 1685 he
became the Acting President of Harvard University (then Harvard College) and
steadily advanced: A little over a year later on July 23, 1686 he was appointed
the Rector. On June 27, 1692 he became the President of Harvard, a position
which he held until September 6, 1701. He was rarely present on campus or in
the town, especially during his term of Rector as he was out of the Colony for
all but two years of his term in that office. Despite his absences he did make
some changes: reimplementation of Greek and Hebrew instruction, replacement of
classical Roman authors with Biblical and Christian authors in ethics classes,
enactment of requirements that students attend classes regularly, live and eat
on campus and that seniors not haze other students. Involvement in politics.
While politics and Puritan religion were closely related during Increase's
lifetime, his first direct involvement with politics occurred as a result of
James II of England's manipulation of the New England governments. In 1686
James revoked the Charter of Massachusetts in the process of creating the
unresponsible Dominion of New England. The Dominion was headed by Edmund
Andros, who not only disliked puritanism and was haughty, but ruled as a near
absolute dictator: Town meetings were outlawed, leaving the Dominion without
consent of the governed, marriage was removed from the clergy, and the Old
South Church was temporarily appropriated for Anglican services. The 1687
Declaration of Indulgence, prohibiting discrimination against Catholics, also
saw staunch opposition from the Puritan establishment. When Mather successfully
roused opposition to revocation of the charter, he was nearly framed for
treason. He then traveled to London (eluding spies out to catch him) to
petition the King. While engaged in petitioning he published pieces to build
popular support for his positions, such as "A Narrative of the Miseries of New-
England, By Reason of an Arbitrary Government Erected there Under Sir Edmund
Andros" (1688) and "A Brief Relation for the Confirmation of Charter
Privileges" (1691). He also attempted to restore the old charter and obtain a
royal charter for Harvard; however, he abandoned that course and changed his
petitions to a new charter not lacking any of the rights previously granted.
Following the Glorious Revolution and subsequent overthrow of Andros, a new
charter was granted to the colony. The 1692 charter was a major departure from
its predecessor, granting sweeping home rule, establishing an elective
legislature, enfranchising all freeholders (previously only men admitted to a
congregation could vote), and uniting the Massachusetts Bay Colony and Plymouth
Colony. Following Andros' deposition and arrest, he had William Phips appointed
as Royal Governor and they returned to Massachusetts, arriving on May 14, 1692.
Following his return, the administration of Harvard grew increasingly insistent
that he reside nearer to the institution. Not wanting to leave his Second
Church, he didn't, eventually resigning the Presidency. Involvement in the
Salem witch trials. As an influential member of the community, having
handpicked Governor Phips and his deputy Stoughton, Increase was involved in
the notorious witch hysteria of Salem, Massachusetts. As the court of oyer and
terminer was beginning to hear cases of suspected witchcraft, Increase's son
Cotton wrote a letter known as "The Return of Several Ministers Consulted,"
which urged caution but failed to denounce the use of "spectral evidence". In
June and July 1692 as the trials and executions grew, Mather made a number of
sermons interpreted as a plea to cool the heated atmosphere. In September he
published "Cases of Conscience Concerning Evil Spirits Personating Men,
Witchcrafts, infallible Proofs of Guilt in such as are accused with that Crime"
(more commonly known as just "Cases of conscience concerning evil spirits"),
which defended the judges and trials, but strongly denounced the spectral
evidence used by them. It said, "It were better that Ten Suspected Witches
should escape, than that one Innocent Person should be Condemned." (A slightly
altered version of this phrase would later become known as Blackstone's
formulation.) Afterwards, his reputation was not improved by his involvement
and association with the trials, nor by his subsequent refusal to denounce
them. His refusal to repudiate was likely because of his longtime friendship
with the judges involved. He was also briefly mentioned in a thorough treatment
of his son Cotton by Robert Calef in his comprehensive book of the Salem Trials
and their aftermath "More Wonders of the Invisible World" (referred to as "More
Wonders of the Spiritual World" by the Encyclopædia Britannica Eleventh
Edition). Increase was said to have burned Calef's book in Harvard Yard. Later
life and death. Following Maria's death in August 1714, he remarried. On
September 27, 1722 he fainted and was bedridden thereafter. In August 1723 he
suffered bladder failure and died three weeks later on August 23, 1723 in
Boston and was buried on Copp's Hill. Before his death, he took lodging at the
retreat of Mineral Spring Pond to recover from his illness and drink from the
famous healing waters of the springs from Spring Pond. Beliefs. Throughout his
life Mather was a staunch Puritan, opposing anything openly contradictory to,
mutually exclusive with, or potentially "distracting" from his religious
beliefs. He supported suppression of intoxication, unnecessary effort on
Sundays and ostentatious clothing. He was initially opposed to the Half-Way
Covenant but later supported it. He firmly believed in the direct appearance of
God's disfavor in everyday life, e.g. the weather, political situations,
attacks by "Indians", fires and floods, etc. He was strenuous in attempting to
keep people to his idea of morality, making strong use of jeremiads to try to
prevent indifference and especially to try to get government officials to
enforce public morality. During his tenure at Harvard he regularly stamped out
any relaxation of Puritan strictness, such as latitudinarianism, which had
flourished during his overseas absence. Following his acceptance of the
Covenant, Solomon Stoddard and others attempted to further liberalize
Puritanism by baptism of children who had nonmember parents and admittance of
all but the openly immoral to services. To try and stop this, he had a synod
called in an attempt to outlaw similar measures. A declaration was adopted, but
never made binding. Following this, reform-minded members were sent to the body
and it took on a less conservative tone, bitterly disappointing Mather. Given
name. The stated reason for his first name was "...the never-to-be-forgotten ,
of every sort, wherewith God favoured the country about the time of his
nativity." ["Increase" is a literal translation of the Hebrew name "Yosëf"
(Joseph).]
