Indulgence In Catholic theology, an indulgence is the full or partial remission
of temporal punishment due for sins which have already been forgiven. The
indulgence is granted by the Catholic Church after the sinner has confessed and
received absolution. An indulgence is thus not forgiveness of sin nor release
from the eternal punishment associated with hell in Christian beliefs. The
belief is that indulgences draw on the Treasury of Merit accumulated by
Christ's superabundantly meritorious sacrifice on the cross and the virtues and
penances of the saints. They are granted for specific good works and prayers.
Indulgences replaced the severe penances of the early Church. More exactly,
they replaced the shortening of those penances that was allowed at the
intercession of those imprisoned and those awaiting martyrdom for the faith.
Alleged abuses in selling and granting indulgences were a major point of
contention when Martin Luther initiated the Protestant Reformation (1517).
Catholic teaching. According to the teachings outlined in the Catechism of the
Catholic Church, two distinct consequences follow when a person sins. A mortal
sin (one that is grave and is committed knowingly and freely) is equivalent to
refusing friendship of God and communion with the only source of eternal life.
The loss of eternal life with God and the eternal death of Hell that this
rejection entails is called the "eternal punishment" of sin. In addition, every
sin, even those that, not being mortal, are called venial sins, cause a turning
from God through what the Catechism of the Catholic Church calls an unhealthy
attachment to creatures, which must be purified either here on earth, or after
death in the state called purgatory. The resulting need to break this
attachment to creatures is another punishment for sin, referred to as "temporal
punishment", because, not being a total rejection of God, it is not eternal and
can be overcome in time. Even when the sin is forgiven, the associated
attachment to creatures may remain. The sinner must "strive by works of mercy
and charity, as well as by prayer and the various practices of penance, to put
off completely the 'old man' and to put on the 'new man'." The Catholic
doctrine of the Communion of Saints teaches that this work of cleansing or
sanctification does not have to be done entirely by the person directly
concerned since all Christians (indeed, all persons, each created by God),
living and dead, are united as a single body that has Christ as head. The
holiness of one profits others, well beyond the harm that the sin of one could
cause others. Thus through the communion of saints, recourse not only to the
merits of the saints in heaven but above all to those of Christ himself lets
the contrite sinner be more promptly and efficaciously purified of the
punishments for sin. In view of the Church's interpretation of the power of
binding or loosing granted by Christ, the Church considers that it may
administer to those under its jurisdiction the benefits of these merits in
consideration of prayer or other pious works undertaken by the faithful. This
the Church does for individual Christians, not simply to aid them, but also to
spur them to works of devotion, penance, and charity. There is a common
misconception that, according to the doctrine of the Catholic Church,
indulgences forgive sins: the Catholic Church teaches instead that indulgences
only relieve the temporal punishment due because of the sins, and that a person
is still required to have his grave sins absolved, ordinarily through the
sacrament of Confession, to receive salvation. Since those who have died in the
state of grace (with all mortal sins forgiven) are members of the communion of
saints, it is the belief of the Catholic Church that the living can help those
whose purification from their sins is not yet completed not only by prayer but
also by obtaining indulgences for them. Since the Church on earth has no
jurisdiction over the dead, indulgences can be gained for them only "per modum
suffragii", i.e. by an act of intercession. An indulgence may be plenary or
partial, according as it remits all or only part of the temporal punishment
that at that moment is due for sin. To gain a plenary indulgence, a person must
exclude all attachment to sin of any kind, even venial sin, must perform the
work or say the prayer for which the indulgence is granted, and must also
fulfil the three conditions of sacramental confession, Eucharistic communion
and praying for the intentions of the Pope. The minimum condition for gaining a
partial indulgence is to be contrite in heart: on this condition, a Catholic
who performs the work or recites the prayer in question is granted, through the
Church, remission of temporal punishment of the same worth as is obtained by
the person's own action. Present discipline. By the bull Indulgentiarum
Doctrina of 1 January 1967, Pope Paul VI, responding to suggestions made at the
Second Vatican Council, substantially revised the practical application of the
traditional doctrine. He made it clear that the Church's aim was not merely to
help the faithful make due satisfaction for their sins, but chiefly to bring
them to greater fervour of charity. For this purpose he decreed that partial
indulgences, previously granted as the equivalent of a certain number of days,
months, "quarantines" (Lent-like forty-day periods) or years of canonical
penance, simply supplement, and to the same degree, the remission that those
performing the indulgenced action already gain by the charity and contrition
with which they do it. The abolition of the classification by years and days
made it clearer than before that repentance and faith are required not only for
remission of eternal punishment for mortal sin but also for remission of
temporal punishment for sin. In "Indulgentiarum doctrina" Pope Paul VI wrote:
"Indulgences cannot be gained without a sincere conversion of outlook and unity
with God". In the same bull, Pope Paul ordered that the official list of
indulgenced prayers and good works, which had been called the "Raccolta", be
revised "with a view to attaching indulgences only to the most important
prayers and works of piety, charity and penance". This removed from the list of
indulgenced prayers and good works, now called the "Enchiridion
Indulgentiarum", many prayers for which various religious institutes,
confraternities and similar groups had succeeded in the course of centuries in
obtaining grants of indulgences, but which could not be classified as among
"the most important". Religious institutes and the like, to which grants of
plenary indulgences, for instance for visiting a particular church or shrine,
had been previously made, were given a year from the date of promulgation of
"Indulgentiarum doctrina" to have them confirmed, and any that were not
confirmed (mostly in a more limited way than before) within two years became
null and void. The "Enchiridion Indulgentiarum", which is in Latin, differs
from the Italian-language "Raccolta" that it replaced in listing "only the most
important prayers and works of piety, charity and penance". On the other hand,
it includes new general grants of partial indulgences that apply to a wide
range of prayerful actions, and it indicates that the prayers that it does list
as deserving veneration on account of divine inspiration or antiquity or as
being in widespread use are only "examples" of those to which the first these
general grants applies: "Raising the mind to God with humble trust while
performing one's duties and bearing life's difficulties, and adding, at least
mentally, some pious invocation". In this way, the "Enchiridion
Indulgentiarum", in spite of its smaller size, classifies as indulgenced an
immensely greater number of prayers than were treated as such in the
"Raccolta". Actions for which indulgences are granted. The prayers specifically
mentioned in the "Enchiridion Indulgentiarum" are not of the Latin Rite
tradition alone, but also from the traditions of the Eastern Catholic Churches,
such as the Akathistos, Paraklesis, "Evening Prayer", and "Prayer for the
Faithful Departed" (Byzantine), "Prayer of Thanksgiving" (Armenian), "Prayer of
the Shrine" and the "Lakhu Mara" (Chaldean), "Prayer of Incense" and "Prayer to
Glorify Mary the Mother of God" (Coptic), "Prayer for the Remission of Sins"
and "Prayer to Follow Christ" (Ethiopian), "Prayer for the Church", and "Prayer
of Leave-taking from the Altar" (Maronite), and "Intercessions for the Faithful
Departed" (Syrian). Apart from the recurrences listed in the "Enchiridion",
special indulgences are granted on occasions of special spiritual significance
such as a Jubilee Year or the centenary or similar anniversary of an event such
as the apparition of Our Lady of Lourdes or the celebration of a World Youth
Day. Of particular significance is the plenary indulgence attached to the
Apostolic Blessing that a priest is to impart when giving the sacraments to a
person in danger of death, and which, if no priest is available, the Church
grants to any rightly disposed Christian at the moment of death, on condition
that that person was accustomed to say some prayers during life. In this case
the Church itself makes up for the three conditions normally required for a
plenary indulgence: sacramental confession, Eucharistic communion and prayer
for the Pope's intentions. History of indulgences. Early and medieval beliefs.
In the early church, especially from the third century on, ecclesiastic
authorities allowed a confessor or a Christian awaiting martyrdom to intercede
for another Christian in order to shorten the other's canonical penance. The
Council of Epaon in 517 witnesses to the rise of the practice of replacing
severe canonical penances with something new and milder. It became customary to
commute penances to less demanding works, such as prayers, alms, fasts and even
the payment of fixed sums of money depending on the various kinds of offences
(tariff penances). By the tenth century some penances were not replaced but
merely reduced in connection with pious donations, pilgrimages and similar
meritorious works. Then, in the eleventh and twelfth centuries, the recognition
of the value of these works began to become associated not so much with
canonical penance but with remission of the temporal punishment due to sin. The
earliest record of a plenary indulgence was Pope Urban II's declaration at the
Council of Clermont (1095) that he remitted all penance incurred by crusaders
who had confessed their sins in the Sacrament of Penance, considering
participation in the crusade equivalent to a complete penance. Theologians
looked to God's mercy, the value of the Church's prayers, and the merits of the
saints as the basis on which indulgences could be granted. Around 1230 the
Dominican Hugh of St-Cher proposed the idea of a "treasury" at the Church's
disposal, consisting of the infinite merits of Christ and the immeasurable
abundance of the saints' merits, a thesis that was demonstrated by great
scholastics such as Albertus Magnus and Thomas Aquinas and remains the basis
for the theological explanation of indulgences. Abuses. Indulgences became
increasingly popular in the Middle Ages as a reward for displaying piety and
doing good deeds, though, doctrinally speaking, the Church stated that the
indulgence was only valid for temporal punishment for sins already forgiven in
the Sacrament of Confession. The faithful asked that indulgences be given for
saying their favourite prayers, doing acts of devotion, attending places of
worship, and going on pilgrimage; confraternities wanted indulgences for
putting on performances and processions; associations demanded that their
meetings be rewarded with indulgences. Money raised by indulgences was used for
many righteous causes, both religious and civil; building projects funded by
indulgences include churches, hospitals, leper colonies, schools, roads, and
bridges. However, the later Middle Ages saw the growth of considerable abuses.
Greedy commissaries sought to extract the maximum amount of money for each
indulgence. Professional "pardoners" ("quaestores" in Latin) - who were sent to
collect alms for a specific project - practiced the unrestricted sale of
indulgences. Many of these "quaestores" exceeded Church teachings, whether in
avarice or ignorant zeal, and promised impossible rewards like salvation from
eternal damnation in return for money. With the permission of the Church,
indulgences also became a way for Catholic rulers to fund expensive projects,
such as Crusades and cathedrals, by keeping a significant portion of the money
raised from indulgences in their lands. There was a tendency to forge documents
declaring that indulgences had been granted. Indulgences grew to extraordinary
magnitude, in terms of longevity and breadth of forgiveness. The Fourth Lateran
Council (1215) suppressed some abuses connected with indulgences, spelling out,
for example, that only a one-year indulgence would be granted for the
consecration of churches and no more than a 40-days indulgence for other
occasions. The Council also stated that "Catholics who have girded themselves
with the cross for the extermination of the heretics, shall enjoy the
indulgences and privileges granted to those who go in defense of the Holy
Land." But very soon these limits were widely exceeded. False documents were
circulated with indulgences surpassing all bounds: indulgences of hundreds or
even thousands of years. In 1392, more than a century before Martin Luther
published the 95 Theses, Pope Boniface IX wrote to the Bishop of Ferrara
condemning the practice of certain members of religious orders who falsely
claimed that they were authorized by the pope to forgive all sorts of sins, and
exacted money from the simple-minded among the faithful by promising them
perpetual happiness in this world and eternal glory in the next. An engraving
by Israhel van Meckenem of the "Mass of Saint Gregory" contained a "bootlegged"
indulgence of 20,000 years; one of the copies of this plate (not the one
illustrated, but also from the 1490s) was altered in a later state to increase
it to 45,000 years. The indulgences applied each time a specified collection of
prayers - in this case seven each of the Creed, Our Father, and Hail Mary -
were recited in front of the image. The image of the "Mass of Saint Gregory"
had been especially associated with large indulgences since the Jubilee Year of
1350 in Rome, when it was at least widely believed that an indulgence of 14,000
years had been granted for praying in the presence of the "Imago Pietatis"
("Man of Sorrows"), a popular pilgrimage destination in the basilica of Santa
Croce in Gerusalemme in Rome. Protestant Reformation. The false doctrine and
scandalous conduct of the "pardoners" were an immediate occasion of the
Protestant Reformation. In 1517, Pope Leo X offered indulgences for those who
gave alms to rebuild St. Peter's Basilica in Rome. The aggressive marketing
practices of Johann Tetzel in promoting this cause provoked Martin Luther to
write his Ninety-Five Theses, condemning what he saw as the purchase and sale
of salvation. In Thesis 28 Luther objected to a saying attributed to Tetzel:
"As soon as a coin in the coffer rings, a soul from purgatory springs". The
Ninety-Five Theses not only denounced such transactions as worldly but denied
the Pope's right to grant pardons on God's behalf in the first place: the only
thing indulgences guaranteed, Luther said, was an increase in profit and greed,
because the pardon of the Church was in God's power alone. As regards
indulgences for the living, Tetzel always taught pure doctrine. The assertion
that he put forward indulgences as being not only a remission of the temporal
punishment of sin, but as a remission of its guilt, is as unfounded as is that
other accusation against him, that he sold the forgiveness of sin for money,
without even any mention of contrition and confession, or that, for payment, he
absolved from sins which might be committed in the future. His teaching was, in
fact, very definite, and quite in harmony with the theology of the Church, as
it was then and as it is now, i.e., that indulgences "apply only to the
temporal punishment due to sins which have been already repented of and
confessed"... The case was very different with indulgences for the dead. As
regards these there is no doubt that Tetzel did, according to what he
considered his authoritative instructions, proclaim as Christian doctrine that
nothing but an offering of money was required to gain the indulgence for the
dead, without there being any question of contrition or confession. The Papal
Bull of indulgence gave no sanction whatever to this proposition. It was a
vague scholastic opinion, rejected by the Sorbonne in 1482, and again in 1518,
and certainly not a doctrine of the Church, which was thus improperly put
forward as dogmatic truth. The first among the theologians of the Roman court,
Cardinal Cajetan, was the enemy of all such extravagances, and declared
emphatically that, even if theologians and preachers taught such opinions, no
faith need be given them. "Preachers," said he, "speak in the name of the
Church only so long as they proclaim the doctrine of Christ and His Church; but
if, for purposes of their own, they teach that about which they know nothing,
and which is only their own imagination, they must not be accepted as
mouthpieces of the Church. No one must be surprised if such as these fall into
error." While Luther did not deny the Pope’s right to grant pardons for
penance imposed by the Church, he made it clear that preachers who claimed
indulgences absolved buyers from all punishments and granted them salvation
were in error. Council of Trent. On 16 July 1562, the Council of Trent
suppressed the office of "quaestores" and reserved the collection of alms to
two canon members of the chapter, who were to receive no remuneration for their
work; it also reserved the publication of indulgences to the bishop of the
diocese. Then on 4 December 1563, in its final session, the Council addressed
the question of indulgences directly, declaring them "most salutary for the
Christian people", decreeing that "all evil gains for the obtaining of them be
wholly abolished", and instructing bishops to be on the watch for any abuses
concerning them. A few years later, in 1567, Pope Pius V cancelled all grants
of indulgences involving any fees or other financial transactions. After the
Council of Trent, Clement VIII established a commission of Cardinals to deal
with indulgences according to the mind of the Council. It continued its work
during the pontificate of Paul V and published various bulls and decrees on the
matter. But only Clement IX established a true Congregation of Indulgences (and
Relics) with a Brief of 6 July 1669. In a "motu proprio" on 28 January 1904,
Pius X joined the Congregation of Indulgences with that of Rites, but with the
restructuring of the Roman Curia in 1908 all matters regarding indulgences was
assigned to the Holy Office. In a "motu proprio" on 25 March 1915, Benedict XV
transferred the Holy Office's Section for Indulgences to the Apostolic
Penitentiary, but maintained the Holy Office's responsibility for matters
regarding the doctrine of indulgences. Eastern Orthodox Church. The Eastern
Orthodox Churches believe one can be absolved from sins by the Sacred Mystery
of Confession, which in the East is preceded by a period of fasting. Because of
differences in the theology of salvation, indulgences for the remission of
temporal punishment of sin do not exist in Eastern Orthodoxy, but until the
twentieth century there existed in some places a practice of absolution
certificates ("συγχωροχάρτια – synchorochartia"). While some of
these certificates were connected with any patriarch's decrees lifting for the
living or the dead some serious ecclesiastical penalty, including
excommunication, the Greek Orthodox Patriarch of Jerusalem, with the approval
of the Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople, had the sole privilege, because
of the expense of maintaining the Holy Places and paying the many taxes levied
on them, of distributing such documents in large numbers to pilgrims or sending
them elsewhere, sometimes with a blank space for the name of the beneficiary,
living or dead, an individual or a whole family, for whom the prayers would be
read. Greek Orthodox Patriarch of Jerusalem Dositheos Notaras (1641–1707)
wrote: "It is an established custom and ancient tradition, known to all, that
the Most Holy Patriarchs give the absolution certificate
("συγχωροχάρτιον – synchorochartion") to the faithful people
… they have granted them from the beginning and still do." A Russian Orthodox
source says that these certificates were in use among Greek Orthodox until the
middle of the twentieth century, and were "certificates which absolved from
sins, which anyone could obtain, often for a specified sum of money. The
absolution granted by these papers, according to Christos Yannaras, had no
connection with any participation of the faithful in the Mystery of Penance,
nor in the Mystery of the Eucharist". The same source interprets the Western
indulgence also as absolution from sin, not as remission of temporal
punishment.
