Infidel Infidel (literally "one without faith") is a term used in certain
religions, especially Christianity or Islam, for one who has no religious
beliefs, or who doubts or rejects the central tenets of the particular
religion. "Infidel" is an ecclesiastical term in Christianity around which the
Church developed a body of theology that deals with the concept of infidelity,
which makes a clear differentiation between those who were baptized and
followed the teachings of the Church versus those who are outside the faith.
The term "infidel" was used by Christians to describe those perceived as the
enemies of Christianity. When applied to non-monotheists, the usage of the word
is similar to the appellations "heathen" or "pagan". As such, the term
"infidel" has often been applied to atheists, whose disbelief is viewed
negatively in both Christianity and Islam. After the ancient world the concept
of otherness, an exclusionary notion of the outside by societies with more or
less coherent cultural boundaries, became associated with the development of
the monotheistic and prophetic religions of Judaism, Christianity and Islam.
The conception of infidelity as a theological condition is a result of their
strict conformity to monotheism, as well as their rejection and condemnation of
pagan rites. Etymology. The origins of the word Infidel date to the late 15th
century, deriving from the French "infidèle" or Latin "īnfidēlis", from "in-
" "not" + "fidēlis" "faithful" (from "fidēs" "faith", related to "fīdere"
'to trust'). The word originally denoted a person of a religion other than
one's own, specifically a Christian to a Muslim, a Muslim to a Christian, or a
Gentile to a Jew. Later meanings in the 15th century include "unbelieving", "a
non-Christian" and "one who does not believe in religion" (1527). In religious
thought. These notions of infidelity by Christians and Muslims are assumed to
have formed the cultural context under which the Crusades and various holy wars
occurred. Christian. Christians have historically referred to people outside
their religious group as infidels, signifying a distinction between somebody
who for whatever reason is ignorant of the Christian message and somebody who
has actively rejected the Christian religion. It only became a well established
notion in English sometime in the early sixteenth century, when Jews or
"Mohammedans", were described as active opponents to Christianity, and as such
infidel was seen as term of contempt. In Catholic doctrine, an infidel is one
who does not believe in the doctrine at all and is thus distinct from a
heretic, who is one seen as having fallen astray from true doctrine, i.e. by
denying the divinity of Jesus. Similarly, the ecclesiastical term was also used
by the Methodist Church, in reference to those "without faith". Today, the
usage of the term infidel has declined; the current preference is for the terms
"non-Christians" and "non-believers" (persons without religious affiliations or
beliefs), reflecting the commitment of mainstream Christian denominations to
engage in dialog with persons of other faiths. Nevertheless, some apologists
have argued for the usage of the term, stating that it does not come from a
disrespectful perspective, but is similar to using the term "orthodox" for
devout believers. Islamic. Infidel is an English language word commonly used to
translate the equivalent Arabic language word for non-Muslims; "kafir",
literally the one who "covers", is usually translated as "disbeliever"; i.e. in
English translations of the Quranic verse, 109:1, In the Islamic doctrinal
sense, the term only refers to a person who does not recognize the one God
(Allah) such as atheists and polytheists. However, since Islam considers Jews
and Christians as fellow believers they are called "People of the Book ("Ahl
al-kitab")" instead. Kafir, like infidel, has also come to be regarded as
offensive, thus some Muslim scholars discourage its use due to the Quran's
command to use kind words. It is even a punishable offense to use this term
against a Jew or a Christian, under Islamic law. Some contemporary Muslim
extremists, however, have applied the term to all non-Muslims. During the
Ottoman Empire the equivalent derogatory term, used by Turkish Muslims with
reference to Greeks, Armenians and other Christians within their empire was
"Giaour". It is an adaptation of the Persian word Gabr, itself ultimately
derived from Kafir (Arabic). Jewish. Judaism has a notion of pagan gentiles who
are called "acum" (an acronym of Ovdei Cohavim u-Mazzaloth or, literally, those
who are "star-and-constellation worshippers") or idolaters. A Hebrew term,
"kofer", which is cognate with the Arabic "kafir", is however applied only to
apostate Jews. Infidels under Canon Law. Right to rule. In "Quid super his",
Innocent IV, asked the question "s it licit to invade a land that infidels
possess or which belongs to them?" and held that while Infidels had a right to
"dominium" (right to rule themselves and choose their own governments), however
the pope, as the Vicar of Christ, "de jure" possessed the care of their souls
and had the right to politically intervene in their affairs if their ruler
violated or allowed his subjects to violate a Christian and Euro-centric
normative conception of Natural law, such as sexual perversion or idolatry. He
also held that he had an obligation to send missionaries to infidel lands, and
that if they were prevented from entering or preaching, then the pope was
justified in dispatching Christian forces accompanied with missionaries to
invade those lands, as Innocent stated simply "If the infidels do not obey,
they ought to be compelled by the secular arm and war may be declared upon them
by the pope, and nobody else." This was however not a reciprocal right and non-
Christian missionaries such as those of Muslims could not be allowed to preach
in Europe "because they are in error and we are on a righteous path." A long
line of Papal hierocratic canonists, most notably those who adhered to Alanus
Anglicus's influential arguments of the Crusading-era, denied Infidel dominium,
and asserted Rome's universal jurisdictional authority over the earth, and the
right to authorize pagan conquests solely on the basis of non-belief because of
their rejection of the Christian god. In the extreme hierocractic canonical
discourse of the mid-twelfth century such as that espoused by Bernard of
Clairvaux, the mystic leader of the Cisertcians, legitimized German colonial
expansion and practice of forceful Christianisation in the Slavic territories
as a holy war against the Wends, arguing that infidels should be killed
wherever they posed a menace to Christians. When Frederick the II unilaterally
arrogated papal authority, he took on the mantle to "destroy convert, and
subjugate all barbarian nations." A power in papal doctrine reserved for the
pope. Hostiensis, a student of Innocent, in accord with Alanus, also asserted
"... by law infidels should be subject to the faithful." and the heretical
quasi-Donatist John Wyclif, regarded as the forefather of English Reformation,
also held that valid "dominium" rested on a state of grace. The Teutonic
Knights were one of the by-products of this papal hierocratic and German
discourse. After the Crusades in the Levant, they moved to crusading activities
in the infidel Baltics. Their crusades against the Lithuanians and Poles
however precipitated the Lithuanian Controversy, and the Council of Constance,
following the condemnation of Wyclif, found Hostiensis's views no longer
acceptable and ruled against the knights. Future Church doctrine was then
firmly aligned with Innocents IV's position. The development of counter
arguments later on the validity of Papal authority, the rights of infidels and
the primacy of natural law, led to various treatises such as those by Hugo
Grotius, John Locke, Immanuel Kant and Thomas Hobbes, which in turn led to the
transformation of international law's treatment of the relationship between
Christian and non-Christian societies and the development of human rights.
Colonization of the Americas. During the Age of discovery, the Papal Bulls such
as "Romanus Pontifex" and more importantly "inter caetera" (1493), implicitly
removed "dominium" from infidels and granted them to the Spanish Empire and
Portugal with the charter of guaranteeing the safety of missionaries.
Subsequent English and French rejections of the bull refuted the Popes
authority to exclude other Christian princes. As independent authorities such
as the Head of the Church of England, they drew up charters for their own
colonial missions based on the temporal right for care of infidel souls in
language echoing the inter caetera. The charters and papal bulls would form the
legal basis of future negotiations and consideration of claims as title deeds
in the emerging Law of nations in the European colonization of the Americas.
The rights bestowed by "Romanus Pontifex" and "inter caetera" have never fallen
from use, serving as the basis for legal arguments over the centuries. The U.S.
Supreme Court ruled in the 1823 case "Johnson v. M'Intosh "that as a result of
European discovery and assumption of ultimate dominion, Native Americans had
only a right to occupancy of native lands, not the right of title. This
decision was upheld in the 1831 case "Cherokee Nation v. Georgia", giving
Georgia authority to extend state laws over Cherokees within the state, and
famously describing Native American tribes as "domestic dependent nations."
This decision was modified in "Worcester v. Georgia", which stated that the
U.S. federal government, and not individual states, had authority in Indian
affairs, but it maintained the loss of right to title upon discovery by
Europeans. Native American groups including the Taíno and Onondaga have called
on the Vatican to revoke the bulls of 1452, 1453, and 1493. Marriage. According
to the Catholic Encyclopedia, the church views Marriage as forbidden and null
when conducted between the faithful (Christians) and infidels, unless a
dispensation has been granted. This is because marriage is a sacrament of the
Catholic Church, which infidels are deemed incapable of receiving. As a
philosophical tradition. Some philosophers such as Thomas Paine, David Hume,
George Holyoake, Charles Bradlaugh, Voltaire and Rousseau earned the label of
infidel or freethinkers, both personally and for their respective traditions of
thought because of their attacks on religion and opposition to the Church. They
established and participated in a distinctly labeled, infidel movement or
tradition of thought, that sought to reform their societies which were steeped
in Christian thought, practice, laws and culture. The Infidel tradition was
distinct from parallel anti-Christian, sceptic or deist movements, in that it
was anti-theistic and also synonymous with atheism. These traditions also
sought to set up various independent model communities, as well as societies,
whose traditions then gave rise to various other socio-political movements such
as secularism in 1851, as well as developing close philosophical ties to some
contemporary political movements such as socialism and the French Revolution.
Towards the early twentieth century, these movements sought to move away from
the tag "infidel" because of its associate negative connotation in Christian
thought, and is attributed to George Holyoake's coining the term 'secularism'
in an attempt to bridge the gap with other theist and Christian liberal reform
movements. In 1793, Immanuel Kant's "Religion within the Boundaries of Mere
Reason", reflected the Enlightenment periods' philosophical development, one
which differentiated between the moral and rational and substituted rational/
irrational for the original true believer/infidel distinction. Implications
upon medieval civil law. Laws passed by the Catholic Church governed not just
the laws between Christians and Infidels in matters of religious affairs, but
also civil affairs. They were prohibited from participating or aiding in
infidel religious rites, such as circumcisions or wearing images of non-
Christian religious significance. In the Early Middle Ages, based on the idea
of the superiority of Christians to infidels, regulations came into place such
as those forbidding Jews from possessing Christian slaves; the laws of the
decretals further forbade Christians from entering the service of Jews, for
Christian women to act as their nurses or midwives; forbidding Christians from
employing Jewish physicians when ill; restricting Jews to definite quarters of
the towns into which they were admitted and to wear a dress by which they might
be recognized. Later during the Victorian era, testimony of either self
declared, or those accused of being Infidels or Atheists, was not accepted in a
court of law because it was felt that they had no moral imperative to not lie
under oath because they did not believe in God, or Heaven and Hell. These rules
have now given way to modern legislation and Catholics, in civil life, are no
longer governed by ecclesiastical law.
