Institute of the Brothers of the Christian Schools The (also known as the
Christian Brothers, the Lasallian Brothers, the French Christian Brothers, or
the De La Salle Brothers; ; Latin: Fratres Scholarum Christianarum) is a Roman
Catholic religious teaching congregation, founded in France by Saint Jean-
Baptiste de la Salle and now based in Rome. Brothers use the post-nominal
abbreviation FSC. Founder, his Rule and the Mission of the Institute. The
Founder is St. John Baptist de La Salle, a French priest who lived in the 17th
century. He came from a wealthy family. He became involved with in teaching
poor children in parish charity schools, and focused his life on this. He was
canonized as a saint on May 15, 1900. In 1950, Pope Pius XII declared him to be
the Special Patron of All Teachers of Youth in the Catholic Church. He
emphasized the virtue of faith for the brothers: "The spirit of this Institute
is first, a spirit of faith, which should induce those who compose it not to
look upon anything but with the eyes of faith, not to do anything but in view
of God, and to attribute all to God." (Rule 1718). He also said that “To
touch the hearts of your students and to inspire them with the Christian spirit
is the greatest miracle you could perform, and the one that God asks of you,
since this is the purpose of your work.” The Brothers Rule states that the
Mission of the Institute is “to provide a human and Christian education to
the young, especially the poor, according to the ministry entrusted to them by
the church.” Education. The Institute now conducts educational work in 80
different countries, in both developed and developing nations, with more than
800,000 students enrolled in its educational works. Other activities. From 1882
until 1989, a non-profit arm of the Brothers ran a winery in the Napa Valley at
Greystone Cellars near St. Helena, California. Most famous for Christian
Brothers Brandy, the operation and rights to the name were sold to Heublein,
Inc. in 1989. In 1981 the Institute started Christian Brothers Investment
Services, an ethical or socially responsible investment service for Catholic
organisations. The service attempts to use its shareholdings to influence the
way the companies in which it has invested operate. Lasallian schools and
institutions usually incorporate the "Signum Fidei" as a mark of their
heritage.
