Integral theory Integral Theory is a philosophy promoted by Ken Wilber that
seeks a synthesis of the best of pre-modern, modern, and postmodern reality. It
is portrayed as a "theory of everything," and offers an approach "to draw
together an already existing number of separate paradigms into an interrelated
network of approaches that are mutually enriching." It has been applied by
scholar-practitioners in 35 distinct academic and professional domains as
varied as organizational management, art, and feminism. It initially started as
a theoretical transpersonal psychology that attempted to synthesize Western and
non-Western understandings of consciousness with notions of biological, mental,
and divine evolution. Wilber has since distanced himself from transpersonal
psychology and Integral Theory has turned into an emerging field of academic
discourse and research focused on the complex interactions of ontology,
epistemology, and methodology. However, there is ongoing discussion surrounding
its standing in academia. Integral Theory has been applied in a variety of
different domains: Integral Art, Integral Ecology, Integral Economics, Integral
Politics, Integral Psychology, Integral Spirituality, and many others.
Researchers have also developed applications in areas such as leadership,
coaching, and organization development. The first interdisciplinary academic
conference on Integral Theory took place in 2008. SUNY Press currently
publishes the peer-reviewed "Journal of Integral Theory and Practice" and has
also published four books in the "SUNY series in Integral Theory."
Methodologies. , pronounced "ah-qwul," is a widely used framework in Integral
Theory. It is also alternatively called the "Integral Operating System" (IOS)
or by various other synonyms. The term stands for "all quadrants, all levels,
all lines, all states, and all types." It is conceived by some integral
theorists to be one of the most comprehensive approaches to reality, a
metatheory that attempts to explain how academic disciplines and every form of
knowledge and experience fit together coherently. Integral theory. Sri
Aurobindo, Jean Gebser, and Ken Wilber, have all made significant theoretical
contributions to integral theory. In the teachings of Sri Aurobindo, integral
yoga refers to the process of the union of all the parts of one's being with
the Divine, and the transmutation of all of their jarring elements into a
harmonious state of higher divine consciousness and existence. Gebser wrote
that he was unaware of Sri Aurobindo's prior usage of the term 'integral',
which coincides to some extent with his own. Wilber, drawing on both
Aurobindo's and Gebser's theories, as well as on the writings of many other
authors, created a theory which he calls AQAL. AQAL stands for "All Quadrants
All Levels." AQAL Theory – Lines.. Lines are defined as relatively
independent capacities of growth and emergence that unfold in levels or stages.
The relative independence of lines stresses that they can be developed to
various higher or lower degrees. (This explains the different levels of the
lines we see in the psychograph.) Whilst we typically focus on lines of human
development in the UL quadrant, lines are actually present in all quadrants,
serving as areas of growth in tetra-evolution. In the UL quadrant of individual
subjectivity, lines fall into three groupings or categories; cognitive lines,
self-related lines and talent or skill lines. The relative independence of
lines does not preclude some important necessary but not sufficient
relationships. i.e. A certain degree of physiological development is necessary
but not sufficient for cognitive development, and so for cognitive development
> self-development > interpersonal development > moral development. Lines have
levels and levels arise within lines. They are mutually inter-dependant but can
be investigated separately. Lines are present in each quadrant, arising as
distinct developmental domains or capacities. UR examples include;
physiological development, nervous system, endocrine system, behavioural
development, task complexity. LR examples include; techno-economic modes of
production, physical systems, species, modes of transportation, economic
exchange systems, geo-political systems, linguistic structures. LL examples
include; world-view, intimate relationship, development of a ‘we’,
linguistic semantics, cultural values. UL examples include; cognitive, self-
identity, interpersonal, moral, emotional, aesthetic, kinaesthetic, spiritual
and more. Lines in the UL quadrant concern the development of individual
skills, capacities and intelligences. Each line can be understood by simple
questions we confront as we go about our lives. In addition to AQAL, scholars
have proposed other methodologies for integral studies. Bonnitta Roy has
introduced a "Process Model" of integral theory, combining Western process
philosophy, Dzogchen ideas, and Wilberian theory. She distinguishes between
Wilber's concept of "perspective" and the Dzogchen concept of "view", arguing
that Wilber's view is situated within a framework or "structural enfoldment"
which constrains it, in contrast to the Dzogchen intention of being mindful of
view. Wendelin Küpers, Ph.D., a German scholar specializing in
phenomenological research, has proposed that an "integral pheno-practice" based
on aspects of the work of Maurice Merleau-Ponty can provide the basis of an
"adequate phenomenology" useful in integral research. His proposed approach
claims to offer a more inclusive and coherent approach than classical
phenomenology, including procedures and techniques called "epoché",
"bracketing", "reduction", and "free variation." In the context of an integral
approach to climate change, Sean Esbjörn-Hargens has proposed a new approach
called Integral Pluralism, which builds on Wilber's recent work but emphasizes
elements such as Ontological Pluralism that are understated or absent in
Wilber's own writings. Contemporary figures. A variety of intellectuals,
academics, writers, and other specialists have advanced the integral theory in
recent decades. Themes. Integral art. In the context of Integral Theory,
"Integral art" can be defined as art that reaches across multiple quadrants and
levels. It may also refer to art that was created by someone who thinks or acts
in an integral way. Integral ecology. "Integral ecology" is a multi-
disciplinary approach pioneered by Michael E. Zimmerman and Sean Esbjörn-
Hargens. It applies Wilber's integral theory (especially the eight
methodological perspectives) to the field of environmental studies and
ecological research. Integral economics. "Integral economics" is a
‘paradigmatic’ methodology emanating from integral thought and theory as it
translates to economics. This 'new' praxis offers a structural framework for
addressing and resolving problems the Integral Institute has associated in
their Mission with “evolutionary forms of capitalism; and the culture wars in
political, religious, and scientific domains”. These efforts are thus
affording "theorists and developmental psychologists a needed and useful early
look at the formal, dynamic process by which the evolution of higher-order
development proceeds" in relation to an integral model. Integral leadership. As
the term is often used, "Integral leadership" is a style of leadership that
attempts to integrate other major styles of leadership. In "style" terms,
integral leadership is an approach to influence that involves understanding
'where people are' (their mindsets, values, goals, capabilities and situational
dynamics) and then interacting with them in a way that is appropriate and
helpful given 'where they are'. Integral politics. "Integral politics" is an
endeavor to develop a balanced and comprehensive politics around the principles
of integral studies. Theorists including Don Beck, Lawrence Chickering, Jack
Crittenden, David Sprecher, and Ken Wilber have applied concepts such as the
AQAL methodology of Integral Theory to issues in political philosophy and
applications in government. Integral psychology. Integral psychology is
originally based on the Yoga psychology of Sri Aurobindo. In the context of
Integral Theory, it applies Wilber's AQAL and related themes to the field of
psychology. For Wilber, Integral psychology is psychology that is inclusive or
holistic rather than exclusivist or reductive, and values and integrates
multiple explanations and methodologies. Integral city. Integral City is a term
that was coined in 2000 by Marilyn Hamilton as a description of the city as a
living human system at the city scale, using an integral lens. Integration of
integral theories. Emerging from the broader integral movement is a range of
meta-theoretical approaches to integral theorizing. This includes Mark Edward's
notion of "integral metatheory", Jennifer Gidley's "integration of integral
views" and Gary Hampson's "ecology of integrals". Gidley's position is that
integral theory creation to date has been seriously hampered by internal
rivalry, factionalism and, ironically, lack of integration of kindred theories.
She offers a means for perceiving the interrelationships among significant
integrative approaches that have been operating in relative isolation from each
other. Her research points towards the possibility of new liaisons between
approaches that are: inclusive of the vastness of noospheric breadth (macro-
integral); that provide rigorous theoretic means for cohering it (meso-
integral); that attend to the concrete details required for applying the
theories (micro-integral); that encourage the participation of all aspects of
the human being throughout this process (participatory-integral); and that are
able to traverse and converse across these multiple dimensions (transversal-
integral). Reception in mainstream academia. Integral Theory is widely ignored
at mainstream academic institutions. Nevertheless, about 90 M.A. theses or
Ph.D. dissertations have been written between 1987 and 2009 that make use of
Integral Theory, according to the Integral Research Center. In addition, the
"Journal of Integral Theory and Practice" has been vetted and is indexed by
Elsevier (Scopus) and EBSCO (Humanities International Complete database).
Integral research has been published in an array of interdisciplinary or
intradisciplinary journals; however, it has been said by some to have a ways to
go in terms of being brought into dialogue with other disciplines. The capacity
of Integral Theory to synthesize major Western and non-Western psychologies,
the perennial philosophy, and religious ideas into a cross-cultural map of
consciousness has been applauded, sometimes with arguably hyperbolic
enthusiasm. Huston Smith, a professor of Philosophy and Religion at Syracuse
University and author of "The World's Religions", has said that Wilber's
integral theory brings Asian and Western psychology together more
systematically and comprehensively than other approaches. Michael E. Zimmerman,
writing in "The Encyclopedia of Religion and Nature", says that Wilber's views
are sometimes sharply contested, but he is widely admired for his efforts in
forming a "constructive postmodernism" able to "reenchant" the world without
inviting regression. Forman and Esbjörn-Hargens, two of the leading proponents
of Integral Theory, maintain that the integral paradigm has made limited
inroads in academic research because many of Wilber's influential writings have
been situated between conventional academic discourse and popular philosophy.
However, the independent scholar Frank Visser says that there is a problematic
relation between Wilber and academia for several reasons, including a "self-
referential discourse" wherein Wilber tends to describe his work as being at
the forefront of science. Visser has compiled a bibliography of online
criticism of Wilber's Integral Theory and produced an overview of their
objections. Another Wilber critic, the independent scholar Andrew P. Smith,
observes that most of Wilber's work has not been published by university
presses, a fact that discourages some academics from taking his ideas
seriously. Wilber's failure to respond to critics of Integral Theory is also
said to contribute to the field's chilly reception in some quarters. Forman and
Esbjörn-Hargens have countered criticisms regarding the academic standing of
integral studies in part by claiming that the divide between Integral Theory
and academia is exaggerated by critics who themselves lack academic credentials
or standing. They also said that participants at the first Integral Theory
Conference in 2008 had largely mainstream academic credentials and pointed to
existing programs in alternative universities like John F. Kennedy University
or Fielding Graduate University as an indication of the field's emergence.
Jennifer Gidley, Research Fellow at RMIT University Melbourne, states that
there is a need in the 21st century to create conceptual bridges between
Integral Theory, philosophy and pedagogy and other related philosophical,
theoretical, and pedagogical approaches. She undertook a comparative study of
key evolution of consciousness thinkers, focusing particularly on the integral
theoretic narratives of Rudolf Steiner, Jean Gebser, and Ken Wilber (but also
with due reference to the seminal writings of Sri Aurobindo and those of
contemporary European integral theorists such as Ervin Laszlo and Edgar Morin).
She noted the conceptual breadth of Wilber's integral evolutionary narrative in
transcending both scientism and epistemological isolationism. She also drew
attention to some limitations of Wilber’s integral project, notably his
undervaluing of Gebser's actual text, and the substantial omission of the
pioneering contribution of Steiner, who, as early as 1904 wrote extensively
about the evolution of consciousness, including the imminent emergence of a new
stage. As a contribution to the knowledge base of integral education, Gidley
has also undertaken a hermeneutic comparative analysis of Rudolf Steiner's
educational approach and Wilber's Integral Operating System. External links.
"Academic programs" "Conferences" "Organizations" "Publications"
