Full communion In Christian ecclesiology, full communion is a relationship
between church organizations or groups that mutually recognize their sharing
the essential doctrines. For the Catholic Church and the Eastern Orthodox
Church, full communion exists only between Christians who form a single church.
Protestants understand full communion as instead a matter of practical
relations among denominations that nonetheless fully retain their distinct
identities. Catholic Church. The Catholic Church makes a distinction between
full and partial communion. Where full communion exists, there is but one
Church. Partial communion, on the other hand, exists where some elements of
Christian faith are held in common, but complete unity on essentials is
lacking. For instance, the Roman Catholic Church sees itself as in partial
communion with Protestants, and as in much closer, but still incomplete,
communion with the Orthodox Churches. Full communion involves completeness of
"those bonds of communion – faith, sacraments and pastoral governance –
that permit the Faithful to receive the life of grace within the Church."[http:
//clsa.org/content/files/USCCB_memo_2006_0405.pdf] The particular Churches that
form the Catholic Church are each seen, not as a separate body that has entered
into practical arrangements concerning its relations with the others, but as
the embodiment in a particular region or culture of the one Catholic Church.
This applies both to the local particular Churches, such as dioceses or
eparchies, in the Catholic Church and to the "sui iuris" (autonomous) Churches
within it. The Catholic Church sees itself as in partial, not full communion,
with other Christian groups. "With the Orthodox Churches, this communion is so
profound that it lacks little to attain the fullness that would permit a common
celebration of the Lord's Eucharist" "Catechism of the Catholic Church" (838).
In fact, full communion is seen as an essential condition for sharing together
in the Eucharist, apart from exceptional circumstances, in line with the
second-century practice witnessed to by Saint Justin Martyr, who, in his "First
Apology" [http://www.ccel.org/fathers/ANF-01/just/
justinapology1.html#Section66], wrote: "No one is allowed to partake (of the
Eucharist) but the man who believes that the things which we teach are true,
and who has been washed with the washing that is for the remission of sins, and
unto regeneration, and who is so living as Christ has enjoined." Accordingly,
"Catholic priests are forbidden to concelebrate the Eucharist with priests or
ministers of Churches or ecclesial communities which do not have full communion
with the Catholic Church." The Directory for the Application of Principles and
Norms on Ecumenism, 122–136 indicates the circumstances in which some sharing
in sacramental life, especially the Eucharist, is permitted with other
Christians. The norms there indicated for the giving of the Eucharist to other
Christians are summarized in The "Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches"
indicates that the norms of the Directory apply also to the clergy and laity of
the Eastern Catholic Churches. Eastern Orthodox and Oriental Orthodox churches.
Eastern Orthodox and Oriental Orthodox Christians have an understanding of what
full communion means that is very similar to that of the Catholic Church.
Though they have no figure corresponding to that of the Roman Catholic Pope,
performing a function like that of the Pope's Petrine Office, they see each of
their autocephalous Churches as embodiments of, respectively, the one Eastern
Orthodox Church or the one Oriental Orthodox Church. They too consider full
communion an essential condition for common sharing in the Eucharist. The
Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople, as first among equals among the Eastern
Orthodox autocephalous churches and their spiritual leader, though not having
authority similar to that of the Roman Catholic Pope, serves as their
spokesman. The Pope of the Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria holds a
somewhat similar position in Oriental Orthodoxy. For the autocephalous Churches
that form the Eastern Orthodox Church, see Eastern Orthodox Church
organization. Their number is somewhat in dispute. The Churches of Oriental
Orthodoxy are: the Coptic, Armenian Apostolic, Eritrean Orthodox, Jacobite,
Indian Orthodox and Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Churches. Other churches. Other
churches see full communion between them as meaning that their members may
licitly participate in each others' rites, particularly in the partaking of the
Eucharist in closed communion denominations, and involving also recognition of
each other's offices of ministry as valid and thus, in most cases,
interchangeability of ordained ministers. Importantly, the existence of full
communion, as thus understood, does not presume that there is no difference in
rites or in doctrine between the two Churches, but rather that these
differences do not touch on points defined as essential. The word
"intercommunion" is sometimes used of this arrangement, which is much less
close than the unity between Churches that share a common history, such as the
Anglican Communion. This understanding of "full communion" differs from that of
the Roman Catholic Church and Eastern Christianity in that the churches that
enter into such arrangements do not consider themselves as forming together a
single church. It is in the stronger sense of becoming a single church that the
Traditional Anglican Communion sought "full communion" with the Roman Catholic
Church as a "sui iuris" (particular Church) jurisdiction. Its membership is now
deciding whether to accept the offer of full communion (again in the stronger
sense) within the framework of personal ordinariates of the Latin Rite of the
Roman Catholic Church.
