Involution (esoterism) The term involution refers to different things depending
on the writer. In some instances it refers to a process that occurs prior to
evolution and gives rise to the cosmos, in others an aspect of evolution, and
still others a process that follows the completion of evolution in the human
form. Involution according to Esoteric cosmology. That period of time devoted
to the attainment of self-consciousness and the building of the vehicles
through which the spirit in man manifests, is called "involution". Its purpose
is to slowly carry life lower and deeper into denser and denser matter for the
building of forms, till the nadir of materiality is reached. From that point,
life begins to ascend into higher Worlds. This succeeding period of existence,
during which the individual human being develops "self-consciousness" into
"divine omniscience", is called "spiritual evolution." In the cosmology of
Surat Shabda Yoga, involution and evolution apply to both the macrocosm, the
whole of creation, and the microcosm, the constitution of an individual soul.
"The Rosicrucian Cosmo-Conception", a Rosicrucian text written by Max Heindel,
advances the concept of epigenesis as the "key" related to the evolution (after
an "involutionary" period) of human beings. Involution according to Sri
Aurobindo. Introduction. For Sri Aurobindo, involution is the process by which
the Omnipresent Reality, i.e. the Absolute, Brahman extends Itself to create a
universe of separate forms from out of Its own Force/Energy. "Sat", "Chit-
Tapas", and Delight/"Ananda" are the three aspects of "Satchitananda", and are
mentioned in terms of Involution . Spirit or consciousness manifests as these
three, and then as the intermediate link of Supermind, which is transitional
between the higher and lower (matter, life, and mind) nature. The reason for
involution is Delight - the Delight of Being (the Spirit or Absolute) moving to
Delight of Becoming (temporal existence, the cosmos). Being throws itself
forward into a multiplicity of forms, becoming lost in the inconscience of
matter, and then through evolution it partakes in the Delight of rediscovering
the Spirit which had been hidden in the interim. Evolution is thus the movement
forward by which the created universe evolves from its initial state of
inconscience (i.e. as matter), evolves animated life forms and mental beings
(i.e. humans), and continues to evolve spiritual properties, and in that
process rediscovers its Source. Such an Evolution of animated forms is only
possible because at each stage of development, the developing entity contains
within itself the conception of what it may become. Thus, the evolution of
animated life out of matter supposes a previous involution of that animated
capacity. This is akin to a seed that already has the essence of the tree that
will emerge from it. Each plane emerges from an earlier plane through the
evolutionary process, which takes place in chronological time. But in a
parallel construction, each of these new planes can be understood as being a
descendent of its corresponding higher order plane from the Infinite. Thus,
when mentality emerged in the universe, the universal plane of Mind was
implanted to a degree in those beings harboring that mentality. The evolution
is the development of all entities in the cosmos, including humans, in order to
attain their fulfillment, including the discovery of spiritual Delight, which
was, and always is, the experience of the Source Creator. The evolution is the
progressive development from the original inconscience of matter into life
(movement, sensation, desire, etc. and living physical beings), and from thence
to mind (in conscious animals and most especially humans - the self-conscious
thinking animal), and from thence to spiritualized mind, culminating in the The
Supermind or Truth Consciousness (as supramental individuals, and finally the
supramental, i.e. a divine life on earth.) Sat. We cannot speak of Sat without
Chit Ananda or Being, Consciousness and Bliss. They represent a totality. Sat
is the vital state of that which is was and always will be. In a sense it is a
beginnining but because it is pregnant with possibility it is inexorably tied
to Ananda or the recognition of Being and then the subsequent realization of
bliss which is divine inner knowing. Each flows out of the other and then back
again. It could be said that Sat only exists through Ananda or Consciousness
however, these levels of differentiation cannot grasp the true nature of either
of these three qualities since they are interdependent. "Chit-tapas". "Chit-
Tapas" or Consciousness-Force, in Sri Aurobindo's philosophy refers to the pure
energy of Consciousness by which creation ultimately comes about; the infinite
divine self-awareness which is also the infinite all-effective Will. It is also
one of the seven planes of existence, according to the Vedic cosmology and the
seven lokas of Hindu thought. In chapter 10 of "The Life Divine", Sri Aurobindo
writes at length on the nature of Consciousness-Force as a principle of the
Divine. As he understands it (following the Tantric dichotomy of Shiva and
Shakti), "Chit" or Consciousness is not an inert and passive principle; but
contains the potential spiritual Energy, "Tapas", which in Creation becomes the
dynamic and creative principle or Force, called "Shakti". "Chit-Tapas" or
"Chit-Shakti" is therefore the universal Consciousness-Force, the divine
Energy; the Mother. Delight. Delight is Sri Aurobindo's term for ananda, and
plays a large part in his cosmology and spiritual teaching. Delight is the
reason for creation, by which The Absolute extends its Delight of Being into
multiplicity, losing itself in the inconscience and then through Delight
rediscovering Itself through individuals realising their Divine nature and
proceeding to spiritual realisation. In other words, the universe was created
so that the Delight of the Infinite Spirit can manifest in all the forms of
creation. When we discover our higher nature, the soul and spirit, we
experience the delight for which we were came into being and of which we are a
part. In chapters 11 and 12 of "The Life Divine", Sri Aurobindo writes at
length on the nature of Delight as a principle of the Divine, and its role in
creation. Meher Baba. Meher Baba uses "involution" in the opposite meaning;
rather than the descent of Spirit into matter, he refers to it as meaning the
inner path of the human soul to the transcendent Self. Other Indian
interpretations. For Baba Hari Dass, Evolution is the "Cause" of Involution,
and vice versa. (Baba Hari Dass is a Maunisadhu monk who practices continual
silence.) Integral thought. In integral thought, involution is the process by
which the Divine manifests the cosmos. The process by which the creation rises
to higher states and states of consciousness is the evolution. Involution
prepares the universe for the Big Bang; evolution continues from that point
forward. The term "involution" comes from the idea that the divine "involves"
itself in creation. After the creation, the Divine (i.e. the Absolute, Brahman,
God) is both the One (the Creator) and the Many (that which was created). The
integral philosopher Ken Wilber refers to involution in his online chapter of
"Kosmic Karma", employing concepts from Plotinus, Advaita Vedanta, Tibetan
Buddhism, and Sri Aurobindo. According to Wilber, the cosmic evolution
described in his previous works is preceded by an involution of Spirit into
Matter. This involution follows the reverse stages to the sequence of evolution
- e.g. Spirit to soul to mind to life to matter. Once the stage of insentient,
lifeless matter is attained, then "something like the Big Bang occurs",
whereupon matter and manifest world come into concrete existence, from which
stage evolution follows.
