Irresistible grace Irresistible Grace (or efficacious grace) is a doctrine in
Christian theology particularly associated with Calvinism, which teaches that
the saving grace of God is effectually applied to those whom he has determined
to save (the elect) and, in God's timing, overcomes their resistance to obeying
the call of the gospel, bringing them to faith in Christ. The doctrine.
According to Calvinism, those who obtain salvation do so, not by their own
"free" will, but because of the sovereign grace of God. That is, men yield to
grace, not finally because their consciences were more tender or their faith
more tenacious than that of other men. Rather, the willingness and ability to
do God's will, are evidence of God's own faithfulness to save men from the
power and the penalty of sin, and since man is so corrupt that he will not
decide and cannot be wooed to follow after God, God must powerfully intervene.
In short, Calvinism argues that regeneration must precede faith. Calvin says of
this intervention that "it is not violent, so as to compel men by external
force; but still it is a powerful impulse of the Holy Spirit, which makes men
willing who formerly were unwilling and reluctant," and John Gill says that
"this act of drawing is an act of power, yet not of force; God in drawing of
unwilling, makes willing in the day of His power: He enlightens the
understanding, bends the will, gives an heart of flesh, sweetly allures by the
power of His grace, and engages the soul to come to Christ, and give up itself
to Him; he draws with the bands of love. Drawing, though it supposes power and
influence, yet not always coaction and force: music draws the ear, love the
heart, and pleasure the mind." Jonathan Edwards has sometimes been
quoted—notably by R. C. Sproul—as referring to the irresistible call of God
as the "holy rape of the soul," but the phrase does not appear in Edwards'
"Works". Instead, the phrase seems to have been coined by Puritan scholar Perry
Miller, and many Calvinists distance themselves from it. Objections to the
doctrine. Arminian. Christians associated with Arminianism, notably followers
of John Wesley and part of the Methodist movement, reject the Calvinist
doctrine. Instead, they believe that God's prevenient grace is equally provided
to all human beings alike, drawing them toward His love and salvation. In this
view, (1) after God's universal dispensation of grace to mankind, the will of
man, which was formerly adverse to God and unable to obey, can now choose to
obey; and (2) although God's grace is a strong initial move to effect
salvation, it can ultimately be resisted and rejected. Both sides agree that
the resistibility of grace is inexorably bound up with the theological system's
view of humanity's inability to respond to God and of the extent of God's
grace. As Calvinist Charles Hodge says, "The (Arminian) and (Roman Catholic)
doctrine is true, if the other parts of their doctrinal system are true; and it
is false if that system be erroneous. If the (Calvinistic) doctrine concerning
the natural state of man since the fall, and the sovereignty of God in
election, be Scriptural, then it is certain that sufficient grace does not
become efficacious from the cooperation of the human will." Thus the passages
discussing those doctrines are also relevant here. Lutheran. Like Calvinists,
Lutherans view the work of salvation as monergistic in which an unconverted or
unrepentant person always resists and rejects God and his ways. Even during
conversion, the Formula of Concord says, humans resist "the Word and will of
God, until God awakens him from the death of sin, enlightens and renews him."
Furthermore, they both see the preaching of the gospel as a means of grace by
which God offers salvation. Calvinists distinguish between a resistible,
outward call to salvation given to all who hear the free offer of the gospel,
and an efficacious, inward work by the Holy Spirit. Every person is unwilling
to follow the outward call to salvation until, as the Westminster Confession
puts it, "being quickened and renewed by the Holy Spirit, he is thereby enabled
to answer this call, and to embrace the grace offered and conveyed by it." Once
inwardly renewed, every person freely follows God and his ways as "not only the
obligatory but the preferable good," and hence that special renewing grace is
always effective. Contrary to the Calvinist position, Lutherans hold that
whenever the Holy Spirit works outwardly through the Word and sacraments, he
always acts inwardly through them as well. Unlike Calvinists, Lutherans believe
the Holy Spirit always works efficaciously. The Word heard by those that resist
it is just as efficacious as the Word preached to those that convert. The
Formula of Concord teaches that when humans reject the calling of the Holy
Spirit, it is not a result of the Word being less efficacious. Instead,
contempt for the means of grace is the result of "the perverse will of man,
which rejects or perverts the means and instrument of the Holy Ghost, which God
offers him through the call, and resists the Holy Ghost, who wishes to be
efficacious, and works through the Word..." Lutherans are certain that the work
of the Holy Spirit does not occur merely alongside the means of grace to
regenerate, but instead is an integral part of them, always working through
them wherever they are found. Lutherans teach that the Holy Spirit limits
himself to working only through the means of grace and nowhere else. so that
those who reject the means of grace are simultaneously resisting and rejecting
the Holy Spirit and the grace he brings. Biblical passages related to the
doctrine. Proponents of Arminianism argue that the word "draw" (Greek: ,
"helkô") as used in John 6:44 does not require the sense of "drag", though
they admit this is the word's usual meaning (as in Jn. 18:10; 21:6; 21:11; Acts
16:19; 21:30; Jas. 2:6). They point to John 12:32 as an example: "And I, when I
am lifted up from the earth, will draw all people to myself." Arminians
interpret this to mean that Jesus draws all people to Himself but some are able
resist this drawing since, if the call is truly irresistible, then all must
come to Christ and be saved. They may also note that in the Septuagint version
of Jeremiah 38:13, when Jeremiah is lifted out of the pit where he was left to
die, this Greek verb is used for the action which his rescuers performed after
he voluntarily secured the ropes under his armpits, and that this rescue was
certainly performed in cooperation with Jeremiah's wishes. Therefore, they may
argue, even if the semantics of "draw" are understood in the usual sense, this
should only be taken to indicate the source of the power, not the question of
whether the person being drawn independently desires the drawing, or to
indicate that the drawing is done irrespective of their wishes. Calvinists
argue that (1) the word "draw" should be understood according to its usual
semantics in both John 6:44 and 12:32; (2) the word "all" (translated "all
people" in v. 12:32) should be taken in the sense of "all kinds of people"
rather than "every individual"; and thus (3) the former verse refers to an
irresistible internal call to salvation and the latter to the opening of the
Kingdom of God to the Gentiles, not a universal, resistible internal call. Some
have asserted on this basis that the text of John 6:44 can entail either
universalism or Calvinism, but not Arminianism. Arminian William Barclay argues
that "man's resistance can defeat the pull of God" mentioned in John 6:44, but
commentator Leon Morris contends that "(n)ot one of (Barclay's) examples of the
verb ('draw') shows the resistance as successful. Indeed we can go further.
There is not one example in the New Testament of the use of this verb where the
resistance is successful. Always the drawing power is triumphant, as here."
Saul’s Conversion 9 Meanwhile, Saul was still breathing out murderous threats
against the Lord’s disciples. He went to the high priest 2 and asked him for
letters to the synagogues in Damascus, so that if he found any there who
belonged to the Way, whether men or women, he might take them as prisoners to
Jerusalem. 3 As he neared Damascus on his journey, suddenly a light from heaven
flashed around him. 4 He fell to the ground and heard a voice say to him,
“Saul, Saul, why do you persecute me?” 5 “Who are you, Lord?” Saul
asked. “I am Jesus, whom you are persecuting,” he replied. 6 “Now get up
and go into the city, and you will be told what you must do.” 7 The men
traveling with Saul stood there speechless; they heard the sound but did not
see anyone. 8 Saul got up from the ground, but when he opened his eyes he could
see nothing. So they led him by the hand into Damascus. 9 For three days he was
blind, and did not eat or drink anything. 10 In Damascus there was a disciple
named Ananias. The Lord called to him in a vision, “Ananias!” “Yes,
Lord,” he answered. 11 The Lord told him, “Go to the house of Judas on
Straight Street and ask for a man from Tarsus named Saul, for he is praying. 12
In a vision he has seen a man named Ananias come and place his hands on him to
restore his sight.” 13 “Lord,” Ananias answered, “I have heard many
reports about this man and all the harm he has done to your holy people in
Jerusalem. 14 And he has come here with authority from the chief priests to
arrest all who call on your name.” 15 But the Lord said to Ananias, “Go!
This man is my chosen instrument to proclaim my name to the Gentiles and their
kings and to the people of Israel. 16 I will show him how much he must suffer
for my name.” 17 Then Ananias went to the house and entered it. Placing his
hands on Saul, he said, “Brother Saul, the Lord—Jesus, who appeared to you
on the road as you were coming here—has sent me so that you may see again and
be filled with the Holy Spirit.” 18 Immediately, something like scales fell
from Saul’s eyes, and he could see again. He got up and was baptized, 19 and
after taking some food, he regained his strength. History of the doctrine. In
the Catholic Church, debates concerning the respective role of efficacious
grace and free will led to the establishment of the Congregatio de Auxiliis at
the end of the 16th century by the Pope Clement VIII. The Dominicans insisted
on the role of the efficacious grace, but the Jesuits embraced Molinism, which
postulated greater liberty in the will. These debates also led to the famous
formulary controversy in France which pitted the Jansenists against the
Jesuits. The doctrine is one of the so-called Five points of Calvinism that
were defined at the Synod of Dort during the Quinquarticular Controversy with
the Arminian Remonstrants, who objected to the general predestinarian scheme of
Calvinism. In Calvinist churches, the doctrine is most often mentioned in
comparisons with other salvific schemes and their respective doctrines about
the state of mankind after the Fall, and it is not a common topic for sermons
or studies otherwise.
