Isaiah Isaiah ( or ; Jews and Christians consider the Book of Isaiah a part of
their Biblical canon; he is the first listed (although not the earliest) of the
"neviim akharonim", the latter prophets. Biography. The first verse of the Book
of Isaiah states that he prophesied during the reigns of Uzziah (or Azariah),
Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, the kings of Judah (). Uzziah reigned fifty-two
years in the middle of the 8th century BC, and Isaiah must have begun his
ministry a few years before Uzziah's death, probably in the 740s BC. Isaiah
lived until the fourteenth year of Hezekiah (who died 698 BC), and may have
been contemporary for some years with Manasseh. Thus Isaiah may have prophesied
for as long as sixty-four years. Isaiah's wife was called "the prophetess" (),
either because she was endowed with the prophetic gift, like Deborah () and
Huldah (), or simply because she was the wife of "the prophet" (). The second
interpretation, that it was simply an honorary title, "Mrs. Prophet" as it
were, is likely. They had two sons, naming one Shear-Jashub, meaning "A remnant
shall return" and the younger, Maher-Shalal-Hash-Baz, meaning, "Spoil quickly,
plunder speedily." In early youth, Isaiah may have been moved by the invasion
of Israel by the Assyrian monarch Tiglath-Pileser III (); and again, twenty
years later, when he had already entered his office, by the invasion of
Tiglath-Pileser and his career of conquest. Ahaz, king of Judah, at this crisis
refused to co-operate with the kings of Israel and Syria in opposition to the
Assyrians, and was on that account attacked and defeated by Rezin of Damascus
and Pekah of Israel (; ). Ahaz, thus humbled, sided with Assyria, and sought
the aid of Tiglath-Pileser against Israel and Syria. The consequence was that
Rezin and Pekah were conquered and many of the people carried captive to
Assyria (, ; ). Soon after this Shalmaneser V determined wholly to subdue the
kingdom of Israel, Samaria was taken and destroyed (722 BC). So long as Ahaz
reigned, the kingdom of Judah was unmolested by the Assyrian power; but on his
accession to the throne, Hezekiah, who was encouraged to rebel "against the
king of Assyria" (), entered into an alliance with the king of Egypt (). This
led the king of Assyria to threaten the king of Judah, and at length to invade
the land. Sennacherib (701 BC) led a powerful army into Judah. Hezekiah was
reduced to despair, and submitted to the Assyrians (). But after a brief
interval war broke out again, and again Sennacherib led an army into Judah, one
detachment of which threatened Jerusalem (; ). Isaiah on that occasion
encouraged Hezekiah to resist the Assyrians (), whereupon Sennacherib sent a
threatening letter to Hezekiah, which he "spread before the LORD" (). According
to the account in Kings (and its derivative account in Chronicles) the judgment
of God now fell on the Assyrian army and wiped out 180,000 of its men. "Like
Xerxes in Greece, Sennacherib never recovered from the shock of the disaster in
Judah. He made no more expeditions against either southern Palestine or Egypt."
The remaining years of Hezekiah's reign were peaceful (). Isaiah probably lived
to its close, and possibly into the reign of Manasseh, but the time and manner
of his death are not specified in either the Bible or recorded history. There
is a tradition (reported in both the Martyrdom of Isaiah and the Lives of the
Prophets) that he suffered martyrdom by Manasseh due to pagan reaction. In
Christianity. Gregory of Nyssa (c. 335–395), believed that the Prophet Esaias
(Isaiah) "knew more perfectly than all others the mystery of the religion of
the Gospel." Jerome (c. 342–420) also lauds the Prophet Esias, saying, "He
was more of an Evangelist than a Prophet, because he described all of the
Mysteries of the Church of Christ so vividly that you would assume he was not
prophesying about the future, but rather was composing a history of past
events." In Islam. Although Isaiah is not mentioned by name in the Qur'an or in
the authenticated sayings of Prophet Muhammed, Muslim sources have accepted him
as a prophet. Some Muslim scholars, such as Ibn Kathir and Kisa'i, reproduced
Jewish traditions, transmitted through early Jewish converts to Islam,
regarding Isaiah. Such Old Testament stories, which are not confirmed by the
Quran or prophetic hadeeth, are referred to as Isra'iliyyah, and are not
considered strong enough to be used as evidence in Islamic law. Isaiah is
mentioned as a prophet in Ibn kathir's "Stories of the Prophets" and the modern
writers Muhammad Asad and Abdullah Yusuf Ali accepted Isaiah as a true Hebrew
prophet, who preached to the Israelites following the death of King David.
Isaiah is well known in Muslim exegesis and literature, notably for his
predictions of the coming of Jesus and Muhammad. Isaiah's narrative in Muslim
literature can roughly be divided into three sections. The first part
establishes Isaiah as a prophet of Israel during the reign of Hezekiah; the
second part focuses on Isaiah's actions during the siege of Jerusalem by
Sennacherib; and the third part is primarily focused upon Isaiah warning the
people of coming doom. Muslim exegesis preserves a tradition, which parallels
that of the Hebrew Bible, which states that Hezekiah was the king that ruled
over Jerusalem during Isaiah's time. Hezekiah obeyed and gave an ear to what
Isaiah advised him but, nonetheless, this was a turbulent time for Israel.
Tradition, however, maintains that Hezekiah was a righteous man and that the
turbulence increased after Hezekiah's death. After the death of the king,
Isaiah told the people to not forsake God and he warned Israel that the people
must cease from their persistent sin and acts of disobedience. Muslim tradition
maintains that the unrighteous people of Israel were angered and sought to kill
Isaiah. In a death which resembles that attributed to Isaiah in "Lives of the
Prophets", Muslim exegesis recounts that Isaiah was martyred by Israelites by
being sawed in half. Rabbinic literature. According to the Rabbinic literature,
Isaiah was a descendant of the royal house of Judah and Tamar (Sotah 10b). He
was the son of Amoz ("not to be confused with Prophet Amos"), who was the
brother of King Amaziah of Juda. (Talmud tractate Megillah 15a).
