Ishmael Ishmael ( ISO 259-3 "Yišmaˁel"; "Ismaēl"; ; "") is a figure in the
Hebrew Bible and the Qur'an, and was Abraham's first son according to Jews,
Christians and Muslims. Ishmael was born of Abraham's marriage to Sarah's
handmaiden Hagar (). According to the Genesis account, he died at the age of
137 (). Etymology. Cognates of Hebrew "Yishma'el" existed in various ancient
Semitic cultures, including early Babylonian and Minæan. It is translated
literally as "God has hearkened", suggesting that "a child so named was
regarded as the fulfillment of a divine promise". Genesis narrative. "This is
the account of Ishmael from " Birth. In , the birth of Ishmael was planned by
the Patriarch Abraham's first wife, who at that time was known as Sarai. She
and her husband Abram (Abraham), sought a way to have children in order to
fulfill the Abrahamic covenant that was established in . Since Sarai had yet to
bear Abram a child, her idea was to offer her Egyptian handmaiden Hagar to
Abram, so that they could have a child by her. Abram consented to a marital
arrangement taking Hagar as his second wife when he was in his late 85th year
of age. Customs of that time dictated that, although Hagar was the birth
mother, any child conceived would belong to Sarai and Abram (Sarah and
Abraham). Inheritance rights and the first circumcision. When he was 13 years
old, Ishmael was circumcised at the same time as all other males in Abraham's
house becoming a part of the covenant in a mass circumcision. This occurred
because his father Abram was inaugurated as Abraham at the age of 99 and then
initiated into the covenant by having himself and the males of his entire
household circumcised. () At the time of the covenant, God informed Abraham
that his wife Sarah would give birth to a son, which he was instructed to name
Isaac. God told Abraham that He would establish his covenant through Isaac, and
when Abraham inquired as to Ishmael's role, God answers that Ishmael has been
blessed and that He “will make him fruitful, and will multiply him
exceedingly; twelve princes shall he beget, and I will make him a great
nation.” () A year later, Ishmael's half-brother Isaac was born by Abraham to
his first wife Sarah. On the day of feasting during which Abraham celebrated
the weaning of Isaac, Ishmael was “mocking” or "playing with" Isaac (the
Hebrew word is ambiguous) and Sarah asked Abraham to expel Ishmael and his
mother, saying: "Get rid of that slave woman and her son, for that slave
woman's son will never share in the inheritance with my son Isaac." This
proposition was grievous in Abraham's sight because of his son and the
bondwoman, Hagar. Abraham only agreed when God told him that "for in Isaac your
seed shall be called", and that He would "make a nation of the son of the
bondwoman" Ishmael, since he was a descendant of Abraham. () At the age of 14,
Ishmael was freed along with his mother. The Lord’s covenant made clear
Ishmael was not to inherit Abraham’s house and that Isaac would be the seed
of the covenant. Abraham gave him and his mother a supply of bread and water
and sent them away. Hagar entered in the wilderness of Beer-sheba where the two
soon ran out of water and Hagar, not wanting to witness the death of her son,
set the boy some distance away from herself, and wept. "And God heard the voice
of the lad" and sent his angel to tell Hagar, "Arise, lift up the lad, and hold
him in thine hand; for I will make him a great nation." And God "opened her
eyes, and she saw a well of water", from which she drew to save Ishmael's life
and her own. "And God was with the lad; and he grew, and dwelt in the
wilderness, and became an archer." () Descendants. Ishmael also had one known
daughter, Mahalath or Basemath, the third wife of Esau. Ishmael also appeared
with Isaac at the burial of Abraham. Ishmael died at the age of 137.
Deuterocanonical references. The book of Jubilees places the location and
identity of the Ishmaelites as the Arab peoples residing in Arab territories.
This is the current view for the majority of the Christian, Islamic and Jewish
faiths. According to Biblical accounts the Arab people traditionally have had
long-standing alliances with the descendants of the Assyrians and the Medes.
World views. Historians and academics in the fields of linguistics and source
criticism believe that the stories of Ishmael belong to the three strata of J,
or Yahwist source, the P, or Priestly source, and the E, or Elohist source (See
Documentary hypothesis). For example, The narration in is of J type and the
narration in is of E type. Islamic traditions consider Ishmael to be the
ancestor of Arab people, excluding Arabs who are descendants of Ya'rub. Arabs
who are from Ishmael-descendant tribes are occasionally referred to as
"Arabized-Arabs" to highlight their ancestry. The Prophet Muhammad was of these
Arabs. Jewish traditions are split between those, like Josephus, who consider
Ishmael the ancestor of the Arabs, and those, like Maimonides, who believe that
the northern Arabs are descended from the sons of Keturah, whom Abraham married
after Sarah's death. Judaism. Judaism has generally viewed Ishmael as wicked
though repentant (whereas Christianity omits any reference to repentance, which
is sourced in the Talmudic explanation of the Hebrew Bible ). Judaism maintains
that Isaac rather than Ishmael was the true heir of Abraham. In some Rabbinic
traditions Ishmael is said to have had two wives; one of them named Aisha. This
name corresponds to the Muslim tradition for the name of Muhammad's wife. This
is understood as a metaphoric representation of the Muslim world (first Arabs
and then Turks) with Ishmael. The name of an important 2nd century CE
sage—Ishmael ben Elisha, known as "Rabbi Ishmael" (רבי ישמעאל), one
of the Tannaim—indicates that the Biblical Ishmael enjoyed a positive image
among Jews of the time. Rabbinical commentators in the Midrash Genesis Rabbah
also say that Ishmael's mother Hagar was the Pharaoh's daughter, thereby making
Ishmael the grandson of the Pharaoh. This could be why Genesis 17:20 refers to
Ishmael as the father of 12 mighty princes. According to Genesis 21:21, Hagar
married Ishmael to an Egyptian woman, and if Rabbinical commentators are
correct about Hagar being the daughter of the Pharaoh, his marriage to a woman
selected by the Pharaoh's daughter could explain how and why his sons became
princes. However, according to other Jewish commentators, Ishmael's mother
Hagar is identified with Keturah, the woman Abraham married after the death of
Sarah, stating that Abraham sought her out after Sarah's death. It is suggested
that Keturah was Hagar's personal name, and that "Hagar" was a descriptive
label meaning "stranger". This interpretation is discussed in the Midrash and
is supported by Rashi, Gur Aryeh, Keli Yakar, and Obadiah of Bertinoro. Rashi
(Rabbi Shlomo Itzhaki) argues that "Keturah" was a name given to Hagar because
her deeds were as beautiful as incense (hence: "ketores"), and/or that she
remained chaste from the time she was separated from Abraham—"keturah"
[ קְטוּרָה "Q'turah" ] derives from the Aramaic word for "restrained".
It is also said that Sarah was motivated by Ishmael's sexually frivolous ways
because of the reference to his "making merry" (Gen. 21:9), a translation of
the Hebrew word "Mitzachek". This was developed into a reference to idolatry,
sexual immorality or even murder; some rabbinic sources claim that Sarah
worried that Ishmael would negatively influence Isaac, or that he would demand
Isaac's inheritance on the grounds of being the firstborn. Regarding the word
"Mitzachek" (again in Gen. 21:9) The Jewish Study Bible by Oxford University
Press says this word in this particular context is associated with; "Playing is
another pun on Isaac's name (cf. 17.17; 18.12; 19.14; 26.8). Ishmael was
'Isaacing', or 'taking Isaac's place'." Also others take a more positive view,
emphasizing Hagar's piety, noting that she was "the one who had sat by the well
and besought him who is the life of the worlds, saying 'look upon my misery'".
Islam. Ishmael is recognized as an important prophet and patriarch of Islam.
Muslims believe that Ishmael was the firstborn of Abraham, born to him from his
second wife Hagar. Ishmael is recognized by Muslims as the ancestor of several
prominent Arab tribes and being the forefather of Muhammad. Muslims also
believe that Muhammad was the descendant of Ishmael that would establish a
great nation, as promised by God in the Old Testament. Ishmael in the Qur'an.
Ishmael is mentioned over ten times in the Qur'an, often alongside other
patriarchs and prophets of ancient times. In XIX: 54, the Qur'an says: "And
make mention in the Scripture of Ishmael. He was a keeper of his promise, and
he was a messenger, a prophet. He enjoined upon his people worship and
almsgiving, and was most acceptable in the sight of his Lord." Later on, in
XXXVIII: 48, Ishmael is mentioned together with Elisha and Dhul-Kifl as one of
"the patiently enduring and righteous, whom God caused to enter into his
mercy." It is also said of Lot, Elisha, Jonah and Ishmael, that God gave each
one "preference above the worlds" (VI: 86). These references to Ishmael are, in
each case, part of a larger context in which other holy prophets are mentioned.
In other chapters of the Qur'an, however, which date from the Medina period,
Ishmael is mentioned closely with his father Abraham: Ishmael stands alongside
Abraham in their attempt to set up the Kaaba in Mecca as a place of
monotheistic pilgrimage (II: 127-129) and Abraham thanks God for granting him
Ishmael and Isaac in his old age (XIV: 35-41). Ishmael is further mentioned
alongside the patriarchs who had been given revelations (II: 136) and Jacob's
sons promise to follow the faith of their forefathers, "Abraham, Ishmael and
Isaac", when testifying their faith (II: 133). In the narrative of the near-
sacrifice of Abraham's son (XXXVII: 100-107), the son is not named and,
although the general interpretation is that it was Ishmael, Tabari maintained
that it was Isaac. Most modern commentators, however, regard the son's
identification as least important in a narrative which is given for its moral
lesson. Ishmael in Muslim literature. The commentaries on the Qur'an and the
numerous collections of "Stories of the Prophets" flesh out the Islamic
perspective of Ishmael and detail his integral part in setting up the Kaaba.
According to Muslim tradition, Ishmael was buried in Al-Hijr, inside the Sacred
Mosque. In Islamic belief, Abraham had prayed to God for a son and God heard
his prayer. Muslim exegesis states that Sarah asked Abraham to marry her
Egyptian handmaiden Hagar because she herself was barren. Hagar soon bore
Ishmael, who was the first son of Abraham. After Sarah gave birth to her own
son, Isaac, tension arose between the two women. According to exegesis, God
told Abraham to listen to Sarah, who said that both Hagar and Ishmael should be
taken out of their household and into the desert. In Islamic tradition, Abraham
took Hagar and Ishmael to the desert himself, where he left them and returned
to his household. In the desert, the young Ishmael cried with thirst. His
mother searched for water, which resulted in her running seven times between
the Safa and Marwah hills, before God helped them by making spring water gush
forth from the Zamzam well, so both mother and son could rejuvenate themselves.
To commemorate the bravery of Hagar and Ishmael, Muslims run between the Safa
and Marwah hills during Hajj. On one of his visits to Mecca, Abraham is said to
have asked his son to help him build the requested Kaaba. Islamic traditions
hold that the Kaaba was first built by Adam and that Abraham and Ishmael
rebuilt the Kaaba on the old foundations. As Ishmael grew up in Arabia, he is
said to have become fluent in Arabic. In the genealogical trees that the early
scholars drew, Ishmael was considered the ancestor of the Northern Arabs and
Muhammad was linked to him through the lineage of the patriarch Adnan.
Christianity. In some Christian biblical interpretations, Ishmael is used to
symbolize the older—now rejected—Judaic tradition; Isaac symbolizes the new
tradition of Christianity. According to the Genesis account, Ishmael and his
mother were cast out of the house of Abraham at the request of Sarah, in order
to make sure that Isaac would be Abraham's . In the book of Galatians (4:
21–31), Paul uses the incident to symbolize the relationship between Judaism,
the older but now rejected tradition, and Christianity. In Galatians 4:28–31,
Hagar is associated with the Sinai covenant, while Sarah is associated with the
covenant of grace into which her son Isaac enters. Bahá'í Faith. The Bahá'í
writings state that it was Ishmael, and not Isaac, who was the son that Abraham
almost sacrificed. However, the Bahá'í writings also state that the name is
unimportant as either could be used: the importance is that both were symbols
of sacrifice. According to Shoghi Effendi, there has also been another Ishmael,
a prophet of Israel, commonly known as Samuel.
