Islamic calendar The Islamic calendar, Muslim calendar or Hijri calendar is a
lunar calendar consisting of 12 months in a year of 354 or 355 days. Being a
purely lunar calendar, it is not synchronized with the seasons. With an annual
drift of 10 or 11 days, the seasonal relation repeats about every 33 Islamic
years. It is used to date events in many Muslim countries (concurrently with
the Gregorian calendar), and used by Muslims everywhere to determine the proper
days on which to observe the annual fast (see Ramadan), to attend Hajj, and to
celebrate other Islamic holidays and festivals. The first year was the Islamic
year beginning in AD 622 during which the emigration of Muhammad from Mecca to
Medina, known as the Hijra, occurred. Each numbered year is designated either H
for "Hijra" or AH for the Latin "anno Hegirae" (in the year of the Hijra),
hence, Muslims typically call their calendar the Hijri calendar. The current
Islamic year is 1433 AH. In the Gregorian calendar 1433 AH runs from
approximately 26 November 2011 (evening) to 14 November 2012 (evening). Days of
the week. In Arabic, as in Hebrew, the "first day" of the week corresponds with
Sunday of the planetary week. The Islamic and Jewish weekdays begin at sunset,
whereas the medieval Christian and planetary weekdays begin at the following
midnight. The Christian liturgical day, however, kept in monasteries, begins
with vespers (see ), which is evening, in line with the other Abrahamic
traditions. Muslims gather for worship at a mosque at noon on "gathering day"
(, means ‘day’) which corresponds with Friday. Thus "gathering day" is
often regarded as the weekly day of rest. This is frequently made official,
with many Muslim countries adopting Friday and Saturday (e.g. Egypt) or
Thursday and Friday (e.g. Saudi Arabia) as official weekends, during which
offices are closed; other countries (e.g. Iran) choose to make Friday alone a
day of rest, and few others (e.g. Morocco) adopted the Western Saturday-Sunday
weekend while making Friday a working day with a long midday break to allow
time off for worship. History. Pre-Islamic calendar. Inscriptions of the
ancient South Arabian calendars reveal the use of a number of local calendars.
At least some of these calendars followed the lunisolar system. For Central
Arabia, especially Mecca, there is a lack of epigraphical evidence but details
are found in the writings of Muslim authors of the Abbasid era. Both al-Biruni
and al-Mas'udi suggest that the Ancient Arabs used the same month names as the
Muslims. The Islamic tradition is unanimous in stating that the Arabs of
Ḥijāz distinguished between two types of months, permitted ("ḥalāl") and
forbidden ("ḥarām") months. The forbidden months were four months during
which fighting is forbidden, listed as Rajab and the three months around the
pilgrimage season, Dhū al-Qiʿda, Dhū al-Ḥijja, and Muḥarram. Information
about the forbidden months is also found in the writings of Procopius, where he
describes an armistice with the Eastern Arabs of the Lakhmid al-Mundhir which
happened in the summer of 541 AD. However, Muslim historians do not link these
months to a particular season. The Qur'an links the four forbidden months with
"Nasīʾ", a word that literally means "postponement". According to Muslim
tradition, the decision of postponement was administered by the tribe of
Kinanah, by a man known as the "al-Qalammas" of Kinanah and his descendants
(pl. "qalāmisa"). Different interpretations of the concept of "Nasīʾ" have
been proposed. Some scholars, both Muslim and Western, maintain that the pre-
Islamic calendar used in Central Arabia was a purely lunar calendar similar to
the modern Islamic calendar. According to this view, "Nasīʾ" is related to
the Pagan practices of the Meccan Arabs, where they would alter the
distribution of the forbidden months within a given year without implying a
calendar manipulation. This interpretation is supported by Arab historians and
lexicographers, like Ibn Hisham, Ibn Manzur, and the corpus of Qur'anic
exegesis. It is also corroborated by an early Sabaic inscription, where a
religious ritual was "postponed" ("ns'ʾw") due to war. According to the
context of this inscription, the verb "ns'ʾ" has nothing to do with
intercalation, but only with moving religious events within the calendar
itself. The similarity between the religious concept of this ancient
inscription and the Qur'an suggests that non-calendering postponement is also
the Qur'anic meaning of "Nasīʾ". Thus the Encyclopaedia of Islam concludes
that the "The Arabic system of [Nasīʾ] can only have been intended to move
the Hajj and the fairs associated with it in the vicinity of Mecca to a
suitable season of the year. It was not intended to establish a fixed calendar
to be generally observed." Others concur that it was originally a lunar
calendar, but suggest that about 200 years before the Hijra it was transformed
into a lunisolar calendar containing an intercalary month added from time to
time to keep the pilgrimage within the season of the year when merchandise was
most abundant. This interpretation was first proposed by the medieval Muslim
astrologer and astronomer Abu Ma'shar al-Balkhi, and later by al-Biruni, al-
Mas'udi, and some Western scholars. This interpretation considers "Nasīʾ" to
be a synonym to the Arabic word for "intercalation" ("kabīsa"). It also
suggests that every second or third year the beginning of the year was
postponed by one month. The intercalation doubled the month of the pilgrimage,
that is, the month of the pilgrimage and the following month were given the
same name, postponing the names and the sanctity of all subsequent months in
the year by one. The first intercalation doubled the first month Muharram, then
three years later the second month Safar was doubled, continuing until the
intercalation had passed through all twelve months of the year and returned to
Muharram, when it was repeated. The Arabs, according to one explanation
mentioned by Abu Ma'shar, learned of this type of intercalation from the Jews.
Prohibiting Nasīʾ. In the tenth year of the Hijra, as documented in the
Qur'an (sura 9:36–37), God revealed the "prohibition of the Nasīʾ". The
prohibition of "Nasīʾ" would presumably have been announced when the
intercalated month had returned to its position just before the month of Nasi'
began. If Nasīʾ meant intercalation, then the number and the position of the
intercalary months between 1 AH and 10 AH are uncertain; Western calendar dates
commonly cited for key events in early Islam such as the Hijra, the Battle of
Badr, the Battle of Uhud and the Battle of the Trench, should be viewed with
caution as they might be in error by one, two or even three lunar months. This
prohibition was mentioned by Muhammad during the farewell sermon which was
delivered on 9 Dhu al-Hijja 10 AH (Julian date Friday March 6, AD 632) on Mount
Arafat during the farewell pilgrimage to Mecca. The three successive forbidden
months mentioned by Muhammad (months in which battles are forbidden) are Dhu
al-Qi'dah, Dhu al-Hijjah, and Muharram, months 11, 12, and 1. The single
forbidden month is Rajab, month 7. These months were considered forbidden both
within the new Islamic calendar and within the old pagan Meccan calendar.
Numbering the years. In pre-Islamic Arabia, it was customary to identify a year
after a major event which took place in it. Thus, according to Islamic
tradition, Abraha, governor of Yemen, then a province of the Christian Kingdom
of Aksum (Ethiopia), attempted to destroy the Kaaba with an army which included
several elephants. The raid was unsuccessful, but that year became known as the
"Year of the Elephant", during which Muhammad was born (sura al-Fil). Most
equate this to the year AD 570, but a minority use AD 571. In AD 638 (17 AH),
Abu Musa Ashaari, one of the officials of the Caliph Umar in Basrah, complained
about the absence of any years on the correspondence he received from Umar,
making it difficult for him to determine which instructions were most recent.
This report convinced Umar of the need to introduce an era for Muslims. After
debating the issue with his counsellors, he decided that the first year should
include the date of Muhammad's arrival at Medina (known as Yathrib, before
Muhammad's arrival). Uthman ibn Affan then suggested that the months begin with
Muharram, in line with the established custom of the Arabs at that time. The
years of the Islamic calendar thus began with the month of Muharram in the year
of Muhammad's arrival at the city of Medina, even though the actual emigration
took place in Safar and Rabi' I. Because of the Hijra, the calendar was named
the Hijra calendar. The first day of the first month of the Islamic calendar (1
Muharram 1 AH) was Friday, 16 July AD 622, the equivalent civil tabular date
(same daylight period) in the Julian calendar. The Islamic day began at the
preceding sunset on the evening of 15 July. This Julian date (16 July) was
determined by medieval Muslim astronomers by projecting back in time their own
tabular Islamic calendar, which had alternating 30- and 29-day months in each
lunar year plus eleven leap days every 30 years. For example, al-Biruni
mentioned this Julian date in the year AD 1000. Although not used by either
medieval Muslim astronomers or modern scholars to determine the Islamic epoch,
the thin crescent moon would have also first become visible (assuming clouds
did not obscure it) shortly after the preceding sunset on the evening of 15
July, 1.5 days after the associated dark moon (astronomical new moon) on the
morning of 14 July. Though Cook and Crone in "" cite a coin from 17 AH, the
first surviving attested use of a Hijri calendar date alongside a date in
another calendar (Coptic) is on a papyrus from Egypt in 22 AH, PERF 558.
Astronomical considerations. The Islamic calendar is not to be confused with a
lunar calendar that is based on astronomical calculations. The latter is based
on a year of 12 months adding up to 354.37 days. Each lunar month begins at the
time of the monthly "conjunction", when the Moon is located on a straight line
between the Earth and the Sun. The month is defined as the average duration of
a rotation of the Moon around the Earth (29.53 days). By convention, months of
30 days and 29 days succeed each other, adding up over two successive months to
59 full days. This leaves only a small monthly variation of 44 minutes to
account for, which adds up to a total of 24 hours (i.e. the equivalent of one
full day) in 2.73 years. To settle accounts, it is sufficient to add one day
every three years to the lunar calendar, in the same way that one adds one day
to the Gregorian calendar, every four years. The technical details of the
adjustment are described in Tabular Islamic calendar. The Islamic calendar,
however, is based on a different set of conventions. Each month has either 29
or 30 days, but usually in no discernible order. Traditionally, the first day
of each month is the day (beginning at sunset) of the first sighting of the
hilal (crescent moon) shortly after sunset. If the hilal is not observed
immediately after the 29th day of a month (either because clouds block its view
or because the western sky is still too bright when the moon sets), then the
day that begins at that sunset is the 30th. Such a sighting has to be made by
one or more trustworthy men testifying before a committee of Muslim leaders.
Determining the most likely day that the hilal could be observed was a
motivation for Muslim interest in astronomy, which put Islam in the forefront
of that science for many centuries. This traditional practice is still followed
in the overwhelming majority of Muslim countries. Each Islamic state proceeds
with its own monthly observation of the new moon (or, failing that, awaits the
completion of 30 days) before declaring the beginning of a new month on its
territory. But, the lunar crescent becomes visible only some 17 hours after the
conjunction, and only subject to the existence of a number of favourable
conditions relative to weather, time, geographic location, as well as various
astronomical parameters. Given the fact that the moon sets progressively later
than the sun as one goes west, with a corresponding increase in its "age" since
conjunction, Western Muslim countries may, under favorable conditions, observe
the new moon one day earlier than eastern Muslim countries. Due to the
interplay of all these factors, the beginning of each month differs from one
Muslim country to another, during the 48 h period following the conjunction.
The information provided by the calendar in any country does not extend beyond
the current month. A number of Muslim countries try to overcome some of these
difficulties by applying different astronomy-related rules to determine the
beginning of months. Thus, Malaysia, Indonesia, and a few others begin each
month at sunset on the first day that the moon sets after the sun (moonset
after sunset). In Egypt, the month begins at sunset on the first day that the
moon sets at least five minutes after the sun. A detailed analysis of the
available data shows, however, that there are major discrepancies between what
countries say they do on this subject, and what they actually do. Theological
considerations. If the Islamic calendar were prepared using astronomical
calculations, Muslims throughout the Muslim world could use it to meet all
their needs, the way they use the Gregorian calendar today. But, there are
divergent views on whether it is licit to do so. A majority of theologians
oppose the use of calculations (beyond the constraint that each month must be
not less than 29 nor more than 30 days) on the grounds that the latter would
not conform with Muhammad's recommendation to observe the new moon of Ramadan
and Shawal in order to determine the beginning of these months. However, some
jurists see no contradiction between Muhammad's teachings and the use of
calculations to determine the beginnings of lunar months. They consider that
Muhammad's recommendation was adapted to the culture of the times, and should
not be confused with the acts of worship. Thus, jurists Ahmad Muhammad Shakir
and Yusuf al-Qaradawi both endorsed the use of calculations to determine the
beginning of all months of the Islamic calendar, in 1939 and 2004 respectively.
So did the "Fiqh Council of North America" (FCNA) in 2006 and the "European
Council for Fatwa and Research" (ECFR) in 2007. Fatimid Dawoodi Bohra follows
the tabular Islamic calendar (see section below) prepared on the basis of
astronomical calculations from the days of Fatimid imams. Saudi Arabia's Umm
al-Qura calendar. Saudi Arabia uses the sighting method to determine the
beginning of each month of the Hijri calendar. Since AH 1419 (1998/99) several
official hilal sighting committees have been set up by the government to
determine the first visual sighting of the lunar crescent at the beginning of
each lunar month. Nevertheless, the religious authorities also allow the
testimony of less experienced observers and thus often announce the sighting of
the lunar crescent on a date when none of the official committees could see it.
The country also uses the Umm al-Qura calendar, based on astronomical
calculations, but this is restricted to administrative purposes. The parameters
used in the establishment of this calendar underwent significant changes over
the past decade. Before AH 1420 (before 18 April 1999), if the moon's age at
sunset in Riyadh was at least 12 hours, then the day "ending" at that sunset
was the first day of the month. This often caused the Saudis to celebrate holy
days one or even two days before other predominantly Muslim countries,
including the dates for the Hajj, which can only be dated using Saudi dates
because it is performed in Mecca. For AH 1420–22, if moonset occurred after
sunset at Mecca, then the day beginning at that sunset was the first day of a
Saudi month, essentially the same rule used by Malaysia, Indonesia, and others
(except for the location from which the hilal was observed). Since the
beginning of AH 1423 (16 March 2002), the rule has been clarified a little by
requiring the geocentric conjunction of the sun and moon to occur before
sunset, in addition to requiring moonset to occur after sunset at Mecca. This
ensures that the moon has moved past the sun by sunset, even though the sky may
still be too bright immediately before moonset to actually see the crescent. In
2007, the Islamic Society of North America, the Fiqh Council of North America
and the European Council for Fatwa and Research announced that they will
henceforth use a calendar based on calculations, using the same parameters as
the Umm al-Qura calendar, to determine (well in advance) the beginning of all
lunar months (and therefore the days associated with all religious
observances). This was intended as a first step on the way to unify Muslims'
calendars throughout the world, in some future time. Other calendars using the
Islamic era. The Solar Hejri is a solar calendar used in Iran and Afghanistan
which counts its years from the Hijra or migration of Muhammad from Mecca to
Medina in AD 622. Tabular Islamic calendar. There exists a variation of the
Islamic calendar known as the tabular Islamic calendar in which months are
worked out by arithmetic rules rather than by observation or astronomical
calculation. It has a 30-year cycle with 11 leap years of 355 days and 19 years
of 354 days. In the long term, it is accurate to one day in about 2,500 years.
It also deviates up to about one or two days in the short term.This calendar is
a type of Fatimid calendar and followed by the Dawoodi Bohra in true sense.
Kuwaiti algorithm. Microsoft uses the "Kuwaiti algorithm", a variant of the
tabular Islamic calendar, to convert Gregorian dates to the Islamic ones.
Microsoft claims that the variant is based on a statistical analysis of
historical data from Kuwait. Convert Hijri to civil date or civil to Hijri
date. Conversions may be done online (see list of programmes at the bottom of
this page), using the Tabular Islamic calendar (see section above) or, most
accurately, through the Jewish calendar, which is accurate to one day in 15,186
years. Theoretically, the days of the months correspond in both calendars if
the displacements which are a feature of the Jewish system are ignored. The
table below gives, for nineteen years, the Muslim month which corresponds to
the first Jewish month. This table may be extended since every nineteen years
the Muslim month number increases by seven. When it goes above twelve, subtract
twelve and add one to the year AH. From AD412 to AD632 inclusive the month
number is 1 and the calculation gives the month correct to a month or so. AD622
corresponds to BH1 and AH1. For earlier years, year BH = (623 or 622) - year
AD). An example calculation: What is the civil date and year AH of the first
day of the first month in the year AD20875? We first find the Muslim month
number corresponding to the first month of the Jewish year which begins in
AD20874. Dividing 20874 by 19 gives quotient 1098 and remainder 12. Dividing
2026 by 19 gives quotient 106 and remainder 12. The two years are therefore
(1098-106)=992x19 years apart. The Muslim month number corresponding to the
first Jewish month is therefore (992x7)=6944 higher than in 2026. To convert
into years and months divide by twelve - 6944/12=578 years and 8 months.
Adding, we get 1447y 10m + 20874y - 2026y + 578y 8m = 20874y 6m. Therefore, the
first month of the Jewish year beginning in AD20874 corresponds to the sixth
month of the Muslim year AH20874. The worked example in Hebrew
calendar#Conversion between Jewish and civil dates shows that the civil date of
the first day of this month (ignoring the displacements) is Friday, 14 June.
The year AH20875 will therefore begin seven months later, on the first day of
the eighth Jewish month, which the worked example shows to be 7 January,
AD20875 (again ignoring the displacements). The date given by this method,
being calculated, may differ by a day from the actual date, which is determined
by observation. A reading of the section which follows will show that the year
AH20875 is wholly contained within the year AD20875, also that in the Gregorian
calendar this correspondence will occur one year earlier. The reason for the
discrepancy is that the Gregorian year (like the Julian) is slightly too long,
so the Gregorian date for a given AH date will be earlier and the Muslim
calendar catches up sooner. Current correlations. Because a hijri or Islamic
lunar year is between 10 and 12 days shorter than a civil year, it begins
10–12 days earlier in the civil year following the civil year in which the
previous hijri year began. Once every 33 or 34 hijri years, or once every 32 or
33 civil years, the beginning of a hijri year (1 Muharram) coincides with one
of the first ten days of January. Subsequent hijri New Years move backward
through the civil year back to the beginning of January again, passing through
each civil month from December to January. Uses. The Islamic calendar is now
used primarily for religious purposes, and for official dating of public events
and documents in Muslim countries. Because of its nature as a purely lunar
calendar, it cannot be used for agricultural purposes and historically Islamic
communities have used other calendars for this purpose: the Egyptian calendar
was formerly widespread in Islamic countries, and the Iranian calendar and the
1789 Ottoman calendar (a modified Julian calendar) were also used for
agriculture in their countries. In Morocco, the Berber calendar (another Julian
calendar) is still used by farmers in the countryside. These local solar
calendars have receded in importance with the near-universal adoption of the
Gregorian calendar for civil purposes. As noted above, Saudi Arabia uses the
Islamic calendar to date religious occasions such as Ramadan, Hajj, etc. and
the Umm-al-Qura calendar, based on calculations, for administrative purposes
and daily government business. In Indonesia, the Javanese calendar, created by
Sultan Agung in 1633, combines elements of the Islamic and pre-Islamic Saka
calendars. British author Nicholas Hagger writes that after seizing control of
Libya, Muammar Gaddafi "declared" on 1 December 1978 "that the Muslim calendar
should start with the death of the prophet Mohammed in 632 rather than the
hijra (Mohammed's 'emigration' from Mecca to Medina) in 622". This put the
country ten solar years behind the standard Muslim calendar. However, according
to the "Encyclopedia of the Developing World" in 2006, "More confusing still is
Qaddafi's unique Libyan calendar, which counts the years from the Prophet's
birth, or sometimes from his death. The months July and August, named after
Julius and Augustus Caesar, are now Nasser and Hannibal respectively."
Reflecting on a 2001 visit to the country, American reporter Neil MacFarquhar
observed, "Life in Libya was so unpredictable that people weren't even sure
what year it was. The year of my visit was officially 1369. But just two years
earlier Libyans had been living through 1429. No one could quite name for me
the day the count changed, especially since both remained in play. ... Event
organizers threw up their hands and put the Western year in parentheses
somewhere in their announcements." External links. Calendar date converters
