Islam and antisemitism Islam and antisemitism relates to Islamic theologicial
teaching against Jews and Judaism and the treatment of Jews in Muslim
countries. With the origin of Islam in the 7th century and its rapid spread in
the Arabian peninsula and beyond, Jews (and many other peoples) came to be
subject to the rule of Muslim rulers. The quality of the rule varied
considerably in different periods, as did the attitudes of the rulers,
government officials, clergy and general population to various subject peoples
from time to time, which was reflected in their treatment of these subjects.
Reuven Firestone notes that "negative assessments and even condemnation of
prior religions and their adherents occur in all three scriptures of Judaism,
Christianity, and Islam." This article looks at the Muslim attitude to, and
treatment of, Jews in Islamic thought and societies throughout history, and
explores the ramifications of these attitudes in the contemporary world. The
Quran on Jews in its historical setting. The Quran makes forty-three specific
references to ""Bani Isrāīl"" (meaning the Children of Israel). The Arabic
term "yahud", denoting Jews, and "yahudi" occur eleven times and the verbal
form "hāda" (meaning "to be a Jew/Jewish") occurs ten times. According to
Khalid Durán, the negative passages use "Yahūd", while the positive
references speak mainly of the "Banī Isrā’īl". Jews are not mentioned at
all in verses dating from the Meccan period. According to Bernard Lewis, the
coverage given to Jews is relatively insignificant. The references in the Quran
to Jews are interpreted in different ways. According to Frederick M. Schweitzer
and Marvin Perry, these references are "mostly negative" According to Tahir
Abbas the general references to Jews are favorable, with only those addressed
to particular groups of Jews containing harsh criticisms. According to Bernard
Lewis and other scholars, the earliest verses of the Quran were largely
sympathetic to Jews. Mohammed admired them as monotheists and saw them as
natural adherents to the new faith and Jewish practices helped model early
Islamic behavior, such as midday prayer, prayers on Friday, Ramadan fasting
(modelled after the Jewish Yom Kippur fast on the tenth of the month of
Tishrei), and most famously the fact that until 623 Muslims prayed toward
Jerusalem, not Mecca. After his flight (al-hijra) from Mecca, where religious
intolerance reigned, in 622 Mohammad with his followers settled in Yathrib,
subsequently renamed "Medina al-Nabi" (‘City of the Prophet’) where he
managed to draw up a ‘social contract’, widely referred to as the
'Constitution of Medina'. This contract, known as the Leaf ("ṣaḥīfa")
upheld the peaceful coexistence between Muslims, Jews and Christians, defining
them all, under given conditions, as constituting the umma, or community of
that city, and granting the latter freedom of religious thought and practice.
Yathrib/Medina was not homogeneous. Alongside the 200 odd emigrants from Mecca
(the "Muhājirūn"), who had followed Mohammad, its population consisted of the
Faithful of Medina ("Anṣār", ‘the helpers’), Arab pagans, three Jewish
tribes and some Christians. The foundational 'constitution' sought to
establish, for the first time in history according to Ali Khan, a formal
agreement guaranteeing interfaith conviviality, albeit ringed with articles
emphasizing strategic cooperation in the defense of the city. In paragraph 16
of this document, it states that:'Those Jews who follow us are entitled to our
aid and support so long as they shall not have wronged us or lent assistance
(to any enemies) against us'. Paragraph 37 has it that 'To the Jews their own
expenses and to the Muslims theirs. They shall help one another in the event of
any attack on the people covered by this document. There shall be sincere
friendship, exchange of good counsel, fair conduct and no treachery between
them.'. The three local Jewish tribes were the Banu Nadir, the Banu Qurayza,
and the Banu Qaynuqa. While Mohammad clearly had no prejudice against them, and
appears to have regarded his own message as substantially the same as that
received by Jews on Sinai, tribal politics, and Mohammad's deep frustration at
Jewish refusals to accept his prophethood, quickly led to a break with all
three. Unfortunate linguistic misunderstandings may also have given the
impression, evidenced in the Quran, that the Jewish community was publicly
humiliating Mohammad. One clan was evicted from Medina in 624. In 625, the Banu
Nadir Jewish tribe was evicted from Medina. Lastly, in the Mecca siege of
Medina in 627, the last major Jewish tribe initially helped the Muslims in
fortifying the back portions of Medina, but due to their later exposed
treachery in trying to assist the pagan Meccan army, the Muslims laid siege to
this last group of Jews. Since the Torah prescribes the death penalty for
treachery, the adult males of this last Jewish tribe were killed, and the women
and children were taken into slavery (but later freed). The direction of prayer
was shifted towards Mecca from Jerusalem and the most negative verses about
Jews were set down after this time. According to Laqueur, conflicting
statements about Jews in the Qur'an have affected Muslim attitudes towards Jews
to this day, especially during periods of rising Islamic fundamentalism.
Judaism in theology. According to Bernard Lewis, there is nothing in Muslim
theology (with a single exception) that can be considered refutations of
Judaism or ferocious anti-Jewish diatribes. Lewis and Chanes suggest that, for
a variety of reasons, Muslims were not antisemitic for the most part. The
Quran, like Judaism, orders Muslims to profess strict monotheism. It also
rejects the stories of Jewish deicide as a blasphemous absurdity, and other
similar stories in the Gospels play no part in the Muslim educational system
The Quran does not present itself as a fulfillment of the Hebrew Bible but
rather a restoration of its original message – thus, no clash of
interpretations between Judaism and Islam can arise. In addition Lewis argues
that the Quran lacks popular western traditions of 'guilt and betrayal'.
Rosenblatt and Pinson suggest that the Quran teaches toleration of Judaism as a
fellow monotheistic faith. Lewis adds, negative attributes ascribed to subject
religions (in this case Judaism and Christianity) are usually expressed in
religious and social terms, but only very rarely in ethnic or racial terms.
However, this does sometimes occur. The language of abuse is often quite
strong. It has been argued that the conventional Muslim epithets for Jews,
apes, and Christians, pigs derive from Quranic usage. Lewis adduces three
passages in the Quran (, , ) used to ground this view. The interpretation of
these 'enigmatic' passages in Islamic exegetics is highly complex, dealing as
they do with infractions like breaking the Sabbath. According to Goitein, the
idea of Jewish Sabbath breakers turning into apes may reflect the influence of
Yemeni midrashim. Firestone notes that the Qurayza tribe itself is described in
Muslim sources as using the trope of being turned into apes if one breaks the
Sabbath to justify not exploiting the Sabbath in order to attack Mohammad, when
they were under siege. According to Stillman, the Quran praises Moses, and
depicts the Israelites as the recipients of divine favour. The Quran dedicates
many verses to the glorification of Hebrew prophets, says Leon Poliakov. He
quotes verse as an example, We gave him Isaac and Jacob: all (three) guided:
and before him, We guided Noah, and among his progeny, David, Solomon, Job,
Joseph, Moses, and Aaron: thus do We reward those who do good: And Zakariya and
John, and Jesus and Elias: all in the ranks of the righteous: And Isma'il and
Elisha, and Jonas, and Lot: and to all We gave favour above the nations.
Remarks on Jews. Leon Poliakov, Walter Laqueur, and Jane Gerber, argue that
passages in the Quran reproach Jews for their refusal to recognize Muhammad as
a prophet of God. "The Quran is engaged mainly in dealing with the sinners
among the Jews and the attack on them is shaped according to models that one
encounters in the New Testament." The Muslim holy text defined the Arab and
Muslim attitude towards Jews to this day, especially in the periods when
Islamic fundamentalism was on the rise. Walter Laqueur states that the Quran
and its interpreters has a great many conflicting things to say about the Jews.
Jews are said to be treacherous and hypocritical and could never be friends
with a Muslim. Frederick M. Schweitzer and Marvin Perry state that references
to Jews in the Quran are mostly negative. The Quran states that wretchedness
and baseness were stamped upon the Jews, and they were visited with wrath from
Allah, that was because they disbelieved in Allah's revelations and slew the
prophets wrongfully. And for their taking usury, which was prohibited for them,
and because of their consuming people's wealth under false pretense, a painful
punishment was prepared for them. The Quran requires their "abasement and
poverty" in the form of the poll tax jizya. In his "wrath" God has "cursed" the
Jews and will turn them into apes/monkeys and swine and idol worshipers because
they are "infidels". According to Martin Kramer, the Quran speaks of Jews in a
negative way and reports instances of Jewish treachery against the Islamic
prophet Muhammad. However, Islam didn't hold up those Jews who practiced
treachery against Muhammad as archetypes nor did it portray treachery as the
embodiment of Jews in all times and places. The Quran also attests to
Muhammad's amicable relations with Jews. While traditional religious
supremacism played a role in the Islamic view of Jews, the same attitude
applied to Christians and other non-Muslims. Islamic tradition regards Jews as
a legitimate community of believers in God (called "people of the Book")
legally entitled to sufferance. The Quran () clears Jews from the accusation of
deicide, and states "they killed him [Jesus not". They also argue that the
Jewish Bible has not been incorporated in the Islamic text, and "virtuous
Muslims" are not contrasted with "stiff-necked, criminal Jews". English
translation of the Qur'an by Arberry. However, due to the Quran's timely
process of story-telling, a majority of scholars agree that all references to
Jews or other groups within the Quran refers to only certain populations at a
certain point in history and bare any racial profiling or religious profiling,
it also gives some legitimacy to their religion in "Those who believe, and the
Jews, and the Sabi'un, and the Christians, who believe in God and the Last Day
and do good, there is no fear for them, nor shall they grieve." The Quran gives
credence to the Christian claim of Jews scheming against Jesus, " ... but God
also schemed, and God is the best of schemers."(Qur'an ) In the Muslim view,
the crucifixion of Jesus was an illusion, and thus the Jewish plots against him
ended in failure. According to Gerber, in numerous verses (; ; ; ; , , ; ) the
Quran accuses Jews of altering the Scripture. But the Quran differentiates
between "good and bad" Jews, adding to the idea that the Jewish people or their
religion itself are not the target of the story-telling process. The criticisms
deal mainly "with the sinners among the Jews and the attack on them is shaped
according to models that one encounters in the New Testament." The Quran also
speaks favorably of Jews. Though it also criticizes them for not being grateful
of God's blessing on them, the harsh criticisms, are only addressed towards a
particular group of Jews, as it is clear from the context of the Quranic
verses, but the translations usually confuse this by using the general term
"Jews". To judge Jews based on the deeds of some of their ancestors is an anti-
Quranic idea. Ali S. Asani suggests that the Quran endorses the establishment
of religiously and culturally plural societies and this endorsement has
affected the treatment of religious minorities in Muslim lands throughout
history. He cites the endorsement of pluralism to explain why violent forms of
antisemitism generated in medieval and modern Europe, culminating in the
Holocaust, never occurred in regions under Muslim rule. Some verses of the
Qur'an, notably , preach tolerance towards members of the Jewish faith.
According to Kramer, Jews are regarded as members of a legitimate community of
believers in God, "people of the Book", and therefore legally entitled to
sufferance. Distortion. Martin Kramer argues that for Muslims to arrive at the
concept of the "eternal Jew", there must be more at work than the Islamic
tradition. Islamic tradition does, however, provide the sources for islamic
antisemitism. The fact that many Islamic thinkers have spent time in the West
has resulted in the absorption of antisemitism, he says. Modern texts further
distort the Quran by quoting it besides texts such as the "Protocols of Zion".
Thus, Kramer concludes that there is no doubt modern Muslims effectively make
use of the Quran, using Islamic tradition as a source on which antisemitism
today feeds, but it is also a selective and distorting use. Muhammad. During
Muhammad's life, Jews lived in the Arabian Peninsula, especially in and around
Medina. Muhammad is also known to have Jewish friends, and had a Jewish wife
(Safiyya) who became a Muslim. According to Poliakov, "the degree to which
Muhammad shows his respect for each religion and Christians is remarkable".
According to Pinson, Rosenblatt and F.E. Peters, they also began to connive
with Muhammad's enemies in Mecca to overthrow him (despite having signed a
peace treaty). According to F.E. Peters, they also began to secretly to
conspire with Muhammad's enemies in Mecca to overthrow him (despite having been
forced by their conquerors to sign a peace treaty.) After each major battle,
Muhammad accused one of the Jewish tribes of treachery and attacked it. Two
Jewish tribes were expelled and the last one, the Banu Qurayza, was wiped out
after it threw itself on Muhammad's mercy. Samuel Rosenblatt states that these
incidents were not part of policies directed exclusively against Jews, and
Muhammad was more severe with his pagan Arab kinsmen than foreigner
monotheists. In addition Muhammad's conflict with Jews was considered of rather
minor importance. According to Lewis, since the clash of Judaism and Islam was
resolved and ended during Muhammad's lifetime with Muslim victory, no Muslim
equivalent of the still unresolved theological dispute between Church and
Israel fueled antisemitism. There is also a difference between Jewish denial of
Christian and Muslim messages, since Muhammad never claimed to be a Messiah or
Son of God. It is significant that the death of Muhammad was not caused by
Jews. Muhammad's disputes with his neighboring Jewish tribes left no marked
traces on his immediate successors (known as Caliphs). The first Caliphs based
their treatment upon the Quranic verses encouraging tolerance. Classical
commentators viewed Muhammad's struggle with Jews as a minor episode in his
career, but this has changed in modern times due to external influences.
Poliakov opines that Muhammad's actions and teachings gave rise to an open and
more conciliatory society, where the Muslims were compelled to protect the
lives and religion of the Jews. Hadith. Stillman (2006) This hadith has been
quoted countless times, and it has become a part of the charter of Hamas. They
are debased, cursed, anathematized forever by God and so can never repent and
be forgiven; they are cheats and traitors; defiant and stubborn; they killed
the prophets; they are liars who falsify scripture and take bribes; as infidels
they are ritually unclean, a foul odor emanating from them – such is the
image of the Jew in classical Islam, degraded and malevolent. Quran. The words
"humility" and "humiliation" occur frequently in the Quran and later Muslim
literature in relation to Jews. According to Lewis, "This, in Islamic view, is
their just punishment for their past rebelliousness, and is manifested in their
present impotence between the mighty powers of Christendom and Islam." The
standard Quranic reference to Jews is verse : "And remember ye said: "O Moses!
we cannot endure one kind of food (always); so beseech thy Lord for us to
produce for us of what the earth groweth, -its pot-herbs, and cucumbers,
Itsgarlic, lentils, and onions." He said: "Will ye exchange the better for the
worse? Go ye down to any town, and ye shall find what ye want!" They were
covered with humiliation and misery; they drew on themselves the wrath of
Allah. This because they went on rejecting the Signs of Allah and slaying His
Messengers without just cause. This because they rebelled and went on
transgressing." Two verses later we read: "And remember, Children of Israel,
when We made a covenant with you and raised Mount Sinai before you saying,
"Hold tightly to what We have revealed to you and keep it in mind so that you
may guard against evil." But then you turned away, and if it had not been for
Allah's grace and merecy, you surely would have been among the lost. And you
know those among who sinned on the Sabbath. We said to them, "You will be
transformed into despised apes." So we used them as a warning to their people
and to the following generations, as well as a lesson for the Allah-fearing."
(Quran ) The accusation that Jews will ultimately be transformed into apes and
pigs is traditionally understood literally and is derived from such Quranic and
other early Muslim sources. The Quran associates Jews above all with rejection
of God's prophets including Jesus and Muhammad, thus explaining their
resistance to him personally. (Cf. Surah 2:87–91; 5:59, 61, 70, and 82.) It
states that they are, together with outright idolators, the worst and most
inveterate enemies of Islam, and thus will not only suffer eternally in Hell
but in this world will be the most degraded of the Peoples of the Book, below
even Christians, everywhere. (Cf. Surah 5:82; 3:54–56.) It also asserts that
Jews believe that they are the sole children of God (Surah 5:18), and that only
they will achieve salvation (Surah 2:111). According to the Quran, Jews
blasphemously claim that Ezra is the son of God, as Christians claim Jesus is,
(Surah 9:30) and that God's hand is fettered (Surah 5:64 – i.e., that they
can freely defy God). Some of those who are Jews, "pervert words from their
meanings", (Surah 4:44), and because they have committed wrongdoing, God has
"forbidden some good things that were previously permitted them", thus
explaining Jewish commandments regarding food, Sabbath restrictions on work,
and other rulings as a punishment from God (Surah 4:160). They listen for the
sake of mendacity (Surah 5:41), twisting the truth, and practice forbidden
usury, and therefore they will receive "a painful doom" (Surah 4:161). The
Quran gives credence to the Christian claim of Jews scheming against Jesus,
"...but God also schemed, and God is the best of schemers"(Surah 3:54). In the
Muslim view, the crucifixion of Jesus was an illusion, and thus the supposed
Jewish plots against him ended in complete failure. In numerous verses (Surah
3:63, 71; 4:46, 160–161; 5:41–44, 63–64, 82; 6:92) the Quran accuses Jews
of deliberately obscuring and perverting scripture. Pre-modern Islam. Jerome
Chanes, Pinson, Rosenblatt, Mark Cohen, Norman Stillman, Uri Avnery, M. Klien
and Bernard Lewis argue that antisemitism in pre-modern Islam is rare, and did
not emerge until modern times. Lewis argues that there is little sign any deep-
rooted emotional hostility directed against Jews, or any other group, that can
be characterized as antisemitism. There were, however, clearly negative
attitudes, which were in part the "normal" feelings of a dominant group towards
subject groups. More specifically, the contempt consisted of Muslim contempt
for disbelievers. Literature. According to Lewis, the outstanding
characteristic of the classical Islamic view of Jews is their unimportance. The
religious, philosophical, and literary Islamic writings tended to ignore Jews
and focused more on Christianity. Although, the Jews received little praise or
even respect, and were sometimes blamed for various misdeed but there were no
fears of Jewish conspiracy and domination, nor any charges of diabolic evil nor
accusations of poisoning the wells nor spreading the plague nor were even
accused of engaging in blood libels until Ottomans learned the concept from
their Greek subjects in 15th century. Poliakov writes that various examples of
medieval Muslim literature portray Judaism as an exemplary pinnacle of faith,
and Israel being destined by this virtue. He quotes stories from "The Book of
One Thousand and One Nights" that portray Jews as pious, virtuous and devoted
to God, and seem to borrow plots from midrashim. However, Poliakov writes that
treatment of Jews in Muslim literature varies, and the tales are meant for pure
entertainment, with no didactic aim. After Ibn Nagraela, a Jew, attacked the
Quran by alleging various contradictions in it, Ibn Hazm, a Moor, criticized
him furiously. Ibn Hazm wrote that Ibn Nagraela was "filled with hatred" and
"conceited in his vile soul." According to Schweitzer and Perry, some
literature during the 10th and 11th century "made Jews out to be untrustworthy,
treacherous oppressors, and exploiters of Muslims". This propaganda sometimes
even resulted in outbreaks of violence against the Jews. An 11th century
Moorish poem describes Jews as "a criminal people" and blames them for causing
social decay, betraying Muslims and poisoning food and water. Martin Kramer
writes that in Islamic tradition, in striking contrast with the Christian
concept of the eternal Jew, the contemporary Jews were not presented as
archetypes—as the embodiment of Jews in all times and places. Life under
Muslim rule. Jews and Christians living under early Muslim rule were known as
"dhimmi"s, a status that was later also extended to other non-Muslims like
Hindus. As dhimmis they were to be tolerated, and entitled to the protection
and resources of the "Ummah", the Muslim commonwealth. In return they had to
pay a tax known as the "jizya" in accordance with Quran. Lewis and Poliakov
argue that Jewish communities enjoyed toleration and limited rights as long as
they accepted Muslim superiority. These rights were legally established and
enforced. The restrictions on dhimmis included: payment of higher taxes; at
some locations, being forced to wear clothing or some othe insignia
distinguishing them from Muslims; sometimes barred from holding public office,
bearing arms or riding a horse; disqualified as witnesses in litigation
involving Muslims; at some locations and times, dhimmis were prevented from
repairing existing or erecting new places of worship. Proselytizing on behalf
of any faith but Islam was barred. Later additions to the code included
prohibitions on adopting Arab names, studying the Quran, selling alcoholic
beverages. Abdul Aziz Said writes that the Islamic concept of dhimmi, when
applied, allowed other cultures to flourish and prevented the general rise of
antisemitism. Schweitzer and Perry give as examples of early Muslim
antisemitism: 9th century "persecution and outbreaks of violence"; 10th and
11th century antisemitic propaganda that "made Jews out to be untrustworthy,
treacherous oppressors, and exploiters of Muslims". This propaganda "inspired
outbreaks of violence and caused many casualties in Egypt". An 11th century
Moorish poem describes Jews as "a criminal people" and alleges that "society is
nearing collapse on account of Jewish wealth and domination, their exploitation
and betrayal of Muslims; that Jews worship the devil, physicians poison their
patients, and Jews poison food and water as required by Judaism, and so on."
Jews under the Muslim rule rarely faced martyrdom or exile, or forced
conversion and they were fairly free to choose their residence and profession.
Their freedom and economic condition varied from time to time and place to
place. Forced conversions occurred mostly in the Maghreb, especially under the
Almohads, a militant dynasty with messianic claims, as well as in Persia, where
Shi'a Muslims were generally less tolerant than their Sunni counterparts.
Notable examples of the cases where the choice of residence was taken away from
them includes confining Jews to walled quarters (mellahs) in Morocco beginning
from the 15th century and especially since the early 19th century. Egypt. The
caliphs of Fatimid dynasty in Egypt were known to be Judeophiles, according to
Leon Poliakov. They paid regularly to support the Jewish institutions (such as
the rabbinical academy of Jerusalem). A significant number of their ministers
and counselors were Jews. Benjamin of Tuleda, a famous 12th century Jewish
explorer, described the Caliph al Abbasi as a "great king...kind unto Israel".
He further mentions Muslims and Jews being involved in common devotions, such
as visiting the grave of Ezekiel, whom both religions regard as a prophet.
Iberian Peninsula. With the Muslim conquest of the Iberian Peninsula, Spanish
Judaism flourished for several centuries. Thus, what some refer to as the
"golden age" for Jews began. During this period the Muslims (at least in Spain)
tolerated other religions, including Judaism, and created a heterodox society.
Muslim relations with Jews in Spain were not always peaceful, however. The
eleventh century saw Muslim pogroms against Jews in Spain; those occurred in
Córdoba in 1011 and in Granada in 1066. In the 1066 Granada massacre, a Muslim
mob crucified the Jewish vizier Joseph ibn Naghrela and massacred about 4,000
Jews. The Muslim grievance involved was that some Jews had become wealthy, and
others had advanced to positions of power. The Almohad dynasty, which overthrew
the dynasty that ran Spain during the early Muslim era, offered Christians and
Jews the choice of conversion or expulsion; in 1165, one of their rulers
ordered that all Jews in the country convert on pain of death (forcing the
Jewish rabbi, theologian, philosopher, and physician Maimonides to feign
conversion to Islam before fleeing the country). In Egypt, Maimonides resumed
practicing Judaism openly only to be accused of apostasy. He was saved from
death by Saladin's chief administrator, who held that conversion under coercion
is invalid. During his wanderings, Maimonides also wrote The Yemen Epistle, a
famous letter to the Jews of Yemen, who were then experiencing severe
persecution at the hands of their Muslim rulers. In it, Maimonides describes
his assessment of the treatment of the Jews at the hands of Muslims:Maimonides,
"Epistle to the Jews of Yemen", translated in Stillman (1979), pp. 241–242
Mark Cohen quotes Haim Hillel Ben-Sasson, a specialist in medieval European
Jewish history, who cautioned that Maimonides' condemnation of Islam should be
understood "in the context of the harsh persecutions of the 12th century and
that furthermore one may say that he was insufficiently aware of the status of
the Jews in Christian lands, or did not pay attention to this, when he wrote
the letter." Cohen continues by quoting Ben-Sasson, who argues that Jews
generally had a better legal and security situation in the Muslim countries
than in Christendom. Ottoman Empire. While some Muslim states declined, the
Ottoman Empire rose as the "greatest Muslim state in history". As long as the
empire flourished, the Jews did as well, according to Schweitzer and Perry. The
Ottomans were more tolerant of Jews and promoted their economic development.
The Jews flourished as great merchants, financiers, government officials,
traders and artisans. Contrast with Christian Europe. Lewis states that in
contrast to Christian antisemitism, the attitude of Muslims toward non-Muslims
is not one of hate, fear, or envy, but rather simply contempt. This contempt is
expressed in various ways, such as abundance of polemic literature attacking
the Christians and occasionally also the Jews. "The negative attributes
ascribed to the subject religions and their followers are usually expressed in
religious and social terms, very rarely in ethnic or racial terms, though this
does sometimes occur." The language of abuse is often quite strong. The
conventional epithets are apes for Jews, and pigs for Christians. Lewis
continues with several examples of regulations which were symbolizing the
inferiority that non-Muslims living under Muslim rule had to live with, such as
different formulae of greeting when addressing Jews and Christians than when
addressing Muslims (both in conversations or correspondences), and forbidding
Jews and Christians to choose names used by Muslims for their children by the
Ottoman times. Schweitzer and Perry argue that there are two general views of
the status of Jews under Islam, the traditional "golden age" and the
revisionist "persecution and pogrom" interpretations. The former was first
promulgated by Jewish historians in the 19th century as a rebuke of the
Christian treatment of Jews, and taken up by Arab Muslims after 1948 as "an
Arab-Islamist weapon in what is primarily an ideological and political struggle
against Israel". The revisionists argue that this idealized view ignores "a
catalog of lesser-known hatred and massacres". Mark Cohen concurs with this
view, arguing that the "myth of an interfaith utopia" went unchallenged until
it was adopted by Arabs as a "propaganda weapon against Zionism", and that this
"Arab polemical exploitation" was met with the "counter-myth" of the "neo-
lachrymose conception of Jewish-Arab history", which also "cannot be maintained
in the light of historical reality". Antisemitism in the Islamic Middle East.
Antisemitism has increased in the Muslim world during modern times. While
Bernard Lewis and Uri Avnery date the rise of antisemitism to the establishment
of Israel, M. Klein suggests the antisemitism could have been present in the
mid-19th century. Scholars point out European influence, including that of
Nazis, and the establishment of Israel as the root causes for antisemitism.
Norman Stillman explains that increased European commercial, missionary and
imperialist activities during the 19th and 20th centuries brought antisemitic
ideas to the Muslim world. Initially these prejudices only found a reception
among Arab Christians and were too foreign for any widespread acceptance among
Muslims. However, with the rise of the Arab-Israeli conflict, European
antisemitism began to gain acceptance in modern literature. 19th century.
According to Mark Cohen, Arab antisemitism in the modern world arose relatively
recently, in the 19th century, against the backdrop of conflicting Jewish and
Arab nationalism, and was imported into the Arab world primarily by
nationalistically minded Christian Arabs (and only subsequently was it
"Islamized"). The Damascus affair occurred in 1840, when an Italian monk and
his servant disappeared in Damascus. Immediately following, a charge of ritual
murder was brought against a large number of Jews in the city. All were found
guilty. The consuls of England, France and Austria as well as Ottoman
authorities, Christians, Muslims and Jews all played a great role in this
affair. Following the Damascus affair, Pogroms spread through the Middle East
and North Africa. Pogroms occurred in: Aleppo (1850, 1875), Damascus (1840,
1848, 1890), Beirut (1862, 1874), Dayr al-Qamar (1847), Jerusalem (1847), Cairo
(1844, 1890, 1901–02), Mansura (1877), Alexandria (1870, 1882, 1901–07),
Port Said (1903, 1908), Damanhur (1871, 1873, 1877, 1891), Istanbul (1870,
1874), Buyukdere (1864), Kuzguncuk (1866), Eyub (1868), Edirne (1872), Izmir
(1872, 1874). There was a massacre of Jews in Baghdad in 1828. There was
another massacre in Barfurush in 1867. In 1839, in the eastern Persian city of
Meshed, a mob burst into the Jewish Quarter, burned the synagogue, and
destroyed the Torah scrolls. This is known as the Allahdad incident. It was
only by forcible conversion that a massacre was averted. Benny Morris writes
that one symbol of Jewish degradation was the phenomenon of stone-throwing at
Jews by Muslim children. Morris quotes a 19th century traveler: "I have seen a
little fellow of six years old, with a troop of fat toddlers of only three and
four, teaching to throw stones at a Jew, and one little urchin would, with the
greatest coolness, waddle up to the man and literally spit upon his Jewish
gaberdine. To all this the Jew is obliged to submit; it would be more than his
life was worth to offer to strike a Mahommedan." 20th century. The massacres of
Jews in Muslim countries continued into the 20th century. The Jewish quarter in
Fez was almost destroyed by a Muslim mob in 1912. There were Nazi-inspired
pogroms in Algeria in the 1930s, and massive attacks on the Jews in Iraq and
Libya in the 1940s (see Farhud). Pro-Nazi Muslims slaughtered dozens of Jews in
Baghdad in 1941. American academic Bernard Lewis and others have charged that
standard antisemitic themes have become commonplace in the publications of Arab
Islamic movements such as Hizbullah and Hamas, in the pronouncements of various
agencies of the Islamic Republic of Iran, and even in the newspapers and other
publications of Refah Partisi, the Turkish Islamic party whose head served as
prime minister in 1996–97." Lewis has also written that the language of abuse
is often quite strong, arguing that the conventional epithets for Jews and
Christians are apes and pigs, respectively. Connections between Nazi Germany
and Muslim countries. Despite the fact that an estimated 100,000 Muslims
(primarily of Bosniak descent) were murdered during the Holocaust, the first
attempts at an Arab Nazi movement occurred in 1933, when a Jaffa correspondent
of the Cairo newspaper "Al-Ahram" applied to the German council for help. Many
of the Arabs were in full support of Nazi Germany, and believed that if Hitler
won the war, the Arab cause would prosper. The influence of the Nazis in the
Arab world continued to grow though the 1930s. Nazi influenced political
parties arose in the 1930s and 1940s, many of which played an important role in
the leadership of the Arab world post-World War II. Egypt, Syria, and Iran are
believed to have harbored Nazi war criminals, though they have rejected the
charge. With the recruiting help of the Grand Mufti al-Husseini, the 13th
Waffen Mountain Division of the SS "Handschar", formed mostly of Muslims in
1943, was the first non-Germanic SS division. "Mein Kampf" has been published
and, according to the Middle East Media Research Institute (MEMRI), was 6th on
the Palestinian best-seller list in 1999. Mohammad Amin al-Husayni. The Mufti
of Jerusalem, Haj Amin al-Husseini attempted to create an alliance with Nazi
Germany and Fascist Italy to obstruct the creation of a Jewish homeland in
Palestine, and hinder any emigration by Jewish refugees from the Holocaust
there. Historians debate to what extent al-Husseini's fierce opposition to
Zionism was grounded in nationalism or antisemitism or a combination of both.
On March 31, 1933, within weeks of Hitler's rise to power in Germany, al-
Husayni sent a telegram to Berlin addressed to the German Consul-General in the
British Mandate of Palestine saying Muslims in Palestine and elsewhere looked
forward to spreading their ideology in the Middle East. Al-Husseini secretly
met the German Consul-General near the Dead Sea in 1933 and expressed his
approval of the anti-Jewish boycott in Germany and asked him not to send any
Jews to Palestine. Later that year, the Mufti's assistants approached Wolff,
seeking his help in establishing an Arab National Socialist party in Palestine.
Reports reaching the foreign offices in Berlin showed high levels of Arab
admiration of Hitler. Al-Husseini met the German Foreign Minister, Joachim von
Ribbentrop on November 20, 1941 and was officially received by Adolf Hitler on
November 30, 1941 in Berlin. He asked Hitler for a public declaration that
"recognized and sympathized with the Arab struggles for independence and
liberation, and that it would support the elimination of a national Jewish
homeland", and he submitted to the German government a draft of such a
declaration, containing the clause. Husayni aided the Axis cause in the Middle
East by issuing a fatwa for a holy war against Britain in May 1941. The Mufti's
widely heralded proclamation against Britain was declared in Iraq, where he was
instrumental in the anti-British Iraqi revolt of 1941. During the war, the
Mufti repeatedly made requests to "the German government to bomb Tel Aviv." Al-
Husseini was involved in the organization and recruitment of Bosnian Muslims
into several divisions of the Waffen SS and other units. and also blessed
sabotage teams trained by Germans before they were dispatched to Palestine,
Iraq, and Transjordan. Iraq. In March 1940, General Rashid Ali, a nationalist
Iraqi officer forced the pro-British Iraqi Prime Minister Nuri Said Pasha, to
resign. In May, he declared jihad against Great Britain. Forty days later,
British troops occupied the country. The 1941 Iraqi coup d'état occurred on
April 3, 1941 when the regime of the Regent 'Abd al-Ilah was overthrown, and
Rashid Ali was installed as Prime Minister. In 1941, following Rashid Ali's
pro-Axis coup, riots known as the "Farhud" broke out in Baghdad in which
approximately 180 Jews were killed and about 240 were wounded, 586 Jewish-owned
businesses were looted and 99 Jewish houses were destroyed. Iraq initially
forbade the emigration of its Jews after the 1948 war on the grounds that
allowing them to go to Israel would strengthen that state, but they were
allowed to emigrate again after 1950, if they agreed to forgo their assets. The
Ottoman Empire, Turkey, Iraq and Kurdistan. Jews and Assyrian Christians forced
migrations between 1843 and the 21st century. In his recent PhD thesis and in
his recent book the Israeli scholar Mordechai Zaken discussed the history of
the Assyrian Christians of Turkey and Iraq (in the Kurdish vicinity) during the
last 180 years, from 1843 onwards. In his studies Zaken outlines three major
eruptions that took place between 1843 and 1933 during which the Assyrian
Christians lost their land and hegemony in their habitat in the Hakkārī (or
Julamerk) region in southeastern Turkey and became refugees in other lands,
notably Iran and Iraq, and ultimately in exiled communities in European and
western countries (the USA, Canada, Australia, New-Zealand, Sweden, France, to
mention some of these countries). Mordechai Zaken wrote this study from an
analytical and comparative point of view, comparing the Assyrian Christians'
experience with the experience of the Kurdish Jews who had been dwelling in
Kurdistan for two thousands years or so, but were forced to emigrate to Israel
in the early 1950s. The Jews of Kurdistan were forced to leave as a result of
the Arab-Israeli war, as a result of increasing hostility and acts of violence
against Jews in Iraqi and Kurdish towns and villages, and as a result of a new
situation that developed during the 1940s in Iraq and Kurdistan in which the
ability of Jews to live in relative comfort and tolerance (that was disrupted
from time to time prior to that period) with their Arab and Muslim neighbors,
as they had done for many years, practically came to an end. In the end, the
Jews of Kurdistan had to leave their Kurdish habitat en masse and migrate into
Israel. The Assyrian Christians, on the other hand, suffered a similar fate but
migrated in stages following each political crisis with the regime in whose
boundaries they lived or following each conflict with their Muslim, Turkish,
Arab or Kurdish neighbors, or following the departure or expulsion of their
patriarch Mar Shimon in 1933, first to Cyprus and then to the United States.
Consequently, although there is still a small and fragile community of
Assyrians in Iraq, millions of Assyrian Christians live today in exiled and
prosperous communities in the west. Iran. In Iran, Reza Shah sympathized with
Nazi Germany, making the Jewish community fearful of possible persecutions.
Although these fears did not materialise, anti-Jewish articles were published
in the Iranian media. A rumor that Hitler converted to Islam led to a marriage
between the Shia clergy and the nascent, ultra-nationalist secularized
prejudices in Iran. Egypt. In Egypt, Ahmad Husayn founded the Young Egypt Party
in 1934. He immediately expressed his sympathy for Nazi Germany to the German
ambassador to Egypt. Husayn sent a delegation to the Nuremberg rally and
returned with enthusiasm. After the Sudeten Crisis, the party leaders denounced
Germany for aggression against small nations, but nonetheless retained elements
similar to Nazism or Fascism, e.g. salutes, torchlight parades, leader worship,
and antisemitism and racism. The party's impact before 1939 was minimal, and
their espionage efforts were of little value to the Germans. During World War
II, Cairo was a haven for agents and spies throughout the war. Egyptian
nationalists were active, with many Egyptians, including Farouk of Egypt and
prime minister Ali Mahir Pasha, all of whom hoped for an Axis victory, and full
independence of Egypt from Britain. Islamist groups. Many Islamic terrorist
groups have openly expressed antisemitic views. Lashkar-e-Toiba's propaganda
arm has declared the Jews to be "Enemies of Islam", and Israel to be the "Enemy
of Pakistan". Hamas has been widely described as antisemitic. It has issued
antisemitic leaflets, and its writings and manifestos rely upon antisemitic
documents (the Protocols of the Elders of Zion, and other European Christian
literature), exhibiting antisemitic themes. In 1998, Esther Webman of the
Project for the Study of Anti-Semitism at the Tel Aviv University wrote that
although the above is true, antisemitism was not the main tenet of Hamas
ideology. In an editorial in The Guardian in January 2006, Khaled Meshaal, the
chief of Hamas's political bureau denied antisemitism, on Hamas' part, and said
that the nature of Israeli-Palestinian conflict was not religious but
political. He also said that Hamas has "no problem with Jews who have not
attacked us." Amal Saad-Ghorayeb, a Shiite scholar and assistant professor at
the Lebanese American University has written that Hezbollah is not Anti-
Zionist, but rather Anti-Jewish. She quoted Hassan Nasrallah as saying: "If we
searched the entire world for a person more cowardly, despicable, weak and
feeble in psyche, mind, ideology and religion, we would not find anyone like
the Jew. Notice, I do not say the Israeli." Regarding the official public
stance of Hezbollah as a whole, she said that while Hezbollah, "tries to mask
its anti-Judaism for public-relations reasons ... a study of its language,
spoken and written, reveals an underlying truth." In her book, "Hezbollah:
Politics & Religion", she explored the anti-Jewish roots of Hezbollah ideology,
arguing that Hezbollah "believes that Jews, by the nature of Judaism, possess
fatal character flaws." Saad-Ghorayeb also said that "Hezbollah's Quranic
reading of Jewish history has led its leaders to believe that Jewish theology
is evil." 21st century. France is home to Europe's largest population of
Muslims — about 6 million — as well as the continent's largest community of
Jews, about 600,000. In 2000, Muslims attacked synagogues in retaliation for
damage done to their Muslim brethren in the Palestinian territories. ("See
also: Second Intifada") Many Jews protested, the acts were declared "Muslim
antisemitism". By 2007, however, attacks were much less severe, and an "all-
clear" was perceived. However, during the 2008–2009 Gaza War, tensions
between the two communities increased and there were several dozen reported
instances of violence such as arson and assaults. French Jewish leaders
complained of "a diffuse kind of anti-Semitism becoming entrenched in the
Muslim community" while Muslim leaders responded that the issues were
"political rather than religious" and that Muslim anger is "not against Jews,
it's against Israel." On July 28, 2006, at around 4:00 p.m. Pacific time, the
Seattle Jewish Federation shooting occurred when Naveed Afzal Haq shot six
women, one fatally, at the Jewish Federation of Greater Seattle building in the
Belltown neighborhood of Seattle, Washington, United States. He shouted, "I'm a
Muslim American; I'm angry at Israel" before he began his shooting spree.
Police have classified the shooting as a hate crime based on what Haq said
during a 9-1-1 call. In 2012, the Palestinian Authority Grand Mufti of
Jerusalem, Muhammad Ahmad Hussein, citing Hadiths, called for the killing of
all Jews. In Egypt, Dar al-Fadhilah published a translation of Henry Ford's
antisemitic treatise, The International Jew, complete with distinctly
antisemitic imagery on the cover. Antisemitic comments by Muslim Leaders and
Scholars. Yusuf al-Qaradawi. Sheikh Yousef Al-Qaradhawi On Al-Jazeera Incites
Against Jews, Arab Regimes, and the U.S.; Calls on Muslims to Boycott Starbucks
and Others; Says 'Oh Allah, Take This Oppressive, Jewish, Zionist Band of
People... And Kill Them, Down to the Very Last One', MEMRITV – Clip #1979
January 12, 2009. "Throughout history, Allah has imposed upon the people who
would punish them for their corruption. The last punishment was carried out by
Hitler. By means of all the things he did to them – even though they
exaggerated this issue – he managed to put them in their place. This was
divine punishment for them. Allah willing, the next time will be at the hand of
the believers". Muhammad Hussein Yacoub. [http://www.memri.org/bin/
latestnews.cgi?ID=SD227809 Egyptian Cleric Muhammad Hussein Ya'qoub: The Jews
are the Enemies of Muslims Regardless of the Occupation of Palestine; 'Believe
That We Will Fight, Defeat, and Annihilate Them, Until Not a Single Jew Remains
on the Face of the Earth', Middle East Media Research Institute (MEMRI) –
Special Dispatch 2278, March 12, 2009. Ibrahim Mahdi.  Palestinian Authority
Sermons 2000–2003. Jewishvirtuallibrary.org. Retrieved on 2012-06-01. Ahmad
Bahr. Hamas Official Ahmad Bahr Preaches for the Annihilation of Jews and
Americans, MEMRI, Clip No. 3538, August 10, 2012. Sheik Bassam Al-Kayed. Sheik
Bassam Al-Kayed, Head of the Islamic Scholars Association in Lebanon: The Jews
Are Behind Almost All Civil Strife in the World, MEMRI, Clip No. 3550
(transcript), August 10, 2012. Sami Al-Arian. Sami Al-Arian, a leading Muslim
speaker in the U.S. until his arrest and conviction for funding an Islamist
terrorist organization, on September 29, 1991, said in a speech at a Chicago
conference that "God cursed those who are the sons of Israel", and that Allah
had made Jews "monkeys and swine", and damned them in this world and the
afterworld. Abdul Rahman Al-Sudais. Abdul Rahman Al-Sudais is the leading imam
of the Grand mosque located in the Islamic holy city of Mecca, Saudi Arabia.
The BBC aired a Panorama episode, entitled "A Question of Leadership", which
reported that al-Sudais referred to Jews as "the scum of the human race" and
"offspring of apes and pigs", and stated, "the worst ... of the enemies of
Islam are those ... whom he ... made monkeys and pigs, the aggressive Jews and
oppressive Zionists and those that follow them ... Monkeys and pigs and
worshippers of false Gods who are the Jews and the Zionists." Hazem Shuman. In
a sermon broadcast on Egypt's "Al-Rahma" TV channel on October 31, 2009,
Egyptian cleric Hazem Shuman stated, with regard to Jews that "Your turn has
come at last, you offspring of apes and pigs, you most accursed creatures
created by Allah, you people who have harmed the Prophet again and again” and
further stated that “It has been proven that the Jews are like a cancer –
if they are not removed from the body of the nation, they will kill the entire
nation.” Sheikh Ba'd bin Abdallah Al-Ajameh Al-Ghamidi. He also said Jews are
"the scum of the human race, the rats of the world, the violators of pacts and
agreements, the murderers of the prophets, and the offspring of apes and pigs."
Egyptian Sheikh Muhammad Sayyid Tantawy, Grand Imam of Al-Azhar Mosque and
Grand Sheikh of Al-Azhar University, and "perhaps the foremost Sunni Arab
authority", has been criticized for remarks made in April 2002, described Jews
in his weekly sermon as "the enemies of Allah, descendants of apes and pigs."
Mahathir bin Muhammad. Mahathir bin Mohamad, who served as Prime Minister of
Malaysia from 1981 to 2003, has made a number of public remarks about Jews. In
1970, he wrote in his controversial book "The Malay Dilemma": ""The Jews for
example are not merely hook-nosed, but understand money instinctively."" Saudi
School Books. A May 2006 study of Saudi Arabia's revised schoolbook curriculum
discovered that the eighth grade books included the following statements, Saudi
textbooks for 9th graders teach that "the annihilation of the Jewish people is
imperative." Heads of American publishing houses have issued a statement asking
the Saudi government to delete the "hate". Other Statements. On May 5, 2001,
after Shimon Peres visited Egypt, the Egyptian al-Akhbar internet paper stated
that: "lies and deceit are not foreign to Jews... For this reason, Allah
changed their shape and made them into monkeys and pigs." Erel Shalit, "Hero
and His Shadow: Psychopolitical Aspects of Myth and Reality in Israel",
University Press of America, 2004, ISBN 0-7618-2724-2, p. 21. Reconciliation
efforts. In Western countries, some Islamic groups and individual Muslims have
made scattered efforts to reconcile with the Jewish community through dialogue
and to oppose Antisemitism. For instance, in Britain there is the group Muslims
Against Anti-Semitism. Islamic studies scholar Tariq Ramadan has been outspoken
against antisemitism, stating: "In the name of their faith and conscience,
Muslims must take a clear position so that a pernicious atmosphere does not
take hold in the Western countries. Nothing in Islam can legitimize xenophobia
or the rejection of a human being due to his/her religious creed or ethnicity.
One must say unequivocally, with force, that anti-Semitism is unacceptable and
indefensible." Mohammad Khatami, former president of Iran, declared
antisemitism to be a "Western phenomena", having no precedents in Islam and
stating the Muslims and Jews had lived harmoniously in the past. An Iranian
newspaper stated that has been hatred and hostility in history, but conceded
that one must distinguish Jews from Zionists. In North America, the Council on
American-Islamic Relations has spoken against some antisemitic violence, such
as the 2006 Seattle Jewish Federation shooting. According to the Anti-
Defamation League, CAIR has also been affiliated with antisemitic organizations
such as Hamas and Hizbollah. The Prophet made absolute peace with the Jews of
Medina when he went there as an immigrant. That did not entail any love for
them or amiability with them. But the Prophet dealt with them, buying from
them, talking to them, calling them to God and Islam. When he died, his shield
was mortgaged to a Jew, for he had mortgaged it to buy food for his family.
Martin Kramer considers that as "an explicit endorsement of normal relations
with Jews". Trends. According to Norman Stillman, Antisemitism in the Muslim
world increased greatly for more than two decades following 1948 but "peaked by
the 1970s, and declined somewhat as the slow process of rapprochement between
the Arab world and the state of Israel evolved in the 1980s and 1990s."
Johannes J. G. Jansen believes that antisemitism will have no future in the
Arab world in the long run. In his view, like other imports from the Western
World, antisemitism is unable to establish itself in the private lives of
Muslims. In 2004 Khaleel Mohammed said that "Anti-Semitism has become an
entrenched tenet of Muslim theology, taught to 95 per cent of the religion's
adherents in the Islamic world", a claim immediately dismissed as false and
racist by Muslim leaders, who accused Mohammed of destroying efforts at
relationship building between Jews and Muslims. In 2010, Moshe Maʻoz,
Professor Emeritus of Islamic and Middle Eastern Studies at The Hebrew
University, edited a book questioning the common perception Islam is
antisemitic or anti-Israel, and maintaining that most Arab regimes and most
leading Muslim clerics have a pragmatic attitude to Israel. According to the
Pew Global Attitudes Project released on August 14, 2005, high percentages of
the populations of six Muslim-majority countries have negative views of Jews.
To a questionnaire asking respondents to give their views of members of various
religions along a spectrum from "very favorable" to "very unfavorable", 60% of
Turks, 74% of Pakistanis, 76% of Indonesians, 88% of Moroccans, 99% of Lebanese
Muslims and 100% of Jordanians checked either "somewhat unfavorable" or "very
unfavorable" for Jews. Islamic antisemitism in Europe. The Netherlands. In the
Netherlands, antisemitic incidents, from verbal abuse to violence, are
reported, allegedly connected with Islamic youth, mostly boys from Moroccan
descent. A phrase made popular during football matches against the so-called
Jewish football club Ajax has been adopted by Muslim youth and is frequently
heard at pro-Palestinian demonstrations: "Hamas, Hamas, Jews to the gas!".
According to the Centre for Information and Documentation on Israel, a pro-
Israel lobby group in the Netherlands, in 2009, the number of anti-Semite
incidents in Amsterdam, the city that is home to most of the approximately
40,000 Dutch Jews, was said to be doubled compared to 2008. In 2010, Raphaël
Evers, an orthodox rabbi in Amsterdam, told the Norwegian newspaper Aftenposten
that jews can no longer be safe in the city anymore due to the risk of violent
assaults. "Jews no longer feel at home in the city. Many are considering aliyah
to Israel." Belgium. There were recorded well over a hundred antisemitic
attacks in Belgium in 2009. This was a 100% increase from the year before. The
perpetrators were usually young males of immigrant background from the Middle
East. In 2009, the Belgian city of Antwerp, often referred to as Europe's last
shtetl, experienced a surge in antisemitic violence. Bloeme Evers-Emden, an
Amsterdam resident and Auschwitz survivor, was quoted in the newspaper
Aftenposten in 2010: "The antisemitism now is even worse than before the
Holocaust. The antisemitism has become more violent. Now they are threatening
to kill us." France. In 2004, France experienced rising levels of Islamic
antisemitism and acts that were publicized around the world. In 2006, rising
levels of antisemitism were recorded in French schools. Reports related to the
tensions between the children of North African Muslim immigrants and North
African Jewish children. The climax was reached when Ilan Halimi was tortured
to death by the so-called "Barbarians gang", led by Youssouf Fofana. In 2007,
over 7,000 members of the community petitioned for asylum in the United States,
citing antisemitism in France. Between 2001 and 2005, an estimated 12,000
French Jews took Aliyah to Israel. Several émigrés cited antisemitism and the
growing Arab population as reasons for leaving. At a welcoming ceremony for
French Jews in the summer of 2004, then Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon
caused controversy when he advised all French Jews to "move immediately" to
Israel and escape what he coined "the wildest anti-semitism" in France. In the
first half of 2009, an estimated 631 recorded acts of antisemitism took place
in France, more than the whole of 2008. Speaking to the World Jewish Congress
in December 2009, the French Interior Minister Hortefeux described the acts of
antisemitism as "a poison to our republic." He also announced that he would
appoint a special coordinator for fighting racism and antisemitism. Rises in
antisemitism in modern France have been linked to the intensifying
Israeli–Palestinian conflict. Since the Gaza War in 2009, decreases in
antisemitism have been reversed. A report compiled by the Coordination Forum
for Countering Anti-Semitism singled out France in particular amongst Western
countries for antisemitism. Between the start of the Israeli offensive in Gaza
in late December and the end of it in January, an estimated hundred antisemitic
acts were recorded in France. This compares with a total of 250 antisemitic
acts in the whole of 2007. Germany. According to a 2012 survey, 18% of the
Turks in Germany believe Jews are inferior human beings. Sweden. A government
study in 2006 estimated that 39% of the Muslim population, harbor strong and
consistent antisemitic views. Former Prime Minister Göran Persson described
these results as "surprising and terrifying". However, the Rabbi of Stockholm's
Orthodox Jewish community, Meir Horden claimed that "It's not true to say that
the Swedes are anti-Semitic. Some of them are hostile to Israel because they
support the weak side, which they perceive the Palestinians to be." In March
2010, Fredrik Sieradzk told "Die Presse", an Austrian Internet publication,
that Jews are being "harassed and physically attacked" by "people from the
Middle East," although he added that only a small number of Malmö's 40,000
Muslims "exhibit hatred of Jews." Sieradzk also stated that approximately 30
Jewish families have emigrated from Malmö to Israel in the past year,
specifically to escape from harassment. Also in March, the Swedish newspaper
"Skånska Dagbladet" reported that attacks on Jews in Malmö totaled 79 in
2009, about twice as many as the previous year, according to police statistics.
In early 2010, the Swedish publication "The Local" published series of articles
about the growing antisemitism in Malmö, Sweden. In an interview in January
2010, Fredrik Sieradzki of the Jewish Community of Malmö stated that
“Threats against Jews have increased steadily in Malmö in recent years and
many young Jewish families are choosing to leave the city. Many feel that the
community and local politicians have shown a lack of understanding for how the
city’s Jewish residents have been marginalized.” He also added that "right
now many Jews in Malmö are really concerned about the situation here and
don’t believe they have a future here.” The Local also reported that Jewish
cemeteries and synagogues have repeatedly been defaced with antisemitic
graffiti, and a chapel at another Jewish burial site in Malmö was firebombed
in 2009. In 2009 the Malmö police received reports of 79 antisemitic
incidents, double the number of the previous year (2008). Fredrik Sieradzki,
spokesman for the Malmö Jewish community, estimated that the already small
Jewish population is shrinking by 5% a year. “Malmö is a place to move away
from,” he said, citing antisemitism as the primary reason. In October 2010,
"The Forward" reported on the current state of Jews and the level of
antisemitism in Sweden. Henrik Bachner, a writer and professor of history at
the University of Lund, claimed that members of the Swedish Parliament have
attended anti-Israel rallies where the Israeli flag was burned while the flags
of Hamas and Hezbollah were waved, and the rhetoric was often antisemitic—not
just anti-Israel. But such public rhetoric is not branded hateful and
denounced. Charles Small, director of the Yale University Initiative for the
Study of Antisemitism, stated that “Sweden is a microcosm of contemporary
anti-Semitism. It’s a form of acquiescence to radical Islam, which is
diametrically opposed to everything Sweden stands for.” Per Gudmundson, chief
editorial writer for "Svenska Dagbladet", has sharply criticized politicians
who him claims offer “weak excuses” for Muslims accused of antisemitic
crimes. “Politicians say these kids are poor and oppressed, and we have made
them hate. They are, in effect, saying the behavior of these kids is in some
way our fault.” Judith Popinski, and 86-year-old Holocaust survivor, stated
that she is no longer invited to schools that have a large Muslim presence to
tell her story of surviving the Holocaust. Popinski, who found refuge in Malmö
in 1945, stated that, until recently, she told her story in Malmö schools as
part of their Holocaust studies program, but that now, many schools no longer
ask Holocaust survivors to tell their stories, because Muslim students treat
them with such disrespect, either ignoring the speakers or walking out of the
class. She further stated that "Malmö reminds me of the anti-Semitism I felt
as a child in Poland before the war. “I am not safe as a Jew in Sweden
anymore.” In December 2010, the Jewish human rights organization Simon
Wiesenthal Center issued a travel advisory concerning Sweden, advising Jews to
express "extreme caution" when visiting the southern parts of the country due
to an increase in verbal and physical harassment of Jewish citizens by Muslims
in the city of Malmö. Norway. In 2010, the Norwegian Broadcasting Corporation
after one year of research, revealed that anti-semitism was common among
Norwegian Muslims. Teachers at schools with large shares of Muslims revealed
that Muslim students often "praise or admire Adolf Hitler for his killing of
Jews", that "Jew-hate is legitimate within vast groups of Muslim students" and
that "muslims laugh or command to stop when trying to educate about the
Holocaust". Additionally that "while some students might protest when some
express support for terrorism, none object when students express hate of Jews"
and that it says in "the Quran that you shall kill Jews, all true Muslims hate
Jews". Most of these students were said to be born and raised in Norway. One
Jewish father also told that his child after school had been taken by a Muslim
mob (though managed to escape), reportedly "to be taken out to the forest and
hanged because he was a Jew".
