Jesus in Islam In Islam, Jesus (Isa; "") is considered to be a Messenger of God
and the "Masih" (Messiah) who was sent to guide the Children of Israel ("banī
isrā'īl") with a new scripture, the "Injīl" or Gospel. The belief in Jesus
(and all other messengers of God) is required in Islam, and a requirement of
being a Muslim. The Quran mentions Jesus by name twenty-five times, while it
only mentions Muhammad by name four times. It states that Jesus was born to
Mary (Arabic: Maryam) as the result of virginal conception, a miraculous event
which occurred by the decree of God (Arabic: Allah). To aid in his ministry to
the Jewish people, Jesus was given the ability to perform miracles (such as
healing the blind, bringing dead people back to life, etc.), all by the
permission of God rather than of his own power. According to the Quran, Jesus,
although appearing to have been crucified, was not killed by crucifixion or by
any other means, instead, "God raised him up to himself". Many Muslims believe
that Jesus will return to earth near the Day of Judgment to restore justice and
to defeat "Masih ad-Dajjal" ("the false messiah", also known as the
Antichrist). Like all prophets in Islam, Jesus is considered to have been a
"Muslim" (i.e., one who submits to the will of God), as he preached that his
followers should adopt the "straight path" as commanded by God. Islam rejects
the Trinitarian Christian view that Jesus was God incarnate or the son of God,
that he was ever crucified or resurrected, or that he ever atoned for the sins
of mankind. The Quran says that Jesus himself never claimed any of these
things, and it furthermore indicates that Jesus will deny having ever claimed
divinity at the Last Judgment, and God will vindicate him. The Quran emphasizes
that Jesus was a mortal human being who, like all other prophets, had been
divinely chosen to spread God's message. Islamic texts forbid the association
of partners with God ("shirk"), emphasizing a strict notion of monotheism
("tawhīd"). Numerous titles are given to Jesus in the Quran and in Islamic
literature, the most common being "al-Masīḥ" ("the messiah"). Jesus is also,
at times, called "Seal of the Israelite Prophets", because, in general Muslim
belief, Jesus was the last prophet sent by God to guide the Children of Israel.
Jesus is seen in Islam as a precursor to Muhammad, and is believed by Muslims
to have foretold the latter's coming. Jesus narrative in Islam. Birth. The
Quranic account of Jesus begins with a prologue, which describes the birth of
his mother, Mary, and her service in the Jerusalem temple, while under the care
of the prophet and priest Zechariah, who was to be the father of John the
Baptist. The Quran then goes on to describe the conception of Jesus. Mary whom
the Quran states was chosen by God over the women of all the worlds, conceives
Jesus while still a virgin. Annunciation. Mary had withdrawn into the Temple,
where she was visited by the angel Gabriel (Arabic: "Jibrail") to give the glad
tidings of a holy son. The Quran states that God sent the message through the
angel Gabriel to Mary that God had honoured Mary among the women of all
nations. The angel also told Mary that she will give birth to a holy son, named
Jesus, who will be a great prophet, to whom God will give the Gospel. The angel
further told Mary that Jesus will speak in infancy and maturity and will be a
companion to the most righteous. When this news was given to Mary, she asked
the angel how she could conceive and have a child when no man had touched her.
The reply of the angel to Mary was, "Even so: Allah createth what He willeth:
When He hath decreed a plan, He but saith to it, 'Be,' and it is!". The Quran,
therefore, states that Jesus was created from the act of God's will. The Quran
compares this miraculous creation of Jesus with the creation of Adam, where God
created Adam by his act of will ("kun-fa-yakun", meaning "Be and it is").
According to the Quran, the same answer was given to the question of Zechariah,
when he asked how his wife, Elizabeth, could conceive a baby as she was very
old. Birth of Jesus. The Quran narrates the virgin birth of Jesus numerous
times. The Quran states that, Mary while traveling in the desert of Bayt Lahm
(Bethlehem) was overcome by the pains of childbirth, during her agony and
helplessness, God provided a water stream under her feet from which she could
drink. Furthermore, as she was near a palm tree, Mary was told to shake the
trunk of the palm tree so that ripe dates would fall down from which she could
eat and be nourished. Mary cried in pain and held onto the palm, at which point
a voice came from "beneath her", understood by some to refer to Jesus, who was
yet in her womb, which said "Grieve not! Your Lord has provided a water stream
under you; And shake the trunk of palm tree, it will let fall fresh ripe-dates
upon you. And eat and drink and calm thy mind". That day, Mary gave birth to
her son Jesus in the middle of the desert. Mission. According to Islamic texts,
Jesus was divinely chosen to preach the message of monotheism and submission to
the will of God to the Children of Israel ("banī isrā'īl"). Ascension.
Islamic texts categorically deny the idea of crucifixion or death attributed to
Jesus by the Bible. The Quran states that people (i.e., the Jews and Romans)
sought to kill Jesus, but they did not crucify nor kill him, although "this was
made to appear to them." Muslims believe that Jesus was not crucified but
instead, he was raised up by God unto the heavens. This "raising" is often
understood to mean through bodily ascension, although, according to the Quran,
God raised him "unto himself" rather than "the heavens" after rescuing him from
an accursed death on the cross, which suggests a raising of status as a true
prophet and Messiah by the protection of the omnipresent God, when many were in
doubt of his truthfulness. Similar to the raising of the prophet Idris (Enoch)
in the 19th chapter of the Quran, Substitution interpretation. While most
western scholars, Jews, and Christians believe Jesus died, most Muslims believe
he ascends to Heaven without being put on the cross and God transformed another
person to appear exactly like Jesus who was crucified instead of Jesus. Jesus
ascended bodily to Heaven, there to remain until his Second coming in the End
days. Second coming. According to Islamic tradition which describes this
graphically, Jesus' descent will be in the midst of wars fought by the Mahdi
("lit". "the rightly guided one"), known in Islamic eschatology as the redeemer
of Islam, against the Antichrist ("al-Masīh ad-Dajjāl", "False messiah") and
his followers. Jesus will descend at the point of a white arcade, east of
Damascus, dressed in yellow robes – his head anointed. He will then join the
Mahdi in his war against the Antichrist. Jesus, considered as a Muslim, will
abide by the Islamic teachings. Eventually, Jesus will slay the Antichrist, and
then everyone from the People of the Book ("ahl al-kitāb", referring to Jews
and Christians) will believe in him. Thus, there will be one community, that of
Islam. After the death of the Mahdi, Jesus will assume leadership. This is a
time associated in Islamic narrative with universal peace and justice. Islamic
texts also allude to the appearance of Ya'juj and Ma'juj (known also as Gog and
Magog), ancient tribes which will disperse and cause disturbance on earth. God,
in response to Jesus' prayers, will kill them by sending a type of worm in the
napes of their necks. Jesus' rule is said to be around forty years, after which
he will die. Muslims will then perform the funeral prayer for him and then bury
him in the city of Medina in a grave left vacant beside Muhammad, Abu Bakr, and
Umar (companions of Muhammad and the first and second Sunni caliphs
("Rashidun") respectively). Some Muslims also hold to the apocryphal prophecies
regarding the coming of the Paraclete (Praiseworthy One), such as that in the
Epistle of the Apostles, as referring to Muhammad. In Islamic thought. Jesus is
described by various means in the Quran. The most common reference to Jesus
occurs in the form of "Ibn Maryam" (son of Mary), sometimes preceded with
another title. Jesus is also recognised as a prophet ("nabī") and messenger
("rasūl") of God. The terms "wadjih" ("worthy of esteem in this world and the
next"), "mubārak" ("blessed", or "a source of benefit for others"), "`abd-
Allāh" (servant of God) are all used in the Quran in reference to Jesus.
Another title frequently mentioned is "al-Masīḥ", which translates to "the
Messiah". This does not correspond to the Christian concept of Messiah, as
Islam regards all prophets, including Jesus, to be mortal and without any share
in divinity. Muslim exegetes explain the use of the word "masīh" in the Quran
as referring to Jesus' status as the one anointed by means of blessings and
honors; or as the one who helped cure the sick, by anointing the eyes of the
blind, for example. Quranic verses also employ the term ""kalimat Allah""
(meaning the "word of God") as a descriptor of Jesus, which is interpreted as a
reference to the creating word of God, uttered at the moment of Jesus'
conception; or as recognition of Jesus' status as a messenger of God, speaking
on God's behalf. Theology. The Christian doctrine of the Trinity is similarly
rejected in Islam. Such notions of the divinity of Jesus, Muslims state,
resulted from human interpolations of God's revelation. Islam views Jesus as a
human like all other prophets, who preached that salvation came through
submission to God's will and worshiping God alone. Thus, Jesus is considered in
Islam to have been a Muslim by the definition of the term (i.e., one who
submits to God's will), as were all other prophets in Islam. Precursor to
Muhammad. Muslims believe that Jesus was a precursor to Muhammad, and that he
announced the latter's coming. They base this on a verse of the Quran wherein
Jesus speaks of a messenger to appear after him named Ahmad. Islam associates
Ahmad with Muhammad, both words deriving from the "h-m-d" triconsonantal root
which refers to praiseworthiness. Muslims also assert that evidence of Jesus'
pronouncement is present in the New Testament, citing the mention of the
Paraclete whose coming is foretold in the Gospel of John. Muslim commentators
claim that the original Greek word used was "periklutos", meaning famed,
illustrious, or praiseworthy – rendered in Arabic as Ahmad; and that this was
replaced by Christians with "parakletos". The tree shown right depicts lineage.
Ascetic literature. Jesus is widely venerated in Muslim ascetic and mystic
literature, such as in Muslim mystic Al-Ghazzali's "Ihya `ulum ad-Din" ("The
revival of the religious sciences"). These works lay stress upon Jesus'
poverty, his preoccupation with worship, his detachment from worldly life and
his miracles. Such depictions also include advice and sermons which are
attributed to him. Later Sufic commentaries adapted material from Christian
gospels which were consistent with their ascetic portrayal. Sufi philosopher
Ibn Arabi described Jesus as "the seal of universal holiness" due to the
quality of his faith and "because he holds in his hands the keys of living
breath and because he is at present in a state of deprivation and journeying."
Ahmadiyya views. The Ahmadiyya view of Jesus, while agreeing that Jesus was a
mortal prophet, breaks with mainstream Islamic interpretation by asserting that
Jesus was not raised physically to Heaven. They claim that he instead, survived
the crucifixion and later died a natural death after having migrated towards
India. A position Ahmadis claim is backed by the Quran and the Gospels and one
which they have adopted as a characteristic of their faith. Ahmadis identify
Jesus with Yuz Asaf who is entombed at the Roza Bal shrine in Srinagar, Kashmir
The physical coming of the same Israelite Jesus would disqualify Muhammad as
the final prophet, on whom religion was completed. Ahmadis believe the advent
of the Imam Mahdi and the prophecies of the second coming of Jesus were
fulfilled through the person of Mirza Ghulam Ahmad.
