Islamic–Jewish relations Islamic–Jewish relations started in the 7th
century CE with the origin and spread of Islam in the Arabian peninsula. The
two religions share similar values, guidelines, and principles. Islam also
incorporates Jewish history as a part of its own. Muslims regard the Children
of Israel as an important religious concept in Islam. Moses, the most important
prophet of Judaism, is also considered a prophet and messenger in Islam. Moses
is mentioned more in the Quran than any other individual, and his life is
narrated and recounted more than that any other prophet. There are
approximately forty-three references to the Israelites in the Quran (excluding
individual prophets), and many in the Hadith. Later rabbinic authorities and
Jewish scholars such as Maimonides discussed the relationship between Islam and
Jewish law. Maimonides himself, it has been argued, was influenced by Islamic
legal thought. Because Islam and Judaism share a common origin in the Middle
East through Abraham, both are considered Abrahamic religions. There are many
shared aspects between Judaism and Islam; Islam was strongly influenced by
Judaism in its fundamental religious outlook, structure, jurisprudence and
practice. Because of this similarity, as well as through the influence of
Muslim culture and philosophy on the Jewish community within the Islamic world,
there has been considerable and continued physical, theological, and political
overlap between the two faiths in the subsequent 1,400 years. Religious
figures. Hebrew and Arab peoples are generally classified as Semitic, a concept
derived from Biblical accounts of the origins of the cultures known to the
ancient Hebrews. Those closest to them in culture and language were generally
deemed to be descended from their forefather Shem, one of the sons of Noah.
Enemies were often said to be descendants of his cursed nephew Canaan, grandson
of Noah, son of Ham. Modern historians confirm the affinity of ancient Hebrews
and Arabs based on characteristics that are usually transmitted from parent to
child, such as genes and habits, with the most well-studied criterion being
language. Similarities between Semitic languages (including Hebrew and Arabic)
and their differences with those spoken by other adjacent people confirm the
common origin of Hebrews and Arabs among other Semitic nations. Around the 12th
century BCE, Judaism developed as a monotheistic religion. According to Jewish
tradition, the history of Judaism begins with the Covenant between God and
Abraham, who is considered a Hebrew. (The first Hebrew being Eber, a forefather
of Abraham.) The Hebrew Bible occasionally refers to "Arvi" peoples (or
variants thereof), translated as "Arab" or "Arabian" deriving from "Arava"
plain, the dwellers of plains. Some Arabs of the Arabian Peninsula are
considered descendants of Ismael, the first son of Abraham. While the commonly
held view among historians, most Westerners and some lay Muslims is that Islam
originated in Arabia with Muhammad's first recitations of the Qur'an in the 7th
century CE, In Islam`s view, the Qur'an itself asserts that it was Adam who is
the first Muslim (in the sense of believing in God and surrendering to God and
God's commands). Islam also shares many traits with Judaism (as well as with
Christianity), like the belief in and reverence for common prophets, such as
Moses and Abraham, who are recognized in both faiths. Abraham. Judaism and
Islam are known as "Abrahamic religions". The first Abrahamic religion was
Judaism as practiced in the wilderness of the Sinai peninsula subsequent to the
Exodus of the Hebrews from Egypt and continuing as the Hebrews entered the land
of Canaan to conquer and settle it. The kingdom eventually split into the
kingdoms of Israel and Judah prior to the Babylonian Exile, at the beginning of
the 1st millennium CE. The firstborn son of Abraham, Ishmael, is considered by
Muslims to be the "Father of the Arabs". Abraham's second son Isaac is called
"Father of the Hebrews". In Islamic tradition Isaac is viewed as the
grandfather of all Israelites and the promised son of Abraham from his barren
wife Sarah. In Hadith, Muhammad says that some forty thousands prophets and
messengers came from Abraham's seed, most of these were from Isaac, and that
the last one in this line was Jesus. In the Jewish tradition Abraham is called
"Avraham Avinu" or "Our Father Abraham". For Muslims, he is considered an
important prophet of Islam (see "Ibrahim") and the ancestor of Muhammad through
Ishmael. Abraham is called the Friend of God in Islam and is regarded as one of
the prophets of Islam alongside Noah, Moses, Jesus and Mohammed among others.
Muhammad. In the course of Muhammad's proselytizing in Makkah/Mecca, he
initially viewed Christians and Jews (both of whom he referred to as "People of
the Book") as natural allies, sharing the core principles of his teachings, and
anticipated their acceptance and support. Ten years after his first revelation
in Mount Hira, a delegation consisting of the representatives of the twelve
important clans of Medina pledged to physically protect Muhammad and invited
him as a neutral outsider to Medina to serve as chief arbitrator for the entire
community, which had been fighting with each other for around a hundred years
and was in need of an authority. Among the things Muhammad did in order to
settle down the longstanding grievances among the tribes of Medina was drafting
a document known as the Constitution of Medina. The community defined in the
Constitution of Medina had a religious outlook but was also shaped by the
practical considerations and substantially preserved the legal forms of the old
Arab tribes. Muhammad also adopted some features of the Jewish worship and
customs such as fasting on the Yom Kippur day. According to Alford Welch, the
Jewish practice of having three daily prayer rituals appears to have been a
factor in the introduction of the Islamic midday prayer but that Muhammad's
adoption of facing north towards Qiblah (position of Jerusalem - Islam's first
Qiblah or direction of prayer, and now present Qiblah towards Kabah in Makkah)
when performing the daily prayers however was also practiced among other groups
in Arabia. Many Medinans converted to the faith of the Meccan immigrants,
particularly pagan and polytheist tribes, but Jews kept aloof though few
converts from them. The Jews rejected Muhammad's claim to prophethood, and
further argued that some passages in the Qur'an contradicted with the Torah.
Their opposition was due to political as well as religious reasons, as many
Jews in Medina had close links with Abd-Allah ibn Ubayy, who was partial to the
Jews and would have been Medina's prince if not for Muhammad's arrival. Mark
Cohen adds that Muhammad appeared "centuries after the cessation of biblical
prophecy" and "couched his message in a verbiage foreign to Judaism both in its
format and rhetoric." Maimonides, a Jewish scholar, referred to Muhammad as a
false prophet. Moreover, Maimonides asserted that Muhammad's claim to
prophethood was in itself what disqualified him, because it contradicted the
prophecy of Moses, the Torah and the Oral Tradition. His argument further
asserted that Muhammad being illiterate also disqualified him from being a
prophet. In the Constitution of Medina, Jews were given equality to Muslims in
exchange for political loyalty and were allowed to practice their own culture
and religion. However, as Muhammad encountered opposition from the Jews,
Muslims began to adopt a more negative view on the Jews. Jews' violation of the
Constitution of Medina by aiding the enemies of the community finally brought
on major battles of Badr and Uhud which resulted in Muslim's victory and the
exile of the Banu Qainuqa and Banu Nadir, two of the main three Jewish tribes
from Medina. Other prophets. Both regard many people as being prophets with
exceptions. Both unlike Christianity teach Eber, Job, and Joseph were prophets.
However according to one sage in Judaism the whole story attributed to Job was
an allegory and Job never actually existed. Rashi, a Jewish commentator on the
Hebrew Scriptures quotes a text dating to 160CE, which is also quoted in the
Talmud on his commentary on Genesis 10 to show that Eber was a prophet.
Historical interaction. Jews have often lived in predominantly Islamic nations.
Since many national borders have changed over the fourteen centuries of Islamic
history, a single community, such as the Jewish community in Cairo, may have
been contained in a number of different nations over different periods. Middle
Ages. In the Iberian Peninsula, under Muslim rule, Jews were able to make great
advances in mathematics, astronomy, philosophy, chemistry and philology. This
era is sometimes referred to as the Golden age of Jewish culture in the Iberian
Peninsula. Traditionally Jews living in Muslim lands, known (along with
Christians) as dhimmis, were allowed to practice their religion and to
administor their internal affairs but subject to certain conditions. They had
to pay the jizya (a per capita tax imposed on free, adult non-Muslim males) to
the Muslim government but is exempted from paying the zakat (a tax imposed on
free, adult Muslim males). Dhimmis were prohibited from bearing arms or giving
testimony in most Muslim court cases, for there were many Sharia laws which did
not apply to Dhimmis, who practiced Halakha. A common misconception is that of
the requirement of distinctive clothing, which is a law not taught by the
Qur'an or hadith but invented by the Shia in early medieval Baghdad. Jews
rarely faced martyrdom or exile, or forced compulsion to change their religion,
and they were mostly free in their choice of residence and profession. The
notable examples of massacre of Jews include the killing or forcible conversion
of them by the rulers of the Almohad dynasty in Al-Andalus in the 12th century.
Notable examples of the cases where the choice of residence was taken away from
them includes confining Jews to walled quarters (mellahs) in Morocco beginning
from the 15th century and especially since the early 19th century. Most
conversions were voluntary and happened for various reasons. However, there
were some forced conversions in the 12th century under the Almohad dynasty of
North Africa and al-Andalus as well as in Persia. The medieval Volga state of
Khazaria converted to Judaism, whereas its subject Volga Bulgaria converted to
Islam. Conversion of Jews to Islam. Islam seeks converts, and often
proselytizes to Jews. In modern times, some notable converts to Islam from a
Jewish background include Muhammad Asad (b. Leopold Weiss), Abdallah Schleifer
(b. Marc Schleifer), Youssef Darwish, and Maryam Jameelah (b. Margret Marcus).
More than 200 Israeli Jews converted to Islam between 2000 and 2008.
Historically, in accordance with traditional Islamic law, Jews generally
enjoyed freedom of religion in Islamic states as People of the Book. However,
certain rulers did historically enact forced conversions for political reasons
and religious reasons in regards to youth and orphans. A number of groups who
converted from Judaism to Islam have remained Muslim, while maintaining a
connection to and interest in their Jewish heritage. These groups include the
"anusim" or Daggataun of Timbuktu who converted in 1492, when Askia Muhammed
came to power in Timbuktu and decreed that Jews must convert to Islam or leave,
and the "Chala", a portion of the Bukharan Jewish community who were pressured
and many times forced to convert to Islam. In Persia, during the Safavid
dynasty of the 16th and 17th centuries, Jews were forced to proclaim publicly
that they had converted to Islam, and were given the name "Jadid-al-Islam" (New
Muslims). In 1661, an Islamic edict was issued overturning these forced
conversions, and the Jews returned to practicing Judaism openly. Similarly, to
end a pogrom in 1839, the Jews of Mashhad were forced to convert "en masse" to
Islam. They practiced Judaism secretly for over a century before openly
returning to their faith. At the turn of the 21st century, around 10,000 lived
in Israel, another 4,000 in New York City, and 1,000 elsewhere. (See Allahdad
incident.) In Turkey, the claimed messiah Sabbatai Zevi was forced to convert
to Islam in 1668. Most of his followers abandoned him, but several thousand
converted to Islam as well, while continuing to see themselves as Jews. They
became known as the Dönmeh (a Turkish word for a religious convert). Some
Donmeh remain today, primarily in Turkey. Conversion of Muslims to Judaism.
Judaism does not proselytize, and often discourages conversion to Judaism;
maintaining that all people have a covenant with God, and instead encourages
non-Jews to uphold the Seven Laws given to Noah. Conversions to Judaism are
therefore relatively rare, including those from the Islamic world. One famous
Muslim who converted to Judaism was Ovadyah, famous from his contact with
Maimonides. Reza Jabari, an Iranian flight attendant who hijacked the air
carrier Kish Air flight 707 between Tehran and the resort island of Kish in
September 1995, and landed in Israel converted to Judaism after serving four-
and-a-half years in an Israeli prison. He settled among Iranian Jews in the
Israeli Red Sea resort town of Eilat. Another such case includes Avraham Sinai,
a former Hezbollah fighter who, after the Israel-Lebanon War ended, fled to
Israel and converted from Islam to become a religious and practicing Jew.
Contemporary era. Iran contains the largest number of Jews among Muslim
countries and Uzbekistan and Turkey have the next largest communities. Iran's
Jewish community is officially recognized as a religious minority group by the
government, and, like the Zoroastrians, they were allocated a seat in the
Iranian parliament. In 2000 it was estimated that at that time there were still
30–35,000 Jews in Iran, other sources put the figure as low as 20–25,000.
They can not emigrate out of Iran, since the government only allows one family
member to leave & be out of the country at a time. A Jewish businessman was
hanged for helping Jews emigrate. In present times, the Arab-Israeli conflict
is a defining event in the relationship between Muslims and Jews. The State of
Israel was proclaimed on 14 May 1948, one day before the expiry of the British
Mandate of Palestine. Not long after, five Arab countries—Egypt, Syria,
Jordan, Lebanon and Iraq—attacked Israel, launching the 1948 Arab-Israeli
War. After almost a year of fighting, a ceasefire was declared and temporary
borders, known as the Green Line, were instituted. Jordan annexed what became
known as the West Bank and Egypt took control of the Gaza Strip. Israel was
admitted as a member of the United Nations on 11 May 1949. During the course of
the hostilities, 711,000 Arabs, according to UN estimates, fled or were
expelled. 1948 also saw a similar Jewish exodus from Arab lands where Jews were
forcibly expelled or fled from Arab nations due to persecution. Interfaith
activities. The Slovenian philosopher Slavoj Žižek has argued that the term
"Judeo-Muslim" to describe the middle-east culture against the western
Christian culture would be more appropriate in these days, claiming as well a
reduced influence from the Jewish culture on the western world due to the
historical persecution and exclusion of the Jewish minority. (Though there is
also a different perspective on Jewish contributions and influence.) A "Judaeo-
Christian-Muslim" concept thus refers to the three main monotheistic religions,
commonly known as the Abrahamic Religions. Formal exchanges between the three
religions, modeled on the decades-old Jewish-Christian interfaith dialogue
groups, became common in American cities following the 1993 Israeli-Palestinian
Oslo accords. Following 9/11, there was a break-down in interfaith dialogue
that included mosques, due to the increased attention to Islamic sermons in
American mosques, that revealed “anti-Jewish and anti-Israel outbursts by
previously respected Muslim clerics and community leaders.” One of the
country’s most prominent mosques is the New York Islamic Cultural Center,
built with funding from Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, and Malaysia. Its imam, Mohammad
Al-Gamei'a, disappeared two days after 9/11. Back in Egypt, he was interviewed
on an Arabic-language Web site, charging that the "Zionist media" had covered
up Jewish responsibility for the terrorist attack on the World Trade Center. He
agreed with Osama bin Laden's accusations in bin Laden's Letter to America,
claiming that Jews were guilty of "disseminating corruption, heresy,
homosexuality, alcoholism, and drugs." And he said that Muslims in America were
afraid to go to the hospital for fear that some Jewish doctors had "poisoned"
Muslim children. "These people murdered the prophets; do you think they will
stop spilling our blood? No," he said. The interview was published 4 October on
a Web site affiliated with Cairo's Al-Azhar University, Islam's most respected
theological academy. Immediately after 9/11, Imam Al-Gamei'a had presided over
an interfaith service at his mosque. At the service the imam was quoted as
saying, "We emphasize the condemnation of all persons, whoever they be, who
have carried out this inhuman act." The Reverend James Parks Morton, president
of the Interfaith Center of New York, who attended the service, called Imam Al-
Gamei'a's subsequent comments "astonishing." "It makes interfaith dialogue all
the more important," Reverend Morton said. Post 9/11 remarks made by Muslim
leaders in Cleveland and Los Angeles also led to the suspension of longstanding
Muslim-Jewish dialogues. Some Jewish community leaders cite the statements as
the latest evidence that Muslim-Jewish dialogue is futile in today's charged
atmosphere. John Rosove, senior rabbi of Temple Israel of Hollywood, and other
Jewish participants withdrew from the three-year-old Muslim-Jewish dialogue
group after one of the Muslim participants, Salam al-Marayati of MPAC,
suggested in a radio interview that Israel should be put on the list of
suspects behind the 11 September attacks. However in January 2011, MPAC member
Wa’el Azmeh and Temple Israel engaged in an interfaith dialogue. In
Cleveland, Jewish community leaders put Muslim-Jewish relations on hold after
the spiritual leader of a prominent mosque appeared in (a 1991) videotape
...aired after 9/11 by a local TV station. Imam Fawaz Damra calls for
"directing all the rifles at the first and last enemy of the Islamic nation and
that is the sons of monkeys and pigs, the Jews." The revelation was all the
more shocking since Imam Damra had been an active participant in local
interfaith activities. Good Jewish-Muslim relations continue in Detroit, which
has the nation's largest Arab-American community. Jewish organizations there
have established good relations with a religious group called the Islamic
Supreme Council of North America. In Los Angeles there has been a formation of
an interfaith think tank through the partnership of neighboring institutions
the University of Southern California, The Hebrew Union College, and Omar
Foundation. The Center for Muslim-Jewish Engagement has an extensive online
resource center with scholarly works on similar topics from Muslim and Jewish
perspectives. The Center of Muslim-Jewish Engagement has begun to launch an
interfaith religious text-study group to build bonds and form a positive
community promoting interfaith relations. Common aspects. There are many common
aspects between Islam and Judaism. As Islam developed it gradually became the
major religion closest to Judaism, both of them being strictly Monotheist
religious traditions originating in a Semitic Middle Eastern culture. As
opposed to Christianity, which originated from interaction between ancient
Greek and Hebrew cultures, Islam is similar to Judaism in its fundamental
religious outlook, structure, jurisprudence and practice. There are many
traditions within Islam originating from traditions within the Hebrew Bible or
from postbiblical Jewish traditions. These practices are known collectively as
the Isra'iliyat. The Qur'an speaks extensively about the Children of Israel
(Banû Isrâ'îl) and recognizes that the Jews (a-Yahûd) are, according to
lineage, descendants of Prophet Abraham through his son Isaac and grandson
Jacob. They were chosen by Allah for a mission: "And We chose them, purposely,
above (all) creatures." al-Dukhân: 32 Allah raised among them many Prophets
and bestowed upon them what He had not bestowed upon many others: "And
(remember) when Musa said unto his people: O my people ! Remember Allah's favor
unto you, how He placed among you Prophets, and He made you Kings, and gave you
that (which) He gave not to any (other) of (His) creatures." al-Mâ'idah: 20
He, also, exalted them over other nations of the earth and granted them many
favors: "O Children of Israel! Remember My favor wherewith I favored you and
how I preferred you to (all) creatures." al-Baqarah: 47 They were chosen by God
for a mission (44:32) and God raised among them many Prophets and bestowed upon
them what He had not bestowed upon many others (5:20). Holy scripture. Islam
and Judaism share the idea of a revealed Scripture. Even though they differ
over the precise text and its interpretations, the Hebrew "Torah" and the
Muslim "Qur'an" share a lot of narrative as well as injunctions. From this,
they share many other fundamental religious concepts such as the belief in a
day of Divine Judgment. Reflecting the vintage of the religions, the Torah is
traditionally in the form of a scroll and the Qur'an in the form of a codex.
Muslims commonly refer to Jews (and Christians) as fellow "People of the Book":
people who follow the same general teachings in relation to the worship of the
one God worshipped by Abraham - Allah. The "Qur'an" distinguishes between
"People of the Book" (Jews and Christians), who should be tolerated even if
they hold to their faiths, and idolaters (polytheists) who are not given that
same degree of tolerance (See Al-Baqara, 256). Some restrictions for Muslims
are relaxed, such as Muslim males being allowed to marry a woman from the
"People of the Book" (Qur'an, 5:5), or Muslims being allowed to eat Kosher
meat. Religious law. Judaism and Islam are unique in having systems of
religious law based on oral tradition that can override the written laws and
that does not distinguish between holy and secular spheres. In Islam the laws
are called Sharia, In Judaism they are known as Halakha. Both Judaism and Islam
consider the study of religious law to be a form of worship and an end in
itself. Rules of conduct. The most obvious common practice is the statement of
the absolute unity of God, which Muslims observe in their five times daily
prayers (Salah), and Jews state at least twice (Shema Yisrael), along with
praying 3 times daily. The two faiths also share the central practices of
fasting and almsgiving, as well as dietary laws and other aspects of ritual
purity. Under the strict dietary laws, lawful food is called "Kosher" in
Judaism and "Halal" in Islam. Both religions prohibit the consumption of pork.
Halal restrictions are similar to a subset of the Kashrut dietary laws, so all
kosher foods are considered halal, while not all halal foods are Kosher. Halal
laws, for instance, do not prohibit the mixing of milk and meat or the
consumption of shellfish, each of which are prohibited by the kosher laws. Both
Islam and traditional Judaism ban homosexuality and forbid human sexual
relations outside of marriage and necessitate abstinence during the wife's
menstruation. Both practice circumcision for males. Other similarities. Islam
and Judaism both consider the Christian doctrine of the trinity and the belief
of Jesus being God as explicitly against the tenets of monotheism. Idolatry,
worshiping graven images, is likewise forbidden in both religions. Both believe
in angels and demons (Sahtahn in Hebrew/Judaism and Al-Shai'tan in Arabic/
Islam) (However, many Jews do not consider angels nor demons to be literal
beings as stated by Rabbi Moshe Ben Maimon) and many angels possess similar
names and roles in both religions. Neither religion subscribes to the concept
of original sin. Both view homosexuality as sinful. Narrative similarities
between Jewish texts and the Hadith have also been noted. Both state Potiphar's
wife was named Zuleika. There is a small bone in the body at the base of the
spinal column called the Luz bone (known by differing traditions as either the
coccyx or the seventh cervical vertebra) from which the body will be rebuilt at
the time of resurrection, according to Muslims and Jews who share the belief
that this bone does not decay. Muslims books refer to this bone as "^Ajbu al-
Thanab" (عَجْبُ الذَّنَب). Rabbi Joshua Ben Hananiah replied to
Hadrian, as to how man revived in the world to come, "From Luz, in the back-
bone." Interplay between Jewish and Islamic thought. There was a great deal of
intellectual cultural diffusion between Muslim and Jewish rationalist
philosophers of the medieval era, especially in Muslim Spain. Saadia Gaon. One
of the most important early Jewish philosophers influenced by Islamic
philosophy is Rav Saadia Gaon (892–942). His most important work is "Emunoth
ve-Deoth" ("Book of Beliefs and Opinions"). In this work Saadia treats of the
questions that interested the "Mutakallimun" so deeply — such as the creation
of matter, the unity of God, the divine attributes, the soul, etc. — and he
criticizes the philosophers severely. The 12th century saw the apotheosis of
pure philosophy. This supreme exaltation of philosophy was due, in great
measure, to Ghazali (1058–1111) among the Arabs, and to Judah ha-Levi (1140)
among the Jews. Like Ghazali, Judah ha-Levi took upon himself to free religion
from the shackles of speculative philosophy, and to this end wrote the
"Kuzari", in which he sought to discredit all schools of philosophy alike.
Maimonides. Maimonides endeavored to harmonize the philosophy of Aristotle with
Judaism; and to this end he composed the work, "Dalalat al-Ḥairin" ("Guide
for the Perplexed") — known better under its Hebrew title "Moreh Nevuchim"
— which served for many centuries as the subject of discussion and comment by
Jewish thinkers. In this work, Maimonides considers creation, the unity of God,
the attributes of God, the soul, etc., and treats them in accordance with the
theories of Aristotle to the extent in which these latter do not conflict with
religion. For example, while accepting the teachings of Aristotle upon matter
and form, he pronounces against the eternity of matter. Nor does he accept
Aristotle's theory that God can have a knowledge of universals only, and not of
particulars. If He had no knowledge of particulars, He would be subject to
constant change. Maimonides argues: "God perceives future events before they
happen, and this perception never fails Him. Therefore there are no new ideas
to present themselves to Him. He knows that such and such an individual does
not yet exist, but that he will be born at such a time, exist for such a
period, and then return into non-existence. When then this individual comes
into being, God does not learn any new fact; nothing has happened that He knew
not of, for He knew this individual, such as he is now, before his birth"
("Moreh", i.20). While seeking thus to avoid the troublesome consequences
certain Aristotelian theories would entail upon religion, Maimonides could not
altogether escape those involved in Aristotle's idea of the unity of souls; and
herein he laid himself open to the attacks of the orthodox. Arabic philosophy
also found a following with the Jews, to whom belongs the honor of having
transmitted it to the Christian world. A series of eminent men — such as the
Tibbons, Narboni, and Gersonides — joined in translating the Arabic
philosophical works into Hebrew and commenting upon them. The works of Ibn
Roshd especially became the subject of their study, due in great measure to
Maimonides, who, in a letter addressed to his pupil Joseph ben Judah, spoke in
the highest terms of Ibn Roshd's commentary. Islam and the halakhah | Judaism |
Find Articles at BNET. Findarticles.com. Retrieved on 2010-10-19. Influence on
exegesis. Saadia Gaon's commentary on the Bible bears the stamp of the
Mutazilites; and its author, while not admitting any positive attributes of
God, except these of essence, endeavors to interpret Biblical passages in such
a way as to rid them of anthropomorphism. The Jewish commentator, Abraham ibn
Ezra, explains the Biblical account of Creation and other Scriptural passages
in a philosophical sense. Nahmanides (Rabbi Moshe ben Nahman), too, and other
commentators, show the influence of the philosophical ideas current in their
respective epochs. This salutary inspiration, which lasted for five consecutive
centuries, yielded to that other influence alone that came from the neglected
depths of Jewish and of Neoplatonic mysticism, and which took the name of
"Kabbalah". Islamic commentary on the Qur'an, or tafsir, also draws heavily on
Jewish sources. This is called "Isra'iliyat" Muslim-Jewish wars and military
conflicts. In the early days of Islam, the Jewish tribes of Arabia had broken
the peace treaty with the early Muslims, resulting a short conflict. The Jewish
tribes were expelled from Arabia. After the Muslims established control over
the Arabian peninsula, there were for 1300 years no direct wars and conflict
between Jews and Muslims. In the 20th century, the Zionist ideology was
created, which wanted to create a Jewish homeland in Palestine, this created
tensions between the Palestinians and Zionist Jews. In 1948, the state Israel
was born, shortly after its declaration of independence the Arab States
declared war on Israel, the Israelis were victorious. After the 1948 Arab-
Israeli War twelve more wars were fought between the Arab States and Israel.
These wars and conflicts were more political-nationalistic then religious. The
Arab-Israeli conflict has weakened the Islamic–Jewish relations severely, as
both Muslims and Jews regard the city of Jerusalem sacred.
