Jacob Jacob (; Standard¬ ', Tiberian¬ '; Septuagint '; '; "heel" or "leg-
puller"), also later known as Israel (, Standard¬ ', Tiberian¬ ', "persevere
with God"; Septuagint '; '), as described in the Hebrew Bible, the Talmud, the
New Testament and the Qur'an was the third patriarch of the Hebrew people with
whom God made a covenant, and ancestor of the tribes of Israel, which were
named after his descendants. In the Hebrew Bible, he is the son of Isaac and
Rebekah, the grandson of Abraham, Sarah and of Bethuel, and the younger twin
brother of Esau. Jacob had twelve sons and at least one daughter, by his two
wives, Leah and Rachel, and by their female slaves Bilhah and Zilpah. The
children named in Genesis were Reuben, Simeon, Levi, Judah, Dan, Naphtali, Gad,
Asher, Issachar, Zebulun, daughter Dinah, Joseph, and Benjamin. Before the
birth of Benjamin, Jacob is renamed "Israel" by an angel ( and ). The name
"Israel" can be translated as "God contended", but other meanings have also
been suggested. Some commentators say the name comes from the verb "≈õ≈ìarar"
("to rule, be strong, have authority over"), thereby making the name mean "God
rules" or "God judges". Other possible meanings include "the prince of God"
(from the King James Version) or "El fights/struggles". As a result of a severe
drought in Canaan, Jacob moved to Egypt at the time when his son Joseph was
viceroy. After Jacob died there 17 years later, Joseph carried Jacob's remains
to the land of Canaan, where he gave them stately burial in the same Cave of
Machpelah as were buried Abraham, Sarah, Isaac, Rebekah and Jacob's wife, Leah
(). Jacob in Genesis. The biblical account of the life of Jacob is found in the
Book of Genesis, chapters 25-50. Jacob and Esau's birth. Jacob and his twin
brother, Esau, were born to Isaac and Rebekah after 20 years of marriage, when
Isaac was 60 (, ). Rebekah was uncomfortable during her pregnancy and went to
inquire of God why she was suffering. She received the prophecy that the twins
were fighting in her womb and would continue to fight all their lives, even
after they became two separate nations. The prophecy also said that "the one
people shall be stronger than the other people; and the elder shall serve the
younger;" (Genesis 25:25 KJV) When the time came for Rebekah to give birth, the
firstborn, Esau, came out covered with red hair, as if he were wearing a hairy
garment, and his heel was grasped by the hand of Jacob, the secondborn.
According to Genesis 25:25, Isaac and Rebekah named the first son ◊¢◊©◊ï, Esau
(`Esav or `Esaw, meaning "hairy" or "rough", from , "`asah", "do" or "make"; or
"completely developed", from , "`assui"). The second son they named ◊ô◊¢◊ß◊ë,
Jacob (Ya`aqob or Ya`aqov, meaning "heel-catcher", "supplanter", "leg-puller",
"he who follows upon the heels of one", from , "`aqab" or "`aqav", "seize by
the heel", "circumvent", "restrain", a wordplay upon , "`iqqebah" or "`iqqbah",
"heel"). The boys displayed very different natures as they matured. "...and
Esau was a cunning hunter, a man of the field; but Jacob was a simple man,
dwelling in tents" (). Moreover, the attitudes of their parents toward them
also differed: "And Isaac loved Esau because he did eat of his venison: but
Rebekah loved Jacob." () Sale of the birthright. The Hebrew Bible, in (), tells
the account of Esau selling his birthright to Jacob. This passage states that
Esau, returning famished from the fields, begged Jacob to give him some of the
stew that Jacob had just made. (Esau referred to the dish as "that same red
pottage", giving rise to his nickname, ("`Edom", meaning "Red").) Jacob offered
to give Esau a bowl of stew in exchange for his birthright, to which Esau
agreed. Jacob's deception of Isaac. As Isaac aged, he became blind and was
uncertain when he would die, so he decided to bestow Esau's birthright upon
him. He requested that Esau go out to the fields with his weapons (quiver and
bow) to kill some venison. Isaac then requested that Esau make "savory meat"
for him out of the venison, according to the way he enjoyed it the most, so
that he could eat it and bless Esau. Rebekah overheard this conversation. It is
suggested that she realized prophetically that Isaac's blessings would go to
Jacob, since she was told before the twins' birth that the older son would
serve the younger. She quickly ordered Jacob to bring her two kid goats from
their flock so that he could take Esau's place in serving Isaac and receiving
his blessing. Jacob protested that his father would recognize their deception
since Esau was hairy and he himself was smooth-skinned. He feared his father
would curse him as soon as he felt him, but Rebekah offered to take the curse
herself, then insisted that Jacob obey her. Jacob did as his mother instructed
and, when he returned with the kids, Rebekah made the savory meat that Isaac
loved. Before she sent Jacob to his father, she dressed him in Esau's garments
and laid goatskins on his arms and neck to simulate hairy skin. Disguised as
Esau, Jacob entered Isaac's room. Surprised that Esau was back so soon, Isaac
asked how it could be that the hunt went so quickly. Jacob responded, "Because
the LORD your God brought it to me." Rashi, on says Isaac's suspicions were
aroused even more, because Esau never used the personal name of God. Isaac
demanded that Jacob come close so he could feel him, but the goatskins felt
just like Esau's hairy skin. Confused, Isaac exclaimed, "The voice is Jacob's
voice, but the hands are the hands of Esau!" . Still trying to get at the
truth, Isaac asked him directly, "Art thou my very son Esau?" and Jacob
answered simply, "I am." Isaac proceeded to eat the food and to drink the wine
that Jacob gave him, and then told him to come close and kiss him. As Jacob
kissed his father, Isaac smelled the clothes which belonged to Esau and finally
accepted that the person in front of him was Esau. Isaac then blessed Jacob
with the blessing that was meant for Esau. states Isaac's blessing: "Therefore
God give thee of the dew of heavens, and the fatness of the earth, and plenty
of corn and wine: Let people serve thee: be lord over thy brethren, and let thy
mother's sons bow down to thee: cursed be every one that curseth thee, and
blessed be he that blesseth thee." Jacob had scarcely left the room when Esau
returned from the hunt to prepare his game and receive the blessing. The
realization that he had been deceived shocked Isaac, yet he acknowledged that
Jacob had received the blessings by adding, "Indeed, he will be remain
blessed!" (27:33). Esau was heartbroken by the deception and begged for his own
blessing. Having made Jacob a ruler over his brothers, Isaac could only
promise, "By your sword you shall live, but your brother you shall serve; yet
it shall be that when you are aggrieved, you may cast off his yoke from upon
your neck" (27:39-40). Although Esau sold Jacob his own birthright, which was
his blessing, for "red pottage", Esau still hated Jacob for receiving his
blessing that their father Isaac unknowingly had given to him. (Genesis 27:41
KJV) He vowed to kill Jacob as soon as Isaac died. When Rebekah heard about his
murderous intentions, she ordered Jacob to travel to her brother Laban's house
in Haran, until Esau's anger subsided. She convinced Isaac to send Jacob away
by telling him that she despaired of his marrying a local girl from the idol-
worshipping families of Canaan (as Esau had done). After Isaac sent Jacob away
to find a wife, Esau realized his own Canaanite wives were evil in his father's
eyes and so he took a daughter of Isaac's half-brother, Ishmael, as another
wife. Jacob's ladder. Near Luz en route to Haran, Jacob experienced a vision of
a ladder, or staircase, reaching into heaven with angels going up and down it,
commonly referred to as "Jacob's ladder". He heard the voice of God, who
repeated many of the blessings upon him, coming from the top of the ladder..
According to Rashi, the ladder signified the exiles that the Jewish people
would suffer before the coming of the Jewish Messiah: the angels that
represented the exiles of Babylonia, Persia, and Greece each climbed up a
certain number of steps, paralleling the years of the exile, before they "fell
down"; but the angel representing the last exile, that of Rome or Edom, kept
climbing higher and higher into the clouds. Jacob feared that his children
would never be free of Esau's domination, but God assured him that at the End
of Days, Edom too would come falling down. In the morning, Jacob awakened and
continued on his way to Haran, after naming the place where he had spent the
night "Bethel", "God's house". Jacob's marriages. Arriving in Haran, Jacob saw
a well where shepherds were gathering their flocks to water them and met
Laban's younger daughter, Rachel, Jacob's first cousin; she was working as a
shepherdess. He loved her immediately, and after spending a month with his
relatives, asked for her hand in marriage in return for working seven years for
Laban. Laban agreed to the arrangement. These seven years seemed to Jacob "but
a few days, for the love he had for her", but when they were complete and he
asked for his wife, Laban deceived Jacob by switching Rachel's older sister,
Leah, as the veiled bride. In the morning, when the truth became known, Laban
justified his action, saying that in his country it was unheard of to give a
younger daughter before the older. However, he agreed to give Rachel in
marriage as well if Jacob would work another seven years. After the week of
wedding celebrations with Leah, Jacob married Rachel, and he continued to work
for Laban for another seven years. Jacob loved Rachel more than Leah, and Leah
felt hated. God opened Leah's womb and she gave birth to four sons rapidly:
Reuben, Simeon, Levi, and Judah. Rachel, however, remained barren. Following
the example of Sarah, who gave her handmaid to Abraham after years of
infertility, Rachel gave Jacob her handmaid, Bilhah, in marriage so that Rachel
could raise children through her. Bilhah gave birth to Dan and Naphtali. Seeing
that she had left off childbearing temporarily, Leah then gave her handmaid
Zilpah to Jacob in marriage so that Leah could raise more children through her.
Zilpah gave birth to Gad and Asher. (According to The Testaments of the
Patriarchs, Testament of Naphtali, Chapter 1, lines 9-12, Bilhah and Zilpah
were daughters of Rotheus and Euna, servants of Laban.) Afterwards, Leah became
fertile again and gave birth to Issachar, Zebulun, and Dinah, Jacob's first and
only daughter. God remembered Rachel, who gave birth to Joseph and Benjamin. If
pregnancies of different marriages overlapped, the twelve births could have
occurred within seven years (the first eleven births occur within six years -
Genesis 31:38). After Joseph was born, Jacob decided to return home to his
parents. Laban was reluctant to release him, as God had blessed his flock on
account of Jacob. Laban asked what he could pay Jacob. Jacob proposed that all
the spotted, speckled, and brown goats and sheep of Laban's flock, at any given
moment, would be his wages. Jacob placed peeled rods of poplar, hazel, and
chestnut within the flocks' watering holes or troughs, an action he later
attributes to a dream. The text suggests that Jacob performed breeding
experiments over the years to make his own flocks both more abundant and
stronger than Laban's, that Laban responded by repeatedly reinterpreting the
terms of Jacob's wages, and that the breeding favored Jacob regardless of
Laban's pronouncements. Thus Jacob's herds increased and he became very
wealthy. As time passed, Laban's sons noticed that Jacob was taking the better
part of their flocks, and so Laban's friendly attitude towards Jacob began to
change. God told Jacob that he should leave, which he and his wives and
children did without informing Laban. Before they left, Rachel stole the
"teraphim," considered to be household idols, from Laban's house. In a rage,
Laban pursued Jacob for seven days. The night before he caught up to him, God
appeared to Laban in a dream and warned him not to say anything good or bad to
Jacob. When the two met, Laban played the part of the injured father-in-law,
demanding his "teraphim" back. Knowing nothing about Rachel's theft, Jacob told
Laban that whoever stole them should die and stood aside to let him search.
When Laban reached Rachel's tent, she hid the "teraphim" by sitting on them and
stating she could not get up because she was menstruating; this event was
considered by the biblical audience as conveying significant defilement upon
the "teraphim." Jacob and Laban then parted from each other with a pact to
preserve the peace between them. Laban returned to his home and Jacob continued
on his way. Journey back to Canaan. As Jacob neared the land of Canaan, he sent
messengers ahead to his brother Esau. They returned with the news that Esau was
coming to meet Jacob with an army of 400 men. With great apprehension, Jacob
prepared for the worst. He engaged in earnest prayer to God, then sent on
before him a tribute of flocks and herds to Esau, "a present to my lord Esau
from thy servant Jacob". Jacob then transported his family and flocks across
the ford Jabbok by night, then recrossed back to send over his possessions,
being left alone in communion with God. There, a mysterious being appeared
("man", Genesis 32:24, 28; or "God", Genesis 32:28, 30, Hosea 12:3, 5; or
"angel", Hosea 12:4), and the two wrestled until daybreak. When the being saw
that he did not overpower Jacob, he touched Jacob on the sinew of his thigh
(the "gid hanasheh", ◊í◊ô◊ì ◊î◊ ◊©◊î), and as a result, Jacob developed a limp
(Genesis 32:31). Because of this, "to this day the people of Israel do not eat
the sinew of the thigh that is on the hip socket" (). This incident is the
source of the mitzvah of porging. Jacob then demanded a blessing, and the being
declared that from then on, Jacob would be called ◊ô÷¥◊©÷∞◊Ç◊®÷∏◊ê÷µ◊ú, Israel
("Yisra`el", meaning "one that struggled with the divine angel" (Josephus),
"one who has prevailed with God" (Rashi), "a man seeing God" (Whiston), "he
will rule as God" (Strong), or "a prince with God" (Morris), from , "prevail",
"have power as a prince"). Jacob asked the being's name, but he refused to
answer. Afterwards Jacob named the place Penuel ("Penuw`el", "Peniy`el",
meaning "face of God"), saying "I have seen God face to face and lived."
Because the terminology is ambiguous ("el" in "Yisra`el") and inconsistent, and
because this being refused to reveal his name, there are varying views as to
whether he was a man, an angel, or God. Josephus uses only the terms "angel",
"divine angel", and "angel of God", describing the struggle as no small
victory. According to Rashi, the being was the guardian angel of Esau himself,
sent to destroy Jacob before he could return to the land of Canaan.
Trachtenberg theorized that the being refused to identify itself for fear that,
if its secret name was known, it would be conjurable by incantations. Literal
Christian interpreters like Henry M. Morris say that the stranger was "God
Himself and, therefore, Christ in His preincarnate state", citing Jacob's own
evaluation and the name he assumed thereafter, "one who fights victoriously
with God", and adding that God had appeared in the human form of the Angel of
the LORD to eat a meal with Abraham in Genesis 18. In the morning, Jacob
assembled his 4 wives and 11 sons, placing the maidservants and their children
in front, Leah and her children next, and Rachel and Joseph in the rear. Some
commentators cite this placement as proof that Jacob continued to favor Joseph
over Leah's children, as presumably the rear position would have been safer
from a frontal assault by Esau, which Jacob feared. Jacob himself took the
foremost position. Esau's spirit of revenge, however, was apparently appeased
by Jacob's bounteous gifts of camels, goats and flocks. Their reunion was an
emotional one. Esau offered to accompany them on their way back to Israel, but
Jacob protested that his children were still young and tender (born 6 to 13
years prior in the narrative); Jacob suggested eventually catching up with Esau
at Mount Seir. According to the Sages, this was a prophetic reference to the
End of Days, when Jacob's descendants will come to Mount Seir, the home of
Edom, to deliver judgment against Esau's descendants for persecuting them
throughout the millennia (see Obadiah 1:21). Jacob actually diverted himself to
Succoth and was not recorded as rejoining Esau until, at Machpelah, the two
bury their father Isaac, who lived to 180 and was 60 years older than them.
Jacob then arrived in Shechem, where he bought a parcel of land, now identified
as Joseph's Tomb. In Shechem, Jacob's daughter Dinah was kidnapped and raped by
the ruler's son, who desired to marry the girl. Dinah's brothers, Simeon and
Levi, agreed in Jacob's name to permit the marriage as long as all the men of
Shechem first circumcised themselves, ostensibly to unite the children of Jacob
in Abraham's covenant of familial harmony. On the third day after the
circumcisions, when all the men of Shechem were still in pain, Simeon and Levi
put them all to death by the sword and rescued their sister Dinah, and their
brothers plundered the property, women, and children. Jacob condemned this act,
saying "You have brought trouble on me by making me a stench to the Canaanites
and Perizzites, the people living in this land." He later rebuked his two sons
for their anger in his deathbed blessing (Genesis 49:5-7). Jacob returned to
Bethel, where he had another vision of blessing. Although the death of Rebecca,
Jacob's mother, is not explicitly recorded in the Bible, Deborah, Rebecca's
nurse, died and was buried at Bethel, at a place that Jacob calls "Allon
Bachuth" (◊ê◊ú◊ï◊ü ◊ë◊õ◊ï◊™), "Oak of Weepings" (Genesis 35:8). According to
the Midrash, the plural form of the word "weeping" indicates the double sorrow
that Rebecca also died at this time. Jacob then made a further move while
Rachel was pregnant; near Bethlehem, Rachel went into labor and died as she
gave birth to her second son, Benjamin (Jacob's twelfth son). Jacob buried her
and erected a monument over her grave. Rachel's Tomb, just outside Bethlehem,
remains a popular site for pilgrimages and prayers to this day. Jacob then
settled in Migdal Eder, where his firstborn, Reuben, slept with Rachel's
servant Bilhah; Jacob's response was not given at the time, but he did condemn
Reuben for it later, in his deathbed blessing. Jacob was finally reunited with
his father Isaac in Mamre (outside Hebron). When Isaac died at the age of 180,
Jacob and Esau buried him in the Cave of the Patriarchs, which Abraham had
purchased as a family burial plot. At this point in the biblical narrative, two
genealogies of Esau's family appear under the headings "the generations of
Esau". A conservative interpretation is that, at Isaac's burial, Jacob obtained
the records of Esau, who had been married 80 years prior, and incorporated them
into his own family records, and that Moses augmented and published them. Jacob
in Hebron. The house of Jacob dwelt in Hebron, in the land of Canaan. His
flocks were often fed in the pastures of Shechem as well as Dothan. Of all the
children in his household, he loved Rachel‚Äôs firstborn son, Joseph, the most.
Thus Joseph‚Äôs half brothers were jealous of him and they ridiculed him often.
Joseph even told his father about all of his half brothers‚Äô misdeeds. When
Joseph was seventeen years old, Jacob made a long coat or tunic of many colors
for him. Seeing this, the half brothers began to hate Joseph. Then Joseph began
to have dreams that implied that his family would bow down to him. When he told
his brothers about these dreams, it drove them to conspire against him. When
Jacob heard of these dreams, he rebuked his son for proposing the idea that the
house of Jacob would even bow down to Joseph. Yet, he contemplated his son‚Äôs
words about these dreams. () Sometime afterward, the sons of Jacob by Leah,
Bilhah and Zilpah, were feeding his flocks in Shechem. Jacob wanted to know how
things were doing, so he asked Joseph to go down there and return with a
report. This was the last time he would ever see his son in Hebron. Later that
day, the report that Jacob ended up receiving came from Joseph's brothers who
brought before him a coat laden with blood. Jacob identified the coat as the
one he made for Joseph. At that moment he cried ‚ÄúIt is my son‚Äôs tunic. A
wild beast has devoured him. Without doubt Joseph is torn to pieces.‚Äù He rent
his clothes and put sackcloth around his waist mourning for days. No one from
the house of Jacob could comfort him during this time of bereavement. () The
truth was, Jacob‚Äôs son Joseph, was turned on by his brothers and ultimately
sold into slavery on a caravan headed for Egypt. () Seven year famine. Twenty
years later, throughout the Middle East a severe famine occurred like none
other that lasted seven years. It crippled nations. The word was that the only
kingdom prospering was Egypt. In the second year of this great famine, when
Israel (Jacob) was about 130 years old, he told his ten sons of Leah, Bilhah
and Zilpah, to go to Egypt and buy grain. Israel‚Äôs youngest son Benjamin,
born from Rachel, stayed behind by his father‚Äôs order to keep him safe. ()
When the ten sons returned to their father Israel, from Egypt, they were
stockpiled with grain on their donkeys. They relayed to their father all that
had happened in Egypt. They spoke of being accused of as spies and that their
brother Simeon, had been taken prisoner. When Reuben, the eldest, mentioned
that they needed to bring Benjamin to Egypt to prove their word as honest men,
their father became furious with them. He couldn‚Äôt understand how they were
put in a position to tell the Egyptians all about their family. When the sons
of Israel opened their sacks, they saw their money that they used to pay for
the grain. It was still in their possession, and so they all became afraid.
Israel then became angry with the loss of Joseph, Simeon, and now possibly
Benjamin. It turned out that Joseph, who identified his brothers in Egypt, was
able to secretly return that money that they used to pay for the grain, back to
them. When the house of Israel consumed all the grain that they brought from
Egypt, Israel told his sons to go back and buy more. This time, Judah spoke to
his father in order to persuade him about having Benjamin accompany them, so as
to prevent Egyptian retribution. In hopes of retrieving Simeon and ensuring
Benjamin's return, Israel told them to bring the best fruits of their land,
including: balm, honey, spices, myrrh, pistachio nuts and almonds. Israel also
mentioned that the money that was returned to their money sacks was probably a
mistake or an oversight on their part. So, he told them to bring that money
back and use double that amount to pay for the new grain. Lastly, he let
Benjamin go with them and said ‚Äúmay God Almighty give you mercy‚Ä¶ If I am
bereaved, I am bereaved!‚Äù () Jacob in Egypt. When the sons of Israel (Jacob)
returned to Hebron from their second trip, they came back with twenty
additional donkeys carrying all kinds of goods and supplies as well as Egyptian
transport wagons. When their father came out to meet them, his sons told him
that Joseph was still alive, that he was the governor over all of Egypt and
that he wanted the house of Israel to move to Egypt. Israel‚Äôs heart ‚Äústood
still‚Äù and just couldn‚Äôt believe what he was hearing. Looking upon the
wagons he declared ‚ÄúJoseph my son is still alive. I will go and see him
before I die.‚Äù () Israel and his entire house of seventy, gathered up with
all their livestock and began their journey to Egypt. En route, Israel stopped
at Beersheba for the night to make a sacrificial offering to his God, Yahweh.
Apparently he had some reservations about leaving the land of his forefathers,
but God reassured him not to fear that he would rise again. God also assured
that he would be with him, he would prosper, and he would also see his son
Joseph who would lay him to rest. Continuing their journey to Egypt, when they
approached in proximity, Israel sent his son Judah ahead to find out where the
caravans were to stop. They were directed to disembark at Goshen. It was here,
after twenty-two years, that Jacob saw his son Joseph once again. They embraced
each other and wept together for quite a while. Israel then said, ‚ÄúNow let me
die, since I have seen your face, because you are still alive.‚Äù () The time
had come for Joseph‚Äôs family to personally meet the Pharaoh of Egypt. After
Joseph prepared his family for the meeting, the brothers came before the
Pharaoh first, formally requesting to pasture in Egyptian lands. The Pharaoh
honored their stay and even made the notion that if there were any competent
men in their house, then they may elect a chief herdsman to oversee Egyptian
livestock. Finally, Joseph‚Äôs father was brought out to meet the Pharaoh.
Because the Pharaoh had such a high regard for Joseph, practically making him
his equal, it was an honor to meet his father. Thus, Israel was able to bless
the Pharaoh. The two chatted for a bit, the Pharaoh even inquiring of
Israel‚Äôs age which happened to be 130 years old at that time. After the
meeting, the families were directed to pasture in the land of Ramses where they
lived in the province of Goshen. The house of Israel acquired many possessions
and multiplied exceedingly during the course of seventeen years, even through
the worst of the seven-year famine. () Final days. Israel (Jacob) was 147 years
old when he called to his favorite son Joseph and pleaded that he not be buried
in Egypt. Rather, he requested to be carried to the land of Canaan to be buried
with his forefathers. Joseph swore to do as his father asked of him. Not too
long afterward, Israel had fallen ill losing much of his vision. When Joseph
came to visit his father, he brought with him his two sons, Ephraim and
Manasseh. Israel declared that they would be heirs to the inheritance of the
house of Israel, as if they were his own children, just as Reuben and Simeon
were. Then Israel laid his right hand on the younger Ephraim‚Äôs head and his
left hand on the eldest Manasseh‚Äôs head and blessed Joseph. However, Joseph
was displeased that his father‚Äôs right hand was not on the head of his
firstborn, so he switched his father‚Äôs hands. But Israel refused saying,
‚Äúbut truly his younger brother shall be greater than he.‚Äù A declaration he
made, just as Israel himself was to his firstborn brother Esau. Then Israel
called all of his sons in and prophesied their blessings or curses to all
twelve of them in order of their ages. () Afterward, Israel died and the
family, including the Egyptians, mourned him seventy days. Israel was embalmed
and a great ceremonial journey to Canaan was prepared by Joseph. He led the
servants of Pharaoh, and the elders of the houses Israel and Egypt beyond the
Jordan River to Atad where they observed seven days of mourning. Their
lamentation was so great that it caught the attention of surrounding Canaanites
who remarked ‚ÄúThis is a deep mourning of the Egyptians.‚Äù This spot was then
named Abel Mizraim. Then they buried him in the cave of Machpelah, the property
of Abraham when he bought it from the Hittites. () Sons of Jacob. Reuben (),
Simeon (), Levi (), Judah (), Dan (), Naphtali (), Gad (), Asher (), Issachar
(), Zebulun (), Dinah (), Joseph (), and Benjamin (). The offspring of Jacob's
sons became the tribes of Israel following the Exodus, when the Israelites
conquered and settled in the Land of Israel. Religious perspectives. Jewish
tradition. According to the classic Jewish texts, Jacob, as the third and last
patriarch, lives a life that parallels the descent of his offspring, the Jewish
people, into the darkness of exile. In contrast to Abraham ‚Äî who illuminates
the world with knowledge of God and earns the respect of the inhabitants of the
land of Canaan ‚Äî and Isaac ‚Äî who continues his father's teachings and also
lives in relative harmony with his neighbors ‚Äî Jacob experiences many
personal struggles both in the land and out of it - including the hatred of his
brother, Esau; the deception of his father-in-law, Laban; the rape of his
daughter, Dinah; the death of his favorite wife, Rachel; and the sale of his
son, Joseph. For this reason, the Jewish commentators interpret many elements
of his story as being symbolic of the future difficulties and struggles the
Jewish people would undergo. There are two opinions in the Midrash as to how
old Rebekah was at the time of her marriage and, consequently, at the twins'
birth. According to the traditional counting cited by Rashi, Isaac was 37 years
old at the time of the Binding of Isaac, and news of Rebekah's birth reached
Abraham immediately after that event. In that case, since Isaac was 60 when
Jacob and Essau were born and they had been married for 20 years, then Isaac
was 40 years old when he married Rebekah (Gen. 25:20), making Rebekah 3 years
old at the time of her marriage, and 23 years old at the birth of Jacob and
Essau. According to the second opinion, Rebekah was 14 years old at the time of
their marriage, and 34 years old at the birth of Jacob and Essau. In either
case, Isaac and Rebekah were married for 20 years before Jacob and Esau were
born. The Midrash says that during Rebekah's pregnancy whenever she would pass
a house of Torah study, Jacob would struggle to come out; whenever she would
pass a house of idolatry, Esau would agitate to come out. Rashi explained that
Isaac, when blessing Jacob instead of Esau, smelled the heavenly scent of Gan
Eden (Paradise) when Jacob entered his room and, in contrast, perceived Gehenna
opening beneath Esau when the latter entered the room, showing him that he had
been deceived all along by Esau's show of piety. When Laban planned to deceive
Jacob into marrying Leah instead of Rachel, the Midrash recounts that both
Jacob and Rachel suspected that Laban would pull such a trick; Laban was known
as the "Aramean" (deceiver), and changed Jacob's wages ten times during his
employ (Genesis 31:7). The couple therefore devised a series of signs by which
Jacob could identify the veiled bride on his wedding night. But when Rachel saw
her sister being taken out to the wedding canopy, her heart went out to her for
the public shame Leah would suffer if she were exposed. Rachel therefore gave
Leah the signs so that Jacob would not realize the switch. Jewish Apocalyptic
literature of the Hellenistic period includes many ancient texts with
narratives about Jacob, many times with details different from Genesis. The
more important are the book of Jubilees and the Book of Biblical Antiquities.
Jacob is also the protagonist of the Testament of Jacob, of the Ladder of Jacob
and of the Prayer of Joseph, which interpret the experience of this Patriarch
in the context of merkabah mysticism. Eastern Christianity. The Eastern
Orthodox Church and those Eastern Catholic Churches which follow the Byzantine
Rite see Jacob's dream as a prophecy of the Incarnation of the Logos, whereby
Jacob's ladder is understood as a symbol of the Theotokos (Virgin Mary), who,
according to Orthodox theology, united heaven and earth in her womb. The
biblical account of this vision () is one of the standard Old Testament
readings at Vespers on Great Feasts of the Theotokos. The account of Jacob's
blessing of Joseph's sons is also seen as prophetic by Christian commentators.
For example, the crossing of his arms to bestow his patriarchal blessing on
them in is seen as a foreshadowing of the blessings Christians believe resulted
from Jesus' death on the cross. Islamic tradition. Muslims revere Jacob
(Arabic: ŸäÿπŸÇŸàÿ® , Standard: "Ya'qub") as a Prophet of Islam who received
inspiration from God. He is acknowledged as a patriarch of Islam. Muslims
believe that he preached the same monotheistic faith as his forefathers
Abraham, Isaac and Ishmael. Jacob is mentioned 16 times in the Qur'an. In the
majority of these references, Jacob is mentioned alongside fellow prophets and
patriarchs as an ancient and pious prophet. According to the Qur'an, Jacob
remained in the company of the elect throughout his life. (XXXVIII: 47) The
Qur'an specifically mentions that Jacob was guided (VI: 84) and inspired (IV:
163) and was chosen to enforce the awareness of the Hereafter. (XXXVIII: 46)
Jacob is described as a good-doer (XXI: 72) and the Qur'an further makes it
clear that God inspired Jacob to contribute towards purification and hold the
contact prayer. (XXI: 73) Jacob is further described as being resourceful and a
possessor of great vision (XXXVIII: 45) and is further spoken of as being
granted a "tongue of truthfulness to be heard". (XIX: 50) Of the life of Jacob,
the Qur'an narrates two especially important events. The first is the role he
plays in the story of his son Joseph. The Qur'an narrates the story of Joseph
in detail, and Jacob, being Joseph's father, is mentioned thrice and is
referenced another 25 times. In the narrative, Jacob does not trust some of his
older sons (XII: 11, 18, 23) because they do not respect him. (XII: 8, 16-17)
Jacob's prophetic nature is evident from his foreknowledge of Joseph's future
greatness (XII: 6), his foreboding and response to the supposed death of Joseph
(XII: 13, 18) and in his response to the sons' plight in Egypt. (XII: 83, 86-
87, 96) Islamic literature fleshes out the narrative of Jacob, and mentions
that his wives included Rachel. Jacob is later mentioned in the Qur'an in the
context of the promise bestowed to Zechariah, regarding the birth of John the
Baptist. (XIX: 6) Jacob‚Äôs second mention is in the Qur'an‚Äôs second chapter.
As Jacob lay on his deathbed, he asked his twelve sons to testify their faith
to him before he departed from this world to the next. (II: 132) Each son
testified in front of Jacob that they would promise to remain Muslim until the
day of their death, that is they would surrender their wholeselves to God alone
and would worship only Him. In contrast to the Judeo-Christian view of Jacob,
one main difference is that the story of Jacob's blessing, in which he deceives
Isaac, is not accepted in Islam. The Qur'an makes it clear that Jacob was
blessed by God as a prophet and, therefore, Muslims believe that his father,
being a prophet as well, also knew of his son's greatness. Jacob is also cited
in the "Hadith" as an example of one who was patient and trusting in God in the
face of suffering. Jacob is also important as his life drew numerous parallels
with the life of Muhammad. Jacob suffered great loss repeatedly, as did
Muhammad in the Year of Sorrow, when both Khadija and Abu Talib died.
Muhammad‚Äôs famous Night Journey, when the prophet travelled through the
Heavens, has been seen by scholars as the obvious prophetic parallel to
Jacob‚Äôs equally famous vision of Jacob's Ladder coming down from the Heavens.
Muslim scholars have also linked both prophets through the fact that both
prophets made at least one important journey in their lives; just as Jacob
migrated from Canaan to Egypt, Muhammad migrated from Mecca to Medina. The
story of Jacob in Islam also draws many parallels with the Islamic traditions
of Job, In that both had lost many things, and still upheld patience. In
Islamic tradition, Jacob had lost his father, Isaac as well as his wife Rachel
in the same year, followed by his loss of his favorite son, Joseph. Similarly
Job lost everything, and stayed patient and kept faith in God, and eventually
everything was returned back to him and some things were multiplied for him.
Historicity. Most biblical scholars and historians of ancient Israel today view
the patriarchical narratives, including the life of Jacob, as late (6th and 5th
centuries BCE) literary compositions that have ideological and theological
purposes but are unreliable for historical reconstruction of the presettlement
period of Israel‚Äôs past.
