James the Just James (Hebrew: יעקב "Ya'akov"; Greek Ἰάκωβος
"Iákōbos"), first Bishop of Jerusalem, who died in 62 or 69, was an important
figure in Early Christianity. He is distinguished from the Apostle James, son
of Zebedee by various epithets; he is called James the brother of the Lord by
Paul (Galatians 1:19), James the brother of the Lord, surnamed the Just by
Hegesippus and others, "James the Righteous", "James of Jerusalem", "James
Adelphotheos" (Ἰάκωβος ὁ ἀδελφόθεος), and so on. James
became the leader of the Christian movement in Jerusalem in the decades after
Jesus' death, but like the rest of the early Christians, information about his
life is scarce and ambiguous. Apart from a handful of references in the
Gospels, the main sources for his life are the Acts of the Apostles, the
Pauline epistles, the historian Josephus, and St. Jerome who also quotes the
early Christian chronicler Hegesippus. The Epistle of James in the New
Testament is traditionally attributed to him, and he is a principal author of
the Apostolic Decree of Acts 15. In the extant lists of Hippolytus of Rome,
Dorotheus of Tyre, the Chronicon Paschale, and Dimitry of Rostov, he is the
first of the Seventy Apostles, though some sources, such as the Catholic
Encyclopedia, draw the conclusion that "these lists are unfortunately
worthless". Hegesippus in his fifth book of his Commentaries, writing of James,
says "After the apostles, James the brother of the Lord surnamed the Just was
made head of the Church at Jerusalem." As a consequence of the doctrine of
perpetual virginity, which does not allow that Mary had children after Jesus,
Jerome considered that the term "brother" of the Lord should be read "cousin",
and concluded that James "the brother of the Lord," (Gal.1:19) is therefore
James, son of Alphaeus, one of the Twelve Apostles of Jesus, as well as James,
the son of Mary Cleophas. He is not, however, identified with James the Great.
Other Christian denominations consider the Matthew 1:25 statement that Joseph
"knew her not till she had brought forth her firstborn son" to mean that Joseph
and Mary did have normal marital relations after Jesus' birth, and that James,
Joses, Jude, and Simon were the biological sons of Mary and Joseph; and, thus,
Jesus' half-brothers. Epithet. In the New Testament, James is simply "James",
other than Paul's one reference to "James, the brother of the Lord" (Galatians
1:19). Eusebius records that Clement of Alexandria related, "This James, whom
the people of old called the Just because of his outstanding virtue, was the
first, as the record tells us, to be elected to the episcopal throne of the
Jerusalem church."Jesus said to them, "No matter where you are, you are to go
to James the Just, for whose sake heaven and earth came into being."Miller,
Robert J., ed. (1994) "The Complete Gospels" Polebridge Press. ISBN 0-06-
065587-9 The name also helps distinguish him from other important figures in
early Christianity of the same name, such as James, son of Zebedee. He is
sometimes referred to in Eastern Christianity as "James Adelphotheos" (), i.e.,
"James the Brother of God". The oldest surviving Christian liturgy, the Liturgy
of St James, called him "the brother of God" ("Adelphotheos"). New Testament
sources. The earliest New Testament sources on James are the surviving Pauline
Epistles from about the sixth decade, describing events roughly during 35–55.
The Acts of the Apostles, written between 60 and 100, describes the same
period. The Gospels, with a disputed dating ranging from about 50 to as late as
110, describe the period of Jesus' ministry, around 30. In these sources, there
is more than one person named James, and different titles are used to
distinguish between them. Paul's epistles. The third mention of James in
Galatians is within the so-called "incident at Antioch". According to Paul,
Peter cared about James's opinion and what the other Christians thought. This
is generally taken as an indication that this James is the same as James, the
younger brother of Jesus. Acts of the Apostles. James is also an authority in
the early church at the Council of Jerusalem (James is quoting Amos 9:11–12).
Gospels. The Gospel of John never mentions anyone called James, but mentions
Jesus' unnamed "brothers" as being present with Mary when Jesus attended the
wedding at Cana (), but later that his brothers did not believe in him (). Two
disciples named James. The Synoptic Gospels, similarly to the Epistle to the
Galatians, recognize a core group of three disciples (Peter, John and James)
having the same names as those given by Paul. However, the James in this group
is sometimes called the brother of John, which would be James the Great, who is
definitely not James the brother of Jesus. And he called to him his twelve
disciples and gave them authority over unclean spirits, to cast them out, and
to heal every disease and every affliction. The names of the twelve apostles
are these: first, Simon, who is called Peter, and Andrew his brother; James the
son of Zebedee, and John his brother; Philip and Bartholomew; Thomas, and
Matthew the tax collector; James the son of Alphaeus, and Thaddaeus; Simon the
Cananaean, and Judas Iscariot, who betrayed him. James, the son of Zebedee, is
also known as James the Great, who is not the same James as James the Just.
James, son of Alphaeus, however, is usually identified with James the Less. .
James, son of Mary. A Mary is also later mentioned as the mother of a James,
both in the Gospel of Mark and in the Gospel of Matthew. Catholic
interpretation generally holds that this James is to be identified with James,
the son of Alphaeus and James, the brother of Jesus.   . Other sources. The
Jerusalem Church. Fragment X of Papias (writing in the second century) refers
to "James the bishop and apostle". According to Eusebius, the Jerusalem church
escaped to Pella during the siege of Jerusalem by the future Emperor Titus in
70 and afterwards returned, having a further series of Jewish bishops until the
Bar Kokhba revolt in 130. Following the second destruction of Jerusalem and the
rebuilding of the city as Aelia Capitolina, subsequent bishops were Greeks. The
evidence of Eusebius is confirmed by the account of the Bordeaux Pilgrim. Early
Christian apocrypha. Some apocryphal gospels testify to the reverence Jewish
followers of Jesus (like the Ebionites) had for James. The Gospel of the
Hebrews fragment 21 confirms the account of Paul in 1 Corinthians regarding the
risen Jesus' appearance to James, and this is mentioned also by the Gospel of
Thomas (one of the works included in the Nag Hammadi library), saying 12,
relates that the disciples asked Jesus, "We are aware that you will depart from
us. Who will be our leader?" Jesus said to him, "No matter where you come it is
to James the Just that you shall go, for whose sake heaven and earth have come
to exist." Epiphanius' (Panarion 29.4) describes James as a Nazirite. The
pseudepigraphical First Apocalypse of James associated with James's name
mentions many details, some of which may reflect early traditions: he is said
to have authority over the twelve apostles and the early church; this work also
adds, somewhat puzzlingly, that James left Jerusalem and fled to Pella before
the Roman siege of that city in 70. (Ben Witherington suggests what is meant by
this was that James's bones were taken by the early Christians who had fled
Jerusalem). The Apocryphon of James, the sole copy of which was found in the
Nag Hammadi library and which may have been written in Egypt in the 3rd
century, recounts a post-resurrection appearance of the risen Christ to James
and Peter that James is said to have recorded in Hebrew. In the dialogue, Peter
speaks twice (3:12; 9:1) but misunderstands Jesus. Only James is addressed by
name (6:20), and James is the more dominant of the two. The Gospel of James (or
"Infancy Gospel of James"), a work of the 2nd century, also presents itself as
written by James — a sign that his authorship would lend authority — and so
do several tractates in the codices found at Nag Hammadi. Relationship to
Jesus. Jesus' brothers — James as well as Jude, Simon and Joses — are named
in Matthew 13:55 and Mark 6:3 and mentioned elsewhere. James's name always
appears first in lists, which suggests he was the eldest among them. In the
passage in Josephus's "Jewish Antiquities" (20.9.1), the Jewish historian
describes James as "the brother of Jesus who is called Christ", although it is
not known whether this is original or added by later Christian editors/
copyists. Paul, recounting his conversion, recalls, "Then after three years I
went up to Jerusalem to visit Cephas and remained with him fifteen days. But I
saw none of the other apostles except James the Lord's brother." Interpretation
of the phrase "brother of the Lord" and similar phrases is divided between
those who interpret the phrase literally and those (Catholics, Eastern Orthodox
and some Protestants) who presuppose the perpetual virginity of Mary and
therefore do not also accept an absolutely literal interpretation. Younger
half-brother, son of Mary and Joseph. The Mosaic Law advised married couples to
be fruitful and have many children. According to this hypothesis, Mary and
Joseph as zealous Jews would may have attempted to have more children after
Mary gave birth to Jesus, thus making James a brother of Jesus. The New
Testament says that Jesus was miraculously conceived and born of a virgin, and
Jesus is referred to as the "first-born son" of Mary, so James and the other
so-called brethren of Jesus could have been younger brothers. However, Luke's
reporting of the visit of Mary, Joseph, and Jesus to the Temple of Jesualem
when Jesus was 12 makes no reference to brothers. Moreover, John's Gospel
reveals that while Jesus dies on the cross, he entrusted care of his mother to
his disciple John, whereas if he had had brothers Mosaic Law would have demand
that they care for her. Younger half-brother, son of Mary and a second husband.
A variant on this is presented by James Tabor, who argues that after the early
and childless death of Joseph, Mary married Clopas, whom he accepts as a
younger brother of Joseph, according to the Levirate law. According to this
view, Clopas fathered James and the later siblings, but not Jesus. John Dominic
Crossan suggested that James was probably Jesus' older brother. Older
stepbrother, son of Joseph by an earlier marriage. Jerome asserts in his tract
"The Perpetual Virginity of Blessed Mary" that the term "first-born" was used
to refer to any offspring that opened the womb, rather than definitely implying
other children. The Protevangelium of James assumes the Greek nature of Jewish
practices during this period in history and says that Mary was betrothed to an
older relative in order to preserve her virginity and that Joseph already had
children. In this case, James was one of Joseph's children from his previous
marriage and, therefore, Jesus' stepbrother. One argument supporting this view
is that it would have been against Jewish custom for Jesus to give his mother
to the care of John (who is not at all suspected to be a blood relative of
Jesus) if Mary had other living sons. This is because the eldest son would take
responsibility for his mother after the death of her husband. So any other sons
of Mary should have taken on this responsibility if they existed, therefore
arguing against a direct biological brother relationship. Also, Aramaic and
Hebrew tended to use circumlocutions to point out blood relationships; it is
asserted that just calling some people "brothers of Jesus" would not have
necessarily implied the same mother. Rather, something like "sons of the mother
of Jesus" would have been used to indicate a common mother. Scholars and
theologians who assert this point out that Jesus was called ""the" son of Mary"
rather than ""a" son of Mary" in his hometown (Mark 6:3). Cousin, son of a
sister of Mary. James, along with the others named "brethren" of Jesus, could
also have been Jesus' cousins. This claim is justified by the fact that cousins
were also called "brothers" and "sisters" in Jesus' postulated native language,
Aramaic, which, like Biblical Hebrew, does not contain a word for "cousin".
Furthermore, the Greek words "adelphos" and "adelphe" were not restricted to
their literal meaning of a full brother or sister in the Bible; nor were their
plurals. This use is still common in Greece and other Balkan cultures. This
assumes, naturally, that the Middle Eastern authors' usage of Greek reflects
their way of speaking. The tradition of considering cousins as brothers or
sisters is still evident in most Eastern cultures; in some languages, the term
"cousin" does not even exist. Eusebius of Caesarea (c. 275 – 339) reports the
tradition that James the Just was the son of Joseph's brother Clopas and
therefore was of the "brethren" (which he interprets as "cousin") of Jesus
described in the New Testament. James, who is called the brother of the Lord,
surnamed the Just, the son of Joseph by another wife, as some think, but, as
appears to me, the son of Mary, sister of the mother of our Lord of whom John
makes mention in his book... Jerome refers to the scene of the crucifixion in
John 19:25, where three Marys – the mother of Jesus, Mary of Clopas, and Mary
Magdalene – are said to be witnesses. John also mentions the "sister" of the
mother of Jesus, often identified with Mary of Clopas due to grammar. Mary "of
Clopas" is often interpreted as Mary, "wife of Clopas". Mary of Nazareth and
Mary of Clopas also need not be literally sisters, in light of the usage of the
said words in Greek, Hebrew and Aramaic. Mary of Clopas is suggested to be the
same as "Mary, the mother of James the younger and Joses", "Mary the mother of
James and Joseph" and the "other Mary" in Jesus' crucifixion and post-
resurrection accounts in the Synoptic Gospels. Proponents of this
identification argue that the writers of the Synoptics would have called this
Mary, simply, "the mother of Jesus" if she was indeed meant to be the mother of
Jesus, given the importance of her son's crucifixion and resurrection: they
also note that the mother of James and Joses is called "Maria", whereas the
mother of Jesus is "Mariam" or "Marias" in Greek. These proponents find it
unlikely that Mary would be referred to by her biological children other than
Jesus at such a significant time (James happens to be the brother of one Joses,
as spelled in Mark, or Joseph, as in Matthew). Jerome's opinion suggests an
identification of James the Just with the Apostle James, son of Alphaeus;
"Clopas" and "Alphaeus" are thought to be different Greek renderings of the
Aramaic name "Halpai". Despite this, some biblical scholars tend to distinguish
them; this is also not Roman Catholic dogma, though a traditional teaching.
Since this Clopas is, according to Eusebius, Joseph of Nazareth's brother (see
above) and this Mary is said to be Mary of Nazareth's sister, James could be
related to Jesus by blood and law. Other relationships. Also, Jesus and James
could be related in some other way, not strictly "cousins", following the non-
literal application of the term "adelphos" and the Aramaic term for "brother".
According to the apocryphal First Apocalypse of James, James is not the earthly
brother of Jesus, but a spiritual brother who according to the Gnostics
"received secret knowledge from Jesus prior to the Passion." The Epistle of
James. The "Epistle of James" has been traditionally attributed to James the
Just since 253, although it is now common for scholars to disagree on its
authenticity. Life. The canonical writings of the New Testament, as well as
other written sources from the Early Church, provide some insights into James's
life and his role in the Early Church. There is mention of him in the Gospel of
John and the early portions of the Acts of the Apostles. The Synoptics mention
his name, but no further information. However, the later chapters of the Acts
of the Apostles provide evidence that James was an important figure in the
Christian community of Jerusalem. Jerome, letters. Since it was unlawful for
anyone but the High Priest of the Temple to enter the Holy of Holies, and then
only once a year on Yom Kippur, Jerome's quotation from Hegesippus indicates
that James was considered a High Priest. The Pseudo-Clementine "Recognitions"
suggest this. Jerome quotes the non-canonical Gospel of the Hebrews: "'Now the
Lord, after he had given his grave clothes to the servant of the priest,
appeared to James, for James had sworn that he would not eat bread from that
hour in which he had drunk the Lord's cup until he should see him risen from
the dead.' And a little further on the Lord says, 'bring a table and bread.'
And immediately it is added, 'He took bread and blessed and broke and gave it
to James the Just and said to him, "My brother, eat your bread, for the Son of
Man is risen from the dead."'" And so he ruled the church of Jerusalem thirty
years, that is until the seventh year of Nero. (See Jerome and the Early Church
Fathers.) The non-canonical Gospel of Thomas confirms that James was an
important leader, stating, "The disciples said to Jesus: We know that you will
depart from us; who is it who will lead us?" Jesus said to them, "Wherever you
have come from, go to James the Just, for whom heaven and earth came to be."
Paul further describes James as being one of the persons to whom the risen
Christ showed himself (1 Corinthians 15:3–8); later in 1 Corinthians, Paul
mentions James in a way that suggests James had been married (9:5); and in
Galatians, Paul lists James with Cephas (better known as Peter) and John as the
three "pillars" of the Church (2:9) and who will minister to the "circumcised"
(in general Jews and Jewish Proselytes) in Jerusalem, while Paul and his
fellows will minister to the "uncircumcised" (in general Gentiles) (2:12).
These terms (circumcised/uncircumcised) are generally interpreted to mean Jews
and Greeks, who were predominant; however, this is an oversimplification, as
1st-century Judaea Province also had some Jews who no longer circumcised and
some Greeks (called Proselytes or Judaizers) and others such as Egyptians,
Ethiopians, and Arabs who did. When Peter, having miraculously escaped from
prison, must flee Jerusalem due to Herod Agrippa's persecution, he asks that
James be informed (Acts 12:17). When the Christians of Antioch were concerned
over whether Gentile Christians need be circumcised to be saved, they sent Paul
and Barnabas to confer with the Jerusalem church. James played a prominent role
in the formulation of the council's decision (Acts 15:13ff). James was the last
named figure to speak, after Peter, Paul and Barnabas; he delivered what he
called his "decision" ( NRSV)— the original sense is closer to "opinion". He
supported them all in being against the requirement (Peter had cited his
earlier revelation from God regarding Gentiles) and suggested prohibitions
about eating blood as well as meat sacrificed to idols and fornication. This
became the ruling of the Council, agreed upon by all the apostles and elders
and sent to the other churches by letter. When Paul arrives in Jerusalem to
deliver the money he raised for the faithful there, it is to James that he
speaks, and it is James who insists that Paul ritually cleanse himself at
Herod's Temple to prove his faith and deny rumors of teaching rebellion against
the Torah (Acts 21:18ff) (a charge of antinomianism). Not only does the Book of
Acts makes it clear that James led the Jerusalem Christian Church as its first
leader, but this is supported by early Christian historians like Eusebius and
Clement of Alexandria in the late 2nd century, who recorded the following: "For
they say that Peter and James and John after the ascension of our Saviour, as
if also preferred by our Lord, strove not after honor, but chose James the Just
bishop of Jerusalem". (See the Early Church Fathers and Jerome.) Death.
According to a passage found in existing manuscripts of Josephus's "Antiquities
of the Jews," (xx.9) "the brother of Jesus, who was called Christ, whose name
was James" met his death after the death of the procurator Porcius Festus, yet
before Lucceius Albinus took office ("Antiquities" 20,9) — which has thus
been dated to 62. The High Priest Ananus ben Ananus took advantage of this lack
of imperial oversight to assemble a Sanhedrin (although the correct translation
of the Greek "synhedion kriton" is "a council of judges"), who condemned James
"on the charge of breaking the law," then had him executed by stoning. Josephus
reports that Ananus's act was widely viewed as little more than judicial murder
and offended a number of "those who were considered the most fair-minded people
in the City, and strict in their observance of the Law," who went as far as
meeting Albinus as he entered the province to petition him about the matter. In
response, King Agrippa replaced Ananus with Jesus, the son of Damneus. George
Albert Wells challenges the identification of the James whom Ananus ben Ananus
had executed with James the Just, considering the words "who was called Christ"
to be a later interpolation. Wells also noted that the Church Father Origen,
who consulted the works of Josephus in around 248, related an account of the
death of James that linked it as the cause of the Roman siege of Jerusalem,
something not found in our current manuscripts of Josephus, a fact that is
repeated by mainstream Biblical scholars. Accordingly, the scribes and
Pharisees Vespasian's siege and capture of Jerusalem delayed the selection of
Simeon of Jerusalem to succeed James. According to Schaff in 1904, this account
by "Hegesippus has been cited over and over again by historians as assigning
the date of the martyrdom to 69", though he challenged the assumption that
Hegesippus gives anything to denote such a date. Josephus does not mention in
his writings how James was buried, which makes it hard for scholars to
determine what happened to James after his death. Modern interpretation. Modern
historians of the early Christian churches tend to place James in the tradition
of Jewish Christianity; where Paul emphasized faith over observance of Mosaic
Law, which he considered a burden, an antinomian disposition, James is thought
to have espoused the opposite position, which is derogatively called Judaizing.
One corpus commonly cited as proof of this are the "Recognitions" and "Homilies
of Clement" (also known as the Clementine literature), versions of a novel that
has been dated to as early as the 2nd century, where James appears as a saintly
figure who is assaulted by an unnamed enemy some modern critics think may be
Paul. Scholar James D. G. Dunn has proposed that Peter was the "bridge-man"
(i.e. the "pontifex maximus") between the two other "prominent leading
figures": Paul and James the Just. Traditional Christian theologians have
maintained likewise that the two held the same beliefs; evangelicals claim that
James's talk of works referred to works that God produced in Christians as
evidence of conversion (as Paul himself assumes that works will follow faith).
On the other hand, Orthodox and Catholic theologians claim that Paul did not
discount the importance of works (citing passages such as Romans 6 and 8) and
that James was not referring to ceremonial works of the Torah (citing the fact
that at the First Council of Jerusalem, James declared that only a small
portion of the Torah should be applied to Gentile converts). The ossuary
controversy. In the November 2002 issue of "Biblical Archaeology Review",
André Lemaire of the Sorbonne University in Paris published the report that an
ossuary bearing the inscription "Ya'aqov bar Yosef akhui Yeshua" ('"James son
of Joseph brother of Jesus") had been identified belonging to a collector, who
quickly turned out to be Oded Golan. The ossuary was exhibited at the Royal
Ontario Museum in Toronto, Canada, late that year; but on June 18, 2003, the
Israeli Antiquities Authority published a report concluding, based on an
analysis of the patina, that the inscription is a modern forgery. Specifically,
it appeared that the inscription had been added recently and made to look old
by addition of a chalk solution. The Discovery Channel's 2004 documentary
"James, Brother of Jesus" shows the examination of the inscription's patina by
the Royal Ontario Museum using longwave ultraviolet light, and they concluded
there was "nothing suspicious" about the engraving. On December 29, 2004, Golan
was indicted in an Israeli court along with three other men — Robert Deutsch,
an inscriptions expert who teaches at Haifa University; collector Shlomo Cohen;
and antiquities dealer Faiz al-Amaleh. They were accused of being part of a
forgery ring that had been operating for more than 20 years. Golan denied the
charges against him. According to the BBC, "when the police took Oded Golan
into custody and searched his apartment they discovered a workshop with a range
of tools, materials, and half finished 'antiquities'. This was evidence for a
fraud of a scale far greater than they had suspected." However, on March 14,
2012, Golan was declared innocent of all charges of forgery, though with the
judge saying this acquittal "does not mean that the inscription on the ossuary
is authentic or that it was written 2,000 years ago" and "it was not proven in
any way that the words 'the brother of Jesus' necessarily refer to the 'Jesus'
who appears in Christian writings." Feast day. In the Roman Catholic Church,
the feast day of Philip the Apostle, along with that of James the Just, was
traditionally observed on 1 May, the anniversary of the dedication of the
church dedicated to them in Rome (now called the Church of the Twelve
Apostles). The current ordinary calendar transfers this combined feast to May
3. In the Eastern Orthodox Church, James is commemorated as "Apostle James the
Just, brother of Our Lord", and as such, multiple days are assigned to his
feasts. His feast days are on October 23, December 26 and the next Sunday of
the Nativity along with King David and Saint Joseph and January 4 among the
Seventy Apostles. In the Episcopal Church of the United States of America and
Lutheran Church, James, brother of Jesus and martyr is commemorated on October
23.
