Persecution of Jehovah's Witnesses in Nazi Germany Jehovah's Witnesses suffered
religious persecution in Nazi Germany between 1933 and 1945 after refusing to
perform military service, join Nazi organizations or give allegiance to the
Hitler regime. An estimated 10,000 Witnesses—half of the number of members in
Germany during that period—were imprisoned, including 2000 who were sent to
concentration camps. An estimated 1200 died in custody, including 250 who were
executed. They were the first Christian denomination banned in the Third Reich
and the most extensively and intensively persecuted. Unlike Jews and Gypsies
who were persecuted on the basis of their ethnicity, Jehovah's Witnesses could
escape persecution and personal harm by renouncing their religious beliefs by
signing a document indicating renouncement of their faith, submission to state
authority, and support of the German military. Historian Sybil Milton concludes
that "their courage and defiance in the face of torture and death punctures the
myth of a monolithic Nazi state ruling over docile and submissive subjects."
The group came under increasing public and governmental persecution from 1933,
with many expelled from jobs and schools, deprived of income and suffering
beatings and imprisonment, despite early attempts to demonstrate shared goals
with the National Socialist regime. Historians are divided over whether the
Nazis intended to exterminate them, but several authors have claimed the
Witnesses' militancy and outspoken condemnation of the Nazis contributed to
their level of suffering. Pre-Nazi era. Jehovah's Witnesses were an outgrowth
of the International Bible Students, who began missionary work in Europe in the
1890s. A German branch office of the Watch Tower Society opened in Elberfeld in
1902. By 1933 almost 20,000 Witnesses were counted as active door-to-door
preachers and their annual Memorial service was attracting almost 25,000
people. In Dresden there were more Bible Students than in New York, where the
Watch Tower Society was headquartered. Members of the religion, who were known
as "Ernste Bibelforscher", or Earnest Bible Students, had attracted opposition
since the end of World War I, with accusations that they were Bolsheviks,
communists and covertly Jewish. From 1920 the German Evangelical church called
for a ban on Watch Tower Society publications, which were engaging in
increasing amounts of antichurch polemic and through the remainder of the 1920s
opposition mounted from a combination of church and Völkisch movement
agitation and pamphlet campaigns. Nazis began to harass Bible Students, with SA
members also disrupting meetings. From 1922, German Bible Students were
arrested on charges of illegal peddling as they publicly distributed Watch
Tower Society literature. Between 1927 and 1930, almost 5000 charges were laid
against members of the religion, and although most ended in acquittals some
"severe sentences" were also handed down. From 1930 calls for state
intervention against the Bible Students increased and on March 28, 1931 Reich
president Paul von Hindenburg issued the Decree for the Resistance of Political
Acts of Violence, which provided for action to be taken in cases in which
religious organizations, institutions or customs were "abused or maliciously
disparaged". Bavaria became the first German state where the decree was used
against the Bible Students, with a police order issued on November 18 to
prohibit and confiscate all Bible Student publications throughout the state. A
second decree in 1932 widened the ban in other German states. By the end of
1932 more than 2300 charges against Bible Students were pending. Legislative
developments. Adolf Hitler was appointed chancellor of Germany on 30 January
1933, and from that point persecution of Jehovah's Witnesses intensified.
Witnesses, being politically neutral, refused to swear loyalty to the Nazi
regime. Initially, Witness indifference to the Nazi state manifested itself in
the refusal to raise their arms in the Nazi salute, join the German Labor
Front, participate in Nazi welfare collections, perform air raid duties or
participate in Nazi rallies and parades. Nazi Party SA stormtroopers raided the
homes of Witnesses who failed to vote in a November 1933 plebiscite over German
withdrawal from the League of Nations and marched them to the polling booths.
Some were beaten or forced to walk holding placards declaring their "betrayal"
of the fatherland; in one town a billboard was displayed in the market place
listing Bible Student "traitors" who had not voted, and mobs also gathered
outside Witnesses' homes to throw stones or chant. Similar action was taken at
subsequent elections in the one-party state. Nazi authorities denounced
Jehovah's Witnesses for their ties to the United States and derided the
apparent revolutionary millennialism of their preaching that a battle of
Armageddon would precede the rule of Christ on earth. They linked Jehovah's
Witnesses to "international Jewry" by pointing to Witness reliance on certain
Old Testament texts. The Nazis had grievances with many of the smaller
Protestant groups on these issues, but only the Jehovah's Witnesses and the
Christadelphian Church refused to bear arms or swear loyalty to the state.
Activities of the Bible Students Association were banned in the states of
Mecklenburg-Schwerin (April 10, 1933) and Bavaria (April 13). When Witnesses
responded with a nationwide house-to-house booklet distribution campaign, many
were arrested and within a week bans were extended to the states of Saxony and
Hessen. Publications were also confiscated in some states. On April 24 police
seized the Bible Student headquarters at Magdeburg, withdrawing five days later
after US diplomatic efforts. From mid-May other states issued decrees outlawing
the Bible Students and by the middle of June they were banned in almost every
state. In one state's decree, the rationale for the ban was said to be that
Bible Students were "imposing" on householders Watch Tower Society journals
"which contain malicious attacks on the major Christian churches and their
institutions". On June 25, 1933 about 7000 Witnesses assembled at the
Wilmersdorfer Tennishallen in Berlin where a 3800-word "Declaration of Facts"
was issued. The document, written by Watch Tower Society president J.F.
Rutherford, asserted the religion's political neutrality, appealed for the
right to publicly preach and claimed it was the victim of a misinformation
campaign by other religions. Some 2.1 million copies of the Declaration,
reproduced as a four-page pamphlet, were distributed publicly throughout
Germany, with a copy also sent to Hitler accompanied by a seven-page cover
letter assuring the Chancellor that the IBSA "was not in opposition to the
national government of the German Reich", but that, to the contrary, "the
entirely religious, nonpolitical objectives and efforts of the Bible Students"
were "completely in agreement with the corresponding goals of the national
government". German historian Detlef Garbe described the Declaration as part of
the religion's efforts to adapt at a time of increasing persecution, while
Canadian historian Professor James Penton, a former Jehovah's Witness and
critic of the religion, claimed the Declaration was a compromising document
that proves "that Watch Tower leaders were attempting to pander to the
Nazis"—an allegation the Watch Tower Society rejected in a 1998 magazine
article. The distribution of the declaration prompted a new wave of persecution
against German Witnesses. On June 28 thirty stormtroopers occupied the branch
office for a second time, closing the factory, sealing the printing presses and
hoisting the swastika over the building. In late August, authorities used 25
trucks to transport about 70 tonnes of Watch Tower literature and Bibles to the
city's outskirts and publicly burned them. Preaching activities and meetings in
private homes continued, though the threat of Gestapo raids caused many
believers to withdraw association and activity in some places ceased. When
authorities discovered banned literature was being smuggled into Germany from
abroad, Bavarian police ordered the confiscation of mail of all known Bible
Students and expressed irritation that their activity was increasing rather
than ceasing. By early 1934 Rutherford had concluded that an improvement in
conditions within Germany was unlikely. On February 9, 1934 the Watch Tower
Society president sent a strongly worded letter to Hitler, asking the
chancellor to allow the Witnesses to assemble and worship without hindrance,
warning that if he failed to do so by March 24, the organization would
publicise the "unjust treatment" throughout the world. He threatened that
Jehovah God would also punish Hitler and destroy him at Armageddon. The
society's German branch president Paul Balzereit directed members that they
should continue to distribute "The Watchtower", but that meetings be kept to
about three to five people in size and public preaching be discontinued. But in
September 1934, at an international convention of 3500 Witnesses in Basel,
Switzerland, under the theme "Fear Them Not", Rutherford reversed the
instruction. He urged the 1000 German Witnesses present to resume completely
their preaching activity, starting with a collective witnessing effort on
October 7. The convention also passed a resolution of protest, a copy of which
was sent to Hitler with the warning: "Refrain from further persecution of
Jehovah's Witnesses; otherwise God will destroy you and your national party."
On October 8 an international campaign was launched to flood the Reich
chancellory with telegrams and letters of protest. In late 1934 all state bans
against the Witnesses were replaced with a prohibition at the Reich level.
State governments were instructed in July 1935 to confiscate all Watch Tower
Society publications, including Bibles and in December nine Watch Tower leaders
were sentenced to up to 2½ years' jail for defying bans. Yet throughout 1933
and 1934 some courts continued to acquit Witnesses after legal and
constitutional challenges. Germany reintroduced universal military service in
1935, Jehovah's Witnesses generally refused to enroll. Although they were not
pacifists, they refused to bear arms for any political power. The Nazis
prosecuted Jehovah's Witnesses for failing to report for conscription and
arrested those who did missionary work for undermining the morale of the
nation. John Conway, a British historian, stated that they were “against any
form of collaboration with the Nazis and against service in the army.”
Children of Jehovah's Witnesses also suffered under the Nazi regime. In
classrooms, teachers ridiculed children who refused to give the "Heil Hitler"
salute or sing patriotic songs. Principals found reasons to expel them from
school. Following the lead of adults, classmates shunned or beat the children
of Witnesses. On occasion, authorities sought to remove children from their
Witness parents and send them to other schools, orphanages, or private homes to
be brought up as "good Germans". Jehovah's Witnesses could, however, escape
persecution and personal harm by renouncing their religious beliefs. From 1935
Gestapo officers offered members a document to sign indicating renouncement of
their faith, submission to state authority, and support of the German military.
By signing the document, individuals vowed to refrain from any association with
members of the IBSA for the purposes of studying the Bible, "The Watchtower" or
other Bible Student publications, refrain from participating in any Bible
Student activities and also report to authorities any observations that members
were continuing the organizational structure of Jehovah's Witnesses. Garbe says
a "relatively high number" of people signed the statement before the war, but
"extremely low numbers" of Bible Student prisoners did so in concentration
camps in later years. Punishment. From 1933 Witnesses working in post offices,
railway stations or other civil service jobs began to be dismissed for refusing
to give the compulsory Hitler salute. From August 1934 they could be also lose
their jobs for refusing to take an official oath swearing loyalty and obedience
to Hitler. Teachers were required to sign a statement confirming they were not
members of the International Bible Students Association and were fired if they
refused. Jehovah's Witnesses were dismissed in the private sector as well,
often at the insistence of the German Labor Front (DAF) or Nazi Party members.
In 1936 the Nazi press urged that Bible Students be removed from all German
companies, while self-employed members of the religion were denied professional
or business licences to carry out their work on the basis that their refusal to
join Nazi organizations marked them as "politically unreliable". The state
confiscated motor vehicles and bicycles used by Witnesses for their business,
withdrew driver's licences, withdrew pensions and evicted Witnesses from their
homes. Schoolchildren were required to sing the "Horst Wessel song" and
"Deutschlandlied" at a flag salute roll call, give the Hitler salute and take
part in ceremonies honoring Hitler; those who refused were beaten by teachers
and sometimes by classmates, while many were also expelled. From March 1936
authorities began removing Witness children from their parents, forcing some of
them to undergo "corrective training". From early 1935 Gestapo officers began
widening their use of "protective detention", usually when judges failed to
convict Witnesses on charges of defying the Bible Student ban. Bible Students
deemed to "present an imminent danger to the National Socialist state because
of their activities" were from that point not handed to courts for punishment
but sent directly to concentration camps for incarceration for several months,
but even those who completed their prison terms were routinely arrested by the
Gestapo upon release and taken into protective custody. More brutal methods of
punishment began to be applied from 1936, including horsewhipping, prolonged
daily beatings, the torture of family members and the threat of shooting. Some
Witnesses were placed in mental institutions and subjected to psychiatric
treatment; sterilization was ordered for some deemed to be "stubborn" in their
refusal to denounce their religion. Following an assembly in Lucerne,
Switzerland in early September 1936 up to 3000 copies of a resolution of
protest were sent to government, public and clerical leaders, stepping up the
Watch Tower Society's anti-Catholic polemic. Several German Witnesses who
attended the convention were arrested by waiting police as they returned to
their homes and between August and September the Gestapo arrested more than
1000 members. The society responded with a pamphlet campaign on December 12,
dropping up to 200,000 copies of the Lucerne resolution in mailboxes and also
leaving them at phone booths, park benches and parked cars. Those arrested in
subsequent police raids were sentenced to up to two years in prison. The number
of arrests increased; in Dresden alone as many as 1500 Witnesses had been
arrested by mid-1937. Another letterbox campaign was carried out in June 1937,
a year in which the Watch Tower Society announced German Witnesses had
distributed more than 450,000 books and booklets in 12 months. Compulsory
military service for all men aged between 18 and 45 was introduced by Hitler in
March 1935. No exemptions were provided for religious or conscientious reasons
and Witnesses who refused to serve or take the oath of allegiance to Hitler
were sent to prison or concentration camp, generally for terms of one or two
years. At the outbreak of war in August 1939 more serious punishments were
applied. A decree was enacted that greatly increased penal regulations during
periods of war and states of emergency and included in the decree was an
offense of "demoralization of the armed forces"; any refusal to perform
military service or public inducement to this effect would be punishable by
death. Between August 1939 and September 1940 152 Bible Students appeared
before the highest military court of the Wehrmacht charged with demoralization
of the armed forces and 112 were executed, usually by beheading. Garbe
estimates about 250 German and Austrian Jehovah's Witnesses were executed
during World War II as a result of military court decisions. In November 1939
another regulation was issued providing for the jailing of anyone who supported
or belonged to an "anti-military association" or displayed an "anti-military
attitude", which allowed authorities to impose prison sentences on the charge
of IBSA membership. Death penalties were applied frequently after 1943.
Concentration camps. 1935 the authorities began sending hundreds of Jehovah's
Witnesses to concentration camps, where they imprisoned with Communists,
Socialists, other political prisoners and union members. In May 1938 they
accounted for 12 percent of all prisoners at Buchenwald concentration camp near
Weimar; by May 1939 they represented 40 percent of all prisoners at Schloss
Lichentenburg, the central concentration camp for women, though as the total
number of prisoners increased rapidly, the proportion of Witnesses generally
fell to about 3 percent. About 2000 Witnesses were eventually sent to
concentration camps, where they were identified by purple triangles; as many as
1200 died in custody, including 250 who were executed. Garbe claims members of
the religion were special objects of hatred by the SS, receiving beatings,
whippings and public humiliation and given the dirtiest and most laborious work
details for refusing to salute, stand at attention or sing Nazi songs. They
were subjected to high-pressure jets of ice-cold water from fire hydrants and
subjected to arbitrary acts of torture including pushing a fully laden
wheelbarrow with their necks while crawling on hands and knees. Others were
forced to stand still for an entire day in the heat or cold or were confined in
groups in small closets in an attempt to suffocate them. From March to December
1938 Jehovah's Witnesses in Buchenwald were not allowed to send or receive
letters or to purchase food. Many approached starvation and were forced to eat
leaves from trees and bushes. Many were forced to engage in a "drill" that
included rolling, creeping, hopping and running for 75 minutes while camp
guards kicked and beat them, while others, forced to work in stone quarries,
were refused medical attention when sick. Conditions for Witnesses improved in
1942, when they were increasingly given work details that required little
supervision, such as farming, gardening, transportation and unloading goods,
while others worked in civilian clothing in a health resort, as housekeepers
for Nazi officials or were given construction and craft tasks at military
buildings. Causes of persecution and Nazi motives. Garbe accepts that both
ideologies claimed to represent the "epitome of truth", demanded the person as
a whole, tolerated no questioning of ideology and also held a common belief in
salvation utopias for certain parts of humankind and the vision of a Thousand-
Year Reign. But pitted against a considerably more powerful organization, the
religion's efforts were doomed to fail. Penton noted that in August 1933 then
branch overseer Martin Harbeck directed members that they should cease
distributing literature and holding meetings without police permission. He said
the organization's later decision to abandon caution and direct members to
intensify their preaching efforts was a "reckless" behavior that caused
Witnesses and their families more suffering than was necessary. Hitler, Penton
argued, had become highly popular with the German populace by 1936, yet
Witnesses persisted in distributing a Rutherford booklet that described the
chancellor as "of unsound mind, cruel, malicious and ruthless". He said the
international campaign to swamp Hitler with telegrams of protest in October
1934 infuriated the chancellor and was a major factor in bringing greater
governmental persecution on them. Citing Dietrich Hellmund's description of
their "incredible public militancy", he wrote: "Jehovah's Witnesses were the
most stridently outspoken conscientious objectors in the country, and the Nazis
had no intention of putting up with them ... No movement can constantly heap
insults on all other religions, the business community and national governments
in the way that the Bible Student-Jehovah's Witnesses did from 1918 onward
without provoking a reaction. Scholars are divided over the ultimate intention
of the Nazi regime towards Jehovah's Witnesses. Garbe believes the Gestapo
considered members of the religion to be "incorrigible" elements who had to be
ruthlessly eliminated. The 1934 telegram protest had prompted an "hysterical"
Hitler to vow that "this brood will be exterminated in Germany" and he repeated
the threat in August 1942. Watch Tower Society writer Wolfram Slupina claims
the Nazis "attempted to consign the Witnesses to oblivion by systematically
exterminating them". But Penton has argued there is abundant evidence that the
Nazis had no intention to eradicate members:
