Jesus in Christianity Christian views of Jesus are based on the teachings and
beliefs outlined in the Canonical gospels, New Testament letters, and the
Christian creeds. These outline the key beliefs held by Christians about Jesus,
including his divinity, humanity, and earthly life. The second sentence in the
ICET version of the Nicene Creed states: "We believe in one Lord, Jesus Christ,
the only Son of God...". In the New Testament Jesus indicates that he is the
Son of God by calling God his father. Christians consider Jesus the Christ and
believe that through his death and resurrection, humans can be reconciled to
God and thereby are offered salvation and the promise of eternal life. These
teachings emphasize that as the willing Lamb of God, Jesus "chose to" suffer in
Calvary as a sign of his full obedience to the will of the Eternal Father, as
an "agent and servant of God". The choice Jesus made thus counter-positions him
as a new man of morality and obedience, in contrast to Adam's disobedience.
Most Christians believe that Jesus was both human and the Son of God. While
there have been theological debate over the nature of Jesus, Trinitarian
Christians generally believe that Jesus is the Logos, God incarnate, God the
Son, and "true God and true man" (or both fully divine and fully human). Jesus,
having become fully human in all respects, suffered the pains and temptations
of a mortal man, yet he did not sin. As fully God, he defeated death and rose
to life again. According to the Bible, God raised him from the dead. He
ascended to heaven, to sit at the "Right Hand of God," and he will return to
earth again for the Last Judgment and the establishment of the Kingdom of God
in the World to Come. Overview. Although Christian views of Jesus vary, it is
possible to summarize key elements of the shared beliefs among major
denominations based on their catechetical or confessional texts. Christian
views of Jesus are derived from various sources, but especially from the
canonical Gospels, and New Testament letters, such as the Pauline Epistles.
Christians predominantly hold that these works are historically true. The five
major milestones in the gospel narrative of the life of Jesus are his Baptism,
Transfiguration, Crucifixion, Resurrection and Ascension. These are usually
bracketed by two other episodes: his Nativity at the beginning and the sending
of the Paraclete at the end. The gospel accounts of the teachings of Jesus are
often presented in terms of specific categories involving his "works and
words", e.g. his ministry, parables and miracles. Christians not only attach
theological significance to the works of Jesus, but also to his name. Devotions
to the Holy Name of Jesus go back to the earliest days of Christianity. These
devotions and feasts exist both in Eastern and Western Christianity. Christians
predominantly profess that through his life, death, and resurrection, Jesus
restored man's communion with God in the blood of the New Covenant. His death
on a cross is understood as a redemptive sacrifice: the source of humanity's
salvation and the atonement for sin, which had entered human history through
the sin of Adam. However, not all Christian denominations agree on all
doctrines, and both major and minor differences on teachings and beliefs
persist throughout Christianity. Christ, Logos and Son of God. Christians
generally consider Jesus to be the Christ, the long awaited Messiah, as well as
the one and only Son of God. The opening words in the Gospel of Mark (), "The
beginning of the gospel of Jesus Christ, the Son of God" provide Jesus with the
two distinct attributions of Christ and the Son of God. The divinity being
again re-affirmed in . also starts by calling Jesus Christ and explains it
again with: "Jesus, who is called Christ". In the Letters of Saint Paul, the
word "Christ" is so closely associated with Jesus that apparently for the early
Christians there was no need to claim that Jesus was Christ, for that was
considered widely accepted among them. Hence Paul could use the term "Christos"
with no confusion about who it referred to, and as in and he could use
expressions such as "in Christ" to refer to the followers of Jesus. In the New
Testament, the title "Son of God" is applied to Jesus on many occasions. It is
often used to refer to his divinity, from the beginning in the Annunciation up
to the Crucifixion. The declaration that Jesus is the Son of God is made by
many individuals in the New Testament, and on two separate occasions by God the
Father as a voice from Heaven, and is asserted by Jesus himself. In
Christology, the conception that "the Christ" is the "Logos" (i.e. The Word)
has been important in establishing the doctrine of the divinity of Christ and
his position as God the Son in the Trinity as set forth in the Chalcedonian
Creed. The conception derives from the , commonly translated into English as:
"In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was
God." In the original Greek, "Logos" (λόγος) is used for "Word," and in
theological discourse, this is often left untranslated. The "pre-existence of
Christ" refers to the doctrine of the personal existence of Christ before his
conception. One of the relevant Bible passages is where, in the Trinitarian
view, Christ is identified with a pre-existent divine hypostasis called the
Logos or Word. However, other non-Trinitarian views question the aspect of
personal pre-existence or question the aspect of divinity, or both. This
doctrine is reiterated in when Jesus refers to the glory which he had with the
Father "before the world was" during the Farewell discourse. John 17:24 also
refers to the Father loving Jesus "before the foundation of the world".
Following the Apostolic Age, from the 2nd century onwards, several
controversies developed about how the human and divine are related within the
person of Jesus. Eventually in 451 the "Hypostatic union" was decreed, namely
that Jesus is both fully divine and fully human. However, differences among
Christian denominations continued thereafter - see the article on Christology
for details. Incarnation, Nativity and Second Adam. Apostle Paul viewed the
birth of Jesus as an event of cosmic significance which brought forth a "new
man" who undid the damage caused by the fall of the first man, Adam. Just as
the Johannine view of Jesus as the incarnate Logos proclaims the universal
relevance of his birth, the Pauline perspective emphasizes the birth of a new
man and a new world in the birth of Jesus. Paul's eschatological view of Jesus
counter-positions him as a new man of morality and obedience, in contrast to
Adam. Unlike Adam, the new man born in Jesus obeys God and ushers in a world of
morality and salvation. In the Pauline view, Adam is positioned as the first
man and Jesus as the second: Adam, having corrupted himself by his
disobedience, also infected humanity and left it with a curse as inheritance.
The birth of Jesus, on the other hand, counterbalanced the fall of Adam,
bringing forth redemption and repairing the damage done by Adam. "An
introduction to the early history of Christian doctrine" by James Franklin
Bethune-Baker 2005 ISBN 1-4021-5770-3 page 334 In patristic theology, Paul's
contrasting of Jesus as the new man versus Adam provided a framework for
discussing the uniqueness of the birth of Jesus and the ensuing events of his
life. The Nativity of Jesus thus began to serve as the starting point for
"cosmic Christology" in which the birth, life and Resurrection of Jesus have
universal implications. The concept of Jesus as the "new man" repeats in the
cycle of birth and rebirth of Jesus from his Nativity to his Resurrection:
following his birth, through his morality and obedience to the Father, Jesus
began a "new harmony" in the relationship between God the Father and man. The
Nativity and Resurrection of Jesus thus created the author and exemplar of a
new humanity. In this view, the birth, death and Resurrection of Jesus brought
about salvation, undoing the damage of Adam. Ministry. In the Canonical
gospels, the Ministry of Jesus begins with his Baptism in the countryside of
Judea, near the River Jordan and ends in Jerusalem, following the Last Supper.
The Gospel of Luke () states that Jesus was "about 30 years of age" at the
start of his ministry. The date of the start of his ministry has been estimated
at around AD 27-29 and the end in the range AD 30-36. Jesus' "Early Galilean
ministry" begins when after his Baptism, he goes back to Galilee from his time
in the Judean desert. In this early period he preaches around Galilee and
recruits his first disciples who begin to travel with him and eventually form
the core of the early Church. The "Major Galilean ministry" which begins in
Matthew 8 includes the Commissioning the twelve Apostles, and covers most of
the ministry of Jesus in Galilee. The "Final Galilean ministry" begins after
the death of John the Baptist as Jesus prepares to go to Jerusalem. In the
"Later Judean ministry" Jesus starts his final journey to Jerusalem through
Judea. As Jesus travels towards Jerusalem, in the "Later Perean ministry",
about one third the way down from the Sea of Galilee along the River Jordan, he
returns to the area where he was baptized. The "Final ministry in Jerusalem" is
sometimes called the "Passion Week" and begins with the Jesus' triumphal entry
into Jerusalem. The gospels provide more details about the final ministry than
the other periods, devoting about one third of their text to the last week of
the life of Jesus in Jerusalem. Teachings, parables and miracles. In the New
Testament the teachings of Jesus are presented in terms of his "words and
works". The words of Jesus include several sermons, as well as parables that
appear throughout the narrative of the Synoptic Gospels (the gospel of John
includes no parables). The works include the miracles and other acts performed
during his ministry. Although the Canonical Gospels are the major source of the
teachings of Jesus, the Pauline Epistles, which were likely written decades
before the gospels, provide some of the earliest written accounts of the
teachings of Jesus. The New Testament does not present the teachings of Jesus
as merely his own teachings, but equates the words of Jesus with divine
revelation, with John the Baptist stating in : "he whom God hath sent speaketh
the words of God" and Jesus stating in : "My teaching is not mine, but his that
sent me". In Jesus claims divine knowledge, stating: "No one knows the Son
except the Father and no one knows the Father except the Son", asserting the
mutual knowledge he has with the Father. Discourses. The gospels include
several discourses by Jesus on specific occasions, such as the Farewell
discourse delivered after the Last Supper, the night before his crucifixion.
Although some of the teachings of Jesus are reported as taking place within the
formal atmosphere of a synagogue (e.g. in Matthew 4:23) many of the discourses
are more like conversations than formal lectures. The Gospel of Matthew has a
structured set of sermons, often grouped as the Five Discourses of Matthew
which present many of the key teachings of Jesus. Each of the five discourses
has some parallel passages in the Gospel of Mark or the Gospel of Luke. The
five discourses in Matthew begin with the Sermon on the Mount, which
encapsulates many of the moral teaching of Jesus and which is one of the best
known and most quoted elements of the New Testament. The Sermon on the Mount
includes the "Beatitudes" which describe the character of the people of the
Kingdom of God, expressed as "blessings". The Beatitudes focus on love and
humility rather than force and exaction and echo the key ideals of Jesus'
teachings on spirituality and compassion. The other discourses in Matthew
include the "Missionary Discourse" in Matthew 10 and the "Discourse on the
Church" in Matthew 18, providing instructions to the disciples and laying the
foundation of the codes of conduct for the anticipated community of followers.
Parables. The parables of Jesus represent a major component of his teachings in
the gospels, the approximately thirty parables forming about one third of his
recorded teachings. The parables may appear within longer sermons, as well as
other places within the narrative. Jesus' parables are seemingly simple and
memorable stories, often with imagery, and each conveys a teaching which
usually relates the physical world to the spiritual world. In the 19th century,
Lisco and Fairbairn stated that in the parables of Jesus, "the image borrowed
from the visible world is accompanied by a truth from the invisible (spiritual)
world" and that the parables of Jesus are not "mere similitudes which serve the
purpose of illustration, but are internal analogies where nature becomes a
witness for the spiritual world". Similarly, in the 20th century, calling a
parable "an earthly story with a heavenly meaning", William Barclay states that
the parables of Jesus use familiar examples to lead men's minds towards
heavenly concepts. He suggests that Jesus did not form his parables merely as
analogies but based on an "inward affinity between the natural and the
spiritual order." Miracles. In Christian teachings, the miracles of Jesus were
as much a vehicle for his message as were his words. Many of the miracles
emphasize the importance of faith, for instance in Cleansing ten lepers, Jesus
did not say: "My power has saved you" but says "Rise and go; your faith has
saved you." Similarly, in the Walking on Water miracle, Apostle Peter learns an
important lesson about faith in that as his faith wavers, he begins to sink.
One characteristic shared among all miracles of Jesus in the Gospel accounts is
that he delivered benefits freely and never requested or accepted any form of
payment for his healing miracles, unlike some high priests of his time who
charged those who were healed. In he advised his disciples to heal the sick
without payment and stated: "freely ye received, freely give." Christians in
general believe that Jesus' miracles were actual historical events and that his
miraculous works were an important part of his life, attesting to his divinity
and the Hypostatic union, i.e., the dual natures of Jesus as God and Man.
Christians believe that while Jesus' experiences of hunger, weariness, and
death were evidences of his humanity, the miracles were evidences of his deity.
Christian authors also view the miracles of Jesus not merely as acts of power
and omnipotence, but as works of love and mercy: they were performed not to awe
men by the feeling of omnipotence, but to show compassion for sinful and
suffering humanity. And each miracle involves specific teachings. Since
according to the Gospel of John it was impossible to narrate all the miracles
performed by Jesus, the Catholic Encyclopedia states that the miracles
presented in the Gospels were selected for a twofold reason: first for the
manifestation of God's glory, and then for their evidential value. Jesus
referred to his "works" as evidences of his mission and his divinity, and in he
declared that his miracles have greater evidential value than the testimony of
John the Baptist. Crucifixion and atonement. The accounts of the crucifixion
and subsequent resurrection of Jesus provide a rich background for
Christological analysis, from the Canonical Gospels to the Pauline Epistles. In
Johannine "agent Christology" the submission of Jesus to crucifixion is a
sacrifice made as an "agent of God" or "servant of God", for the sake of
eventual victory. This builds on the salvific theme of the Gospel of John which
begins in with John the Baptist's proclamation: "The Lamb of God who takes away
the sins of the world". Further reinforcement of the concept is provided in
where the "lamb slain but standing" is the only one worthy of handling the
scroll (i.e. the book) containing the names of those who are to be saved. A
central element in the Christology presented in the Acts of the Apostles is the
affirmation of the belief that the death of Jesus by crucifixion happened "with
the foreknowledge of God, according to a definite plan". In this view, as in ,
the cross is not viewed as a scandal, for the crucifixion of Jesus "at the
hands of the lawless" is viewed as the fulfilment of the plan of God. Paul's
Christology has a specific focus on the death and resurrection of Jesus. For
Paul, the crucifixion of Jesus is directly related to his resurrection and the
term "the cross of Christ" used in may be viewed as his abbreviation of the
message of the gospels. For Paul, the crucifixion of Jesus was not an isolated
event in history, but a cosmic event with significant eschatological
consequences, as in . In the Pauline view, Jesus, obedient to the point of
death () died "at the right time" () based on the plan of God. For Paul the
"power of the cross" is not separable from the Resurrection of Jesus. John
Calvin supported the "agent of God" Christology and argued that in his trial in
Pilate's Court Jesus could have successfully argued for his innocence, but
instead submitted to crucifixion in obedience to the Father. This
Christological theme continued into the 20th century, both in the Eastern and
Western Churches. In the Eastern Church Sergei Bulgakov argued that the
crucifixion of Jesus was "pre-eternally" determined by the Father before the
creation of the world, to redeem humanity from the disgrace caused by the fall
of Adam. In the Western Church, Karl Rahner elaborated on the analogy that the
blood of the Lamb of God (and the water from the side of Jesus) shed at the
crucifixion had a cleansing nature, similar to baptismal water. Resurrection,
Ascension and Second Coming. The New Testament teaches that the resurrection of
Jesus is a foundation of the Christian faith. Christians, through faith in the
working of God are spiritually resurrected with Jesus, and are redeemed so that
they may walk in a new way of life. But Christ really has been raised from the
dead. He is the first of all those who will rise. Death came because of what a
man did. Rising from the dead also comes because of what a man did. Because of
Adam, all people die. So because of Christ, all will be made alive. If the
cross stands at the center of Paul's theology, so does the Resurrection: unless
the one died the death of "all", the "all" would have little to celebrate in
the resurrection of the one. Paul taught that, just as Christians share in
Jesus' death in baptism, so they will share in his resurrection for Jesus was
designated the Son of God by his resurrection. Paul's views went against the
thoughts of the Greek philosophers to whom a bodily resurrection meant a new
imprisonment in a corporeal body, which was what they wanted to avoid; given
that for them the corporeal and the material fettered the spirit. At the same
time, Paul believed that the newly resurrected body would be a heavenly body;
immortal, glorified, powerful and pneumatic in contrast to an earthly body,
which is mortal, dishonored, weak and psychic. According to theologian Peter
Carnley, the resurrection of Jesus was different from the Resurrection of
Lazarus as: "In the case of Lazarus, the stone was rolled away so that he could
walk out... the raised Christ didn't have to have the stone rolled away,
because he is transformed and can appear anywhere, at any time." The Apostolic
Fathers, discussed the death and resurrection of Jesus, including Ignatius
(50−115), Polycarp (69−155), and Justin Martyr (100−165). Following the
conversion of Constantine and the liberating Edict of Milan in 313, the
ecumenical councils of the 4th, 5th and 6th centuries, that focused on
Christology helped shape the Christian understanding of the redemptive nature
of Resurrection, and influenced both the development of its iconography, and
its use within Liturgy.
