Jewish eschatology Jewish eschatology is concerned with events that will happen
in the end of days, according to the Hebrew Bible and Jewish thought. This
includes the ingathering of the exiled diaspora, the coming of Jewish Messiah,
afterlife, and the revival of the dead Tsadikim. Eschatology, generally is the
area of theology and philosophy concerned with the final events in the history
of the world, the ultimate destiny of humanity, and related concepts. In
Judaism, end times are usually called the "end of days" (aḥarit ha-yamim,
אחרית הימים), a phrase that appears several times in the Tanakh. The
idea of a messianic age has a prominent place in Jewish thought, and is
incorporated as part of the end of days. Overview and textual sources. In
Judaism, the main textual source for the belief in the end of days and
accompanying events is the Tanakh or Hebrew Bible. In the Five Books of Moses,
references are made in Deuteronomy 28-31, that the Jews will not be able to
keep the Laws of Moses in the Land of Israel and will be subsequently exiled
and ultimately redeemed. The books of the Hebrew Prophets elaborated and
prophesied about the end of days. In rabbinic literature, the Rabbis elaborated
and explained the prophecies that were found in the Hebrew Bible along with the
oral law and Rabbinic traditions about its meaning. It is also believed that
history will complete itself and the ultimate destination will be reached when
all mankind returns to the Garden of Eden. The Messiah. The Hebrew word
"mashiach" (or "moshiach") refers to the Jewish idea of the Messiah. Like the
English word "messiah", mashiach means "anointed". The Jewish Messiah refers to
a human leader, physically descended from the Davidic line, who will rule and
unite the people of Israel and will usher in the Messianic Age of global and
universal peace. While the name of Jewish Messiah is considered to be one of
the things that precede creation, he is not considered to be divine nor is he
considered to be Jesus, in sharp contrast to Christian belief. In biblical
times the title "mashiach" was awarded for somebody in a high position of
nobility and greatness. For example, means High Priest. In the Talmudic era the
title "mashiach" or מלך המשיח, (in the Tiberian vocalization pronounced
), literally meaning "the anointed King", is referred to the human Jewish
leader and king who will redeem Israel in the end of days and who will usher in
a messianic era of peace and prosperity for both the living and the deceased.
In the Tanakh (Hebrew Bible). Most of the textual requirements concerning the
Messiah, what he will do, and what will be done during his reign are located
within the Book of Isaiah, although requirements are mentioned in other
prophets as well. In the Talmud. Throughout Jewish history Jews have compared
these passages (and others) to contemporary events in search of signs of the
Messiah's imminent arrival, continuing into present times. For example, many
Orthodox Jewish leaders have suggested that the devastation among Jews wrought
by the Holocaust may represent a sign of hope for the Messiah's present
imminent arrival. In Rabbinic commentaries. Advent of the messianic era.
According to the Talmud, the Midrash, and the Kabbalistic work, the Zohar, the
'deadline' by which the Messiah must appear is 6000 years from creation. A
majority of Orthodox and Hasidic Jews believe that the Hebrew calendar dates
back to the time of creation; the year 2009-2010 (the Hebrew New Year begins
during September or October) of the Gregorian calendar corresponds to the
Hebrew year 5770. There is a kabbalistic tradition that maintains that the
seven days of creation in Genesis 1 correspond to seven millennia of the
existence of natural creation. The tradition teaches that the seventh day of
the week, "Shabbat" or the day of rest, corresponds to the seventh millennium
(Hebrew years 6000 - 7000), the age of universal 'rest' - the Messianic Era.
"Six eons for going in and coming out, for war and peace. The seventh eon is
entirely Shabbat and rest for life everlasting ". Elaborating on this theme are
numerous early and late Jewish scholars, including the Ramban, Isaac Abrabanel,
Abraham Ibn Ezra, Rabbeinu Bachya, the Vilna Gaon, the Lubavitcher Rebbe, the
Ramchal, Aryeh Kaplan, and Rebbetzin Esther Jungreis. Orthodox Judaism. The
belief in a personal Messiah of the Davidic line is a universal tenet of faith
among Orthodox Jews and one of Maimonides' thirteen principles of faith. Some
authorities in Orthodox Judaism believe that this era will lead to supernatural
events culminating in a bodily resurrection of the dead. Maimonides, on the
other hand, holds that the events of the messianic era are not specifically
connected with the resurrection. (See the Maimonides article.) Reform Judaism.
Reform Judaism generally concurs with the more liberal Conservative perspective
of a future messianic era rather than a personal Messiah. Reflecting its
philosophical position, Reform Judaism, unlike Conservative Judaism, has
altered the traditional prayers to refer to "redemption" rather than a
"redeemer" and removed petitions for restoration of the House of David.
Reconstructionist Judaism. Reconstructionist Judaism rejects the ideas of both
a personal Messiah and a divinely instituted messianic age. It does teach that
human beings can help bring about a better future world. Like Reform Judaism,
Reconstructionist Judaism has also altered traditional prayers so that they no
longer refer to a personal Messiah. The days of the Messiah. According to the
Book of Jeremiah, Moab and Biblical Elam which were exiled during the
Babylonian Exile, will be brought back from their captivity in the end of days.
In the Book of Jeremiah, it is referenced by Jeremiah, who, speaking in the
days of Josiah (Jer. 3:16), prophesied a future time, possibly the end of days,
when the Ark will no longer be talked about or be made again: Rashi comments on
this verse that "The entire people will be so imbued with the spirit of
sanctity that God's Presence will rest upon them collectively, as if the
congregation itself was the Ark of the Covenant." Gog and Magog. According to
some commentators, the war of Gog and Magog envisioned in Ezekiel 38 is
expected to occur in the end of days. This is described to be a climatic war
that is said to occur at the end of the Jewish exile. Persia and other powers
from the north are said to attack Israel, where the God of Israel reveals
himself and ends the war. Radak comments on Zechariah 14, that in the end of
days Jerusalem will be the battle ground of Gog and Magog. According to other
commentators the long exile has already made up for it and it will no longer
occur. "The world to come". Although Judaism concentrates on the importance of
the Earthly world ("Olam Ha'zeh" — "this world"), all of classical Judaism
posits an afterlife. The hereafter is known as "'olam ha-ba" (the "world to
come", עולם הבא in Hebrew), and related to concepts of "Gan Eden" (the
Heavenly "Garden of Eden", or paradise) and "Gehinom". According to religious
Judaism, any non-Jew who lives according to the Seven Laws of Noah is regarded
as a righteous gentile, and is assured of a place in the world to come, the
final reward of the righteous. Hebrew Bible. The phrase '"olam ha-ba",
(עולם הבא) "world to come", does not occur in the Hebrew Bible. Late
Second Temple period. In the late Second Temple period, beliefs about the
ultimate fate of the individual were diverse. Pharisees believed in
resurrection, while Essenes believed in the immortality of the soul, and
Sadducees, apparently, believed in neither. The Dead Sea Scrolls, Jewish
Pseudepigrapha and Jewish magical papyri reflect this diversity. Talmudic
views. The Gemara (Berachos 18b) relates several stories of people who visited
cemeteries and either overheard conversations among dead people or actually
conversed with the dead themselves, and received information that was later
verified as factually correct. The "Shem HaGedolim" by Chaim Joseph David
Azulai, (entry on Rebbe Eliezer bar Nosson), relates and discusses several
incidents of dead Sages returning to our world to visit their families and
friends. Medieval rabbinical views. While all classic rabbinic sources discuss
the afterlife, the classic Medieval scholars dispute the nature of existence in
the "End of Days" after the messianic period. While Maimonides describes an
entirely spiritual existence for souls, which he calls "disembodied
intellects," Nahmanides discusses an intensely spiritual existence on Earth,
where spirituality and physicality are merged. Both agree that life after death
is as Maimonides describes the "End of Days." This existence entails an
extremely heightened understanding of and connection to the Divine Presence.
This view is shared by all classic rabbinic scholars. There is much rabbinic
material on what happens to the soul of the deceased after death, what it
experiences, and where it goes. At various points in the afterlife journey, the
soul may encounter: "Hibbut ha-kever", the pains of the grave; "Dumah", the
angel of silence; Satan as the angel of death; the "Kaf ha-Kela", the catapult
of the soul; "Gehinom" (purgatory); and "Gan Eden" (heaven or paradise). All
classic rabbinic scholars agree that these concepts are beyond typical human
understanding. Therefore, these ideas are expressed throughout rabbinic
literature through many varied parables and analogies. "Gehinom" is fairly well
defined in rabbinic literature. It is sometimes translated as "hell", but is
much closer to the Catholic view of "purgatory" than to the Christian view of
hell, which differs from the classical Jewish view. Rabbinic thought maintains
that souls are not tortured in gehinom forever; the longest that one can be
there is said to be eleven months, with the exception of heretics, and
unobservant Jews. This is the reason that even when in mourning for near
relatives, Jews will not recite mourner's kaddish for longer than an eleven
month period. "Gehinom" is considered a spiritual forge where the soul is
purified for its eventual ascent to "Gan Eden" ("Garden of Eden"). In
Conservative Judaism. Conservative Judaism has generally retained the tenet of
the bodily resurrection of the dead, including traditional references to it in
the liturgy. However, many Conservative Jews interpret the tenet metaphorically
rather than literally. Conservative Judaism both affirms belief in the world
beyond (as referenced in the "Amidah" and Maimonides' Thirteen Precepts of
Faith) while recognizing that human understanding is limited and we cannot know
exactly what the world beyond consists of. Reform and Reconstructionist
Judaism. Reform and Reconstructionist Judaism have altered traditional
references to the resurrection of the dead ("who gives life to the dead") to
refer to "who gives life to all". Reform and Reconstructionist Judaism affirm
belief in the afterlife, though they downplay the theological implications in
favor of emphasizing the importance of the "here and now," as opposed to reward
and punishment. Rabbi Laura Novak Winer, a member of the Union for Reform
Judaism, explains the Reform attitude towards the afterlife by quoting Abraham
Joshua Heschel:  The "this world" orientation is not limited to the Reform and
Reconstructionist movements. Orthodox Rabbi Shmuley Boteach, in expounding the
Chabad view of the afterlife, also affirms the necessity of focusing on one's
legacy, along with Chabad's traditional belief in bodily resurrection in the
Messianic era:  Reincarnation. The notion of reincarnation, while held as a
mystical belief by some, is not an essential tenet of traditional Judaism. It
is not mentioned in traditional classical sources such as the Tanakh ("Hebrew
Bible"), the classical rabbinic works (Mishnah and Talmud), or Maimonides' 13
Principles of Faith. While one might contend the idea of reincarnation is not
outlined in the Tanakh, there exist references to resurrection throughout
Isaiah. However, books of Kabbalah — Jewish mysticism — teach a belief in
"gilgul", transmigration of souls, and hence the belief is universal in Hasidic
Judaism, which regards the Kabbalah as sacred and authoritative. Among well-
known Rabbis who rejected the idea of reincarnation are Saadia Gaon, David
Kimhi, Hasdai Crescas, Yedayah Bedershi (early 14th century), Joseph Albo,
Abraham ibn Daud and Leon de Modena. Among the Geonim, Hai Gaon argued with
Saadia Gaon in favour of "gilgulim". Rabbis who accepted the idea of
reincarnation include, from Medieval times: the mystical leaders Nahmanides
(the Ramban) and Rabbenu Bahya ben Asher; from the 16th-century: Levi ibn Habib
(the Ralbah), and from the mystical school of Safed Shelomoh Alkabez, Isaac
Luria (the Ari) and his exponent Hayyim Vital; and from the 18th-century: the
founder of Hasidism Yisrael Baal Shem Tov, later Hasidic Masters, and the
Lithuanian Jewish Orthodox leader and Kabbalist the Vilna Gaon. With the 16th-
century rational systemisation of Cordoveran Kabbalah by the Ramak, and the
subsequent new paradigm of Lurianic Kabbalah by the Ari, Kabbalah replaced
"Hakirah" (Rationalistic Medieval Jewish Philosophy) as the mainstream
traditional Jewish theology, both in scholarly circles and in the popular
imagination. Isaac Luria taught new explanations of the process of "gilgul",
and identification of the reincarnations of historic Jewish figures, which were
copiled by Haim Vital in his Shaar HaGilgulim. In Kabbalistic understanding of
"gilgul", which differs from many Eastern-religious views, reincarnation is not
fatalistic or automatic, nor is it essentially a punishment of sin, or reward
of virtue. In Judaism, the Heavenly realms could fulfill Maimonides' Principle
of faith in Reward and Punishment. Rather, it is concerned with the process of
individual Tikkun (Rectification) of the soul. In Kabbalistic interpretation,
each Jewish soul is reincarnated enough times only in order to fulfil each of
the 613 Mitzvot. The souls of the righteous among the Nations may be assisted
through "gilgulim" to fulfil their Seven Laws of Noah. As such "gilgul" is an
expression of Divine compassion, and is seen as a Heavenly agreement with the
individual soul to descend again. This stress on physical performance and
perfection of each Mitzvah is tied to the Lurianic doctrine of Cosmic Tikkun of
Creation. In these new teachings, a cosmic catastrophe occurred at the
beginning of creation called the "Shattering of the Vessels" of the Sephirot in
the "World of Tohu (Chaos)". The vessels of the Sephirot broke and fell down
through the spiritual worlds until they were embedded in our physical realm as
"sparks of holiness" (Nitzutzot). The reason in Lurianic Kabbalah that almost
all Mitzvot involve physical action is that through their performance, they
elevate each particular spark of holiness associated with that commandment.
Once all the sparks are redeemed to their spiritual source, the Messianic Era
begins. This metaphysical theology gives cosmic significance to the life of
each person, as each individual has particular tasks that only they can fulfil.
Therefore, "gilgulim" assist the individual soul in this cosmic plan. This also
explains the Kabbalistic reason why the future eschatological Utopia will be in
this world, as only in the lowest, physical realm is the purpose of creation
fulfilled. The idea of "gilgul" became popular in folk belief, and is found in
much Yiddish literature among Ashkenazi Jews. The last judgment. In Judaism,
the day of judgment happens every year on Rosh HaShana, therefore the belief in
a last day of judgment for all mankind is disputed. Some Rabbis hold that there
will be such a day following the resurrection of the dead. Others hold that
there is no need for that because of Rosh HaShana. While yet others hold that
this accounting and judgment happens when one dies. Yet others hold that the
last judgment only applies to the gentile nations and not the Jewish people.
