Jewish views on marriage In Judaism, marriage is viewed as a contractual bond
commanded by God in which a man and a woman come together to create a
relationship in which God is directly involved. Though procreation is not the
sole purpose, a Jewish marriage is also expected to fulfill the commandment to
have children. The main focus centers around the relationship between the
husband and wife. On the spiritual level, marriage is understood to mean that
the husband and wife are merging into a single soul. This is why a man is
considered "incomplete" if he is not married, as his soul is only one part of a
larger whole that remains to be unified. Engagement. In Jewish law, an
engagement ("shidukhin") is a contract between a man and a woman where they
mutually promise to marry each other at some future time and the terms on which
it shall take place. The promise may be made by the intending parties or by
their respective parents or other relatives on their behalf. The promise is
formalized in a document known as the , the "Document of Conditions", which is
read prior to the . After this reading, the mothers of the future bride and
groom break a plate. Today, some sign the contract on the day of the wedding,
some do it as an earlier ceremony, and some do not do it at all. In Haredi
communities, many marriages are arranged by a professional match-maker
(""shadchan"") who receives a "brokerage-fee" for his or her services. The
parents may be actively involved in the matchmaking procedure, but the young
couple is not forced to marry. The Shidduch is thus a system of arranged
introductions rather than arranged marriages. Betrothal and marriage. In Jewish
law, marriage consists of two separate acts, called "erusin" (or "kiddushin",
meaning "sanctification"), which is the betrothal ceremony, and "nissu'in" or
"chupah", the actual ceremony for the marriage. "Erusin" changes the couple's
interpersonal status, while "nissu'in" brings about the legal consequences of
the change of status. In Talmudic times, these two ceremonies usually took
place up to a year apart; the bride lived with her parents until the actual
marriage ceremony ("nissuin"), which would take place in a room or tent that
the groom had set up for her. Since the Middle Ages the two ceremonies have
taken place as a combined ceremony performed in public. According to the
Talmud, "erusin" involves the groom handing an object to the bride - either an
object of value such as a ring, or a document stating that she is being
betrothed to him. In order to be valid, this must be done in the presence of
two unrelated male witnesses. After erusin, the laws of adultery apply, and the
marriage cannot be dissolved without a religious divorce. After "nisuin", the
couple may live together. Matrimony. Marital harmony. Marital harmony, known as
""shlom bayit"," is valued in Jewish tradition. The Talmud states that a man
should love his wife as much as he loves himself, and honour her "more" than he
honours himself; indeed, one who honours his wife was said, by the classical
rabbis, to be rewarded with wealth. Similarly, a husband was expected to
discuss with his wife any worldly matters that might arise in his life. Tough
love was frowned upon; the Talmud forbids a husband from being overbearing to
his household, and domestic abuse by him was also condemned. It was said of a
wife that "God counts her tears". As for the wife, the greatest praise the
Talmudic rabbis offered to any woman was that given to a wife who fulfils the
wishes of her husband; to this end, an early midrash states that a wife should
not leave the home "too frequently". A wife, also, was expected to be modest,
even if the only other person present with her was her husband. It was believed
in classical times that God's presence dwelt in a pure and loving home.
Conjugal rights and obligations. Marriage obligations and rights in Judaism are
ultimately based on those apparent in the Bible, although they have been
filtered and expanded on by many prominent rabbinic authorities throughout
history. Traditionally, the obligations of the husband include providing for
his wife. He is obligated to provide for her sustenance for her benefit, in
exchange he is also entitled to her income. However, this is a right to the
wife and she can release her husband of the obligation of sustaining her and
she can then keep her income exclusively for herself. The document that
provides for this is the ketuba. This document also gives over to the husband
the right she has to marry anyone of her choosing. The Bible itself gives the
wife protections, as per Exodus 21:10, although the rabbis may have added
others later. The rights of the husband and wife are described in tractate
Ketubot in the Talmud, which explains how the rabbis balanced the two sets of
rights of the wife and the husband. According to the non-traditional view, in
the Bible the wife is treated as a possession owned by her husband, but later
Judaism imposed several obligations on the husband, effectively giving the wife
several rights and freedoms; indeed, being a Jewish wife was often a more
favourable situation than being a wife in many other cultures. For example, the
Talmud establishes the principle that a wife is entitled, but not compelled, to
the same dignity and social standing as her husband, and is entitled to keep
any additional advantages she had as a result of her social status before her
marriage. In the Bible. Biblical Hebrew has two words for "husband": "ba'al"
(also meaning "master"), and "ish" (also meaning "man", parallel to "isha"
meaning "woman" or "wife"). The words are contrasted in Hosea 2:18 (2:16 in
Christian Bibles), where God speaks to Israel as though it is his wife: "On
that day, says the Lord, you will call 'my husband' ("ish"), and will no longer
call me 'my master' ("ba'al")." Women were not isolated from society. The Bible
refers to the presence of women at festive events. and they take part in public
rejoicing, song, and dance. A wife was also seen as being of high value, and
was therefore, usually, carefully looked after. Early nomadic communities
practised a form of marriage known as "beena", in which a wife would own a tent
of her own, within which she retains complete independence from her husband;
this principle appears to survive in parts of early Israelite society, as some
early passages of the Bible appear to portray certain wives as each owning a
tent as a personal possession (specifically, Jael, Sarah, and Jacob's wives).
In later times, the Bible describes wives as being given the innermost room(s)
of the husband's house, as her own private area to which men were not
permitted; in the case of wealthy husbands, the Bible describes their wives as
having each been given an entire house for this purpose. It was not, however, a
life of complete freedom. The descriptions of the Bible suggest that a wife was
expected to perform certain household tasks: spinning, sewing, weaving,
manufacture of clothing, fetching of water, baking of bread, and animal
husbandry. The Book of Proverbs contains an entire acrostic about the duties
which would be performed by a "virtuous" wife. The husband too, is indirectly
implied to have some responsibilities to his wife. The Covenant Code orders men
who have two wives (polygynously) to not deprive the first wife of food, of
clothing, nor of sexual activity; if the husband does not provide the first
wife with these things, she is to be divorced, without cost to her. The Talmud
interprets this as a requirement for a man to provide food and clothing to, and
have sex with, each of his wives, even if he only has one. As a polygynous
society, the Israelites did not have any laws which imposed marital fidelity on
men. Adulterous married women and adulterous betrothed women, however, were
subject to the death penalty by the biblical laws against adultery, as were
their male accomplices. According to the Priestly Code of the Book of Numbers,
if a pregnant woman was suspected of adultery, she was to be subjected to the
Ordeal of Bitter Water, a form of trial by ordeal, but one that took a miracle
to convict. The literary prophets indicate that adultery was a frequent
occurrence, despite their strong protests against it, and these legal
strictnesses. In the Talmud and Rabbinic Judaism. Rabbinic courts could compel
the husband to make this provision, if he fails to do so voluntarily. Moses
Schreiber, a prominent opponent of early Reform Judaism, argued that if a man
could not provide his wife with this minimum, he should be compelled to divorce
her; other Jewish rabbis argued that a man should be compelled to hire himself
out, as a day-labourer, if he cannot otherwise make this provision to his wife.
According to prominent Jewish writers of the Middle Ages, if a man is absent
from his wife for a long period, the wife should be allowed to sell her
husband's property, if necessary to sustain herself. Similarly, they argued
that if a wife had to take out a loan to pay for her sustenance during such
absence, her husband had to pay the debt on his return. In order to offset the
husband's duty to support his wife, she was required by the Talmud to surrender
all her earnings to her husband, together with any profit she makes by
accident, and the right of usufruct on her property; the wife was not required
to do this if she wished to support herself. Although the wife always retained
ownership of her property itself, if she died while still married to her
husband, he was to be her heir, according to the opinion of the Talmud; this
principle, though, was modified, in various ways, by the rabbis of the Middle
Ages. Home and household. In Jewish tradition the husband was expected to
provide a home for his wife, furnished in accordance to local custom,
appropriate for the husband's status; the marital couple were expected to live
together in this home, although if the husband's choice of work made it
difficult to do so, the Talmud excuses him from the obligation. Traditionally,
if the husband changed his usual abode, the wife was considered to have a duty
to move with him. In the Middle Ages, it was argued that if a person continued
to refuse to live with their spouse, the spouse in question had sufficient
grounds for divorce Most Jewish religious authorities held that a husband must
allow his wife to eat at the same table as him, even if he gave his wife enough
money to provide for herself. By contrast, if a husband mistreated his wife, or
lived in a disreputable neighbourhood, the Jewish religious authorities would
permit the wife to move to another home elsewhere, and would compel the husband
to finance her life there. Expanding on the household tasks which the Bible
implies a wife should undertake, rabbinic literature requires her to perform
all the housework (such as baking, cooking, washing, caring for her children,
etc.), unless her marriage had given the husband a large dowry; in the latter
situation, the wife was expected only to tend to supposedly "affectionate"
tasks, such as making his bed, and serving him his food. Jewish tradition
expected the husband to provide the bed linen and kitchen utensils. If the wife
had young twin children, the Talmud made her husband responsible for caring for
one of them. Clothing. The Talmud elaborates on the biblical requirement of the
husband to provide his wife with clothing, by insisting that each year he must
provide each wife with 50 zuzim's-worth of clothing, including garments
appropriate to each season of the year. The Talmudic rabbis insist that this
annual clothing gift should include one hat, one belt, and three pairs of shoes
(one pair for each of the three main annual festivals: Passover, Shabu'ot, and
Sukkoth). The husband was also expected by the classical rabbis to provide his
wife with jewellery and perfumes if he lived in an area where this was
customary. Physical obligations. The Talmud argues that a husband is
responsible for the protection of his wife's body. If his wife became ill, then
he would be compelled, by the Talmud, to defray any medical expense which might
be incurred in relation to this; the Talmud requires him to ensure that the
wife receives care. Although he technically had the right to divorce his wife,
enabling him to avoid paying for her medical costs, several prominent rabbis
throughout history condemned such a course of action as "inhuman" behaviour,
even if the wife was suffering from a prolonged illness. If the wife dies, even
if not due to illness, the Talmud's stipulations require the husband to
arrange, and pay for, her burial; the burial must, in the opinion of the
Talmud, be one conducted in a manner befitting the husband's social status, and
in accordance with the local custom. Prominent rabbis of the Middle Ages
clarified this, stating that the husband must make any provisions required by
local burial customs, potentially including the hiring of mourners and the
erection of a tombstone. According to the Talmud, and later rabbinic writers,
if the husband was absent or refused to do these things, a rabbinical court
should arrange the wife's funeral, selling some of the husband's property in
order to defray the costs. If the wife was captured, the husband was required
by the Talmud and later writers to pay the ransom demanded for her release;
there is some debate whether the husband was required only to pay up to the
wife's market value as a slave, or whether he must pay any ransom, even to the
point of having to sell his possessions to raise the funds. If the husband and
wife were both taken captive, the historic Jewish view was that the rabbinic
courts should first pay the ransom for the wife, selling some of the husband's
property in order to raise the funds. Fidelity. In the classical era the
attitude of rabbinic scholars towards adultery was comparatively mild; although
the Talmud allowed people to be convicted of adultery merely on the basis of
circumstantial evidence, it forbids conviction if These rules made it
practically impossible to convict any woman of adultery, and in nearly every
case women were acquitted. However,a Kohen (Jewish priest) was compelled to
divorce his wife if she had been raped, due to the religious belief that a
priest should be untainted. Even when a woman was convicted, the punishment was
comparatively mild; the death penalty (for all crimes) was abolished in 40 AD,
possibly under pressure from the Roman overlords, and adulteresses were flogged
instead. Nevertheless, the husbands of convicted adulteresses were not
permitted by the Talmud to forgive their guilty wives, instead being compelled
to divorce them; according to Maimonides, a conviction for adultery nullified
any right that the wife's "marriage contract" (Hebrew: "ketubah") gave her to a
compensation payment for being divorced. Once divorced, an adulteress was not
permitted, according to the Talmudic writers, to marry her paramour. As for men
who committed adultery (with another man's wife), Abba ben Joseph and Abba
Arika are both quoted in the Talmud as expressing abhorrence, and arguing that
such men would be condemned to Gehenna. Family purity. The laws of "family
purity" ("tohorat hamishpacha") are considered an important part of an Orthodox
Jewish marriage and adherence to them is (in Orthodox Judaism) regarded as a
prerequisite of marriage. This involves observance of the various details of
the menstrual niddah laws. Orthodox brides and grooms often attend classes on
this subject prior to the wedding. The Niddah laws are regarded as an intrinsic
part of marital life (rather than just associated with women). Together with a
few other rules, including those about the ejaculation of semen, these are
collectively termed "family purity". Sexual relations. In marriage, conjugal
relations are guaranteed as a fundamental right for a woman, along with food
and clothing. This obligation is known as "onah." Sex within marriage is the
woman's right and the man's duty. If either partner refuses to participate,
that person is considered rebellious and the other spouse can sue for divorce.
Child marriage. In Ashkenazi communities in the Middle Ages, girls were married
off very young(12 1/2) because then they would be able to have children in the
Jewish community. Some of the rabbis in the Talmud were in favor of having boys
marry as soon as they reached the age of majority ( before 20). Those unwilling
to marry after the age of twenty were considered cursed by God. Torah study was
viewed as a valid reason for delaying marriage, but lifelong celibacy was
discouraged. Despite the young threshold for marriage, a large age gap between
the spouses was opposed. In modern times, child marriage is extremely rare in
the Jewish community; it is banned by law in most countries. Intermarriage.
Rates of marriage between Jews and non-Jews have increased in countries other
than Israel (the Jewish diaspora). According to the National Jewish Population
Survey 2000-01, 47% of marriages involving Jews in the United States between
1996 and 2001 were with non-Jewish partners. Jewish leaders in different
branches generally agree that possible assimilation is a crisis, but they
differ on the proper response to intermarriage. There are also differences
between streams on what constitutes an intermarriage, arising from their
differing criteria for being Jewish in the first place. Orthodox and
Conservative streams do not accept as Jewish a person whose mother is not
Jewish, nor a convert whose conversion was conducted under the authority of a
more liberal stream. Marriage in Israel. Civil marriage does not exist in
Israel, and the only institutionalized form of Jewish marriage is the religious
one, i.e. a marriage conducted under the auspices of the rabbinate.
Specifically, marriage of Israeli Jews must be conducted according to
"halakha", as viewed by Orthodox Judaism. One consequence is that Jews in
Israel who cannot marry according to Jewish law (e.g. a kohen and a divorcée,
or a Jew and one who is not halachically Jewish) cannot marry at all. This has
led for calls, mostly from the secular segment of the Israeli public, for the
institution of civil marriage. Many people are affected by the restrictions. In
Israel in the early twenty first century there are approximately "300,000
Israelis who cannot marry because one of the partners is not Jewish, or his or
her Jewishness cannot be established." Some secular Israelis travel abroad to
have civil marriages, either because they do not wish an Orthodox wedding or
because their union cannot be sanctioned by "halakha". These marriages are
legally recognized in Israel, though not recognized by the rabbinate as Jewish.
All legal marriages performed in Israel must be carried out by religious
authorities of an approved religion. Couples of different religions, or none,
cannot legally marry in Israel, whether citizens or not. Divorce. Halakha
(Jewish law) allows for divorce. The document of divorce is termed a "get". The
final divorce ceremony involves the husband giving the "get" document into the
hand of the wife or her agent, but the wife may sue in rabbinical court to
initiate the divorce. In such a case, a husband may be compelled to give the
"get", if he has violated any of his numerous obligations; this was
traditionally accomplished by beating and or monetary coercion. The rationale
was that since he was required to divorce his wife due to his (or her)
violations of the contract, his good inclination desires to divorce her, and
the community helps him to do what he wants to do anyway. In this case, the
wife may or may not be entitled to a payment. Since around the 12th century,
Judaism recognized the right of a wife abused physically or psychologically to
a divorce. Conservative Judaism follows halacha, though differently than
Orthodox Judaism. Reform Jews usually use an egalitarian form of the Ketubah at
their weddings. They generally do not issue Jewish divorces, seeing a civil
divorce as both necessary and sufficient; however, some Reform rabbis encourage
the couple to go through a Jewish divorce procedure. Conservative and Orthodox
Judaism do not recognize civil law as overriding religious law, and thus do not
view a civil divorce as sufficient. Thus, a man or woman may be considered
divorced by the Reform Jewish community, but still married by the Conservative
community. Orthodox Judaism does not recognize Reform weddings because, if they
did, the children of a Reform woman who remarried would be considered mamzerim,
the children of an adulterous relationship, a personal status that does not
allow a person to marry a non-mamzer. This allows Reform Jews to become, and
marry, Orthodox Jews should they choose to. Agunah. Traditionally, when a
husband fled or his whereabouts were unknown for any reason, the woman was
considered an "agunah" (literally “an anchored woman”) and was not allowed
to remarry; in traditional Judaism divorce can only be initiated by the
husband. Prior to modern communication, the death of the husband while in a
distant land was a common cause of this situation. In modern times when a
husband refuses to issue a "get" due to money, property or custody battles, the
woman who cannot remarry is considered a Michuseres Get, not an agunah. A man
in this situation would not be termed a "Misarev Get" (literally "a refuser of
a divorce document") unless a valid Beis Din had required him to issue a Get.
The term "agunah" is often used in such circumstances but it is not technically
accurate. Within both the Conservative and Orthodox communities, there are
efforts to avoid situations where a woman is not able to obtain a Jewish
divorce from her husband. After the fact, various Jewish and secular legal
methods are used to deal with such problems. None of the legal solutions
addresses the agunah problem in the case of a missing husband.
