Jewish Theological Seminary of America The Jewish Theological Seminary of
America (JTS or JTSA) is one of the academic and spiritual centers of
Conservative Judaism, and a major center for academic scholarship in Jewish
studies. JTS operates five schools: Albert A. List College of Jewish Studies
(which is affiliated with Columbia University and offers joint/double bachelors
degree programs with both Columbia and Barnard College); The Graduate School;
the William Davidson Graduate School of Jewish Education; the H. L. Miller
Cantorial School and College of Jewish Music; and The Rabbinical School. It
also operates a number of research and training institutes. History. Jewish
Theological Seminary of Breslau. Rabbi Zecharias Frankel (1801–1875) at one
time was in the traditional wing of the nascent Reform Judaism movement. After
the second Reform rabbinic conference (1845, Frankfurt, Germany) he resigned
after coming to believe that their positions were excessively radical. In 1854
he became the head of a new rabbinical school, the Jewish Theological Seminary
of Breslau. In his magnum opus "Darkhei HaMishnah" ("Ways of the Mishnah"),
Frankel amassed scholarly support which showed that Jewish law was not static,
but rather had always developed in response to changing conditions. He called
his approach towards Judaism 'Positive-Historical', which meant that one should
accept Jewish law and tradition as normative, yet one must be open to changing
and developing the law in the same historical fashion that Judaism has always
historically developed. The Morais era (1886–1897). About this time in
America, Rabbi Sabato Morais championed the reaction to American Reform. At one
time Morais had been a voice for moderation within the coalition of Reformers.
He had opposed the more radical changes, but was open to moderate changes that
would not offend traditional sensibilities. After the Reform movement published
the Pittsburgh Platform, Morais recognized the futility of his efforts and
began the creation of a new rabbinical school in New York City. The "Jewish
Theological Seminary Association" was founded with Morais as its President in
1886. Morais was soon joined by Alexander Kohut and Bernard Drachman, both of
whom had received "semicha" (rabbinic ordination) at Rabbi Frankel's Breslau
seminary. They shaped the curriculum and philosophy of the new school after
Rabbi Frankel's seminary. The first graduate to be ordained was Morris Mandel
who went to lead Adas Israel congregation (Washington, D.C.). Morais served as
the president of the Jewish Theological Seminary of America until his death in
1897. The Schechter era (1902-1915). After Morais's death, the financial
position of the association became precarious. In October 1901, a new
organization was projected entitled the "Jewish Theological Seminary of
America," with which the association was invited to incorporate. This
arrangement was carried into effect April 14, 1902. The new organization was
endowed with a fund of over $500,000, and was presented with a suitable
building on University Heights by Jacob H. Schiff. It obtained a charter from
the state of New York (approved Feb. 20, 1902), "for the perpetuation of the
tenets of the Jewish religion, the cultivation of Hebrew literature, the
pursuit of Biblical and archeological research, the advancement of Jewish
scholarship, the establishment of a library, and the education and training of
Jewish rabbis and teachers. It is empowered to grant and confer the degrees of
Rabbi, Ḥazan, Master and Doctor of Hebrew Literature, and Doctor of Divinity,
and also to award certificates of proficiency to persons qualified to teach in
Hebrew schools." The reorganized seminary was opened on Sept. 15, 1902, in the
old building of the Theological Seminary Association at 736 Lexington Avenue.
Solomon Schechter assumed presidency of JTS, as well as serving as Professor of
Jewish theology. In a series of papers he articulated an ideology for the
nascent movement of Conservative Judaism. In 1913 he presided over the creation
of the United Synagogue of America. (The name was changed in 1991 to the United
Synagogue of Conservative Judaism.) Along with Schechter and Bernard Drachman,
professors at the Seminary at the time included: Louis Ginzberg, professor of
Talmud; Alexander Marx, professor of history and rabbinical literature and
librarian; Israel Friedländer, professor of Bible; Joseph Mayor Asher,
professor of homiletics; and Joshua A. Joffe, instructor in Talmud. In 1905,
Israel Davidson joined the faculty, teaching Hebrew and Rabbinics. According to
David Ellenson and Lee Bycel, "each of these men was a distinguished scholar,
and the academic reputation of the Seminary soared with the addition of these
men to the faculty... Schechter was determined to carve out the highest
academic reputation for the Seminary." The rabbinical school had very high
academic standards. The curriculum focused especially on Talmud, legal codes,
and classical rabbinic literature, but aside from a little time for a
Homiletics class, very little time was spent on practical training for serving
in a rabbinical position. As of 1904 there were 37 students in the theological
department, and 120 students took a set of courses designed for teachers (which
later evolved into the Teachers Institute). Mordechai Kaplan also joined the
faculty during this period and became professor of homiletics (upon Joseph
Mayor Asher's death) and also the first principal of a new school within JTS
known as The Teachers Institute (TI). The Teachers Institute opened in 1909. A
majority of its students were women, both because teaching was seen as a
women's profession and because the Teachers Institute was one of the only
institutions where women could obtain an advanced education in Jewish studies.
The Teachers Institute offered both undergraduate and graduate degrees. (Its
undergraduate division later evolved into the Albert A. List College of Jewish
Studies, and its graduate division evolved into the William Davidson Graduate
School of Jewish Education.) The Adler era (1915-1940). In 1915, Schechter was
succeeded by Cyrus Adler, the President of Dropsie College. A member of the
board with impressive academic qualifications, he was initially seen as an
interim replacement for Schechter. But no better chancellor was found, and
Adler went on to serve as President until 1940. During the 1920s, Adler
explored the possibility of a merger with Yeshiva University, but Orthodox
leaders of Yeshiva University viewed JTS as insufficiently Orthodox. New
faculty appointed during the early part of Adler's tenure included the Biblical
scholar Jacob Hoschander. In the 1920s, Boaz Cohen and Louis Finkelstein, both
of whom were ordained at JTS and completed their doctoral degrees at Columbia
University, joined the Talmud faculty. In the 1930s, Adler appointed H.L.
Ginsberg, Robert Gordis, and Alexander Sperber as professors of Bible. He also
gave appointments to Israel Efros, Simon Greenberg, Milton Steinberg, and Ismar
Elbogen. During his tenure, Adler groomed Louis Finkelstein as his chosen
successor. In 1931, he appointed Finkelstein to a full professorship.
Finkelstein became the Solomon Schechter Professor of Theology. In 1937 Adler
appointed Finkelstein as Provost. In 1930 the organization commissioned a new
headquarters for 122nd Street and Broadway in a neo-colonial style, with a
tower at the corner. The architects were Gehron, Ross and Alley. In 1931, the
Seminary College of Jewish Studies was established for students who wanted
college-level courses in Jewish studies but who were not preparing for teaching
careers. (The Seminary College of Jewish Studies later became the Albert A.
List College of Jewish Studies.) The Finkelstein era (1940-72). Louis
Finkelstein became Chancellor of the Jewish Theological Seminary in 1940.
During his chancellorship, JTS made significant efforts to engage the American
public. One of its signature programs was a radio and television show called
The Eternal Light. The show aired on Sunday afternoons, featuring well-known
Jewish personalities like Chaim Potok and Elie Wiesel. Broadcasts did not
involve preaching or prayer, but drew on history, literature and social issues
to explore Judaism and Jewish holidays in a manner that was accessible to
persons of any faith. The show continued to run until 1985. During the 1940s,
the Jewish Theological Seminary established Camp Ramah as a tool for furthering
Jewish education. The founders envisioned an informal camp setting where Jewish
youth would reconnect with the synagogue and Jewish tradition, and a new cadre
of American-born Jewish leadership could be cultivated. The first camp opened
in Conover, Wisconsin in 1947. The program was drawn up by Moshe Davis and
Sylvia Ettenberg of the JTS Teachers' Institute. In 1945, JTS established a new
institution, the Leadership Training Fellowship, designed to educate young
people within Conservative synagogues and guide them into Jewish public
service. In 1952, the Jewish Theological Seminary opened a new school known as
the Cantors Institute. (The school was later renamed the H. L. Miller Cantorial
School and College of Jewish Music.) This was at roughly the same time that the
other established American Jewish seminaries, Hebrew Union College and Yeshiva
University opened cantorial schools. Prior to this time, American cantors were
often trained in Europe. In 1950, Finkelstein created the Universal Brotherhood
program, which "brought together laymen interested in interpreting the ethical
dimensions of Judaism to the wider society." JTS expanded its public outreach
in the 1950s with Finkelstein's development of JTS's Institute for Religious
Studies and the establishment of its Herbert H. Lehman Institute of Ethics.
During the Finkelstein era, the Institute for Religious and Social Studies
brought together Protestant, Roman Catholic and Jewish scholars for theological
discussions. (In 1986, the name of the institute was changed to the Finkelstein
Institute for Religious and Social Studies in Finkelstein's honor.) In 1957,
JTS announced plans to build a satellite campus in Jerusalem for JTS rabbinical
students studying in Israel. A building was completed in 1962. (The campus
eventually evolved into the home of the Schechter Institute of Jewish Studies.)
In 1962, the seminary also acquired the Schocken Institute for Jewish Research
and its library in Jerusalem. In 1968, JTS received a charter from the State of
New York to create an Institute for Advanced Studies in the Humanities, which
conferred bachelor's, master's, and doctoral degrees. The Institute was
designed as a non-sectarian academic institute which would train future college
and university professors. Its first students enrolled in 1970. The Institute
later evolved into the Graduate School of the Jewish Theological Seminary.
Faculty during the Finkelstein era. When Finkelstein took office, prominent
faculty members included Louis Ginzberg, Alexander Marx, Mordecai Kaplan, H.L.
Ginsberg, Robert Gordis, and Boaz Cohen. In 1940, Finkelstein made his most
significant academic appointment, hiring the prominent Talmud scholar Saul
Lieberman as Professor of Palestinian Literature and Institutions. In 1948,
Lieberman became dean of the Rabbinical School. In 1958, he was named rector of
the Seminary. In 1945, Finkelstein hired the theologian Abraham Joshua Heschel,
who had been teaching for a brief period at Hebrew Union College. During the
course of his chancellorship, Finkelstein also gave academic appointments to
other prominent scholars including Moshe Davis (1942), Shalom Spiegel (1943),
Yochanan Muffs (1954), Max Kadushin (1960), Gerson Cohen, David Weiss Halivni,
Judah Goldin, Chaim Dimitrovsky, and Seymour Siegel. Finkelstein appointed Max
Arzt to serve as Vice-Chancellor of JTS in 1951, and he appointed Arzt as
Israel Goldstein Professor of Practical Theology in 1962. Library fire. In
April 1966 JTS's library caught fire. 70,000 books were destroyed, and many
others were damaged. The Cohen era (1972-1986). Gerson D. Cohen became
Chancellor of the Jewish Theological Seminary in 1972. Prominent faculty during
Cohen's chancellorship included David Weiss Halivni of the Talmud Department
and José Faur. Both of these scholars resigned when the JTS faculty voted to
ordain women as rabbis and as cantors in 1983. Yochanan Muffs, who had joined
the JTS faculty in 1954, was a prominent professor of Bible. Max Kadushin, who
had joined the JTS faculty in 1960, taught ethics and rabbinic thought until
his death in 1980. In 1972, Cohen appointed Avraham Holtz as the dean of
academic evelopment. Neil Gillman served as Dean of the JTS Rabbinical School
for much of the Cohen chancellorship. Morton Leifman served as Dean of the
Cantors Institute. Cohen oversaw the appointment of Judith Hauptman as the
first female professor of Talmud at JTS. Hauptman began teaching at JTS in
1973. Joel Roth, who had begun teaching at JTS in 1968, was appointed Associate
Professor of Talmud upon completing his Ph.D. at JTS in 1973. Roth went on to
serve as the dean of the Rabbinical School from 1981 to 1984. He was succeeded
by Gordon Tucker, who became dean of the Rabbinical School in 1984. In June
1973, the Seminary's Institute for Advanced Studies in the Humanities was
granted permission to grant Ph.D. degrees in Jewish History, Bible, Talmud,
Jewish Philosophy, and Hebrew. In 1975, the Seminary replaced the Institute for
Advanced Studies in the Humanities with the Graduate School of the Jewish
Theological Seminary, which brought together JTS's non-theological academic
training programs. Cohen appointed historian Ismar Schorsch as the first dean
of the Graduate School. Admission of female students. Beginning in the 1970s,
the topic of women's ordination was regularly discussed at JTS. Women who
unsuccessfully sought admission to the rabbinical school during the 1970s
included Susannah Heschel, daughter of JTS faculty member Abraham Joshua
Heschel. After years of discussion, the JTS faculty voted to ordain women as
rabbis and as cantors in 1983. The first female rabbi to graduate from the
school (and the first female Conservative Jewish rabbi in the world) was Amy
Eilberg, who graduated and was ordained as a rabbi in 1985. The first class of
female rabbis that was admitted to JTS in 1984 included Rabbi Naomi Levy, who
later became a best-selling author and Nina Beth Cardin, who became an author
and environmental activist. Erica Lipitz and Marla Rosenfeld Barugel were the
first women ordained as cantors by JTS (and the first female Conservative
Jewish cantors in the world.) They were both ordained in 1987. The Schorsch era
(1986–2006). Ismar Schorsch became Chancellor of JTS in 1986. Among his
accomplishments was creating the William Davidson Graduate School of Jewish
Education, which was established through an endowmen by William Davidson of
Detroit in 1994. Prominent faculty in the Talmud and Rabbinics department
during Schorsch's chancellorship included Joel Roth, Mayer Rabinowitz, David C.
Kraemer and Judith Hauptman. Hauptman was the first woman appointed to teach
Talmud at JTS. The Bible department included David Marcus and Stephen A.
Geller. The Jewish literature Department included David G. Roskies. The Jewish
history department included Jack Wertheimer and Shuly Rubin Schwartz. The
Jewish Philosophy department included Neil Gillman and Shaul Magid. In 2004,
Alan Mittleman joined the Jewish Philosophy department and became head of JTS's
Louis Finkelstein Institute for Religious and Social Studies. The number of
advanced programs in the Graduate School grew over the course of Schorsch's
tenure. The Graduate School came to describe itself as being "the most
extensive academic program in advanced Judaica in North America." Gordon
Tucker's tenure as dean of the Rabbinical School ended in 1992. His
predecessor, Joel Roth, again became dean, serving in 1992-1993. Roth was
succeeded by William Lebeau, who served as dean from 1993-1999. Lebeau was
succeeded by Alan Kensky, and then Lebeau became dean of the Rabbinical School
again in June 2002. In 1998, Henry Rosenblum was appointed Dean of the H.L.
Miller Cantorial School and College of Jewish Music at the Jewish Theological
Seminary in 1998, becoming the first Hazzan to hold that position. Rosenblum
remained in this position until 2010. The Eisen era (2007-present). Arnold
Eisen, Koshland Professor of Jewish Culture and Religion and Chair of the
Department of Religious Studies at Stanford University, took office as
Chancellor-elect on July 1, 2006, the day after Schorsch stepped down. Eisen
assumed the position full time on July 1, 2007. Eisen is the second non-rabbi,
after Cyrus Adler, to hold this post. He is also the first person with a social
science background to serve as Chancellor; previous chancellors had backgrounds
in Jewish history or Talmud. In January 2007, at the start of Eisen's
chancellorship, Daniel S. Nevins was named the Dean of the Rabbinical School of
the Jewish Theological Seminary of America, succeeding Rabbi William Lebeau.
Biblical scholar Alan Cooper was named Provost. In 2010, Henry Rosenblum left
the H.L. Miller Cantorial School as part of JTS's restructuring efforts, and
Nevins also became responsible for oversight of the H.L. Miller Cantorial
School. In June 2009, Goldman Sachs executive Abby Joseph Cohen was named
Chairman of the Board of JTS, the first woman to hold the position. Also in
2009, with funding from the Charles H. Revson Foundation and the Booth Ferris
Foundation, JTS established The Center for Pastoral Education with the goal of
teaching the art of pastoral care to seminary students and ordained clergy of
all faiths. The Center was developed by Rabbi Mychal Springer, formerly an
Associate Dean of the Rabbinical School. Springer became the Center's first
director. In 2010, the Tikvah Fund endowed a new institute at JTS, the Tikvah
Institute for Jewish Thought, which is "devoted to the intellectual encounter
between the best sources of Jewish and broader Western reflection on the
deepest problems of human life." According to the Seminary, "JTS was selected
by the Tikvah Fund based on its academic excellence and its mission to advance
Jewish life in the modern world." Alan Mittleman, Chair of the Department of
Jewish Thought, was appointed as its director. Professor Burton L. Visotzky was
appointed to replace Mittleman as director of the Louis Finkelstein Institute
for Religious and Social Studies. His early work as director of the Finkelstein
Institute focused on Muslim-Jewish dialogue. In October 2010, a group of
prominent Muslim and Jewish scholars and leaders, joined by the heads of
several Christian seminaries, met at JTS for two days to discuss and compare
the situations of Islam and Judaism in America. In May, 2011, Eisen launched
“Conservative Judaism: A Community Conversation,” an interactive website
featuring original essays on Conservative Judaism, with responses from Movement
and Lay leaders and scholars. Admission of LGBT students. Since March 2007, JTS
has accepted openly gay students into their rabbinical and cantorial programs
(the Seminary's other three schools upheld such non-discrimination policies
prior to this date). A survey conducted prior to the decision indicated that
58% of the rabbinical student body supported this change. The school issued a
press release announcing the new admission policy, without taking a stance on
same-sex unions. JTS marked the first year anniversary of the change with a
special program. Some students who opposed the change in admission policy said
they felt excluded from the day's program because it did not sufficiently
recognize the pluralism in the student body. In April 2011, JTS held a Yom
Iyyun, or day of learning, about LGBTQ issues, and their intersection with
Judaism. Joy Ladin, a transgender woman who teaches English at Yeshiva
University, gave a talk about her life. Other programs included creating
welcoming communities, and inclusive prayer, among others. It was sponsored in
part by Keshet, the Jewish social action group that works to see queer
individuals included in all sectors of Jewish life. New Mission. The Jewish
Theological Seminary of America is a preeminent institution of Jewish higher
education that integrates rigorous academic scholarship and teaching with a
commitment to strengthening Jewish tradition, Jewish lives, and Jewish
communities. JTS articulates a vision of Judaism that is learned and
passionate, pluralist and authentic, traditional and egalitarian; one that is
thoroughly grounded in Jewish texts, history, and practices, and fully engaged
with the societies and cultures of the present. Our vision joins faith with
inquiry; the covenant of our ancestors with the creative insights of today;
intense involvement in the society and State of Israel with devotion to the
flowering of Judaism throughout the world; service to the Jewish community, as
well as to all of the communities of which Jews are a part: our society, our
country, and our world. JTS serves North American Jewry by educating
intellectual and spiritual leaders for Conservative Judaism and the vital
religious center, training rabbis, cantors, scholars, educators, communal
professionals, and lay activists who are inspired by our vision of Torah and
dedicated to assisting in its realization. JTS and the Conservative Movement.
JTS was the founding institution of Conservative Judaism in America. The United
Synagogue of America, the organization of Conservative synagogues, was founded
by Solomon Schechter while he served as President of JTS. During the
chancellorship of Louis Finkelstein, however, there were many tensions between
JTS and the Conservative Judaism movement which it led. JTS was often more
traditional in matters of religious practice than the denomination as a whole.
Finkelstein was also perceived as focusing on American and world Jewry as a
whole while paying little attention to the Conservative movement. According to
scholar Michael Panitz, the situation changed under Finkelstein's successors.
Under Chancellor Gerson Cohen (chancellor from 1972–86), JTS "decisively
embraced its identity as a Conservative Jewish institution, it thereby
abandoned its earlier hopes to provide a non-denominational unifier for
traditional and moderate American Jews." The next chancellor, Ismar Schorsch
(1986–2006), "emerged as an outspoken advocate for Conservative Judaism."
With the new mission statement introduced by Chancellor Arnold Eisen (2007-),
the school has positioned itself as serving both "Conservative Judaism" and
"the vital religious center." As of 2010, JTS's website describes JTS as "the
academic and spiritual center of Conservative Judaism worldwide." Others
describe it as "the academic and spiritual centre of Conservative Judaism in
the United States." A second important center for Conservative Judaism in the
United States is the Ziegler School of Rabbinic Studies in California, founded
by graduates of JTS in 1996. Current educational programs. Rabbinical School.
The Rabbinical School describes itself as offering "an intensive program of
study, personal growth, and spiritual development that leads to rabbinic
ordination and a career of service to the Jewish community." As of 2010, the
rabbinical school requires five or six years of study. Its curriculum requires
extensive study of Talmud, midrash, Bible, Jewish history, Hebrew language, and
various professional skills. Students are required to spend the second year of
the program at the Schechter Institute of Jewish Studies in Jerusalem.
Cantorial School. The Cantorial School describes itself as training "select
advanced students as hazzanim (cantors) for congregational service or as
teachers of Jewish music, choral directors, composers, or research scholars."
The school is technically divided into two parts: the entity formally known as
the "H. L. Miller Cantorial School" invests students as hazzanim, while the
entity known as the "College of Jewish Music" awards the Master's degree in
Sacred Music. All students in the Cantorial School are enrolled in both
programs simultaneously. At present, the first year of cantorial school at JTS
is generally spent in Israel. The curriculum during the five years focuses on
three main areas: general music, Jewish music and Jewish text study. William
Davidson Graduate School of Jewish Education. In 1994, William Davidson of
Detroit, Michigan established a $15 million endowment at JTS to fund the
William Davidson Graduate School of Jewish Education, which trains educators
who can serve in Jewish institutions and elsewhere, in both formal and informal
settings. The Davidson School offers both master's and doctoral degrees. List
College. Albert A. List College of Jewish Studies (List College) is the
undergraduate school of JTSA. It is closely affiliated with Columbia
University; almost all List College students are enrolled in dual-degree
programs (BA/BA or BA/BS) with either Columbia University’s School of General
Studies or Barnard College.
