Jews for Jesus Jews for Jesus is a conservative, Christian evangelical
organization that focuses on the conversion of Jews to Christianity. Its
members consider themselves to be Jews – either as defined by Jewish law, or
as according to the view of Jews for Jesus. Jews for Jesus defines "Jewish" in
terms of parentage and as a birthright, regardless of religious belief. The
identification of Jews for Jesus as a Jewish organization is rejected by Jewish
religious denominations and secular Jewish groups due to the Christian beliefs
of its members. The group's evangelical activities have garnered mixed
reactions from other Christian individuals and organizations, largely divided
between liberal and conservative lines. Founded in 1973, Jews for Jesus employs
more than 200 people, estimates its adherents at 30,000 to 125,000 worldwide
and takes in about $20 million a year in donations. History. The organization
was founded by Moishe Rosen an ordained Baptist minister (who was born Jewish
and converted to Christianity at the age of 17) and Jhan Moskowitz an ordained
Christian and Missionary Alliance minister and son of a holocaust survivor.
Rosen was the head of the San Francisco arm of the American Board of Missions
to the Jews (an organization now known as Chosen People Ministries). In 1973,
Rosen broke off from that organization, and in September of that year,
incorporated Jews for Jesus as Hineni Ministries with its headquarters in the
San Francisco area. Over the next few years, it established branches in other
cities. From September 1979 - June 1980, it shut down its branches to retrain
its missionaries. It then went on to open more branches, mostly in United
States cities, in the 1980s, as well as abroad in the 1990s. Rosen remained its
executive director until May 1996 when he was replaced by David Brickner, also
a Baptist minister. Moishe Rosen died in May 2010. The organization has
maintained its headquarters in or near San Francisco, California since its
inception. Aims and organization. Jews for Jesus is based in San Francisco,
California. Jews for Jesus official mission statement is "to make the
Messiahship of Jesus an unavoidable issue to our Jewish people worldwide."
Through media advertisements, production and distribution of literature,
producing music and organizing person-to-person evangelism, the organization
asserts that "a specifically Jewish mission" is necessary, saying, "Jewish
people tend to dismiss evangelistic methods and materials that are couched in
Christian lingo, because they reinforce the assumption that Jesus is for 'them'
not 'us'." Jews for Jesus promotes awareness of the Jewish heritage of the
Christian faith. Their website contains brief descriptions of Jewish festivals.
The group also provides programs that provide their Christian interpretation of
Jewish holidays such as Passover, Sukkot and Hanukkah, explaining what they
consider messianic elements and how they believe these festivals are related to
Jesus. Beliefs. Jews for Jesus takes the mainstream Christian positions that
Jesus is the Messiah, that his coming was prophesied in the Hebrew Bible, and
that Jesus is the son of God, the second person of the Trinity. Jews for Jesus
believes that their views of the Messiah are entirely compatible with the view
of God presented in Jewish scriptures, and that the doctrine of the Trinity,
fundamental to the Christian faith, is not entirely alien to Judaism. According
to an article on Jews for Jesus by B. Robinson of Ontario Consultants on
Religious Tolerance, Their doctrinal statement is basically indistinguishable
from Evangelical and other conservative Christian groups. ... They differ from
some Evangelical Christian groups in their belief that Israel continues to
exist as a "covenant people." They also integrate some Jewish customs and use
Hebrew and Yiddish in some literature. Leadership, funding and outreach. Jews
for Jesus is funded by donations from Messianic Jews and like-minded
Christians. It has a full-time staff of more than 200 employees running branch
offices in nine cities across the United States. There are also branch offices
in Australia, Brazil, Canada (in Montreal and Toronto), France, Germany (in
Essen), Hungary, Israel, Russia, South Africa, Switzerland, the United Kingdom
and Ukraine (in Dnepropetrovsk, Kharkov, Kiev and Odessa). In addition to its
English-language website, the group has websites in Hebrew, Portuguese, Polish,
Persian, Italian, Spanish and Korean. According to the Evangelical Council for
Financial Accountability, the group's total income in FY 2010 was
US$20,728,530. Evangelizing. The majority of evangelism used by Jews for Jesus
consists of handing out literature on the streets, one-on-one Bible studies,
full-page ads in leading newspapers and magazines, ISSUES (an eight-page
evangelistic publication for Jewish seekers) and internet evangelism. The
organization uses colorful pamphlets and T-shirts to get their message across
and is known for targeting populations of Jews which they see as receptive to
their message, such as recent immigrants, college students, senior citizens and
interfaith couples. Regarding "targeting," Jews for Jesus says this on its
website: "The term 'targeting' brings to mind darts or firearms. We can't
imagine throwing the gospel at people or aiming to harm them with it. Actually,
targeting is a propaganda term that has been misappropriated from the marketing
profession. . . . Those who are not Christians use it to disparage evangelism.
To scoffers and unbelievers it has a negative connotation. We avoid the term
'targeting' because we see the gospel as something to be presented freely
rather than something to be sold. We don't throw our tracts at people; we hand
them to those who want to take them." Stephanie Persin writes, "Evangelists in
the organization have been trained to recite phrases from the Old Testament and
to use Yiddish words so as to convince potential converts that Jews for Jesus
maintain Jewish traditions." Regarding Jewish traditions, Jews for Jesus says
on its website: "As for the accusation that we 'fraudulently use Jewish symbols
and Jewish holidays,' we have a right to use Jewish symbols by virtue of our
ancestry, and we have a right to celebrate Passover and other Jewish holidays
and interpret them according to the teachings of Scripture. The accusation
would only be valid if the New Testament were false." On their official
website, Jews for Jesus says that they give out 8 million pamphlets a year.
They use college-age volunteers for some of their short-term evangelism
campaigns. Each July they send a team of 20 to 30 to New York City, which they
say has the world's largest and most diverse Jewish population. Affiliations
and support. On the Christian counter-cult site Apologetics Index, Jews for
Jesus is listed as an orthodox member of the Christianity family. Jews for
Jesus is a member of numerous evangelical Christian groups, including The World
Evangelical Alliance, the Evangelical Council for Financial Accountability, the
World Evangelical Fellowship, the Evangelical Fellowship of Canada, the
Canadian Council for Christian Charities, the Evangelical Alliance of Great
Britain, the Evangelical Alliance of South Africa, the Fédération
Evangélique de France (Evangelical Federation of France), and the Lausanne
Consultation on Jewish Evangelism. J.I. Packer, Board of Governors' Professor
of Theology at Regent College in Vancouver, British Columbia: "Jews for Jesus
is a worldwide Christian mission that was born against the background of
California's Jesus movement and has grown steadily ever since. Holding that
Jesus of Nazareth -- God incarnate, crucified, risen, and now reigning -- is
the true Messiah foretold in the Old Testament and the true fulfillment of
Jewish hopes, the mission exists to press his claims on Jewish people
everywhere. It is based on two principles. First, Jews who receive Jesus Christ
as their Lord and Savior and who are 'completed' and 'fulfilled' thereby do not
need to leave behind their Jewish identity or break with Jewish ways. As
Judaizing was not a theological requirement for the first gentile Christians,
so gentilizing is not a cultural requirement for today's Jewish believers.
Though they belong in the Christian church, which has been mainly gentile -
- non-Jewish, that is -- for most of its life, within the church they are free
to be as Jewish as they like. Second, up-front, in-your-face challenge, with as
much humor, chutzpah, and goodwill as possible, is the way to approach Jews
evangelistically." Dr. Joseph M. Stowell III, past president of Moody Bible
Institute, current president of Cornerstone University in Grand Rapids,
Michigan, and author of over 20 Christian books: "Since Moishe Rosen founded
Jews for Jesus in the early 1970s, thousands of Jewish people have come to
experience living faith in Jesus as their Messiah through this strategic
ministry. And just as important, thousands of Gentiles have as well. We are
proud that David Brickner, the executive director, and many others at Jews for
Jesus are graduates of Moody Bible Institute. I'm privileged to be associated
with them and I encourage you in your association with Jews for Jesus now and
in the future." Mark Bailey, President of Dallas Theological Seminary: "I have
watched the ministry of Jews for Jesus for twenty-five years. I have known
their chairman of the board, Byron Spradlin, for the same period. Susan Perlman
now serves on the board of Dallas Theological Seminary, and I am pleased to
call Moishe Rosen and David Brickner my friends. All are committed followers of
Messiah Jesus. I have always found the ministry of Jews for Jesus and their
traveling musicians to be evangelical in their doctrine and appropriately
evangelistic in their presentation. They are both creative and biblical in
their communication of the gospel. They help lead the way in Jewish evangelism.
John Stephen Piper, Senior Pastor, Bethlehem Baptist Church, Minneapolis,
Minnesota: "For almost two decades I have followed with joy the ministry of
Jews for Jesus. I say with joy" because I love the gospel of the glory of Jesus
the Messiah, and I love Jewish people, and I love bold, compassionate ways of
connecting Jews and Jesus. All I have seen and all I know of Jews for Jesus
makes me happy to say a rousing YES to their ministry. From Moshe Rosen to
David Brickner I have admired the leadership. I have seen them up close and in
action. I have been a partner in the Behold Your God mission in Minneapolis and
have spoken to the band of bold witnesses before they hit the streets. I
encourage my people to give support, and I have wished I had a fraction of the
dedication and courage I see in the missionaries who put themselves at risk
week in and week out. The risk is mainly from misunderstanding. It is
inevitable. Bold, loving summons to believe on Jesus as the Messiah will be
seen by some as arrogant,by others as abusive, by others as controlling, by
others as ethnic assault, by others as the most precious gift ever given. I see
it as obedience to Jesus and as the very embodiment of the love of Christ for
lost sinners like me. 'Whoever has the Son has life; whoever does not have the
Son of God does not have life.' (1 John 5:12) May God give Jews for Jesus
faithfulness to offer the Son to all who need him—to the Jew first and also
to the gentile." Torkild Masvie, International Director, Caspari Center,
Jerusalem: "I have known the Jews for Jesus organization and senior staff for
years. They are an organization with fundamental integrity, i.e. they live up
to their stated goals with no hidden agenda. They are characterized by their
clear, sober, biblical theology which is in line with the principles of the
reformation. They represent a clear voice against the separation of Jewish and
Gentile believers in Messiah and encourage active membership of Jewish
believers in Jesus in local churches." Opposition and criticism. One of the
criticisms of Jews for Jesus surrounds the tactics they employ in their
missionary and outreach programs. Critics say that the organization uses vague
and misleading language along with deceptive tactics in its attempt to convert
Jews to Christianity. These tactics include statements that Jesus is the
fulfillment of the Jewish prophecy of Messiah and attempts by Jews for Jesus to
interpret core principles of Judaism in an effort to bring these Jewish
principles into accord with Christian doctrines. To this end, critics say that
Jews for Jesus uses the ambiguity in the definition of "Jew" and "Jewish" to
confuse their prospective converts into believing there is a possibility of one
being a follower of both Christianity and Judaism simultaneously. On its
website in answer to a frequently asked question,"How can I respond to the
accusation that Jews for Jesus distorts Jewish religious symbols?," Jews for
Jesus says, "Regardless of what anyone says, we are Jews in that we are
physically descended from Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. At the same time we are
also Christians—those who believe in and follow Jesus, the Jewish Messiah.
One classification does not cancel out the other, even though rabbis like to
teach that Judaism and Christianity are mutually exclusive categories and hence
are antithetical to one another." Mainstream Judaism. Belief in Jesus as deity,
son of God, or even a non-divine Christ/Messiah or Prophet (as in Islam), is
held as incompatible with Judaism by all Jewish denominations. Jewish Community
Relations Council of New York. Spiritual Deception Prevention Project The
director of a counter-missionary group "Torah Atlanta", Rabbi Efraim Davidson,
stated that "the Jews for Jesus use aggressive proselytizing to target
disenfranchised or unaffiliated Jews, Russian immigrants and college students"
and that "their techniques are manipulative, deceptive and anti-Semitic." In
his 1997 book "The Vanishing American Jew: In Search of Jewish Identity for the
Next Century", Alan Dershowitz wrote: "In America, and in other nations that
separate church from state, one's Jewishness is a matter of self-definition
..." but notes: "I do not mean to include former Jews who practice Christianity
under the deliberately misleading name Jews for Jesus. A Jew for Jesus already
has a name: a Christian." Outreach Judaism. Outreach Judaism, a Jewish counter-
missionary organization founded by Rabbi Tovia Singer, aims to provide
educational resources to individuals targeted by organizations such as Jews for
Jesus. Jews for Judaism. Jews for Judaism, established by Rabbi Bentzion
Kravitz in 1986, is a Jewish organization aiming "to strengthen and preserve
Jewish identity through education and counseling that counteracts deceptive
proselytizing targeting Jews for conversion". The name "Jews for Judaism" is a
deliberate parody of Jews for Jesus, as Jews for Jesus is one of the missionary
organizations that Jews for Judaism was founded to counter. Christian. Some
Western Christians object to evangelizing Jews because they see Jewish
religious practice as valid in and of itself. Some Liberal Protestant
denominations that have issued statements criticizing evangelism of Jews
include the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, the United Church of Christ
and the Presbyterian Church USA, which said in 1988 that Jews have their own
covenant with God. The Board of Governors of the Long Island Council of
Churches opposes proselytizing of Jews, and voiced these sentiments in a
statement that "noted with alarm" the "subterfuge and dishonesty" inherent in
the "mixing religious symbols in ways which distort their essential meaning",
and named Jews for Jesus as one of the three groups about whom such behavior
was alleged. In 2003, the sponsorship of Jews for Jesus by All Souls Church,
Langham Place, a Conservative Evangelical Church in London, with a launch event
on Rosh Hashanah launching a UK mission targeting the Jewish community led to
the Interfaith Alliance UK a coalition of Jewish, Christian and Islamic
religious leaders issuing a letter of protest to the Archbishop of Canterbury.
Islamic interfaith conference. The Interfaith Conference of Metropolitan
Washington includes Muslims, Jews, and liberal church groups. The Conference
states that they "support the right of all religions to share their message in
the spirit of good will;" however Rev. Clark Lobenstine, has condemned the
"proselytizing efforts" of "Jews for Jesus and other messianic Jewish groups."
His wording matched the Conference's 1987 "Statement on Proselytism," which
makes claims against "groups that have adopted the label of Hebrew
Christianity, Messianic Judaism, or Jews for Jesus," so it is unclear which
claims are directed at Jews for Jesus in particular. A particularly strong
opposition has emerged from Muslim imams and leaders in the light of the
emergence of "Messianic Muslim" Evangelical missions directed at the Muslim
community modeled on Jews for Jesus, with the presentation of Evangelical
beliefs in Arabicised terms and encouragement of Muslims to become "followers
for 'Isa", and on 10 December 2003, a joint Jewish-Muslim Delegation supported
by the Office of the Chief Rabbi in Great Britain together with Muslim imams
presented a protest to the Bishop of London, Richard Chartres. Other.
"America's Religions. An Educator's Guide to Beliefs and Practices" contains "
note about Jews for Jesus, Messianic Jews, Hebrew Christians, and similar
groups: Jews in these groups who have converted to Christianity but continue to
observe various Jewish practices are no longer considered part of the Jewish
community in the usual sense." There are several other organizations that
oppose identification of Jews for Jesus as a Jewish group. Litigation. 1987 –
freedom of speech. In the case of Board of Airport Commissioners of Los Angeles
v. Jews for Jesus, Inc., 482 U.S. 569 (1987), The Supreme Court held that a law
which banned "First Amendment activities" within the Central Terminal Area at
L.A. International Airport to be invalid as substantially "over broad," and
therefore, invalid on its face. As Justice O'Connor stated, in her opinion,
such a law could even be construed to prohibit a traveler from approaching a
ticketing booth and asking when the flight from Des Moines was scheduled to
arrive. The municipal agency in charge of Los Angeles International Airport had
barred the group from distributing leaflets at the airport "as part of a larger
ban on what they described as First Amendment activities. Jews for Jesus
challenged the airport's right to institute such a sweeping ban." 1992 –
civil rights violations. In 1992 the New York Court of Appeals ruled against
Jews for Jesus in a suit the organization brought against the Jewish Community
Relations Council of New York (JCRCNY), an umbrella group representing 60
Jewish agencies in the metropolitan New York area. The case addressed the
JCRCNY's 1985 warning to Long Island rabbis that Jews for Jesus was seeking a
venue to conduct a Passover seder. Jews for Jesus sued the JCRCNY for violating
its civil rights; the decision upheld a lower court ruling that the JCRCNY
communication did not "go beyond the proposal stage" and that there was no
evidence that any of the Long Island rabbis had actually contacted
establishments for the purpose of discriminating against Jews for Jesus. In a
1992 lawsuit brought by Jews for Jesus against the JCRCNY, the United States
Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit ruled that the efforts of the JCRCNY
urging Jewish organizations not to patronize a New York country club because it
allowed Jews for Jesus to hold its annual convention on its premises were not
protected as an exercise of the JCRC's First Amendment rights. 1993 – refusal
of automatic citizenship in Israel. In 1993 the Supreme Court of Israel, in a
case involving a couple affiliated with Jews for Jesus, ruled that Jews who
adhere to the Christian beliefs are regarded by Israeli law as "members of a
different faith," and are not eligible for the automatic citizenship that
Israel grants Jews. This is done not to try to change Jewish Law, but to
preserve the Jewish character of the State of Israel – i.e., that allowing in
people whose sole mission is to get Jews to become Christians is inimical to
one of the core ethics of the country (to be a haven for Jews). In its summary
of the ruling, the Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs stated that the belief
that Jesus is the Messiah "cannot be reconciled with Judaism" and "marks the
clear separation between Judaism and Christianity." 1998 and 2005–2006 –
online name. Jews for Jesus has been involved in litigation regarding Internet
use of its name. In 1998 they successfully sued Steven Brodsky for
cybersquatting — registering the domain name jewsforjesus.org for a site
criticizing the organization. The domain now belongs to Jews for Jesus and is
used for their main site. In 2005 Jews for Jesus sued Google for allowing a
Blogspot user to put up a site at the third-level subdomain
"jewsforjesus.blogspot.com". In September 2006 "Christianity Today" reported
that "Jews for Jesus settled out of court with a critical blogger identified as
'Whistle Blower' on jewsforjesus.blogspot.com. The evangelistic ministry
assumed control of the site." 2006 – misuse of Jackie Mason name. In 2006
comedian and actor Jackie Mason filed a lawsuit against Jews for Jesus,
alleging that they unlawfully distributed a pamphlet which used his name and
likeness in a way that suggested he was a member of the group. In fact, Mason
is Jewish and not associated with Jews for Jesus. Jews for Jesus has issued a
detailed response to the allegation on their website. A judge of the United
States District Court for the Southern District of New York denied a
preliminary injunction against Jews for Jesus over the pamphlet, finding the
distribution of the pamphlet to be protected by the First Amendment, and also
stated that the pamphlet did not suggest that Mason was a Christian. In
December 2006, Jackie Mason dropped the lawsuit against Jews for Jesus after
they issued a letter of apology to Mason. The group's executive director, David
Brickner, stated in the letter to Mason that he wanted "to convey my sincere
apologies for any distress that you felt over our tract." Brickner continued
that he believed its publication was protected by the Constitution, but the
group was willing in the interest of peace and love for Israel to retire the
pamphlet. Mason replied in front of the federal court in Manhattan where he
accepted the apology, "There's no such thing as a Jew for Jesus. It's like
saying a black man is for the KKK. You can't be a table and a chair. You're
either a Jew or a Gentile."
