Jihad Jihad (; "" ), an Islamic term, is a religious duty of Muslims. In
Arabic, the word "jihād" translates as a noun meaning "struggle". "Jihad"
appears 41 times in the Quran and frequently in the idiomatic expression
"striving in the way of God "(al-jihad fi sabil Allah)"". A person engaged in
jihad is called a "mujahid"; the plural is mujahideen. Jihad is an important
religious duty for Muslims. A minority among the Sunni scholars sometimes refer
to this duty as the sixth pillar of Islam, though it occupies no such official
status. In Twelver Shi'a Islam, however, Jihad is one of the 10 Practices of
the Religion. There are two commonly accepted meanings of jihad: an inner
spiritual struggle and an outer physical struggle. The "greater jihad" is the
inner struggle by a believer to fulfill his religious duties. This non-violent
meaning is stressed by both Muslim and non-Muslim authors. The "lesser jihad"
is the physical struggle against the enemies of Islam. This physical struggle
can take a violent form or a non-violent form. The proponents of the violent
form translate jihad as "holy war", although some Islamic studies scholars
disagree. The "Dictionary of Islam" and British-American orientalist Bernard
Lewis both argue jihad has a military meaning in the large majority of cases.
Some scholars maintain non-violent ways to struggle against the enemies of
Islam. An example of this is written debate, often characterized as "jihad of
the pen". According to the BBC, a third meaning of jihad is the struggle to
build a good society. In a commentary of the hadith Sahih Muslim, entitled al-
Minhaj, the medieval Islamic scholar Yahya ibn Sharaf al-Nawawi stated that
"one of the collective duties of the community as a whole (fard kifaya) is to
lodge a valid protest, to solve problems of religion, to have knowledge of
Divine Law, to command what is right and forbid wrong conduct". Origins. The
beginnings of Jihad are traced back to the words and actions of Muhammad and
the Quran. This encourages the use of Jihad against non-Muslims. The Quran,
however, never uses the term Jihad for fighting and combat in the name of
Allah; qital is used to mean “fighting.” Jihad in the Quran was originally
intended for the nearby neighbors of the Muslims, but as time passed and more
enemies arose, the Quranic statements supporting Jihad were updated for the new
adversaries. The first documentation of the law of Jihad was written by ‘Abd
al-Rahman al-Awza’i and Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Shaybani. The document grew
out of debates that had surfaced ever since Muhammad's death. Usage of the
term. In Modern Standard Arabic, "jihad" is one of the correct terms for a
struggle for any cause, violent or not, religious or secular (though كفاح
"kifāḥ" is also used). For instance, Mahatma Gandhi's satyagraha struggle
for Indian independence is called a "jihad" in Modern Standard Arabic (as well
as many other dialects of Arabic); the terminology is also applied to the fight
for women's liberation. Distinction of "greater" and "lesser" jihad. In his
work, "The History of Baghdad", Al-Khatib al-Baghdadi, an 11th-century Islamic
scholar, referenced a statement by the companion of Muhammad Jabir ibn Abd-
Allah. The reference stated that Jabir said, "The Prophet... returned from one
of his battles, and thereupon told us, 'You have arrived with an excellent
arrival, you have come from the Lesser Jihad to the Greater Jihad—the
striving of a servant (of Allah) against his desires (holy war)." This
reference gave rise to the distinguishing of two forms of jihad: "greater" and
"lesser". Some Islamic scholars dispute the authenticity of this reference and
consider the meaning of jihad as a holy war to be more important. Sunnah.org
The best of jihad. Abu Dawud, Tirmidhi, ibn Majah Ibn Nuhaas, Book of Jihad,
Translated by Nuur Yamani, p. 107 In a similarly worded Hadith to the one
above, Ibn Nuhaas cited a hadith from Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal, where it states
that the highest kind of Jihad, is "“The person who is killed whilst spilling
the last of his blood.”4/144 It has also been reported that Muhammad
considered performing hajj to be the best jihad for Muslim women. Spiritual
struggle. Muslim scholar Mahmoud Ayoub states that "The goal of true "jihad" is
to attain a harmony between "islam" (submission), "iman" (faith), and "ihsan"
(righteous living)." In modern times, Pakistani scholar and professor Fazlur
Rahman Malik has used the term to describe the struggle to establish "just
moral-social order", while President Habib Bourguiba of Tunisia has used it to
describe the struggle for economic development in that country. Warfare (Jihad
bil Saif). Within classical Islamic jurisprudence—the development of which is
to be dated into the first few centuries after the prophet's death—jihad is
the only form of warfare permissible under Islamic law, and may consist in wars
against unbelievers, apostates, rebels, highway robbers and dissenters
renouncing the authority of Islam. The primary aim of jihad as warfare is not
the conversion of non-Muslims to Islam by force, but rather the expansion and
defense of the Islamic state. In later centuries, especially in the course of
the colonization of large parts of the Muslim world, emphasis has been put on
non-militant aspects of the jihad. Today, some Muslim authors only recognize
wars with the aim of territorial defense as well as the defense of religious
freedom as legitimate. Whether the Quran sanctions defensive warfare only or
commands an all out war against non-Muslims depends on the interpretation of
the relevant passages. This is because it does not explicitly state the aims of
the war Muslims are obliged to wage; the passages concerning "jihad" rather aim
at promoting fighters for the Islamic cause and do not discuss military ethics.
In the classical manuals of Islamic jurisprudence, the rules associated with
armed warfare are covered at great length. Such rules include not killing
women, children and non-combatants, as well as not damaging cultivated or
residential areas. More recently, modern Muslims have tried to re-interpret the
Islamic sources, stressing that Jihad is essentially defensive warfare aimed at
protecting Muslims and Islam. Although some Islamic scholars have differed on
the implementation of Jihad, there is consensus amongst them that the concept
of jihad will always include armed struggle against persecution and oppression.
Debate. Controversy has arisen over whether the usage of the term "jihad"
without further explanation refers to military combat, and whether some have
used confusion over the definition of the term to their advantage. Middle East
historian Bernard Lewis argues that "the overwhelming majority of classical
theologians, jurists, and traditionalists (specialists in the hadith)
understood the obligation of jihad in a military sense." Furthermore, Lewis
maintains that for most of the recorded history of Islam, from the lifetime of
the Prophet Muhammad onward, the word jihad was used in a primarily military
sense. Views of different Muslim groups. Ahmadiyya. In Ahmadiyya Islam, jihad
is primarily one's personal inner struggle and should not be used violently for
political motives. Violence is the last option only to be used to protect
religion and one's own life in extreme situations of persecution. Sunni. Jihad
has been classified either as "al-jihād al-akbar" (the greater jihad), the
struggle against one's ego or self ("nafs"), or "al-jihād al-asghar" (the
lesser jihad), the external, physical effort, often implying fighting (this is
similar to the shiite view of jihad as well). Gibril Haddad has analyzed the
basis for the belief that internal jihad is the "greater jihad", "Jihad al-
akbar". Haddad identifies the primary historical basis for this belief in a
pair of similarly worded hadith, in which Mohammed is reported to have told
warriors returning home that they had returned from the lesser jihad of
struggle against non-Muslims to a greater jihad of struggle against lust.
Although Haddad notes that the authenticity of both hadeeth is questionable, he
nevertheless concludes that the underlying principle of superiority internal
jihad does have a reliable basis in the Quran and other writings. In contrast,
the Hanbali scholar Ibn Qayyim Al-Jawziyya did believe that "internal Jihad" is
important but he suggests those hadith as weak which consider "Jihad of the
heart/soul" to be more important than "Jihad by the sword". Contemporary
Islamic scholar Abdullah Yusuf Azzam has argued the hadith is not just weak but
"is in fact a false, fabricated hadith which has no basis. It is only a saying
of Ibrahim Ibn Abi `Abalah, one of the Successors, and it contradicts textual
evidence and reality." Some contemporary Islamists have succeeded in replacing
the greater jihad, the fight against desires, with the lesser jihad, the holy
war to establish, defend and extend the Islamic state. Sufic. The Sufic view
classifies "Jihad" into two; the "Greater Jihad" and the "Lesser Jihad".
Muhammad put the emphasis on the "greater Jihad" by saying that "Holy is the
warrior who is at war with himself". In this sense external wars and strife are
seen but a satanic counterfeit of the true "jihad" which can only be fought and
won within; no other Salvation existing can save man without the efforts of the
man himself being added to the work involved of self-refinement. In this sense
it is the western view of the Holy Grail which comes closest to the Sufic
ideal; for to the Sufis Perfection is the Grail; and the Holy Grail is for
those who after they become perfect by giving all they have to the poor then go
on to become "Abdal" or "changed ones" like Enoch who was "taken" by God
because he "walked with God". (Genesis:5:24) here the "Holy Ones" gain the
surname "Hadrat" or "The Presence". History. Early Muslim conquests. Two years
after the death of the Islamic prophet Muhammad in 632, Muslims under the
leadership of caliph Umar began military campaigns against the Byzantine empire
and the Sassanian empire. In the Battle of Yarmuk in 636, Muslims defeated the
Byzantine army, forcing the empire to withdraw from Syria. The Byzantines
surrendered near Cairo in 641. The conquest of Alexandria, then capital of
Egypt, took longer. Muslims faced little resistance from the locals as they had
suffered under Byzantine rule. In the Battle of al-Qadisiyya in 637 where the
Persian army was defeated. In 642, Muslims defeated the Persians at the Battle
of Nahāvand, opening up the plateau to Muslim conquest. Within 15 years Iran
had been conquered. Muslims later pushed into central Asia. Often called "the
Great conquests", the role of Islam in them is debated. Medieval Arabic authors
said that the conquests had been commanded by God. They were presented as
orderly and disciplined, under the command of the caliph. Many modern
explanations dispute the idea that jihad was a motivating force in the
conquests. They hold that Arabs on the eve of the conquests were poor and
desertification in the Arabian peninsula had reduced local resources. These
explanations cite material causes as opposed to religion as the fundamental
cause of the conquests. Some recent explanations cite both material and
religious causes in the conquests. Muslim brotherhood. In 1928, Hassan al-Banna
founded the Muslim Brotherhood, a rigidly conservative and highly secretive
Egyptian-based organization dedicated to resurrecting a Muslim empire
(Caliphate). According to al-Banna, "It is the nature of Islam to dominate, not
to be dominated, to impose its law on all nations and to extend its power to
the entire planet." The Muslim Brotherhood, also called Muslim Brethren (jamiat
al-Ikhwan al-muslimun, literally Society of Muslim Brothers), it opposes
secular tendencies of Islamic nations and wants return to the precepts of the
Quran, and rejection of Western influences. Al Bana was born out of the extreme
Muslim right wing's desire to counter the ideology of modernization, the
Brotherhood's platform included a strict interpretation of the Quran that
glorified suicidal violence. Along with Al Banna, the grand Mufti of Jerusalem
Haj-al Amin Al-Husseini was also an enormously influential Muslim leader of the
time. Together, the two created a powerful and popular Islamist party by
classically appealing to fundamentalist Islamic principals while blaming the
world's problems on the Jews. Al-Banna also gave the group the motto it still
uses today: "Allah is our purpose, the Prophet our leader, the Quran our
constitution, jihad our way and dying for God our supreme objective." The 9/11
Commission Report states the Brotherhood's influence on Osama bin Laden and on
Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman responsible for the 1993 attack on the WTC. An
important aspect of the Muslim Brotherhood ideology is the sanctioning of Jihad
such as the 2004 fatwa issued by Sheikh Yousef Al-Qaradhawi making it a
religious obligation of Muslims to abduct and kill U.S. citizens in Iraq. It
advocated a war of Arabism and Islamic Jihad against the British and the Jews.
The Muslim brotherhood waged a "Holy war" against Syria after the Hama
massacre. The BBC explains how the roots of Jihad and the origins of Bin
Laden's concept of jihad can be traced back to two early 20th century figures,
who started powerful Islamic revivalist movements in response to colonialism
and its aftermath. al-Banna blamed the western idea of separation between
religion and politics for Muslims' decline. In the 1950s Sayed Qutb, Muslim
Brotherhood's prominent member, took the arguments of al-Banna even further.
For Qutb, "all non-Muslims were infidels - even the so-called "people of the
book", the Christians and Jews," he also predicted an eventual clash of
civilisations between Islam and the west. "Qutb inspired a whole generation of
Islamists, including Ayatollah Khomeini." The Muslim world widely accepted his
ideology post Arabs' defeat in the 1967 war. The Muslim Brotherhood has been
involved in violent attacks. From its Islamic theme in its symbolism: on its
flag there's a brown square frames a green circle with a white perimeter. Two
swords cross inside the circle beneath a red Quran. The cover of the Quran
says: "Truly, it is the Generous Quran." The Arabic beneath the sword handles
translates as "Be prepared." A reference to a Quranic verse that talks of
preparing to fight the enemies of God. It is among 17 groups categorized as
"terrorist organizations" by the Russian government, as well as in Egypt, where
they started to perform terrorist attacks, now banned by that government.
Scholar states that in "The Muslim Brotherhood's Conquest of Europe," its real
goal is to extend Islamic law Sharia throughout Europe and the United States.
Contemporary Islamism holds that Islam is now under attack, and therefore -
experts explain- Contemporary Islamist Ideology Authorizing Genocidal Murder,
27 January 2004, MEMRI [http://www.memri.org/bin/
articles.cgi?Page=subjects&Area=jihad&ID=SR2504] In the "Holy land foundation"
case of the Palestinian Arab al-Arian's involvement in funding terror
organization, the Muslim Brotherhood's papers detailed plan to seize U.S. The
Group's takeover plot emerged when revealed a handful of classified evidence
detailing Islamist extremists' ambitious plans for a U.S. takeover. Terrorism
researchers said "the memos and audiotapes, many translated from Arabic and
containing detailed strategies by the international Islamist group the Muslim
Brotherhood, are proof that extremists have long sought to replace the
Constitution with Shariah, or Islamic law," paving its way via a plot to form
"a complex network of seemingly benign Muslim organizations whose real job,
according to the (US) government, was to spread militant propaganda and raise
money." The Muslim Brotherhood created some American Muslim groups and sought
influence in others, many of which are listed as unindicted co-conspirators in
the Holy Land case, such as CAIR. Muslim Brotherhood Website: Jihad Against
Non-Muslims Is Obligatory Indeed, the Muslim Brotherhood has a long-standing
war on the West. From 1948 until the 1970s it engaged in assassinations and
terrorism in Egypt, and has indoctrinated many who went on to commit acts of
terror. Muslim Brotherhood's supreme guide issued the statement that Al Qaeda's
"Bin Laden is a Jihad Fighter." The accused mastermind of the 9/11 terror
massacre, Khalid Sheikh Mohammed was raised in Kuwait and joined the Muslim
Brotherhood at age 16. Warfare in Muslim societies. The major imperial Muslim
dynasties of Ottoman Turkey (Sunni) and Persia (Shia) each established systems
of authority around traditional Islamic institutions. In the Ottoman empire,
the concept of ghaza was promulgated as a sister obligation to jihad. The
Ottoman ruler Mehmed II is said to have insisted on the conquest of
Constantinople (Christian Byzantium) by justifying "ghaza" as a basic duty.
Later Ottoman rulers would apply "ghaza" to justify military campaigns against
the Persian Safavid dynasty. Thus both rival empires established a tradition
that a ruler was only considered truly in charge when his armies had been sent
into the field in the name of the true faith, usually against "giaurs" or
heretics — often meaning each other. The 'missionary' vocation of the Muslim
dynasties was prestigious enough to be officially reflected in a formal title
as part of a full ruler style: the Ottoman (many also had Ghazi as part of
their name) Sultan Murad Khan II Khoja-Ghazi, 6th Sovereign of the House of
Osman (1421–1451), literally used Sultan ul-Mujahidin. The so-called Fulbe
jihad states and a few other jihad states in western Africa were established by
a series of offensive wars. The commands inculcated in the Quran (in five suras
from the period after Muhammad had established his power) on Muslims to fight
those who will neither embrace Islam nor pay a poll-tax ("Jizya") were not
interpreted as a general injunction on all Muslims constantly to make war on
the infidels (originally only polytheists who claimed to be monotheists, not
"People of the Book", Jesus is seen as the last of the precursors of the
Prophet Muhammed; the word infidel had different historical uses, notably used
by the Crusaders to refer to the Muslims they were fighting against). It was
generally supposed that the order for a general war can only be given by the
Caliph (an office that was claimed by the Ottoman sultans), but Muslims who did
not acknowledge the spiritual authority of the Caliphate (which is vacant),
such as non-Sunnis and non-Ottoman Muslim states, always looked to their own
rulers for the proclamation of a jihad; there has been in fact no universal
warfare by Muslims on non-believers since the early caliphate. Some proclaimed
Jihad by claiming themselves as mahdi, e.g. the Sudanese Mahommed Ahmad in
1882. Non-Muslim opinions. Maxime Rodinson, an orientalist, wrote that "Jihad
is a propagandistic device which, as need be, resorts to armed struggle – two
ingredients common to many ideological movements." In English-speaking
countries, especially the United States, the term "jihadist" has been used in
Western media as a synonym for "mujahid", and frequently used to describe
militant Islamic groups, including but not restricted to Islamic terrorism.
David Cook, author of "Understanding Jihad", said "In reading Muslim literature
— both contemporary and classical — one can see that the evidence for the
primacy of spiritual jihad is negligible. Today it is certain that no Muslim,
writing in a non- Western language (such as Arabic, Persian, Urdu), would ever
make claims that jihad is primarily nonviolent or has been superseded by the
spiritual jihad. Such claims are made solely by Western scholars, primarily
those who study Sufism and/or work in interfaith dialogue, and by Muslim
apologists who are trying to present Islam in the most innocuous manner
possible." Cook argued that "Presentations along these lines are ideological in
tone and should be discounted for their bias and deliberate ignorance of the
subject" and that "t is no longer acceptable for Western scholars or Muslim
apologists writing in non-Muslim languages to make flat, unsupported statements
concerning the prevalence — either from a historical point of view or within
contemporary Islam—of the spiritual jihad."
