John Wimber John Richard Wimber (February 25, 1934 - November 17, 1997) was a
musician, charismatic pastor and one of the founding leaders of the Vineyard
Movement, a neocharismatic Evangelical Christian denomination which began in
the USA and has now spread to many countries world-wide. Life and ministry.
John Richard Wimber was the son of Basil Wimber and Genevieve Estelynn (Martin)
Wimber. Some say he was born in Kirksville, Missouri, while others say he was
born in Peoria, Illinois. California death records say he was born in Missouri.
He was raised in a non-religious family, but converted to evangelical
Christianity in May 1963. He had previously been the keyboard player in the
band "The Paramours". Some have attributed the formation of the band The
Righteous Brothers to Wimber (then known as Johnny Wimber) since he was the one
who brought Bobby Hatfield and Bill Medley together for the band The Paramours
in 1962. In the following years he attended a Quaker church in Yorba Linda,
California. During this time, he led hundreds of others to convert to
Christianity. By 1970, he was leading 11 different Bible study groups that
involved more than 500 people. In 1974 he became the Founding Director of the
Department of Church Growth at the Charles E. Fuller Institute of Evangelism
and Church Growth, which was founded by the Fuller Theological Seminary and the
Fuller Evangelistic Association. He directed the department until 1978. In this
time a House Church began to form in his home. This group began to embrace some
of the beliefs of the Charismatic movement. This resulted in a split with the
Quaker church that this group belonged to. Wimber pastored this new church,
which would later become known as the Anaheim Vineyard Christian Fellowship,
from 1977 to 1994. Eventually, it outgrew his home and began to meet elsewhere.
After initially joining Calvary Chapel, the church had some differences with
the Calvary Chapel leadership, relating mainly to the practice of spiritual
gifts, his rejection of traditional Dispensationalism, and his embrace of
Kingdom theology. As a result, they left Calvary Chapel to join a small group
of churches started by Kenn Gulliksen, known as Vineyard Christian Fellowships,
which became an international Vineyard Movement. The Vineyard Movement is
rooted in both historic evangelicalism and the charismatic renewal. Due to this
duality, the movement uses the term "Empowered Evangelicals" (a term coined by
Rich Nathan and Ken Wilson in their book of the same name) to reflect their
roots in traditional evangelicalism as opposed to classical Pentecostalism.
Members also sometimes describe themselves as the "radical middle" between
evangelicals and Pentecostals, which is a reference to the book "The Quest for
the Radical Middle," a historical survey of the Vineyard by Bill Jackson. A
particular emphasis of the Vineyard Movement was church planting. One of
Wimber's many catchphrases - intended to capture theological and practical
ideas in easy to remember sound bites - was that "church planting is the best
form of evangelism". Both during his lifetime and since his death the Vineyard
Movement has established thousands of churches across the USA and
internationally. Wimber became a well-known speaker at international
charismatic conferences with a focus on what he called "Power Evangelism" and
healing through the power of the Holy Spirit. It is important to note that,
while considered by many to be a charismatic teacher, Wimber himself (along
with the leaders of the Vineyard Movement) repeatedly rejected the charismatic
label as applying to their teachings. Wimber strongly espoused Kingdom
theology, and this approach to the charismatic differed from many of his peers
and predecessors. Wimber's embrace of this new approach led a friend, C. Peter
Wagner, to coin the phrase, "The Third Wave of the Holy Spirit" to describe the
concept he taught (and to avoid some current labels with their negative
connotations). The Third Wave differed from classic Pentecostalism and the
Charismatic movement, foremost, in their approach to speaking in tongues.
Whereas the previous groups had emphasized the gift of tongues as the only
evidence for the baptism of the Holy Spirit, Wimber and those he influenced
emphasized that this was just one of the many spiritual gifts taught in the
Bible. This teaching revolutionized what was a major theological stumbling
block to some mainstream Evangelicals, the demonstration of "signs and wonders"
expressed in the present-day world in a form alleged to be alike to those of
the days of the First Century Apostles. Wimber held influence with a number of
them, most famously Jack Deere, C. Peter Wagner, and Wayne Grudem. Gordon-
Conwell missiologist J. Christy Wilson also mentions Wimber in his book "More
to be Desired than Gold". Wimber also differed from contemporaries in his
rejection of the Word of Faith movement, and the associated doctrines and
showiness. The pursuit of authenticity was core to Wimber's idea of church, and
this was reflected in the worship as well. He died of a brain hemorrhage on
November 17, 1997, aged 63, following a fall and recent coronary bypass
surgery. Theological views. Baptism of the Holy Spirit. Wimber tentatively held
to a modified evangelical view on baptism of the Holy Spirit that says it
happens at conversion but that there is an experiential aspect (e.g. speaking
in tongues) that may not be manifested or released until a later date. Wimber
says: I think these quotes are taken from part 4 of this series: http://
digital.vineyardresources.com/os/product/best-wimber-mp3, it's file name is
bestofjwspiritual-gifts4of5 and these quotes are found at 20:40, 28:40 and 31:
30. If you listen to the whole thing it seems that this uncertainty is
referring to baptism of the Holy Spirit and not to the cessationist/charismatic
issue that obviously he was not unsure about. I think this quote is taken from
http://digital.vineyardresources.com/os/product/best-wimber-mp3, it's file name
is bestofjwspiritual-gifts4of5 and this quote is found at 34:40 Gender roles.
Wimber held a complementarian view of gender roles. This view believes the
Bible to teach that a husband is called to lovingly lead, protect and provide
for his wife and family, and that the wife should joyfully and intelligently
affirm and submit to her husbands leadership. Complementarians also believe the
Bible to teach that men are to bear primary responsibility to lead the church
and that therefore only men should be elders. Wimber said:http://www.cbmw.org/
Journal/Vol-12-No-2/Women-in-Ministry-in-the-Vineyard-USA 'I personally do not
favor ordaining women as elders in the local church...I encourage our women to
participate in any ministry, except church governance.' Sam Storms comments:
'Others would point out that in spite of his complementarian convictions,
Wimber permitted at least two notable exceptions: both Jackie Pullinger (Hong
Kong) and Ann Watson (England) served as the senior leaders of their respective
congregations (although I should mention that Watson viewed her role as
exceptional, given the premature death of her husband, and not a position to
which women in ordinary circumstances should aspire).' Legacy. Authenticity.
'Power Healing' by John Wimber, p40 'Power Healing' by John Wimber, p223 'Power
Healing' by John Wimber, p187 'Power Healing' by John Wimber, p149 http://
www.christianitytoday.com/ct/1997/july14/7t8046.html?start=2 A sociologist who
conducted an analysis at one of Wimber's conferences observed that hype was
also opposed by Wimber's team, commenting, "A few seemed to attempt to mimic
phenomena like hand shaking but their attempts were obviously artificial and
they were told to stop it by the more experienced team members." Some
Christians believe we should never struggle with doubt, fear, anxiety,
disillusionment, depression, sorrow, or agony. And when Christians do, it is
because they're not exercising the quality of faith they ought to; periods of
disillusionment and despair are sin. If those ideas are true, then I'm not a
good Christian. Not only have I suffered physically with health problems, but I
also spent a great deal of time struggling with depression during my battle
with cancer. Wider impact and other teachings. Wimber's teaching influenced
many Christians, both inside and out of the Vineyard movement. One of the key
foundations of his teaching was intimacy with God, rather than religious habit
and discipline. Another characteristic is in the area of teaching, which
emphasized preaching extensively from the gospels and using Jesus as the model
for Christian believers. Wimber also had a deep desire to be active in helping
the poor. He strongly emphasized signs and wonders (aka "Doin' the Stuff"), the
priesthood of every believer and that every Christian has the ability to
prophesy and heal the sick. While this is not a new concept, Wimber was a key
figure in the introduction of the concept that praying for the sick (or
anything else) shouldn't be saved for special healing services, but should take
place at every Church service, and out on the streets (by every believer). As a
result, many churches have prayer time after the sermon. The Vineyard worship
style has also had a wide influence on the church. Wimber's teaching has had a
significant influence on other Charismatic leaders, such as Mike Bickle, Terry
Virgo, Randy Clark, John Arnott, Bill Johnson, John Paul Jackson and Sam
Storms. In 2007 Sam Storms wrote an article commemorating Wimber 10 years after
his death. Criticism. Wimber's theology and methods have been challenged by
cessationist Christians. Their criticism focuses mainly on his embrace of
Kingdom theology. Critics also argue that Wimber's emphasis on dramatic proofs
of spiritual power show a lack reliance on the Bible, and instead rely on
practices derived from New Age philosophy and humanistic psychology. Critical
considerations of Wimber's work and approaches to evangelism can be found
online. Books. Wimber wrote several widely read books, among them:
