Joseph Smith Joseph Smith, Jr. (December 23, 1805 ‚Äì June 27, 1844) was an
American religious leader and the founder of the Latter Day Saint movement, the
predominant branch of which is Mormonism. At age twenty-four, Smith published
the Book of Mormon, and in the next fourteen years he attracted thousands of
followers, established cities and temples, and created a lasting religious
culture. Smith was born in Sharon, Vermont, and by 1817 had moved with his
family to the burned-over district of western New York, an area repeatedly
swept by religious revivals during the Second Great Awakening. The Smiths
believed in visions and prophecies, and participated in folk religious
practices typical of the era. According to Smith, beginning in the early 1820s
he had visions, in one of which an angel directed him to a buried book of
golden plates inscribed with a Judeo-Christian history of ancient American
civilizations. In 1830, he published what he said was an English translation of
these plates as the Book of Mormon and organized the Church of Christ as a
restoration of the early Christian church. Church members were later called
Latter Day Saints, Saints, or Mormons. In 1831, Smith and his followers moved
west with plans to build a communalistic American Zion. They gathered in
Kirtland, Ohio, and established an outpost in Independence, Missouri, intended
to be Zion's "center place". During the 1830s, Smith sent out missionaries,
published revelations, and supervised construction of an expensive temple.
However, due to the collapse of a church-sponsored bank and violent skirmishes
with angry non-Mormon Missourians, Smith's dreams of building Zion in Missouri
and Ohio failed by the end of the decade. In the early 1840s, Smith established
a new city called Nauvoo, Illinois, where he served as mayor and militia
commander. In 1844, Smith and the Nauvoo City Council angered non-Mormons by
destroying a printing press after it was used to publish an expos√© critical of
Smith's power and practice of polygamy. During the ensuing turmoil, Smith was
imprisoned in Carthage, Illinois, and killed when a mob stormed the jailhouse.
During his lifetime Smith published many revelations and other texts that are
regarded as scripture by his followers. His teachings include unique views
about the nature of God, cosmology, family structures, political organization,
and religious collectivism. His followers regard him as a prophet of at least
the stature of Moses and Elijah. Smith's legacy includes a number of religious
denominations, the largest of which are the The Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints and Community of Christ. Life. Early years (1805‚Äì27).
Joseph Smith, Jr. was born on December 23, 1805, in Sharon, Vermont, to Lucy
Mack Smith and her husband Joseph, a merchant and farmer. After suffering a
crippling bone infection when he was seven, the younger Smith hobbled around on
crutches for three years. In 1816‚Äì17, after an ill-fated business venture and
three years of crop failures, the Smith family moved to the western New York
village of Palmyra and eventually took a mortgage on a farm in nearby
Manchester town. During the Second Great Awakening, the region was a hotbed of
religious enthusiasm. Between 1817 and 1825 there were several camp meetings
and revivals in the Palmyra area. Although the Smith family was caught up in
this excitement, they disagreed about religion. Joseph Smith became interested
in religion at about the age of twelve, and he participated in church classes,
read the Bible, and reportedly showed an interest in Methodism. With his
family, he also took part in religious folk magic, a common practice at the
time. Like many people of that era, both his parents and his maternal
grandfather reportedly had visions or dreams that they believed communicated
messages from God. Because of the religious divisions in his family and
community, Smith was conflicted about the benefit of organized religion, saying
that he had become concerned for the welfare of his soul but was confused by
competing religious denominations. Smith later recalled having a vision from
God around 1820 that resolved his sense of religious confusion and personal
questions. Praying in a wooded area near his home, he said he saw a vision in
which God told him his sins were forgiven, and that all contemporary churches
had "turned aside from the gospel." Smith said he told a preacher about the
experience who he said dismissed the story with contempt; otherwise the
experience was largely unknown, including to most Mormons, until the 1840s.
Although Smith probably originally understood the event as a personal
conversion, this "First Vision" would later grow in importance among Mormons,
who see it as the founding event of Mormonism. The Smith family supplemented
its meager farm income by treasure-digging. Joseph was said to have an ability
to use seer stones for locating lost items and buried treasure. To do so, Smith
would put a stone in a white stovepipe hat and would then see the required
information in reflections given off by the stone. In 1823, Smith said that
while praying at night for forgiveness from his sins, he was visited by an
angel named Moroni, who revealed the location of a buried book of golden plates
as well as other artifacts, including a breastplate and a set of spectacles
with lenses composed of seer stones, which had been hidden in a hill in
Manchester near his home. Smith said he attempted to remove the plates the next
morning but was unsuccessful because the angel prevented him. During the next
four years, Smith made annual visits to the hill, but each time returned
without the plates. Meanwhile, Smith continued traveling to western New York
and Pennsylvania as a treasure seeker and a farmhand. In 1826, he was brought
before a court in Chenango County, New York, for "glass-looking", or pretending
to find lost treasure. While boarding at the Hale house in Harmony,
Pennsylvania, Smith met Emma Hale and began courting her. When Smith asked for
Emma's hand, her father, Isaac Hale, objected because Smith was "a stranger"
and had no means of supporting his daughter other than money digging. On
January 18, 1827, Smith and Emma "eloped to marry" and the couple began
boarding with Smith's parents in Manchester. On September 22, 1827, Smith made
his last annual visit to the hill, taking Emma with him. This time, he said, he
retrieved the plates and placed them in a locked chest. He said the angel
commanded him not to show the plates to anyone else but to publish their
translation, reputed to be the religious record of indigenous Americans. Joseph
later told Emma's parents that his treasure-seeking days were behind him.
Although Smith had left his treasure hunting company, his former associates
believed he had double-crossed them by taking for himself what they considered
joint property. They ransacked places where a competing treasure-seer said the
plates were hidden, leading Smith to believe that he could not accomplish the
translation in Palmyra. Founding a church (1827‚Äì30). In October 1827, Smith
and his pregnant wife moved from Palmyra to Harmony (now Oakland, Pennsylvania)
aided by money from a comparatively prosperous neighbor Martin Harris. Living
near his in-laws, Smith transcribed some of the characters (what he called
"reformed Egyptian") engraved on the plates and then dictated a translation to
his wife. In February 1828, Martin Harris arrived to assist with the
translation. Harris took a sample of the characters to a few prominent
scholars, including Charles Anthon, who Harris said initially authenticated the
characters and their translation, then recanted upon hearing that Smith had
received the plates from an angel. Anthon later denied this claim but Harris
returned to Harmony in April 1828 motivated to act as Smith's scribe.
Translation continued until mid-June 1828, until Harris began having doubts
about the existence of the golden plates. Harris convinced Smith to let him
take the existing 116 pages of manuscript to Palmyra to show a few family
members. Harris then lost the manuscript‚Äìof which there was no copy‚Äìat
about the same time as Smith's wife Emma gave birth to a stillborn son. Smith
said that as punishment for losing the manuscript the angel took away the
plates and he had lost his ability to translate until September 22, 1828, when
Smith said that the plates were restored. Smith did not earnestly resume the
translation again until April 1829, when he met Oliver Cowdery, who replaced
Harris as Smith's scribe. They worked full time on the translation between
April and early June 1829, and then moved to Fayette, New York, where they
continued to work at the home of Cowdery's friend Peter Whitmer. When the
translation spoke of an institutional church and a requirement for baptism,
Smith and Cowdery baptized each other, saying that John the Baptist had
appeared and given them priesthood authority to do so. Translation was
completed around July 1, 1829. Knowing that potential converts to the planned
church might find Smith's story of the plates incredible, Smith asked a group
of 11 witnesses, including Martin Harris and male members of the Whitmer and
Smith families, to sign statements testifying that they had seen the golden
plates, and in the case of the latter eight witnesses, had actually handled the
plates. According to Smith, the angel Moroni took back the plates after Smith
was finished using them. The translation, known as the Book of Mormon, was
published in Palmyra on March 26, 1830, by printer E. B. Grandin. Martin Harris
financed the publication by mortgaging his farm. Soon thereafter on April 6,
1830, Smith and his followers formally organized the Church of Christ, and
small branches were established in Palmyra, Fayette, and Colesville, New York.
The Book of Mormon brought Smith regional notoriety, but also strong opposition
by those who remembered Smith's money-digging and his 1826 trial near
Colesville. After Cowdery baptized several new members (including Emma Smith),
the Mormons began receiving threats of mob violence. Before Smith could confirm
the new members, he was arrested and brought to trial as a disorderly person.
Though Smith was acquitted, he and Cowdery had to flee Colesville to escape a
gathering mob. Probably referring to this period of flight, Smith told years
later of hearing the voices of Peter, James, and John who he said ordained
Smith and Cowdery to a higher priesthood. When Oliver Cowdery and other church
members attempted to exercise independent authority‚Äìas when Hiram Page used a
seer stone to locate the American New Jerusalem prophesied by the Book of
Mormon‚ÄìSmith responded by establishing himself as the sole prophet. In 1833
Smith dispatched Cowdery to lead a mission to Missouri to find the true
location of the New Jerusalem and to proselytize the Native Americans. Smith
also dictated a lost "Book of Enoch", telling how the biblical Enoch had
established a city of Zion of such civic goodness that God had taken it to
heaven. On their way to Missouri, Cowdery's party passed through the Kirtland,
Ohio, area and converted Sidney Rigdon and over a hundred members of his
Disciples of Christ congregation, more than doubling the size of the church.
Rigdon visited New York and quickly became second in command of the church, to
the discomfort of Smith's earlier followers. In the face of acute and growing
opposition in New York, Smith announced that Kirtland was the "eastern
boundary" of the New Jerusalem, and that the Saints must gather there. Life in
Ohio (1831‚Äì38). After moving to Kirtland, Ohio, in January 1831, Smith
mitigated the new converts' exuberant exhibition of spiritual gifts, bringing
the Ohio congregation within his own religious authority. Prior to conversion,
the congregation had been practicing a form of Christian communism, and Smith
adopted a communal system within his own church, calling it the United Order of
Enoch. At Rigdon's suggestion, Smith promised the church's elders that in
Kirtland they would receive an endowment of heavenly power, and in the church's
June 1831 general conference, he introduced the greater authority of a High
("Melchizedek") Priesthood to the church hierarchy. The church grew as new
converts poured into Kirtland. By the summer of 1835, there were fifteen
hundred to two thousand Mormons in the vicinity of Kirtland, many expecting
Smith to lead them shortly to the Millennial kingdom. Though Oliver Cowdery's
mission to the Indians was a failure (halted by a Federal agent to the Indian
tribes), he sent word he had found the site for the New Jerusalem in Jackson
County, Missouri. After he visited there in July 1831, Smith agreed and
pronounced the county's rugged outpost Independence to be the "center place" of
Zion. Rigdon, however, disapproved of the location, and for most of the 1830s,
the church was divided between Ohio and Missouri. Smith continued to live in
Ohio but visited Missouri again in early 1832 in order to prevent a rebellion
of prominent Saints, including Cowdery, who believed Zion was being neglected.
Smith's trip was hastened by a mob of residents led by former Saints who were
incensed over the United Order and Smith's political power. The mob beat Smith
and Rigdon unconscious, tarred and feathered them, and left them for dead. In
Jackson County, older Missouri residents resented the Mormon newcomers for
various political and religious reasons. Mob attacks began in July 1833, but
Smith advised the Mormons to patiently bear them until a fourth attack, after
which they were permitted to fight back. Nevertheless, once they began to
defend themselves, the Mormons were brutally expelled from the county. In
response to an 1834 revelation Smith led a small paramilitary expedition, later
called Zion's Camp, to aid the Missouri Mormons. The expedition was a disaster;
the men were outnumbered and suffered from a cholera outbreak and dissension,
so Smith disbanded the expedition. Smith gave a revelation saying that to
redeem Zion, the saints must receive an endowment in the Kirtland Temple then
under construction. Zion's Camp failed to improve the situation in Jackson
County, and was viewed as a failure, but it also led to a transformation in
Mormon leadership and culture, and many future church leaders would come from
the group. Just before Zion's Camp left Kirtland, Smith disbanded the United
Order and changed the name of the church to "Church of Latter Day Saints".
After the Camp returned, Smith drew heavily from its participants to establish
five governing bodies in the church, all of equal authority to check one
another. The Saints built the Kirtland Temple at great cost, and at the
temple's dedication in March 1836, they participated in the prophesied
endowment, a scene of visions, angelic visitations, prophesying, speaking and
singing in tongues, and other spiritual experiences. The period from
1834‚Äì1837 was one of relative peace for Joseph Smith. After the dedication of
the Kirtland temple in late 1837, "Smith's life descended into a tangle of
intrigue and conflict," and a series of internal disputes led to the collapse
of the Kirtland Mormon community. Smith was accused of false steps in promoting
a church-sponsored bank and of having a relationship with his serving girl,
Fanny Alger. Building the temple left the church deeply in debt, and Smith was
hounded by creditors. After Smith heard about treasure supposedly hidden in
Salem, Massachusetts, he traveled there and received a revelation that God had
"much treasure in this city". After a month, he returned empty-handed. Smith
and other church leaders then set up a joint stock company to act as a quasi-
bank, establishing the Kirtland Safety Society in January 1837, which issued
bank notes capitalized in part by real estate. Smith invested heavily in the
notes and encouraged the Saints to buy them as a religious duty. The bank
failed within a month. As a result, the Kirtland Saints suffered intense
pressure from debt collectors and severe price volatility. Smith was held
responsible for the failure, and there were widespread defections from the
church, including many of Smith's closest advisers. After a warrant was issued
for Smith's arrest on a charge of banking fraud, Smith and Rigdon fled Kirtland
for Missouri on the night of January 12, 1838. Life in Missouri (1838‚Äì39).
After leaving Jackson County, the Saints in Missouri established the town of
Far West. Smith's plans to redeem Zion in Jackson County had lapsed by 1838,
and after Smith and Rigdon arrived in Missouri, Far West became the new Mormon
"Zion". In Missouri, the church also received a new name: the "The Church of
Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints", and construction began on a new temple.
Soon after Smith and Rigdon arrived at Far West, hundreds of disaffected Saints
who had remained in Kirtland followed them to Missouri. Smith encouraged the
settlement of land outside Caldwell County, instituting a stake in Adam-ondi-
Ahman. Also during this time, a church council expelled many of the oldest and
most prominent leaders of the church, including John Whitmer, David Whitmer, W.
W. Phelps, and Oliver Cowdery. Though Smith hated violence, his experiences led
him to believe that his faith's survival required greater militancy against
anti-Mormons. Around June 1838, recent convert Sampson Avard formed a covert
organization called the Danites to intimidate Mormon dissenters and oppose
anti-Mormon militia units. Sidney Rigdon was working to restore the United
Order, but lawsuits by Oliver Cowdery and other dissenters threatened that
plan. After Rigdon issued a thinly veiled threat in a sermon, the Danites
expelled the dissenters from the county. While it is unclear how much Smith
knew of the Danites, he at least partially approved of their activities. In a
keynote speech at the town's Fourth of July celebration, Rigdon issued threats
against non-Mormon aggressors, promising a "war of extermination" against mobs,
should Mormons be attacked. After Rigdon's oration, Smith allowed the speech to
be published as a pamphlet. Rigdon's July 4 oration produced a flood of anti-
Mormon rhetoric in Missouri newspapers and stump speeches during the political
campaign leading up to the 1838 Missouri elections. Violence erupted on August
6, 1838, in Daviess County, where Mormon influence was increasing because of
their new settlement of Adam-ondi-Ahman, when non-Mormons in Gallatin tried to
prevent Mormons from voting. Although there were no immediate deaths, the
election-day scuffles initiated the 1838 Mormon War, which quickly escalated as
non-Mormon vigilantes raided and burned Mormon farms. Meanwhile, under Smith's
general oversight and command, the Danites and other Mormon forces pillaged
non-Mormon towns. During this time, Smith and other Mormon leaders helped
inflame Mormon sentiment with militant rhetoric including a promise to
"establish our religion with the sword" if molested. His rhetoric perhaps
produced greater militancy among Mormons than he had intended. When Mormons
attacked the Missouri state militia at the Battle of Crooked River in an
attempt to rescue some captured Mormons, Governor Boggs ordered that the
Mormons be "exterminated or driven from the state". Before word of this order
got out, non-Mormon vigilantes surprised and killed about 18 Mormons in the
Haun's Mill massacre, effectively ending the war. On November 1, 1838, the
Saints surrendered to 2,500 state troops, and agreed to forfeit their property
and leave the state. Smith was immediately court-martialed for treason, and
nearly executed, but militiaman Alexander Doniphan, who was also the Saints'
attorney, probably saved Smith's life, arguing that Smith was a civilian. Smith
was then sent to a state court for a preliminary hearing, where several of his
former allies, including Danite commander Sampson Avard, testified against him.
Smith and five others, including Rigdon, were charged with "overt acts of
treason", and transferred to the jail at Liberty, Missouri to await trial.
Smith's months in prison with Rigdon strained their relationship, and Brigham
Young rose in prominence as Smith's defender. Under Young's leadership, about
14,000 Saints made their way to Illinois and searched for land to purchase.
Smith bade his time writing contemplative statements directed mainly to
Mormons. He did not deny responsibility for the Danites, but he said he had
been ignorant of Avard's extreme militancy. Many Saints now considered Smith a
fallen prophet, but he assured them he still had the heavenly keys. He directed
the Saints to collect and publish all their stories of persecution, and to
moderate their antagonism to non-Mormons. On April 6, 1839, after a grand jury
hearing in Davis County, Smith and his companions escaped custody, perhaps with
the guards' assistance, while they were being escorted to Boone County. Life in
Nauvoo, Illinois (1839‚Äì44). Newspapers throughout the country criticized
Missouri for expelling the Mormons, and Illinois accepted the refugees who
gathered along the banks of the Mississippi. Smith purchased high-priced swampy
woodland in the hamlet of Commerce and urged his followers to move there.
Promoting the image of the Saints as an oppressed minority, he unsuccessfully
petitioned the federal government for help in obtaining reparations. In the
summer of 1839 the Saints suffered from a terrible plague of malaria and the
next two summers were even worse. Also that summer, Smith sent Brigham Young
and other members of the Quorum of the Twelve to missions in Europe where they
found willing converts, many of them poor factory workers. The religion also
attracted a few wealthy and influential converts, including John C. Bennett,
M.D., the Illinois quartermaster general. Bennett used his connections in the
Illinois legislature to obtain an unusually liberal charter for the new city,
which Smith named "Nauvoo" (Hebrew ◊ ÷∏◊ê◊ï◊ï÷º, meaning "to be beautiful").
The charter granted the city virtual autonomy, authorized a university, and
granted Nauvoo "habeas corpus" power‚Äìwhich saved Smith's life by allowing him
to fend off extradition to Missouri Though Mormon general authorities
controlled Nauvoo's civil government, the city promised an unusually liberal
guarantee of religious freedom. The charter also authorized the Nauvoo Legion
an autonomous militia with actions limited only by state and federal
constitutions. "Lieutenant General" Smith and "Major General" Bennett became
its commanders, thereby controlling by far the largest body of armed men in
Illinois. Smith, who was often a poor judge of character, made Bennett
Assistant President of the church, and Bennett was elected Nauvoo's first
mayor. In 1841, Smith began revealing the doctrine of plural marriage to a few
of his closest male associates, including Bennett, who began using it as a
license for free love. When embarrassing rumors of "spiritual wifery" got
abroad, Smith forced Bennett's resignation as Nauvoo mayor. In retaliation,
Bennett wrote "lurid expos√©s of life in Nauvoo". The early Nauvoo years were a
period of doctrinal innovation. Smith introduced baptism for the dead in 1840,
and in 1841, construction began on the Nauvoo Temple as a place for recovering
lost ancient knowledge. An 1841 revelation promised the restoration of the
"fulness of the priesthood", and in May 1842, Smith inaugurated a revised
endowment or "first anointing". The endowment resembled rites of freemasonry
that Smith had observed two months earlier when he had been initiated into the
Nauvoo Masonic lodge. At first the endowment was open only to men, who once
initiated became part of the Anointed Quorum. For women, Smith introduced the
Relief Society, a service club and sorority within which Smith predicted women
would receive "the keys of the kingdom". Smith also elaborated on his plan for
a millennial kingdom. He no longer envisioning the building of Zion in Nauvoo,
but viewed Zion as encompassing all of North and South America, with Mormon
settlements being "stakes" of Zion's metaphorical tent. Zion also became less a
refuge from an impending tribulation than a great building project. In the
summer of 1842, Smith revealed a plan to establish the millennial Kingdom of
God, which would eventually establish theocratic rule over the whole earth. By
mid-1842, popular opinion had turned against the Saints. In particular, Thomas
C. Sharp, editor of the "Warsaw Signal", criticized the Saints' political and
military aspirations. After an unknown assailant shot at Missouri governor
Lilburn Boggs on May 6, 1842, anti-Mormons in Illinois reported rumors that
Smith had predicted Boggs's death. Circumstantial evidence suggested that the
shooter was Smith's bodyguard, Porter Rockwell, who was later tried and
acquitted. Nevertheless Boggs ordered Smith's extradition, and Smith went into
hiding, believing that if he went to Missouri he would be murdered. Smith
ultimately avoided extradition when a US district attorney for Illinois passed
along his opinion that the extradition was unconstitutional. Another
extradition attempt was made in June 1843, when Illinois Governor Thomas Ford
reluctantly agreed to turn Smith over to Missouri on the old charge of treason.
Two Missourian officers arrested Smith, but failed to bring him to Missouri
when Smith was released on a writ of habeas corpus. While this ended the
Missourians' attempts at extradition, it caused significant political fallout
in Illinois. In December 1843, under the authority of the Anointed Quorum,
Smith petitioned Congress to make Nauvoo an independent territory with the
right to call out federal troops in its defense. Smith then wrote to the
leading presidential candidates and asked them what they would do to protect
the Mormons. After receiving noncommittal or negative responses, Smith
announced his own third-party candidacy for President of the United States,
suspending regular proselytizing and sending out the Quorum of the Twelve and
hundreds of other political missionaries. In March 1844, following a dispute
with a federal bureaucrat, Smith organized the secret Council of Fifty with
authority to decide which national or state laws Mormons should obey. The
Council was also to select a site for a large Mormon settlement in Texas,
California, or Oregon, where Mormons could live under theocratic law beyond
other governmental control. In effect, the Council was a shadow world
government, a first step toward creating a global "theodemocracy". One of the
Council's first acts was to elect Smith as "prophet, priest and king" of the
millennial monarchy. Death. By the spring of 1844, a rift developed between
Smith and a half dozen of his closest associates. Most notably William Law,
Smith's trusted counselor, and Robert Foster, a general of the Nauvoo Legion,
disagreed with Smith about how to manage Nauvoo's economy. Both also said that
Smith had proposed marriage to their wives. Believing the dissidents were
plotting against his life, Smith excommunicated them on April 18, 1844. The
dissidents formed a competing church and the following month, at Carthage, the
county seat, they procured grand jury indictments against Smith for polygamy
and other crimes. On June 7, 1844, the dissidents published the first (and
only) issue of the "Nauvoo Expositor", calling for reform within the church.
The paper decried polygamy and Smith's new "doctrines of many Gods", and it
alluded to Smith's kingship and theocratic aspirations, promising to present
evidence of its allegations in succeeding issues. Fearing the newspaper might
bring the countryside down on the Mormons, the Nauvoo city council declared the
"Expositor" a public nuisance and ordered the Nauvoo Legion to destroy the
press. In the words of historian Richard Bushman, Smith "failed to see that
suppression of the paper was far more likely to arouse a mob than the libels.
It was a fatal mistake." Destruction of the newspaper provoked a strident call
to arms by Thomas C. Sharp, editor of the "Warsaw Signal". Fearing an uprising,
Smith mobilized the Nauvoo Legion on June 18 and declared martial law. Carthage
responded by mobilizing its small detachment of the state militia, and Illinois
Governor Thomas Ford appeared, threatening to raise a larger militia unless
Smith and the Nauvoo city council surrendered themselves. Smith initially fled
across the Mississippi River, but shortly returned and surrendered to Ford. On
June 23, Smith and his brother Hyrum were taken to Carthage to stand trial for
inciting a riot. Once the Smiths were in custody, the charges were increased to
treason against Illinois. On June 27, 1844, an armed mob with blackened faces
stormed Carthage Jail where Joseph and Hyrum were being held. Hyrum, who was
trying to secure the door, was killed instantly with a shot to the face. Smith
fired a pepper-box pistol that had been smuggled into the prison, then sprang
for the window. He was shot multiple times before falling out the window,
crying ""Oh Lord my God!"" He died shortly after hitting the ground. Smith was
buried in Nauvoo. Five men were later tried for his murder, but all were
acquitted. Revelations. According to Richard Bushman, the "signal feature" of
Smith's life was "his sense of being guided by revelation". Instead of
presenting ideas with logical arguments Smith dictated authoritative
revelations and let people decide whether or not to believe. Smith's teachings
came primarily through his revelations, which read like scripture: and open to
interpretation. Even Smith's followers disagree about the implications of his
teachings. Smith and his followers viewed his revelations as being above
teachings or opinions, and Smith's actions seemed to indicate that he believed
in his revelations as much as his most loyal followers. Smith's first recorded
revelation was a rebuke from God for having let Martin Harris lose 116 pages of
Book of Mormon manuscript, chastising him for "fearing man more than God". The
revelation was given in the voice of God, and Smith, as a speaker, was absent
from the revelation. Subsequent revelations would take on a similar
authoritative style; a typical revelation might begin with words like "Hearken
O ye people which profess my name, saith the Lord your God." Book of Mormon.
The "Book of Mormon" has been called the longest and most complex of Smith's
revelations. The "Book of Mormon" is organized as a compilation of smaller
books, each named after its main named narrator or a prominent leader. It tells
the story of the rise and fall of a religious civilization beginning around 600
BC and ending in 421 AD. The story begins with a family that leaves Jerusalem,
just before the Babylonian captivity. They eventually construct a ship and sail
to a "promised land" in the Western Hemisphere. There, they are divided into
two factions: Nephites and Lamanites. The Nephites become a righteous people
who build a temple and live the law of Moses, though their prophets teach a
Christian gospel. The book explains itself to be largely the work of Mormon, a
Nephite prophet and military figure, and whose son, Moroni, buries the records
written on golden plates. Early Mormons understood the "Book of Mormon" to be a
religious history of the indigenous peoples of the Americas. Smith's followers
view it as an extension of the Bible, somewhat like a large apocryphal work,
while some academics have called it a response to pressing cultural and
environmental issues of Joseph's times, or sometimes autobiographical. Critics
hypothesize that Smith drew from scraps of information available to him,
calling the work fiction. Christian themes permeate the work; for instance,
Nephite prophets teach of Christ's coming, and talk of the star that will
appear at his birth. After the crucifixion and resurrection in Jerusalem, Jesus
appears in the Americas, repeats the Sermon on the Mount, blesses children, and
appoints twelve disciples. The book ends with Moroni's exhortation to "come
unto Christ" Smith never said how he translated the golden plates, implying
only that he transcribed the words. For at least some of the earliest
translation, Smith is said to have used the "Urim and Thummim", a pair of seer
stones he said were buried with the plates. Later, however, he used the single
chocolate-colored stone he had found in 1822 and used for treasure hunting.
Joseph Knight said that Smith saw the words of the translation while he gazed
at the stone or stones in the bottom of his hat, excluding all light, a process
similar to divining the location of treasure. Sometimes Smith concealed the
process by raising a curtain or dictating from another room, while at other
times he dictated in full view of witnesses while the plates lay covered on the
table. After completing the translation, Smith gave the brown stone to Cowdery,
but continued to receive revelations using another stone until about 1833 when
he said he no longer needed it. The "Book of Mormon" drew many converts to the
church, but as Fawn Brodie noted, "The book lives today because of the prophet,
not he because of the book." Smith had assumed a role as prophet, seer, and
apostle of Jesus Christ, and by early 1831, he was introducing himself as
"Joseph the Prophet". The language of authority in Smith's revelations was
appealing to converts, and the revelations were given with the confidence of an
Old Testament prophet. Moses and Abraham. In June 1830 Smith received a
"revelation of Moses" in which Moses saw "the world and the ends thereof" and
asked God questions about the purpose of creation and man's relationship to
God. This revelation initiated a revision of the Bible on which Smith worked
sporadically until 1833 and which remained unpublished at his death. Smith
believed that the Bible had been corrupted through the ages, and he worked to
restore the original intent. Smith's revision added long passages rewritten
"according to his inspiration". While many changes involved straightening out
seeming contradictions or making small clarifications, other changes added
large "lost" portions to the text. For instance, Smith nearly tripled the
length of the first five chapters of Genesis in writing what would become the
"Book of Moses". The "Book of Moses" begins with the "cosmic inquiry" of Moses,
who learns that God made the earth and heavens to bring humans to eternal life.
The book also provides an enlarged account of the Genesis creation narrative
and expands the story of Enoch, the ancestor of Noah, saying he spoke with God,
received a prophetic calling, and eventually built a city of Zion so righteous
that it was taken to heaven. The book also elaborates and expands upon
foreshadowing and "types" of Christ, in effect Christianizing the Old
Testament. In 1835 Smith encouraged some of the Kirtland Saints to purchase
rolls of ancient Egyptian papyri from a traveling exhibitor. Over the next
several years Smith worked off and on as events allowed, producing a
translation of one of these rolls, which he published in 1842 as the "Book of
Abraham." The "Book of Abraham" told of the founding of the Abrahamic nation,
spoke of astronomy, cosmology, lineage and priesthood, and gave another account
of the creation story. Other revelations. Parley P. Pratt once described how
Joseph received revelations.  Revelations were immediately copied, and then
circulated among church members. Smith's revelations often came in response to
specific questions. He described the revelatory process as having "pure
Intelligence" flowing into him. "It may give you sudden strokes of ideas", he
said "so that by noticing it, you may find it fulfilled the same day or soon;
(i.e.) those things that were presented unto your minds by the Spirit of God,
will come to pass." Smith, however, never viewed the wording to be infallible.
The revelations were not God's words verbatim, but "couched in language
suitable to Joseph's time". In 1833 Smith edited and expanded many of the
previous revelations, publishing them as the "Book of Commandments", which
later became part of the "Doctrine and Covenants". Smith gave varying types of
revelations. Some were temporal, while others were spiritual or doctrinal; some
were received for a specific individual, while others were directed at the
whole church. Notable revelations include an 1831 revelation called "The Law"
containing directions for missionary work, rules for organizing society in
Zion, a reiteration of the Ten Commandments, an injunction to "administer to
the poor and needy", and an outline for the Law of consecration. An 1832
revelation called "The Vision" added to the fundamentals of sin and atonement,
introduced doctrines of life after salvation, the theme of Exaltation, and a
heaven with degrees of glory. Another 1832 revelation "on Priesthood" was the
first to explain priesthood doctrine. Three months later, Smith gave a lengthy
revelation called the "Olive Leaf" containing themes of cosmology and
eschatology, and discussing subjects such as light, truth, intelligence, and
sanctification, and a related revelation given in 1833 put Christ at the center
of salvation. Another 1833 revelation called the "Word of Wisdom", was framed
not as a commandment, but a recommendation. Coming at a time of temperance
agitation, it counseled a diet of wholesome herbs, fruits, grains, a sparing
use of meat, and recommended that Saints avoid "strong" alcoholic drinks,
tobacco, and "hot drinks" (later interpreted to mean tea and coffee). Smith and
other Saints did not strictly follow this counsel, though it later became a
requirement in the LDS Church. In 1835 Smith gave the "great revelation" that
organized the priesthood into quorums and councils, and served as a complex
blueprint for church structure. Smith's last revelation on the "New and
Everlasting Covenant" was recorded in 1843, and dealt with the theology of
family, the doctrine of sealing, and plural marriage. Before 1832, most of
Smith's revelations dealt with establishing the church, gathering the saints,
and building the City of Zion, while later revelations dealt with the
priesthood, endowment, and exaltation. The revelations slowed in Kirtland
during the autumn of 1833, and again after the dedication of the Kirtland
Temple, as Smith relied more heavily on his own teachings. Smith moved away
from written revelations opening with "verily thus saith the Lord" and taught
more in sermons, conversations, and letters. For instance, the doctrines of
baptism for the dead and the nature of God were introduced in sermons, and one
of Smith's most famed statements about there being "no such thing as immaterial
matter" was recorded from a casual conversation with a Methodist preacher.
Distinctive views and teachings. Cosmology and theology. Smith taught that all
existence was material, including a world of "spirit matter" so fine that it
was invisible to all but the purest mortal eyes. Matter, in Smith's view, could
neither be created nor destroyed; the creation involved only the reorganization
of existing matter. Like matter, "intelligence" was co-eternal with God, and
human spirits had been drawn from a pre-existent pool of eternal intelligences.
Nevertheless, spirits were incapable of experiencing a "fullness of joy" unless
joined with corporeal bodies. The work and glory of God was to create worlds
across the cosmos where inferior intelligences could be embodied. Though Smith
initially viewed God the Father as a spirit, he eventually began teaching that
God was an advanced and glorified man, embodied within time and space. Both God
the Father and Jesus were distinct beings with physical bodies, but the Holy
Spirit was a "personage of Spirit". Through the gradual acquisition of
knowledge, those who received exaltation could eventually become coequal with
God. The ability of humans to progress to godhood implied a vast hierarchy of
gods, with God himself having a father. Those who became gods would reign,
unified in purpose and will, leading inferior intelligences to share
immortality and eternal life. The opportunity to achieve exaltation extended to
all humanity; those who died with no opportunity to accept saving ordinances
could achieve exaltation by accepting them vicariously in the afterlife through
ordinances such as baptism for the dead. Children who died in their innocence
were guaranteed to rise at the resurrection and receive exaltation. Apart from
those who committed the eternal sin, Smith taught that even the wicked and
disbelieving would achieve a degree of glory in the afterlife. Religious
authority and ritual. Smith's teachings were rooted in dispensational
restorationism. He taught that the Church of Christ restored through him was a
latter-day restoration of the early Christian faith, which had been lost in a
great apostasy. At first, Smith's church had little sense of hierarchy, Smith's
religious authority being derived from visions and revelations. Though Smith
did not claim exclusive prophethood, an early revelation designated him as the
only prophet allowed to issue commandments "as Moses". This religious authority
encompassed economic and political as well as spiritual matters. For instance,
in the early 1830s, he temporarily instituted a form of religious communism,
called the United Order, requiring Saints to consecrate all their property to
the church. He also envisioned that theocratic institutions he established
would have a role in the world-wide political organization of the Millennium.
By the mid-1830s, Smith began teaching a hierarchy of three priesthoods
(Melchizedek, Aaronic, and Patriarchal), each of them a continuation of
biblical priesthoods through patrilineal succession or ordination by biblical
figures appearing in visions. Upon introducing the Melchizedek or "High"
Priesthood in 1831, Smith taught that its recipients would be "endowed with
power from on high", thus fulfilling a need for a greater holiness and an
authority commensurate with the New Testament apostles. This doctrine of
endowment evolved through the 1830s, until in 1842, the Nauvoo endowment
included an elaborate ceremony containing elements similar to Freemasonry and
the Jewish tradition of Kabbalah. The endowment was extended to women in 1843,
though Smith never clarified whether women could be ordained to priesthood
offices. Smith taught that the High Priesthood's endowment of heavenly power
included the sealing powers of Elijah, allowing High Priests to effect binding
consequences in the afterlife. For example, this power would enable proxy
baptisms for the dead and priesthood marriages that would be effective into the
afterlife. Elijah's sealing powers also enabled the second anointing, or
"fulness of the priesthood", which, according to Smith, sealed married couples
to their exaltation. Theology of family. During the early 1840s, Smith unfolded
a theology of family relations called the "New and Everlasting Covenant" that
superseded all earthly bonds. He taught that outside the Covenant, marriages
were simply matters of contract, and that in the afterlife Mormons outside the
Covenant would be limited in their progression. To fully enter the Covenant, a
man and woman must participate in a "first anointing", a "sealing" ceremony,
and a "second anointing", or sealing by the "Holy Spirit of Promise". When
fully sealed into the Covenant, Smith said that no sin nor blasphemy (other
than the eternal sin) could keep them from their "exaltation" in the afterlife.
According to Smith, only one person on earth at a time‚Äîin this case,
Smith‚Äîcould possess this power of sealing. Smith taught that the highest
exaltation could be achieved through "plural marriage" (polygamy), which was
the ultimate manifestation of this New and Everlasting Covenant. Plural
marriage allowed an individual to transcend the angelic state and become a god,
accelerating the expansion of one's heavenly kingdom. Polygamy. Smith had by
some accounts been teaching a polygamy doctrine as early as 1831, and there is
evidence that Smith was a polygamist by 1835. Although the church had publicly
repudiated polygamy, in 1837 there was a rift between Smith and Oliver Cowdery
over the issue. Cowdery suspected that Smith had engaged in a relationship with
his serving girl Fanny Alger. Smith never denied a relationship, but insisted
it was not adulterous, presumably because he had taken Alger as a plural wife.
In April 1841, Smith wed Louisa Beaman, and during the next two and a half
years he may have married or been sealed to 30 additional women, ten of them
already married to other men, though this was generally done with the knowledge
and consent of their husbands. Ten of Smith's wives were under the age of
twenty, while others were widows over fifty. The practice of plural marriage
was kept a secret. Polygamy (or plural marriage) caused a breach between Smith
and his first wife, Emma. Although Emma knew of some of her husband's
marriages, she almost certainly did not know the extent of his polygamous
activities. In 1843, Emma temporarily accepted Smith's marriage to four women
boarded in the Smith household, but she soon regretted her decision and
demanded that the other wives leave. In July, Smith dictated a revelation
pressuring Emma to accept plural marriage, but the two were not reconciled
until September, after Emma began participating in temple ordinances and
received an "endowment". Political views. While campaigning for President of
the United States in 1844, Smith had opportunity to take political positions on
issues of the day. Smith considered the United States Constitution, and
especially the Bill of Rights, to be inspired by God and "the Saints' best and
perhaps only defense". He believed a strong central government was crucial to
the nation's well-being but thought democracy better than tyranny‚Äîalthough he
also taught that a theocratic monarchy was the ideal form of government. In
foreign affairs, Smith was an expansionist, though he viewed "expansionism as
brotherhood". Smith favored a strong central bank and high tariffs to protect
American business and agriculture. He disfavored imprisonment of convicts
except for murder, preferring efforts to reform criminals through labor; he
also opposed courts-martial for military deserters. He supported capital
punishment but opposed hanging, preferring execution by firing squad or
beheading in order to "spill criminal's blood on the ground, and let the smoke
thereof ascend up to God". Despite having published a pro-slavery essay in
1836, Smith later strongly opposed slavery. During his presidential campaign,
he proposed abolishing slavery by 1850 and compensating slaveholders through
sale of public lands. Smith did not believe blacks to be genetically inferior
to whites; he welcomed both freemen and slaves into the church. But he opposed
baptizing slaves without permission of their masters, and he opposed
miscegenation. Smith declared that he would be one of the instruments in
fulfilling Nebuchadnezzar's statue vision in the Book of Daniel: that secular
government would be destroyed without "sword or gun", and would be replaced
with a "theodemocratic" Kingdom of God. Smith taught that this kingdom would be
multidenominational and democratic so long as the people chose wisely. Ethics
and behavior. See the Thirteenth Article of Faith. Smith said his ethical rule
was, "When the Lord commands, do it"; meaning that revelation from God
supersedes all else, including earthly law. (quoting a letter Smith wrote to
Nancy Rigdon after she had rejected his proposal of polygamous marriage); .
Beginning in the mid-1830s and into the 1840s, as the Mormon people became
involved in conflicts with the Missouri and Illinois state governments, Smith
taught that "Congress has no power to make a law that would abridge the rights
of my religion," and that they were not under the obligation to follow laws
they deemed as being contrary to their "religious privilege". Smith may have
thus felt justified in promoting polygamy despite its violation of some
traditional ethical standards. Legacy. Impact. Smith attracted thousands of
devoted followers before his death in 1844 and millions within a century.
(speech dated October 14, 1838 at the Far West town square, in which Smith
called himself "a second Mohammed"); . He is regarded as a prophet and apostle
on par with Moses, Elijah, Peter or Paul, second in importance within the faith
only to Jesus. Mormons and Ex-Mormons have produced a large amount of scholarly
work about Smith, and while Mormons tend to shield their prophet's reputation,
those who have broken away from the faith have to justify their decision to
leave. Interpretations range from viewing Smith as a prophet who restored the
true faith, to a "pious fraud" who believed he was called of God to preach
repentance, and felt justified inventing visions in order to convert people, to
a gifted "mythmaker" who was the product of his Yankee environment. Mormon and
non-Mormon biographers agree that Smith was one of the most influential,
charismatic, and innovative figures in American religious history. Smith's
teachings and practices aroused considerable antagonism, with newspapers as
early as 1829 dismissing him as a fraud (a view still held by many evangelical
Christians). He was twice imprisoned for alleged treason, the second time
falling victim to an angry mob that stormed the jail. After his death at age
thirty eight, the Saints believed he had died as a martyr to seal the testimony
of his faith. Smith himself made no claims to perfection, comparing himself to
a "rough stone" that lacked polish. Memorials to Smith include the Joseph Smith
Memorial Building in Salt Lake City, Utah, the Joseph Smith Building on the
campus of Brigham Young University, and a granite obelisk marking his birth
place. Religious denominations. Smith's death resulted in a succession crisis.
Smith had proposed several ways to choose his successor, but had never
clarified his preference. Smith's brother Hyrum, had he survived, would have
had the strongest claim, followed by Joseph's brother Samuel, who died
mysteriously a month after his brothers. Another brother, William, was unable
to attract a sufficient following. Smith's sons Joseph III and David also had
claims, but Joseph III was too young and David was yet unborn. The Council of
Fifty had a theoretical claim to succession, but it was a secret organization.
Some of Smith's ordained successors, such as Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer,
had left the church. The two strongest succession candidates were Brigham
Young, senior member of the Quorum of the Twelve, and Sidney Rigdon, the senior
member of the First Presidency. In a conference on August 8, most of the Saints
elected Young, who led them to the Utah Territory as The Church of Jesus Christ
of Latter-day Saints, whose membership surpassed 14 million members in 2010.
Smaller groups followed Sidney Rigdon and James J. Strang, who had based his
claim on a forged letter of appointment. Other Saints followed Lyman Wight and
Alpheus Cutler. Many members of these smaller groups, including most of Smith's
family, eventually coalesced in 1860 under the leadership of Joseph Smith III
and formed what was known for more than a century as the Reorganized Church of
Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints (now Community of Christ), which now has
about 250,000 members. , adherents of the denominations originating from Joseph
Smith's teachings number approximately 14.5 million. Family and descendants.
Smith wed Emma Hale in January 1827. She gave birth to nine children, five of
whom died before the age of two. The first three children (a boy Alvin in 1828
and twins Thaddeus and Louisa on April 30, 1831) died shortly after birth. When
the twins died, the Smiths adopted twins, Julia and Joseph, whose mother had
recently died in childbirth. (Joseph died of measles in 1832.) Joseph and Emma
Smith had four sons who lived to maturity: Joseph Smith III (November 6, 1832),
Frederick Granger Williams Smith (June 29, 1836), Alexander Hale Smith (June 2,
1838), and David Hyrum Smith (November 17, 1844, born after Joseph's death). ,
DNA testing had provided no evidence that Smith had fathered any children by
women other than Emma. Throughout her life and on her deathbed, Emma Smith
frequently denied that her husband had ever taken additional wives. Emma
claimed that the very first time she ever became aware of a polygamy revelation
being attributed to Joseph by Mormons was when she read about it in Orson
Pratt's booklet "The Seer" in 1853. Emma campaigned publicly against polygamy
and also authorized and was the main signatory of a petition in Summer 1842,
with a thousand female signatures, denying that Joseph was connected with
polygamy, and as president of the Ladies' Relief Society, Emma authorized
publishing a certificate in October 1842 denouncing polygamy and denying her
husband as its creator or participant. After Smith's death, Emma Smith quickly
became alienated from Brigham Young and the church leadership. Young, whom Emma
feared and despised, was suspicious of her desire to preserve the family's
assets from inclusion with those of the church, and thought she would be even
more troublesome because she openly opposed plural marriage. When most Latter
Day Saints moved west, she stayed in Nauvoo, married a non-Mormon, Major Lewis
C. Bidamon, and withdrew from religion until 1860, when she affiliated with
what became the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints (now
the Community of Christ), first headed by her son, Joseph Smith III. Emma never
denied Joseph Smith's prophetic gift or repudiated her belief in the
authenticity of the Book of Mormon.
