Jubilee (Christianity) The concept of the Jubilee is a special year of
remission of sins and universal pardon. In the Biblical Book of Leviticus, a
Jubilee year is mentioned to occur every fiftieth year, in which slaves and
prisoners would be freed, debts would be forgiven and the mercies of God would
be particularly manifest. In the Holy Bible, Leviticus 25:8-13 states, ""And
thou shalt number seven sabbaths of years unto thee, seven times seven years;
and the space of the seven sabbaths of years shall be unto thee forty and nine
years. Then shalt thou cause the trumpet of the jubile to sound on the tenth
day of the seventh month, in the day of atonement shall ye make the trumpet
sound throughout all your land. And ye shall hallow the fiftieth year, and
proclaim liberty throughout all the land unto all the inhabitants thereof: it
shall be a jubile unto you; and ye shall return every man unto his possession,
and ye shall return every man unto his family. A jubile shall that fiftieth
year be unto you: ye shall not sow, neither reap that which groweth of itself
in it, nor gather the grapes in it of thy vine undressed. For it is the jubile;
it shall be holy unto you: ye shall eat the increase thereof out of the field.
In the year of this jubile ye shall return every man unto his possession.""
According to Rabbi Baruch S. Davidson (a member of the Chabad.org Ask the Rabbi
team) in his answer to, "When is the next Jubilee year?", the Jubilee year is
currently not observed or commemorated. He explains that, in the 6th century
BCE, the Assyrians conquered the Northern Kingdom of Israel and sent the
majority of its population into exile. Those who were deported are historically
known as the Ten Lost Tribes. The Jewish peoples are certain before that point
in time the Jubilee was regularly observed. They also believe after the
destruction of the Second Temple and the disbandment of the Sanhedrin (supreme
rabbinical court), the Jubilee year was no longer marked in any form. Rabbi
Baaruch also noted, biblical law indicates the Jubilee is only observed when
all twelve Israelite tribes are living in Israel. (Lev 25:10 “And you shall
sanctify the fiftieth year, and proclaim freedom throughout the land for all
who live on it...”) These are two of many reasons, the Jubilee year is
currently not observed or commemorated. However, some Israelites are of the
opinion that the Jubilee is observed as long as there is a partial
representation of each tribe. In Christianity, the tradition dates to 1300,
when Pope Boniface VIII convoked a holy year, following which ordinary jubilees
have generally been celebrated every 25 or 50 years; with extraordinary
jubilees in addition depending on need. Christian Jubilees, particularly in the
Catholic tradition, generally involve pilgrimage to a sacred site, normally the
city of Rome. "Pre-History" of the Christian Jubilee. The year of Jubilee in
both the Jewish and Christian traditions is a time of joy, the year of
remission or universal pardon. In Mosaic law, each fiftieth year was to be
celebrated as a jubilee year, and that at this season every household should
recover its absent members, the land return to its former owners, the Hebrew
slaves be set free, and debts be remitted (see Jubilee (Biblical)). The same
conception, spiritualized, forms the fundamental idea of the Christian Jubilee,
though it is difficult to judge how far any sort of continuity can have existed
between the two. It is commonly stated that Pope Boniface VIII instituted the
first Christian Jubilee in the year 1300, and it is certain that this is the
first celebration of which we have any precise record, but it is also certain
that the idea of solemnizing a fiftieth anniversary was familiar to medieval
writers, no doubt through their knowledge of the Bible, long before that date.
The jubilee of a monk's religious profession was often kept, and probably some
vague memory survived of those Roman "ludi saeculares" which are commemorated
in the ""Carmen Saeculare"" of Horace, even though this last was commonly
associated with a period of a hundred years rather than any lesser interval.
But, what is most noteworthy, the number fifty was specially associated in the
early 13th century with the idea of remission. The translation of the body St.
Thomas of Canterbury took place in the year 1220, fifty years after his
martyrdom. The sermon on that occasion was preached by Cardinal Stephen
Lantron, who told his hearers that this coincidence was meant by Providence to
recall "the mystical virtue of the number fifty, which, as every reader of the
sacred page is aware, is the number of remission." In the light of this
explicit mention of a jubilee with great remissions of the penalties of sin to
be obtained by full confession and purpose of amendment, it seems difficult to
reject the statement of Cardinal Giacomo Stefaneschi, the contemporary and
counsellor of Pope Boniface VIII, and author of a treatise on the first
Jubilee, that the proclamation of the Jubilee owed its origin to the statements
of certain aged pilgrims who persuaded Boniface that great indulgences had been
granted to all pilgrims in Rome about a hundred years before. It is also
noteworthy that in the Chronicle of Alberic of Three Fountains, under the year
1208 (not, be it noted 1200), we find this brief entry: "It is said that this
year was celebrated as the fiftieth year, or the year of jubilee and remission,
in the Roman Court." The first Christian jubilee. On February 22, 1300,
Boniface published the Bull ""Antiquorum fida relatio"", in which, appealing
vaguely the precedent of past ages, he declares that he grants afresh and
renews certain "great remissions and indulgences for sins" which are to be
obtained "by visiting the city of Rome and the venerable basilica of the Prince
of the Apostles". Coming to more precise detail, he specifies that he concedes
"not only full and copious, but the most full, pardon of all their sins", to
those who fulfill certain conditions. These are, first, that being truly
penitent they confess their sins, and secondly, that they visit the basilicas
of St. Peter and St. Paul in Rome, at least once a day for a specified
time—in the case of the inhabitants of the city for thirty days, in the case
of strangers for fifteen. No explicit mention is made of Communion as a
requirement to receive the indulgence, nor does the word "jubilee" occur in the
Bull—indeed the pope speaks rather of a celebration which is to occur every
hundred years—but writers both Roman and foreign described this year as
"annus jubileus", and the name "jubilee" (though others, such as the "holy
year" or "the golden year" have been used as well) has been applied to such
celebrations ever since. Dante, who is himself supposed by some to have visited
Rome during this year to gain the Jubilee indulgence, refers to it under the
name "Giubbileo" in the Inferno and indirectly bears witness to the enormous
concourse of pilgrims by comparing the sinners passing along one of the bridges
of Malebolge in opposite directions, to the throngs crossing the bridge of the
Castel Sant'Angelo on their way to and from St. Peter's. Similarly, the
chronicler Giovanni Villani was so impressed on this occasion by the sight of
the monuments of Rome and the people who flocked thither that he then and there
formed the resolution of his great chronicle, in the course of which he gives a
remarkable account of what he witnessed. Other attendees may have included the
artists, Cimabue and Giotto, as well as Charles de Valois brother of the King
of France. Villani describes the indulgence connected with this jubilee as a
full and entire remission of all sins "di culpa e di pena" (), and he dwells
upon the great contentment and good order of the people, despite the fact that
during the greater part of that year there were two hundred thousand pilgrims
on an average present in Rome over and above the ordinary population. With
regard to the phrase just noticed, "a culpa et a poena" (in Latin), which was
often popularly used of the Jubilee and other similar indulgences, it should be
observed that it means no more than what is now understood by a "plenary
indulgence". It implied, however, that any approved Roman confessor had
faculties to absolve from reserved cases (sins whose forgiveness can only be
granted by certain priests), and that the liberty thus virtually accorded of
selecting a confessor was regarded as a privilege. The phrase was an
unscientific one, and was not commonly used by theologians. It certainly did
not mean, as some have pretended, that the indulgence of itself released from
guilt (which could be punished by Hell) as well as penalty (for sins already
forgiven, usually removed in Purgatory). Guilt is actually remitted in the
Catholic Church only in virtue of sacramental confession and the sorrow of the
penitent. The sovereign pontiff never claimed any power of absolving in
grievous matters apart from the sacrament. "All theologians", remarks
Maldonatus, "unanimously without a single exception, reply that an indulgence
is not a remission of guilt but of the penalty." The Jubilee of 1350. Boniface
VIII had intended that the Jubilee should be celebrated only once in a hundred
years. Some time before the middle of the 14th century, great urgings, in which
St. Birgitta of Sweden and the poet Petrarch amongst others had a share, were
made to Pope Clement VI, then residing at Avignon, to anticipate this term.
Clement VI assented, and in 1350 accordingly, a Jubilee was held, though the
pope did not return to Rome himself. Cardinal Gaetani Ceccano was dispatched to
represent him. On this occasion daily visits to the Basilica di San Giovanni in
Laterano were enjoined, besides those to the basilicas of St. Peter and St.
Paul outside the Walls, while at the next Jubilee, (in 1390) the Basilica di
Santa Maria Maggiore was added to the list. The visit to these four churches
has remained as one of the conditions for gaining the Roman Jubilee indulgence.
The Jubilees of 1390 and 1423. The celebration next following was held in 1390,
and in virtue of an ordinance of Pope Urban VI, it was proposed to hold a
Jubilee every thirty-three years as representing the period of the sojourn of
Christ upon earth and also the average span of human life. In 1400, so many
people came to Rome, that Pope Boniface IX granted the indulgence again, even
though he had not decreed a Jubilee year previously. Another Jubilee was
proclaimed by Pope Martin V in 1423 (33 years after the last proclaimed Jubilee
in 1390), but Pope Nicholas V, in 1450, reverted to the quinquagesimal period,
while Pope Paul II decreed that the Jubilee should be celebrated every twenty-
five years, and this has been the normal rule ever since. Subsequent Jubilees.
The Jubilees of 1450 and 1475 were attended by vast crowds of pilgrims, and
that of 1450 was unfortunately made famous by a terrible accident in which
nearly two hundred persons were trampled to death in a panic which occurred on
the bridge of Sant' Angelo. But even this disaster had its good effects in the
pains taken afterwards to widen the thoroughfares and to provide for the
entertainment and comfort of the pilgrims by numerous charitable organizations,
of which the Archconfraternity of the Holy Trinity, founded by St. Philip Neri,
was the most famous. In 1500 Pope Alexander VI announced that the Doors in the
four major basilicas would be opened contemporaneously, and that he himself
would open the Holy Door of Saint Peter's. The ninth Jubilee was solemnly
opened on December 24, 1524 by Pope Clement VII, at a time when there were
already symptoms of the great crises which would soon tear the Church apart,
with the Protestant Reformation. The 1550 Jubilee was proclaimed by Paul III,
but it was Pope Julius III who actually opened it. It is recorded that in 1575,
in the time of Pope Gregory XIII, as many as 300,000 people came to Rome from
all over Europe. The following Holy Year was proclaimed by Pope Clement VIII in
1600. In 1625, Urban VIII opened the ceremonial doors for the Jubilee year.
However the amount of pilgrims was lower than expected due to the wars in
northern Italy and so the Pope suspended the declaration of indulgences outside
Rome in an attempt to lure the faithful to the city. He then went on to declare
a universal or extraordinary jubilee in 1628 to pray for peace. This was
repeated the next year in 1629 and brought undoubted material benefits to the
city. Finally, Innocent X oversaw the last of his jubilees in 1650. Clement X
presided over that of 1675. While Clement XI, who opened the Jubilee of the
year 1700, is remembered especially for establishing one of Rome's most
renowned charitable institutions, the Hospice St Michele a Ripa. Gradually
other similar institutions were opened to offer shelter and assistance to
pilgrims, as in the year 1725, the Holy Year called by Benedict XIII. A famous
preacher during the Jubilee 1750, proclaimed by Benedict XIV, was Saint
Leonardo da Porto Maurizio, the apostle of the Via Crucis, who set up 14
stations of the Cross inside the ruins of the Colosseum. Clement XIV announced
the Jubilee of the Year 1775 but died three months before Christmas and the
Holy Door was opened by the new Pope, Pius VI. The difficult situation in which
the Church found herself during the hegemonic rule of Napoleon prevented Pius
VII from proclaiming the Jubilee of 1800. More than a half a million pilgrims
made the journey to Rome for the Jubilee of 1825. Twenty five years later, the
Holy Year could not be held because of the unsettled situation in the Roman
Republic and temporary exile of Pius IX. However, he was able to announce a
Jubilee for 1875, but it was celebrated without any external solemnity, with
only the clergy present for the inauguration. The holy doors were not opened,
and the pilgrims who came were generally in Rome to do homage to the Pope, who
had not accepted the Italian annexation of Rome by the troops of King Victor
Emmanuel, rather than to obtain an indulgence. The Jubilee of 1900, though
shorn of much of its splendour by the self-confinement of the Pope within the
limits of the Vatican, was, nevertheless carried out by Pope Leo XIII with all
the solemnity that was possible. In the 20th century, Jubilees were held in
1925, 1933 (in commemoration of Jesus' death), 1950, 1975, 1983 (Holy Year of
the Redemption) and 2000. Pope Pius XII used the occasion of the 1950 jubilee
to declare a new national anthem for the Vatican City. The "Great Jubilee" of
2000. Pope John Paul II announced a Great Jubilee for the year 2000 with his
Apostolic Letter "Tertio Millennio Adveniente" ("As the Third Millennium
Approaches") of November 10, 1994. In this writing, he called for a three-year
preparation period leading up to the opening of the Great Jubilee in December
1999. The first year, 1997, was to be dedicated to meditation on Jesus, the
second to the Holy Spirit, and the third to God the Father. This Jubilee was
especially marked by a simplification of the rites and the requirements for
achieving the indulgence, as well as a huge effort to involve more Christians
in the celebration. Protestant Churches and the Orthodox were invited to
celebrate the Jubilee together with the Catholics as a sign of ecumenical
dialogue. Furthermore, special Jubilees were invoked for various groups within
the Church, such as children, athletes, politicians, and actors. World Youth
Day, celebrated in Rome in August, brought over two million young people
together. The Jubilee was closed by the pope on January 6, 2001, by the closing
of the holy door of St. Peter's and the promulgation of the Apostolic Letter
"Novo Millennio Ineunte" ("Upon Entering the New Millennium"), which outlined
the pope's vision for the future of the Church. Ceremonial of the Jubilee. The
most distinctive feature in the ceremonial of the Jubilee is the unwalling and
the final walling up of the "holy door" in each of the four great basilicas
which the pilgrims are required to visit. The doors are opened by the Pope at
the beginning of the Jubilee and then sealed up again afterwards. Previously,
the rite included the use of a silver hammer (for removing the concrete at the
opening) and a silver trowel (for sealing it again after the Jubilee). The Pope
would pound on the wall, which would then be set to collapse. This ritual
caused injury of bystanders, so for the Great Jubilee of 2000, Pope John Paul
II simplified the rite considerably, opening and closing the doors with his
hands. Traditionally, the Pope himself opens and closes the doors of St.
Peter's Basilica personally, and designates a cardinal to open those of St.
John Lateran, St. Mary Major, and St. Paul outside the Walls. In the Great
Jubilee, the Pope chose to open all the doors personally, while designating
cardinals to close all the doors except that of St. Peter's. Catholic parishes
all over the world share a similar rite dedicating a door for the purposes of
the Jubilee Year in order to accommodate its parishioners who do not intend to
visit Rome for the occasion. Local parishes' doors include the same indulgence
given to the Basilica doors. The Jubilee Indulgence. This is a plenary
indulgence which, as stated by Pope Boniface VIII in Consistory, it is the
intention of the Holy See to grant in the most ample manner possible. Of
course, when first conceded, such an indulgence, and also the privilege annexed
of choosing a confessor who had power to absolve from reserved cases, was a
much rarer spiritual boon than it has since become. So preeminent was the favor
then regarded that the custom arose of suspending all other indulgences during
the Jubilee year, a practice which, with certain modifications, still exists to
the present day. The precise conditions for gaining each Jubilee indulgence are
determined by the Roman pontiff, and they are usually announced in a special
Bull, distinct from that which it is customary to issue on the preceding feast
of the Ascension giving notice of the forthcoming celebration. The main
conditions, however, which do not usually vary, are five: confession,
Communion, prayer for the Pope, complete renunciation of all attachment to sin,
and visits to the four basilicas during a certain specified period. (The first
four are common to all plenary indulgences.) The statement made by some, that
the Jubilee indulgence, being "a culpa et a paena", did not of old presuppose
either confession or repentance, is absolutely without foundation, and is
contradicted by every extant official document of the Roman Catholic Church.
Besides the ordinary Jubilee indulgence, to be gained only by pilgrims who pay
a visit to Rome, or through special concession by certain cloistered religious
confined within their monasteries, it has long been customary to extend this
indulgence the following year to the faithful throughout the world, though in
2000, the indulgence was extended to the whole world during the Jubilee year
itself. For this, fresh conditions are appointed, usually including a certain
number of visits to local churches and sometimes fasting or other works of
charity. Further, the popes have constantly exercised their prerogative of
conceding to all the faithful indulgences ad "instar jubilaei" (after the model
of a Jubilee) which are commonly known as "extraordinary Jubilees". On these
occasions, as at the Jubilee itself, special facilities are usually accorded
for absolution from reserved cases, though on the other hand, the great
indulgence is only to be gained by the performance of conditions much more
onerous than those required for an ordinary plenary indulgence. Such
extraordinary Jubilees are commonly granted by a newly elected pontiff at his
accession or on occasions of some unexpected celebration, as was done, for
example, at the convening of the First Vatican Council, or again at times of
great calamity. Pope John Paul II convoked Jubilees in 1983 (Holy Year of the
Redemption) and in 2000 (the Great Jubilee). In 2000, he greatly liberalized
the conditions for gaining the Jubilee indulgence. A visit to only one of the
four patriarchal basilicas in Rome was necessary (entering through the holy
door). To the four baslicas were added the Sanctuary of Divine Love in Rome,
and each diocese was permitted to name a location within the diocese where the
indulgence could be gained. For instance, the diocese of Rome added the chapel
in the airport at Fiumicino as a possible pilgrimage site. Most dioceses simply
named the local cathedral as the pilgrimage site. There was no requirement for
multiple visits. On the last full day of the Jubilee, pilgrims were permitted
to enter the holy door at St. Peter's until late into the night, so that no one
would be denied the opportunity to gain the indulgence. The requirements of
confession, Communion, prayer for the Pope and freedom from all attachment to
sin remained in place, as for all plenary indulgences.
