Jubilee (biblical) The Jubilee (Hebrew "yovel" ◊ô◊ï◊ë◊ú) year is the year at
the end of seven cycles of "shmita" (Sabbatical years), and according to
Biblical regulations had a special impact on the ownership and management of
land in the Land of Israel; there is some debate whether it was the 49th year
(the last year of seven sabbatical cycles, referred to as the Sabbath's
Sabbath), or whether it was the following (50th) year. Jubilee deals largely
with land, property, and property rights. As with most cultures, the property
rights regarding land, slaves and indentured servants was less absolute than
for other property rights such as for tools and personal artifacts. The
biblical rules concerning Sabbatical years ("shmita") are still observed by
many religious Jews in the State of Israel, but the regulations for the Jubilee
year have not been observed for many centuries. Etymology. The Septuagint
rendered the Hebrew "yovel" as "a trumpet-blast of liberty" (Œ±œÜŒµœÉŒµœâœÇ
œÉŒ∑ŒºŒ±œÉŒπŒ± "afeseos semasia"), and the Vulgate by Latin "iobeleus".
Traditionally, it was thought that the English term "Jubilee" derives from the
Hebrew term "yobel" (via Latin ""), which in turn derives from "yobhel",
meaning "ram"; the Jubilee year was announced by a blast on a shofar, an
instrument made from a ram's horn, during that year's Yom Kippur. An
alternative etymology notes that the Latin verb "i≈´bil≈ç", "shout for joy,"
predates the Vulgate, and proposes that instead the Latin "jubilo" (meaning
"shout"), as well as Middle Irish "ilach" (victory cry), New English "yowl",
and Ancient Greek "iuzo" (shout), derived from the Proto-Indo-European root
"*yu-" (shout for joy). In this case the Hebrew term for "jubilee" is a
borrowing from neighboring Indo-European languages, rather than deriving from
another Hebrew word. Origin and purpose. Biblical scholars argue that the
Jubilee is an obvious development of the Sabbatical year. Rather than waiting
for the 50th or 49th year, the Deuteronomic code requires that Hebrew slaves be
liberated during their 7th year of service, as does the Covenant Code, which
some textual scholars regard as pre-dating the Holiness Code; the Book of
Ezekiel, which some textual scholars also regard as earlier than the Holiness
Code, refers to a "year of liberty" (◊©◊ ◊™ ◊ì◊®◊ï◊®), during which property is
returned to the original owner (or their heirs), but the word ◊ì◊®◊ï◊® is used
by Jeremiah to describe the release of slaves during the Sabbatical year, which
various scholars take to imply that Ezekiel must have been referring to the
sabbatical year. Scholars suspect that the transfer of these regulations to
49th or 50th year was a deliberate attempt to parallel the fact that Shavuot is
50 days after Passover, and follows seven weeks of harvest; this parallel is
regarded as significant in Kabbalah. According to the theories of Julius
Wellhausen and others who have followed his approach, the Biblical chapters
that contain the Jubilee and Sabbatical-year legislation (chapters 25 and 27 of
Leviticus) were part of the so-called "P" or Priestly Code that represented the
last stage in the development of Israel's religion. If Wellhausen's theories of
the formation of the Biblical canon were to be accepted, it would mean that
these chapters necessarily were written in a late exilic or post-exilic period.
◊ê◊®◊• ◊û◊í◊ï◊®◊ô◊î◊ù) into Israel's land of promise, Israel's enemies (◊ß◊î◊ú
◊¢◊û◊ô◊ù) in to a sign of fecundity, or Israel's abundant sin (◊ë◊û◊ê◊ì ◊û◊ê◊ì)
into a sign of YHWH's covenant. It is, however, plausible that Ezekiel, writing
in exile, re-evaluated P's portrayal of Israel's uniqueness, cynically
inverting these images so that what was once a "pleasing fragrance to YHWH"
symbolizes impiety and irreverance. John Bergsma provides a further argument
against an exilic or post-exilic date for the codifying the Jubilee and
Sabbatical-year legislation, saying that the "Sitz im Leben" (life situation)
of the exilic or post-exilic period is not at all addressed by this
legislation. John Sietze Bergsma, "The Jubilee from Leviticus to Qumran: A
History of Interpretation" (Leiden/Boston: Brill, 2007) 77. Italics are in the
original. Bergsma therefore points out the incongruity of Wellhausen's
ascribing an exilic or post-exilic date to the Jubilee and Sabbatical-year
legislation, since this would conflict with the "Sitz im Leben" of Israel
during, and after, the exile. In addition, Bergsma shows that the problem that
this legislation was addressing was a problem recognized by the kings of
Babylon in the second millennium BC, which naturally suggests the possibility
of a much earlier date of codification. These Babylonian kings (to whom could
be added Ammizaduga) occasionally issued decrees for the cancellation of debts
and/or the return of the people to the lands they had sold. Such "clean slate"
decrees were intended to redress the tendency of debtors, in ancient societies,
to become hopelessly in debt to their creditors, thus accumulating most of the
arable land into the control of a wealthy few. The decrees were issued
sporadically. Economist Michael Hudson maintains that the Biblical legislation
of the Jubilee and Sabbatical years addressed the same problems encountered by
these Babylonian kings, but the Biblical formulation of the laws presented a
significant advance in justice and the rights of the people. This was due to
the "clean slates" now being codified into law, rather than relying on the whim
of the king. Furthermore, the regular rhythm of the Sabbatical and Jubilee
years meant that everyone would know when the next release was due, thereby
giving fairness and equity to both creditor and debtor. Hudson therefore
maintains that not only was the Levitical legislation a significant advance
over the prior attempts to deal with indebtedness, but this legislation was
also eminently practical, in contradiction to many Biblical interpreters who
are not economists and who have labeled it "utopian." Regulations. The biblical
regulations concerning the Jubilee year form part of the Holiness Code, which
appears in the Torah as part of the collections of laws given on Mount Sinai or
Mount Horeb. According to these regulations, the Jubilee was to be sounded once
49 years had been counted, raising an ambiguity over whether the Jubilee was
within the 49th year, or followed it as an intercalation in the 7 year
sabbatical cycles; scholars and classical rabbinical sources are divided on the
question. The biblical requirement is that the Jubilee year was to be treated
like a Sabbatical year, with the land lying fallow, but also required the
compulsory return of all property to its original owners or their heirs, except
the houses of laymen within walled cities, in addition to the manumission of
all Israelite indentured servants. The biblical regulations state that the land
was to rest a "Sabbath" when the Children of Israel came to the land God was
giving them Israel. The Seder Olam Rabbah (second century AD), stated that this
verse meant that the counting was not to start until after the Israelites had
gained control of Canaan, which the Seder Olam, based upon received tradition,
placed at 14 years after their entry into the land. This interpretation has
been largely adopted in later rabbinic scholarship. One reason for this
interpretation of the Levitical text was that if counting started before the
land was completely conquered, it would require the Israelites to return the
land to the Canaanites within 50 years; similar nationalistic concerns about
the impact of the Jubilee on land ownership have been raised by Zionist
settlers. From a legal point of view, the Jubilee law effectively banned sale
of land as fee simple, and instead land could only be leased for no more than
50 years. The biblical regulations go on to specify that the price of land had
to be proportional to how many years remained before the Jubilee, with land
being cheaper the closer it is to the Jubilee. Length of the Jubilee cycle.
Since the 49th year was already a sabbatical year, the land was required to be
left fallow during it, but if the 50th year also had to be kept fallow, as the
Jubilee, then no new crops would be available for two years, and only the
summer fruits would be available for the following year, creating a much
greater risk of starvation overall; Judah haNasi contended that the jubilee
year was identical with the sabbatical 49th year. However, the majority of
classical rabbis believed that the biblical phrase "hallow the fiftieth year",
together with the biblical promise that there would be three years worth of
fruit in the "sixth year", implies that the jubilee year was the 50th year. The
opinion of the Geonim, and generally of later authorities, was that prior to
the Babylonian captivity the Jubilee was the intercalation of the 50th year,
but after the captivity ended the Jubilee was essentially ignored, except for
the blast of the shofar, and coincided with the sabbatical 49th year; the
reason was that the Jubilee was only to be observed when the Jews controlled
all of Canaan, including the territories of Reuben and Gad and the eastern
half-tribe of Manasseh. The length of the Jubilee cycle continues to be of
interest to modern scholarship, as does the question of the practicality of the
legislation, and whether it was ever put into effect on a nation-wide basis.
Regarding the length of the cycle, three significant scholarly studies devoted
to the Jubilee and Sabbatical years agree that it was 49 years, while
disagreeing somewhat on the interpretation of the other issues involved. These
major studies were those of Benedict Zuckermann, Robert North, and Jean-
Fran√ßois Lefebvre. The reasons given by these authors to support a 49-year
cycle are both textual (examining all relevant Biblical texts) and practical.
Textual and practical considerations. An example of the textual argument is
given by North in his comparison of with . The first passage establishes the
timing, in days, for the Festival of Weeks ("Shavuot"), while the second
prescribes the timing, in years, for the Jubilee. In the first passage, the
start of counting for the Festival of Weeks is said to be "the day after the
Sabbath" ("mimaharat ha-shabat", ), and is to end "the day after the seventh
Sabbath" ("mimaharat ha-shabat ha-sheviyit", ). These seven weeks would
constitute 49 days in most modern methods of reckoning. Nevertheless, verse 16
says that they are to be reckoned as 50 days. This method of reckoning
(sometimes called "inclusive numbering") is fairly common in Scripture; for
example, the Feast of Tabernacles is to last for seven days (), but the last
day is called the eighth day (v. 36). North found this comparison between
Leviticus 23 (Feast of Weeks) and Leviticus 25 (Jubilees) to be "the strongest
possible support for the "forty-ninth" year" as the Jubilee year. His
conclusion that the Jubilee was identical with the seventh Sabbatical year was
followed by Lefebvre, for this as well as additional reasons. The consideration
that the Jubilee was identical with the seventh Sabbatical year solves the
various practical problems, as also addressed by these authors. If the Jubilee
were separate from, and following the seventh Sabbatical year, then there would
be two fallow years in succession. Lefebve points out, however, that there is
no support in Scripture for two voluntary fallow years in succession, even
though some have misinterpreted as if this refers to a Jubilee year following a
Sabbatical year, which is not the sense of the passage. Lefebvre shows that
this cannot be the case because planting is mentioned for the eighth year; it
is the year after a Sabbath, a year in which planting and harvesting resume.
Another practical problem that would occur if the Jubilee cycle were 50 years
is that, after the first cycle, the Jubilee and Sabbatical cycles would be out
of phase unless the seventh Sabbatical cycle was stretched to eight years. But
Scripture gives no instructions for making such an adjustment. Instead, it is
assumed that the two cycles will always be in phase so that the "shofar" can be
sounded in the seventh year of the seventh Sabbatical cycle. Historical
considerations. Although not cited by these authors, two historical arguments
also argue for a 49-year cycle. The first is that the Samaritans celebrated a
49-year cycle. Although the Samaritans stopped counting for the Jubilee some
hundreds of years ago, according to a recent report an effort is underway to
determine the date when counting ceased in order to resume. The counting will
again be according to a 49-year cycle. A second historical argument has been
presented to the effect that the two instances of a Jubilee mentioned in the
Babylonian Talmud (tractates "Arakin" 12a and "Megillah" 14b) appear to be
proper historical remembrances, because the known calculation methods of
rabbinic scholarship were incapable of correctly calculating the dates of the
Jubilees mentioned. Rabbinic (Talmudic) scholarship always assumed non-
accession reckoning for kings, whereby the first partial year of a king was
double-counted both for him and as the last year of the deceased king. This
reckoning would give 47 years from the Jubilee mentioned in the 18th year of
Josiah ("Megillah" 14b) to the Jubilee that took place 14 years after Jerusalem
fell to the Babylonians ("Arakin" 12a), whereas the correct difference was 49
years (623 BC to 574 BC). This has been presented as additional evidence that
the cycle was 49 years, and further that the cycles were being measured until
the last Jubilee in the days of Ezekiel, when the stipulations of the Jubilee
year, long neglected except in the counting of the priests, could no longer be
observed because the people were captive in a foreign land. The date when
counting began. The Seder Olam Rabbah recognized the importance of the Jubilee
and Sabbatical cycles as a long-term calendrical system, and attempted at
various places to fit the Sabbatical and Jubilee years into its chronological
scheme. As mentioned above, the Seder Olam put forth the idea that the counting
for these cycles was deferred until 14 years after entry into the land. The
reasons for this are given in Seder Olam chapter 11. In Joshua chapter 14,
Caleb mentions that he was 40 years old when he was sent out as a spy in the
second year in the wilderness, and his present age was 85 (Joshua 14:7,10),
which meant he received his inheritance seven years after entering Canaan.
Rabbi Jose assumed that everyone else received their inheritance when Caleb
did, or had already received it, so that the allotment of the land to the
tribes was finished at this time. Because the division of the land took seven
years, the conquest that followed must also have taken seven years. "One has to
say that 14 years Israel spent at Gilgal, seven when they were conquering and
seven when they were distributing." Then, after putting up the Tabernacle at
Shiloh, "At that moment, they started to count years for tithes, Sabbatical
years, and Jubilee years." Another explanation has been offered for Rabbi
Jose's postponement of counting until 14 years had elapsed. In this same
chapter 11 of the Seder Olam, Rabbi Jose stated (for unknown reasons) that
Israel's time in its land must have lasted an integral number of Jubilee
periods. If this were true, one of those periods should have ended at the
beginning of the exile in 587 BC. Yet Rabbi Jose also believed that Ezekiel 40:
1 marked the beginning of the seventeenth Jubilee, and this was 14 years after
the city fell. In other words, the Jubilee came 14 years too late, according to
the idea that the time in the land must comprise an integral number of Jubilee
cycles. Rodger Young proposes that the knowledge of when a genuine Jubilee was
due was the real reason for the supposition of a delay before the start of
counting: Rodger C. Young, "Three Verifications of Thiele's Date for the
Beginning of the Divided Kingdom," "Andrews University Seminary Studies" 45
(2007) 178 n. 36. There is, of course, an alternative account of when counting
started: at the entry into the land. This follows from a straightforward
reading of the relevant text in Leviticus: Lord then spoke to Moses at Mount
Sinai, saying, "Speak to the sons of Israel, and say to them, 'When you come
into the land which I shall give you, then the land shall have a sabbath to the
Lord. Six years you shall sow your field, and six years you shall prune your
vineyard and gather in its crop, but during the seventh year the land shall
have a sabbath rest, a sabbath to the Lord¬ÖYou are also to count off seven
sabbaths of years for yourself, seven times seven years, so that you have the
time of the seven sabbaths of years, "namely", forty-nine years. You shall then
sound a ram's horn abroad on the tenth day of the seventh month; on the day of
atonement you shall sound a horn all through your land. You shall thus
consecrate the fiftieth year and proclaim a release through the land to all its
inhabitants. It shall be a jubilee for you (Leviticus 25:1-4, 8-10, NASB). If
counting is measured back 17 cycles from Ezekiel's Jubilee that began in Tishri
of 574 BC, the first year of the first cycle would have been 1406 BC. According
to the religious calendar that started the year in Nisan, and in accordance
with Joshua 5:10 that places the entry in the land in Nisan, Nisan of 1406 BC
is the month and year when counting started. But 1406 BC is the year of entry
into the land that is traditionally derived by another method, namely taking
Thiele's date of 931/930 BC for the start of the divided kingdom after
Solomon's death, in conjunction with 1 Kings 6:1 (Solomon's fourth year was
480th year of Exodus-era), to derive the date of the Exodus in 1406 BC. The
method of determining the date of the Exodus and entry into Canaan from the
Jubilee cycles is independent of the method of deriving these dates from 1
Kings 6:1, yet the two methods agree. Theological significance. Leviticus
argues that the Jubilee existed because the land was the possession of Yahweh,
and its current occupiers were merely aliens or tenants, and therefore the land
shouldn't be sold forever. Midrashic sources argue that the Jubilee was created
to preserve the original division of land between the Israelite tribes, as
evidenced by the rabbinical tradition that the Jubilee should not be imposed
until the Israelites were in control of Canaan. Leviticus also states that the
Israelites were the servants of Yahweh, which classical rabbis took as
justification for the manumission of Israelite slaves at the Jubilee, using the
argument that no man should have two masters, and thus, as the servants of
Yahweh, the Israelites shouldn't also be the servants of men.
