Justification (theology) Justification, in Christian theology, is God's act of
removing the guilt and penalty of sin while at the same time declaring a sinner
righteous through Christ's atoning sacrifice. To Protestants righteousness from
God is credited to the sinner's account through faith alone, without works. The
means of justification is an area of significant difference between Catholics/
Eastern Orthodox and Protestants. Broadly speaking, Catholic and Orthodox
Christians distinguish between initial justification, which in their view
occurs at baptism, and permanent justification, accomplished after a lifetime
of striving to do God's will. Most Protestants believe that justification is a
singular act in which God declares an unrighteous individual to be righteous,
an act made possible because Christ was legally "made sin" while on the cross
(2 Cor 5:21). Justification is granted to all who exercise faith, and that is
viewed as a gift from God (unmerited favour) by Lutherans and Calvinists, who
use , as well as and to support that belief. Catholics and Eastern Orthodox use
and to support their belief that justification is kept through avoiding grave
sins. Justification is seen by Protestants as being the theological fault line
that divided Catholic from Protestant during the Protestant Reformation.
Biblical references. New Testament. Jesus used the idea of ransom, or
redemption when referring to his work on earth. Christ's death and resurrection
(triumph over Satan and death) provide justification for believers before God.
His righteousness becomes theirs, and his death becomes an offering to God in
their place, to pay for all of their sins. According to Protestants this
justification is by faith alone - not through good deeds - and is a gift from
God through Christ. According to Catholics and Eastern Orthodox justification
is a free gift but is gotten through baptism initially and through the
sacrament of reconciliation if justification is lost through grave sin. . "You
see that a person is justified by what he does and not by faith alone.. But
faith without works is dead." In the context of the surrounding verses, it is
apparent that the point being made is that what one believes modifies one's
actions - thus true faith in God results in a desire to follow his instruction
to love one another, and thus would result in good deeds.citation] The Joint
Declaration on the Doctrine of Justification (JDDJ), signed by both Lutheran
World Federation and The Roman Catholic Church on 31 October 1999, clearly
stated that "consensus in basic truths of the doctrine of justification exists
between Lutherans and Catholics." In Roman Catholic and Lutheran doctrines, as
expressed under section 4.7 no.37, "we confess together that good works - a
Christian life lived in faith, hope and love - follow justification and are its
fruits. When the justified live in Christ and act in the grace they receive,
they bring forth, in biblical terms, good fruit. Since Christians struggle
against sin their entire lives, this consequence of justification is also for
them an obligation they must fulfill. Thus both Jesus and the apostolic
Scriptures admonish Christians to bring forth the works of love." The
declaration reinstates that several theological views on justification held by
Lutherans and Catholics, though not apparently similar to each other, are in
fact explaining the same "basic truths of the doctrine of justification" at
different angles. An example can be cited from section 4.7 no. 38-39, "when
Catholics affirm the 'meritorious' character of good works, they wish to say
that, according to the biblical witness, a reward in heaven is promised to
these works. Their intention is to emphasize the responsibility of persons for
their actions, not to contest the character of those works as gifts, or far
less to deny that justification always remains the unmerited gift of grace," in
comparison with "the concept of a preservation of grace and a growth in grace
and faith is also held by Lutherans. They do emphasize that righteousness as
acceptance by God and sharing in the righteousness of Christ is always
complete. At the same time, they state that there can be growth in its effects
in Christian living. When they view the good works of Christians as the fruits
and signs of justification and not as one's own 'merits', they nevertheless
also understand eternal life in accord with the New Testament as unmerited
'reward' in the sense of the fulfillment of God's promise to the believer."
Concerning the need for righteousness, Jesus says "I tell you, unless your
righteousness exceeds that of the scribes and Pharisees, you will not enter the
kingdom of heaven." This is possible by accepting the salvation of Christ. His
righteousness (rightness and purity before God, as Christ never committed any
sins) is transferred to believers when they seek the forgiveness that Christ
purchased for them on the cross. Concerning his own death and speaking at the
Last Supper, he says, ". . .this is My blood of the covenant, which is poured
out for many for the forgiveness of sins." He also speaks often of forgiveness
of sins. Paul. It was Paul who developed the term justification in the theology
of the church. Justification is a major theme of the epistles to the Romans and
to the Galatians in the New Testament, and is also given treatment in many
other epistles. In Romans, Paul develops justification by first speaking of
God's just wrath at sin (Rom. 1:18 - 3:20). Justification is then presented as
the solution for God's wrath. One is said to be 'justified by faith apart from
works of the Law.' Further, Paul writes of sin and justification in terms of
two men, Adam and Christ. Through Adam, sin came into the world bringing death;
through Jesus, righteousness came into the world, bringing justification unto
life. In this connection, Paul speaks of Adam's sin being 'imputed' or
'accounted' and speaks of justification as acting in analogy to sin. In chapter
8, Paul connects justification with predestination and glorification. He
further states that those who are justified cannot be separated from the love
of Christ. Several of these passages are central in the debate between Roman
Catholics, and the various streams of Protestantism (while there is broad
agreement on justification by faith, there is no complete doctrinal uniformity
on Justification among all Protestant denominations), who can understand them
in quite different ways. In Galatians, Paul emphatically rejects justification
by works of the Law, a rejection sparked apparently by a controversy concerning
the necessity of circumcision for salvation. Other New Testament writers. The
Epistle to the Hebrews also takes up the theme of justification, declaring that
Jesus' death is superior to the Old Testament sacrifices in that it takes away
sin once for all (Heb. 10). In Hebrews, faith in Jesus' sacrifice includes
steadfast perseverance. James discusses justification briefly but
significantly, declaring that a faith that is apart from works cannot be a
justifying faith, because faith is made perfect or completed by works. Indeed,
works are required for justification because "man is justified by works, and
not by faith alone," though the sense of the word "justified" in this passage
is disputed. The writer of James emphasizes the Jewish belief that faith and
deeds go together. However, in James, it is possible that "justification" is
referring to how believers are to behave as believers, not how an unbeliever
becomes a believer (i.e., salvation). Faith without works is counterfeit. The
faith must produce good fruit as a sign lest it become the occasion for self-
justification. Early church and justification. After the Apostolic era, the
concept of justification was secondary to issues such as martyrdom.
Justification as a concept is mentioned in the works of early church fathers
and in the sermons of John Chrysostom, but it is not developed until
Augustine's conflict with Pelagius. Pelagius taught that one became righteous
through the exertion of one's will to follow the example of Jesus' life.
Pelagius wrote in his commentary on the book of Romans that men are justified
"by faith alone", in his own words. Over against this, Augustine taught that we
are justified by God, as a work of His grace. Augustine took great pains in his
anti-Pelagian works to refute the notion that our works could serve as the
proper basis for our justification. Following an appeal from Augustine, Pope
Innocent I condemned Pelagius. The accused heretic wrote an appeal of his own,
declaring his innocence, which was duly accepted by Innocent's successor, Pope
Zosimus. However, the Council of Carthage in 418 again renounced Pelagius with
papal approval. Hence, in the early church, justification was a work of God
leading to righteousness, and saving us from God's wrath. Comparison of
traditions. Christian traditions answer questions about the nature, function
and meaning of justification quite differently. These issues include: Is
justification an event occurring instantaneously or is it as an ongoing
process? Is justification effected by divine action alone ("monergism"), by
divine and human action together ("synergism") or by human action? Is
justification permanent or can it be lost? What is the relationship of
justification to sanctification, the process whereby sinners become righteous
and are enabled by the Holy Spirit to live lives pleasing to God? Anglican /
Episcopal. Anglicans, particularly High Church Anglo-Catholics, often follow
Catholicism and Orthodoxy in believing both man and God are involved in
justification. "Justification has an objective and a subjective aspect. The
objective is the act of God in Christ restoring the covenant and opening it to
all people. The subjective aspect is faith, trust in the divine factor,
acceptance of divine mercy. Apart from the presence of the subjective aspect
there is no justification. People are not justified apart from their knowledge
or against their will...God forgives and accepts sinners as they are into the
divine fellowship, and that these sinners are in fact changed by their trust in
the divine mercy." Justification, the establishment of a relationship with God
through Christ, and sanctification go hand in hand. In historic Anglicanism,
the eleventh article of the "Thirty-Nine Articles" made it clear that
justification cannot be earned, "We are accounted righteous before God... not
for our own works or deservings". However, certain Anglican and Episcopalian
theologians (especially Anglo-Catholics) argue for a faith characterized by
"faithfulness", where good works and the Sacraments play an important role in
the life of the Christian believer. (see New Perspective on Paul) Methodism.
John Wesley, the founder of Methodism, was heavily influenced by the thought of
Dutch Reformed theologian Jacob Arminius and Hugo Grotius' governmental theory
of the atonement. Hence, he held that God's work in us consisted of prevenient
grace, which undoes the effects of sin sufficiently that we may then freely
choose to believe. An individual's act of faith then results in becoming part
of the body of Christ, which allows one to appropriate Christ's atonement for
oneself, erasing the guilt of sin. According to the Articles of Religion in the
"Book of Discipline of the Methodist Church": However, once the individual has
been so justified, one must then continue in the new life given; if one fails
to persevere in the faith and in fact falls away from God in total unbelief,
the attachment to Christ — and with it, justification — may be lost.
Eastern Orthodoxy. Eastern Christianity, including both Eastern Orthodoxy and
Oriental Orthodoxy, tends to de-emphasize justification compared to Catholicism
or Protestantism, subsuming it within other words such as "sanctification" or
"theosis" — so much so that justification often has no separate treatment in
Eastern theological works. The Greek term for justification (, "dikaiōsis") is
not understood by most Eastern theologians to mean simply being pardoned of
one's sins. In large part, this de-emphasis on justification is historical. The
Eastern church sees humanity as inheriting the disease of sin from Adam, but
not his guilt; hence, there is no need in Eastern theology for any forensic
justification. Lutheranism. From 1510 to 1520, Luther lectured on the Psalms,
the books of Hebrews, Romans, and Galatians. As he studied these portions of
the Bible, he came to view the use of terms such as penance and righteousness
by the Catholic Church in new ways. He became convinced that the church was
corrupt in their ways and had lost sight of what he saw as several of the
central truths of Christianity, the most important of which, for Luther, was
the doctrine of justification — God's act of declaring a sinner righteous —
by faith alone through God's grace. He began to teach that salvation or
redemption is a gift of God's grace, attainable only through faith in Jesus.
"This one and firm rock, which we call the doctrine of justification," insisted
Martin Luther, "is the chief article of the whole Christian doctrine, which
comprehends the understanding of all godliness." He also called this doctrine
the "articulus stantis et cadentis ecclesiae" ("article of the standing and
falling of the church"): "…if this article stands, the Church stands; if it
falls, the Church falls." Lutherans follow Luther in this when they call this
doctrine "the material principle" of theology in relation to the Bible, which
is "the formal principle." They believe justification by grace alone through
faith alone in Christ's righteousness alone is the gospel, the core of the
Christian faith around which all other Christian doctrines are centered and
based. Traditionally, Lutherans have taught "forensic" (or legal)
justification, a divine verdict of acquittal pronounced on the believing
sinner. God declares the sinner to be "not guilty" because Christ has taken his
place, living a perfect life according to God's law and suffering for his sins.
For Lutherans justification is in no way dependent upon the thoughts, words,
and deeds of those justified through faith alone in Christ. The new obedience
that the justified sinner renders to God through sanctification follows
justification as a consequence, but is not part of justification. Lutherans
believe that individuals receive this gift of salvation through faith alone.
Saving faith is the knowledge of, acceptance of, and trust in the promise of
the Gospel. Even faith itself is seen as a gift of God, created in the hearts
of Christians by the work of the Holy Spirit through the Word and Baptism.
Faith is seen as an instrument that receives the gift of salvation, not
something that causes salvation. Thus, Lutherans reject the "decision theology"
which is common among modern evangelicals. For Lutherans, justification
provides the power by which Christians can grow in holiness. Such improvement
comes about in the believer only after he has become a new creation in Christ.
This improvement is not completed in this life: Christians are always "saint
and sinner at the same time" ("simul iustus et peccator") — saints because
they are holy in God's eyes, for Christ's sake, and do works that please Him;
sinners because they continue to sin until death. Reformed. John Calvin's
understanding of justification was in substantial agreement with Martin
Luther's. Calvin expanded this understanding by emphasizing that justification
is a part of one's union with Christ. The center of Calvin's soteriology was
"Union with Christ" (Inst., III.xi.10). For Calvin, one is united to Christ by
faith, and all of the benefits of Christ come from being united to him.
Therefore, anyone who is justified will also receive all of the benefits of
salvation, including sanctification. Thus, while Calvin agreed in substance
with the "simultaneously saint and sinner" formulation (Inst. III.xiii), he was
more definite in asserting that the result of being justified is a consequent
sanctification (III.xiv.19; III.xvi). Calvin also used more definite language
than Luther, spelling out the exchange notion of imputed righteousness: that
the good works that Jesus did in his life (collectively referred to as the
active obedience of Christ) are imputed to his people, while their sins were
imputed to him on the cross. For Calvin, Adam and Jesus functioned as "federal
heads", or legal representatives, meaning that each one represented his people
through his actions (II.i.8). When Adam sinned, all of Adam's people were
accounted to have sinned at that moment. When Jesus achieved righteousness, all
of his people were accounted to be righteous at that moment. In this way Calvin
attempted to simultaneously solve the problems of original sin, justification,
and atonement. Some of the technical details of this union with Christ are tied
into Calvin's understanding of the atonement and of predestination. One outcome
of Calvin's change in center over against Luther was that he saw justification
as a permanent feature of being connected to Christ: since, for Calvin, people
are attached to Christ monergistically, it is therefore impossible for them to
lose justification if indeed they were once justified. This idea was expressed
by the Synod of Dort as the "perseverance of the saint." In recent times, two
controversies have arisen in the Reformed churches over justification. The
first concerns the teaching of "final justification" by Norman Shepherd; the
second is the exact relationship of justification, sanctification, and church
membership, which is part of a larger controversy concerning the "Federal
Vision". Catholicism. To Catholics, justification is "a translation, from that
state wherein man is born a child of the first Adam, to the state of grace, and
of the adoption of the sons of God, through the second Adam, Jesus Christ, our
Savior", including the transforming of a sinner from the state of
unrighteousness to the state of holiness. This transformation is made possible
by accessing the merit of Christ, made available in the atonement, through
faith and the sacraments. The Catholic Church teaches that "faith without works
is dead" and that works perfect faith. In Catholic theology, all are born in a
state of original sin, meaning that both the guilt and sin nature of Adam are
inherited by all. Following Augustine, the Catholic Church asserts that people
are unable to make themselves righteous; instead, they require justification.
Catholic theology holds that the sacrament of baptism, which is closely
connected to faith, "purifies, justifies and sanctifies" the sinner; in this
sacrament, the sinner is "freed from sin". This is termed initial justification
or "being cleansed of sin", the entrance into the Christian life. Catholics use
Mark 16:16, John 3:5, and Acts 2:38 to support this view in justification by
baptism. As the individual then progresses in his Christian life, he continues
to receive God's grace both directly through the Holy Spirit as well as through
the sacraments. This has the effect of combating sin in the individual's life,
causing him to become more righteous both in heart and in action. If one falls
into mortal sin they lose justification and it can be gained back through the
sacrament of confession. At the Final Judgment, the individual's works will
then be evaluated. At that time, those who are righteous will be shown to be
so. This is the permanent justification. In the infallible Council of Trent the
Catholic Church declared in the VII session in canon IV that, "If any one
saith, that the sacraments of the New Law are not necessary unto salvation, but
superfluous; and that, without them, or without the desire thereof, men obtain
of God, through faith alone, the grace of justification;-though all (the
sacraments) are not indeed necessary for every individual; let him be anathema
(excommunicated)." The New Church (Emanuel Swedenborg). According to the
doctrine of The New Church, as explained by Emanuel Swedenborg, the doctrine of
justification by faith alone is a false belief, which forms the foundation of
much of Protestant theology. Man must of his own volition justify himself, and
yet believe that justification comes from God only. Not only must man believe
in God, but must love God with all his strength, and his neighbor as himself.
Inasmuch as man obeys God's commandment to love others, so God conjoins Himself
to man, and man to God. It is from this that man's belief becomes a living and
saving belief. It is by means of faith from charity, that a man is reformed and
justified, and this is done as if from himself, and this proceeds from the
Divine Truth which flows in from the Holy Spirit. Man is of the will and
understanding, and he is saved when both are brought into accordance with God's
will. "Believing in the Lord is not merely acknowledging Him but also doing His
commandments; for simply acknowledging Him is solely a matter of thought,
arising from somewhat of the understanding; but doing His commandments is also
a matter of acknowledgment from the will. Man's mind consists of understanding
and will; and as the understanding deals with thinking and the will with doing,
so when man's acknowledgment is merely from the thought of the understanding he
comes to the Lord with only half of his mind; but when there is doing he comes
with all of it; and this is to believe." Other. Universalism became a
significant minority view in the 18th century, popularized by thinkers such as
John Murray (the American, not the Scot). Universalism holds that Christ's
death on the cross has entirely atoned for the sin of humanity; hence, God's
wrath is or will be satisfied for all people. Conservative and liberal
varieties of universalism then point in different directions. Pluralistic
Unitarian Universalism asserts that many different religions all lead to God.
Others teach that God's love is sufficient to cover for sins, thus embracing
some form of the moral influence theory of Peter Abelard. For some
universalists, justification either was accomplished once and for all in the
crucifixion, or is altogether unnecessary. A range of so called 'New
Perspectives on Paul', represented by Protestant scholars such as E.P. Sanders,
N.T. Wright, and James Dunn, have given rise to a re-thinking of the historical
Protestant understanding of justification. Proponents of this view argue that
Paul's letters have too often been read through the lens of the Protestant
reformation rather than in the context of first-century Second Temple Judaism,
and therefore impose a religion of legalism on their understanding of
Pharisaism. This view has been strongly criticized by a number of Reformed
ministers and theologians including John Piper, D.A. Carson, and Sinclair
Ferguson. An alternative theory to traditional views of justification is that
Christ died to prove that mankind is actually innocent before God, thus the
word justification is taken literally rather than a theological definition
being applied.This is not to be confused with the Legal Justification theory
which states only that mankind is legally justified. Interactions between
various doctrines. "Sola fide". Luther's reformulation of justification
introduced the phrase "sola fide", or "by faith alone". That phrase has been
one of the uniting factors among various Protestant denominations; despite the
wide variety of doctrines and practices among Protestants, they all agree that
one is saved (often meaning "justified") by faith alone. Catholics from the
Diet of Worms and Council of Trent until the present day (e.g., Sungenis) have
criticized this phrase on several grounds. First and foremost, it appears to
them to indicate that one can be justified without any actual change of life.
Hence the strong language of Trent: and Second, Catholics point out that the
only use of the formula "faith alone" ("sola fide") is in , which appears to
deny the "sola fide" concept: "You see that a man is justified by works, and
not by faith alone." In addition, there is the passage (in for example, )
describing Christ's judgment at the end of time. The just, those who are to
enter into the Kingdom, are separated from those who are to go into everlasting
punishment, on the basis of their actions in life: 'Come, ye blessed of my
Father, possess you the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the
world. For I was hungry, and you gave me to eat; I was thirsty, and you gave me
to drink; I was a stranger, and you took me in.. Depart from me, you cursed,
into everlasting fire.. for I was hungry, and you gave me not to eat; I was
thirsty, and you gave me not to drink.. And these shall go into everlasting
punishment: but the just, into life everlasting.' Hence, they claim that
Scripture upholds their rejection of "sola fide" justification. Third, Roman
Catholics claim that the term "sola fide" has many different subtleties of
meaning among different groups of Protestants. They maintain that these
differences cast doubt on the coherence of the concept of "sola fide". Within
Protestantism, there is debate as to how strongly sanctification is tied to
justification. Thus, in modern times, the "Lordship Salvation" controversy
between some faculty at Dallas Seminary (Charles Ryrie and Zane C. Hodges) and
others (John F. MacArthur and R.C. Sproul) has resulted in serious thinking on
this question: can one be justified without any evidence of sanctification
whatsoever? (It should be noted that this question, however important, is a
misunderstanding of the Lordship Salvation controversy. The proposition that
all genuine born again people will do some good works is common ground, since
grace advocates Wilkin, Ryrie and Hodges have all concurred that they will.
Wilkin, “Are Good Works Inevitable?” Grace in Focus, February 1990; Ryrie,
"So Great Salvation", and Hodges, "We Believe in: Assurance of Salvation" The
Journal of the Grace Evangelical Society, 1990. In the Lordship debate, the
question is: can true believers commit 'apostasy'?) Looking at this controversy
from the outside, Roman Catholics claim that "justification by faith alone"
does not have a coherent meaning. Protestants meanwhile hold tenaciously to the
"sola fide" formula, charging that without it, the Christian is led down a path
that is inevitably Pelagian and Judaizing. They charge that the abuses Luther
saw were a logical outworking of a Roman Catholic system that includes good
works as a necessary condition for justification. They respond to the argument
from James 2:24 (above) by asserting that the passage in question refers to
demonstrating one's justification before men, rather than achieving
justification before God. Despite these differences, Roman Catholics and most
Lutherans as represented by most of the Lutheran councils worldwide that agreed
with the Joint Declaration on the Doctrine of Justification (JDDJ), believe
that they have found much agreement on the subject of justification. Other
Lutherans, especially Confessional Lutherans, maintain that this agreement
fails to properly define the meaning of faith, sin, and other essential terms
and thus do not support the Lutheran World Federation's agreement. Likewise,
Catholics affirming the real and serious differences between the decrees of the
Council of Trent and the normative Lutheran documents collected in the 1580
Book of Concord equally reject the 1999 "JDDJ" as fatally flawed. In July 2006
the World Methodist Council, representing 70 million Wesleyan Christians,
including The United Methodist Church, "signed on" to the Joint Declaration on
Justification between Roman Catholics and the Lutheran World Federation.
Anglican bishop N.T. Wright has written extensively on the topic of
justification (see also New Perspective on Paul). His views are troubling to
many evangelicals, and have sparked some debate. Those concerned with his view
of justification worry that he marginalizes the importance of the penal
substitutionary transaction that takes place at salvation. Defenders of Wright
respond by saying that, while the bishop acknowledges advocacy of penal
substitution in many biblical texts, he does not see its application in
scriptures other evangelicals might. Proponents of Wright's view of
justification warn detractors to "read him well" before criticizing his
theology forthright.
