Kairos (retreat) Kairos, adapted to mean "God's time", is a Christian retreat
program for high school and college students that takes place around the world.
The retreat is a four day, three night (or three day, two night in some cases)
residential retreat, that provide participants the chance to contemplate God's
role in their lives. Process. The retreat is usually led mostly by the peers of
the participants. For the high school retreats, the team is composed of both
seniors or juniors who have already made the retreat and a few faculty from the
school. The difference between Kairos and other retreats is that it focuses
mostly on helping one find his or her own personal relationship with God during
a few days of discerning and discovery. During this process, the retreatant
also becomes very close with the others involved in the retreat. Some groups
and schools refer to those that went as "kai-sisters" or "kai-brothers."
Through the course of the retreat, a building of a strong community takes
place, through encouraging openness, reflection, and trust. Students often use
the expression "LTF" or "LT4" to encourage students to take the virtues of the
three day retreat with them beyond its conclusion. Also, Kairos is
traditionally a very secretive retreat, that is, returning retreatants often
refuse to describe the retreat to others; as Kairos is a unique retreat, it is
often felt that it is better to enter into the retreat not knowing what will
happen on it. Kairos Leaders. The leaders of the Kairos retreat are typically
about one peer leader for every 6 to 10 retreat participant, as well as one
peer "rector" who is designated as the overall leader of the retreat. In high
school Kairos retreats, there are also adult leaders, often teachers who help
lead the retreat. In most instances, the leaders of the retreats are kept
secret from the retreat participants until the retreat actually begins,
although the leader list is already set ahead of time during the planning
period of the retreat. Location. Kairos retreats are often held at retreat
houses removed from the hustle and bustle of mainstream society. This practice
is intended to remove the retreat participants from their everyday life, so
they are free to clear their minds of regular life. With this concept in mind,
the leaders of many Kairos retreats often request that the retreatants hand in
their cell phones and other electronic devices, so that they can be more fully
separated from the outside. History. The Kairos retreat program is based on the
"Christian Awakening" retreat program, which was developed in 1965 by the
Diocese of Brooklyn, in the United States. A team of Priests, Brothers, and Lay
People under the direction of Fr. Douglas L. Brown of the Brooklyn Diocese made
use of the Cursillo Retreat format, which has its roots in Ignatian
spirituality, but adapted it for older teenagers. The retreat itself stems from
Ignatian spirituality, as put forth in the Spiritual Exercises of St. Ignatius
Loyola. The retreat was immediately successful; within three years it was
adopted in Connecticut, California, Arizona, Illinois, Indiana, Maryland,
Massachusetts, New Hampshire, New York, Texas, Virginia, Kentucky, and
Washington D.C. In December, 1975, Fr. Bob Colaresi, O.Carm, from Joliet
Catholic High School, further developed the program and made a retreat that was
first called "Chiros" by Fr. Kevin McBrien. In March 1979, it was properly
spelled Kairos. By 1995 the program had spread to 20 Jesuit high schools
throughout the United States.
