Kairos Kairos () is an ancient Greek word meaning the right or opportune moment
(the supreme moment). The ancient Greeks had two words for time, chronos and
kairos. While the former refers to chronological or sequential time, the latter
signifies a time in between, a moment of indeterminate time in which something
special happens. What the special something is depends on who is using the
word. While chronos is quantitative, kairos has a qualitative nature. "Kairos"
(καιρός) also means "weather" in both ancient and modern Greek. The
plural, καιροι (kairoi or keri) means "the times". In rhetoric. In
rhetoric kairos is "a passing instant when an opening appears which must be
driven through with force if success is to be achieved." Kairos was central to
the Sophists, who stressed the rhetor's ability to adapt to and take advantage
of changing, contingent circumstances. In "Panathenaicus", Isocrates writes
that educated people are those “who manage well the circumstances which they
encounter day by day, and who possess a judgment which is accurate in meeting
occasions as they arise and rarely misses the expedient course of action".
Kairos is also very important in Aristotle's scheme of rhetoric. Kairos is, for
Aristotle, the time and space context in which the proof will be delivered.
Kairos stands alongside other contextual elements of rhetoric: "The Audience",
which is the psychological and emotional makeup of those who will receive the
proof; and "To Prepon", which is the style with which the orator clothes their
proof. In Christian theology. In the New Testament kairos means "the appointed
time in the purpose of God", the time when God acts (e.g. Mark 1.15, the kairos
is fulfilled). It differs from the more usual word for time which is chronos
(kronos). In the Eastern Orthodox and Eastern Catholic churches, before the
Divine Liturgy begins, the Deacon exclaims to the Priest, ""Kairos tou poiesai
to Kyrio"" ("It is time ["kairos"] for the Lord to act"); indicating that the
time of the Liturgy is an intersection with Eternity. In "The Interpretation of
History", neo-orthodox Lutheran theologian Paul Tillich made prominent use of
the term. For him, the "kairoi" are those crises in history (see Christian
existentialism) which create an opportunity for, and indeed demand, an
existential decision by the human subject - the coming of Christ being the
prime example (compare Karl Barth's use of "geschichte" as opposed to
"historie"). In the Kairos Document, an example of liberation theology in South
Africa under apartheid, the term "kairos" is used to denote "the appointed
time", "the crucial time" into which the document or text is spoken.
References. Mark Freier (2006) "Time Measured by Kairos and Kronos"
