Kenosis In Christian theology, Kenosis (from the Greek word for emptiness
("kénōsis")) is the 'self-emptying' of one's own will and becoming entirely
receptive to God's divine will. The word ("ekénōsen") is used in Philippians
2:7, "Jesus made himself nothing ..." (NIV) or "...he emptied himself..."
(NRSV), using the verb form ("kenóō") "to empty". See also Strong's G2758.
New Testament usage. The New Testament does not use the actual word "kénōsis"
but the verb form "kenóō" occurs five times (Ro.4:14, 1Co.1:17, 9:15, 2Co.9:
3, Phil.2:7). Of these five times it is Phil 2:7, in which Jesus is said to
have "emptied himself," which is the starting point of Christian ideas of
kenosis. John the Baptist displayed the attitude when he said of Jesus, "He
must become greater; I must become less." (Jn 3:30). Kenosis in Christology.
John of the Cross. In Christian theology, "kenosis" is the concept of the
'self-emptying' of one's own will and becoming entirely receptive to God and
the divine will. It is used both as an explanation of the Incarnation, and an
indication of the nature of God's activity and will. Mystical theologian John
of the Cross' work "Dark Night of the Soul" is a particularly lucid explanation
of God's process of transforming the believer into the icon or "likeness of
Christ". An apparent dilemma arises when Christian theology posits a God
outside of time and space, who enters into time and space to become human
(Incarnate). The doctrine of Kenosis attempts to explain what the Son of God
chose to give up in terms of his divine attributes, in order to assume human
nature. Since the incarnate Jesus is simultaneously truly human and truly
divine, Kenosis holds that these changes were temporarily assumed by God in his
incarnation, and that when Jesus ascended back into heaven following the
resurrection, he fully reassumed all of his original attributes and divinity.
Specifically it refers to attributes of God that are thought to be incompatible
with becoming fully human. For example, God's omnipotence, omnipresence,
omniscience as well as his aseity, eternity, infinity, impassibility and
immutability. Theologians who support this doctrine often appeal to a reading
of . Critics of Kenosis theology argue that the context of Philippians 2:5-8 is
referring to Jesus taking the form of a servant to conceal his divine glory
(revealed temporarily in the Transfiguration), or to forsaking his place and
position in heaven to dwell among men, as opposed to forsaking his divine
attributes or nature (see syncatabasis). Kenotic Christology focuses on certain
passages in the Gospels where Jesus was not omniscient concerning the date of
the Second Advent (, Matthew 24:36), and draws attention to the fact that He
was not omnipresent during the incarnation. It became a central issue in the
Protestant debates of the sixteenth century, and was revived in the nineteenth
century to reinterpret classical doctrines of the incarnation. Eastern
Orthodoxy. The Orthodox Mystical Theology of the East emphasises following the
example of Christ. Kenosis is only possible through humility and presupposes
that one seeks union with God. The Poustinia tradition of the Russian Orthodox
Church is one major expression of this search. Kenosis is not only a
Christological issue in Orthodox theology, it has moreover to do with
Pneumatology, namely to do with the Holy Spirit. Kenosis, relative to the human
nature, denotes the continual epiklesis and self-denial of one's own human will
and desire. With regard to Christ, there is a kenosis of the Son of God, a
condescension and self-sacrifice for the redemption and salvation of all
humanity. Humanity can also participate in God's saving work through theosis;
becoming holy by grace. Therefore, in Eastern Orthodoxy, theosis never concerns
becoming like God in essence or being, which is pantheism; instead, it concerns
becoming united to God by grace, through his Energies. Orthodox theology
distinguishes between divine Essence and Energies. Kenosis therefore is a
paradox and a mystery since "emptying oneself" in fact fills the person with
divine grace and results in union with God. Kenosis in Orthodox theology is the
transcending or detaching of oneself from the world or the passions, it is a
component of dispassionation. Much of the earliest debates between the Arian
and Orthodox Christians were over kenosis. The need for clarification about the
human and divine nature of the Christ (see the hypostatic union) were fought
over the meaning and example that Christ set, as an example of kenosis or
ekkenosis. Protestantism. Another perspective is the idea that God is self-
emptying. He poured out himself to create the cosmos and the universe, and
everything within it. Therefore, it is our duty to pour out ourselves. (This is
similar to C.S. Lewis's statement in "Mere Christianity" that a painter pours
his ideas out in his work, and yet remains quite a distinct being from his
painting.) Catholicism. Sempiternus Rex Christus Unitarianism. Since all forms
of Unitarianism do not accept the personal pre-existence of Christ therefore
all Unitarian interpretations of Phil.2:7, and the concept of "kenosis", Christ
"emptying" himself, take as a starting point that his "emptying" occurred in
life, and not before birth. However as Thomas Belsham put it, there are varying
views on when in life this emptying occurred. Belsham took this to be at the
crucifixion, whereas Joseph Priestley took this to be in the Garden of
Gethsemane when Christ did not resist arrest. The Christadelphian Tom Barling
considered that the "emptying" of Christ was a continual process which started
in the earliest references to Christ's character, Luke 2:40,52, and continued
through the temptations of Christ and his ministry. Gnosticism. The equivalent
to kenōsis in Gnostic literature is Christ's withdrawal of his own luminosity
into himself, so as to cease dazzling his own disciples. At the request of his
disciples, "Jesus drew to himself the glory of his light". There are parallels
to this voluntary withdrawal of the incarnate deity's light in the literatures
of other religions also, such as in Daoism, where when the incarnate deity
"Crane Boy" came to the world of humans in his incarnation as Han Xiangzi, he
"concealed his auspicious light, left the underworld, and returned to the world
of humans." Kenotic ethic. The kenotic ethic is the ethic of Jesus, considered
as the ethic of sacrifice. The Philippians passage urges believers to imitate
Christ's self-emptying. In this interpretation, Paul was not primarily putting
forth a theory about God in this passage, rather he was using God's humility
exhibited in the incarnation event as a call for Christians to be similarly
subservient to others.
