King James Only movement The "King James Only movement" advocates the
superiority of the Authorized King James Version (KJV) of the Bible. The date
of the birth of the King James Only doctrine is not known, but the earliest
known point of origin for the concept of King James Onlyism is probably in the
1930s, beginning in some fundamentalist churches. The evolution of the King
James Bible only has moved to a more stringent definition wherein they do not
refer to the King James Bible as a version. Instead of the abbreviations
“KJV” they will note “KJB” (this subtlety has been accused as
factionalizing the movement, of "preserved" vs. "inspired)." Further drawing
differential beliefs of those who use Greek and Hebrew Lexicons, Concordances,
and other external sources to improve the (in their opinion) meanings of King
James Language words. The more stringent believers hold that the King James
Bible hold all the definition within the text, and no other sources are
acceptable. In Joey Faust's 2011 book, "The Word: God Will Keep It", Faust
cites diverse quotations going back to the mid 1600s which demonstrate the bias
of King James Bible Onlyism. This book asserts that the movement is not new at
all but has rather become more vocal as the new Bible versions become more
popular. Many of the quotations come from those who despise the King James Only
movement and thus, the quotations verify the existence of the movement. The
movement itself grew stronger years later, perhaps after David Otis Fuller's
book, "Which Bible?", published in 1970. The sect came to be known for its
exclusivity for the King James Bible, specifically the KJV "Pure Cambridge
Edition" Bible. Church historian and apologist James R. White states that the
phrases "KJV Only" and "KJV Onlyism" are not "insulting" or "inaccurate."
However, KJV proponent D. A. Waite states the term is a "smear word."
Variations. These latter two views have also been referred to as "double
inspiration". These classifications are not mutually exclusive nor is it a
comprehensive summary of those who prefer the KJV. Douglas Wilson, for
instance, argues that the KJV (or, in his preferred terminology, the Authorized
Version) is superior because of its manuscript tradition, its translational
philosophy (with updates to the language being regularly necessary), and its
ecclesiastical authority, having been created by the church and authorized for
use in the church. The KJV's wide availability, popularity and public domain
status also come into play on top of or apart from any theological preference.
History. The history of the King James Version Only (hereafter KJVO) movement
can best be described by a genealogical outline of writers whose books have not
only given birth to the movement but also influenced their doctrines. Dr. James
D. Price's book, published in 2006, gives the same information in a summary.
Benjamin G. Wilkinson (1872–1968), a staunch Seventh-Day Adventist
missionary, theology professor and college president, wrote "Our Authorized
Bible Vindicated" (1930), in which he attacked the Westcott-Hort Greek text and
expressed strong opposition to the English Revised Version New Testament (ERV,
1881), in particular because it didn’t support two prooftexts favored by
Adventists. He was the first to apply to the King James Bible, claiming that
the reference is a prooftext for divine preservation of the Scriptures. Jasper
James Ray (1894–1985), a business manager, missionary and Bible teacher,
wrote a booklet entitled "God Wrote Only One Bible" (1955). It was nearly
identical to Wilkerson's "Our Authorized Bible Vindicated" book without note or
acknowledgement to Wilkerson's authorship. The result was a continued
propagation of Wilkerson's statements but with the misconception of a separate,
corroborating affirmation of Wilkerson's ideas. Regular Baptist pastor David
Otis Fuller (1903–1988) edited a book entitled "Which Bible?" published in
1970. It is an anthology by authors such as Robert Dick Wilson (1856–1930),
Zane Clark Hodges (1932–2008) and others, who distinctly reject the "Textus
Receptus only" / "KJV-Only" viewpoint and whose writings actually give some
information refuting some of the extremes of the KJVO movement. This book,
however, is singularly responsible for birth of the "King James only" / "Textus
Receptus only" controversial viewpoint that gained wide acceptance among KJV-
Only believers. Almost half of the book is dedicated to the ten out of sixteen
chapters from Wilkinson's "Our Authorized Bible Vindicated". Peter Sturges
Ruckman (1921–present), a Baptist preacher, wrote many books: a series of
uniformly bound books that are claimed to be commentaries on various Bible
books, topical books on Bible-related subjects and books related to Bible text
and translation issues. At least some of his books are characterized by harsh
criticism of almost everyone involved in textual criticism, such as Benjamin
Breckinridge Warfield (1851–1921), Archibald Thomas Robertson (1863–1934),
Charles Haddon Spurgeon (1834–1892) with the likes of Julius Wellhausen
(1844–1918) and Harry Emerson Fosdick (1878–1969). "The Christian's
Handbook of Manuscript Evidence" (1970) is among them. Ruckman was influenced
by J. J. Ray's "God Wrote Only One Bible", and Ruckman's "The Bible Babel"
(1964) is nearly identical to Ray's 1955 book. Some supporters of the KJVO
movement reject Ruckman's position that the King James Version Bible is
superior to existing Hebrew and Greek manuscripts, and they also criticize
Ruckman because "his writings are so acerbic, so offensive and mean-spirited
that the entire movement has become identified with his kind of confrontational
attitude." Edward F. Hills (1912–1981), who wrote "Believing Bible Study"
(1967) and "King James Version Defended" (1956, 1973) and wrote a chapter on
Dean John William Burgon in Fuller's "Which Bible?", did not advocate the
inerrancy of the King James Version nor the Origenian origin of the Septuagint.
However, Hills’ works are commonly cited to give support to the KJVO's
position, even though Hills never supported such KJVO positions. Hills’
writings have been taken to task in slanting the public opinion toward the KJVO
stance proffered by the movement, as well as against other Bible versions. The
KJVO movement as it stands today is inspired by Wilkinson, Ray, Fuller and
Ruckman. As the movement progressed from one generation to the next, it became
more radicalized and extreme. External links. Pro King James Only Anti King
James Only
