Kollel A kollel (, pl. כוללים, kollelim, a "gathering" or "collection"
scholars) is an institute for full-time, advanced study of the Talmud and
rabbinic literature. Like a yeshiva, a kollel features shiurim (lectures) and
learning "sedarim" (learning sessions); unlike a yeshiva, the student body of a
kollel are all married men. Kollels generally pay a regular monthly stipend to
their members. Beginning in the last third of the 20th century, the kollel
concept expanded with the introduction of community kollels. Community kollels
are a kiruv (Jewish outreach) tool which aims to increase Jewish knowledge and
identity as a hedge against assimilation. Community kollels are typically
composed of a minyan of students who engage in advanced Torah study with their
own rabbis and "shiurim" for part of the day, and then conduct one-on-one
learning sessions, free classes, and holiday activities for the Jewish
community at large during the other part of the day. History. Original sense.
Originally, the word was used in the sense of "community". Each new group of
settlers who came from various European countries to settle in Palestine
established their own separate community with their own support system. Each
community was referred to as the Kollel of ... to identify the specific
community of the Yishuv haYashan. The overwhelming majority of these settlers
were scholars who left their homelands to devote themselves to study Torah and
serve God for the rest of their lives. The Kollel was the umbrella organization
for all their needs. The first examples were Kolel Perushim who were the
students of the Vilna Gaon, and who established the first Ashkenaz settlement
in Jerusalem, Colel Chabad for the Russian Hasidim. The Polish Jews were
divided into many Kollelim; Kollel Poland headed by Rabbi Chaim Elozor Wax;
Kollel Vilna Zamutch was under different leadership; and the Galicians were
incorporated under Kolel Chibas Yerushalayim. The last initially included the
entire Austro-Hungarian Kingdom, but as each subparty looking for more
courteous distribution, the Hungarians separated into Kolel Shomrei HaChomos.
Modern sense. The first "kollel" in the Jewish diaspora was the Kovno Kollel,
the modern sense of the term, the "Kollel Perushim" founded in Kovno in 1877.
It was founded by Rabbi Yisrael Salanter, and directed by Rabbi Isaac Blaser.
The ten students were required to separate from their families, except for the
Sabbath, and devote themselves to studying for the Rabbinate. There was a four
year limit on one's membership in the kollel. Two people can be considered to
have spearheaded the kollel philosophy and outgrowth in today's world - Rabbi
Aharon Kotler, the founder of Beth Medrash Govoha, America's largest yeshiva
located in Lakewood, New Jersey, and Rabbi Elazar Shach, one of the most
prominent leaders of the Jewish community in Israel until his death in 2001.
The community kollel movement was also fostered by Torah Umesorah, the National
Society for Hebrew Day Schools. Currently, the term is applied in America to
any stipend given for yeshiva study and is now a general term for the yeshivah
approach to life. Philosophy. The unique philosophy of the kollel, in which
members are subsisting entirely on support from others, is part of an overall
philosophy of Orthodox Judaism, that God meant Jews to primarily occupy
themselves in this world with the study of Torah, and gave certain Jews more of
a propensity to work with the intention that they should support the
'learners'. In orthodox Judaism this has become known as the 'Issachar-Zebulun'
partnership, after the first recorded relationship of this sort in the Bible,
where Jacob on his deathbed instructs a more business-inclined brother to
support his studious sibling Issachar. The reward of the supporter is seen to
be proportionate, for example in an ideal partnership (50/50 division of the
money) the business partner is considered to have an equal portion in the
learner's World-To-Come earned by his studying. Community kollels. In the early
1990s "community" kollelim were functioning in Los Angeles; Toronto, and
Detroit, a kollel was established in Montreal. Other examples of successful
community kollelim include kollelim in Dallas; St. Louis, Missouri; Atlanta;
Seattle; Pittsburgh; and Phoenix, Arizona. In the past years about 30 Haredi
"community kollelim" in North America have been opened by yeshiva-trained
scholars to serve, in addition to the full time study by the members of the
kollel, as centers for adult education and outreach to the Jewish communities
in which they located themselves. Topics include everything from basic Hebrew
to advanced Talmud. In addition to imparting Torah knowledge, such kollels
function to impart technical skills required for self-study. Most Kollels have
a scholar as a Rosh Kollel who is the head of the Kollel. He decides on the
subject matter studied by the Kollel. In many cases he spends a lot of time
fund-raising to support the Kollel. Many Orthodox Jewish yeshiva students study
in kollel for a year or two after they get married, whether or not they will
pursue a rabbinic career. Modest stipends or the salaries of their wives and
the increased wealth of many families have made kollel study commonplace for
yeshiva graduates. The largest U.S. kollel is at Beth Medrash Govoha in
Lakewood, New Jersey, with over 1500 kollel scholars attached to the yeshiva
which is 4700 strong in total, large kollels also exist in Ner Israel
Rabbinical College numbering 180 scholars and in Yeshiva Rabbi Chaim Berlin of
over 100 scholars. In the Israeli Haredi Jewish community thousands of men
study full-time for many years in hundreds of kollelim. Kollel has been known
at times to cause a great deal of friction with the secular Israeli public at
large, and garnering criticism from the Modern Orthodox, non-Orthodox and
secular Jewish community. The Haredi community defends this practice with the
argument that Judaism must cultivate Torah scholarship in the same way that the
secular academic world does, no matter how high the costs may be financially in
the short run, in the long run the Jewish people will benefit from the large
number of learned laymen, scholars, and rabbis. Yeshiva students who learn in
Kollel often go on to become rabbis, poskim ("decisors" of Jewish law), or
teachers of Talmud and Judaism.
