Laity In religious organizations, the laity consists of all members who are not
a part of the clergy, whether they are or are not members of religious
institutes, for example a nun or lay brother. In Christian cultures, the term
"lay priest" was sometimes used in the past to refer to a secular priest, a
diocesan priest who is not a member of a religious institute. Terms such as
"lay priest", "lay clergy" and "lay nun" were also once used in Buddhist
cultures to indicate ordained persons who continued to live in the wider
community instead of retiring to a monastery. In the context of specialized
professions, the term "lay" is often used to refer to those who are not members
of that profession. The word "lay" derives from the Anglo-French "lai" (from
Late Latin "laicus", from the Greek "λαϊκός, laikos", of the people, from
"λαός, laos", the people at large). Christian laity. Anglicanism. In
Anglicanism, the term "laity" refers to anyone who is not a bishop, priest, or
deacon in the Church. In the Anglican tradition, all baptized persons are
expected to minister in Christ's name. The orders of ministry are thus laymen,
deacons, priests, and bishops. The ministry of the laity is "to represent
Christ and his Church; to bear witness to him wherever they may be; and,
according to the gifts given them, to carry on Christ's work of reconciliation
in the world; and to take their place in the life, worship, and governance of
the Church". Much of the ministry of the laity thus takes place outside
official church structures in homes, workplaces, schools, and so forth. Laymen
also play important roles in the structures of the church. There are elected
lay representatives on the various governing bodies of churches in the Anglican
communion. In the Church of England, these governing bodies range from a local
Parochial Church Council, through Deanery Synods and Diocesan Synods. At the
topmost level, the General Synod includes a house of Laity. Likewise, in the
Episcopal Church in the USA the General Convention includes four laymen from
each diocese in the House of Deputies, and each diocesan convention includes
lay delegates from the parishes. On the local parish level, laymen are elected
to a church council called a vestry which manages church finances and elects
the parish rector. Parish musicians, bookkeepers, administrative assistants,
sextons, sacristans, etc., are all roles normally filled by laymen. At higher
levels, diocesan and national offices rely on laymen in many important areas of
responsibility. Often specialized ministries as campus ministers, youth
ministers, or hospital chaplains are performed by laymen. Laymen serve in
worship services in a number of important positions, including vergers,
acolytes, lectors, intercessors, ushers, and so forth. Acolytes include torch
bearers, crucifers, thurifers, and boat bearers. Lectors read the lessons from
the Bible appointed for the day (except for the Gospel reading, which is read
by a Deacon), and may also lead the Prayers of the People. Some specialized lay
ministries require special licensing by the bishop. Which ministries require a
license varies from province to province. In the Episcopal Church, there are
six specialized lay ministries requiring a license: Pastoral Leader, Worship
Leader, Preacher, Eucharistic Minister, Eucharistic Visitor, and Catechist.
Roman Catholicism. The narrower sense in which the Second Vatican Council gave
instruction concerning the laity is as follows: In this narrower sense, the
Council taught that the laity's specific character is secularity: they are
Christians who live the life of Christ in the world. Their role is to sanctify
the created world by directing it to become more Christian in its structures
and systems: "the laity, by their very vocation, seek the kingdom of God by
engaging in temporal affairs and by ordering them according to the plan of
God". The laity are full members of the Church, fully share in Church's purpose
of sanctification, of "inner union of men with God", acting with freedom and
personal responsibility and not as mere agents of the hierarchy. Due to their
baptism, they are members of God's family, the Church, and they grow in
intimate union with God, "in" and "by means" of the world. It is not a matter
of departing from the world as the monks and the nuns do that they sanctify
themselves; it is precisely through the material world sanctified by the coming
of the God made flesh, i.e. made material, that they reach God. Doctors,
mothers of a family, farmers, bank tellers, drivers, by doing their jobs in the
world with a Christian spirit are already extending the Kingdom of God.
According to the repeated statements of Popes and lay Catholic leaders, the
laity should say "we are the Church," in the same way that the saints said that
"Christ lives in me." Lay involvement takes diverse forms, including
participation in the life of the parish, confraternities, lay apostolates,
secular institutes, and lay ecclesial movements. There are also lay
ecclesiastical ministries, and where there is a priest shortage, lay people
have to take on some functions previously performed by priests. Methodist lay
preacher. A very early tradition of preaching in the Wesleyan / Methodist
churches was for a lay preacher to be appointed to lead services of worship and
preach in a group (called a 'circuit') of meeting places or churches. The lay
preacher walked or rode on horseback in a prescribed circuit of the preaching
places according to an agreed pattern and timing, and people came to the
meetings. After the appointment of ministers and pastors, this lay preaching
tradition continued with local preachers being appointed by individual
churches, and in turn approved and invited by nearby churches, as an adjunct to
the minister or during their planned absences. In addition to being appointed
by members of their local churches, Local and Certified Lay Speakers of the
United Methodist Church (more commonly in the United States) attend a series of
training sessions. These training sessions prepare the individual to become a
leader within the church. All individuals who are full members of the church
are laity, but some go on to become Lay Speakers. Some preachers get their
start as Lay Speakers. A well-known lay preacher was the late King Taufa'ahau
Tupou IV of Tonga. The comparable term in the Anglican and Episcopal churches
is Lay Reader. Presbyterianism. Presbyterians do not use the term "lay". Thus
the Church of Scotland has "Readers", men and women set apart by presbyteries
to conduct public worship. This arises out of the belief in the priesthood of
all believers. Ministers are officially 'teaching elders' alongside the 'ruling
elders' of the Kirk Session and have equivalent status, regardless of any other
office. In the Church of Scotland, as the Established church in Scotland, this
gives ruling elders in congregations the same status as Queen's chaplains,
professors of theology and other highly qualified ministers. All are humble
servants of the people in the congregation and parish. Ministers are simply men
and women whose gift is for their role in teaching and possibly pastoral work.
They are thus selected for advanced theological education. All elders (teaching
and ruling) in meetings of Session, Presbytery, or Assembly are subject to the
Moderator, who may or may not be a minister but is always an elder. The Church
of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
Saints practices the principle of having a lay ministry. Essentially all worthy
male members above the age of 12 are ordained to an office of the priesthood
and hold various positions in the church. With the exception of General
Authorities, all leadership positions are temporary. Permanent positions are
only held by apostles and the First Quorum of the Seventy. They are also unpaid
positions, and they are often called to these positions after a long secular
career. Patriarchs (usually one per Stake) are also called for life. Buddhist
lay persons. In Buddhism, a layperson is known as an "upasaka" (masc.) or
"upasika" (fem.). Buddhist laypeople take refuge in the Triple Gem (the Buddha,
his teaching, and his community of noble disciples) and accept the Five
Precepts (or the Eight Precepts) as rules for conduct. Laymen and laywomen are
two of the "four assemblies" that comprise the Buddha's "Community of
Disciples." In Chinese Buddhism, there are usually laypersons, who are depicted
wearing a black robe and sometimes a brown sash, denoting that they received
the five precepts.
