Last Judgment The Last Judgment, Final Judgment, Day of Judgment, Judgment Day,
or The Day of the Lord or in Islam Yawm al-Qiyāmah or Yawm ad-Din is part of
the eschatological world view of the Abrahamic religions and in the
Frashokereti of Zoroastrianism. In Christian theology, it is the final and
eternal judgment by God of every nation. The concept is found in all the
Canonical gospels, particularly the Gospel of Matthew. It will purportedly take
place after the Resurrection of the Dead and the Second Coming of Christ. This
belief has inspired numerous artistic depictions. Christian sources. "When the
Son of Man comes in His glory. All the nations will be gathered before Him, and
He will separate people one from another as a shepherd separates his sheep from
the goats, and He will set the sheep on His right hand but the goats at the
left. Then the king will say to those on His right hand, “Come, you blessed
of My Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the
world; for I was hungry and you gave me food, I was thirsty and you gave me
drink, I was a stranger and you took Me in, I was naked and you clothed Me, I
was sick and you visited me, I was in prison and you came to me.” ...
“Assuredly, I say to you, inasmuch as you did it to one of the least of these
My Brethren, you did it to me.” "Then He will also say to those on the left
hand, “Depart from Me, you cursed, into the everlasting fire prepared for the
devil and his angels; for I was hungry and you gave Me no food, I was thirsty
and you gave Me no drink, I was a stranger and you did not take Me in, naked
and you did not clothe Me, sick and in prison and you did not visit Me.” ...
“Assuredly, I say to you, inasmuch as you did not do it to one of the least
of these, you did not do it to me.” And these will go away into everlasting
punishment, but the righteous into eternal life."(Matthew 25:31-36, 40-43, 45-
46 NRSV) "And I saw a great white throne, and him that sat on it, from whose
face the earth and the heaven fled away; and there was found no place for them.
And I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God; and the books were
opened: and another book was opened, which is the book of life: and the dead
were judged out of those things which were written in the books, according to
their works." (Rev 20:11-12) Adherents of millennialism, mostly Protestant
Christians, regard the two passages as describing separate events: the "sheep
and goats" judgment will determine the final status of those persons alive at
the end of the Tribulation, and the "Great White Throne" judgment will be the
final condemnation of the unrighteous dead at the end of all time, after the
end of the world and before the beginning of the eternal period described in
the final two chapters of Revelation. "Even now the axe is lying at the root of
the trees; every tree therefore that does not bear good fruit is cut down and
thrown into the fire. ‘I baptize you with water for repentance, but one who
is more powerful than I is coming after me; I am not worthy to carry his
sandals. He will baptize you with the Holy Spirit and fire. His winnowing fork
is in his hand, and he will clear his threshing-floor and will gather his wheat
into the granary; but the chaff he will burn with unquenchable fire.’" "Just
as the weeds are collected and burned up with fire, so will it be at the end of
the age. The Son of Man will send his angels, and they will collect out of his
kingdom all causes of sin and all evildoers, and they will throw them into the
furnace of fire, where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth. Then the
righteous will shine like the sun in the kingdom of their Father. Let anyone
with ears listen!" "‘I tell you, my friends, do not fear those who kill the
body, and after that can do nothing more. But I will warn you whom to fear:
fear him who, after he has killed, has authority to cast into hell. Yes, I tell
you, fear him! ... ‘I came to bring fire to the earth, and how I wish it were
already kindled!'" Christianity. Catholicism. Belief in the last judgment
(often linked with the General judgment) is held firmly inside Catholicism.
Immediately upon death each soul undergoes the particular judgment, and
depending upon the state of the person's soul, goes to heaven, purgatory, or
hell. The last judgment will occur after the resurrection of the dead and the
reuniting of a person's soul with own physical body. The Catholic Church
teaches that at the time of the last judgment Christ will come in His glory,
and all the angels with him, and in his presence the truth of each man's
relationship with God will be laid bare, and each person who has ever lived
will be judged with perfect justice. Those already in heaven will remain in
heaven; those already in hell will remain in hell; and those in purgatory will
be released into heaven. Following the last judgment, the bliss of heaven and
the pains of hell will be perfected in that those present will also be capable
of physical bliss/pain. After the last judgment the universe itself will be
renewed with a new heaven and a new earth in the World to Come. Eastern
Orthodoxy. The Eastern Orthodox Church teaches that there are two judgments:
the first, or "Particular" Judgment, is that experienced by each individual at
the time of his or her death, at which time God will decide where the soul is
to spend the time until the Second Coming of Christ (see Hades in
Christianity). This judgment is generally believed to occur on the fortieth day
after death. The second, "General" or "Final" Judgment will occur after the
Second Coming. Although in modern times some have attempted to introduce the
concept of Soul sleep into Orthodox thought about life after death, it has
never been a part of traditional Orthodox teaching—in fact, it contradicts
the Orthodox understanding of the intercession of the Saints. Eastern Orthodoxy
teaches that salvation is bestowed by God as a free gift of Divine grace, which
cannot be earned, and by which forgiveness of sins is available to all.
However, the deeds done by each person are believed to affect how he will be
judged, following the Parable of the Sheep and the Goats. How forgiveness is to
be balanced against behavior is not well-defined in scripture, judgment in the
matter being solely Christ's. Similarly, although Orthodoxy teaches that
salvation is obtained only through Christ and his Church, the fate of those
outside the Church at the Last Judgment is left to the mercy of God and is not
declared. Iconography. The theme of the Last Judgment is extremely important in
Orthodoxy. Traditionally, an Orthodox church will have a fresco or mosaic of
the Last Judgment on the back (western) wall, (see the 12th-century mosaic
pictured at the top of this page) so that the faithful, as they leave the
services, are reminded that they will be judged by what they do during this
earthly life. The icon of the Last Judgement traditionally depicts Christ
Pantokrator, enthroned in glory on a white throne, surrounded by the Theotokos
(Virgin Mary), John the Baptist, Apostles, saints and angels. Beneath the
throne the scene is divided in half with the "mansions of the righteous" (),
i.e., those who have been saved to Jesus' right (the viewer's left); and the
torments of those who have been damned to his left. Separating the two is the
River of fire which proceeds from Jesus' left foot. For more detail, see below.
Hymnography. The theme of the Last Judgment is found in the funeral and
memorial hymnody of the Church, and is a major theme in the services during
Great Lent. The second Sunday before the beginning of Great Lent is dedicated
to the Last Judgment. It is also found in the hymns of the Octoechos used on
Saturdays throughout the year. Protestantism. Amillennialism. Amillennialism is
common among some Mainline Protestant denominations such as the Lutheran,
Reformed and Anglican churches. Many, but not all, partial preterists are
amillennialists. Amillennialism declined in Protestant circles with the rise of
Postmillennialism and the resurgence of Premillennialism in the 18th and 19th
centuries, but it has regained prominence in the West after World War II.
Lutheranism. Lutherans do not believe in any sort of earthly millennial kingdom
of Christ either before or after his second coming on the last day. On the last
day, all the dead will be resurrected. Their souls will then be reunited with
the same bodies they had before dying. The bodies will then be changed, those
of the wicked to a state of everlasting shame and torment, those of the
righteous to an everlasting state of celestial glory. After the resurrection of
all the dead, and the change of those still living, all nations shall be
gathered before Christ, and he will separate the righteous from the wicked.
Christ will publicly judge all people by the testimony of their faith, the good
works of the righteous in evidence of their faith, and the evil works of the
wicked in evidence of their unbelief. He will judge in righteousness in the
presence of all and men and angels, and his final judgement will be just
damnation to everlasting punishment for the wicked and a gracious gift of life
everlasting to the righteous. Millennialism. Particularly among those
Protestant groups who adhere to a millennialist eschatology, the Last Judgment
is said to be carried out before the Great White Throne by Jesus Christ to
either eternal life or eternal consciousness in the lake of fire at the end of
time. Salvation is granted by grace based on the individual's surrender and
commitment to Jesus Christ. A second particular judgment they refer to as the
Bema Seat judgement occurs after (or as) salvation is discerned when awards are
granted based on works toward heavenly treasures. What happens after death and
before the final judgment is hotly contested; some believe all people "sleep"
in Sheol until the resurrection, others believe Christians dwell in Heaven and
pagans wander the earth, and others consider the time to pass instantaneously.
Nevertheless, the body is not fully "redeemed" until after "Death" is destroyed
after the Great Tribulation. Protestant Millennialism falls into roughly two
categories: Premillennialist (Christ's second coming precedes the millennium)
and Postmillennialist (which sees Christ's second coming as occurring after the
millennium). Dispensational premillennialism generally holds that Israel and
the Church are separate. It also widely holds to the pretribulational return of
Christ, which believes that Jesus will return before a seven year Tribulation
followed by an additional return of Christ with his saints. Esoteric Christian
tradition. Although the Last Judgment is preached by a great part of Christian
mainstream churches; the Esoteric Christian tradition—composed, among others,
by the Essenes and Rosicrucians—the Spiritualist movement, Christian Science,
and some liberal theologies reject the traditional conception of the Last
Judgment as inconsistent with an all-just and loving God, in favor of some form
of universal salvation. The Western Wisdom Teachings of the Rosicrucians teach
that when the Day of Christ comes, marking the end of the current fifth or
Aryan epoch, the human race will have to pass a final examination or last
judgment, where, as in the "Days of Noah", the chosen ones or pioneers, the
"sheep", will be separated from the "goats" or stragglers, by being carried
forward into the next evolutionary period, inheriting the ethereal conditions
of the New Galilee in the making. Nevertheless, it is emphasized that all
beings of the human evolution will ultimately be saved in a distant future as
they acquire a superior grade of consciousness and altruism. At the present
period, the process of human evolution is conducted by means of successive
rebirths in the physical world and the salvation is seen as being mentioned in
Revelation 3:12 (KJV), which states "Him that overcometh will I make a "pillar"
in the temple of my God and "he shall go no more out"". However, this western
esoteric tradition states—like those who have had a near-death
experience—that after the death of the physical body, at the end of each
physical lifetime and after the life review period (which occurs before the
silver cord is broken), it occurs a judgment, more akin to a Final Review or
End Report over one's life, where the life of the subject is fully evaluated
and scrutinized. This judgment is seen as being mentioned in Hebrews 9:27,
which states that "it is appointed unto men once to die, but "after this the
judgment"". Islam. In Islam, "Yawm al-Qiyāmah" ( "the Day of Resurrection") or
"Yawm ad-Din" ( "the Day of Judgment") is believed to be God's (Arabic:
Allāh's) final assessment of humanity. The sequence of events (according to
the most commonly-held belief) is the annihilation of all creatures,
resurrection of the body, and the judgment of all sentient creatures. The exact
time when these events will occur is unknown, however there are said to be
major and minor signs which are to occur near the time of "Qiyamat" (End time).
Many verses of the Qu'ran, especially the earlier ones, are dominated by the
idea of the nearing of the day of resurrection. Belief in al-Qiyāmah is
considered a fundamental tenet of faith by all Muslims.Belief in the day of
Judgement is one of the six articles of faith. The trials and tribulations
associated with it are detailed in both the Qur'an and the hadith, as well as
in the commentaries of the Islamic expositors and scholarly authorities such as
al-Ghazali, Ibn Kathir, Ibn Majah, Muhammad al-Bukhari, and Ibn Khuzaimah who
explain them in detail. Every human, Muslim and non-Muslim alike, is believed
to be held accountable for their deeds and are believed to be judged by God
accordingly.[5 The importance of the 'last judgment' is underlined by the many
references to it in the Qur'an and its many names. For example, it is also
called "the Day of Reckoning","the Hour",[7"the Last Day",[9 "Day of Judgment",
"Day of the Reckoning". Judaism. In Judaism, the day of judgment happens every
year on Rosh Hashanah (a day which is also known as Yom HaDin, Judgment Day),
therefore the belief in a last day of judgment for all mankind is disputed.
Some Rabbis hold that there will be such a day following the resurrection of
the dead. Others hold that there is no need for that because of Rosh Hashanah.
While yet others hold that this accounting and judgment happens when one dies.
Yet others hold that the last judgment only applies to the nations and not the
Jewish people. Artistic representations. In art, the Last Judgment is a common
theme in medieval and renaissance religious iconography. Like most early
iconographic innovations, its origins stem from Byzantine art, although it was
a much less common subject than in the West during the Middle Ages. In Western
Christianity, it is often the subject depicted in medieval cathedrals and
churches, either outside on the central tympanum of the entrance, or inside on
the (rear) west wall, so that the congregation attending church saw the image
on either entering of leaving. In the 15th century it also appeared as the
central section of a triptych on altarpieces, with the side panels showing
heaven and hell. The usual composition has Christ seated high in the centre,
flanked by angels and the Virgin Mary and John the Evangelist who are
supplicating on behalf of the souls being judged (in what is called a Deesis
group in Orthodoxy). Saint Michael is often shown, either weighing souls on
scales or directing matters, and there may be a large crowd of saints, angels,
and the saved around the central group. At the bottom of the composition a
crowd of souls are shown, often with some rising from their graves. These are
being sorted and directed by angels into the saved and the damned. Almost
always the saved are on the viewer's left (so on the right hand of Christ), and
the damned on the right. The saved are led up to heaven, often shown as a
fortified gateway, while the damned are handed over to devils who herd them
down into hell on the right; the composition therefore has a circular pattern
of movement. Often the damned disappear into a Hellmouth, the mouth of a huge
monster, an image of Anglo-Saxon origin. The damned often include figures of
high rank, wearing crowns, mitres and often the Papal tiara during the lengthy
periods when there were antipopes, or in Protestant depictions. There may be
detailed depictions of the torments of the damned. The most famous Renaissance
depiction is Michelangelo Buonarroti's "The Last Judgment" in the Sistine
Chapel. Included in this fresco is his self-portrait, as St. Bartholomew's
flayed skin. The image in Eastern Orthodox icons has a similar composition, but
usually less space is devoted to Hell, and there are often a larger number of
scenes; the Orthodox readiness to label figures with inscriptions often allows
more complex compositions. There is more often a large group of saints around
Christ (which may include animals), and the hetoimasia or "empty throne",
containing a cross, is usually shown below Christ, often guarded by archangels;
figures representing Adam and Eve may kneel below it or below Christ. A
distinctive feature of the Orthodox composition, especially in Russian icons,
is a large band leading like a chute from the feet of Christ down to Hell; this
may resemble a striped snake or be a "river of Fire" coloured flame red. If it
is shown as a snake, it attempts to bite Adam on the heel, but as he is
protected by Christ is unsuccessful.
