Latin Church The Latin Church is the largest particular church within the
Catholic Church. It is a particular church not on the level of the local
particular churches known as dioceses or eparchies, but on the level of
autonomous ritual churches, of which there are 23, the remaining 22 of which
are Eastern Catholic Churches. The Latin Church developed in the Western Roman
Empire (Western Europe and North Africa) where, from classical antiquity to the
Renaissance, Latin was the principal language of education and culture. The
various Latin liturgical rites that developed in that area also use or have
used that language. Terminology. "Church" and "rite". In accordance with these
definitions, the Latin Church is one such group of Christian faithful united by
a hierarchy and recognized by the supreme authority of the Catholic Church as
an autonomous particular church. The Latin rite is the whole of the patrimony
of that distinct particular church, by which it manifests its own manner of
living the faith, including its own liturgy, its theology, its spiritual
practices and traditions and its canon law. A person is a member of or belongs
to a particular church. A person also inherits or "is of", a particular
patrimony or rite. Since the rite has liturgical, theological, spiritual and
disciplinary elements, a person is also to worship, to be catechized, to pray
and to be governed according to a particular rite. "Latin Catholic" and "Roman
Catholic". At times, the Holy See has used the term "Roman Catholic" to refer
to the whole Catholic Church, that is in communion with the Bishop and Church
of Rome. It has never used the term "Roman Catholic" to refer exclusively to
the Latin Church, and one would have to go back more than two and a half
centuries to find a papal document that used "Roman" as equivalent to "Latin".
The Holy See quite commonly uses the term "Roman" (again, not "Roman Catholic")
with reference to the diocese of Rome, as in "Holy Roman Church". However, some
Eastern Catholics use the expression "Roman Catholic" to mean "Latin Catholic",
while others "are proud to call themselves Roman Catholics", and "Roman
Catholic" sometimes appears in the compound name of Eastern Catholic churches
and parishes. Distinguishing characteristics. Liturgical patrimony. The then
Cardinal Joseph Ratzinger spoke on 24 October 1988 of the Latin liturgical
rites as follows: "Several forms of the Latin rite have always existed, and
were only slowly withdrawn, as a result of the coming together of the different
parts of Europe. Before the Council there existed side by side with the Roman
rite, the Ambrosian rite, the Mozarabic rite of Toledo, the rite of Braga, the
Carthusian rite, the Carmelite rite, and best known of all, the Dominican rite,
and perhaps still other rites of which I am not aware". Today, the most common
Latin liturgical rites are the Roman Rite, the Ambrosian Rite, the Mozarabic
Rite, and variations of the Roman Rite such as the Anglican Use and the
Tridentine extraordinary form of the Roman Rite. The 22 Eastern Catholic
Churches share 5 families of liturgical rites: the Alexandrian Rite (shared by
2 churches), the Antiochene or West Syrian Rite (3 churches), the Armenian Rite
(1 church), the Byzantine Rite (14 churches), and the Chaldean or East Syrian
Rite (2 churches). The Latin liturgical rites, like the Armenian, are used only
in a single autonomous particular church. Disciplinary patrimony. Canon law for
the Latin Church was codified in the "Code of Canon Law", of which there have
been two editions, the first promulgated by Pope Benedict XV in 1917, and the
second by Pope John Paul II in 1983. The Eastern Catholic Churches, which each
have their own canon law, have in common the canons codified in the "Code of
Canons of the Eastern Churches" of 1990. In the Latin Church, the norm for
administration of confirmation is that, except when in danger of death, the
person to be confirmed should "have the use of reason, be suitably instructed,
properly disposed, and able to renew the baptismal promises", and "the
administration of the Most Holy Eucharist to children requires that they have
sufficient knowledge and careful preparation so that they understand the
mystery of Christ according to their capacity and are able to receive the body
of Christ with faith and devotion." In the Eastern Churches these sacraments
are usually administered immediately after baptism, even for an infant.
Celibacy is obligatory for priests in the Latin Church (although exceptions are
sometimes allowed), but in most of the Eastern Catholic Churches ordination to
the priesthood (but not to the episcopate) may be conferred on married men.
(There is no difference between the churches with regard to celibacy for male
and female religious.) Bishops in the Latin Church are appointed by the Pope on
the advice of the various dicasteries of the Roman Curia. The synods of Eastern
patriarchal and major archiepiscopal Churches elect bishops for their own
territory, receiving from the Pope only letters of recognition; although the
Pope can in fact veto the decision, this rarely if ever happens. The bishops
for other territories and those of lesser Eastern Catholic Churches are
appointed in the same way as Latin bishops, on the advice of the Congregation
for the Oriental Churches.
