Latria Latrīa is a Latin term (from the Greek , "latreia") used in Eastern
Orthodox and Roman Catholic theology to mean adoration, a reverence directed
only to the Holy Trinity. Latria carries an emphasis on the internal form of
worship, rather than external ceremonies. Catholic teachings. "The only-
begotten Son of God is to be adored in the Holy Sacrament of the Eucharist with
the worship of "latria", including external worship. Pope Paul VI's 1965
encyclical Mysterium Fidei: also affirmed this belief and in items 56 stated:
"The Catholic Church has always displayed and still displays this latria that
ought to be paid to the Sacrament of the Eucharist, both during Mass and
outside of it." Latria vs. Dulia and Hyperdulia. "Latria" is sacrificial in
character, and may be offered only to God. Catholics offer other degrees of
reverence to the Blessed Virgin Mary and to the Saints; these non-sacrificial
types of reverence are called "hyperdulia" and "dulia", respectively. In
English, dulia is also called "veneration". Hyperdulia is essentially a
heightened degree of dulia provided only to the Blessed Virgin. This
distinction, written about as early as Augustine of Hippo and St Jerome, was
detailed more explicitly by Thomas Aquinas in his Summa Theologiae, A.D. 1270,
II II, 84, 1: "Reverence is due to God on account of His Excellence, which is
communicated to certain creatures not in equal measure, but according to a
measure of proportion; and so the reverence which we pay to God, and which
belongs to latria, differs from the reverence which we pay to certain excellent
creatures; this belongs to dulia, and we shall speak of it further on (II II
103 3)"; in this next article St. Thomas Aquinas writes: "Wherefore dulia,
which pays due service to a human lord, is a distinct virtue from latria, which
pays due service to the Lordship of God. It is, moreover, a species of
observance, because by observance we honor all those who excel in dignity,
while dulia properly speaking is the reverence of servants for their master,
dulia being the Greek for servitude." Linguistic distinctions in English.
Generally, in English, the word "adoration" is reserved for God alone and
therefore it aptly translates "latria". The word "worship" is derived from the
W. Saxon noun "weorðscipe" 'condition of being worthy', which is from "weorð"
'worthy' + "-scipe" '-ship'. The word "worship" is used in a strong sense in
relation to God ("latria"), but also in a weak sense in relation to man: for
instance, "His Worship the Mayor", or "Your Worship" (when addressing a
magistrate in Court), or the worship of the saints ("dulia") as distinct to the
adoration of God ("latria"). "Adoration" provides a clear and unequivocal, and
therefore better, translation of "latria" and expression of the absolute
sacrificial reverence due to God alone. "This worship called forth by God, and
given exclusively to Him as God, is designated by the Greek name "latreia"
(Latinized, "latria"), for which the best translation that our language affords
is the word "Adoration". Adoration is different from other acts of worship,
such as supplication, confession of sin, etc., inasmuch as it formally consists
in self-abasement before the Infinite, and in devout recognition of His
transcendent excellence."[http://www.newadvent.org/cathen/01151a.htm] Roman
Catholic and Eastern Orthodox Christians especially adore with "latria" during
their religious service, the Mass or Divine Liturgy. Protestant Christians do
not have a Eucharistic sacrifice "per se"; while Catholics consider themselves
to literally participate in the sacrifice at the foot of Calvary, that what
Christ offered once "participates in the divine eternity" (CCC § 1085).
