Liberal Judaism Liberal Judaism () (), is one of the two forms of Progressive
Judaism found in the United Kingdom, the other being Reform Judaism. Liberal
Judaism, which developed at the beginning of the twentieth century is less
conservative than UK Reform Judaism. Liberal Judaism considers itself the
sister movement of North American Reform Judaism. Beliefs and practices. To
quote the Movement's website, "It reverences Jewish tradition, and seeks to
preserve all that is good in the Judaism of the past. But it lives in the
present. It desires that Judaism shall be an active force for good in the lives
of Jewish individuals, families and communities today, and that it shall make
its contribution to the betterment of human society. And it stresses "the full
equality and participation of men and women in every sphere of religious life;
an emphasis on ethical conduct above ritual observance; an affirmation of each
individual's freedom to act responsibly in accordance with the dictates of the
informed religious conscience; a pride in combining our Jewish heritage with
full participation in the civic life of this country; and an awareness of our
duty not only to the Jewish people and to the State of Israel, but also to the
entire human family, each one of whom is created in the Divine image". The
British scholar Daniel Langton's study of the spiritual founder of the Liberal
Synagogue, Claude Montefiore, has caused recent debate. In his account of the
origins of the movement, Langton claims that the aspirations of Montefiore have
not been realised: Montefiore's passionate anti-Zionism was soon marginalised
and his declared aim to amalgamate "the best of Judaism and Christianity" led
him to propound an unpopular view of Jesus and Paul of Tarsus as religious
authorities of real interest to modern Jews. This did not go undisputed, and
met with strong criticism in the Jewish Chronicle from the Liberal Jewish
Synagogue, which sees itself as continuing on foursquare Montefiore's
insistence on the best of modern scholarship, inclusiveness, intellectual
honesty, and an overriding ethics-led view of what it means to be Jewish. LJS
rabbis have also been notably prepared to criticise Israeli policy and some
Israeli/Zionist attitudes, whenever they have felt them to be falling short of
the particular ethical standards to be expected of Jews. In recent years, also
similar to North American Reform Judaism, there has also been a move towards
more traditional elements in Liberal services than a generation earlier - i.e.
more use of Hebrew, more wearing of "tallit" and "kippot", more enjoyment of
"Purim" and other traditional minor festivals. But Liberal Judaism is still
distinctly more progressive than Reform. Examples would include more readily
recognising as Jewish without conversion the child of a Jewish father and a
non-Jewish mother, or Liberal Judaism's readiness to celebrate homosexual
partnerships in synagogues with more of the traditional symbolism associated
with Jewish weddings. Origins. The Liberal movement in the UK was founded in
the early part of the 20th century by Lily Montagu, Claude Montefiore and
others as the Jewish Religious Union (JRU). It began in October 1902 with a
supplementary prayer meeting, an adjunct to the then Orthodox and Reform
synagogues, with the intention of using more English in services, men and women
sitting freely together, the use of organ music, and a more inclusive form of
worship which would prove attractive to members of British Jewry who felt
uninvolved or out of sympathy with existing traditionalist patterns of worship.
The Liberal movement steadily gained adherents after the founding in 1911 of
the Liberal Jewish synagogue, the first of more than thirty Liberal
congregations in the UK. The Liberal Jewish Synagogue. Wishing to establish a
permanent home, premises were acquired in 1912 in a former chapel in Hill
Street, Park Road, London. By 1918 it was evident that a larger building was
needed and a site was purchased in 1924 on St. John's Wood Road, opposite Lords
Cricket Ground. A synagogue seating 1,350 and a communal hall were opened in
1925. From the beginning men and women sat together, hats were not required for
men, and from 1915 seats were not assigned to individuals. From its inception
there was a Religion School, with correspondence classes for children who could
not attend and a Youth Group from 1918. The 1925 building was replaced with a
new complex including Sanctuary, Hall, offices and residential development. It
was consecrated in 1992. Senior Rabbis have included: Israel Mattuck (from
1912), Leslie Edgar (initially as assistant - 1931), John D. Rayner (initially
as assistant 1957), David Goldberg (1989), Alexandra Wright (2004)
Organisations. The JRU did not intend itself to be a separate denomination.
Rather, synagogues affiliated with the JRU were interested in developing a form
of authentic Judaism that was responsive to changes going on in the modern
world, without going down the path of classical German Reform. Many of its
members were inspired by Claude Montefiore's 1903 book "Liberal Judaism - An
Essay". In 1909 the JRU changed its name to the "Jewish Religious Union for the
Advancement of Liberal Judaism" In 1944 the name changed again to the Union of
Liberal and Progressive Synagogues, more commonly known as the ULPS. In 2003 it
changed its name to Liberal Judaism, which has always been the main term used
for the movement. LJY-Netzer is the youth movement of Liberal Judaism, a
progressive Zionist youth movement, and a branch (or "snif") of Netzer Olami.
