Limited atonement Limited atonement (or definite atonement or particular
redemption) is a doctrine accepted in some Christian theological traditions. It
is particularly associated with the Reformed tradition and is one of the five
points of Calvinism. The doctrine states that Jesus Christ's substitutionary
atonement on the cross is specifically designed for the elect only, that He
only died for them. This is in contrast to a belief that Christ died for all,
but while this atonement is sufficient for the salvation of all, it is only
efficient for the elect, those who receive Christ, these being predestined unto
salvation. Thus its primary benefits are not given to all of humanity due to
unbelief. However this is not a classical view. The doctrine. The doctrine of
the limited scope (or extent) of the atonement is intimately tied up with the
doctrine of the nature of the atonement. It also has much to do with the
general Calvinist view of predestination. Calvinists advocate the satisfaction
theory of the atonement, which developed in the writings of Anselm of
Canterbury and Thomas Aquinas. In brief, the Calvinistic refinement of this
theory, known as penal substitution, states that the atonement of Christ pays
the penalty incurred by the sins of men—that is, Christ receives the wrath of
God for sins and thereby cancels the judgment they had incurred. The Calvinist
view of predestination teaches that God created Adam in a state of original
righteousness, but he fell into sin and all humanity in him as their Federal
Head. Those elected to salvation were chosen without a view to their faith or
good works but by the sovereign will of God. The Calvinist atonement is called
"definite" by some because they believe it certainly secures the salvation of
those for whom Christ died, and it is called "limited" in its extent because it
effects salvation for the elect only. Calvinists do not believe the power of
the atonement is limited in any way, which is to say that no sin is too great
to be expiated by Christ's sacrifice, in their view. Among English Calvinistic
Baptists, the doctrine was usually known as "particular redemption", giving its
adherents the name Particular Baptists. This term emphasizes the intention of
God to save particular persons through the atonement, as opposed to mankind in
"general" as General Baptists believe. Biblical passages. Additionally, in the
high priestly prayer, Jesus prays for the protection and sanctification of
those who believed in him, and he explicitly excludes praying for all: "I am
not praying for the world but for those whom you have given me, for they are
yours.". Paul instructs the elders in Ephesus "to shepherd the church of God
which He purchased with His own blood," and he says in his letter to the same
church that "Christ loved the church and gave himself up "for her."" Likewise,
Jesus foreshadows that he will lay down his life "for his friends," and an
angel tells Jesus' earthly father Joseph that he "will save "His people" from
their sins". Calvinists believe that these passages demonstrate that Jesus died
for the church (that is, the elect) only. Confessional positions. Chapter 3,
paragraph 6 of the Westminster Confession of Faith says, "Neither are any other
redeemed by Christ, effectually called, justified, adopted, sanctified, and
saved, but the elect only." The Canons of Dort assert that "This death of God's
Son is the only and entirely complete sacrifice and satisfaction for sins; it
is of infinite value and worth, more than sufficient to atone for the sins of
the whole world" (Section 2, Article 3). Article 8 of the same section says For
it was the entirely free plan and very gracious will and intention of God the
Father that the enlivening and saving effectiveness of his Son's costly death
should work itself out in all his chosen ones, in order that he might grant
justifying faith to them only and thereby lead them without fail to salvation.
In other words, it was God's will that Christ through the blood of the cross
(by which he confirmed the new covenant) should effectively redeem from every
people, tribe, nation, and language all those and only those who were chosen
from eternity to salvation and given to him by the Father; that he should grant
them faith (which, like the Holy Spirit's other saving gifts, he acquired for
them by his death); that he should cleanse them by his blood from all their
sins, both original and actual, whether committed before or after their coming
to faith; that he should faithfully preserve them to the very end; and that he
should finally present them to himself, a glorious people, without spot or
wrinkle. Objections to the doctrine. Limited atonement is contrasted with the
view popularly termed "hypothetical universalism" or unlimited atonement, which
is advocated by Arminian, Methodist, Lutheran, Messianic Jewish, and Roman
Catholic theologians (among others) and which says Christ's work makes
redemption possible for all but certain for none. (This doctrine should not be
confused with concepts of universal reconciliation, in which God loves and
saves his entire creation.) Though Lutherans and Catholics share a similar
doctrine of the nature of the atonement with Calvinists, they differ on its
extent, whereas Arminians and Methodists generally accept an alternate theory
of the nature of the atonement such as the moral government theory. The elect
in such models are all the people who choose to avail themselves of God's
gracious offer of salvation through Christ, not a pre-determined group. Thus,
these systems place a limit on the efficacy of the atonement rather than on its
extent, like Calvinists. Historically, the Arminian Remonstrants raised this
doctrine as a point of debate over predestination in the Quinquarticular
Controversy, and their position was ultimately condemned by Calvinists at the
Synod of Dort in 1619. In spite of opposition, the doctrine of the universal
extent of the atonement became and remains prevalent outside of Calvinist
circles. Even some Calvinistic Christians identify themselves as Amyraldians or
"four point Calvinists" and teach an unlimited atonement. In particular,
Amyraldism teaches that God has provided Christ's atonement for all alike, but
seeing that none would believe on his own, He elects those whom He will bring
to faith in Christ, thereby preserving the Calvinist doctrine of unconditional
election. Calvin himself did not clearly articulate an opinion on this
doctrine, which is nonetheless usually associated with his name, but most
modern Calvinists see it as a necessary consequence of his doctrines of
election and the atonement. Some have contended that the doctrine of particular
redemption implies that Christ's sacrifice was insufficient to atone for the
sins of the whole world, but Calvinists have universally rejected this notion,
instead holding that the value of the atonement is infinite but that God
intentionally withholds its efficacious availability only to the elect.
Rebuttal. Calvinists admit that these are difficult passages with respect to
the extent of the atonement, but following the Protestant hermeneutic principle
of letting Scripture interpret Scripture, they attempt to use their
interpretations of other passages on election and other passages on the extent
of the atonement to clarify the meaning of these difficult passages (one
difficulty with this endeavor, which is always encountered in applying the
principle of Scripture interpreting Scripture, is that it presupposes a
framework can be established from other passages without any exegetical
assumptions). According to this principle, since the word "world", for
instance, is used at other places in the New Testament in a way obviously not
intended to include every single person in the world (such as and ), its
meaning in any particular passage must be determined by the context. In
particular, they understand "all" to refer to all of the elect (as in ) instead
of every person in the world; or to refer to "all" qualitatively, instead of
quantitatively, as in all races of people, not just Israelites (as in ; ; ; and
); or to refer to the elect in all places throughout the world (as in , where
the words "the sins of" have been added to the last phrase by the ESV and other
translations and literally reads "but for the whole world", as in the NKJV,
ASV, the Vulgate, etc.). They also posit that there can be different senses of
the concept of salvation — as simply the defense and preservation of temporal
life (as they understand ) or as salvation from God's wrath unto eternal life.
Opponents of the view, such as Arminians, hold that such interpretations are
read into the passages, rather than being their natural meanings; while
admitting that words like "world" and "all" in the Bible do not always mean
"every human being," they maintain that there are no grounds for taking the
terms in a limited sense here. A related Calvinist approach understands
scripture to speak of the atonement in two-fold manner, holding to the medieval
formula that Christ's death was "sufficient for all, but efficient for the
elect." Under this approach, seemingly opposed scriptures are reconciled by
classifying them as referring to either the sufficiency or the efficiency of
the atonement. Opponents offer alternate interpretations of the same passages
which in turn support a universal atonement, and the disagreement has yet to
find any significant resolution. Consequently, both limited and unlimited
atonement views are still held in Christian theology. Limited views are
typically restricted to Protestant denominations. The Roman Catholic and
Eastern Orthodox Churches both reject the view. Comparison among Protestants.
This table summarizes the classical views of three different Protestant
beliefs. The eternal election of God, however, vel praedestinatio (or
predestination), that is, God's ordination to salvation, does not extend at
once over the godly and the wicked, but only over the children of God, who were
elected and ordained to eternal life before the foundation of the world was
laid, as Paul says, Eph. 1:4. 5: He hath chosen us in Him, having predestinated
us unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ. [...]it was the will of God
that Christ by the blood of the cross, whereby He confirmed the new covenant,
should effectually redeem out of every people, tribe, nation, and language, all
those, and those only, who were from eternity chosen to salvation and given to
Him by the Father;[...] [...]To these succeeds the fourth decree, by which God
decreed to save and damn certain particular persons. This decree has its
foundation in the foreknowledge of God, by which he knew from all eternity
those individuals who would, through his preventing grace, believe, and,
through his subsequent grace would persevere, according to the before described
administration of those means which are suitable and proper for conversion and
faith; and, by which foreknowledge, he likewise knew those who would not
believe and persevere.[...] References. See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Wikipedia:Footnotes for an explanation of how to generate footnotes using the
tags, and the template below.
