Di indigetes In Georg Wissowa's terminology, the di indigetes or indigites were
Roman deities not adopted from other religions, as distinguished from the "di
novensides". Wissowa thus regarded the "indigetes" as "indigenous" gods, and
the "novensides" as "newcomer gods". Ancient usage, however, does not treat the
two terms as a dichotomy, nor maintain this clear-cut distinction. Wissowa's
interpretation is no longer widely accepted and the meaning remains uncertain.
In classical Latin, the epithet "Indiges", singular in form, is applied to Sol
"(Sol Indiges)" and to Jupiter of Lavinium, later identified with Aeneas. One
theory holds that it means the "speaker within", and goes back to before the
recognition of divine persons. Another, which the Oxford Classical Dictionary
holds more likely, is that it means "invoked" in the sense of "pointing to", as
in the related word "indigitamenta". In Augustan literature, the "di indigites"
are often associated with "di patrii" and appear in lists of local divinities
(that is, divinities particular to a place). Servius notes that Praeneste had
its own "indigetes". Evidence pertaining to "di indigites" is rarely found
outside Rome and Lavinium, but a fragmentary inscription from Aletrium (modern
Alatri, north of Frosinone) records offerings to "di Indicites" including
Fucinus, a local lake-god; Summanus, a god of nocturnal lightning; Fiscellus,
otherwise unknown, but perhaps a local mountain god; and the Tempestates,
weather deities. The inscription has been interpreted as a list of local or
nature deities to whom transhumant shepherds should make propitiary offers.
Wissowa listed 33 "di indigetes", including two collectives in the plural, the
Lares of the estate and the Lemures of the dead. Any list of "indigetes",
however, is conjectural; Raimo Anttila points out that "we do not know the list
of the "di indigetes"." Scholarship on the "di indigetes". C. Koch, A. Grenier,
H. J. Rose, Hendrik Wagenvoort, E. Vetter, K. Latte, G. Radke, R. Schilling and
more recently R. Anttilla have made contributions to the enquiry into the
meaning of the word "Indiges" and on the original nature of the "di indigetes".
Particularly complete is Carl Koch's analysis which centres mainly on the
question of "Sol Indiges". Koch has argued that "Sol Indiges" is the god to
which is devoted the "Agonium" of December 11 on the grounds of the fragment of
the "fasti" discovered at Ostia in 1921 which reads ag]ON IND[igeti CIL XIV
4547 and of Johannes Lydus "de Mensibus" IV 155: "...Agonalia daphneephorooi
kai genarcheeei Heliooi...": Agonalia for the laurel bearer and primaeval
ancestor Sol, that Lydus compares to a similar custom in Athens terminating
with laurel bearing. "Sol Indiges" had two festivals, the other one being on
August 9 on the Quirinal. He remarks too that the festival of December 11 is in
correspondence with the "Matralia" of June 11 dedicated to Mater Matuta,
considered the goddes of dawn and, in the ritual, the aunt of the sun, son of
the night. Koch was the first to advance the hypothesis of the Sol Indiges as
the Forefather (Stammvater) of the Roman nation. Albert Grenier has contributed
a paper in which he expounds the results obtained by Koch and pays more
attention to the original nature of the di Indigetes. As Koch had already done
he cites the formula of the oath of loyalty to M. Livius Drusus in 91 B.C. by a
Latin chief preserved by Diodorus Siculus in which are mentioned, after
Iuppiter Capitolinus, Vesta and Mars Pater, "Helios genarchees" and "euergetin
zooin te kai phytoon Geen", 'the mother Earth which benefits animals and
plants'. Grenier thinks "Sol Indiges" and the "Good Mother Earth", whom he
interprets to be the "Mater Matuta" of the "Matralia", would be the "di
Indigetes" of the "devotio" of Decius Mus. He goes on to analyse the other
testimonies related to the cult of the "di indigetes" found in Dionysius of
Halicarnassus. The first is the inscription on the monument on the Numicius
supposed to be dedicated to "Aeneas Iuppiter Indiges" which reads: "Of the
Father God chthonios who rules the flow of the Numicius". Grenier remarks the
inscription does not mention Aeneas and is in fact just a small sanctuary of
the god of the river. In this same region Pliny (see above) mentions a "Sol
Indiges" and Dionysius describes a monument called at his time "Sanctuary of
the Sun", made up by two altars on an East-West line by a marsh: it was
believed to have been erected by Aeneas as a token of thanksgiving for the
miracle of the spring. On this evidence Grenier concludes that "Sol Indiges" is
connected to Lavinium and to the cult of the "Penates publici" of Rome, this
fact being supported by Varro: "Lavinium ibi dii penates nostri". This
identification is further supported by the tradition that the new consuls upon
entering office sacrificed on this "Sanctuary of the sun" to Iuppiter Indiges
and the by the fact that the formulae of the oaths never mention the "di
indigetes" along with Iuppiter: e.g. the Table of Bantia reads: "Iuranto per
Iovem deosque Penates". Grenier concludes from such evidence that the "Penates"
were included within the "indigetes". The Roman "Penates publici" were
represented as two male youngsters similar to the Dioscures and identified with
the gods brought by Aeneas from Troy to Latium. As the true identity of the
Indigetes was secret to avoid exauguration Grenier considers a later
development the identification with Aeneas and Romulus and thinks the original
"indigetes" were naturalistic gods, forces like the sun, the earth and the
waters which make the wheat and the children grow. Finally he concludes they
should have been the "turba deorum" of the "indigitamenta" which in his view
expressed the animistic nature of the most ancient Roman religion. A relevant
point in the discussion of the sources that Grenier has though overlooked is
the fact that the inscription quoted by Dionysius (I 64 end) in Greek "Patros
Theoy Chthonioy..." must translate Latin "Patrii Indigetis". For a
correspondence see the Greek interpretation of Tages as "Hermes Chthonios".
Similar conclusions have been reached by Hendrik Wagenvoort in his book "Roman
Dynamism" Oxford 1947, chapter III "Numen, Novensiles and Indigetes", p.Â 73-
103, as Grenier acknowledges. H. J. Rose has refused Koch's interpretation of
the di Indigetes as the primordial ancestors (Stammvater) of the Roman nation
on the grounds that the formula of Diodorus is not a Roman original but is
framed along the Greek fashion and looks to reflect a Greek model. Kurt Latte
has supported Carl Koch's thesis that the most ancient Roman religious concepts
were based on the natural forces of the sun, moon and waters. He cites and
quotes the invocations to the goddess of the Moon at the beginning of every
month by the "pontifex minor", who repeated for five or seven times the
invocation: ""Dies te quinque calo Iuno Covella"" or when the Nonae were on the
seventh day: ""Septem dies te calo Iuno Covella"". The invocation to the god of
the "Tiber" during the summer draught: ""Adesto Tiberine, cum tuis undis"".
These invocations he supposes were justified by a faith in the magic power of
words. "Pater Indiges" is attested by Solinus II 15 as referred to Aeneas after
his disappearance on the Numicius and Dionysius too makes reference to the
Numicius. Latte thinks that it must be the same cult and the question is
whether in augustan times the original Pater Indiges was transformed into
"Iuppiter Indiges". Whereas Dionysius's text may imply the latter
interpretation as the right one Latte thinks the material is insufficient to
reach a decision. The other occurrence of "Indiges" in the singular is that of
"Sol Indiges" of which two festivals are known as well as the location of his
cult on the Quirinal (from the Fasti) one of which is the "Ag]on. Ind[igeti"
mentioned in the Fasti of Ostia and in Lydus "De Mensibus" IV 155. Latte argues
that the date of this latter festival does not allow to be brought into any
correspondence with the yearly course of the sun, but could perhaps be the day
on which sowing should be completed, citing Columella, thus the sacrifice
should refer to the power of the sun on vegetation. Latte concludes that by
putting all the above elements together it could be argued that "Indiges" might
be traced to a representation in which man requests the god to ensure the
safety of his sowing. As "Numicus" has its parallel with "Tiber" so "Sol" has
its own one in the goddess of the Moon. The naive faith in the influence of
celestial bodies has countless parallels even e.g. in Athens. Latte goes on to
say that besides these two there are only instances in the plural which were
already not understood by the ancient in Varro's times. The poets of the
augustan times had just a vague idea that the word was an archaism that
entailed a strong ancient Roman taint in appealing to the gods, without any
clear idea of its original meaning. Latte refuses Wissowa's position that it
was a central concept in Roman theology, also on the grounds of its irrelevance
in the Roman calendar which reflects the most ancient known religious
historical representation. The iscription from Sora dating to 4 B. C. could be
the issue of augustan restoration and not a proof of an original "Iuppiter
indiges". Another inscription from Ardea mentions "novem deivo" and the context
clearly does not allow the interpretation of "newly imported", disproving
Wissowa's assumptions. Latte has also enquired into the etymology of the word
"indiges". He recalls the attempt by Krestchmer to explain it with "digitus"
(finger) which meets difficulties because in Rome one did not use fingers in
invoking the gods and in the common original exit of the ancient singular. The
most ancient connection with "ag-ye", "aio" by Corssen is based on "indigitare"
(frequentative as "agitare" for "agere"). However more recent discussions have
asked this interpretation into question as such formations are usually found
only for monosyllabic verbal themes showing a vocalic shift with a preverbal,
such as "comes", "superstes", "trames", which "aio" excludes; moreover they
have in Latin an active meaning. Also the hypothesis of a retrograde formation
from "indigitare" meets both linguistic and semantic difficulties: the
construction with "agere" in the meaning of "rendering oneself present" implies
an impossible formation from a consonantic shift and the semantics of "agere"
to render oneself present is highly unlikely for ancient times. Another
relevant remark by Latte concerns the belief in the effecacy of the divine
appellatives, which are sometimes the same for different gods such as "Heries
Iunonis" and "Heres Martea". The Iguvine Tables mention a "ahtu iuvio" and a
"ahtu marti" interpreted as "Actui Iovio" and "Actui Martio" to which
sacrifices are offered. Latte remarks that here the offer is made to the
abstract concept of the virtue or power of the god and not to the god himself.
Other gods had special entities representing their power as in Rome "Salacia
Neptuni" and "Lua Saturni". Latte finally refuses the interpretation "indigetes
divi" for Greek "daimones" found in the translation by Macrobius of Hesiod
"Opera" 121 considering it influenced by late time speculations. The connexion
of the gentilician cult of the sun of the Aurelii with that of "Sol Indiges" is
impossible to prove. Most recently glottologist Raimo Anttilla has made renewed
attempts into the enquiry of the original meaning of the word "indiges" in his
book on protoindoeuropean root *ag. He thiks all the etymological and formal
impasses mentioned by Latte could be overcome if one makes the basis of
"indiges" instead of verb "aio" (I say) verb "ago" in the sense of to impel, to
drive, in this case to drive from within ("*endo agentes"). The action of the
gods would the that of driving man just as man drives cattle e.g. also in
sacrifice (agonium, etymology already cited by Ovid in his "Fasti" I 319 ff).
Anttilla bases his analysis on the results of Latte, Radke, Schilling and
Ancellotti and Cerri. He agrees with Schilling's view that the concept
underwent changes and its original meaning should be kept different from its
later history. Anttilla starts considering the coincidence of "Indiges" with an
"Agonium" on Dec. 11 and its corresponce with the festival of "Mater Matuta" on
June 11. He thinks there is sufficient evidence to say that we have to do with
a solar cult centred on Lavinium connecting the sun with water and earth. "Sol
Indiges" is "Pater Indiges", "divus pater" i.e. "Iuppiter Indiges", the highest
divine power, the one which makes nature produce food. This impelling action
seems close to "Aja Ekapad" and Savitr as variant terms for the sun in
connexion with other natural phenomena. A similar tint is in Indra as Samaja
gathering booty, the warrior aspect of economy. It is noteworthy that AGON IND
repeat the same root *ag. The Italic evidence for sacrificial and divine power
under *ag is plentiful. Umbrian divinities of action, "ahtu", dative singular
(from *ag-t-eu) are part of the sacrificial actions of Iuppiter and Mars,
whereas with Cerfe, growth (genitive singular of *ker-s-o-) the action is
assigned to the other gods, e.g. Cerfus Martius 'the principle of vegetative
growth in the sphere of Mars' the equivalent of Ares Aphneios in Arcadia. The
god of creation Brahman is called ajana, i.e. driver, instigator. It is a
general human religious concept that men drive animals and god drives men.
Since "Indiges" as driver-in makes sense, from this would also stem the meaning
of "indigitare", "indigitamenta". Carrying out a ritual action results in
driving, here "agere" and "agonalis". On the basis of this big picture Anttilla
attempts to draw a more precise conclusion and overcome the remaining formal
difficulties. He argues that holding to the old interpretation of "indiges" as
'the caller (forth)' and interpreting the uncertain Umbrian consonant-stem
dative plural "acetus" 'to the callers forth' as Ancellotti and Cerri do is
doubtful and the etymology would be better represented by an *ag- drive than by
an *ag-ye say, as the supposed root *kei/*ki is a moving root too and not a
calling root. Radke has also proposed the possibility of *en-dhigh-et- grade 0
as in "figulus" (from IE stem DHEIG) as a nomen agentis menaing 'forming,
shaping, generating from within', close to impelling. To support his analysis
Anttilla cites a medical term "indigo/indigere" meaning to drive bodily fluids,
which is not attested in ancient texts. A hard tumor (scirosis) 'fit ex
glutinoso et spisso humore quod confluendo ita membris indigitur ut insitus
locis ubi considerit unum esse videatur': the tumor is formed by humours that
run together to a certain location by pushing the limbs from the inside so as
it looks one thing with the limb where they set. So tumors are pushed in as
tubers and plants. Although the lexicographic evidence is flimsy Anttilla
thinks it is important owing to the close relation between medicine and
religion. "Indiges, indigere" would hint to something coming out and bringing
forth an end result (pushing into a state). Drive in is at the same time come
out. The richness of nature deities or their epithets (ahtu) brings about the
beneficial result of life/food. The coordinator would be Iuppiter Indiges, the
Impeller corresponding to "Zeus Ageetoor" at Sparta. Finally Anttilla considers
the worst formal difficulty left that of the suffix -et- and its vowel not
rising in indigetes, as remarked by Radke p.Â 151. Similar formations are
merges/mergitis sheaf, ales/alitis winged, mansues/mansuetis tame, seges/
segetis cornfield, harvest, produce, two of which pertain to the growing and
reaping domain; Anttilla thinks in archaic religious language peculiar forms
are often preserved. "Indigitare" evoking gods would be to drive them in for
our needs and "Sol Indiges" would be the force that drives all of nature,
particularly food. Radke and Ancellotti e Cerri interpret the -t- form as a
kind of active participle or agent noun and this would be the only possibility.
Latte too gives as a background for "indiges" the general appeal to natural
forces in Roman religion, e.g. the summoning of the Moon goddess and other
instances. Archeological finds. At Lavinium in 1958 was excavated an
inscription dated to the 3rd century BC reading "Lare Aineia" and in 1971 a
templet built over a princely cenotaph in the Oriental style of the 7th century
BC probably on the site of a "heroon" described by Dionysius Halicarnassus.
This would support an ancient assimilation of Aeneas to "Indiges Pater".
