List of biblical names This page introduces a list of about 2,600 proper names
with their meanings from the Bible, mainly compiled from the 19th century
public domain resources of "Hitchcock's Bible Names Dictionary" as part of
"Hitchcock's New and Complete Analysis of the Holy Bible" written by Roswell
Dwight Hitchcock and "Dictionary of the Bible" by William R. Smith. Most of the
male and female names and their definitions can also be found in Herbert
Lockyer's reference books "All the Men of the Bible" and "All the Women of the
Bible." Most of the divine names and their definitions can also be found in
Lockyer's "All the Divine Names and Titles in the Bible." Many of the biblical
names can also be found in Baker's "Evangelical Dictionary", Easton's Bible
Dictionary, Nave's Topical Bible and Torrey's "New Topical Textbook". Others
can be found in the Catholic Encyclopedia and the new Schaff-Herzog
Encyclopedia of Religious Knowledge (Dictionary edition). The biblical names
pertaining just to the Old Testament can all be found in Joan Comay's reference
book titled "Who's Who in the Old Testament." Other Biblical name definitions
of places, cities, countries, angels, gods, mountains and Hebrew names can be
found in Nancy M. Tischler's encyclopedia "All Things in the Bible: an
Encyclopedia of the Biblical World." Significance of names. Many names describe
nations, people, and ancient history. Some describe expressions of hopes,
revelations of divine purposes, and prophecies of the future. Some are part of
genealogical histories, as it was common in Jewish customs to keep a family
history. Sometimes names indicated certain circumstances with their birth or
family line. Characteristics and traits of people were an important aspect of
names in ancient Israel. For example the name Nabal means "senseless and fool",
and Abigail indicated that this is what her husband amounted to (). Sometimes
names pointed to occupations, sometimes to a symbolic or a prophetic feature.
Sometimes place names have become personal names (e.g. the name Eden, from the
Garden of Eden). Sometimes names were given to show family relationships (e.g.
uncle, father). Names sometimes had a special meaning (e.g. praise, additional,
rebellion, bitterness). Sometimes names were of a type of plant or had
charactistics of natural phenomenon (i.e. thunder, lightning, rain). Sometimes
names were related to animals or their characteristics. Before the Protestant
Reformation the most common names were Adam, Benjamin, Elias, Daniel, David,
Joseph, Samson, and Solomon. After the Reformation names like Aaron, Elijah,
Joshua, Moses, and Nathaniel were added to mainstream popularity. Saint names
associated with the Roman Catholic Church were used less after the Reformation.
Maher-shalal-hash-baz is the longest name in the Bible, and was much used as a
given name. Mary and John are the most used of the Christian names. List of
biblical names. Note that "names" refers to any noun, which may be: people,
places, cities, countries, angels, gods, mountains, etc. Meanings of the names
are not always definite or clear, but a possible meaning has been provided in
every case. Most of the meanings come from Hebrew, while the others come from
Greek, Aramaic, or Latin. A – B – C – D – E – F – G – H – I –
J – K – L – M – N – O – P – Q – R – S – T – U – V - Y
– Z Related sayings. Lockyer in his reference book "All the men of the Bible"
on page 14 explains that a person's name and reputation is a treasure. He sums
it up with an old Roman proverb: "without a name a man is nothing." There are
many quotes throughout the Bible that convey the same idea.
