List of Christian denominations Some groups included do not consider themselves
a denomination (e.g., the Roman Catholic Church considers itself the one true
church and the Apostolic See, and as pre-denominational). Regarding the use of
the word "church," the Roman Catholic Church does not consider any groups or
denominations to be true "churches" unless they have maintained apostolic
succession and observe the seven sacraments (by this definition, the Eastern
Orthodox, Oriental Orthodox, Assyrian Church of the East, and a few other
churches (PNCC, some Old Catholics, etc.) are, for the most part, the only
other Christian groupings considered by the Catholic Church to be true
"churches"). Some groups are large (e.g. Catholics, Lutherans, Anglicans or
Baptists), while others are just a few small churches, and in most cases the
relative size is not evident in this list. Also, modern movements such as
Fundamentalist Christianity, Pietism, Evangelicalism, Pentecostalism and the
Holiness movement sometimes cross denominational lines, or in some cases create
new denominations out of two or more continuing groups, (as is the case for
many United and uniting churches, for example). Such subtleties and
complexities are not clearly depicted here. Additionally, some groups viewed by
non-adherents as denominational actively resist being called a "denomination"
and do not have any formal denominational structure, authority, or record-
keeping beyond the local congregation; several groups within Restoration
Movement fall into this category. Catholicism. These are the churches which
claim continuity (based upon Apostolic Succession) with the early Church.
Catholic Church. The Catholic Church is composed of 23 Rites: the Western or
Latin Rite and the 22 Eastern Rites (i.e., Eastern Catholic Churches). The
Latin Church. The Latin Rite (not to be confused with the Roman Rite, which is
one of the Latin liturgical rites, not a particular Church) is the largest and
most widely known of the 23 Rites that together make up the Catholic Church.
Eastern Catholic Churches. All of the following are Particular Churches of the
Catholic Church. They are all in communion with the Bishop of Rome and
acknowledge his claim of universal jurisdiction and authority. They have some
minor distinct theological emphases and expressions (for instance, in the case
of those that are of Greek/Byzantine tradition, concerning some non-doctrinal
aspects of the Latin view of Purgatory). The Eastern Catholic churches and the
Latin church (which together compose the worldwide Catholic Church) share the
same doctrine and sacraments, and thus the same faith. The Catholic Church
considers itself the One Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church that Christ
founded. As such, the Catholic Church does not consider itself a denomination,
but as pre-denominational, the original Church of Christ. Eastern Orthodox.
List provided in order of precedence. Indentation indicates autonomy rather
than autocephaly. Eastern Orthodox Church. The Eastern Orthodox Church
considers itself to be the One Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church that Christ
founded. Oriental Orthodoxy. Oriental Orthodoxy comprises those Christians who
did not accept the Council of Chalcedon (AD 451). Other denominations often
erroneously label these churches "Monophysite", however, as the Oriental
Orthodox do not adhere to the teachings of Eutyches, they themselves reject
this label, preferring the term Miaphysite. The Oriental Orthodox Church
considers itself to be the One Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church that Christ
founded. Church of the East. The Church of the East is said to have been formed
by St Thomas. The Church did not attend the Council of Ephesus (AD 431). It is
incorrectly referred to as the Nestorian Church; Assyrian Christians do not
consider themselves Nestorians, and recent Christological agreements with the
Catholic and some of the Orthodox churches have resolved this debate
permanently, clearing the way for ecumenical relations. The Church of the East
considers itself to be the One Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church that Christ
founded. Protestantism. These are the churches "which repudiated the papal
authority, and separated or were severed from the Roman communion in the
Reformation of the 16th cent., and of any of the bodies of Christians descended
from them." Anglicanism. Anglican Communion. Anglicanism has referred to itself
as the via media between Roman Catholicism and Protestantism. It considers
itself to be both Catholic and Reformed. Although the use of the term
"Protestant" to refer to Anglicans was once common, it is controversial today,
with some rejecting the label and others accepting it. The Anglican Communion
considers itself to be part of the One Holy catholic and Apostolic Church that
Christ founded, without the implication that various other churches are not
also branches of it. Baptists. Note: All Baptist associations are
congregationalist affiliations for the purpose of cooperation, in which each
local church is governmentally independent. The most prominent Baptist
organizations in the United States are the American Baptist Association,
tending to be more liberal, the National Baptist Convention, tending to be more
moderate and the Southern Baptist Convention, tending to be more conservative.
Spiritual Baptists. Note: The Spiritual Baptist Archdiocese of New York, Inc
has congregationalist affiliations for the purpose of cooperation, in which
each local church is governmentally independent. United and uniting churches.
Churches which are the result of a merger between distinct denominational
churches. Churches are listed here when their disparate heritage marks them as
inappropriately listed in the particular categories above. Religious Society of
Friends (Quakers). The Religious Society of Friends (Quakers), is considered
historically to be a Protestant Christian denomination. It has gone through a
small number of doctrinal schisms in its history as a Christian church. Today,
it exists as several separate and distinct Quaker branches, and it also has an
emphasis on Christian belief and practice which ranges from evangelical to
liberal. Nontrinitarian groups. Christians who do not believe in the
traditional hypothesis of a Triune God ("one God in three co-equal Persons")
Latter Day Saints. Most Latter Day Saint denominations are derived from the
Church of Christ, established by Joseph Smith in 1830. The majority of "Prairie
Saint" denominations were established after the death of Smith by the remnants
of the Saints who did not go west with Brigham Young. Many of which rejected
some or most of the 1840s theological developments in favor of 1830s
theological understandings and practices. The Rocky Mountain denominations are
The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and various sects who broke
from it after its settlement in the Rocky Mountains, many breaking after its
abandonment of practicing polygamy in 1890. Other denominations are defined by
either a belief in Joseph Smith as a prophet, or acceptance of the Book of
Mormon as scripture. Mormonism is generally considered restorationist,
believing that Smith, by inspiration and revelation, restored the original
Church of Christ to the earth. Some Latter Day Saint denominations are regarded
by other Christians as being nontrinitarian, but generally do not accept that
label themselves, in contrast to the groups labeled "nontrinitarian" below. The
churches within the Latter Day Saint movement are not recognized as an orthodox
Christian denomination, and with the exception of Community of Christ, which is
a member communion of the National Council of Churches, are usually rejected as
Christian by many Protestants. Mormons, however, strongly oppose this
rejection. New Thought. The relation of New Thought to Christianity is
sometimes murky spiritually; some of its adherents see themselves as practising
a true form of Christianity, while adherents of Religious Science says "yes and
no" to the question of whether they consider themselves to be Christian in
belief and practice, leaving it up to the individual to define oneself
spiritually. Syncretistic religions incorporating elements of Christianity. The
relation of these movements to other Christian ideas can be remote. They are
listed here because they include some elements of Christian practice or
beliefs, within religious contexts which may be only loosely characterized as
Christian.
