List of names for the biblical nameless This list provides names given in
Jewish, Islamic or Christian tradition for characters who are unnamed in the
Bible. Hebrew Bible/Old Testament. Wives of the antediluvian patriarchs. The
book of "Jubilees" provides names for a host of unnamed biblical characters,
including wives for most of the antediluvian patriarchs. The last of these is
Noah's wife, to whom it gives the name of "Emzara". Other Jewish traditional
sources contain many different names for Noah's wife. The book of "Jubilees"
says that Awan was Adam and Eve's first daughter. Their second daughter "Azura"
married Seth. For many of the early wives in the series, "Jubilees" notes that
the patriarchs married their sisters. The "Cave of Treasures" and the earlier
"Kitab al-Magall" (part of Clementine literature) name entirely different women
as the wives of the patriarchs, with considerable variations among the extant
copies. The Muslim historian Ibn Ishaq (c. 750), as cited in al-Tabari (c.
915), provides names for these wives that are generally similar to those in
"Jubilees"; however he makes them Cainites rather than Sethites, despite
clearly stating elsewhere that none of Noah's ancestors were descended from
Cain. Cain and Abel's sisters. See also: Balbira & Kalmana for alternate
traditions of names. Noah's wife. Daughter of Lamech and Zillah and sister of
Tubal-cain (Gen. iv. 22). According to Abba ben Kahana, Naamah was Noah's wife
and was called "Naamah" (pleasant) because her conduct was pleasing to God. But
the majority of the rabbis reject this statement, declaring that Naamah was an
idolatrous woman who sang "pleasant" songs to idols. See also Wives aboard the
Ark for a list of traditional names given to the wives of Noah and his sons
Shem, Ham, and Japheth. Daughter of Ham. The Mormon "Book of Abraham", first
published in 1842, mentions the name of Egyptus (Abraham 1:23) as being Ham's
wife; his daughter apparently has the same name (v. 25). Nimrod's wife. A large
body of legend has attached itself to Nimrod, whose brief mention in "Genesis"
merely makes him "a mighty hunter before the Lord". These legends usually make
Nimrod to be a sinister figure, and they reach their peak in Hislop's "The Two
Babylons", which make Nimrod and Semiramis to be the original authors of every
false and pagan religion. Potiphar's wife. Potiphar's wife attempted to seduce
Joseph in Egypt. Pharaoh's daughter. Pharaoh's daughter, who drew Moses out of
the water, is known as "Bithiah" in Jewish tradition (identifying her with the
"Pharaoh's daughter Bithiah" in 1 Chronicles 4:18). Pharaoh's magicians. The
names of Jannes and Jambres, or Jannes and Mambres, were well known through the
ancient world as magicians. In this instance, nameless characters from the
Hebrew Bible are given names in the New Testament. Their names also appear in
numerous Jewish texts. Job's wife. Apocryphal Jewish folklore says that Sitis,
or Sitidos, was Job's first wife, who died during his trials. After his
temptation was over, the same sources say that Job remarried Dinah, Jacob's
daughter who appears in Genesis. The source does not tell which wife of Job has
this name. Jephthah's daughter. The "Liber Antiquitatum Biblicarum" falsely
ascribes itself to the Jewish author Philo. It in fact did not surface until
the sixteenth century; see "Works of Philo". The Witch of Endor. According to a
midrash on 1 Samuel 28, Zephaniah was the mother of Abner, Saul's cousin, and a
military commander in Saul's army. (See 1 Samuel 14) The Queen of Sheba.
According to Ethiopian traditions, the Queen of Sheba returned to Ethiopia
pregnant with King Solomon's child. She bore Solomon a son that went on to
found a dynasty that ruled Ethiopia until the fall of Emperor Haile Selassie in
1974. Apocrypha/Deuterocanonical books. The Deuterocanonical books, sometimes
called the "Apocrypha", are considered canonical by Catholics, Eastern
Orthodox, and Oriental Orthodox (though these churches' lists of books differ
slightly from each other), but are considered non-canonical by Jews and
Protestants. The woman with seven sons. The woman with seven sons is a Jewish
martyr who is unnamed in 2 Maccabees 7, but is named Hannah, Miriam, Shamuna
and Solomonia in other sources. According to Eastern Orthodox tradition, her
sons, the "Holy Maccabean Martyrs" (not to be confused with the martyrs in the
Ethiopian book of Meqabyan), are named Abim, Antonius, Gurias, Eleazar,
Eusebonus, Alimus and Marcellus. The seven Archangels. Tobit 12:15 reads "I am
Raphael, one of the seven holy angels, which present the prayers of the saints,
and which go in and out before the glory of the Holy One." Of the six unnamed
archangels, Michael is named in the Book of Daniel, and Gabriel is named in the
Gospel of Luke. The Book of Enoch, deuterocanonical in the Ethiopian Orthodox
Church, names the remaining four archangels Uriel, Raguel, Zerachiel, and
Ramiel. Other sources name them Uriel, Izidkiel, Haniel, and Kepharel. In the
Coptic Orthodox Church the names of these four archangels are given as Suriel,
Sedakiel, Sarathiel and Ananiel. Several other sets of names have also been
given. New Testament. The Magi. The Gospel does not state that there were, in
fact, three magi or when exactly they visited Jesus, only that multiple magi
brought three gifts: gold, frankincense, and myrrh. Nevertheless, the number of
magi is usually extrapolated from the number of gifts, and the three wise men
are a staple of Christian nativity scenes. While the European names have
enjoyed the most publicity, other faith traditions have different versions.
According to the "Armenisches Kindheitsevangelium", the three magi were
brothers and kings, namely Balthasar, king of India; Melqon, king of Persia;
and Gaspar, king of Arabia. The Chinese Christian Church believes that the
astronomer Liu Shang was one of the wise men. The Nativity shepherds. The "Book
of the Bee" was written by Bishop Shelemon in the Aramaic language in the
thirteenth century. Sisters/step-sisters/female cousins of Jesus. The fact that
Jesus had at least two sisters/stepsisters/female cousins is mentioned in Mark
3, 32–34 and Matthew 12, 50, though their exact number is not specified in
either gospel. In addition, the various versions of Epiphanus differ on whether
one of the sisters was named Maria or Anna. Syrophoenician woman. According to
the same source, her daughter was "Berenice". Hæmorrhaging woman. "Veronica"
is a Latin variant of "Berenice" (). According to the "Acts of the Apostles",
Veronica or Berenice obtained some of Jesus' blood on a cloth at the
Crucifixion. Tradition identifies her with the woman who was healed of a
bleeding discharge in the Gospel (see also: Veil of Veronica). Samaritan woman
at the well. In the tradition of the Eastern Orthodox Church, the woman at the
well became a follower of Christ, was baptized, proclaimed the Gospel over a
wide area, and was later martyred. She is recognized as a saint in the Eastern
Orthodox Church. Damned rich man. "Dives" is simply Latin for "rich", and as
such may not count as a proper name. The story of the blessed Lazarus and the
damned rich man is widely recognised under the title of "Dives and Lazarus",
which may have resulted in this word being taken for a proper name. Woman taken
in adultery. A long standing Western Christian tradition first attested by Pope
Gregory I identifies the woman taken in adultery with Mary Magdalene, and also
with Mary of Bethany. Jesus had exorcised seven demons out of Mary Magdalene
(Mark ), and Mary Magdalene appears prominently in the several accounts of
Jesus' entombment and resurrection, but there is no indication in the Bible
that clearly states that Mary Magdalene was the same person as the adulteress
forgiven by Jesus. Roman Catholics also have identified Mary Magdalene as the
weeping woman who was a sinner, and who anoints Jesus' feet in , and while the
Church has dropped this interpretation to a degree, this remains one of her
more famous portrayals. The Eastern Orthodox Church has never identified Mary
Magdalene as either the woman taken in adultery, or the sinful woman who
anointed Jesus' feet. Pontius Pilate's wife. During the trial of Jesus the wife
of Pontius Pilate sent a message to him saying, "Have nothing to do with that
just man; for I have suffered many things this day in a dream because of him."
The proposed names of Procla and Procula may not be names at all, but simply a
form of Pilate's official title of Procurator, indicating that she was the
Procurator's wife. Thieves crucified with Jesus. Dismas is revered as a saint
under that name by Roman Catholics. Soldier who pierced Jesus with a spear. In
tradition he is called "Cassius" before his conversion to Christianity. The
"Lance of Longinus", also known as the "Spear of Destiny", is supposedly
preserved as a relic, and various miracles are said to be worked through it.
