List of religions and spiritual traditions Religion is a collection of cultural
systems, belief systems, and worldviews that establishes symbols that relate
humanity to spirituality and, sometimes, to moral values. While religion is
hard to define, one standard model of religion, used in religious studies
courses, was proposed by Clifford Geertz, who simply called it a "cultural
system". A critique of Geertz's model by Talal Asad categorized religion as "an
anthropological category." Many religions have narratives, symbols, traditions
and sacred histories that are intended to give meaning to life or to explain
the origin of life or the universe. They tend to derive morality, ethics,
religious laws or a preferred lifestyle from their ideas about the cosmos and
human nature. The word "religion" is sometimes used interchangeably with
"faith" or "belief system", but religion differs from private belief in that it
has a public aspect. Most religions have organized behaviors, including
clerical hierarchies, a definition of what constitutes adherence or membership,
congregations of laity, regular meetings or services for the purposes of
veneration of a deity or for prayer, holy places (either natural or
architectural), and/or scriptures. The practice of a religion may also include
sermons, commemoration of the activities of a god or gods, sacrifices,
festivals, feasts, trance, initiations, funerary services, matrimonial
services, meditation, music, art, dance, public service, or other aspects of
human culture. Some academics studying the subject have divided religions into
three broad categories: world religions, a term which refers to transcultural,
international faiths; indigenous religions, which refers to smaller, culture-
specific or nation-specific religious groups; and new religious movements,
which refers to recently developed faiths. One modern academic theory of
religion, social constructionism, says that religion is a modern concept that
suggests all spiritual practice and worship follows a model similar to the
Abrahamic religions as an orientation system that helps to interpret reality
and define human beings, and thus religion, as a concept, has been applied
inappropriately to non-Western cultures that are not based upon such systems,
or in which these systems are a substantially simpler construct. Abrahamic
religions. A group of monotheistic traditions sometimes grouped with one
another for comparative purposes, because all refer to a patriarch named
Abraham. Indian religions. Religions that originated in India and religions and
traditions related to, and descended from, them. African diasporic religions.
African diasporic religions are a number of related religions that developed in
the Americas among African slaves and their descendants in various countries of
the Caribbean Islands and Latin America, as well as parts of the southern
United States. They derive from African traditional religions, especially of
West and Central Africa, showing similarities to the Yoruba religion in
particular. Indigenous traditional religions. Traditionally, these faiths have
all been classified "Pagan", but scholars prefer the terms "indigenous/primal/
folk/ethnic religions".
