Liturgical year The liturgical year, also known as the church year, consists of
the cycle of liturgical seasons in Christian churches which determines when
feast days, including celebrations of saints, are to be observed, and which
portions of Scripture are to be read either in an annual cycle or in a cycle of
several years. Distinct liturgical colours may appear in connection with
different seasons of the liturgical year. The dates of the festivals vary
somewhat between the different churches, though the sequence and logic is
largely the same. In both East and West, the dates of many feasts vary from
year to year, usually in line with the variation in the date of Easter, with
which most other moveable feasts are associated. The extent to which feasts and
festivals are celebrated also varies between churches; in general, Protestant
churches observe far fewer than Catholic and Orthodox, in particular with
regard to feasts of the Virgin Mary and the other Saints. Liturgical cycle. The
liturgical cycle divides the year into a series of seasons, each with their own
mood, theological emphases, and modes of prayer, which can be signified by
different ways of decorating churches, colors of paraments and vestments for
clergy, scriptural readings, themes for preaching and even different traditions
and practices often observed personally or in the home. In churches that follow
the liturgical year, the scripture passages for each Sunday (and even each day
of the year in some traditions) are specified in a lectionary. After the
Protestant Reformation, Anglicans and Lutherans continued to follow the
lectionary of the Roman Rite. Following a decision of the Second Vatican
Council, the Catholic Church revised that lectionary in 1969, adopting a three-
year cycle of readings for Sundays and a two-year cycle for weekdays.
Adaptations of the revised Roman Rite lectionary were adopted by Protestants,
leading to the publication in 1994 of the Revised Common Lectionary for Sundays
and major feasts, which is now used by many Protestant denominations, including
also (Methodists, Reformed, United, etc.) has increased. This has led to a
greater awareness of the Christian year among Protestants, especially among
mainline denominations. Biblical calendars. Scholars are not in agreement about
whether the calendars used by the Jews before the Babylonian captivity were
solar (based on the return of the same relative position between the sun and
the earth) or lunisolar (based on months that corresponded to the cycle of the
moon, with periodic additional months to bring the calendar back into agreement
with the solar cycle) like the present-day Hebrew calendar. The first month of
the year was called ◊ê◊ë◊ô◊ë (Aviv), meaning the month of green ears of grain.
It thus occurred in the spring. At about the time of the Babylonian captivity,
the Jews adopted as the name for the month the term ◊ ◊ô◊°◊ü (Nisan), based on
the Babylonian name Nisanu. Thomas J Talley says that the adoption of the
Babylonian term occurred even before the captivity. Western liturgical
calendar. Western Christian liturgical calendars are based on the cycle of the
Roman Rite of the Catholic Church, including Lutheran, Anglican, and other
Protestant calendars since this cycle pre-dates the Reformation. Generally, the
liturgical seasons in western Christianity are Advent, Christmas, Ordinary Time
(Time after Epiphany), Lent, Easter, and Ordinary Time (Time after Pentecost).
Catholic Church liturgical year. The Catholic Church sets aside certain days
and seasons of each year to recall and celebrate various events in the life of
Christ. In its Roman Rite the liturgical year begins with Advent, the time of
preparation for both the celebration of Jesus' birth, and his expected second
coming at the end of time. This season lasts until 24 December (Christmas Eve).
Christmastide follows, beginning with First Vespers of Christmas on the evening
of 24 December and ending with the Feast of the Baptism of the Lord. Lent is
the period of purification and penance which begins on Ash Wednesday and ends
on Holy Thursday. The Holy Thursday evening Mass of the Lord's Supper marks the
beginning of the Easter Triduum, which includes Good Friday, Holy Saturday, and
Easter Sunday. These days recall Jesus' Last Supper with his disciples, death
on the cross, burial, and resurrection. The seven-week liturgical season of
Easter immediately follows the Triduum, climaxing at Pentecost. This last feast
recalls the descent of the Holy Spirit upon Jesus' disciples after the
Ascension of Jesus. The rest of the liturgical year is commonly known as
Ordinary Time. There are many forms of liturgy in the Catholic Church. Even
putting aside the many Eastern rites in use, the Latin liturgical rites alone
include the Ambrosian Rite, the Mozarabic Rite, and the Cistercian Rite, as
well as other forms that have been largely abandoned in favour of adopting the
Roman Rite. Of this rite, what is now the "ordinary" or, to use a word employed
in the Letter of Pope Benedict XVI accompanying the motu proprio "Summorum
Pontificum", the "normal" form is that which developed from the Second Vatican
Council to the present day, while the form in force in 1962 is authorized as an
extraordinary form of the Roman Rite without restriction in private
celebrations and under certain conditions in public celebrations. The
liturgical calendar in that form of the Roman Rite (see General Roman Calendar
of 1962) differs in some respects from that of the present ordinary form, as
will be noted below, and also from the earlier General Roman Calendar of Pope
Pius XII, the still earlier General Roman Calendar of 1954 and the original
Tridentine Calendar. These articles can be consulted with regard to the Roman-
Rite liturgical year before 1962. Advent. From the Latin "", "arrival" or
"coming", the first season of the liturgical year begins four Sundays before
Christmas and ends on Christmas Eve. Traditionally observed as a "fast", its
purpose focuses on preparation for the coming of Christ. Although often
conceived as awaiting the coming of the Christ-child at Christmas, the modern
Lectionary points the season more toward eschatological themes‚Äîawaiting the
final coming of Christ, when "the wolf shall live with the lamb" (Isaiah 11:6)
and when God will have "brought down the powerful from their thrones, and
lifted up the lowly" (The Magnificat, Luke 1:52)‚Äîparticularly in the earlier
half of the season. This period of waiting is often marked by the Advent
Wreath, a garland of evergreens with four candles. Although the main symbolism
of the advent wreath is simply marking the progression of time, many churches
attach themes to each candle, most often 'hope', 'faith', 'joy', and 'love'.
"Liturgical colour": violet or purple Christmas. The Christmas season
immediately follows Advent. The traditional Twelve Days of Christmas begin with
Christmas Eve on the evening of December 24 and continue until the feast of
Epiphany. The actual Christmas season continues until the Feast of the Baptism
of Christ, which in the present form of the Roman Rite is celebrated on the
Sunday after 6 January. In the pre-1970 form, this feast is celebrated on 13
January, unless 13 January is a Sunday, in which case the feast of the Holy
Family is celebrated instead. Until the suppression of the Octave of the
Epiphany in the 1960 reforms, 13 January was the Octave day of the Epiphany,
providing the date for the end of the season. "Liturgical colour": white
Ordinary Time or Time after Epiphany. "Ordinary" comes from the same root as
our word "ordinal", and in this sense means "the counted weeks". In the Roman
Catholic Church and in some Protestant traditions, these are the common weeks
which do not belong to a proper season. In Latin, these seasons are called the
weeks "per annum", or "through the year". In the current form of the Roman Rite
adopted following the Second Vatican Council, Ordinary Time consists of 33 or
34 Sundays and is divided into two sections. The first portion extends from the
day following the Feast of the Baptism of Christ until the day before Ash
Wednesday (the beginning of Lent). It contains anywhere from three to eight
Sundays, depending on how early or late Easter falls. The main focus in the
readings of the Mass is Christ's earthly ministry, rather than any one
particular event. The counting of the Sundays resumes following Eastertide,
however, two Sundays are replaced by Pentecost and Trinity Sunday, and
depending on whether the year has 52 or 53 weeks, one may be omitted. In the
pre-1970 form of the Roman Rite, the Time after Epiphany has anywhere from one
to six Sundays. As in the current form of the rite, the season mainly concerns
Christ's preaching and ministry, with many of his parables read as the Gospel
readings. The season begins on 14 January and ends on the Saturday before
Septuagesima Sunday. Omitted Sundays after Epiphany are transferred to Time
after Pentecost and celebrated between the Twenty-Third and the Last Sunday
after Pentecost according to an order indicated in the Code of Rubrics, 18,
with complete omission of any for which there is no Sunday available in the
current year. Before the 1960 revisions, the omitted Sunday would be celebrated
on the Saturday before Septuagesima Sunday, or, in the case of the Twenty-Third
Sunday after Pentecost, on the Saturday before the Last Sunday after Pentecost.
"Liturgical colour": green Septuagesima/Pre-Lenten Season. Septuagesima (from
the Latin word for "seventieth") is a two-and-a-half-week period before Lent.
This pre-Lent season is present in the pre-1970 form of the Roman Rite and in
some Protestant calendars. It is a transition from the first part of the season
"per annum" to the season of Lent, and a preparation for the fasting and
penance which begin on Ash Wednesday. Although most of the Divine Office
remains the same as during the season "per annum", certain customs of Lent are
adopted, including the suppression of the "Alleluia", the replacement of the
Alleluia at Mass with the Tract and the Gloria is no longer said on Sundays. In
the 1969 reform of the Roman Rite, this intermediate season was removed, with
these weeks becoming part of Ordinary Time. "Liturgical colour" (where
observed): violet or purple Lent and Passiontide. Lent is a major penitential
season of preparation for Easter. It begins on Ash Wednesday and, if the
penitential days of Good Friday and Holy Saturday are included, lasts for forty
days, since the six Sundays within the season are not counted. In the Roman
Rite the Gloria in Excelsis Deo and the Te Deum are not used in the Mass and
Liturgy of the Hours respectively, except on Solemnities and Feasts, and the
Alleluia and verse that usually precede the reading of the Gospel is either
omitted or replaced with another acclamation. Lutheran churches make these same
omissions. As in Advent, the deacon and subdeacon of the pre-1970 form of the
Roman Rite do not wear their habitual dalmatic and tunicle (signs of joy) in
Masses of the season during Lent; instead they wear "folded chasubles", in
accordance with the ancient custom. In the pre-1970 form of the Roman Rite, the
two weeks before Easter form the season of Passiontide, a subsection of the
Lenten season that begins with Matins of Ash Wednesday and ends immediately
before the Mass of the Easter Vigil. In this form, what previously was
officially called Passion Sunday, has the official name of the First Sunday in
Passiontide, and Palm Sunday has the additional name of the Second Sunday in
Passiontide. In Sunday and ferial Masses (but not on feasts celebrated in the
first of these two weeks) the Gloria Patri is omitted at the Entrance Antiphon
and at the Lavabo, as well as in the responds in the Divine Office. In the
post-1969 form of the Roman Rite, "Passion Sunday" and "Palm Sunday" are both
names for the Sunday before Easter, officially called "Palm Sunday of the
Lord's Passion". The former Passion Sunday became a fifth Sunday of Lent. The
earlier form reads Matthew's account on Sunday, Mark's on Tuesday, and Luke's
on Wednesday, while the post-1969 form reads the Passion only on Palm Sunday
(with the three Synoptic Gospels arranged in a three-year cycle) and on Good
Friday, when it reads the Passion according to John, as also do earlier forms
of the Roman Rite. The veiling of crucifixes and images of the saints with
violet cloth, which was obligatory before 1970, is left to the decision of the
national bishops' conferences. In the United States, it is permitted but not
required, at the discretion of the pastor. In all forms, the readings concern
the events leading up to the Last Supper and the betrayal, Passion, and death
of Christ. The week before Easter is called Holy Week. In the Roman Rite,
feasts that fall within that week are simply omitted, unless they have the rank
of Solemnity, in which case they are transferred to another date. The only
solemnities inscribed in the General Calendar that can fall within that week
are those of St. Joseph and the Annunciation. "Liturgical colour": violet or
purple. The colour rose may be used, where it is the practice, on Laetare
Sunday (4th Sunday of Lent). On Palm Sunday the colour since 1970 is red, by
earlier rules violet or purple, with red being used after 1955 for the blessing
of the palms. Easter Triduum. The Easter Triduum consists of Good Friday, Holy
Saturday and Easter Sunday. Each of these days begins liturgically not with the
morning but with the preceding evening. The triduum begins on the evening
before Good Friday with Mass of the Lord's Supper, celebrated with white
vestments, and often includes a ritual of ceremonial footwashing. It is
customary on this night for a vigil involving private prayer to take place,
beginning after the evening service and continuing until midnight. This vigil
is occasionally renewed at dawn, continuing until the Good Friday liturgy.
During the day of Good Friday Mass is not celebrated in the Catholic Church.
Instead a Celebration of the Passion of the Lord is held in the afternoon or
evening. It consists of three parts: a Liturgy of the Word that includes the
reading of the account of the Passion by John the Evangelist and concludes with
a solemn Universal Prayer. Other churches also have their Good Friday
commemoration of the Passion. The colour of vestments varies: no colour, red,
or black are used in different traditions. Coloured hangings may be removed.
Lutheran churches often either remove colourful adornments and icons, or veil
them with drab cloth. The service is usually plain with somber music, ending
with the congregation leaving in silence. In the Roman Catholic, some Lutheran,
and High Anglican rites, a crucifix (not necessarily the one which stands on or
near the altar on other days of the year) is ceremoniously unveiled. Other
crucifixes are unveiled, without ceremony, after the service. Holy Saturday
commemorates the day during which Christ lay in the tomb. In the Roman Catholic
Church, there is no Mass on this day; the Easter Vigil Mass, which, though
celebrated properly at the following midnight, is often celebrated in the
evening, is an Easter Mass. With no liturgical celebration, there is no
question of a liturgical colour. The Easter Vigil is held in the night between
Holy Saturday and Easter Sunday, to celebrate the resurrection of Jesus. See
also Paschal candle. The liturgical colour is white, often together with gold.
In the Roman Rite, during the "Gloria in Excelsis Deo" the organ and bells are
used in the liturgy for the first time in 2 days, and the statues, which have
been veiled during Passiontide (at least in the Roman Rite through the 1962
version), are unveiled. In Lutheran churches, colours and icons are re-
displayed as well. Easter season. Easter is the celebration of Jesus'
resurrection. The date of Easter varies from year to year, according to a
lunar-calendar dating system (see computus for details). In the Roman Rite, the
Easter season extends from the Easter Vigil through Pentecost Sunday. In the
pre-1970 form of the rite, this season includes also the Octave of Pentecost,
so Eastertide lasts until None of the following Saturday. In the Roman Rite,
the Easter octave allows no other feasts to be celebrated or commemorated
during it; a solemnity, such as the Annunciation, falling within it is
transferred to the following Monday. If Easter Sunday or Easter Monday falls on
25 April, the Greater Litanies, which in the pre-1970 form of the Roman Rite
are on that day, are transferred to the following Tuesday. By a decree of 5 May
2000, the Second Sunday of Easter (the Sunday after Easter Day itself), is
known also in the Roman Rite as Divine Mercy Sunday. Ascension Thursday, which
celebrates the return of Jesus to heaven following his resurrection, is the
fortieth day of Easter, but, in places where it is not observed as a Holy Day
of Obligation, the post-1969 form of the Roman rite transfers it to the
following Sunday. Pentecost is the fiftieth and last day of the Easter season.
It celebrates the sending of the Holy Spirit to the Apostles, which
traditionally marks the birth of the Church, see also Apostolic Age.
"Liturgical colour": white, but red on the feast of Pentecost. Ordinary Time,
Time after Pentecost, Time after Trinity, or Kingdomtide. This season, under
various names, follows the Easter season and the feasts of Easter, Ascension,
and Pentecost. In the post-1969 form of the Roman rite, Ordinary Time resumes
on Pentecost Monday, omitting the Sunday which would have fallen on Pentecost.
In the earlier form, where Pentecost is celebrated with an octave, the Time
after Pentecost begins at Vespers on the Saturday after Pentecost. It ends on
the Saturday before the First Sunday of Advent. The Sundays resume their
numbering at the point that will make the Sunday before Advent the thirty-
fourth, omitting any weeks for which there is no room (present-day form of the
Roman Rite) or are numbered as "Sundays after Pentecost" (pre-1970 Roman Rite,
Eastern Orthodoxy and some Protestants) or as "Sundays after Trinity" (some
Protestants). In the final few weeks of Ordinary Time, many churches direct
attention to the coming of the Kingdom of God, thus ending the liturgical year
with an eschatological theme that is one of the predominant themes of the
season of Advent that began the liturgical year. For instance, in the pre-1970
form of the Roman Rite, the Gospel of the Last Sunday is and in the later form
of that rite all the last three Sundays have similar themes. While the Roman
Rite adopts no special designation for this final part of Ordinary Time, some
denominations do, and may also change the liturgical colour. The Church of
England uses the term "Sundays before Advent" for the final four Sundays and
permits red vestments as an alternative. Other denominations, including the
United Methodist Church and the Christian Church - Synod of Saint Timothy,
speak of "Kingdomtide". The Lutheran Church - Missouri Synod (LCMS) uses the
terms "Third-Last, Second-Last and Last Sunday in the Church Year" and does not
change from green. The LCMS does not officially celebrate a "Feast of Christ
the King." The Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod (WELS) uses the term
"Period of End Times" and assigns red vestments to the first and second
Sundays. Calendar of saints. Hierarchy of feast days. There are degrees of
solemnity of the office of the feast days of saints. In the thirteenth century,
the Roman Rite distinguished three ranks: simple, semidouble and double, with
consequent differences in the recitation of the Divine Office or Breviary. The
simple feast commenced with the chapter ("capitulum") of First Vespers, and
ended with None. It had three lessons and took the psalms of Matins from the
ferial office; the rest of the office was like the semidouble. The semidouble
feast had two Vespers, nine lessons in Matins, and ended with Compline. The
antiphons before the psalms were only intoned. In the Mass, the semidouble had
always at least three "orationes" or collects. On a double feast the antiphons
were sung in their entirety, before and after the psalms. In Lauds and Vespers
there were no "suffragia" of the saints, and the Mass had only one "oratio" (if
no commemoration was prescribed). If ordinary double feasts (referred to also
as lesser doubles) occurred with feasts of a higher rank, they could be
simplified, except the octave days of some feasts and the feasts of the Doctors
of the Church, which were transferred. To the existing distinction between
major and ordinary or minor doubles, Pope Clement VIII added two more ranks,
those of first-class or second-class doubles. Some of these two classes were
kept with octaves. This was still the situation when the 1907 article
Ecclesiastical Feasts in the Catholic Encyclopedia was written. In accordance
with the rules then in force, feast days of any form of double, if impeded by
"occurrence" (falling on the same day) with a feast day of higher class, were
transferred to another day. Pope Pius X simplified matters considerably in his
1911 reform of the Roman Breviary. In the case of occurrence the lower-ranking
feast day could become a commemoration within the celebration of the higher-
ranking one. Until then, ordinary doubles took precedence over most of the
semidouble Sundays, resulting in many of the Sunday Masses rarely being said.
While retaining the semidouble rite for Sundays, Pius X's reform permitted only
the most important feast days to be celebrated on Sunday, although
commemorations were still made until Pope John XXIII's reform of 1960. The
division into doubles (of various kinds) semidoubles and simples continued
until 1955, when Pope Pius XII abolished the rank of semidouble, making all the
previous semidoubles simples, and reducing the previous simples to a mere
commemoration in the Mass of another feast day or of the feria on which they
fell (see General Roman Calendar of Pope Pius XII). Then, in 1960, Pope John
XXIII issued the Code of Rubrics, completely ending the ranking of feast days
by doubles etc., and replacing it by a ranking, applied not only to feast days
but to all liturgical days, as I, II, III, and IV class days. The 1969 revision
by Pope Paul VI (see Roman Catholic calendar of saints) divided feast days into
"solemnities", "feasts" and "memorials", corresponding approximately to Pope
John XXIII's I, II and III class feast days. Commemorations were abolished.
While some of the memorials are considered obligatory, others are optional,
permitting a choice on some days between two or three memorials, or between one
or more memorials and the celebration of the feria. On a day to which no
obligatory celebration is assigned, the Mass may be of any saint mentioned in
the Roman Martyrology for that day. Assumption of Mary. Observed by Roman
Catholics and some Anglicans on August 15, which is the same as the Eastern and
Orthodox feast of the Dormition, the end of the earthly life of the Virgin Mary
and, for some, her bodily Assumption into heaven, is celebrated. The Roman
Catholic teaching on this feast was defined as dogma on November 1, 1950 by
Pope Pius XII in the Papal Bull, "Munificentissimus Deus". In other Anglican
and Lutheran traditions, as well as a few others, August 15 is celebrated as
St. Mary, Mother of the Lord. "Liturgical colour": white Anglican Church. The
Church of England uses a liturgical year that is in most respects identical to
that of the Roman Church. While this is less true of the calendars contained
within the "Book of Common Prayer" and the "Alternative Service Book" (1980),
it is particularly true since the Anglican Church adopted its new pattern of
services and liturgies contained within "Common Worship", in 2000. Certainly,
the broad division of the year into the Christmas and Easter seasons,
interspersed with periods of Ordinary Time, is identical, and the majority of
the Festivals and Commemorations are also celebrated, with a few exceptions. In
some Anglican traditions (including the Church of England) the Christmas season
is followed by an Epiphany season, which begins on the Eve of the Epiphany (on
6 January or the nearest Sunday) and ends on the Feast of the Presentation (on
2 February or the nearest Sunday). Ordinary Time then begins after this period.
The "Book of Common Prayer" contains within it the traditional Western
Eucharistic lectionary which traces its roots to the "Comes" of St. Jerome in
the 5th century. Its similarity to the ancient lectionary is particularly
obvious during Trinity season (Sundays after the Sunday after Pentecost),
reflecting that understanding of sanctification. Eastern Orthodox Church. The
Liturgical year in the Eastern Orthodox Church is characterized by alternating
fasts and feasts, and is in many ways similar to the Roman Catholic year
described above. However, Church New Year (Indiction) traditionally begins on
September 1 (Old Style or New Style), rather than the first Sunday of Advent.
It includes both feasts on the Fixed Cycle and the Paschal Cycle (or Moveable
Cycle). The most important feast day by far is the Feast of Pascha
(Easter)‚Äîthe Feast of Feasts. Then the Twelve Great Feasts, which commemorate
various significant events in the lives of Jesus Christ and of the Theotokos
(Virgin Mary). The majority of Orthodox Christians (Russians, in particular)
follow the Julian Calendar in calculating their ecclesiastical feasts, but many
(including the Ecumenical Patriarchate and the Church of Greece), while
preserving the Julian calculation for feasts on the Paschal Cycle, have adopted
the Revised Julian Calendar (at present coinciding with the Gregorian Calendar)
to calculate those feasts which are fixed according to the calendar date.
Between 1900 and 2100, there is a thirteen-day difference between the dates of
the Julian and the Revised Julian and Gregorian calendars. Thus, for example,
where Christmas is celebrated on December 25 O.S. (Old Style), the celebration
coincides with January 7 in the Revised Calendar. The computation of the day of
Pascha (Easter) is, however, always computed according to a lunar calendar
based on the Julian Calendar, even by those churches which observe the Revised
Calendar. There are four fasting seasons during the year: The most important
fast is Great Lent which is an intense time of fasting, almsgiving and prayer,
extending for forty days prior to Palm Sunday and Holy Week, as a preparation
for Pascha. The Nativity Fast (Winter Lent) is a time of preparation for the
Feast of the Nativity of Christ (Christmas), but whereas Advent in the West
lasts only four weeks, Nativity Fast lasts a full forty days. The Apostles'
Fast is variable in length, lasting anywhere from eight days to six weeks, in
preparation for the Feast of Saints Peter and Paul (June 29). The Dormition
Fast lasts for two weeks from August 1 to August 14 in preparation for the
Feast of the Dormition of the Theotokos (August 15). The liturgical year is so
constructed that during each of these fasting seasons, one of the Great Feasts
occurs, so that fasting may be tempered with joy. In addition to these fasting
seasons, Orthodox Christians fast on Wednesdays and Fridays throughout the year
(and some Orthodox monasteries also observe Monday as a fast day). Certain
fixed days are always fast days, even if they fall on a Saturday or Sunday (in
which case the fast is lessened somewhat, but not abrogated altogether); these
are: The Decollation of St. John the Baptist, the Exaltation of the Cross and
the day before the Epiphany (January 5). There are several fast-free periods,
when it is forbidden to fast, even on Wednesday and Friday. These are: the week
following Pascha, the week following Pentecost, the period from the Nativity of
Christ until January the 5th and the first week of the Triodion (the week
following the 33rd Sunday after the Pentecost). Pascha. The greatest feast is
Pascha, which for the Orthodox is calculated differently than in the West.
Easter for both East and West is calculated as the first Sunday after the full
moon that falls on or after March 21 (nominally the day of the vernal equinox).
However, whereas Western Christians follow the Gregorian Calendar in their
calculations, the Orthodox calculate the fixed date of 21 March according to
the Julian Calendar, and observe the additional rule that Easter may not
precede or coincide with the first day of the Jewish Passover (see computus for
further details). The date of Pascha is central to the entire ecclesiastical
year, determining not only the date for the beginning of Great Lent and
Pentecost, but affecting the cycle of moveable feasts, of scriptural readings
and the Octoechos (texts chanted according to the eight ecclesiastical modes)
throughout the year. There are also a number of lesser feasts throughout the
year that are based upon the date of Pascha. The moveable cycle begins on the
Zacchaeus Sunday (the first Sunday in preparation for Great Lent or the 33rd
Sunday after Pentecost as it is known), though the cycle of the Octoechos
continues until Palm Sunday. The twelve Great Feasts. Some of these feasts
follow the Fixed Cycle, and some follow the Moveable (Paschal) Cycle. Most of
those on the Fixed Cycle have a period of preparation called a Forefeast, and a
period of celebration afterward, similar to the Western Octave, called an
Afterfeast. Great Feasts on the Paschal Cycle do not have Forefeasts. The
lengths of Forefeasts and Afterfeasts vary, according to the feast. NOTE: In
Eastern practice, should this feast fall during Holy Week or on Pascha itself,
the feast of the Annunciation is not transferred to another day. In fact, the
conjunction of the feasts of the Annunciation and Pascha, known as "Kyriou-
Pascha," is considered an extremely festive event. Other Feasts. Every day
throughout the year commemorates some saint or some event in the lives of
Christ or the Theotokos. When a feast on the moveable cycle occurs, the feast
on the fixed cycle that was set for that calendar day is transferred, with the
propers of the feast often being chanted at Compline on the nearest convenient
day. Cycles. In addition to the Fixed and Moveable Cycles, there are a number
of other liturgical cycles in the ecclesiastical year that affect the
celebration of the divine services. These include, the Daily Cycle, the Weekly
Cycle, the Cycle of Matins Gospels, and the Octoechos.. Secular observance.
Because of the dominance of Christianity in Europe throughout the Middle Ages,
many features of the Christian year became incorporated into the secular
calendar. Many of its feasts (e.g., Christmas, Mardi Gras, Saint Patrick's Day)
remain holidays, and are now celebrated by people of all faiths and none ‚Äî in
some cases worldwide. The secular celebrations bear varying degrees of likeness
to the religious feasts from which they derived, often also including elements
of ritual from pagan festivals of similar date.
