Liturgy Liturgy () is the customary public worship done by a specific religious
group, according to its particular traditions. The word, sometimes rendered by
its English translation "service", may refer to an elaborate formal ritual such
as the Eastern Orthodox Divine Liturgy () and Catholic Mass, or a daily
activity such as the Muslim salat and Jewish services. As a religious
phenomenon, liturgy is a communal response to the sacred through activity
reflecting praise, thanksgiving, supplication, or repentance. Ritualization may
be associated with life events such as birth, coming of age, marriage and
death. It thus forms the basis for establishing a relationship with a divine
agency, as well as with other participants in the liturgy. Methods of dress,
preparation of food, application of cosmetics or other hygienic practices are
all considered liturgical activities. Ancient Greece. The familiar sense of the
word is an extension of the technical term in ancient Greek, "leitourgia",
signifying the often expensive offers of service to the people, and thus to the
"polis" and the state. Through the "leitourgia" the rich carried a financial
burden and were correspondingly rewarded with honours. The "leitourgia" became
both mandatory and honorific, supporting the patron's standing among the elite.
The holder of a Hellenic "leitourgia" was not taxed a specific sum, but
entrusted with a particular ritual, which could be performed with greater or
lesser magnificence. The chief sphere remained that of civic religion, embodied
in the festivals: M.I. Finley notes "in Demosthenes' day there were at least 97
liturgical appointments in Athens for the festivals, rising to 118 in a
(quadrennial) Panathenaic year." Eventually, under the Roman Empire, such
obligations, known as " Monera", devolved into a competitive and ruinously
expensive burden that was not avoided when possible. Christianity. Frequently
in Christianity a distinction is made between "liturgical" and "non-liturgical"
churches based on the elaboration and/or antiquity of the worship; in this
usage, churches whose services are unscripted or improvised are called "non-
liturgical". Others object to this usage, arguing that this terminology
obscures the universality of public worship as a religious phenomenon. Thus,
even the "open" or "waiting" worship of Quakers is liturgical, since the
waiting itself until the Holy Spirit moves individuals to speak is a prescribed
form of Quaker worship, sometimes referred to as "the liturgy of silence."
Typically in Christianity, however, the term "the liturgy" normally refers to a
standardized order of events observed during a religious service, be it a
sacramental service or a service of public prayer. In the Catholic tradition,
liturgy is considered to mean the participation of the people in the work of
God and in the liturgy Jesus Christ is considered to continue the work of
redemption in union with his Church. The term "liturgy" can also be used as a
precise term that distinguishes between those religious groups who believe
their ritual requires the "people" to do the "work" of responding to the
priest, and those who do not (hence leitourgia = work of the people).
