Louisiana Voodoo Louisiana Voodoo, also known as New Orleans Voodoo, describes
a set of religious practices which originated from the traditions of the
African diaspora. It is a cultural form of the Afro-American religions which
developed within the French, Spanish, and Creole speaking African American
population of the U.S. state of Louisiana. It is one of many incarnations of
African-based religions rooted in West African Dahomeyan Vodun. They became
syncretized with the Catholicism and Francophone culture of south Louisiana as
a result of the slave trade. Louisiana Voodoo is often confused with—but is
not completely separable from—Haitian Vodou and southern Hoodoo. It differs
from Vodou in its emphasis upon Gris-gris, voodoo queens, use of Hoodoo occult
paraphernalia, and Li Grand Zombi (snake deity). It was through Louisiana
Voodoo that such terms as gris-gris (a Wolof term) and voodoo dolls were
introduced into the American lexicon. History. African influences. Voodoo was
brought to the French colony Louisiana from Africa and from the Haitian exiles
after the Haitian revolution. From 1719 to 1731, the majority of African
captives came directly from what is now Benin, West Africa, bringing with them
their cultural practices, languages, and religious beliefs rooted in spirit and
ancestor worship. Their knowledge of herbs, poisons, and the ritual creation of
charms and amulets, intended to protect oneself or harm others, became key
elements of Louisiana Voodoo. The slave community quickly acquired a strong
presence in Louisiana. The colony was not a stable society when slaves arrived,
which allowed African culture to maintain a prominent position in the slave
community. According to a census of 1731-1732, the ratio of African slaves to
European settlers was over two to one. The ownership of slaves was concentrated
into the hands of only a few of the white settlers, facilitating the
preservation of African culture. Unlike other areas of active slave trade,
there was little separation in Louisiana between families, culture, and
languages. The Embargo Act of 1808 ended all slave imports to Louisiana.
Authorities promoted the growth of the slave population by prohibiting by law
the separation of families. Parents were sold together with their children
under fourteen years of age. The high mortality of the slave trade brought its
survivors together with a sense of solidarity. The absence of fragmentation in
the slave community, along with the kinship system produced by the bond created
by the difficulties of slavery, resulted in a “coherent, functional, well
integrated, autonomous, and self confident slave community.”) As a result
African culture and spirituality did not die out, but rather thrived in French
Creole culture. The practice of making and wearing charms and amulets for
protection, healing, or the harm of others was a key aspect to early Louisiana
Voodoo. The "ouanga", a charm used to poison an enemy, contained the poisonous
roots of the figure maudit tree, brought from Africa and preserved in the West
Indies. The ground up root was combined with other elements such as bones,
nails, roots, holy water, holy candles, holy incense, holy bread, or
crucifixes. The administrator of the ritual frequently evoked protection from
Jehova, the Christian God, and Jesus Christ. This openness of African belief
allowed for the adoption of Catholic practices into Louisiana Voodoo. Another
component of Louisiana Voodoo brought from Africa was the worship of ancestors
and the subsequent emphasis on respect for elders. For this reason, the rate of
survival among elderly slaves was high, further “Africanizing Louisiana
Creole culture.” Voodoo queens. During the 19th century, Voodoo queens became
central figures to Voodoo in the United States. Voodoo queens presided over
ceremonial meetings and ritual dances. They also earned an income by
administrating charms, amulets, and magical powders guaranteed to cure
ailments, grant desires, and confound or destroy one’s enemies. Most noted
for her achievements as voodoo Queen of New Orleans in the 1830s was Marie
Laveau. Once the news of her powers spread, she overthrew the other voodoo
queens of New Orleans. She acted as an oracle, conducted private rituals behind
her cottage on St. Ann Street of the New Orleans French Quarter, performed
exorcisms, and offered sacrifices to spirits. Also a devout Catholic, Marie
encouraged her followers to attend Catholic Mass. The influence of her Catholic
beliefs further facilitated the adoption of Catholic practices into the Voodoo
belief system. Today, she is remembered for her skill and compassion for the
less fortunate, and her spirit is considered one of the central figures of
Louisiana Voodoo. Today, thousands visit the tomb of Marie Laveau to ask
favors. Across the street from the cemetery, offerings of pound cake are left
to the statue of Saint Expedite; these offerings are believed to expedite the
favors asked of Marie Laveau. Saint Expedite represents the spirit standing
between life and death. The chapel where the statue stands was once used only
for holding funerals. Marie Laveau continues to be a central figure of
Louisiana Voodoo and of New Orleans culture. Gamblers shout her name when
throwing dice, and multiple tales of sightings of the Voodoo queen have been
told. Her grave has more visitors than the grave of Elvis Presley. Although she
is not yet officially considered a saint, there is a strong movement to have
her canonized. Commercialization. During the 1930s, true Voodoo went
underground when New Orleans became a tourist destination. Voodoo acquired an
exotic, Hollywood image in the 1932 film "White Zombie". The misconception
developed that the principal elements of Voodoo are hexing and sticking pins
into dolls. Visiting tourists asked favors of voodoo practitioners, who made it
a point never to refuse one who asked for help. Exhausted by fame, voodoo
became an underground religion. At this time, those in search of a fortune took
up the “business of superstitions,” charging money, as true voodoo
followers never did, for fake potions, powders, and gris-gris. The main focus
of Louisiana Voodoo today is to serve others and influence the outcome of life
events through the connection with nature, spirits, and ancestors. True rituals
are held "behind closed doors" as a showy ritual would be considered
disrespectful to the spirits. Voodoo methods include readings, spiritual baths,
specially devised diets, prayer, and personal ceremony. Voodoo is often used to
cure anxiety, addictions, depression, loneliness, and other ailments. It seeks
to help the hungry, the poor, and the sick as Marie Laveau once did. Louisiana
Voodoo and Christianity. As a result of the fusion of Francophone culture and
voodoo in Louisiana, many Voodoo spirits became associated with the Christian
saints that presided over the same domain. Although Voodoo and Catholic
practices are radically different, both saints and spirits act as mediators
with the Virgin Mary and Legba presiding over specific activities. Early
followers of Voodoo in the United States adopted the image of the Catholic
Saints to their spirits. Other Catholic practices adopted into Louisiana Voodoo
include reciting the Hail Mary and the Lord’s Prayer. Voodoo superstitions
and spells. Many superstitions also related to the practice of Hoodoo developed
within the Voodoo tradition in Louisiana. While these superstitions are not
central to the Voodoo faith, their appearance is partly a result of Voodoo
tradition in New Orleans and have since influenced it significantly. In Voodoo
spells, the "cure-all" was very popular among followers. The cure-all was a
Voodoo spell that could solve all problems. There were different recipes in
Voodoo spells for cure-all; one recipe was to mix jimson weed (Warning: due to
the toxicity of Jimson Weed, it is not advised for unskilled practitioners to
create) with sulfur and honey. The mixture was placed in a glass, which was
rubbed against a black cat, and then the mixture was slowly sipped. The Voodoo
doll is a form of gris-gris, and an example of sympathetic magic. Contrary to
popular belief, Voodoo dolls are usually used to bless instead of curse. The
purpose of sticking pins in the doll is not to cause pain in the person the
doll is associated with, but rather to pin a picture of a person or a name to
the doll, which traditionally represents a spirit. The gris-gris is then
performed from one of four categories: love; power and domination; luck and
finance; and uncrossing. Voodoo and Spiritualism. The hallmark of the New
Orleans Spiritual Churches is the honoring of the Native American spirit named
Black Hawk, who lived in Illinois and Wisconsin, not in Africa, or Haiti.
Furthermore, the names of some individual churches in the denomination—such
as Divine Israel—bring to mind typical Black Baptist church names more than
Catholic ones. The New Orleans Spiritual religion is a blend of Spiritualism,
Voodoo, Catholicism, and Pentecostalism; the Voodoo-influenced "Spiritual
Churches" that survive in New Orleans are the result of a mingling of these and
other spiritual practices. It is unique among African-American "Spiritual"
religions in its use of "Spirit Guides" in worship services and in the forms of
ritual possession that its adherents practice. Voodoo today. Today, Voodoo is a
major tourist attraction to the city of New Orleans. Shops selling charms,
gris-gris, candles, and powders cater to both tourists and practitioners. The
New Orleans Historic Voodoo Museum houses numerous artifacts and provides daily
tours of the museum, the St. Louis Cemetery, and the New Orleans French
Quarter. The museum also provides spiritual services including matrimony
blessings, marriage ceremonies, consultations, and other rituals. Voodoo
ceremonies have been held against contemporary problems facing New Orleans,
such as crack cocaine abuse, burglaries, prostitution and assaults.
