Lupercalia Lupercalia was a very ancient, possibly pre-Roman pastoral festival,
observed on February 13 through 15 to avert evil spirits and purify the city,
releasing health and fertility. Lupercalia subsumed Februa, an earlier-origin
spring cleansing ritual held on the same date, which gives the month of
February its name. The name "Lupercalia" was believed in antiquity to evince
some connection with the Ancient Greek festival of the Arcadian Lykaia (from
Ancient Greek: "λύκος" — "lukos", "wolf", Latin "lupus") and the worship
of "Lycaean Pan", assumed to be a Greek equivalent to Faunus, as instituted by
Evander. In Roman mythology, "Lupercus" is a god sometimes identified with the
Roman god Faunus, who is the Roman equivalent of the Greek god Pan. Lupercus is
the god of shepherds. His festival, celebrated on the anniversary of the
founding of his temple on February 15, was called the Lupercalia. His priests
wore goatskins. The historian Justin mentions an image of "the Lycaean god,
whom the Greeks call Pan and the Romans Lupercus," nude save for the girdle of
goatskin, which stood in the Lupercal, the cave where Romulus and Remus were
suckled by a she-wolf. There, on the Ides of February (in February the ides is
the 13th), a goat and a dog were sacrificed, and salt mealcakes prepared by the
Vestal Virgins were burnt. The celebration during the late Republic and Empire.
Plutarch • Life of Caesar The Lupercalia festival was partly in honor of
Lupa, the she-wolf who suckled the infant orphans, Romulus and Remus, the
founders of Rome, explaining the name of the festival, Lupercalia, or "Wolf
Festival." The festival was celebrated near the cave of Lupercal on the
Palatine Hill (the central hill where Rome was traditionally founded), to
expiate and purify new life in the Spring. A known Lupercalia festival of 44 BC
attests to the continuity of the festival but the Lupercal cave may have fallen
into disrepair, and was later rebuilt by Augustus. It has been tentatively
identified with a cavern discovered in 2007, below the remains of Augustus'
palace. The rites were directed by the "Luperci", the "brothers of the wolf
("lupus")", a corporation of "sacerdotes" (priests) of Faunus, dressed only in
a goatskin, whose institution is attributed either to the Arcadian Evander, or
to Romulus and Remus. The Luperci were divided into two collegia, called
"Quinctiliani" (or "Quinctiale"s) and "Fabiani", from the gens Quinctilia (or
Quinctia) and gens Fabia; at the head of each of these colleges was a
"magister". In 44 BC, a third college, the "Julii", was instituted in honor of
Julius Caesar, the first magister of which was Mark Antony. In imperial times
the members were usually of equestrian standing. The festival began with the
sacrifice by the Luperci (or the flamen dialis) of two male goats and a dog.
Next two young patrician Luperci were led to the altar, to be anointed on their
foreheads with the sacrificial blood, which was wiped off the bloody knife with
wool soaked in milk, after which they were expected to smile and laugh. The
sacrificial feast followed, after which the Luperci cut thongs from the skins
of the victims, which were called februa, dressed themselves in the skins of
the sacrificed goats, in imitation of Lupercus, and ran round the walls of the
old Palatine city, the line of which was marked with stones, with the thongs in
their hands in two bands, striking the people who crowded near. Girls and young
women would line up on their route to receive lashes from these whips. This was
supposed to ensure fertility, prevent sterility in women and ease the pains of
childbirth. The Lupercalia in the 5th century. By the 5th century, when the
public performance of pagan rites had been outlawed, a nominally Christian
Roman populace still clung to the Lupercalia in the time of Pope Gelasius I
(494–96). It had been literally degraded since the 1st century, when in 44 BC
the consul Mark Antony did not scruple to run with the Luperci; now the upper
classes left the festivities to the rabble. Whatever the fortunes of the rites
in the meantime, in the last decade of the 5th century they prompted Pope
Gelasius I's taunt to the senators who were intent on preserving them: "If you
assert that this rite has salutary force, celebrate it yourselves in the
ancestral fashion; run nude yourselves that you may properly carry out the
mockery." The remark was addressed to the senator Andromachus by Gelasius in an
extended literary epistle that was virtually a diatribe against the Lupercalia.
Gelasius finally abolished the Lupercalia after a long dispute. Some authors
claim that Gelasius replaced Lupercalia with the "Feast of the Purification of
the Blessed Virgin Mary", but this is based in incorrect assumptions, and there
is no written record of Gelasius intending any such thing. Other authors, like
Oruch, have also claimed that the modern customs of Saint Valentine's Day
originate from Lupercalia customs, again without proof. References in art.
Horace's Ode III, 18 describes Lupercalia. CAESAR (to Calpurnia) ANTONY CAESAR
