Magic and religion Magical thinking in various forms is a cultural universal
and an important aspect of religion. In many cases it becomes difficult or
impossible to draw any meaningful line between beliefs and practices that are
magical versus those that are religious, but in general the term religion is
reserved for an organized cult with a priesthood and dedicated sites of worship
or sacrifice, while magic is prevalent in all societies, regardless of whether
they have organized religion or more general systems of animism or shamanism.
Religion and magic became conceptually separated with the development of
western monotheism, where the distinction arose between supernatural events
sanctioned by mainstream religious doctrine ("miracles") and mere magic rooted
in folk belief or occult speculation. In pre-monotheistic religious traditions,
there is no fundamental distinction between religious practice and magic;
tutelary deities concerned with magic are sometimes called "hermetic deities"
or "spirit guides." Magical practices in prehistory. Appearing from aboriginal
tribes in Australia and New Zealand to rainforest tribes in South America, bush
tribes in Africa and pagan tribal groups in Western Europe and Britain (as
personified by Merlin, based on Welsh prophet Myrddin Wyllt), some form of
shamanism and belief in a spirit world seems to be common in the early
development of human communities. According to Joseph Campbell, the ancient
cave paintings in Lascaux may have been associated with "the magic of the
hunt." Much of the Babylonian and Egyptian pictorial writing characters appear
derived from the same sources. Although indigenous magical traditions persist
to this day, very early on some communities transitioned from nomadic to
agricultural civilizations, and with this shift, the development of spiritual
life mirrored that of civic life. Just as tribal elders were consolidated and
transformed into monarchs and bureaucrats, so too did shamans and adepts evolve
into priestly caste. This shift is not in nomenclature alone. It is at this
stage of development that highly codified and elaborate rituals, setting the
stage for formal religions, began to emerge, such as the funeral rites of the
Egyptians and the sacrifice rituals of the Babylonians, Persians, Aztecs, and
Maya civilizations. Anthropological and psychological perspectives. It is a
postulate of modern anthropology, at least since early 1930s, that there is
complete continuity between magic and religion. In the past, there have been
many attempts by anthropologists to establish some fundamental distinction
between magic and religion, most notably by James George Frazer and Bronisław
Malinowski; they tried to demonstrate that "magical thinking" is a form of
proto-science or pseudoscience rather than a form of religious practice, and
that by this line of thought, early magical beliefs developed through a post-
hoc fallacy — a supplication was made on the altar, and then it rained
shortly afterward. Regardless of whether the supplication was the actual cause,
it was credited with the change, and thus magical beliefs could grow. One
magician's response to this is that magic is unconcerned with establishing
causality, only repeatability: Ramsey Dukes explains in his book S.S.O.T.B.M.E.
that questions such as "Are you sure it was your magic that cured her?" are
irrelevant to the magician. "If it was a coincidence, it doesn't matter just so
long as he can bring about such coincidences" Religious practices and Magic.
Closely related to magic are most forms of religious supplication, asking the
divine for aid. Perhaps the most famous form is prayer, which is ordained by
many religions as a spiritual duty, even aside from any effects on the outside
world. Both magic and religion contain rituals. Typically, there is a
recognition that rituals do not always work; rather, it is thought to simply
increase the likelihood of the desired result coming to pass. While many
rituals focus on personal communion with the divine and spiritual purification,
others often seek "magical" results, such as healing or good luck in battle.
Likewise, both can be divided by the effects they produce into perception and
material changes. That is, whether prayer or some type of spell is used, it can
either bring about an actual change (material) or a change in the way the
subject feels (perception). The same prayer, for it to be "cooler" could
therefore either actually raise the temperature, or simply alter the praying
subject and any other targets feeling of the temperature. This is not to say
that perception changes are not "real" as it could be used in healing to numb
the sensation of pain, allowing healing to take place more easily. The names of
the Gods. There is a long-standing belief in the power of "true names;" this
often descends from the magical belief that knowing a being's true name grants
you power over it. This is often seen as a requirement in spiritualism; knowing
the identity of a spirit greatly aids in soliciting information from it. If
names have power, then knowing the name of a god that is regarded as supreme in
your religion should grant the greatest power of all. This belief is reflected
in traditional Wicca, where the names of the Goddess and the Horned God - the
two supreme deities in Wicca - are usually held as a secret to be revealed only
to initiates. This belief is also reflected in ancient Judaism, which used the
Tetragrammaton (YHWH, usually translated as "Lord" in small caps) to refer to
God "safely" in the Tanakh. The same belief is seen in Hinduism, but with
different conclusions; rather, attaining transcendence and the power of God is
seen as a "good" thing. Thus, some Hindus chant the name of their favorite
deities as often as possible, the most common being Krishna. Religious
artifacts. Some religions believe in transferring holiness to objects and
places; this is often seen in even simple things like "christening" ceremonies
for a new boat. Churches and certain religiously-minded individuals often
consecrate the ground where a building will be constructed. The practice was
common during the Middle Ages, where a large market for spiritual trinkets
existed. Fragments of the true cross and bones of saints were often brought
back by Crusaders from the Holy Land, where they were sold to the peasantry as
cure-alls. Most scholarly sources agree that the vast majority of these sales
were frauds and simply a form of supplemental income for the Crusaders. . This
practice somewhat fell into disrepute during the Reformation; it became
associated with idol worship. As a result, this is less seen in Protestantism
than Roman Catholicism or Eastern Orthodoxy. Sacrifice. One of the more
controversial practices in magic and religion both, this involves a sacrifice
to a supernatural being, such as a god, angel, or demon, who is asked to
intervene on behalf of the person performing the sacrifice. Sacrifice can take
many forms. The most common forms of supplication and sacrifice in pagan and
neopagan religious practice involves the burning of oils or incense. Other
common forms of supplication may include the offering of personal objects to a
deity, offering chants, and the offering of drinks and food. Less used is blood
sacrifice. In early history, blood sacrifice was common; a goat or calf would
be sacrificed. Often, divination would be practiced via the reading of entrails
(notably in Ancient Rome). Leviticus contains detailed rules for proper blood
sacrifice, used in early Judaism. Blood sacrifice has been rejected by some
neopagans, but not all; both Ásatrú and Celtic/Irish Reconstructionists still
practice blood sacrifice and burnt animal offerings. In hoodoo, blood ritual,
or the giving of one's own blood in ritual practices, is not entirely uncommon.
Most strands of modern Judaism believe that with the destruction of the Temple
in Jerusalem, there is no place to sacrifice to any more, and thus the need is
negated (modern Samaritans disagree, and maintain the practice). In
Christianity, it is believed that Jesus's final sacrifice renders any further
sacrifices unnecessary. Some syncretic blends of Islam and native practices in
places such as Indonesia feature sacrifice as an element of worship. The most
extreme form of sacrifice, and the one carrying the most negative taboo, is
human sacrifice. The moloch is one famous but disputed example of the practice;
the Carthaginians seemingly sacrificed young children when circumstances looked
grim, hoping to regain their gods' favor. Some historians attribute this as one
reason for their downfall. Other cultures preferred to sacrifice only their
enemies, offering up captured prisoners in supplication; the Druids became one
of the two religions banned by the Roman Empire due to their practice of
(Roman) human sacrifice. The book Genesis contains the famous story of the
"Binding of Isaac"; Abraham is ordered to sacrifice his son Isaac by God, but
it turns out that God was only performing a test, and a ram is sent instead.
Human sacrifice is condemned afterward. The Qur'an contains strong
condemnations of the Arabian pagans who would sacrifice babies who turned out
to be unwanted girls by leaving them in pots in the desert to die of exposure,
saying that such practice surely leads to hell. Magic and Abrahamic religion.
Magic and Abrahamic religions have had a somewhat checkered past. The King
James Version of the Bible included the famous translation ""Thou shalt not
suffer a witch to live"" (Exodus 22:18), and Saul is rebuked by God for seeking
advice from a diviner who could contact spirits. On the other hand, seemingly
magical signs are documented in the Bible: For example, both the staff of
Pharaoh's sorcerers as well as the staff of Moses and Aaron could be turned
into snakes (Exodus 7:8-13). However, as Scott Noegel points out, the critical
difference between the magic of Pharaoh's magicians and the non-magic of Moses
is in the means by which the staff becomes a snake. For the Pharaoh's
magicians, they employed "their secret arts" whereas Moses merely throws down
his staff to turn it into a snake. To an ancient Egyptian, the startling
difference would have been that Moses neither employed secret arts nor magical
words. In the Torah, Noegel points out that YHWH does not need magical rituals
to act. See also Numbers 21:5-9, in which Moses creates a Bronze Snake in order
to heal the Israelites from snake bites. But see the Talmud, Rosh Hashanah 29a,
which asserts that it was not the bronze serpent that healed the Israelites,
but rather their seeing the snake and submitting themselves to God. The words
"witch" and "witchcraft" appear in some English versions of the Christian Holy
Bible. One verse that is probably responsible for more deaths of suspected
witches than any other passage from the Hebrew Scriptures (Old Testament) is
Exodus 22:18. In the King James Version, this reads: "Thou shalt not suffer a
witch to live." The precise meaning of the Hebrew word "kashaph", here
translated as 'witch' and in some other modern versions, 'sorceress', is
uncertain. In the Septuagint it was translated as "pharmakeia", meaning
'pharmacy', and on this basis, Reginald Scot claimed in the 16th century that
'witch' was an incorrect translation and poisoners were intended. His theory
still holds some currency, but is not widely accepted, and in Daniel 2:
2 "kashaph" is listed alongside other magic practitioners who could interpret
dreams: magicians, astrologers and Chaldeans. It may be noted that gender the
Hebrew word "kashaph" is in the masculine, and in modern Hebrew usage,
"kashaph" is synonemous with a male sorcerer. If a man has laid a charge of
witchcraft and has not justified it, he upon whom the witchcraft is laid shall
go to the holy river; he shall plunge into the holy river and if the holy river
overcome him, he who accused him shall take to himself his house.
