Magic (paranormal) Magic is the art of producing a desired effect or result
through the use of incantation, ceremony, ritual, the casting of spells or
various other techniques that presumably assure human control of supernatural
agencies or the forces of nature. Magic has been practiced in many cultures,
and utilizes ways of understanding, experiencing and influencing the world
somewhat akin to those offered by religion, though it is sometimes regarded as
more focused on achieving results than religious worship. Magic is often viewed
with suspicion by the wider community, and is commonly practiced in isolation
and secrecy. Modern Western magicians generally state magic's primary purpose
to be personal spiritual growth. Modern perspectives on the theory of magic
broadly follow two major views. The first sees magic as a result of a universal
sympathy within the universe, where if something is done here a result happens
somewhere else. The other view sees magic as a collaboration with spirits who
cause the effect. Etymology. Through late 14th century Old French "magique",
the word "magic" derives via Latin "magicus" from the Greek adjective "magikos"
(μαγικός) used in reference to the "magical" arts of the Persian
Magicians (Greek: "magoi", singular "mágos", μάγος), the Zoroastrian
astrologer priests of the ancient Persian Empire. Greek "mágos" is first
attested in Heraclitus (6th century BC, apud. Clement "Protrepticus 12") who
curses the Magians and others for their "impious rites". Likewise, "sorcery"
was taken in ca. 1300 from Old French "sorcerie", which is from Vulgar Latin
"*sortiarius", from "sors" "fate", apparently meaning "one who influences
fate". Common features of magical practice. Rituals. Magical rituals are the
precisely defined actions (including speech) used to work magic. Bronisław
Malinowski describes ritual language as possessing a high "coefficient of
weirdness", by which he means that the language used in ritual is archaic and
out of the ordinary, which helps foster the proper mindset to believe in the
ritual. S. J. Tambiah notes, however, that even if the power of the ritual is
said to reside in the words, "the words only become effective if uttered in a
very special context of other action." These other actions typically consist of
gestures, possibly performed with special objects at a particular place or
time. Object, location, and performer may require purification beforehand. This
caveat draws a parallel to the felicity conditions J. L. Austin requires of
performative utterances. By "performativity" Austin means that the ritual act
itself achieves the stated goal. For example, a wedding ceremony can be
understood as a ritual, and only by properly performing the ritual does the
marriage occur. Émile Durkheim stresses the importance of rituals as a tool to
achieve "collective effervescence", which serves to help unify society.
Psychologists, on the other hand, describe rituals in comparison to obsessive-
compulsive rituals, noting that attentional focus falls on the lower level
representation of simple gestures. This results in goal demotion, as the ritual
places more emphasis on performing the ritual just right than on the connection
between the ritual and the goal. Magical symbols. Magic often utilizes symbols
that are thought to be intrinsically efficacious. Anthropologists, such as Sir
James Frazer (1854–1938), have characterized the implementation of symbols
into two primary categories: the "principle of similarity", and the "principle
of contagion." Frazer further categorized these principles as falling under
"sympathetic magic", and "contagious magic." Frazer asserted that these
concepts were "general or generic laws of thought, which were misapplied in
magic." Principle of similarity. The principle of similarity, also known as the
"association of ideas", which falls under the category of sympathetic magic, is
the thought that if a certain result follows a certain action, then that action
must be responsible for the result. Therefore, if one is to perform this action
again, the same result can again be expected. One classic example of this mode
of thought is that of the rooster and the sunrise. When a rooster crows, it is
a response to the rising of the sun. Based on sympathetic magic, one might
interpret these series of events differently. The law of similarity would
suggest that since the sunrise follows the crowing of the rooster, the rooster
must have caused the sun to rise. Causality is inferred where it might not
otherwise have been. Therefore, a practitioner might believe that if he is able
to cause the rooster to crow, he will be able to control the timing of the
sunrise. Another use of the principle of similarity is the construction and
manipulation of representations of some target to be affected (e.g. voodoo
dolls), believed to bring about a corresponding effect on the target (e.g.
breaking a limb of a doll will bring about an injury in the corresponding limb
of someone depicted by the doll). Principle of contagion. Another primary type
of magical thinking includes the principle of contagion. This principle
suggests that once two objects come into contact with each other, they will
continue to affect each other even after the contact between them has been
broken. One example that Tambiah gives is related to adoption. Among some
American Indians, for example, when a child is adopted his or her adoptive
mother will pull the child through some of her clothes, symbolically
representing the birth process and thereby associating the child with herself.
Therefore, the child emotionally becomes hers even though their relationship is
not biological. As Claude Lévi-Strauss would put it: the birth "would consist,
therefore, in making explicit a situation originally existing on the emotional
level and in rendering acceptable to the mind pains which the body refuses to
tolerate...the woman believes in the myth and belongs to a society which
believes in it." Symbols, for many cultures that use magic, are seen as a type
of technology. Natives might use symbols and symbolic actions to bring about
change and improvements, much like Western cultures might use advanced
irrigation techniques to promote soil fertility and crop growth. Michael Brown
discusses the use of nantag stones among the Aguaruna as being similar to this
type of "technology." These stones are brought into contact with stem cuttings
of plants like manioc before they are planted in an effort to promote growth.
Nantag are powerful tangible symbols of fertility, so they are brought into
contact with crops to transmit their fertility to the plants. Others argue that
ritualistic actions are merely therapeutic. Tambiah cites the example of a
native hitting the ground with a stick. While some may interpret this action as
symbolic (i.e. the man is trying to make the ground yield crops through force),
others would simply see a man unleashing his frustration at poor crop returns.
Ultimately, whether or not an action is symbolic depends upon the context of
the situation as well as the ontology of the culture. Many symbolic actions are
derived from mythology and unique associations, whereas other ritualistic
actions are just simple expressions of emotion and are not intended to enact
any type of change. Magical language. The performance of magic almost always
involves the use of language. Whether spoken out loud or unspoken, words are
frequently used to access or guide magical power. In "The Magical Power of
Words" (1968) S. J. Tambiah argues that the connection between language and
magic is due to a belief in the inherent ability of words to influence the
universe. Bronisław Malinowski, in "Coral Gardens and their Magic" (1935),
suggests that this belief is an extension of man's basic use of language to
describe his surroundings, in which "the knowledge of the right words,
appropriate phrases and the more highly developed forms of speech, gives man a
power over and above his own limited field of personal action." Magical speech
is therefore a ritual act and is of equal or even greater importance to the
performance of magic than non-verbal acts. Not all speech is considered
magical. Only certain words and phrases or words spoken in a specific context
are considered to have magical power. Magical language, according to C. K.
Ogden and I. A. Richards's (1923) categories of speech, is distinct from
scientific language because it is emotive and it converts words into symbols
for emotions; whereas in scientific language words are tied to specific
meanings and refer to an objective external reality. Magical language is
therefore particularly adept at constructing metaphors that establish symbols
and link magical rituals to the world. Malinowski argues that "the language of
magic is sacred, set and used for an entirely different purpose to that of
ordinary life." The two forms of language are differentiated through word
choice, grammar, style, or by the use of specific phrases or forms: prayers,
spells, songs, blessings, or chants, for example. Sacred modes of language
often employ archaic words and forms in an attempt to invoke the purity or
"truth" of a religious or a cultural "golden age". The use of Hebrew in Judaism
is an example. Another potential source of the power of words is their secrecy
and exclusivity. Much sacred language is differentiated enough from common
language that it is incomprehensible to the majority of the population and it
can only be used and interpreted by specialized practitioners (magicians,
priests, shamans, even mullahs). In this respect, Tambiah argues that magical
languages violate the primary function of language: communication. Yet
adherents of magic are still able to use and to value the magical function of
words by believing in the inherent power of the words themselves and in the
meaning that they must provide for those who do understand them. This leads
Tambiah to conclude that "the remarkable disjunction between sacred and profane
language which exists as a general fact is not necessarily linked to the need
to embody sacred words in an exclusive language." Magicians. A magician is any
practitioner of magic; therefore a magician may be a specialist or a common
practitioner, even if he or she does not consider himself a magician. All that
is required is the possession of esoteric knowledge, traits, or expertise that
are culturally acknowledged to harbor magical powers. Magical knowledge is
usually passed down from one magician to another through family or
apprenticeships, though in some cultures it may also be purchased. The
information transferred usually consists of instructions on how to perform a
variety of rituals, manipulate magical objects, or how to appeal to gods or to
other supernatural forces. Magical knowledge is often well guarded, as it is a
valuable commodity to which each magician believes that he has a proprietary
right. Yet the possession of magical knowledge alone may be insufficient to
grant magical power; often a person must also possess certain magical objects,
traits or life experiences in order to be a magician. Among the Azande, for
example, in order to question an oracle a man must have both the physical
oracle (poison, or a washboard, for example) and knowledge of the words and the
rites needed to make the object function. A variety of personal traits may be
credited to magical power, though frequently they are associated with an
unusual birth into the world. For example, in 16th century Friuli, babies born
with the caul were believed to be good witches, "benandanti", who would engage
evil witches in nighttime battles over the bounty of the next year's crops.
Certain post-birth experiences may also be believed to convey magical power.
For example a person's survival of a near-death illness may be taken as
evidence of their power as a healer: in Bali a medium's survival is proof of
her association with a patron deity and therefore her ability to communicate
with other gods and spirits. Initiations are perhaps the most commonly used
ceremonies to establish and to differentiate magicians from common people. In
these rites the magician's relationship to the supernatural and his entry into
a closed professional class is established, often through rituals that simulate
death and rebirth into a new life. Given the exclusivity of the criteria needed
to become a magician, much magic is performed by specialists. Laypeople will
likely have some simple magical rituals for everyday living, but in situations
of particular importance, especially when health or major life events are
concerned, a specialist magician will often be consulted. The powers of both
specialist and common magicians are determined by culturally accepted standards
of the sources and the breadth of magic. A magician may not simply invent or
claim new magic; the magician is only as powerful as his peers believe him to
be. In different cultures, various types of magicians may be differentiated
based on their abilities, their sources of power, and on moral considerations,
including divisions into different categories like sorcerer, witch, healer and
others. Witchcraft. In non-scientific societies, perceived magical attack is an
idea sometimes employed to explain personal or societal misfortune. In
anthropological and historical contexts this is often termed witchcraft or
sorcery, and the perceived attackers 'witches' or 'sorcerers'. Their maleficium
is often seen as a biological trait or an acquired skill. Known members of the
community may be accused as witches, or the witches may be perceived as
supernatural, non-human entities. In early modern Europe and Britain such
accusations led to the executions of tens of thousands of people, who were seen
to be in league with Satan. Those accused of being satanic 'witches' were often
practitioners of (usually benign) folk magic, and the English term 'witch' was
also sometimes used without its pejorative sense to describe such
practitioners. Theories. Anthropological and psychological origins. Definitions
of relevant terminology. The foremost perspectives on magic in anthropology are
functionalist, symbolist and intellectualist. These three perspectives are used
to describe how magic works in a society. The functionalist perspective,
usually associated with Bronisław Malinowski, maintains that all aspects of
society are meaningful and interrelated. In the functionalist perspective,
magic performs a latent function in the society. The symbolist perspective
researches the subtle meaning in rituals and myths that define a society and
deals with questions of theodicy—why do bad things happen to good people.
Finally the intellectualist perspective, associated with Edward Burnett Tylor
and Sir James Frazer, regard magic as logical, but based on a flawed
understanding of the world. Magical thinking. The term 'magical thinking' in
anthropology, psychology, and cognitive science refers to causal reasoning
often involving associative thinking, such as the perceived ability of the mind
to affect the physical world (see the philosophical problem of mental
causation) or correlation mistaken for materialist causation. Perceived causal
associations between actions or events may derive from symbolic associations
such as metaphor, metonym, "As above, so below" from Hermeticism and apparent
synchronicity (coincidental magic). Psychological theories of magic.
Psychological theories treat magic as a personal phenomenon intended to meet
individual needs, as opposed to a social phenomenon serving a collective
purpose. The explanatory power of magic should not be underestimated, however.
Both in the past and in the modern world magical belief systems can provide
explanations for otherwise difficult or impossible to understand phenomena
while providing a spiritual and metaphysical grounding for the individual.
Furthermore, as both Brian Feltham and Scott E. Hendrix argue, magical beliefs
need not represent a form of irrationality, nor should they be viewed as
incompatible with modern views of the world. Intellectualist perspectives. The
belief that one can influence supernatural powers, by prayer, sacrifice or
invocation goes back to prehistoric religion and is present in early records
such as the Egyptian pyramid texts and the Indian Vedas. James George Frazer
asserted that magical observations are the result of an internal dysfunction:
"Men mistook the order of their ideas for the order of nature, and hence
imagined that the control which they have, or seem to have, over their
thoughts, permitted them to exercise a corresponding control over things."
Others, such as N. W. Thomas and Sigmund Freud have rejected this explanation.
Freud explains that "the associated theory of magic merely explains the paths
along which magic proceeds; it does not explain its true essence, namely the
misunderstanding which leads it to replace the laws of nature by psychological
ones". Freud emphasizes that what led primitive men to come up with magic is
the power of wishes: "His wishes are accompanied by a motor impulse, the will,
which is later destined to alter the whole face of the earth in order to
satisfy his wishes. This motor impulse is at first employed to give a
representation of the satisfying situation in such a way that it becomes
possible to experience the satisfaction by means of what might be described as
motor hallucinations. This kind of representation of a satisfied wish is quite
comparable to children's play, which succeeds their earlier purely sensory
technique of satisfaction. [...] As time goes on, the psychological accent
shifts from the "motives" for the magical act on to the "measures" by which it
is carried out—that is, on to the act itself. [...] It thus comes to appear
as though it is the magical act itself which, owing to its similarity with the
desired result, alone determines the occurrence of that result." Theories on
the relationship of magic, science, and religion. Magic and religion are
categories of beliefs and systems of knowledge used within societies. While
generally considered distinct categories in western cultures, the interactions,
similarities, and differences have been central to the study of magic for many
theorists in sociology and anthropology, including Frazer, Mauss, S. J.
Tambiah, Malinowski, Michael Nevin and Isabelle Sarginson. From the
intellectualist and functionalist perspectives, magic is often considered most
analogous to science and technology. Marcel Mauss. In A General Theory of
Magic, Marcel Mauss classifies magic as a social phenomenon, akin to religion
and science, but yet a distinct category. In practice, magic bears a strong
resemblance to religion. Both use similar types of rites, materials, social
roles and relationships to accomplish aims and engender belief. They both
operate on similar principles, in particular those of consecration and sanctity
of objects and places, interaction with supernatural powers mediated by an
expert, employment of symbolism, sacrifice, purification and representation in
rites, and the importance of tradition and continuation of knowledge. Magic and
religion also share a collective character and totality of belief. The rules
and powers of each are determined by the community's ideals and beliefs and so
may slowly evolve. Additionally neither supports partial belief. Belief in one
aspect of the phenomena necessitates belief in the whole, and each incorporates
structural loopholes to accommodate contradictions. The distinction Mauss draws
between religion and magic is both of sentiment and practice. He portrays magic
as an element of pre-modern societies and in many respects an antithesis of
religion. Magic is secretive and isolated, and rarely performed publicly in
order to protect and to preserve occult knowledge. Religion is predictable and
prescribed and is usually performed openly in order to impart knowledge to the
community. While these two phenomena do share many ritual forms, Mauss
concludes that "a magical rite is any rite that does not play a part in
organized cults. It is private, secret, mysterious and approaches the limit of
prohibited rite." In practice, magic differs from religion in desired outcome.
Religion seeks to satisfy moral and metaphysical ends, while magic is a
functional art which often seeks to accomplish tangible results. In this
respect magic resembles technology and science. Belief in each is diffuse,
universal, and removed from the origin of the practice. Yet, the similarity
between these social phenomena is limited, as science is based in
experimentation and development, while magic is an "a priori belief." Mauss
concludes that though magical beliefs and rites are most analogous to religion,
magic remains a social phenomenon distinct from religion and science with its
own characteristic rules, acts and aims. Tambiah. According to Tambiah, magic,
science, and religion all have their own "quality of rationality", and have
been influenced by politics and ideology. Tambiah also believes that the
perceptions of these three ideas have evolved over time as a result of Western
thought. The lines of demarcation between these ideas depend upon the
perspective of a variety of anthropologists, but Tambiah has his own opinions
regarding magic, science, and religion. According to Tambiah, religion is based
on an organized community, and it is supposed to encompass all aspects of life.
In religion, man is obligated to an outside power and he is supposed to feel
piety towards that power. Religion is effective and attractive because it is
generally exclusive and strongly personal. Also, because religion affects all
aspects of life, it is convenient in the sense that morality and notions of
acceptable behavior are imposed by God and the supernatural. Science, on the
other hand, suggests a clear divide between nature and the supernatural, making
its role far less all-encompassing than that of religion. As opposed to
religion, Tambiah suggests that mankind has a much more personal control over
events. Science, according to Tambiah, is "a system of behavior by which man
acquires mastery of the environment." Whereas in religion nature and the
supernatural are connected and essentially interchangeable, in science, nature
and the supernatural are clearly separate spheres. Also, science is a developed
discipline; a logical argument is created and can be challenged. The base of
scientific knowledge can be extended, while religion is more concrete and
absolute. Magic, the less accepted of the three disciplines in Western society,
is an altogether unique idea. Tambiah states that magic is a strictly
ritualistic action that implements forces and objects outside the realm of the
gods and the supernatural. These objects and events are said to be
intrinsically efficacious, so that the supernatural is unnecessary. To some,
including the Greeks, magic was considered a "proto-science." Magic has other
historical importance as well. Much of the debate between religion and magic
originated during the Protestant Reformation. The Catholic Church was attacked
for its doctrine of transubstantiation because it was considered a type of
sacramental magic. Furthermore, the possibility of anything happening outside
of God's purpose was denied. Spells were viewed as ineffective and blasphemous,
because religion required belief in "a conscious agent who could be deflected
from this purpose by prayer and supplication." Prayer was the only way to
effectively enact positive change. The Protestant Reformation was a significant
moment in the history of magical thought because Protestantism provided the
impetus for a systematic understanding of the world. In this systematic
framework, there was no room for magic and its practices. Besides the
Reformation, the Renaissance was an influential epoch in the history of thought
concerning magic and science. During the Renaissance, magic was less
stigmatized even though it was done in secret and therefore considered
"occult". Renaissance magic was based on cosmology, and its powers were said to
be derived from the stars and the alignment of the planets. Newton himself
began his work in mathematics because he wanted to see "whether judicial
astrology had any claim to validity." The lines of demarcation between science,
magic, and religion all have origins dating to times when established thought
processes were challenged. The rise of Western thought essentially initiated
the differentiation between the three disciplines. Whereas science could be
revised and developed through rational thought, magic was seen as less
scientific and systematic than science and religion, making it the least
respected of the three. Bronisław Malinowski. In his essay "Magic, Science and
Religion", Bronisław Malinowski contends that every person, no matter how
primitive, uses both magic and science. To make this distinction he breaks up
this category into the "sacred" and the "profane" or "magic/religion" and
science. He theorizes that feelings of reverence and awe rely on observation of
nature and a dependence on its regularity. This observation and reasoning about
nature is a type of science. Magic and science both have definite aims to help
"human instincts, needs and pursuits." Both magic and science develop
procedures that must be followed to accomplish specific goals. Magic and
science are both based on knowledge; magic is knowledge of the self and of
emotion, while science is knowledge of nature. According to Malinowski, magic
and religion are also similar in that they often serve the same function in a
society. The difference is that magic is more about the personal power of the
individual and religion is about faith in the power of God. Magic is also
something that is passed down over generations to a specific group while
religion is more broadly available to the community. To end his essay,
Malinowski poses the question, "why magic?" He writes, "Magic supplies
primitive man with a number of ready-made rituals, acts and beliefs, with a
definite mental and practical technique which serves to bridge over the
dangerous gaps in every important pursuit or critical situation." Robin Horton.
While both traditional beliefs and western science are based on theoretical
thought, Horton argues that the differences between these knowledge systems in
practice and form are due to their states in open and closed cultures. He
classifies scientifically oriented cultures as ‘open’ because they are
aware of other modes of thought, while traditional cultures are ‘closed’
because they are unaware of alternatives to the established theories. The
varying sources of information in these systems results in differences in form
which, Horton asserts, often blinds observers from seeing the similarities
between the systems as two applications of theoretical thought. History.
Ancient Egypt. Egyptians believed that with "Heka", the activation of the "Ka",
an aspect of the soul of both gods and humans, (and divine personification of
magic), they could influence the gods and gain protection, healing and
transformation. Health and wholeness of being were sacred to "Heka." There is
no word for religion in the ancient Egyptian language as mundane and religious
world views were not distinct; thus, "Heka" was not a secular practice but
rather a religious observance. Every aspect of life, every word, plant, animal
and ritual was connected to the power and authority of the gods. In ancient
Egypt, magic consisted of four components; the primeval potency that empowered
the creator-god was identified with "Heka", who was accompanied by magical
rituals known as "Seshaw" held within sacred texts called "Rw". In addition
"Pekhret", medicinal prescriptions, were given to patients to bring relief.
This magic was used in temple rituals as well as informal situations by
priests. These rituals, along with medical practices, formed an integrated
therapy for both physical and spiritual health. Magic was also used for
protection against the angry deities, jealous ghosts, foreign demons and
sorcerers who were thought to cause illness, accidents, poverty and
infertility. Temple priests used wands during magical rituals. Mesopotamia. In
parts of Mesopotamian religion, magic was believed in and actively practiced.
At the city of Uruk, archaeologists have excavated houses dating from the 5th
and 4th centuries BCE in which cuneiform clay tablets have been unearthed
containing magical incantations. Classical antiquity. In ancient Greece magic
was involved in practice of religion, medicine, and divination. The practice of
magic was banned in the Roman world, and the "Codex Theodosianus" states: If
any wizard therefore or person imbued with magical contamination who is called
by custom of the people a magician...should be apprehended in my retinue, or in
that of the Caesar, he shall not escape punishment and torture by the
protection of his rank. Middle Ages. Several medieval scholars were considered
to be magicians in popular legend, notably Gerbert d'Aurillac and Albertus
Magnus: both men were active in the scientific research of their day as well as
in ecclesiastical matters, which was enough to attach to them a nimbus of the
occult. Magical practice was actively discouraged by the church, but it
remained widespread in folk religion throughout the medieval period. The
demonology and angelology contained in the earliest grimoires assume a life
surrounded by Christian implements and sacred rituals. The underlying theology
in these works of Christian demonology encourages the magician to fortify
himself with fasting, prayers, and sacraments, so that by using the holy names
of God in the sacred languages, he could use divine powers to coerce demons
into appearing and serving his usually lustful or avaricious magical goals.
13th century astrologers include Johannes de Sacrobosco and Guido Bonatti.
Renaissance. Renaissance humanism saw resurgence in hermeticism and Neo-
Platonic varieties of ceremonial magic. The Renaissance, on the other hand, saw
the rise of science, in such forms as the dethronement of the Ptolemaic theory
of the universe, the distinction of astronomy from astrology, and of chemistry
from alchemy. The seven "artes magicae" or "artes prohibitae" or arts
prohibited by canon law by Johannes Hartlieb in 1456 were: nigromancy (which
included "black magic" and "demonology"), geomancy, hydromancy, aeromancy,
pyromancy, chiromancy, and scapulimancy and their sevenfold partition emulated
the artes liberales and artes mechanicae. Both bourgeoisie and nobility in the
15th and 16th century showed great fascination with these arts, which exerted
an exotic charm by their ascription to Arabic, Jewish, Gypsy and Egyptian
sources. There was great uncertainty in distinguishing practices of
superstition, occultism, and perfectly sound scholarly knowledge or pious
ritual. The intellectual and spiritual tensions erupted in the Early Modern
witch craze, further reinforced by the turmoil of the Protestant Reformation,
especially in Germany, England, and Scotland. Baroque. Study of the occult arts
remained intellectually respectable well into the 17th century, and only
gradually divided into the modern categories of natural science, occultism, and
superstition. The 17th century saw the gradual rise of the "age of reason",
while belief in witchcraft and sorcery, and consequently the irrational surge
of Early Modern witch trials, receded, a process only completed at the end of
the Baroque period circa 1730. Christian Thomasius still met opposition as he
argued in his 1701 "Dissertatio de crimine magiae" that it was meaningless to
make dealing with the devil a criminal offence, since it was impossible to
really commit the crime in the first place. In Britain, the Witchcraft Act of
1735 established that people could not be punished for consorting with spirits,
while would-be magicians "pretending" to be able to invoke spirits could still
be fined as con artists. Romanticism. From 1776 to 1781 AD, Jacob Philadelphia
performed feats of magic, sometimes under the guise of scientific exhibitions,
throughout Europe and Russia. Baron Carl Reichenbach's experiments with his
Odic force appeared to be an attempt to bridge the gap between magic and
science. More recent periods of renewed interest in magic occurred around the
end of the 19th century, where Symbolism and other offshoots of Romanticism
cultivated a renewed interest in exotic spiritualities. European colonialism
put Westerners in contact with India and Egypt and re-introduced exotic
beliefs. Hindu and Egyptian mythology frequently feature in 19th century
magical texts. The late 19th century spawned a large number of magical
organizations, including the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn, the
Theosophical Society, and specifically magical variants on Freemasonry. The
Golden Dawn represented perhaps the peak of this wave of magic, attracting
cultural celebrities like William Butler Yeats, Algernon Blackwood, and Arthur
Machen. In cultural contexts. Animism and folk religion. Appearing in various
tribal peoples from Aboriginal Australia and Māori New Zealand to the Amazon,
African savannah, and pagan Europe, some form of shamanic contact with the
spirit world seems to be nearly universal in the early development of human
communities. Much of the Babylonian and Egyptian pictorial writing characters
appear derived from the same sources. Although indigenous magical traditions
persist to this day, very early on some communities transitioned from nomadic
to agricultural civilizations, and with this shift, the development of
spiritual life mirrored that of civic life. Just as tribal elders were
consolidated and transformed into kings and bureaucrats, so too were shamans
and adepts changed into priests and a priestly caste. This shift is by no means
in nomenclature alone. While the shaman's task was to negotiate between the
tribe and the spirit world, on behalf of the tribe, as directed by the
collective will of the tribe, the priest's role was to transfer instructions
from the deities to the city-state, on behalf of the deities, as directed by
the will of those deities. This shift represents the first major usurpation of
power by distancing magic from those participating in that magic. It is at this
stage of development that highly codified and elaborate rituals, setting the
stage for formal religions, began to emerge, such as the funeral rites of the
Egyptians and the sacrifice rituals of the Babylonians, Persians, Aztecs and
Mayans. In 2003, Sinafasi Makelo, a representative of Mbuti pygmies, told the
UN's Indigenous People's Forum that during the Congo Civil War, his people were
hunted down and eaten as though they were game animals. Both sides of the war
regarded them as "subhuman" and some say their flesh can confer magical powers.
On April, 2008, Kinshasa, the police arrested 14 suspected victims (of penis
snatching) and sorcerers accused of using black magic or witchcraft to steal
(make disappear) or shrink men's penises to extort cash for cure, amid a wave
of panic. Arrests were made in an effort to avoid bloodshed seen in Ghana a
decade ago, when 12 alleged penis snatchers were beaten to death by mobs.
Native American medicine. The Shamanism practiced by the indigenous peoples of
the Americas was called "medicine" and was practiced by medicine men. In
addition to healing, medicine served many other purposes, for example among the
Cheyenne, one of Plains Indians that lived in the Great Plains of North
America, medicine such as war paint, war shields, war shirts, and war bonnets,
such as the famous war bonnet of Roman Nose, served to protect a warrior from
wounding during battle. Magic in Hinduism. The Atharva Veda is a veda that
deals with mantras that can be used for both good and bad. The word mantrik in
India literally means "magician" since the mantrik usually knows mantras,
spells, and curses which can be used for or against all forms of magic. Tantra
is likewise employed for ritual magic by the tantrik. Many ascetics after long
periods of penance and meditation are alleged to attain a state where they may
utilize supernatural powers. However, many say that they choose not to use them
and instead focus on transcending beyond physical power into the realm of
spirituality. Many siddhars are said to have performed miracles that would
ordinarily be impossible to perform. Western magic. In general, the 20th
century has seen a sharp rise in public interest in various forms of magical
practice, and the foundation of a number of traditions and organisations,
ranging from the distinctly religious to the philosophical. In England, a
further revival of interest in magic was heralded by the repeal of the last
Witchcraft Act in 1951. In 1954 Gerald Gardner published a book, "Witchcraft
Today", in which he claimed to reveal the existence of a witch-cult that dated
back to pre-Christian Europe. Although many of Gardner's claims have since come
under intensive criticism from sources both within and without the Neopagan
community, his works remain the most important founding stone of Wicca.
Gardner's newly created religion, and many others, took off in the atmosphere
of the 1960s and 1970s, when the counterculture of the hippies also spawned
another period of renewed interest in magic, divination, and other occult
practices. The various branches of Neopaganism and other Earth religions that
have emerged since Gardner's publication tend to follow a pattern in combining
the practice of magic and religion, although this combination is not exclusive
to them. Following the trend of magic associated with counterculture, some
feminists launched an independent revival of goddess worship. This brought them
into contact with the Gardnerian tradition of magical religion (or religious
magic), and deeply influenced that tradition in return. Some people in the West
believe in or practice various forms of magic. The Hermetic Order of the Golden
Dawn, Aleister Crowley's Thelema and their subsequent offshoots, influenced by
Eliphas Levi, are most commonly associated with the resurgence of magical
tradition in the English speaking world of the 20th century. Other, similar
resurgences took place at roughly the same time, centered in France and
Germany. The western traditions acknowledging the natural elements, the
seasons, and the practitioner's relationship with the Earth, Gaia, or a primary
Goddess have derived at least in part from these magical groups, as found in
Neopagan religions and various forms of contemporary paganism. Western magical
traditions include hermetic magic and its many offshoots predominantly inspired
by the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn, as well as Wicca and some other
Neopagan religions and contemporary forms of paganism. Definitions, concepts
and uses of magic tend to vary even within magical traditions and indeed often
between individuals. Wicca is one of the more publicly known traditions within
Neopaganism, a magical religion inspired by medieval witchcraft, with
influences including the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn and Crowley.
Ruickbie (2004:193-209) shows that Wiccans and witches define magic in many
different ways and use it for a number of different purposes. Despite that
diversity of opinion, he concludes that the result upon the practitioner is
generally perceived as a positive one. The belief in magic is often considered
superstitious, although it could be argued that some magical practices rely
upon widely accepted psychological principles and are only intended to promote
internal personal changes within the practitioner themselves. Visualization
techniques, for instance, widely used by magicians, are also used in somewhat
different contexts in fields such as clinical psychology and sports training.
Theories of adherents. Many more theories exist. Practitioners will often mix
these concepts, and sometimes even invent some themselves. In the contemporary
current of chaos magic in particular, it is not unusual to believe that any
concept of magic works. Key principles of utilizing Magic are often said to be
Concentration and Visualization. Many of those who purportedly cast spells
attain a mental state called the "Trance State" to enable the spell. The Trance
State is often described as an emptying of the mind, akin to meditation. Magic
and monotheism. Officially, Christianity and Islam characterize magic as
forbidden witchcraft, and have often prosecuted alleged practitioners of it
with varying degrees of severity. Other religions, such as Judaism and
Zoroastrianism have rather more ambiguous positions towards it. Trends in
monotheistic thought have dismissed all such manifestations as trickery and
illusion, nothing more than dishonest gimmicks. In Judaism. In Judaism the
Torah prohibits Jews from being superstitious or engaging in astrology (Lev.
19, 26); from muttering incantations (Deut. 18, 11); from consulting an ov
(mediums), yidoni (seers), or attempting to contact the dead (Deut. 18, 11);
from going into a trance to foresee events, and from performing acts of magic
(Deut. 18, 10). See 613 Mitzvot. The general theme of these commandments is a
prohibition to channel and utilise forces of impurity for personal gain. That
is, a prohibition against practicing Black Magic. A different type of magic can
be achieved using knowledge of the kabbalah. Because the kabbalah provides
knowledge of the spiritual and conceptual underpinnings of physical existence,
one who possesses kabbalistic knowledge is able to produce physical effects by
directly addressing the spiritual basis of the affected physical object. This
is called 'practical kabbalah' and is a type of White Magic. The practice of
practical kabbalah was banned by the Vilna Gaon due to the decreasing spiritual
sensitivity of later generations. In Christianity. "Magia" was viewed with
suspicion by Christianity from the time of the Church fathers. It was, however,
never completely settled whether there may be permissible practices, e.g.
involving relics or holy water as opposed to "blasphemous" necromancy
("necromantia") involving the invocation of demons (goetia). The distinction
became particularly pointed and controversial during the Early Modern witch-
hunts, with some authors such as Johannes Hartlieb denouncing all magical
practice as blasphemous, while others portrayed natural magic as not sinful.
The position taken by Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa, one of the foremost
Renaissance magicians, is ambiguous. The character of Faustus, likely based on
a historical 16th century magician or charlatan, became the prototypical
popular tale of a learned magician who succumbs to a pact with the devil. The
current Catechism of the Catholic Church discusses divination and magic under
the heading of the First Commandment. The section on "practices of magic or
sorcery" is less absolute, specifying "attempts to tame occult powers" in order
to "have supernatural power over others". Such are denounced as "gravely
contrary to the virtue of religion", notably avoiding a statement on whether
such attempts can have any actual effect (that is, attempts to employ occult
practices are identified as violating the First Commandment because they in
themselves betray a lack of faith, and not because they may or may not result
in the desired effect). Some argue that the recent popularity of the prosperity
gospel constitutes a return to magical thinking within Christianity. Note also
that Gnostic Christianity has a strong mystical current, but shies away from
practical magic and focuses more on theurgy. In Islam. Any discussion of Muslim
magic poses a double set of problems. On the one hand, like its counterpart in
predominantly Christian cultures, magic is forbidden by orthodox leaders and
legal opinions. On the other hand, translating various Arabic terms as
‘magic’ causes another set of problems with no clear answers. Though it
presents a generally contemptuous attitude towards magic (Muhammad was accused
by his detractors of being a magician), the Qur’an distinguishes between
apparent magic (miracles sanctioned by Allah) and real magic. The first is that
used by Solomon, who being a prophet of Allah, is assumed to have used
miraculous powers with Allah's blessing. Muslims also believe that Allah made
an army of Djinn obedient to him. The second form is the magic that was taught
by the "evil ones", or "al-shayatin". "Al-shayatin" has two meanings; the first
is similar to the Christian Satan. The second meaning, which is the one used
here, refers to a "djinn" of superior power. The "al-shayatin" taught knowledge
of evil and "pretended to force the laws of nature and the will of Allah . . ."
According to this belief, those who follow this path turn themselves from Allah
and cannot reach heaven. The Arabic word translated in this passage as "magic"
is "sihr". The etymological meaning of "sihr" suggests that "it is the turning
. . . of a thing from its true nature . . . or form . . . to something else
which is unreal or a mere appearance . . ." By the first millennium CE, "sihr"
became a fully developed system in Islamic society. Within this system, all
magicians "assert that magic is worked by the obedience of spirits to the
magician." The efficacy of this system comes from the belief that every Arabic
letter, every word, verse, and chapter in the Qur’an, every month, day, time
and name were created by Allah "a priori", and that each has an angel and a
"djinn" servant. It is through the knowledge of the names of these servants
that an actor is able to control the angel and "djinn" for his or her purposes.
The Sunni and Shia sects of Islam typically forbid all use of magic. The Sufis
within these two sects are much more ambiguous about its use as seen in the
concept of "Barakah". If magic is understood in terms of Frazer's principle of
"contagion", then "barakah" is another term that can refer to magic. "Barakah",
variously defined as "blessing", or "divine power", is a quality one possesses
rather than a category of activity. According to Muslim conception, the source
of "barakah" is solely from Allah; it is Allah's direct blessing and
intervention conferred upon special, pious Muslims. "Barakah" has a heavily
contagious quality in that one can transfer it by either inheritance or
contact. Of all the humans who have ever lived, it is said that the Prophet
Muhammad possessed the greatest amount of "barakah" and that he passed this to
his male heirs through his daughter Fatima. "Barakah" is not just limited to
Muhammad's family line; any person who is considered holy may also possess it
and transfer it to virtually anyone else. In Morocco, "barakah" transfer can be
accomplished by sharing a piece of bread from which the possessor has eaten
because saliva is the vessel of "barakah" in the human body. However, the
transference of "barakah" may also occur against the will of its possessor
through other forms of physical contact such as hand shaking and kissing. The
contagious element of "barakah" is not limited to humans as it can be found in
rocks, trees, water, and even in some animals, such as horses. First: the
practitioner must be of utterly clean soul and garb. Second, when the proper
angel is contacted, this angel will first get permission from God to go to the
aid of the person who summoned him. Third: the practitioner "must not apply . .
.power except to that purpose to achieve goals which would please God."
However, not all Islamic groups accept this explanation of benevolent magic.
The Salafis particularly view this as "shirk", denying the unity of Allah.
Consequently, the Salafis renounce appellations to intermediaries such as
saints, angels, and "djinn", and renounce magic, fortune-telling, and
divination. This particular brand of magic has also been condemned as forbidden
by a "fatwa" issued by Al-Azhar University. Further, Egyptian folklorist Hasan
El-Shamy, warns that scholars have often been uncritical in their application
of the term "sihr" to both malevolent and benevolent forms of magic. He argues
that in Egypt, "sihr" only applies to sorcery. A person who practices
benevolent magic "is not called "saahir" or "sahhaar" (sorcerer, witch), but is
normally referred to as "shaikh" (or "shaikha" for a female), a title which is
normally used to refer to a clergyman or a community notable or elder, and is
equal to the English title: ‘Reverend.’" Varieties of magical practice. The
best-known type of magical practice is the spell, a ritualistic formula
intended to bring about a specific effect. Spells are often spoken or written
or physically constructed using a particular set of ingredients. The failure of
a spell to work may be attributed to many causes, such as a failure to follow
the exact formula, to the general circumstances being unconducive, to a lack of
magical ability, to a lack of willpower or to fraud. Another well-known magical
practice is divination, which seeks to reveal information about the past,
present or future. Varieties of divination include: astrology, augury,
cartomancy, chiromancy, dowsing, extispicy, fortune telling, geomancy, I Ching,
omens, scrying, and tarot reading. Necromancy is a practice which claims to
involve the summoning of, and conversation with, spirits of the dead. This is
sometimes done simply to commune with deceased loved ones; it can also be done
to gain information from the spirits, as a type of divination; or to command
the aid of those spirits in accomplishing some goal, as part of casting a
spell. Varieties of magic can also be categorized by the techniques involved in
their operation. One common means of categorization distinguishes between
contagious magic and sympathetic magic, one or both of which may be employed in
any magical work. Contagious magic involves the use of physical ingredients
which were once in contact with the person or a thing which the practitioner
intends to influence. Sympathetic magic involves the use of images or physical
objects which in some way resemble the person or thing that one hopes to
influence; voodoo dolls are an example. This dichotomy was proposed by Sir
James Frazer's "The Golden Bough". Other common categories given to magic
include High and Low Magic (the appeal to divine powers or spirits
respectively, with goals lofty or personal, according to the type of magic).
Another distinction is between "manifest" and "subtle" magic. Subtle magic
typically refers to magic of legend, gradually and sometimes intangibly
altering the world, whereas manifest magic is magic that immediately appears as
a result. Academic historian Richard Kieckhefer divides the category of spells
into psychological magic, which seeks to influence other people's minds to do
the magician's will, such as with a love spell, or illusionary magic, which
seeks to conjure the manifestation of various wonders. A spell that conjures up
a banquet, or that confers invisibility on the magician, would be examples of
illusionary magic. Magic that causes objective physical change, in the manner
of a miracle, is not accommodated in Kieckhefer's categories. Magical
traditions. Another method of classifying magic is by "traditions", which in
this context typically refer to complexes or "currents" of magical belief and
practice associated with various cultural groups and lineages of transmission.
Some of these traditions are highly specific and culturally circumscribed.
Others are more and syncretistic. These traditions can compass both divination
and spells. When dealing with magic in terms of "traditions", it is a common
misconception for outsiders to treat any religion in which clergy members make
amulets and talismans for their congregants as a "tradition of magic", even
though what is being named is actually an organized religion with clergy,
laity, and an order of liturgical service. This is most notably the case when
Voodoo, Palo, Santería, Taoism, Wicca, and other contemporary religions and
folk religions are mischaracterized as forms of "magic", or even as "sorcery."
Notes. tags
