Mahayana Mahāyāna ( "mahāyāna", literally the "Great Vehicle") is one of
the two main existing branches of Buddhism and a term for classification of
Buddhist philosophies and practice. Mahāyāna Buddhism originated in India,
and is associated with the oldest historical sect of Buddhism, the
Mahāsāṃghika. The Mahāyāna tradition is the larger of the two major
traditions of Buddhism existing today, the other being that of the Theravāda
school. According to the teachings of Mahāyāna traditions, "Mahāyāna" also
refers to the path of seeking complete enlightenment for the benefit of all
sentient beings, also called "Bodhisattvayāna", or the "Bodhisattva Vehicle.
In the course of its history, Mahāyāna Buddhism spread from India to various
other Asian countries such as China, Japan, Vietnam, Korea, Singapore, Taiwan,
Nepal, Tibet, Bhutan, and Mongolia. Major traditions of Mahāyāna Buddhism
today include Zen/Chán, Pure Land, Tiantai, and Nichiren, as well as the
Esoteric Buddhist traditions of Shingon, Tendai and Tibetan Buddhism.
Etymology. According to Jan Nattier, the term "Mahāyāna" ("Great Vehicle")
was originally an honorary synonym for "Bodhisattvayāna" ("Bodhisattva
Vehicle") — the vehicle of a bodhisattva seeking buddhahood for the benefit
of all sentient beings. The term "Mahāyāna" was therefore formed
independently at an early date as a synonym for the path and the teachings of
the bodhisattvas. Since it was simply an honorary term for "Bodhisattvayāna",
the creation of the term "Mahāyāna" and its application to Bodhisattvayāna
did not represent a significant turning point in the development of a
Mahāyāna tradition. The earliest Mahāyāna texts often use the term
"Mahāyāna" as a synonym for "Bodhisattvayāna", but the term "Hīnayāna" is
comparatively rare in the earliest sources. The presumed dichotomy between
"Mahāyāna" and "Hīnayāna" can be deceptive, as the two terms were not
actually formed in relation to one another in the same era. Among the earliest
and most important references to the term "Mahāyāna" are those that occur in
the "Lotus Sūtra" (Skt. "Saddharma Puṇḍarīka Sūtra") dating between the
1st century BCE and the 1st century CE. Seishi Karashima has suggested that the
term first used in an earlier Gandhāri Prakrit version of the "Lotus Sūtra"
was not the term "mahāyāna" but the Prakrit word "mahājāna" in the sense of
"mahājñāna" (great knowing). At a later stage when the early Prakrit word
was converted into Sanskrit, this "mahājāna", being phonetically ambivalent,
was mistakenly converted into "mahāyāna", possibly due to what may have been
a double meaning in the famous Parable of the Burning House, which talks of
three vehicles or carts (Skt: "yāna"). History. Origins. Some of the earliest
Mahayana sutras, the Prajnaparamita Sutras, were written in response to
Abhidharma's ultrarealism. The origins of Mahāyāna are still not completely
understood. The earliest Western views of Mahāyāna assumed that it existed as
a separate school in competition with the so-called "Hīnayāna" schools. Due
to the veneration of buddhas and bodhisattvas, Mahāyāna was often interpreted
as a more devotional, lay-inspired form of Buddhism, with supposed origins in
stūpa veneration, or by making parallels with the history of the European
Protestant Reformation. These views have been largely dismissed in modern times
in light of a much broader range of early texts that are now available. These
earliest Mahāyāna texts often depict strict adherence to the path of a
bodhisattva, and engagement in the ascetic ideal of a monastic life in the
wilderness, akin to the ideas expressed in the "Rhinoceros Sūtra". The old
views of Mahāyāna as a separate lay-inspired and devotional sect are now
largely dismissed as misguided and wrong on all counts. The earliest textual
evidence of "Mahāyāna" comes from sūtras originating around the beginning of
the common era. Jan Nattier has noted that in some of the earliest Mahāyāna
texts such as the "Ugraparipṛccha Sūtra" use the term "Mahāyāna", yet
there is no doctrinal difference between Mahāyāna in this context and the
early schools, and that "Mahāyāna" referred rather to the rigorous emulation
of Gautama Buddha in the path of a bodhisattva seeking to become a fully
enlightened buddha. There is also no evidence that Mahāyāna ever referred to
a separate formal school or sect of Buddhism, but rather that it existed as a
certain set of ideals, and later doctrines, for bodhisattvas. Paul Williams has
also noted that the Mahāyāna never had nor ever attempted to have a separate
Vinaya or ordination lineage from the early schools of Buddhism, and therefore
each bhikṣu or bhikṣuṇī adhering to the Mahāyāna formally belonged to
an early school. This continues today with the Dharmaguptaka ordination lineage
in East Asia, and the Mūlasarvāstivāda ordination lineage in Tibetan
Buddhism. Therefore Mahāyāna was never a separate rival sect of the early
schools. Much of the early extant evidence for the origins of Mahāyāna comes
from early Chinese translations of Mahāyāna texts. These Mahāyāna teachings
were first propagated into China by Lokakṣema, the first translator of
Mahāyāna sūtras into Chinese during the 2nd century CE. Earliest Mahāyāna
sūtras. Some of these were probably composed in the north of India in the 1st
century CE. Thus scholars generally think that the earliest Mahāyāna sūtras
were mainly composed in the south of India, and later the activity of writing
additional scriptures was continued in the north. However, the assumption that
the presence of an evolving body of Mahāyāna scriptures implies the
contemporaneous existence of distinct religious movement called "Mahāyāna",
may be a serious misstep. Earliest inscriptions. The earliest stone inscription
containing a recognizably Mahāyāna formulation and a mention of the Buddha
Amitabha was found in the Indian subcontinent in Mathura, and dated to around
180 CE. Remains of a statue of a Buddha bear the Brahmi inscription: "Made in
the year 28 of the reign of king Huvishka, ... for the Buddha Amitabha"
(Mathura Museum). However, this image was in itself extremely marginal and
isolated in the overall context of Buddhism in India at the time, and had no
lasting or long-term consequences. Evidence of the name "Mahāyāna" in Indian
inscriptions in the period before the 5th century is very limited in comparison
to the multiplicity of Mahāyāna writings transmitted from Central Asia to
China at that time. These views of a discrepancy between translated texts and
epigraphical evidence assume the presence of Mahāyāna as distinct from the
"Hīnayāna" schools. This view has been largely disproved in more recent
scholarship, as Mahāyāna is now recognized as a tradition working within the
context of the early Buddhist schools rather than as a separate movement. Early
Mahāyāna Buddhism. During the period of early Mahāyāna Buddhism, four major
types of thought developed: Mādhyamaka, Yogācāra, Buddha Nature
("Tathāgatagarbha"), and Buddhist Logic as the last and most recent. In India,
the two main philosophical schools of the Mahāyāna were the Mādhyamaka and
the later Yogācāra. Legacy. Earlier stage forms of Mahāyāna such as the
doctrines of Prajñāpāramitā, Yogācāra, Buddha Nature, and the Pure Land
teachings are still popular in East Asia. In some cases these have spawned new
developments, while in others they are treated in the more traditional
syncretic manner. Paul Williams has noted that in this tradition in the Far
East, primacy has always been given to study of the sūtras. Late Mahāyāna
Buddhism. Late stage forms of Mahāyāna Buddhism in India are found largely in
the schools of Esoteric Buddhism. These were replaced in India and Central Asia
after the early millennium by Islam (Sufism etc.) and Hinduism, and in south-
east Asia by Theravāda Buddhism from Sri Lanka and Islam. They continue to
exist in certain regions of the Himalayas. In contrast to the East Asian
traditions, there has been a strong tendency in Tibetan Buddhism and the
Himalayan traditions to approach the sūtras indirectly through the medium of
exegetical treatises if at all. Doctrine. Few things can be said with certainty
about Mahāyāna Buddhism, especially its early Indian form, other than that
the Buddhism practiced in China, Indonesia, Vietnam, Korea, Tibet, and Japan is
Mahāyāna Buddhism. Mahāyāna can be described as a loosely bound collection
of many teachings with large and expansive doctrines that are able to coexist
simultaneously. Mahāyāna constitutes an inclusive tradition characterized by
plurality and the adoption of new Mahāyāna sūtras in addition to the earlier
Āgama texts. Mahāyāna sees itself as penetrating further and more profoundly
into the Buddha's Dharma. There is a tendency in Mahāyāna sūtras to regard
adherence to these sūtras as generating spiritual benefits greater than those
that arise from being a follower of the non-Mahāyāna approaches to Dharma.
Thus the "Śrīmālādevī Sūtra" claims that the Buddha said that devotion to
Mahāyāna is inherently superior in its virtues to the following the śravaka
or pratyekabuddha paths. The fundamental principles of Mahāyāna doctrine were
based on the possibility of universal liberation from suffering for all beings
(hence the "Great Vehicle") and the existence of buddhas and bodhisattvas
embodying Buddha Nature. The Pure Land school of Mahāyāna simplify the
expression of faith by allowing salvation to be alternatively obtained through
the grace of the Amitābha Buddha by having faith and devoting oneself to
mindfulness of the Buddha. This devotional lifestyle of Buddhism has greatly
contributed to the success of Mahāyāna in East Asia, where spiritual elements
traditionally relied upon mindfulness of the Buddha, mantras and dhāraṇīs,
and reading of Mahāyāna sūtras. In Chinese Buddhism, most monks, let alone
lay people, practice Pure Land, some combining it with Chán (Zen). Most
Mahāyāna schools believe in supernatural bodhisattvas who devote themselves
to the perfections (Skt. "pāramitā"), ultimate knowledge (Skt.
"sarvajñāna"), and the liberation of all sentient beings. In Mahāyāna, the
Buddha is seen as the ultimate, highest being, present in all times, in all
beings, and in all places, and the bodhisattvas come to represent the universal
ideal of altruistic excellence. Universalism. Mahāyāna traditions generally
consider that attainment of the level of arhat is not final. This is based on a
subtle doctrinal distinction between the Mahāyāna and some views contained in
the early Buddhist schools concerning the issues of Nirvāṇa With Remainder
and Nirvāṇa Without Remainder. The Mahāyāna position here is similar to
that of the early school of the Mahāsāṃghika. Some of the early schools
considered that Nirvāṇa Without Remainder always follows Nirvāṇa With
Remainder (Buddhas first achieve enlightenment and then, at "death",
Mahāparinirvāṇa) and that Nirvāṇa Without Remainder is final; whereas
the Mahāyāna traditions consider that Nirvāṇa Without Remainder is always
followed by Nirvāṇa With Remainder — the state of attainment of arhat is
not considered final, and should be succeeded by Bodhisattvahood. This
distinction is most evident regarding doctrinal concerns about the capability
of a Buddha after Nirvāṇa, which is identified by the early schools as being
Nirvāṇa Without Remainder. Amongst the early schools, a completely
enlightened buddha (Skt. "samyaksaṃbuddha") is not able to directly point the
way to Nirvāṇa after death. Some Mahayana schools however, hold that once a
completely enlightened Buddha (Skt. "samyaksaṃbuddha") arises, he or she
continues to directly and actively point the way to Nirvāṇa until there are
no beings left in saṃsāra. Consequently, some Mahāyāna schools talk of a
bodhisattva deliberately refraining from Buddhahood. The Lotus Sutra states
that Shakyamuni Buddha's parinirvana is an expedient, and that he actually
remains in the world to teach and guide living beings. This is why Nichiren
Buddhism regards Shakyamuni as the Eternal Buddha. The early schools held that
Maitreya will be the next Buddha to rediscover the path to Nirvana, when
teachings of Gautam Buddha are forgotten. In contrast, some Mahāyāna schools
hold that Maitreya will be the next buddha manifest in this world and will
introduce the Dharma when it no longer exists, but when he dies (or enters
"Mahāparinirvāṇa"), he will likewise continue to teach the Dharma for all
time. Moreover, some Mahāyāna schools argue that although it is true that,
for this world-system, Maitreya will be the next buddha to manifest, there are
an infinite number of world-systems, many of which have currently active
buddhas or bodhisattvas manifesting. Because the Mahāyāna traditions assert
that eventually everyone will achieve complete enlightenment (Skt. "Anuttarā
Samyaksaṃbodhi"), the Mahāyāna is labeled universalist, whereas the stance
of the early scriptures is that attaining Nirvāṇa depends on effort and is
not pre-determined. Bodhisattva. The Mahāyāna tradition holds that pursuing
only the release from suffering and attainment of Nirvāṇa is too narrow an
aspiration, because it lacks the motivation of actively resolving to liberate
all other sentient beings from Saṃsāra. One who engages in this path is
called a bodhisattva. The defining characteristic of a bodhisattva is
bodhicitta, the intention to achieve omniscient Buddhahood (Trikaya) as fast as
possible, so that one may benefit infinite sentient beings. Sometimes the term
bodhisattva is used more restrictively to refer to those sentient beings on the
grounds. As Ananda Coomaraswamy notes, "The most essential part of the Mahayana
is its emphasis on the Bodhisattva ideal, which replaces that of the arhat, or
ranks before it." According to Mahāyāna teachings, being a high-level
bodhisattva involves possessing a mind of great compassion and transcendent
wisdom (Skt. "prajñā") to realize the reality of inherent emptiness and
dependent origination. Mahāyāna teaches that the practitioner will finally
realize the attainment of Buddhahood. Expedient means. Expedient means (Skt.
"upāya") is found in the "Lotus Sutra", one of the earliest dated Mahāyāna
sūtras, and is accepted in all Mahāyāna schools of thought. It is any
effective method that aids awakening. It does not necessarily mean that some
particular method is "untrue" but is simply any means or stratagem that is
conducive to spiritual growth and leads beings to awakening and nirvana.
Expedient means could thus be certain motivational words for a particular
listener or even the noble eightfold path itself. Basic Buddhism (what
Mahāyāna would term "śravakayāna" or "pratyekabuddhayāna") is an expedient
method for helping people begin the noble Buddhist path and advance quite far.
But the path is not wholly traversed, according to some Mahāyāna schools,
until the practitioner has striven for and attained Buddhahood for the
liberation of all other sentient beings from suffering. Some scholars have
stated that the exercise of expedient means, "the ability to adapt one's
message to the audience, is also of enormous importance in the Pāli canon." In
fact the Pāli term "upāya-kosalla" does occur in the Pāli Canon, in the
"Sangiti Sutta" of the "Digha Nikāya". Liberation. “Devotional” Mahāyāna
developed a rich cosmography, with various Buddhas and bodhisattvas residing in
paradise realms. The concept of the three bodies ("trikāya") supports these
constructions, making the Buddha himself a transcendental figure. Dr. Guang
Xing describes the Mahāyāna Buddha as "an omnipotent divinity endowed with
numerous supernatural attributes and qualities ... is described almost as an
omnipotent and almighty godhead." Under various conditions, the realms Buddha
presides over could be attained by devotees after their death so, when reborn,
they could strive towards buddhahood in the best possible conditions. Depending
on the sect, this salvation to “paradise” can be obtained by faith,
imaging, or sometimes even by the simple invocation of the Buddha’s name.
This approach to salvation is at the origin of the mass appeal of devotional
Buddhism, especially represented by the Pure Land (浄土宗). This rich
cosmography also allowed Mahāyāna to be quite syncretic and accommodating of
other faiths or deities. Various origins have been suggested to explain its
emergence, such as “popular Hindu devotional cults ("bhakti"), and Persian
and Greco-Roman theologies, which filtered into India from the northwest”.
Buddha nature. The teaching of a "Buddha nature" (Skt. "tathāgatagarbha") may
be based on the "luminous mind" concept found in the "Āgamas". The essential
idea, articulated in the Buddha nature sūtras, but not accepted by all
Mahāyānists, is that no being is without a concealed but indestructible
interior link to the awakening of "bodhi" and that this link is an uncreated
element ("dhātu") or principle deep inside each being, which constitutes the
deathless, diamond-like "essence of the self". The "Mahāparinirvāṇa Sūtra"
states: "The essence of the Self ("ātman") is the subtle Buddha nature..."
while the later "Lankāvatāra Sūtra" states that the Buddha nature might be
taken to be self ("ātman"), but it is not. In the 'Sagathakam' section of that
same sutra, however, the Tathagatagarbha as the Self is not denied, but
affirmed: 'The "Atma" characterised with purity is the state of self-
realization; this is the Tathagata's Womb ("garbha"), which does not belong to
the realm of the theorisers'. In the Buddha nature class of sūtras, the word
"self" ("ātman") is used in a way defined by and specific to these sūtras.
(See Atman (Buddhism).) According to some scholars, the Buddha nature discussed
in some Mahāyāna sūtras does not represent a substantial self ("ātman");
rather, it is a positive language and expression of emptiness ("śūnyatā")
and represents the potentiality to realize Buddhahood through Buddhist
practices. It is the "true self" in representing the innate aspect of the
individual that makes actualizing the ultimate personality possible. The actual
"seeing and knowing" of this Buddha essence ("Buddha-dhātu", co-terminous with
the "Dharmakāya" or self of Buddha) is said to usher in nirvanic liberation.
This Buddha essence or "Buddha nature" is stated to be found in every single
person, ghost, god and sentient being. In the Buddha nature sūtras, the Buddha
is portrayed as describing the Buddha essence as uncreated, deathless and
ultimately beyond rational grasping or conceptualisation. Yet, it is this
already real and present, hidden internal element of awakeness ("bodhi") that,
according to the Buddha nature sūtras, prompts beings to seek liberation from
worldly suffering, and lets them attain the spotless bliss that lies at the
heart of their being. Once the veils of negative thoughts, feelings, and
unwholesome behaviour (the "kleśas") are eliminated from the mind and
character, the indwelling Buddha principle ("Buddha-dhātu": Buddha nature) can
shine forth unimpededly and transform the seer into a Buddha. Prior to the
period of these sūtras, Mahāyāna metaphysics was dominated by teachings on
emptiness, in the form of Madhyamaka philosophy. The language used by this
approach is primarily negative, and the Buddha nature genre of sūtras can be
seen as an attempt to state orthodox Buddhist teachings of dependent
origination and on the mysterious reality of nirvana using positive language
instead, to prevent people from being turned away from Buddhism by a false
impression of nihilism. In these sūtras the perfection of the wisdom of not-
self is stated to be the true self; the ultimate goal of the path is then
characterized using a range of positive language that had been used in Indian
philosophy previously by essentialist philosophers, but was now transmuted into
a new Buddhist vocabulary that described a being who has successfully completed
the Buddhist path. The "Uttaratantra" (an exegetical treatise on Buddha nature)
sees Buddha nature not as caused and conditioned ("saṃskṛta"), but as
eternal, uncaused, unconditioned, and incapable of being destroyed, although
temporarily concealed within worldly beings by adventitious defilements.
According to Buddhist scholar Dr. C. D. Sebastian, the "Uttaratantra's"
reference to a transcendental self ("ātma-pāramitā") should be understood as
"the unique essence of the universe," thus the universal and immanent essence
of Buddha nature is the same throughout time and space. Scriptures. Āgamas.
Mahāyāna Buddhism takes the basic teachings of the Buddha as recorded in
early scriptures as the starting point of its teachings, such as those
concerning karma and rebirth, anātman, emptiness, dependent origination, and
the Four Noble Truths. Mahāyāna Buddhists in East Asia have traditionally
studied these teachings in the Āgamas preserved in the Chinese Buddhist canon.
"Āgama" is the term used by those traditional Buddhist schools in India who
employed Sanskrit for their basic canon. These correspond to the Nikāyas used
by the Theravāda school. The surviving Āgamas in Chinese translation belong
to at least two schools, while most of the Āgamas teachings were never
translated into Tibetan. In addition to accepting the essential scriptures of
the various early Buddhist schools as valid, Mahāyāna Buddhism also maintains
large additional collections of sūtras that are not used or recognized by the
Theravāda school. In the past, these were also not recognized by some
individuals within the early Buddhist schools. In other cases, Buddhist
communities were divided along these doctrinal lines. In Mahāyāna Buddhism,
the Mahāyāna sūtras are often given greater authority than the Āgamas. The
first of these Mahāyāna-specific writings were written probably around the
1st century BCE or 1st century CE. Turnings of the Dharma Wheel. Some
traditions of Tibetan Buddhism consider the teachings of Esoteric Buddhism and
Vajrayāna to be the third turning of the Dharma Wheel. Tibetan teachers,
particularly of the Gelugpa school, regard the second turning as the highest
teaching, due to their particular interpretation of Yogācāra doctrine. The
Buddha Nature teachings are normally included in the third turning of the
wheel. The Chinese tradition has a different scheme. Early canon. Scholars have
noted that many key Mahāyāna ideas are closely connected to the earliest
texts of Buddhism. The seminal work of Mahāyāna philosophy, Nāgārjuna's
"Mūlamadhyamakakārikā", mentions the canon's "Katyāyana Sūtra" (SA 301) by
name, and may be an extended commentary on that work. Nāgārjuna systematized
the Mādhyamaka school of Mahāyāna philosophy. He may have arrived at his
positions from a desire to achieve a consistent exegesis of the Buddha's
doctrine as recorded in the canon. In his eyes the Buddha was not merely a
forerunner, but the very founder of the Mādhyamaka system. Nāgārjuna also
referred to a passage in the canon regarding "nirvanic consciousness" in two
different works. Yogācāra, the other prominent Mahāyāna school in dialectic
with the Mādhyamaka school, gave a special significance to the canon's "Lesser
Discourse on Emptiness" (MA 190). A passage there (which the discourse itself
emphasizes) is often quoted in later Yogācāra texts as a true definition of
emptiness. According to Walpola Rahula, the thought presented in the Yogācāra
school's "Abhidharma-samuccaya" is undeniably closer to that of the Pali
Nikayas than is that of the Theravadin Abhidhamma. Both the Mādhyamikas and
the Yogācārins saw themselves as preserving the Buddhist Middle Way between
the extremes of nihilism (everything as unreal) and substantialism (substantial
entities existing). The Yogācārins criticized the Mādhyamikas for tending
towards nihilism, while the Mādhyamikas criticized the Yogācārins for
tending towards substantialism. Key Mahāyāna texts introducing the concepts
of bodhicitta and Buddha nature also use language parallel to passages in the
canon containing the Buddha's description of "luminous mind" and may have been
based on this idea. Theravāda school. Role of the Bodhisattva. In the early
Buddhist texts, and as taught by the modern Theravada school, the goal of
becoming a teaching Buddha in a future life is viewed as the aim of a small
group of individuals striving to benefit future generations after the current
Buddha's teachings have been lost, but in the current age there is no need for
most practitioners to aspire to this goal. Theravada texts do, however, hold
that this is a more perfectly virtuous goal. Theravāda and Hīnayāna.
Although the Theravāda school is usually described as belonging to Hīnayāna,
some authors have argued that it should not be considered such from the
Mahāyāna perspective. Their view is based on a different understanding of the
concept of Hīnayāna. Rather than regarding the term as referring to any
school of Buddhism that hasn't accepted the Mahāyāna canon and doctrines,
such as those pertaining to the role of the boddhisatva, these authors argue
that the classification of a school as "Hīnayāna" should be crucially
dependent on the adherence to a specific phenomenological position. They point
out that unlike the now-extinct Sarvāstivāda school, which was the primary
object of Mahāyāna criticism, the Theravāda does not claim the existence of
independent entities ("dharmas"); in this it maintains the attitude of early
Buddhism. Adherents of Mahāyāna Buddhism disagreed with the substantialist
thought of the Sarvāstivādins and Sautrāntikas, and in emphasizing the
doctrine of emptiness, Kalupahana holds that they endeavored to preserve the
early teaching. The Theravādins too refuted the Sarvāstivādins and
Sautrāntikas (and other schools) on the grounds that their theories were in
conflict with the non-substantialism of the canon. The Theravāda arguments are
preserved in the "Kathāvatthu". Thus, according to this view, no form of real
Hīnayāna Buddhism survives today. Some contemporary Theravādin figures have
indicated a sympathetic stance toward the Mahāyāna philosophy found in texts
such as the "Heart Sūtra" (Skt. "Prajñāpāramitā Hṛdaya") and
Nāgārjuna's "Fundamental Stanzas on the Middle Way" (Skt.
"Mūlamadhyamakakārikā").
