Manichaeism Manichaeism (; in Modern Persian "Āyin e Māni"; ) was a major
gnostic religion, originating in Sassanid era Babylonia. Although most of the
original writings of the founding prophet Mani (in Persian: مانی, Syriac: ,
Latin: Manichaeus or Manes) (c. AD 216–276) have been lost, numerous
translations and fragmentary texts have survived. "Manichaean" as used in
contemporary popular discourse refers to someone who sees the world as a
struggle between Good and Evil (see Figurative Use, below). Manichaeism taught
an elaborate cosmology describing the struggle between a good, spiritual world
of light, and an evil, material world of darkness. Through an ongoing process
which takes place in human history, light is gradually removed from the world
of matter and returned to the world of light from which it came. Its beliefs
were based on local Mesopotamian gnostic and religious movements, Manichaeism
as a syncretistic form of oriental Christianity was quickly successful and
spread far through the Aramaic-Syriac speaking regions, it thrived between the
third and seventh centuries, and at its height was one of the most widespread
religions in the world. Manichaean churches and scriptures existed as far east
as China and as far west as the Roman Empire. It was widespread among the
legions of the Roman Empire, who considered it a soldier's religion, and it was
briefly the main rival to Christianity in the competition to replace classical
paganism. Manichaeism survived longer in the East than in the West, and it
appears to have finally faded away after the 14th century in southern China,
contemporary to the decline in China of the Church of the East – see Ming
Dynasty. An adherent of Manichaeism is called, especially in older sources a
"Manichee". The religion is also referred to as Manicheanism (or Manichaeanism)
and its adherents as "Manicheans" (or "Manichaeans"). By extension, the term
"manichean" is widely applied (often disparagingly) as an adjective to a
philosophy or attitude of moral dualism, according to which a moral course of
action involves a clear (or simplistic) choice between good and evil, or as a
noun to people who hold such a view. History. Life of Mani. Mani, an Arsacid
Iranian by birth, was born AD 216 in Mesopotamia (Iraq), which was ruled by
Persia, then within the Sassanid Empire province of Asuristan. According to the
Cologne Mani-Codex, Mani's parents were members of the religious sect of
Elcesaites. The king of Persia put him to death in 274 or 277. Mani believed
that the teachings of Buddha, Zoroaster, and Jesus were incomplete, and that
his revelations were for the entire world, calling his teachings the "Religion
of Light." Manichaean writings indicate that Mani received revelations when he
was 12 and again when he was 24, and over this time period he grew dissatisfied
with the Elchasaite sect he was born into. Mani began preaching at an early age
and was possibly influenced by contemporary Babylonian-Aramaic movements such
as Mandaeanism, and Aramaic translations of Jewish apocalyptic writings similar
to those found at Qumran (such as the book of Enoch literature). With the
discovery of the Mani-Codex, it also became clear that he was raised in a
Jewish-Christian baptism sect, the Elcesaites, and was influenced by their
writings as well. According to biographies preserved by Ibn al-Nadim and the
Persian polymath al-Biruni, he allegedly received a revelation as a youth from
a spirit, whom he would later call his "Twin" (Aramaic "Tauma" (תאומא),
from which is also derived the name of the apostle Thomas, the "twin"), his
"Syzygos" (Greek for "partner", in the Cologne Mani-Codex), his Double, his
Protective Angel or 'Divine Self'. It taught him truths which he developed into
a religion. His 'divine' Twin or true Self brought Mani to Self-realization and
thus he became a 'gnosticus', someone with divine knowledge and liberating
insight. He claimed to be the 'Paraclete of the Truth', as promised in the New
Testament. Mani composed seven writings, six of which were written in Syriac
Aramaic. The seventh, the Shabuhragan, was written by Mani in Middle Persian
and presented by him to the contemporary King of Sassanid Persia, Shapur I in
the Persian capital of Ctesiphon. Although there is no proof Shapur I was a
Manichaean, he tolerated the spread of Manicheanism and refrained from
persecuting it in his empire's boundaries. According to one tradition it was
Mani himself who invented the unique version of the Syriac script called
Manichaean script, which was used in all of the Manichaean works written within
the Persian Empire, whether they were in Syriac or Middle Persian, and also for
most of the works written within the Uyghur Empire. The primary language of
Babylon (and the administrative and cultural language of the Sassanid Empire)
at that time was Eastern Middle Aramaic, which included three main dialects:
Judeo-Aramaic (the language of the Talmud), Mandaean Aramaic (the language of
the Mandaean religion), and Syriac Aramaic, which was the language of Mani, as
well as of the Syriac Christians. "Mani" is a Sanskrit name used in all three
Aramaic dialects and therefore common among their speakers. Manichaeism's views
on Jesus are described by historians:  Historians also note that Mani declared
himself to be an "apostle of Jesus Christ" Manichaean tradition is also noted
to have claimed that Mani was the reincarnation of different religious figures
from Buddha, Lord Krishna, Zoroaster, and Jesus.  Also academics note that
since much of what is known about Manichaeism comes from later 10th and 11th
Century CE Islamic historians like Al-Biruni and especially the Shia Muslim
Persian historian Ibn al-Nadim (and his work Fihrist); "Islamic authors
ascribed to Mani the claim to be the Seal of the Prophets" This topic is
discussed by an Israeli academic Guy G. Stroumsa Another source of Mani's
scriptures was original Aramaic writings relating to the book of Enoch
literature (see the Book of Enoch and the Second Book of Enoch), as well as an
otherwise unknown section of the book of Enoch called the "Book of Giants".
This book was quoted directly, and expanded on by Mani, becoming one of the
original six Syriac writings of the Manichaean Church. Besides brief references
by non-Manichaean authors through the centuries, no original sources of "The
Book of Giants" (which is actually part six of the "Book of Enoch") were
available until the 20th century. It is noteworthy that Mani, who was brought
up and spent most of his life in a province of the Persian empire, and whose
mother belonged to a famous Parthian family, did not make any use of the
Iranian mythological tradition. There can no longer be any doubt that the
Iranian names of Sām, Narīmān, etc., that appear in the Persian and Sogdian
versions of the Book of the Giants, did not figure in the original edition,
written by Mani in the Syriac language. From a careful reading of the Enoch
literature and the Book of Giants, alongside the description of the Manichaean
myth, it becomes clear that the "Great King of Glory" of this myth (a being
that sits as a guard to the world of light at the seventh of ten heavens in the
Manichaean myth,) is identical with the King of Glory sitting on the heavenly
throne in the Enoch literature. In the Aramaic book of Enoch, in the Qumran
writings in general, and in the original Syriac section of Manichaean
scriptures quoted by Theodore bar Konai, he is called "malka raba de-ikara"
(the great king of glory). Richard Foltz, "Religions of the Silk Road",
Palgrave Macmillan, 2nd edition, 2010, p. 71 ISBN 978-0-230-62125-1 While
Manichaeism was spreading, existing religions such as Christianity and
Zoroastrianism were gaining social and political influence. Although having
fewer adherents, Manichaeism won the support of many high-ranking political
figures. With the assistance of the Persian Empire, Mani began missionary
expeditions. After failing to win the favour of the next generation of Persian
royalty, and incurring the disapproval of the Zoroastrian clergy, Mani is
reported to have died in prison awaiting execution by the Persian Emperor
Bahram I. The date of his death is estimated at AD 276–277. Later history.
Manichaeism continued to spread with extraordinary speed through both the east
and west. It reached Rome through the apostle Psattiq by AD 280, who was also
in Egypt in 244 and 251. It was flourishing in the Fayum area of Egypt in AD
290. Manichaean monasteries existed in Rome in 312 A.D. during the time of the
Christian Pope Miltiades. The spread and success of Manichaeism were seen as a
threat to other religions, and it was widely persecuted in Hellenistic,
Christian, Zoroastrian, Islamic, and Buddhist cultures. In 291, persecution
arose in the Persian empire with the murder of the apostle Sisin by Bahram II,
and the slaughter of many Manichaeans. In AD 296, Diocletian decreed against
the Manichaeans: "We order that their organizers and leaders be subject to the
final penalties and condemned to the fire with their abominable scriptures",
resulting in many martyrdoms in Egypt and North Africa (see "Diocletian
Persecution"). By AD 354, Hilary of Poitiers wrote that the Manichaean faith
was a significant force in southern Gaul. In AD 381 Christians requested
Theodosius I to strip Manichaeans of their civil rights. He issued a decree of
death for Manichaean monks in AD 382. Augustine of Hippo (AD 354–430)
converted to Christianity from Manichaeism, in the year 387. This was shortly
after the Roman Emperor Theodosius I had issued a decree of death for
Manichaeans in AD 382 and shortly before he declared Christianity to be the
only legitimate religion for the Roman Empire in 391. According to his
"Confessions," after nine or ten years of adhering to the Manichaean faith as a
member of the group of "hearers", Augustine became a Christian and a potent
adversary of Manichaeism (which he expressed in writing against his Manichaean
opponent Faustus of Mileve), seeing their beliefs that knowledge was the key to
salvation as too passive and not able to effect any change in one's life. I
still thought that it is not we who sin but some other nature that sins within
us. It flattered my pride to think that I incurred no guilt and, when I did
wrong, not to confess it... I preferred to excuse myself and blame this unknown
thing which was in me but was not part of me. The truth, of course, was that it
was all my own self, and my own impiety had divided me against myself. My sin
was all the more incurable because I did not think myself a sinner.
("Confessions, Book V, Section 10") Some modern scholars have suggested that
Manichaean ways of thinking influenced the development of some of Augustine's
ideas, such as the nature of good and evil, the idea of hell, the separation of
groups into elect, hearers, and sinners, and the hostility to the flesh and
sexual activity. How Manichaeism may have influenced Christianity continues to
be debated. Manichaeism may have influenced the Bogomils, Paulicians, and
Cathars. However, these groups left few records, and the link between them and
Manichaeans is tenuous. Regardless of its accuracy the charge of Manichaeism
was levelled at them by contemporary orthodox opponents, who often tried to
make contemporary heresies conform to those combatted by the church fathers.
Whether the dualism of the Paulicians, Bogomils, and Cathars and their belief
that the world was created by a Satanic demiurge were due to influence from
Manichaeism is impossible to determine. The Cathars apparently adopted the
Manichaean principles of church organization. Priscillian and his followers may
also have been influenced by Manichaeism. The Manichaeans preserved many
apocryphal Christian works, such as the Acts of Thomas, that would otherwise
have been lost. Manichaeism maintained a sporadic and intermittent existence in
the west (Mesopotamia, Africa, Spain, France, North Italy, the Balkans) for a
thousand years, and flourished for a time in the land of its birth (Persia) and
even further east in Northern India, Western China, and Tibet. While it had
long been thought that Manichaeism arrived in China only at the end of the
seventh century, a recent archaeological discovery demonstrated that it was
already known there in the second half of the sixth century. It was adopted by
the Uyghur ruler Khagan Boku Tekin (AD 759–780) in 763, and remained the
state religion for about a century before the collapse of the Uyghur empire in
840. In the east it spread along trade routes as far as Chang'an, the capital
of the Tang Dynasty in China. In the ninth century, it is reported that the
Muslim Caliph Al-Ma'mun tolerated a community of Manichaeans. However, al-Mahdi
persecuted the Manichaeans, establishing an inquisition to root out their
"heresy", even resorting to outright massacre against them. In the Song and
Yuan dynasties of China remnants of Manichaeanism continued to leave a legacy
contributing to sects such as the Red Turbans. Manichaeism claimed to present
the complete version of teachings that were corrupted and misinterpreted by the
followers of its predecessors Adam, Zoroaster, Buddha and Jesus. Accordingly,
as it spread, it adapted new deities from other religions into forms it could
use for its scriptures. Its original Aramaic texts already contained stories of
Jesus. When they moved eastward and were translated into Iranian languages, the
names of the Manichaean deities (or angels) were often transformed into the
names of Zoroastrian yazatas. Thus " " ("The Father of Greatness", the highest
Manichaean deity of Light), in Middle Persian texts might either be translated
literally as "pīd ī wuzurgīh", or substituted with the name of the deity
"Zurwān". Similarly, the Manichaean primal figure " " "The Original Man" was
rendered "Ohrmazd Bay", after the Zoroastrian god Ahura Mazda. This process
continued in Manichaeism's meeting with Chinese Buddhism, where, for example,
the original Aramaic "karia" (the "call" from the world of Light to those
seeking rescue from the world of Darkness), becomes identified in the Chinese
scriptures with Guan Yin ( or Avalokitesvara in Sanskrit, literally, "watching/
perceiving sounds the world", the Chinese Bodhisattva of Compassion). Later
movements accused of "Neo-Manichaeism". During the Middle Ages, several
movements emerged which were collectively described as "Manichaean" by the
Catholic Church, and persecuted as Christian heresies through the
establishment, in 1184, of the Inquisition. They included the Cathar and
Albigensian churches of Western Europe. Other groups sometimes referred to as
"neo-Manichaean" were the Paulician movement, which arose in Armenia, and the
Bogomils in Bulgaria. An example of this usage can be found in the published
edition of the Latin Cathar text, the "Liber de duobus principiis" ("Book of
the Two Principles"), which was described as "Neo-Manichaean" by its
publishers. As there is no presence of Manichaean mythology or church
terminology in the writings of these groups, there has been some dispute among
historians as to whether these groups were descendants of Manichaeism. In
Hungarian Christianity, traces of Manichaeism can be found both in Catholicism
and in Protestant Christianity, Manichaeian symbols are present in folk art, in
Protestant churches and even on the Holy Crown. Manichean teaching and belief.
General. Mani's teaching dealt with the origin of evil, by addressing a
theoretical part of the problem of evil by denying the omnipotence of God and
postulating two opposite powers. Manichaean theology taught a dualistic view of
good and evil. A key belief in Manichaeism is that the powerful, though not
omnipotent good power (God) was opposed by the semi-eternal evil power (Satan).
Humanity, the world and the soul are seen as the byproduct of the battle
between God's proxy, Primal Man, and Satan. The human person is seen as a
battleground for these powers: the soul defines the person, but it is under the
influence of both light and dark. This contention plays out over the world as
well as the human body—neither the Earth nor the flesh were seen as
intrinsically evil, but rather possessed portions of both light and dark.
Natural phenomena (such as rain) were seen as the physical manifestation of
this spiritual contention. Therefore, the Manichaean worldview explained the
existence of evil with a flawed creation God took no role in forming and was
the result of Satan striking out against God. Cosmogony. Manichaeism presented
an elaborate description of the conflict between the spiritual world of light
and the material world of darkness. The beings of both the world of darkness
and the world of light have names. There are numerous sources for the details
of the Manichaean belief. There are two portions of Manichaean scriptures that
are probably the closest thing to the original Manichaean writings in their
original languages that will ever be available. These are the Syriac-Aramaic
quotation by the Nestorian Christian Theodore bar Konai, in his Syriac "Book of
Scholia" (""Ketba de-Skolion"", eighth century), and the Middle Persian
sections of Mani's Shabuhragan discovered at Turpan (a summary of Mani's
teachings prepared for Shapur I). These two sections are probably the original
Syriac and Middle Persian written by Mani. The First Creation: Originally, good
and evil existed in two completely separate realms, one the "World of Light",
ruled by the "Father of Greatness" together with his five "Shekhinas" (divine
attributes of light), and the other the "World of Darkness", ruled by the "King
of Darkness". At a certain point, the "Kingdom of Darkness" notices the "World
of Light", becomes greedy for it and attacks it. The "Father of Greatness", in
the first of three "creations" (or "calls"), calls to the "Mother of Life", who
sends her son "Original Man" ("" in Aramaic), to battle with the attacking
powers of Darkness, which include the "Demon of Greed". The "Original Man" is
armed with five different shields of light (reflections of the five
"Shekhinas"), which he loses to the forces of darkness in the ensuing battle,
described as a kind of "bait" to trick the forces of darkness, as the forces of
darkness greedily consume as much light as they can. When the "Original Man"
comes to, he is trapped among the forces of darkness. The Second Creation: Then
the "Father of Greatness" begins the "Second Creation", calling to the "Living
Spirit", who calls to his five sons, and sends a call to the "Original Man"
("Call" then becomes a Manichaean deity). An answer ("Answer" becomes another
Manichaean deity) then returns from the "Original Man" to the "World of Light".
The "Mother of Life", the "Living Spirit", and his five sons begin to create
the universe from the bodies of the evil beings of the "World of Darkness",
together with the light that they have swallowed. Ten heavens and eight earths
are created, all consisting of various mixtures of the evil material beings
from the "World of Darkness" and the swallowed light. The sun, moon, and stars
are all created from light recovered from the "World of Darkness". The waxing
and waning of the moon is described as the moon filling with light, which
passes to the sun, then through the Milky Way, and eventually back to the
"World of Light". The Third Creation: Great demons (called "archons" in bar-
Khonai's account) are hung out over the heavens, and then the "Father of
Greatness" begins the "Third Creation". Light is recovered from out of the
material bodies of the male and female evil beings and demons, by causing them
to become sexually aroused in greed, towards beautiful images of the beings of
light, such as the "Third Messenger" and the "Virgins of Light". However, as
soon as the light is expelled from their bodies and falls to the earth (some in
the form of abortions – the source of fallen angels in the Manichaean myth),
the evil beings continue to swallow up as much of it as they can to keep the
light inside of them. This results eventually in the evil beings swallowing
huge quantities of light, copulating, and producing Adam and Eve. The "Father
of Greatness" then sends the "Radiant Jesus" to awaken Adam, and to enlighten
him to the true source of the light that is trapped in his material body. Adam
and Eve, however, eventually copulate, and produce more human beings, trapping
the light in bodies of mankind throughout human history. The appearance of the
Prophet Mani was another attempt by the "World of Light" to reveal to mankind
the true source of the spiritual light imprisoned within their material bodies.
Outline of the beings and events in the Manichaean mythos. Beginning with the
time of its creation by Mani, the Manichaean religion had a detailed
description of deities and events that took place within the Manichaean scheme
of the universe. In every language and region that Manichaeism spread to, these
same deities reappear, whether it is in the original Syriac quoted by Theodore
bar Konai, or the Latin terminology given by Saint Augustine from Mani's
"Epistola Fundamenti", or the Persian and Chinese translations found as
Manichaeism spread eastward. While the original Syriac retained the original
description which Mani created, the transformation of the deities through other
languages and cultures produced incarnations of the deities not implied in the
original Syriac writings. This process began in Mani's lifetime, with "The
Father of Greatness", for example, being translated into Middle Persian as
Zurvan, a Zoroastrian supreme being. Organization and religious practices.
Organization of the Manichaean Church. The Manichaean Church was divided into
"Elect" – those who had taken upon themselves the vows of Manicheaism, and
"Hearers" – those who had not, but still participated in the Church. The
terms for these divisions were already common since the days of early
Christianity. In the Chinese writings, the Middle Persian and Parthian terms
are transcribed phonetically (instead of being translated into Chinese). The
Bema Fest. Skjærvø, Prods Oktor, "An Introduction to Manicheism", 2006. While
it is often presumed that the Bema seat was empty, there is some evidence from
the Coptic Manichaean "Bema Psalms", that the Bema seat may have actually
contained a copy of Mani's picture book, the Arzhang. Primary sources. Mani
wrote either seven or eight books, which contained the teachings of the
religion. Only scattered fragments and translations of the originals remain.
The original six Syriac writings are not preserved, although their Syriac names
have been. There are also fragments and quotations from them. A long quotation,
preserved by the eighth-century Nestorian Christian author Theodore bar Konai,
shows that in the original Syriac Aramaic writings of Mani there was no
influence of Iranian or Zoroastrian terms. The terms for the Manichaean deities
in the original Syriac writings are in Aramaic. The adaptation of Manichaeism
to the Zoroastrian religion appears to have begun in Mani's lifetime however,
with his writing of the Middle Persian Shabuhragan, his book dedicated to the
King Shapuhr. In it, there are mentions of Zoroastrian deities such as Ohrmazd,
Ahriman, and Az. Manichaeism is often presented as a Persian religion, mostly
due to the vast number of Middle Persian, Parthian, and Soghdian (as well as
Turkish) texts discovered by German researchers near Turpan, in the Xinjiang
(Chinese Turkestan) province of China, during the early 1900s. However, from
the vantage point of its original Syriac descriptions (as quoted by Theodore
bar Khonai and outlined below), Manichaeism may be better described as a unique
phenomenon of Aramaic Babylonia, occurring in proximity to two other new
Aramaic religious phenomena, Talmudic Judaism and Babylonian Mandaeism, which
were also appearing in Babylonia in roughly the third century AD. The original,
but now lost, six sacred books of Manichaeism were composed in Syriac Aramaic,
and translated into other languages to help spread the religion. As they spread
to the east, the Manichaean writings passed through Middle Persian, Parthian,
Sogdian, Tocharian and ultimately Uyghur and Chinese translations. As they
spread to the west, they were translated into Greek, Coptic, and Latin. Later
works. In later centuries, as Manichaeism passed through eastern Persian
speaking lands and arrived at the Uyghur Empire, and eventually the Uyghur
kingdom of Turpan (destroyed around 1335), long hymn cycles and prayers were
composed in Middle Persian and Parthian. A translation of one of these produced
the Manichaean Chinese Hymnscroll (the 摩尼教下部贊, which Lieu
translates as "Hymns for the Lower Section the Hearers of the Manichaean
Religion"), now available in its entirety (see the external links section).
Critical and polemic sources. Until discoveries in the 1900s of original
sources, the only sources for Manichaeism were descriptions and quotations from
non-Manichaean authors, either Christian, Muslim, Buddhist or Zoroastrian.
While often criticizing Manichaeism, they also quoted directly from Manichaean
scriptures. This enabled Isaac de Beausobre, writing in the 18th century, to
create a comprehensive work on Manichaeism, relying solely on anti-Manichaean
sources. Thus quotations and descriptions in Greek and Arabic have long been
known to scholars, as have the long quotations in Latin by Saint Augustine, and
the extremely important quotation in Syriac by Theodore bar Khonai. Acta
Archelai. In the time of the Apostles there lived a man named Scythianus, who
is described as coming 'from Scythia,' and also as being 'a Saracen by race'
('ex genere Saracenorum'). He settled in Egypt, where he became acquainted with
'the wisdom of the Egyptians,' and invented the religious system which was
afterwards known as Manichaeism. Finally he emigrated to Palestine, and, when
he died, his writings passed into the hands of his sole disciple, a certain
Terebinthus. The latter betook himself to Babylonia, assumed the name of Budda,
and endeavoured to propagate his master's teaching. But he, like Scythianus,
gained only one disciple, who was an old woman. After a while he died, in
consequence of a fall from the roof of a house, and the books which he had
inherited from Scythianus became the property of the old woman, who, on her
death, bequeathed them to a young man named Corbicius, who had been her slave.
Corbicius thereupon changed his name to Manes, studied the writings of
Scythianus, and began to teach the doctrines which they contained, with many
additions of his own. He gained three disciples, named Thomas, Addas, and
Hermas. About this time the son of the Persian king fell ill, and Manes
undertook to cure him; the prince, however, died, whereupon Manes was thrown
into prison. He succeeded in escaping, but eventually fell into the hands of
the king, by whose order he was flayed, and his corpse was hung up at the city
gate. A. A. Bevan, who quoted this story, commented that it 'has no claim to be
considered historical.' View of Judaism in the "Acta Archelai". According to
Hegemonius' portrayal of Mani, the devil god which created the world was the
Jewish Jehovah. Hegemonius reports that Mani said, "It is the Prince of
Darkness who spoke with Moses, the Jews and their priests. Thus the Christians,
the Jews, and the Pagans are involved in the same error when they worship this
God. For he leads them astray in the lusts he taught them." He goes on to
state: "Now, he who spoke with Moses, the Jews, and the priests he says is the
archont of Darkness, and the Christians, Jews, and pagans (ethnic) are one and
the same, as they revere the same god. For in his aspirations he seduces them,
as he is not the god of truth. And so therefore all those who put their hope in
the god who spoke with Moses and the prophets have (this in store for
themselves, namely) to be bound with him, because they did not put their hope
in the god of truth. For that one spoke with them (only) according to their own
aspirations." Central Asian and Iranian primary sources. In the early 1900s,
original Manichaean writings started to come to light when German scholars led
by Albert Grünwedel, and then by Albert von Le Coq, began excavating at
Gaochang, the ancient site of the Manichaean Uyghur Kingdom near Turpan, in
Chinese Turkestan (destroyed around AD 1300). While most of the writings they
uncovered were in very poor condition, there were still hundreds of pages of
Manichaean scriptures, written in three Iranian languages (Middle Persian,
Parthian, and Sogdian) and old Turkish. These writings were taken back to
Germany, and were analyzed and published at the Preußische Akademie der
Wissenschaften in Berlin, by Le Coq and others, such as Friedrich W. K. Müller
and Walter Bruno Henning. While the vast majority of these writings were
written in a version of the Syriac script known as Manichaean script, the
German researchers, perhaps for lack of suitable fonts, published most of them
using Hebrew letters (which could easily be substituted for the 22 Syriac
letters). Perhaps the most comprehensive of these publications was
"Manichaeische Dogmatik aus chinesischen und iranischen Texten" ("Manichaean
Dogma from Chinese and Iranian texts"), by Ernst Waldschmidt and Wolfgang
Lentz, published in Berlin in 1933. More than any other research work published
before or since, this work printed, and then discussed, the original key
Manichaean texts in the original scripts, and consists chiefly of sections from
Chinese texts, and Middle Persian and Parthian texts transcribed with Hebrew
letters. (After the Nazi party gained power in Germany, the Manichaean writings
continued to be published during the 1930s, but the publishers no longer used
Hebrew letters, instead transliterating the texts into Latin letters.) Coptic
primary sources. Additionally, in 1930, German researchers in Egypt found a
large body of Manichaean works in Coptic. Though these were also damaged, many
complete pages survived and, beginning in 1933, were analyzed and published in
Berlin before World War II, by German scholars such as Hans Jakob Polotsky.
Some of these Coptic Manichaean writings were lost during the war. Chinese
primary sources. After the success of the German researchers, French scholars
visited China and discovered what is perhaps the most complete set of
Manichaean writings, written in Chinese. These three Chinese writings are today
kept in London, Paris, and Beijing. Some of the scholars involved with their
initial discovery and publication were Édouard Chavannes, Paul Pelliot, and
Aurel Stein. The original studies and analyses of these writings, along with
their translations, first appeared in French, English, and German, before and
after World War II. The complete Chinese texts themselves were first published
in Tokyo, Japan in 1927, in the Taisho Tripitaka, volume 54. While in the last
thirty years or so they have been republished in both Germany (with a complete
translation into German, alongside the 1927 Japanese edition), and China, the
Japanese publication remains the standard reference for the Chinese texts.
Greek life of Mani, Cologne codex. In Egypt a small codex was found and became
known through antique dealers in Cairo. It was purchased by the University of
Cologne in 1969. Two of its scientists, Henrichs and Koenen, produced the first
edition known since as the Cologne Mani-Codex, which was published in four
articles in the "Zeitschrift für Papyrologie und Epigraphik". The ancient
papyrus manuscript contained a Greek text describing the life of Mani. Thanks
to this discovery, much more is known about the man who founded one of the most
influential world religions of the past. Figurative use. The terms "Manichaean"
and "Manichaeism" are sometimes used figuratively as a synonym of the more
general term "dualist" with respect to a philosophy or outlook. They are often
used to suggest with a somewhat disparaging undertone that the world view in
question simplistically reduces the world to a struggle between Good and Evil.
For example, Jean-Paul Sartre in the essay "Anti-Semite and Jew" referred to
the Anti-Semitic world view as "a form of Manichaeism", since "it explains the
course of the world by the struggle of the principle of Good with the principle
of Evil" (the "principle of Evil" being equated, by an Anti-Semitic person,
with the Jews). Similarly, Zbigniew Brzezinski used the phrase "Manichaean
paranoia" in reference to U.S. President George W. Bush's world view (in the
The Daily Show with Jon Stewart, March 14, 2007); Brzezinski elaborated that he
meant "the notion that he (Bush) is leading the forces of good against the
empire of evil". References. Books and articles. (Cahiers D'Orientalism XVI)
1988a
