Marcionism Marcionism was an Early Christian dualist belief system that
originated in the teachings of Marcion of Sinope at Rome around the year 144
(see also Christianity in the 2nd century). Marcion believed Jesus Christ was
the savior sent by God, and Paul of Tarsus was his chief apostle, but he
rejected the Hebrew Bible and the God of Israel. Marcionists believed that the
wrathful Hebrew God was a separate and lower entity than the all-forgiving God
of the New Testament. This belief was in some ways similar to Gnostic Christian
theology; notably, both are "dualistic", that is, they posit opposing gods,
forces, or principles: one higher, spiritual, and "good", and the other lower,
material, and "evil" (compare Manichaeism), in contrast to the orthodox
Christian view that "evil" has no independent existence, but is a privation or
lack of "good", a view shared by the eminent Jewish theologian Moses
Maimonides. Marcionism, similar to Gnosticism, depicted the Hebrew God of the
Old Testament as a tyrant or demiurge (see also God as the Devil). Marcion was
labeled a gnostic by Philip Schaff, Paul's epistles enjoy a prominent position
in the Marcionite canon, since Paul is credited with correctly transmitting the
universality of Jesus' message. Other authors' epistles were rejected since
they seemed to suggest that Jesus had simply come to found a new sect within
broader Judaism. Religious tribalism of this sort seemed to echo "Yahwism", and
was thus regarded as a corruption of the "Heavenly Father"'s teaching.
Marcionism was denounced by its opponents as heresy, and written against,
notably by Tertullian, in a five-book treatise "Adversus Marcionem", written
about 208. Marcion's writings are lost, though they were widely read and
numerous manuscripts must have existed. Even so, many scholars (including Henry
Wace) claim it is possible to reconstruct and deduce a large part of ancient
Marcionism through what later critics, especially Tertullian, said concerning
Marcion. History. According to Tertullian and other writers of the mainstream
Church (which scholars refer to as Proto-orthodox Christianity), the movement
known as Marcionism began with the teachings and excommunication of Marcion
around 144. Marcion was reportedly a wealthy shipowner, the son of a bishop of
Sinope of Pontus, Asia Minor. He arrived in Rome c. 140, soon after Bar
Kokhba's revolt. That revolution, along with other Jewish-Roman wars (the Great
Jewish Revolt and the Kitos War), provides some of the historical context of
the founding of Marcionism; see also Anti-Judaism in the Roman Empire. Marcion
was excommunicated from the Catholic Church because he was threatening to make
schisms in the church. Marcion used his personal wealth, (particularly a
donation returned to him by the Catholic Church after he was excommunicated),
to fund an ecclesiastical organization. Marcionism continued in the West for
300 years, although Marcionistic ideas persisted much longer. The organization
continued in the East for some centuries later, particularly outside the
Byzantine Empire in areas which later would be dominated by Manichaeism. Schism
within Marcionism. By the reign of emperor Commodus Marcionism was divided into
various opinions with various leaders; among whom was Apelles, whom Rhodo
describes as: "...priding himself on his manner of life and his age,
acknowledges one principle, but says that the prophecies are from an opposing
principle, being led to this view by the responses of a maiden by name
Philumene, who was possessed by a demon". But others, among whom were Potitus
and Basilicus, held to two principles, as did Marcion himself. Others consider
that there are not only two, but three natures. Of these, Syneros was the
leader and chief. Teachings. The premise of Marcionism is that many of the
teachings of Christ are incompatible with the actions of the God of the Old
Testament. Focusing on the Pauline traditions of the Gospel, Marcion felt that
all other conceptions of the Gospel, and especially any association with the
Old Testament religion, was opposed to, and a backsliding from, the truth. He
further regarded the arguments of Paul regarding law and gospel, wrath and
grace, works and faith, flesh and spirit, sin and righteousness, death and
life, as the essence of religious truth. He ascribed these aspects and
characteristics as two principles, the righteous and wrathful God of the Old
Testament, who is at the same time identical with the creator of the world, and
a second God of the Gospel, quite unknown before Christ, who is only love and
mercy. Marcionites held maltheistic views of the God of the Hebrew Bible (known
to some Gnostics as Yaltabaoth), that he was inconsistent, jealous, wrathful
and genocidal, and that the material world he created was defective, a place of
suffering; the God who made such a world is a bungling or malicious demiurge.
In Marcionite belief, Christ was not a Jewish Messiah, but a spiritual entity
that was sent by the Monad to reveal the truth about existence, and thus
allowing humanity to escape the earthly trap of the demiurge. Marcion called
God, the Stranger God, or the Alien God, in some translations, as this deity
had not had any previous interactions with the world, and was wholly unknown.
See also the Unknown God of Hellenism. In various popular sources, Marcion is
often reckoned among the Gnostics, but as the "Oxford Dictionary of the
Christian Church (3rd ed.)" puts it, "it is clear that he would have had little
sympathy with their mythological speculations" (p.Â 1034). In 1911 Henry Wace
stated: Marcionism shows the influence of Hellenistic philosophy on
Christianity, and presents a moral critique of the Old Testament from the
standpoint of Platonism. According to Harnack, the sect may have led other
Christians to introduce a formal statement of beliefs into their liturgy (see
Creed) and to formulate a canon of authoritative Scripture of their own, thus
eventually producing the current canon of the New Testament. Marcion is
believed to have imposed a severe morality on his followers, some of whom
suffered in the persecutions. In particular, he refused to re-admit those who
recanted their faith under Roman persecution; see also Lapsi (Christian).
Marcionite canon. Tertullian claimed Marcion was the first to separate the "New
Testament" from the "Old Testament". Marcion is said to have gathered
scriptures from Jewish tradition, and juxtaposed these against the sayings and
teachings of Jesus in a work entitled the "Antithesis". Besides the
"Antithesis", the Testament of the Marcionites was also composed of a "Gospel
of Christ" which was Marcion's version of Luke, and that the Marcionites
attributed to Paul, that was different in a number of ways from the version
that is now regarded as canonical. It seems to have lacked all prophecies of
Christ's coming, as well as the Infancy account, the baptism, and the verses
were more terse in general. It also included ten of the Pauline Epistles (but
not the Pastoral Epistles or the Epistle to the Hebrews, and, according to the
Muratonian canon, included a Marcionite pseudo-Paul's epistle to the
Alexandrians and an epistle to the Laodiceans) In bringing together these
texts, Marcion redacted what is perhaps the first New Testament canon on
record, which he called the Gospel and the Apostolikon, which reflects his
belief in the writings of Jesus and the apostle Paul respectively. The
Prologues to the Pauline Epistles (which are not a part of the text, but short
introductory sentences as one might find in modern study Bibles ), found in
several older Latin codices, are now widely believed to have been written by
Marcion or one of his followers. Harnack notes: Conversely, several early Latin
codices contain Anti-Marcionite prologues to the Gospels. Reaction to Marcion
by early Christians. According to a remark by Origen ("Commentary on the Gospel
of Matthew" 15.3), Marcion "prohibited allegorical interpretations of the
scripture". Tertullian disputed this in his treatise against Marcion, as did
Henry Wace: Tertullian, along with Epiphanius of Salamis, also charged that
Marcion set aside the gospels of Matthew, Mark and John, and used Luke alone.
and Luke 5:36-38 (nobody tears a piece from a new garment to patch an old
garment or puts new wine in old wineskins), in theorizing that Marcion set
about to recover the authentic teachings of Jesus. Irenaeus claimed, Tertullian
also attacked this view in "De Carne Christi". Recent scholarship. In "Lost
Christianities", Bart Ehrman contrasts the Marcionites with the Ebionites as
polar ends of a spectrum with regard to the Old Testament. Ehrman acknowledges
many of Marcion's ideas are very close to what is known today as "Gnosticism",
especially its rejection of the Jewish God, the Old Testament, and the material
world, and his elevation of Paul as the primary apostle. In the PBS
documentary, From Jesus to Christ, narrated by Elaine Pagels, Ehrman, Karen
King, and other secular New Testament scholars, Marcion's role in the formation
of the New Testament canon is discussed as pivotal, and the first to explicitly
state it. There were early Christian groups, such as the Ebionites, that did
not accept Paul as part of their canon. Robert M. Price, a New Testament
scholar at Johnnie Colemon Theological Seminary, considers the Pauline canon
problem: how, when, and who collected Paul's epistles to the various churches
as a single collection of epistles. The evidence that the early church fathers,
such as Clement, knew of the Pauline epistles is unclear. Price investigates
several historical scenarios and comes to the conclusion and identifies Marcion
as the first person known in recorded history to collect Paul's writings to
various churches together as a canon, the Pauline epistles. Robert Price
summarizes, If this is correct, then Marcion's role in the formation and
development of Christianity is pivotal. Marcionism in Modern history. Historic
Marcionism, and the church Marcion himself established, appeared to die out
around the 5th century, although similarities between Marcionism and
Paulicianism, a later heresy in the same geographical area, indicate that
Marcionist ideas may have survived and even contributed to heresies in Bulgaria
and France. Whether or not that is the case, Marcion's influence and criticism
of the Old Testament are discussed to this very day. Marcionism is discussed in
recent textbooks on early Christianity, such as "Lost Christianities" by Bart
Ehrman. Marcion claimed to find problems in the Old Testament; problems which
many modern thinkers cite today (see Criticism of the Bible and Biblical law in
Christianity), especially its alleged approval of atrocities and genocide. Many
atheists, agnostics, and secular humanists agree with Marcion's examples of
Bible atrocities, and cite the same passages of the Old Testament to discredit
Christianity and Judaism. Most Christians agree with Marcion that the Old
Testament's alleged approval of genocide and murder are inappropriate models to
follow today. Some Christian scholars, such as Gleason Archer and Norman
Geisler, have dedicated much of their time to the attempt to resolve these
perceived difficulties, while others have argued that "just punishments"
(divine or human), even capital punishments, are not genocide or murder because
murder and genocide are "unjustified" by definition (see Christian
Reconstructionism). On the other hand, because of the rejection of the Old
Testament which originates in the Jewish Bible, the Marcionites have been
believed by some Christians to be anti-Jewish. Indeed, the word "Marcionism"
has sometimes been used in modern times to refer to anti-Jewish tendencies in
Christian churches, especially when such tendencies have been thought to be
surviving residues of ancient Marcionism. During the Nazi period, some aspects
of Marcion's ideas were appropriated by the German Christians. They advocated a
complete rejection of everything Jewish in Christianity, which they termed
"Positive Christianity". These ideas fell out of favor after Germany's defeat
in World War II. (See also Nazism and Religion) For some, the postulated
problems of the Old Testament, and the appeal of Jesus are such that they
identify themselves as modern day Marcionites, and follow his solution in
keeping the New Testament as sacred scripture, and rejecting the Old Testament
canon and practices. A term sometimes used for these groups is "New Testament
Only Christians". Carroll R. Bierbower is a pastor of a church he says is
Marcionite in theology and practice. The Cathar movement, historically and in
modern times, reject the Old Testament for the reasons Marcion enunciated. It
remains unclear whether the 11th century Cathar movement is in continuation of
earlier Gnostic and Marcion streams, or represents an independent re-invention.
John Lindell, a former Methodist and Unitarian Universalist pastor, advocates
Christian deism, which does not include the Old Testament as part of its
theology.
