Mary Baker Eddy Mary Baker Eddy (July 16, 1821 ‚Äì December 3, 1910) was the
founder of Christian Science (1879), a Protestant American system of religious
thought and practice adopted by the Church of Christ, Scientist, and others.
She is the author of the movement's textbook, "Science and Health with Key to
the Scriptures", and founded the Christian Science Publishing Society (1898),
which continues to publish a number of periodicals including "The Christian
Science Monitor" (1908). Married three times, she took the name Mary Baker
Glover from her first marriage. She was also known from her third marriage as
Mary Baker Glover Eddy or Mary Baker G. Eddy. Childhood. Mary Morse Baker was
born in Bow, New Hampshire, the youngest of six children of Abigail and Mark
Baker. Although raised a Congregationalist, she came to reject teachings such
as predestination and original sin. She suffered chronic illness and developed
a strong interest in biblical accounts of early Christian healing. According to
Yvonne Cache von Fettweis, in her book "Christian Healer", "Mary's religious
upbringing had taught her that all men are God's servants." In her discovery of
Christian Science, Eddy found that healing the sick was an integral part of
Christian service. From early childhood, Mary Baker‚Äôs life included incidents
of healing others. Her family would bring sick farm animals to her to heal, for
example. Some biographers have suggested Mary was high-strung or emotional;
irrespective of such claims, reports from friends in the community where she
grew up corroborate reports of her ability to heal at a young age. Mary did not
join the Congregational church until she was 17 at Sanbornton Bridge, New
Hampshire (present-day Tilton). While Mary Baker attended the Pembroke Academy,
an event occurred, later related by long time Tilton residents. A mentally
disturbed man had escaped from the local Concord asylum and, brandishing a
club, entered the Pembroke schoolyard terrifying pupils who ran shrieking into
the schoolhouse. Peering through the windows, the children watched in horror as
Mary approached him as he wielded his club above her head, expecting her to be
struck down before their eyes. Instead, she simply took his free hand and
walked him, as he lowered his club to his side, to the schoolyard gate, from
which he departed. The following Sunday he reappeared. Quietly entering the
church, he walked to the Baker pew and stood beside Mary during the hymn
singing, after which he yielded without resistance into legal custody. Early
marriages. On December 10, 1843, she married George Washington Glover. He died
of yellow fever on June 27, 1844, a little over two months before the birth of
their only child, George Washington Glover. After her husband's death, Mary
Baker Glover freed her husband's slaves, unwilling to accept for herself the
price of a human life. As a single mother of poor health, Mrs. Glover wrote
some political pieces for the New Hampshire "Patriot". She also worked as a
substitute teacher in the New Hampshire Conference Seminary. Her success there
led to her briefly opening an experimental school which was an early attempt to
introduce kindergarten methods (love instead of harshness for discipline;
interest instead of compulsion to impart knowledge), but this, like other
similar attempts at this time was not accepted and soon closed. The social
climate of the times made it very difficult for a widowed woman to earn money.
Her mother died in November 1849 and about a year later, her father remarried
Elizabeth Patterson Duncan. Mary Baker Glover continued to have poor health and
her son was put into the care of neighbors by her father and stepmother. Mary
married Dr. Daniel Patterson, a dentist, in 1853 hoping he would adopt the
young boy, and Daniel Patterson signed papers to that effect on their wedding
day. However, he never followed through on his promise. Mary was often bed-
ridden during this period. Of her sisters who were able to help her in the care
of her rambunctious child, none really did, beyond short periods. Her mother
had passed on and her father had remarried a woman who did not welcome either
Mary or her child. A neighbor couple with a small farm and no children took up
the care of the boy for a fee, during times Mary was confined to her bed. When
this couple, who found the boy useful in the farm labor, intended to move out
to the Prairie territories, without her knowing, some of Mary's family arranged
that the couple should take the child along with money given them by her
father. Mary's symptoms worsened and plunged her into a deep depression. The
failure of Patterson to make good on his promises of reunification with her now
far-distant son plunged her into deep despair. Her acute desire to recover her
health led her to seek healing in the various systems fashionable of the
period. She was ready to try anything to bring relief to her sufferings. Daniel
Patterson chased after other women while married to Mary. He ran into financial
difficulty and mortgaged Mary's furniture, jewelry, and books, but was still
unable to keep current on their property in Groton, New Hampshire, and was
eventually forced to vacate. Daniel intended to leave Groton and Mary's sister,
Abigail, removed her from her Groton home to Rumney, six miles distant, in a
carriage with her blind servant following on foot. Persistent ill health. A
fragile child, Mary suffered from a number of physical complaints. The exact
nature of these illnesses, and their possible psychosomatic or hysterical (as
it was called at that time) nature, is still a subject of debate. Mary's
letters from this time, now at the Mary Baker Eddy Library for the Betterment
of Humanity in Boston, Massachusetts, portray her sufferings and search for
relief. In an effort to find health in her adult years, she tried various
medical experiments including homeopathy, medicine, dietary cures, mesmerism,
hydropathy, and other popular ‚Äúcures‚Äù of the day. None of those methods
brought lasting health. Study with Phineas Quimby and his influence. In October
1862 Mary became a patient of Phineas Quimby, a magnetic healer from Maine. She
benefited temporarily by his treatment. From 1862 to 1865 Quimby and Eddy
engaged in lengthy discussions about healing methods practiced by Quimby and
others. It is said by Quimby's supporters that his beliefs influenced her later
thinking and writing, although to what extent has been frequently disputed.
Originally, Eddy gave Quimby much credit for his hypnotic treatments of her
nervous and physical conditions and initially thought his brand of mesmerism
entirely benign. An experience in 1866, when Eddy had a physical healing of
serious injuries while reading the Bible, led her to investigate more and more
into the system of healing she would eventually term ‚ÄúChristian Science.‚Äù
Quimby was steeped both in the Protestant Christianity of his time and the
science of the industrial revolution. Quimby wrote in 1864, "The wise man, in
like measure [,] knows that the light of the body or natural man is but the
reflection of the scientific man. Our misery lies in this darkness. This is the
prison that holds the natural man, till the light of Wisdom bursts his bonds, &
lets the captive free. Here is where where Christ went to preach to the
prisoners bound by error before the reformation of science." Quimby writes many
such passages linking the healing power of Christ with right perception and
understanding, which Quimby equates with Science. The impartial student may see
Quimby as a precursor in the theory and practice of Christian Science, though
Eddy's relationship with Quimby was a subject of controversy even within her
own lifetime. While Quimby had his own notions on the nature of these unseen
forces, which Eddy accepted early on, she would later draw decidedly different
opinions on the nature of thought on the body and reject any form of hypnotism.
It is evident that Eddy and Quimby worked together, appreciated one another and
learned from one another. Quimby later said he learned more from Eddy than she
did from him. Eddy clearly respected him and at one point referred to him as an
‚Äúadvanced thinker‚Äù with a ‚Äúhigh and noble character.‚Äù Still, the
controversy over how much Eddy took from Quimby and vice versa has existed from
their day to the present. Quimby‚Äôs work and writings, as seen above, included
references to ‚ÄúChrist‚Äù and ‚Äúscientific man‚Äù and ‚Äúwisdom,‚Äù all words
which Eddy used in her writings and teachings. However, it is clear, based on
scholarly work on this subject (see, for example, the Gillian Gill and Robert
Peel biographies of Eddy), that Quimby continued to practice various forms of
hypnotism, mesmerism, and physical manipulation of the body. In contrast,
Eddy‚Äôs healing method became firmly grounded in The Bible and the healing
example of Jesus before the first edition of her book Science and Health was
published in 1875. Phineas Quimby died in January 1866. 1866 injury, healing
and study leads to Christian Science. In February 1866, after a fall in Lynn,
Massachusetts caused a spinal injury, she turned to God. She is quoted saying:
However, she later filed a claim for money from the city of Lynn for her injury
on the grounds that she was "still suffering from the effects of that fall"
(though she afterwards withdrew the lawsuit). Mary's attending physician Alvin
M. Cushing, a homeopath, testified under oath that he "did not at any time
declare, or believe, that there was no hope for Mrs. Patterson's recovery, or
that she was in critical condition." She devoted the next three years of her
life to Biblical study and what she considered the discovery of Christian
Science. In her autobiography, Retrospection and Introspection, Eddy writes "I
then withdrew from society about three years,--to ponder my mission, to search
the Scriptures, to find the Science of Mind that should take the things of God
and show them to the creature, and reveal the great curative Principle, --
Deity." Convinced by her own study of the Bible, especially Genesis 1, and
through experimentation, Mary claimed to have found healing power through a
higher sense of God as Spirit and man as God's spiritual "image and likeness."
She became convinced that illness could be healed through an awakened thought
brought about by a clearer perception of God and the explicit rejection of
drugs, hygiene and medicine based upon the observation that Jesus did not use
these methods for healing: It is plain that God does not employ drugs or
hygiene, nor provide them for human use; else Jesus would have recommended and
employed them in his healing. ‚Ä¶ The tender word and Christian encouragement
of an invalid, pitiful patience with his fears and the removal of them, are
better than hecatombs of gushing theories, stereotyped borrowed speeches, and
the doling of arguments, which are but so many parodies on legitimate Christian
Science, aflame with divine Love. ("Science and Health with Key to the
Scriptures", 143:5, 367:3) She eventually called this spiritual perception the
operation of the Christ Truth on human consciousness. Claiming to have first
healed herself and then others, and having learned from these experiences, Eddy
felt anyone could perceive what she called "the Kingdom of Heaven" or spiritual
reality on earth. For her, this healing method was based on scientific
principles and could be taught to others. This positive rule of healing, she
taught, resulted from a new understanding of God as infinite Spirit beyond the
limitations of the material senses. Mary became well known as a healer, and
first-hand accounts survive claiming that miracles occurred similar to miracles
performed by Jesus, who calmed a storm and raised people from the dead.
Publishing her work. In 1873, Mary divorced Daniel Patterson for adultery to
which he readily admitted. In 1875, after several years of testing the
effectiveness of her healing method, Mary published her discovery in a book
entitled "Science and Health" (years later retitled "Science and Health with
Key to the Scriptures"), which she called the textbook of Christian Science.
The first publication run was one thousand copies, which she self-published. In
the final edition, she wrote ""In the year 1866, I discovered the Christ
Science or divine laws of Life, Truth, and Love, and named my discovery
Christian Science"" (p.¬ 107). During these years she taught what she
considered the science of "primitive Christianity" to at least 800 people. Many
of her students became healers themselves. The last 100 pages of Science and
Health (chapter entitled "Fruitage") contains testimonies of people who claimed
to have been healed by reading her book. She made numerous revisions to her
book from the time of its first publication until shortly before her death. In
1877 she married Asa Gilbert Eddy; in 1882 they moved to Boston, and he died
that year. Building a church. Eddy devoted the rest of her life to the
establishment of the church, writing its bylaws, "The Manual of The Mother
Church", and revising "Science and Health". While Eddy was a highly
controversial religious leader, author, and lecturer, thousands of people
flocked to her teachings. By the 1870‚Äôs Mary was telling her students ‚ÄúSome
day I will have a church of my own.‚Äù In 1879 she and her students established
the Church of Christ, Scientist, ‚Äúto commemorate the word and works of our
Master , which should reinstate primitive Christianity and its lost element of
healing.‚Äù In 1892 at Eddy‚Äôs direction, the church reorganized as The First
Church of Christ, Scientist, ‚Äúdesigned to be built on the Rock, Christ...‚Äù
Some years later in 1881, she founded the Massachusetts Metaphysical College,
where she taught approximately 800 students in Boston, Massachusetts between
the years 1882 and 1889. These students spread across the country practicing
healing, and instructing others, in accordance with Eddy's teachings. Eddy
authorized these students to list themselves as Christian Science Practitioners
in the church's periodical, "The Christian Science Journal". She also founded
the "Christian Science Sentinel", a weekly magazine with articles about how to
heal and testimonies of healing. As teacher, author, and preacher, Eddy was
leader of the burgeoning Christian Science movement. In 1888, a reading room
selling Bibles, her writings and other publications opened in Boston. This
model would soon be replicated, and branch churches worldwide maintain more
than 1,200 Christian Science Reading Rooms today. In 1889, she closed the
Massachusetts Metaphysical College to focus on a major revision of "Science and
Health". Throughout her lifetime, "Science and Health" would appear in over 400
separate printings, and undergo six major revisions. "Science and Health" is
currently published in 17 languages including Braille. In 1894, an edifice for
The First Church of Christ, Scientist edifice was completed in Boston (The
Mother Church). In the early years, Eddy served as pastor, and she was
succeeded by several other individuals. In 1895, however, Eddy ordained the
Bible and "Science and Health" as the pastor of The Church of Christ,
Scientist, and the Sunday sermon consists of readings from these two books.
Wednesday meetings also include readings from the Bible and "Science and
Health", and attendees participate by sharing accounts of healing and spiritual
insight. Also in 1895 she published the first edition of a church manual,
establishing guidelines that are followed to this day. It is also in this slim
volume that she made provisions for democratically run local churches around
the world. Eddy founded The Christian Science Publishing Society in 1898, which
became the publishing home for numerous publications launched by her and her
followers. In 1908, at the age of 87, Eddy founded "The Christian Science
Monitor", a daily newspaper. She also founded the "Christian Science Journal"
in 1883, a monthly magazine aimed at the church's members and, in 1898, the
"Christian Science Sentinel", a weekly religious periodical written for a more
general audience, and the "Herald of Christian Science", a religious magazine
with editions in many languages. All of these publications continue to be
published today. Death. Mary Baker Eddy died the evening of December 3, 1910 at
her home at 400 Beacon Street, in the Chestnut Hill section of Newton,
Massachusetts. Her death was not announced until the next morning when a city
medical examiner was called in. She was buried December 8, 1910 at Mount Auburn
Cemetery in Cambridge, Massachusetts. Hundreds of tributes appeared in
newspapers around the world, including The Boston Globe, which wrote, ‚ÄúShe
did a wonderful‚Äîan extraordinary work in the world and there is no doubt that
she was a powerful influence for good.‚Äù Distinguishing between Eddy and
Quimby and other criticisms. Gillian Gill writes Although Eddy used terms such
as "Science", "Health", "error", "shadow", "belief", "Christ" and others used
by Quimby, these terms are also to be found in the Bible and in the common
language of the day. In the end, her conclusions from scriptural study and
continued healing practice were diametrically opposed to the Quimby teachings.
Eddy also eventually rejected many of Quimby's conclusions on the dynamics of
human disease, suffering, healing, redemption, God and Christ. Through her
study of the Bible, Eddy rejected Quimby's notion of a dualism between matter
and spirit. She wrote in "Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures", "All
is infinite Mind and its infinite manifestation, for God is All-in-all. Spirit
is immortal Truth; matter is mortal error." (S&H 468: 10‚Äì12) Eddy found that
while at first hypnotism seemed to benefit the patient, it later created more
problems than the original sickness. Ultimately she rejected any form of
hypnotism or mesmerism, stating Eddy's use of these terms and her teaching are
considered by both her defenders and Quimby's family to be distinct from
Quimbyism. Quimby's son, George, wrote, "Don‚Äôt confuse his method of healing
with Mrs. Eddy‚Äôs Christian Science, so far as her religious teachings go...
The religion which she teaches certainly is hers, for which I cannot be too
thankful." (Gottschalk, Rolling Away the Stone, p.¬ 72). In 1903 Mark Twain
published a satirical diatribe attacking Eddy and her church entitled Christian
Science. Twain wrote When Harper's refused to publish "Christian Science" in
1903, Twain interpreted the rejection as suppression caused by pressure from
Christian Science and wrote, "The situation is not barren of humour. I had been
doing my best to show in print that the Xn Scientist cult has become a power in
the land ‚Äì well, here is the proof: it has scared the biggest publisher in
the Union." Legacy. Today, almost 1,700 Christian Science churches are active
in 76 countries throughout the world. People from all walks of life continue to
practice this religion and use the system of health that Eddy codified almost
150 years ago. Eddy‚Äôs book "Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures"
has been a best seller for decades, and was selected as one of the ‚Äú75 Books
By Women Whose Words Have Changed The World,‚Äù by the Women's National Book
Association. In 1995, Eddy was inducted in the National Women's Hall of Fame.
In 2002, The Mary Baker Eddy Library opened its doors, giving the public access
to one of the largest collections about an American woman. For more than a
century, The Christian Science Journal and the Christian Science Sentinel have
been publishing accounts of restored health based on the system of care that
Eddy taught. The Christian Science Monitor newspaper has won seven Pulitzer
Prizes to date. In 1921, on the 100th anniversary of Eddy's birth, a 100-ton
(in rough) and 60‚Äì70 tons (hewn), eleven-foot square granite pyramid was
dedicated on the site of her birthplace in Bow, New Hampshire. A gift from
James F. Lord, it was later dynamited in 1962 by order of the church's board of
directors. Also demolished was Eddy's former home in Pleasant View, as the
board feared that it was becoming a place of pilgrimage. Although Eddy allowed
personal praise in her lifetime for various reasons, including for publicity
and fundraising, the church shuns both the cult of personality and religious
reliquaries. Residences. All of these houses are currently owned by the
Longyear Museum, and all may be visited.
