Mary (mother of Jesus) Mary (Hebrew: ◊û÷¥◊®÷∞◊ô÷∏◊ù, "Miriam"; Aramaic:
"MaryƒÅm"; Arabic: ŸÖÿ±ŸäŸÖ, "Maryam"), variously called Saint Mary, Mother
Mary, the Virgin Mary, the Theotokos, the Blessed Virgin Mary, Mary, Mother of
God, and, in Islam, as Maryam, mother of Isa', was an Israelite Jewish woman of
Nazareth in Galilee who lived in the late 1st century BC and early 1st century
AD, and is considered by Christians to be the first proselyte to Christianity.
She is identified in the New Testament and in the Qur'an as the mother of Jesus
through divine intervention. Christians hold her son Jesus to be "Christ" (i.e.
the messiah) and God the Son Incarnate ("see Trinitarian monotheism"), whereas
Muslims regard Jesus as the messiah and the most important prophet of God sent
to the people of Israel (and the second-most-important prophet of all, after
Muhammad). The canonical gospels of Matthew and Luke describe Mary as a virgin
(Greek "œÄŒ±œÅŒ∏Œ≠ŒΩŒøœÇ, parth√©nos"). Traditionally, Christians believe that
she conceived her son miraculously by the agency of the Holy Spirit. Muslims
believe that she conceived by the command of God. This took place when she was
already betrothed to Saint Joseph and was awaiting the concluding rite of
marriage, the formal home-taking ceremony. She married Joseph and accompanied
him to Bethlehem, where Jesus was born. In keeping with Jewish custom, the
betrothal would have taken place when she was around 12, and the birth of Jesus
about a year later. The New Testament begins its account of Mary's life with
the Annunciation, when the angel Gabriel appeared to her and announced her
divine selection to be the mother of Jesus. Church tradition and early non-
biblical writings state that her parents were an elderly couple, Saint Joachim
and Saint Anne. The Bible records Mary's role in key events of the life of
Jesus from his conception to his Ascension. Apocryphal writings tell of her
subsequent death and bodily assumption into heaven. Christians of the Catholic
Church, the Eastern Orthodox Church, Oriental Orthodox Church, Anglican
Communion, and Lutheran churches believe that Mary, as mother of Jesus, is the
"Mother of God" (ŒúŒÆœÑŒ∑œÅ ŒòŒµŒø·ø¶) and the Theotokos, literally "Bearer of
God". Mary has been venerated since Early Christianity. Throughout the ages she
has been a favorite subject in Christian art, music, and literature. There is
significant diversity in the Marian beliefs and devotional practices of major
Christian traditions. The Catholic Church has a number of Marian dogmas, such
as the Immaculate Conception of Mary the Perpetual Virginity of Mary, and the
Assumption of Mary into Heaven. Catholics refer to her as Our Lady and venerate
her as the Queen of Heaven and Mother of the Church; most Protestants do not
share these beliefs. Many Protestants see a minimal role for Mary within
Christianity, based on the brevity of biblical references. In ancient sources.
New Testament. The English name "Mary" comes from the Greek "ŒúŒ±œÅŒØŒ±", which
is a shortened form of "ŒúŒ±œÅŒπŒ¨Œº". The New Testament name was based on her
original Hebrew name ◊û÷¥◊®÷∞◊ô÷∏◊ù or Miryam. Both "ŒúŒ±œÅŒØŒ±" and
"ŒúŒ±œÅŒπŒ¨Œº" appear in the New Testament. Family and early life. The New
Testament tells little of Mary's early history. The 2nd century Protoevangelium
of James is the first source to name her parents as Joachim and Anne. According
to Luke, Mary was a cousin of Elizabeth, wife of the priest Zechariah of the
priestly division of Abijah, who was herself part of the lineage of Aaron and
so of the tribe of Levi. Some of those who consider that the relationship with
Elizabeth was on the maternal side, consider that Mary, like Joseph, to whom
she was betrothed, was of the House of David and so of the tribe of Judah, and
that the genealogy of Jesus presented in Luke 3 from Nathan, third son of David
and Bathsheba, is in fact the genealogy of Mary, while the genealogy from
Solomon given in Matthew 1 is that of Joseph. (Aaron's wife Elisheba was of the
tribe of Judah, so all his descendents are from both Levi and Judah.) Mary
resided in "her own house" in Nazareth in Galilee, possibly with her parents,
and during her betrothal ‚Äì the first stage of a Jewish marriage ‚Äì the angel
Gabriel announced to her that she was to be the mother of the promised Messiah
by conceiving him through the Holy Spirit. After a number of months, when
Joseph was told of her conception in a dream by "an angel of the Lord", he was
surprised; but the angel told him to be unafraid and take her as his wife,
which Joseph did, thereby formally completing the wedding rites. Since the
angel Gabriel had told Mary (according to ) that Elizabeth - having previously
been barren - was then miraculously pregnant, Mary hurried to see Elizabeth,
who was living with her husband Zechariah in "Hebron, in the hill "country" of
Judah". Mary arrived at the house and greeted Elizabeth who called Mary "the
mother of my Lord", and Mary spoke the words of praise that later became known
as the "Magnificat" from her first word in the Latin version. After about three
months, Mary returned to her own house. According to the Gospel of Luke, a
decree of the Roman emperor Augustus required that Joseph return to his
hometown of Bethlehem to be taxed. While he was there with Mary, she gave birth
to Jesus; but because there was no place for them in the inn, she used a manger
as a cradle. After eight days, he was circumcised according to Jewish law, and
named "JESUS" in accordance with the instructions that the angel had given to
Mary in , and Joseph was likewise told to call him Jesus in . After Mary
continued in the "blood of her purifying" another 33 days for a total of 40
days, she brought her burnt offering and sin offering to the temple, so the
priest could make atonement for her sins, being cleansed from her blood. They
also presented Jesus ‚Äì "As it is written in the law of the Lord, Every male
that openeth the womb shall be called holy to the Lord" ( ). After the
prophecies of Simeon and the prophetess Anna in concluded, Joseph and Mary took
Jesus and "returned into Galilee, to their own city Nazareth." Sometime later,
the "wise men" showed up at the "house" where Jesus and his family were
staying, and they fled by night and stayed in Egypt for awhile, and returned
after Herod died in 4¬ BC and took up residence in Nazareth. Mary in the life
of Jesus. Mary is involved in the only event in Jesus' adolescent life that is
recorded in the New Testament. At the age of twelve Jesus, having become
separated from his parents on their return journey from the Passover
celebration in Jerusalem, was found among the teachers in the temple. After
Jesus' baptism by John the Baptist and his temptations by the devil in the
desert, Mary was present when, at her suggestion, Jesus worked his first Cana
miracle during a marriage they attended, by turning water into wine.
Subsequently there are events when Mary is present along with James, Joseph,
Simon, and Judas, called Jesus' brothers, and unnamed "sisters". In later
centuries when the doctrine of the Perpetual virginity of Mary developed, the
early Church reinterpreted the words commonly translated "brother" and "sister"
as actually meaning close relatives. There is also an incident in which Jesus
is sometimes interpreted as rejecting his family. "And his mother and his
brothers arrived, and standing outside, they sent in a message asking for him
... And looking at those who sat in a circle around him, Jesus said, 'These are
my mother and my brothers. Whoever does the will of God is my brother, and
sister, and mother.'" Mary is also depicted as being present among the women at
the crucifixion during the crucifixion standing near "the disciple whom Jesus
loved" along with Mary of Clopas and Mary Magdalene, to which list adds "the
mother of the sons of Zebedee", presumably the Salome mentioned in . This
representation is called a "Stabat Mater". Mary, cradling the dead body of her
Son, while not recorded in the Gospel accounts, is a common motif in art,
called a "piet√ " or "pity". After the Ascension of Jesus. In Mary is the only
one to be mentioned by name other than the eleven apostles, who abode in the
upper room, when they returned from mount Olivet. (It is not stated where the
later gathering of about one hundred and twenty disciples was located, when
they elected Matthias to fill the office of Judas Iscariot who perished.) Some
speculate that the "elect lady" mentioned in may be Mary. From this time, she
disappears from the biblical accounts, although it is held by Catholics that
she is again portrayed as the heavenly woman of Revelation. Her death is not
recorded in scripture. However, Catholic and Orthodox tradition and doctrine
have her assumed (taken bodily) into Heaven. Belief in the corporeal assumption
of Mary is universal to Catholicism, in both Eastern and Western Catholic
Churches, as well as the Eastern Orthodox Church, Coptic Churches, and parts of
the Anglican Communion and Continuing Anglican Churches. Later Christian
writings and traditions. According to the apocryphal Gospel of James Mary was
the daughter of Saint Joachim and Saint Anne. Before Mary's conception Anna had
been barren. Mary was given to service as a consecrated virgin in the Temple in
Jerusalem when she was three years old, much like Hannah took Samuel to the
Tabernacle as recorded in the Old Testament. Some apocryphal accounts state
that at the time of her betrothal to Joseph Mary was 12‚Äì14 years old, and he
was ninety years old, but such accounts are unreliable. According to Sacred
Tradition, Mary died surrounded by the apostles (in either Jerusalem or
Ephesus) between three days and 24 years after Christ's ascension. When the
apostles later opened her tomb, they found it to be empty and they concluded
that she had been assumed into Heaven. Mary's Tomb, an empty tomb in Jerusalem,
is attributed to Mary. The Roman Catholic Church teaches Mary's assumption, but
does not teach that she necessarily died. Hyppolitus of Thebes claims that Mary
lived for 11 years after the death of her Son, dying in 41 AD. The earliest
extant biographical writing on Mary is "Life of the Virgin" attributed to the
7th century saint, Maximus the Confessor which portrays her as a key element of
the early Christian Church after the death of Jesus. In the 19th century, a
house near Ephesus in Turkey was found, based on the visions of Anne Catherine
Emmerich, an Augustinian nun in Germany. It has since been visited as the
"House of the Virgin Mary" by Roman Catholic pilgrims who consider it the place
where Mary lived until her assumption. The Gospel of John states that Mary went
to live with the Disciple whom Jesus loved, identified as John the Evangelist.
Irenaeus and Eusebius of Caesarea wrote in their histories that John later went
to Ephesus, which may provide the basis for the early belief that Mary also
lived in Ephesus with John. Christian devotion. 2nd to 5th centuries. Christian
devotion to Mary goes back to the 2nd century and predates the emergence of a
specific Marian liturgical system in the 5th century, following the First
Council of Ephesus in 431. The Council itself was held at a church in Ephesus
which had been dedicated to Mary about a hundred years before. In Egypt the
veneration of Mary had started in the 3rd century and the term Theotokos was
used by Origen, the Alexandrian Father of the Church. The earliest known Marian
prayer (the Sub tuum praesidium, or "Beneath Thy Protection") is from the 3rd
century (perhaps 270), and its text was rediscovered in 1917 on a papyrus in
Egypt. Following the Edict of Milan in 313, by the 5th century artistic images
of Mary began to appear in public and larger churches were being dedicated to
Mary, e.g. S. Maria Maggiore in Rome. Middle Ages. The Middle Ages saw many
legends about Mary, and also her parents and even grandparents. Since the
Reformation. Over the centuries, devotion and veneration to Mary has varied
greatly among Christian traditions. For instance, while Protestants show scant
attention to Marian prayers or devotions, of all the saints whom the Orthodox
venerate, the most honored is Mary, who is considered "more honorable than the
Cherubim and more glorious than the Seraphim." Orthodox theologian Sergei
Bulgakov wrote: "Love and veneration of the Blessed Virgin Mary is the soul of
Orthodox piety. A faith in Christ which does not include his mother is another
faith, another Christianity from that of the Orthodox church." Although the
Catholics and the Orthodox may honor and venerate Mary, they do not view her as
divine, nor do they worship her. Catholics view Mary as subordinate to Christ,
but uniquely so, in that she is seen as above all other creatures. Similarly
Theologian Sergei Bulgakov wrote that although the Orthodox view Mary as
"superior to all created beings" and "ceaselessly pray for her intercession"
she is not considered a "substitute for the One Mediator" who is Christ. "Let
Mary be in honor, but let worship be given to the Lord" he wrote. Similarly,
Catholics do not worship Mary, but venerate her. Catholics use the term
"hyperdulia" for Marian veneration rather than "latria" that applies to God and
"dulia" for other saints. The definition of the three level hierarchy of
"latria", "hyperdulia" and "dulia" goes back to the Second Council of Nicaea in
787. Devotions to artistic depictions of Mary vary among Christian traditions.
There is a long tradition of Roman Catholic Marian art and no image permeates
Catholic art as does the image of Madonna and Child. Both Roman Catholics and
the Orthodox venerate images and icons of Mary, given that the Second Council
of Nicaea in 787 permitted their veneration by Catholics with the understanding
that those who venerate the image are venerating the reality of the person it
represents, and the 842 Synod of Constantinople established the same for the
Orthodox. The Orthodox, however, only pray to and venerate flat, two-
dimensional icons and not three-dimensional statues. The Anglican position
towards Mary is in general more conciliatory than that of Protestants at large
and in a book he wrote about praying with the icons of Mary, Rowan Williams,
the Archbishop of Canterbury said: "It is not only that we cannot understand
Mary without seeing her as pointing to Christ; we cannot understand Christ
without seeing his attention to Mary". Titles. Titles to honor Mary or ask for
her intercession are used by some Christian traditions such as the Eastern
Orthodox or Catholics, but not others, e.g. the Protestants. Common titles for
Mary include "Mother of God" ("Theotokos"), "The Blessed Virgin Mary" (also
abbreviated to "BVM"), "Our Lady" ("Notre Dame, Nuestra Se√±ora, Nossa Senhora,
Madonna") and the "Queen of Heaven" ("Regina Caeli"). Specific titles vary
among Anglican views of Mary, Ecumenical views of Mary, Lutheran views of Mary,
Protestant views on Mary, and Roman Catholic views of Mary, Latter Day Saints'
views of Mary, Orthodox views of Mary. In addition to Islamic views on Mary.
Mary is referred to by the Eastern Orthodox Church, Oriental Orthodoxy, the
Anglican Church, and all Eastern Catholic Churches as Theotokos, a title
recognized at the Third Ecumenical Council (held at Ephesus to address the
teachings of Nestorius, in 431). Theotokos (and its Latin equivalents,
"Deipara" and "Dei genetrix") literally means "Godbearer". The equivalent
phrase "Mater Dei", (Mother of God) is more common in Latin and so also in the
other languages used in the Western Catholic Church, but this same phrase in
Greek (ŒúŒÆœÑŒ∑œÅ ŒòŒµŒø·ø¶), in the abbreviated form of the first and last
letter of the two words (ŒúŒ° ŒòŒ•), is the indication attached to her image in
Byzantine icons. The Council stated that the Church Fathers "did not hesitate
to speak of the holy Virgin as the Mother of God". Some titles have a Biblical
basis, for instance the title "Queen Mother" has been given to Mary since she
was the mother of Jesus, who was sometimes referred to as the "King of Kings"
due to his lineage of King David. The biblical basis for the term Queen can be
seen in the Gospel of Luke 1:32 and the Book of Isaiah 9:6, and Queen Mother
from and . Other titles have arisen from reported miracles, special appeals or
occasions for calling on Mary, e.g. Our Lady of Good Counsel, Our Lady of
Navigators or Our Lady of Ransom who protects captives. The three main titles
for Mary used by the Orthodox are Theotokos, i.e., "Mother of God" (Greek
ŒòŒµŒøœÑœåŒ∫ŒøœÇ), Aeiparthenos, i.e. "Ever Virgin" (Greek
·ºÄŒµŒπœÄŒ±œÅŒ∏·Ω≤ŒΩŒøœÇ), as confirmed in the Fifth Ecumenical Council 553,
and Panagia, i.e., "All Holy" (Greek Œ Œ±ŒΩŒ±Œ≥ŒØŒ±). A large number of titles
for Mary are used by Roman Catholics, and these titles have in turn given rise
to many artistic depictions, e.g. the title Our Lady of Sorrows has resulted in
masterpieces such as Michelangelo's Piet√ . Marian feasts. The earliest feasts
that relate to Mary grew out of the cycle of feasts that celebrated the
Nativity of Jesus. Given that according to the Gospel of Luke (), forty days
after the birth of Jesus, along with the Presentation of Jesus at the Temple
Mary was purified according to Jewish customs, the "Feast of the Purification"
began to be celebrated by the 5th century, and became the "Feast of Simeon" in
Byzantium. In the 7th and 8th centuries four more Marian feasts were
established in the Eastern Church. In the Western Church a feast dedicated to
Mary, just before Christmas was celebrated in the Churches of Milan and Ravenna
in Italy in the 7th century. The four Roman Marian feasts of Purification,
Annunciation, Assumption and Nativity of Mary were gradually and sporadically
introduced into England by the 11th century. Over time, the number and nature
of feasts (and the associated Titles of Mary) and the venerative practices that
accompany them have varied a great deal among diverse Christian traditions.
Overall, there are significantly more titles, feasts and venerative Marian
practices among Roman Catholics than any other Christians traditions. Some such
feasts relate to specific events, e.g. the Feast of Our Lady of Victory was
based on the 1571 victory of the Papal States in the Battle of Lepanto.
Differences in feasts may also originate from doctrinal issues ‚Äì the Feast of
the Assumption is such an example. Given that there is no agreement among all
Christians on the circumstances of the death, Dormition or Assumption of Mary,
the feast of assumption is celebrated among some denominations and not others.
While the Catholic Church celebrates the Feast of the Assumption on August 15,
some Eastern Catholics celebrate it as Dormition of the Theotokos, and may do
so on August 28, if they follow the Julian calendar. The Eastern Orthodox also
celebrate it as the Dormition of the Theotokos, one of their 12 Great Feasts.
Protestants do not celebrate this, or any other Marian feasts. Christian
doctrines. The title "Mother of God" (Theotokos) for Mary was confirmed by the
First Council of Ephesus, held at the Church of Mary in 431. The Council
decreed that Mary is the Mother of God because her son Jesus is one person who
is both God and man, divine and human. This doctrine is widely accepted by
Christians in general, and the term Mother of God had already been used within
the oldest known prayer to Mary, the Sub tuum praesidium which dates to around
250 AD. The Virgin birth of Jesus has been a universally held belief among
Christians since the 2nd century, It is included in the two most widely used
Christian creeds, which state that Jesus "was incarnate of the Holy Spirit and
the "Virgin" Mary" (the Nicene Creed in what is now its familiar form) and the
Apostles' Creed. The Gospel of Matthew describes Mary as a virgin who fulfilled
the prophecy of . The authors of the Gospels of Matthew and Luke consider
Jesus' conception not the result of intercourse and assert that Mary had "no
relations with man" before Jesus' birth. This alludes to the belief that Mary
conceived Jesus through the action of God the Holy Spirit, and not through
intercourse with Joseph or anyone else. The doctrines of the Assumption or
Dormition of Mary relate to her death and bodily assumption to Heaven. While
the Roman Catholic Church has established the dogma of the Assumption, namely
that Mary went directly to Heaven without a usual physical death, the Eastern
Orthodox Church believes in the Dormition, i.e. that she fell asleep,
surrounded by the Apostles. Roman Catholics believe in the Immaculate
Conception of Mary, as proclaimed "Ex Cathedra" by Pope Pius IX in 1854, namely
that she was filled with grace from the very moment of her conception in her
mother's womb and preserved from the stain of original sin. The Latin Rite of
the Roman Catholic Church has a liturgical feast by that name, kept on 8
December. The Eastern Orthodox reject the Immaculate Conception principally
because their understanding of ancestral sin (the Greek term corresponding to
the Latin "original sin") differs from that of the Roman Catholic Church. The
Perpetual Virginity of Mary, asserts Mary's real and perpetual virginity even
in the act of giving birth to the Son of God made Man. The term Ever-Virgin
(Greek "") is applied in this case, stating that Mary remained a virgin for the
remainder of her life, making Jesus her biological and only son, whose
conception and birth are held to be miraculous. Perspectives on Mary. Christian
perspectives on Mary. Christian Marian perspectives include a great deal of
diversity. While some Christians such as Roman Catholics and Eastern Orthodox
have well established Marian traditions, Protestants at large pay scant
attention to Mariological themes. Roman Catholic, Eastern Orthodox, Oriental
Orthodox, Anglican, and Lutherans venerate the Virgin Mary. This veneration
especially takes the form of prayer for intercession with her Son, Jesus
Christ. Additionally it includes composing poems and songs in Mary's honor,
painting icons or carving statues of her, and conferring titles on Mary that
reflect her position among the saints. Anglican view. The multiple churches
that form the Anglican Communion and the Continuing Anglican movement have
different views on Marian doctrines and venerative practices given that there
is no single church with universal authority within the Communion and that the
mother church (the Church of England) understands itself to be both "catholic"
and "Reformed". Thus unlike the Protestant churches at large, the Anglican
Communion (which includes the Episcopal Church in the United States) includes
segments which still retain some veneration of Mary. Mary's special position
within God's purpose of salvation as "God-bearer" "(Theotokos)" is recognised
in a number of ways by some Anglican Christians. All the member churches of the
Anglican Communion affirm in the historic creeds that Jesus was born of the
Virgin Mary, and celebrates the feast days of the Presentation of Christ in the
Temple. This feast is called in older prayer books the Purification of the
Blessed Virgin Mary on 2 February. The Annunciation of our Lord to the Blessed
Virgin on March 25 was from before the time of Bede until the 18th century New
Year's Day in England. The Annunciation is called the "Annunciation of our
Lady" in the 1662 Book of Common Prayer. Anglicans also celebrate in the
Visitation of the Blessed Virgin on May 31, though in some provinces the
traditional date of July 2 is kept. The feast of the St. Mary the Virgin is
observed on the traditional day of the Assumption, August 15. The Nativity of
the Blessed Virgin is kept on September¬ 8. The Conception of the Blessed
Virgin Mary is kept in the 1662 Book of Common Prayer, on December 8. In
certain Anglo-Catholic parishes this feast is called the Immaculate Conception.
Again, the Assumption of Mary is believed in by most Anglo-Catholics, but is
considered a pious opinion by moderate Anglicans. Protestant minded Anglicans
reject the celebration of these feasts. Prayers and venerative practices vary a
great deal. For instance, as of the 19th century, following the Oxford
Movement, Anglo-Catholics frequently pray the Rosary, the Angelus, Regina
Caeli, and other litanies and anthems of Our Lady that are reminiscent of
Catholic practices. On the other hand, Low-church Anglicans rarely invoke the
Blessed Virgin except in certain hymns, such as the second stanza of Ye
Watchers and Ye Holy Ones. The Anglican Society of Mary was formed in 1931 and
maintains chapters in many countries. The purpose of the society is to foster
devotion to Mary among Anglicans. The high-church Anglicans espouse doctrines
that are closer to Roman Catholics, and retain veneration for Mary, e.g.
official Anglican pilgrimages to Our Lady of Lourdes have taken place since
1963, and pilgrimages to Our Lady of Walsingham have gone on for hundreds of
years. Historically, there has been enough common ground between Roman
Catholics and Anglicans on Marian issues that in 2005 a joint statement called
"Mary: grace and hope in Christ" was produced through ecumenical meetings of
Anglicans and Roman Catholic theologians. This document, informally known as
the "Seattle Statement", is not formally endorsed by either the Catholic Church
or the Anglican Communion, but is viewed by its authors as the beginning of a
joint understanding of Mary. Catholic view. In the Catholic Church, Mary is
accorded the title "Blessed," (from Latin "beatus", blessed, via Greek
ŒºŒ±Œ∫Œ¨œÅŒπŒøœÇ, "makarios" and Latin "facere", make) in recognition of her
ascension to Heaven and her capacity to intercede on behalf of those who pray
to her. Catholic teachings make clear that Mary is not considered divine and
prayers to her are not answered by her, they are answered by God. The four
Catholic dogmas regarding Mary are: Mother of God, Perpetual virginity of Mary,
Immaculate Conception (of Mary) and Assumption of Mary. The "Blessed Virgin
Mary", the mother of Jesus has a more central role in Roman Catholic teachings
and beliefs than in any other major Christian group. Not only do Roman
Catholics have more theological doctrines and teachings that relate to Mary,
but they have more festivals, prayers, devotional, and venerative practices
than any other group. The Catholic Catechism states: "The Church's devotion to
the Blessed Virgin is intrinsic to Christian worship." For centuries, Roman
Catholics have performed acts of consecration and entrustment to Mary at
personal, societal and regional levels. These acts may be directed to the
Virgin herself, to the Immaculate Heart of Mary and to the Immaculata. In
Catholic teachings, consecration to Mary does not diminish or substitute the
love of God, but enhances it, for all consecration is ultimately made to God.
Following the growth of Marian devotions in the 16th century, Catholic saints
wrote books such as Glories of Mary and True Devotion to Mary that emphasized
Marian veneration and taught that "the path to Jesus is through Mary". Marian
devotions are at times linked to Christocentric devotions, e.g. the Alliance of
the Hearts of Jesus and Mary. Key Marian devotions include: Seven Sorrows of
Mary, Rosary and scapular, Miraculous Medal and Reparations to Mary. The months
of May and October are traditionally "Marian months" for Roman Catholics, e.g.
the daily Rosary is encouraged in October and in May Marian devotions take
place in many regions. Popes have issued a number of Marian encyclicals and
Apostolic Letters to encourage devotions to and the veneration of the Virgin
Mary. Catholics place high emphasis on Mary's roles as protector and
intercessor and the Catholic Catechism refers to Mary as the "Mother of God to
whose protection the faithful fly in all their dangers and needs". Key Marian
prayers include: Hail Mary, Alma Redemptoris Mater, Sub Tuum Praesidum, Ave
Maris Stella, Regina Coeli, Ave Regina Coelorum and the Magnificat. Mary's
participation in the processes of salvation and redemption has also been
emphasized in the Catholic tradition, but they are not doctrines. Pope John
Paul II's 1987 encyclical "Redemptoris Mater" began with the sentence: "The
Mother of the Redeemer has a precise place in the plan of salvation." Burke,
Raymond L.; et al. (2008). Mariology: A Guide for Priests, Deacons,
Seminarians, and Consecrated Persons ISBN 978-1-57918-355-4 page xxi when he
suggested a redirection of the whole Church towards the program of Pope John
Paul II in order to ensure an authentic approach to Christology via a return to
the "whole truth about Mary". Orthodox view. Orthodox Christianity includes a
large number of traditions regarding the Ever Virgin Mary, the Theotokos. The
Orthodox believe that she was and remained a virgin before and after Christ's
birth. The "Theotokia" (i.e. hymns to the Theotokos) are an essential part of
the Divine Services in the Eastern Church and their positioning within the
liturgical sequence effectively places the Theotokos in the most prominent
place after Christ. Within the Orthodox tradition, the order of the saints
begins with: The Theotokos, Angels, Prophets, Apostles, Fathers, Martyres, etc.
giving the Virgin Mary precedence over the angels. She is also proclaimed as
the "Lady of the Angels". The views of the Church Fathers still play an
important role in the shaping of Orthodox Marian perspective. However, the
Orthodox views on Mary are mostly doxological, rather than academic: they are
expressed in hymns, praise, liturgical poetry and the veneration of icons. One
of the most loved Orthodox Akathists (i.e. standing hymns) is devoted to Mary
and it is often simply called the "Akathist Hymn". Five of the twelve Great
Feasts in Orthodoxy are dedicated to Mary. The Sunday of Orthodoxy directly
links the Virgin Mary's identity as Mother of God with icon veneration. A
number of Orthodox feasts are connected with the miraculous icons of the
Theotokos. The Orthodox view Mary as "superior to all created beings", although
not divine. The Orthodox venerate Mary as conceived immaculate and assumed into
heaven, but they do not accept the Roman Catholic dogmas on these doctrines.
The Orthodox celebrate the Dormition of the Theotokos, rather than Assumption.
The Protoevangelium of James, an extra-canonical book, has been the source of
many Orthodox beliefs on Mary. The account of Mary's life presented includes
her consecration as a virgin at the temple at age three. The High Priest
Zachariah blessed Mary and informed her that God had magnified her name among
many generations. Zachariah placed Mary on the third step of the altar, whereby
God gave her grace. While in the temple, Mary was miraculously fed by an angel,
until she was twelve years old. At that point an angel told Zachariah to
betroth Mary to a widower in Israel, who would be indicated. This story
provides the theme of many hymns for the Feast of Presentation of Mary, and
icons of the feast depict the story. The Orthodox believe that Mary was
instrumental in the growth of Christianity during the life of Jesus, and after
his Crucifixion, and Orthodox Theologian Sergei Bulgakov wrote: "The Virgin
Mary is the center, invisible, but real, of the Apostolic Church" Theologians
from the Orthodox tradition have made prominent contributions to the
development of Marian thought and devotion. John Damascene (c 650‚îÄc 750) was
one of the greatest Orthodox theologians. Among other Marian writings, he
proclaimed the essential nature of Mary's heavenly Assumption or Dormition and
her mediative role. Mary is not merely the instrument, but the direct positive
condition of the Incarnation, its human aspect. Christ could not have been
incarnate by some mechanical process, violating human nature. It was necessary
for that nature itself to say for itself, by the mouth of the most pure human
being: "Behold the handmaid of the Lord, be it unto me according to Thy word."
Protestant view. Protestants in general reject the veneration and invocation of
the Saints. Protestants typically hold that Mary was the mother of Jesus, but
was an ordinary woman devoted to God. Therefore, there is virtually no Marian
veneration, Marian feasts, Marian pilgrimages, Marian art, Marian music or
Marian spirituality in today's Protestant communities. Within these views,
Roman Catholic beliefs and practices are at times rejected, e.g., theologian
Karl Barth wrote that "the heresy of the Catholic Church is its Mariology".
Some early Protestants venerated and honored Mary. Martin Luther wrote that:
"Mary is full of grace, proclaimed to be entirely without sin. God's grace
fills her with everything good and makes her devoid of all evil". However, as
of 1532 Luther stopped celebrating the feast of the Assumption of Mary and also
discontinued his support of the Immaculate Conception. In the text of the
Magnificat (recorded in ), Mary proclaims ""My soul rejoices in God my
Savior"." The personal need of a savior is seen by Protestants as expressing
that Mary never thought herself "sinnless". John Calvin said, "It cannot be
denied that God in choosing and destining Mary to be the Mother of his Son,
granted her the highest honor. However, Calvin firmly rejected the notion that
anyone but Christ can intercede for man. Although Calvin and Huldrych Zwingli
honored Mary as the Mother of God in the 16th century, they did so less than
Martin Luther. Thus the idea of respect and high honor for Mary was not
rejected by the first Protestants; but, they came to criticize the Roman
Catholics for venerating Mary. Following the Council of Trent in the 16th
century, as Marian veneration became associated with Catholics, Protestant
interest in Mary decreased. During the Age of the Enlightenment and residual
interest in Mary within Protestant churches almost disappeared, although
Anglicans and Lutherans continued to honor her. Protestants acknowledge that
Mary is "blessed among women" but they do not agree that Mary is to be
venerated. She is considered to be an outstanding example of a life dedicated
to God. In the 20th century, Protestants reacted in opposition to the Catholic
dogma of the Assumption of Mary. The conservative tone of the Second Vatican
Council began to mend the ecumenical differences, and Protestants began to show
interest in Marian themes. In 1997 and 1998 ecumenical dialogs between
Catholics and Protestants took place, but to date the majority of Protestants
pay scant attention to Marian issues and often view them as a challenge to the
authority of Scripture. Lutheran view. Certain Lutheran churches such as the
Anglo-Lutheran Catholic Church however, continue to venerate Mary and the
saints in the same manner that Roman Catholics do, and hold all Marian dogmas
as part of their faith. Methodist view. The United Methodist Church, as well as
other Methodist churches, have no official writings or teachings on the Virgin
Mary except what is mentioned in Scripture and the ecumenical Creeds, mainly
that Christ was conceived in her womb through the Holy Spirit and that she gave
birth to Christ as a virgin. John Wesley, the founder of the Methodist Movement
within the Church of England, which later led to the Methodist Church, believed
that the Virgin Mary was a perpetual virgin, meaning she never had sex. Many
Methodists reject this concept, but some Methodists believe it. The church does
hold that Mary was a virgin before, during, and immediately after the birth of
Christ. From this, the Virgin Mary is believed to be the Theotokos, or Mother
of God, in the Methodist Church, although the term is usually only used by
those of High Church and Evangelical Catholic tradition. From this statement,
Methodists reject the Catholic ideas of Mary as a Co-Redemptrix and Mediatrix
of the Faith. The Methodist Churches disagree with veneration of saints, of
Mary, and of relics; believing that reverence and praise are for God alone.
However, studying the life of Mary and the biographies of saints is deemed
appropriate, as they are seen as heroes and examples of good Christians. The
Methodist churches reject the doctrines of the Immaculate Conception and the
Assumption of Mary, stating that Christ was the only person to live a sinless
life and to ascend body and soul into Heaven. Latter Day Saints. In the first
edition of the Book of Mormon (1830), Mary was referred to as "the mother of
God, after the manner of the flesh," a reading that was changed to "the mother
of the Son of God" in all subsequent editions (1837‚Äì). Nontrinitarian view.
Nontrinitarians, such as Unitarians, Christadelphians and Jehovah's Witnesses
consider Mary as the mother of Jesus Christ. Because they do not consider Jesus
as God, they do not consider Mary as the Mother of God or the Theotokos. Since
Nontrinitarian churches are typically also mortalist, the issue of praying to
Mary, whom they would consider "asleep," awaiting resurrection, does not arise.
Swedenborg says God as he is in himself could not directly approach evil
spirits to redeem those spirits without destroying them (Exodus 33:20, John 1:
18), so God impregnated Mary, who gave Jesus Christ access to the evil heredity
of the human race, which he could approach, redeem and save. Islamic
perspective. Mary, the mother of Jesus, is mentioned as Maryam, more in the
Qur'an than in the entire New Testament. She enjoys a singularly distinguished
and honored position among women in the Qur'an. A Sura (chapter) in the Qur'an
is titled "Maryam" (Mary), which is the only Sura in the Qur'an named after a
woman, in which the story of Mary (Maryam) and Jesus (Isa) is recounted
according to the Islamic view of Jesus. She is mentioned in the Qur'an with the
honorific title of "our lady" ("syyidatuna") as the daughter of Imran and
Hannah. She is the only woman directly named in the Qur'an; declared (uniquely
along with Jesus) to be a "Sign of God" to mankind; as one who ""guarded her
chastity""; an "obedient one"; "chosen of her mother" and dedicated to God
whilst still in the womb; uniquely (amongst women) "Accepted into service by
God"; cared for by (one of the prophets as per Islam) Zakariya (Zacharias);
that in her childhood she resided in the Temple and uniquely had access to Al-
Mihrab (understood to be the Holy of Holies), and was provided with heavenly
'provisions' by God. Mary is also called a "Chosen One"; a "Purified One"; a
"Truthful one"; her child conceived through ""a Word from God""; and ""exalted
above all women of The Worlds/Universes (the material and heavenly worlds)"".
The Qur'an relates detailed narrative accounts of Maryam (Mary) in two places
Sura 3 and Sura 19. These state beliefs in both the Immaculate Conception of
Mary and the Virgin birth of Jesus. The account given in Sura 19 of the Qur'an
is nearly identical with that in the Gospel according to Luke, and both of
these (Luke, Sura 19) begin with an account of the visitation of an angel upon
Zakariya (Zecharias) and "Good News of the birth of Yahya (John)", followed by
the account of the annunciation. It mentions how Mary was informed by an angel
that she would become the mother of Jesus through the actions of God alone. In
the Islamic tradition, Mary and Jesus were the only children who could not be
touched by Satan at the moment of their birth, for God imposed a veil between
them and Satan. According to author Shabbir Akhtar, the Islamic perspective on
Mary's Immaculate Conception is compatible with the Catholic doctrine of the
same topic. The Qur'an says that Jesus was the result of a virgin birth. The
most detailed account of the annunciation and birth of Jesus is provided in
Sura 3 and 19 of The Qur'an wherein it is written that God sent an angel to
announce that she could shortly expect to bear a son, despite being a virgin.
Other views. Pagan Rome. From the early stages of Christianity, belief in the
virginity of Mary and the virgin conception of Jesus, as stated in the gospels,
holy and supernatural, was used by detractors, both political and religious, as
a topic for discussions, debates and writings, specifically aimed to challenge
the divinity of Jesus and thus Christians and Christianity alike. In the 2nd
century, as part of the earliest anti-Christian polemics, Celsus suggested that
Jesus was the illegitimate son of a Roman soldier named Panthera. The views of
Celsus drew responses from Origen, the Church Father in Alexandria, Egypt who
considered it a fabricated story. How far Celsus sourced his view from Jewish
sources remains a subject of discussion. In Judaism. The issue of the parentage
of Jesus in the Talmud affects also the view of his mother. However the Talmud
does not mention Mary by name and is considerate rather than only polemic. The
story about Panthera is also found the Toledot Yeshu, the literary origins of
which can not be traced with any certainty and given that it is unlikely to go
before the 4th century, it is far too late to include authentic remembrances of
Jesus. The Blackwell Companion to Jesus states that the Toledot Yeshu has no
historical facts as such, and was perhaps created as a tool for warding off
conversions to Christianity. The name Panthera may be a distortion of the term
"parthenos" (virgin) and Raymond E. Brown considers the story of Panthera a
fanciful explanation of the birth of Jesus which includes very little
historical evidence. Robert Van Voorst states that given that Toledot Yeshu is
a medieval document and due to its lack of a fixed form and orientation towards
a popular audience, it is "most unlikely" to have reliable historical
information. 4th-century Arabia. According to the 4th century heresiologist
Epiphanius of Salamis the Virgin Mary was worshipped as a Mother goddess in the
heretical Christian sect Collyridianism, which was found throughout Arabia
sometime during the 300s AD. Collyridianism was made up mostly of women and
even had women priests. They were known to make bread offerings to the Virgin
Mary, along with other practices. The group was condemned as heretical by the
Roman Catholic Church and was preached against by Epiphanius of Salamis, who
wrote about the group in his writings titled Panarion. Study of the historical
Jesus. To date, scholars continue to debate the accounts of the birth of Jesus
from several perspectives, including textual analysis, historical records and
post-apostolic witnesses. Bart D. Ehrman has suggested that the historical
method can never comment on the likelihood of supernatural occurrences. The
statement in that "Joseph did not know Mary until she has given birth to a son"
has been debated among scholars, some suggesting that she did not remain
perpetually virgin. Other scholars contend that the Greek word "hoes" (i.e.
until) denotes a state up to a point, but does not mean that the state ended
after that point, and that Matthew 1:25 does not confirm or deny the virginity
of Mary after the birth of Jesus. Other biblical verses have also been debated,
e.g. that the reference in of Jesus coming "of the seed of David according to
the flesh" may be hypothesized as St. Joseph being the father of Jesus.
However, most scholars reject this interpretation in the context of virgin
birth given that Paul used the Greek word "genomenos" (i.e. becoming) rather
than the word "gennetos" and the reference to "seed of David" is likely to
Mary's lineage.
