Masorti The Masorti Movement is the name given to Conservative Judaism in
Israel and other countries outside Canada and U.S. Masorti means "traditional"
in Hebrew. It should not be confused with the large part of Israeli Jews (25%
to 50% depending on definitions) who define themselves as "masorati" (or Shomer
Masoret) - meaning religiously "traditional" but do not wish to be labelled as
Orthodox. Israel. Conservative Judaism had begun to make its presence known in
Israel before the 1960s. Today, there are almost 60 congregations with over
15,000 affiliates (about 0.25% of the jewish population). In 1962 The Jewish
Theological Seminary of America (JTS) began creating Neve Schechter, the
university's Jerusalem campus. This center houses the Schocken Center for
Jewish Research, and the Saul Lieberman Institute for Talmudic Research. In
1975 JTS instituted a year of study in Israel as a requirement for every
rabbinical student in JTS and the University of Judaism's (now the American
Jewish University) rabbinical seminary. In 1979 JTS Chancellor Gerson Cohen
announced the creation of the Masorti ("Traditional") movement as Israel's own
indigenous Conservative movement, with its own executive director, board and
executive committee. The Masorti movement created MERCAZ, a Zionist party
within the structure of the World Zionist Organization. The Conservative
movement is thus officially represented in the centers of decision making
within the Zionist movement. The Masorti movement sponsors youth groups, an
overnight camp, a system of day camps (Camp Ramah), Kibbutz Hannaton and the
Hannaton Education Center, Moshav Shorashim, and special programs teaching new
olim (immigrants) basic Judaism. It is involved in many issues promoting the
legitimate rights of non-Orthodox Jews. MERCAZ is the Zionist organization of
the Conservative Movement, and represents Conservative/Masorti Jews the world
over. Its goals include pressing for religious pluralism, working for an
equitable distribution of funding from the World Zionist Organization and the
Jewish Agency for Conservative Zionist programs in Israel and America,
promoting civil rights in Israel for all people, encouraging electoral reform
in Israel, and opposing any change in "Who Is a Jew?" and "Law of Return".
MERCAZ is a member of the World Zionist Organization and the Jewish Agency for
Israel, both of which have been designated by the Knesset as channels of
communication and influence between Diaspora Jewry and the government of
Israel. Through these institutions MERCAZ works with on issues such as aliyah
and absorption, education, young leadership, and community affairs. The Masorti
movement in Israel adopts positions on subjects of Jewish Law independent of
the Conservative movement in the United States, and the two movements sometimes
take different positions. The Masorti movement is sometimes somewhat more
traditional than the U.S. Conservative movement and has not accepted a number
of the U.S. movement's leniencies. For example, the Masorti movement in Israel
rejected a decision by the Conservative movement in the United States
permitting Jews living far from synagogues to drive to synagogue on Shabbat.
For eight years up to late 2005 the president of the movement was Rabbi Ehud
Bandel. There is a "Conservative Yeshivah" in Jerusalem, but this belongs to
the American Conservative movement and not to the Israeli Masorti movement.
United Kingdom. While Jacobs found that statement to be compatible with
Orthodox Judaism, the Chief Rabbi condemned his views as "denial of the divine
origin of the Torah". Jacobs and Lawrence Kogan was rejected for the
principalship of the Jews' College and subsequently from the United Synagogue
rabbinate. Jacobs then founded the New London Synagogue, where he remained as
rabbi until his retirement in 1995. Rabbi Chaim Weiner succeeded Louis Jacobs
as head of the New London Synagogue, but when Weiner was appointed head of the
new European Masorti Beth Din in 2005, Jacobs returned. After Jacobs' death,
Rabbi Dr. Reuven Hammer served as interim Rabbi of New London Synagogue until
Rabbi Jeremy Gordon was appointed in January 2008. The largest Masorti
community in the UK is the New North London Synagogue (with 2400 members),
served by Rabbi Jonathan Wittenberg. As with the North American Conservative
movement, individual synagogues can choose to adopt traditional or egalitarian
approaches to women's prayer roles. While approximately 90% of American
Conservative synagogues have adopted fully egalitarian practices, most British
Masorti synagogues have retained a more traditional approach. No female rabbi
has served in a British Masorti synagogue, but in 2010 the Assembly of Masorti
Synagogues appointed Rabbi Daniella Kolodny as its Community Development
Coordinator. Although women chazaniyot (cantors) are common in North American
Conservative synagogues, in 2006, Jaclyn Chernett became the first woman in the
UK to be ordained as a chazan (cantor) in the British Masorti movement. She
serves as chazan at Kol Nefesh Masorti Synagogue in Edgware, North West London.
Noam, the Zionist Youth Movement of the Assembly of Masorti Synagogues, is
amongst the most successful Jewish Youth organisations in the UK. It is the
fastest growing Jewish youth movement, and in 2008 celebrates its 20th
Birthday. Australia. Emanuel Synagogue is the birthplace of the Masorti
movement in Australia. Originally established as a Reform synagogue in 1938
(then called Temple Emanuel) Emanuel Synagogue is now a very large, explicitly
pluralist congregation affiliated to Masorti Olami as well as the Progressive
and Renewal movements. Masorti, Progressive and Renewal services are all
provided. Members attend the service of their choice and join together as one
community for the purposes of meals, education programs and other joint
activities including the governance of the congregation. The Masorti minyan
originally came together in the early 1990s as a small group of laypeople
meeting for a regular Monday morning service under the guidance of Rabbi
Jeffrey Kamins. After some debate, it was agreed to adopt a Masorti form of
service, using the siddur Sim Shalom. Thus the first Masorti service in
Australia came into being. Over time, under Rabbi Kamins' leadership, this
small beginning developed into a full range of services including Shabbat,
Festivals and Monday and Thursday mornings. High Holy Day services of
masorti@emanuel can attract between 600 and 700 participants. Rabbi Kamins
chose to change his rabbinical affiliation to the Rabbinical Assembly and in
time became the Senior Rabbi of the congregation. masorti@emanuel has gradually
become a more clearly articulated stream within the Emanuel Synagogue and is a
growing part of its membership. As part of this growth, there was a change of
name from Temple Emanuel to Emanuel Synagogue, from a Progressive to an
explicitly pluralist congregation. In 1999, Kehilat Nitzan, Melbourne's first
Conservative (Masorti) Congregation was established, with foundation president
Prof John Rosenberg. The congregation appointed its first rabbi, Rabbi Ehud
Bandel in 2006. Currently services are held in B'nai B'rith House, East St
Kilda.The refurbishment and partial reconstruction of a building in Caulfield
to serve as the first Conservative Synagogue building in Australia is advanced,
completion being anticipated during 2010. In 2007 the congregation had
approximately 150 families, with 500 attending High Holiday services. Kehilat
Nitzan is affiliated with Masorti Olami, the World Council of Conservative
Congregations. Netherlands. In 2004, Masorti Judaism was introduced into the
Netherlands by the founding of a Traditional/non-Egalitarian Masorti community
in the town of Almere. Its synagogue is situated in the nearby town of Weesp.
The community was created by secession from Almere's Orthodox (NIK) community.
Mr. Bernhard Cohen is currently its Honorary President and founder. Rabbi Chaim
Weiner (Masorti UK), the first rabbi to provide long-distance communal
supervision, was succeeded in 2009 by rabbi David Soetendorp. In 2005, the
community had some 75 members, and continues to grow. Hungary. In 2010 there
was only one synagogue formally linked with Masorti Olami - Dor Chadash in
Budapest. However there are Neolog congregations in Hungary which are
strikingly similar to Masorti synagogues, for instance Bét Salom Zsinagóga
with Rabbi Zoltán Radnóti who trained in the Neolog seminary in Budapest. In
this synagogue, there is an upstairs tier reserved for women, who also at their
option sit downstairs. Women participate in the service and bimah activities
but are not called up to read from the Torah. Other Neolog synagogues such as
the well-known Dohány Street Synagogue, in Budapest are of a different
character. Masorti Olami. Masorti Olami (also known as The World Council of
Conservative/Masorti Synagogues) builds, renews and strengthens Jewish life
throughout the world, with efforts that focus on existing and developing
communities in Europe, Latin America, the Former Soviet Union, Africa, Asia and
Australia. More than 135 kehillot (communities) are affiliated with Masorti
Olami in Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Canada, China, the Czech Republic,
France, Germany, Hungary, Israel, Japan, the Netherlands, Peru, Portugal,
Russia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Ukraine, Uruguay, the United Kingsom and
the United States of America. All of its activities are conducted within the
context of the overall Conservative/ Masorti movement, in close cooperation
with its affiliated organizations in North America and Israel.
