Massacre of the Innocents The Massacre of the Innocents is the biblical
narrative of infanticide and gendercide by Herod the Great, the Roman appointed
King of the Jews. The historicity of the incident is "an open question that
probably can never be definitively decided", but according to the Gospel of
Matthew Herod ordered the execution of all young male children in the village
of Bethlehem, so as to avoid the loss of his throne to a newborn King of the
Jews whose birth had been announced to him by the Magi. In typical Matthean
style it is understood as the fulfillment of an Old Testament prophecy: "Then
was fulfilled that which was spoken through Jeremiah the prophet, saying, A
voice was heard in Ramah, Weeping and great mourning, Rachel weeping for her
children." The number of infants killed is not stated, however the Holy
Innocents have been claimed as the first Christian martyrs. Biblical account.
In Matthew's account, magi from the east go to Judea in search of the newborn
king of the Jews, having "seen his star in the east". The King, Herod the
Great, directs them to Bethlehem, and asks them to let him know who this king
is when they find him. They find Jesus and honor him, but an angel tells them
not to alert Herod, and they return home by another way. Compare Hosea . See
also  When Herod realised that he had been outwitted by the Magi, he was
furious, and he gave orders to kill all the boys in Bethlehem and its vicinity
who were two years old and under, in accordance with the time he had learned
from the Magi. Then what was said through the prophet Jeremiah was fulfilled:
"A voice is heard in Ramah, weeping and great mourning, Rachel weeping for her
children and refusing to be comforted, because they are no more." Matthew's
purpose is to present Jesus as the Messiah, and the Massacre of the Innocents
as the fulfillment of passages in Hosea, referring to the exodus, and Jeremiah,
to the Babylonian exile. Raymond Brown sees the story as patterned on the
Exodus story of the killing of the Hebrew firstborn by Pharaoh and the birth of
Moses. Historicity. The single account of the Massacre comes in the : it is not
mentioned elsewhere in the gospels or by the Roman Jewish historian, Josephus
(37 – c. 100). Modern liberal scholarship, says Marcus Borg, regards the
biblical accounts of the birth of Jesus as symbolic narratives rather than
factual history. According to Paul L. Maier, the majority of Herod biographers
and theologians hold that the Massacre of the Innocents is "legend and not
historical": Geza Vermes and E. P. Sanders, for example, regard the story as
part of a creative hagiography. Robert Eisenman argues that the story may have
its origins in Herod's murder of his own sons, an act which made a deep
impression at the time and which was recorded by Josephus. Other arguments
against historicity include the silence of Josephus (who does record several
other examples of Herod’s willingness to commit such acts to protect his
power, noting that he "never stopped avenging and punishing every day those who
had chosen to be of the party of his enemies") and the views that the story is
an apologetic device or a constructed fulfilment of prophesy. Some biblical
scholars hold a generally sceptical view of the incident's historicity. Whilst
acknowledging that the episode "contains nothing that is historically
impossible" Hill says that Matthew's "real concern is ... with theological
reflection on the theme of "OT" fulfilment". R. T. France argues for
plausibility on the grounds, inter alia, that “the murder of a few infants in
a small village not on a scale to match the more spectacular assassinations
recorded by Josephus”; Schnackenburg follows this line also, and Gordon Franz
points to Josephus' failure to mention other pivotal events in the first
century AD, such as "the episode of the golden Roman shields in Jerusalem which
was the cause of the bad blood between Herod Antipas and Pontus (sic) Pilate".
In similar vein Barclay follows Carr in finding Josephus' silence not relevant,
drawing a parallel with the diarist John Evelyn's failure to mention the
masscre at Glencoe. Maier argues that sceptics have tended to "regard opinion
as fact, and have largely avoided a careful historical search into the
parameters of the problem". After analysing the arguments against the
historicity of the infant massacre Maier concludes they all "have very serious
flaws". Maier follows Jerry Knoblet in arguing for historicity based on the
"identical personality profiles that emerge of Herod" in both Matthew and
Josephus; Later writings. Protoevangelium of James at newadvent.org. "Cum
audisset inter pueros quos in Syria Herodes rex Iudaeorum intra bimatum iussit
interfici filium quoque eius occisum, ait: Melius est Herodis porcum esse quam
filium," (Ambrosius Theodosius Macrobius, Saturnalia, book II, chapter IV:11).
The story assumed an important place in later Christian tradition; Byzantine
liturgy estimated 14,000 Holy Innocents while an early Syrian list of saints
stated the number at 64,000. Coptic sources raise the number to 144,000 and
place the event on 29 December. Taking the narrative literally and judging from
the estimated population of Bethlehem, the "Catholic Encyclopedia" (1907–12)
more soberly suggested that these numbers were inflated, and that probably only
between six and twenty children were killed in the town, with a dozen or so
more in the surrounding areas. In the arts. Medieval liturgical drama recounted
Biblical events, including Herod's slaughter of the innocents. "The Pageant of
the Shearmen and Tailors", performed in Coventry, England, included a haunting
song about the episode, now known as the Coventry Carol. The "Ordo Rachelis"
tradition of four plays includes the Flight into Egypt, Herod's succession by
Archelaus, the return from Egypt, as well as the Massacre all centred on Rachel
weeping in fulfillment of Jeremiah's prophecy. These events were likewise in
one of the Medieval N-Town Plays. The theme of the "Massacre of the Innocents"
has provided artists of many nationalities with opportunities to compose
complicated depictions of massed bodies in violent action. It was an
alternative to the "Flight into Egypt" in cycles of the Life of the Virgin. It
decreased in popularity in Gothic art, but revived in the larger works of the
Renaissance, when artists took inspiration for their "Massacres" from Roman
reliefs of the battle of the Lapiths and Centaurs to the extent that they
showed the figures heroically nude. The horrific subject matter of the Massacre
of the Innocents also provided a comparison of ancient brutalities with early
modern ones during the period of religious wars that followed the Reformation -
Bruegel's versions show the soldiers carrying banners with the Habsburg double-
headed eagle (often used at the time for Ancient Roman soldiers). The 1590
version by Cornelis van Haarlem also seems to reflect the violence of the Dutch
Revolt. Guido Reni's early (1611) "Massacre of the Innocents", in an unusual
vertical format, is at Bologna. The Flemish painter Peter Paul Rubens painted
the theme more than once. One version, now in Munich, was engraved and
reproduced as a painting as far away as colonial Peru. Another, his grand
"Massacre of the Innocents" is now at the Art Gallery of Ontario in Toronto.
The French painter Nicolas Poussin painted "The Massacre of the Innocents"
(1634) at the height of the Thirty Years' War. "The Childermass", after a
traditional name for the Feast of the Holy Innocents, is the opening novel of
Wyndham Lewis's trilogy "The Human Age". In the novel "The Fall" ("La Chute")
by Albert Camus, the incident is argued by the main character to be the reason
why Jesus chose to let himself be crucified—as he escaped the punishment
intended for him while many others died, he felt responsible and died in guilt.
A similar interpretation is given in José Saramago's controversial "The Gospel
According to Jesus Christ", but there attributed to Joseph, Jesus' father,
rather than to Jesus himself. As depicted by Saramago, Joseph knew of Herod's
intention to massacre the children of Bethlehem, but failed to warn the
townspeople and chose only to save his own child. Guilt-ridden ever after,
Joseph finally expiates his sin by letting himself be crucified (an event not
narrated in the New Testament). The Massacre is the opening plot used in the
2006 movie "The Nativity Story". The folk group Show of Hands wrote a song from
the perspective of the families of the massacre, called "Innocen'ts song/
Gwithian". Feast days. The commemoration of the massacre of these "Holy
Innocents" — considered by some Christians as the first martyrs for
Christ—first appears as a feast of the western church in the Leonine
Sacramentary, dating from about 485. The earliest commemorations were connected
with the Feast of the Epiphany, 6 January: Prudentius mentions the Innocents in
his hymn on the Epiphany. Leo in his homilies on the Epiphany speaks of the
Innocents. Fulgentius of Ruspe (6th century) gives a homily "De Epiphania,
deque Innocentum nece et muneribus magorum" ("On Epiphany, and on the murder of
the Innocents and the gifts of the Magi"). Today, the date of Holy Innocents'
Day, also called Childermas or Children's Mass, varies. 27 December is the date
for West Syrians (Syriac Orthodox Church, Syro-Malankara Catholic Church, and
Maronite Church) and East Syrians (Chaldeans and Syro-Malabar Catholic Church).
28 December is the date in the Church of England, the Lutheran Church and the
Roman Catholic Church (in which, except on Sunday, violet vestments were worn
before 1961, instead of red, the normal liturgical colour for celebrating
martyrs). The Eastern Orthodox Church celebrates the feast on 29 December. In
the 1962 Roman Catholic calendar, the violet vestments for Holy Innocents were
eliminated (red used instead), and if December 28 fell on Sunday, this feast
was commemorated on the Sunday within the Octave of Christmas. This was changed
in a later revision of the Church calendar. In Spain, Hispanic America and the
Philippines, December 28 is a day for pranks, equivalent to April Fool's Day in
many countries. Pranks ("bromas") are also known in Spain as "inocentadas" and
their victims are called "inocentes", or alternatively, the pranksters are the
"inocentes" and the victims should not be angry at them, since they could not
have committed any "sin". One of the more famous of these traditions is the
annual "Els Enfarinats" festival of Ibi in Alicante, where the "inocentadas"
dress up in full military dress and incite a flour fight. Various Catholic
countries had a tradition (no longer widely observed) of role reversal between
children and their adult educators, including boy bishops, perhaps a
Christianized version of the Roman annual feast of the Saturnalia (when even
slaves played "masters" for a day). In some cultures it is said to be an
unlucky day, when no new project should be started. In addition, there was a
medieval custom of refraining where possible from work on the day of the week
on which the feast of "Innocents Day" had fallen for the whole of the following
year until the next Innocents Day. This was presumably mainly observed by the
better-off. Philippe de Commynes, the minister of King Louis XI of France tells
in his memoirs how the king observed this custom, and describes the trepidation
he felt when he had to inform the king of an emergency on the day.
