Mass (music) The Mass, a form of sacred musical composition, is a choral
composition that sets the invariable portions of the Eucharistic liturgy
(principally that of the Catholic Church, the Anglican Communion, and the
Lutheran Church) to music. Most Masses are settings of the liturgy in Latin,
the liturgical sacred language of the Catholic Church's Roman liturgy, but
there are a significant number written in the languages of non-Catholic
countries where vernacular worship has long been the norm. For example, there
are many Masses (often called "Communion Services") written in English for the
Church of England. Musical Masses take their name from the Catholic liturgy
called "the Mass" as well. Masses can be "a cappella", for the human voice
alone, or they can be accompanied by instrumental "obbligatos" up to and
including a full orchestra. Many Masses, especially later ones, were never
intended to be performed during the celebration of an actual mass. Form of the
Mass. I. Kyrie. The Kyrie is the first movement of a setting of the Ordinary of
the Mass: This is from the ancient (Biblical New Testament) Greek language,
unlike the rest of the mass which is Latin. Kyrie movements often have a
structure that reflects the concision and symmetry of the text. Many have a
ternary (ABA) form, where the two appearances of the phrase ""Kyrie eleison""
consist of identical or closely related material and frame a contrasting
""Christe eleison"" section. Or AAABBBCCC' form is also found later on.
Famously, Mozart sets the ""Kyrie"" and ""Christe"" texts in his Requiem Mass
as the two subjects of a double fugue. II. Gloria. The Gloria is a celebratory
passage praising God and Christ: In Mass settings (normally in English)
composed for the Church of England's "Book of Common Prayer" liturgy, the
Gloria is commonly the last movement, because it occurs in this position in the
text of the service. In Order One of the newer "Common Worship" liturgy,
however, it is restored to its earlier place. III. Credo. Since the Second
Vatican Council composers have mostly ignored writing melodies for the Credo in
vernacular languages. Today, the Creed is usually recited by the congregation.
Organizers of international celebrations, such as World Youth Day, have been
encouraged by Rome to familiarize congregants in the Latin chants for the Our
Father and the Credo, specifically Credo III (17th century, Fifth Mode) from
the Missa de Angelis (the Mass of the Angels). The purpose of singing these two
texts in Latin is to engender a sense of unity in the faithful, all of whom
thus sing the prayer of Jesus and the shared belief of the universal Church in
the same language. IV. Sanctus. A variant exists in Lutheran settings of the
Sanctus. While most hymnal settings keep the second person pronoun, other
settings change the second person pronoun to the third person. This is most
notable in J.S. Bach's Mass in B minor, where the text reads "gloria ejus"
("His glory"). Martin Luther's chorale "Isaiah, Mighty in Days of Old", and
Felix Mendelssohn's setting of the "Heilig!" (German "Sanctus") from his
"Deutsche Liturgie" also use the third person. V. Benedictus. "Hosanna in
excelsis" is repeated after the "Benedictus" section, often with musical
material identical to that used after the "Sanctus", or very closely related.
In Gregorian chant the "Sanctus" (with "Benedictus") was sung whole at its
place in the mass. However, as composers produced more embellished settings of
the "Sanctus" text, the music often would go on so long that it would run into
the consecration of the bread and wine. This was considered the most important
part of the Mass, so composers began to stop the "Sanctus" halfway through to
allow this to happen, and then continue it after the consecration is finished.
This practice was forbidden for a period in the 20th century. VI. Agnus Dei.
The Agnus Dei is a setting of the "Lamb of God" litany: In a Requiem Mass, the
words ""miserere nobis"" are replaced by ""dona eis requiem"" (grant them
rest), while ""dona nobis pacem"" is replaced by ""dona eis requiem
sempiternam"" (grant them eternal rest). Other sections. Following the
distribution of the Sacrament, it is customary in most Lutheran churches to
sing the Nunc Dimittis. In a liturgical Mass, there are other sections that may
be sung, often in Gregorian chant. These sections, the "Proper" of the Mass,
change with the day and season according to the Church calendar, or according
to the special circumstances of the Mass. The Proper of the Mass is usually not
set to music in a Mass itself, except in the case of a Requiem Mass, but may be
the subject of motets or other musical compositions. The sections of the Proper
of the Mass include the Introit, Gradual, Alleluia or Tract (depending on the
time of year), Offertory and Communion. Musical settings. Middle Ages. The
earliest musical settings of the Mass are Gregorian chant. The different
portions of the Ordinary came into the liturgy at different times, with the
Kyrie probably being first (perhaps as early as the 7th century) and the Credo
being last (it did not become part of the Roman mass until 1014). In the early
14th century, composers began writing polyphonic versions of the sections of
the Ordinary. The reason for this surge in interest is not known, but it has
been suggested that there was a shortage of new music since composers were
increasingly attracted to secular music, and overall interest in writing sacred
music had entered a period of decline. The non-changing part of the mass, the
Ordinary, then would have music which was available for performance all the
time. Two manuscripts of the 14th century, the Ivrea Codex and the Apt Codex,
are the primary sources for polyphonic settings of the Ordinary. Stylistically
these settings are similar to both motets and secular music of the time, with a
three-voice texture dominated by the highest part. Most of this music was
written or assembled at the papal court at Avignon. Several anonymous complete
masses from the 14th century survive, including the Tournai Mass; however,
discrepancies in style indicate that the movements of these masses were written
by several composers and later compiled by scribes into a single set. The first
complete Mass we know of whose composer can be identified was the "Messe de
Nostre Dame" ("Mass of Our Lady") by Guillaume de Machaut in the 14th century.
Renaissance. The musical setting of the Ordinary of the Mass was the principal
large-scale form of the Renaissance. The earliest complete settings date from
the 14th century, with the most famous example being the Messe de Nostre Dame
of Guillaume de Machaut. Individual movements of the Mass, and especially pairs
of movements (such as Gloria-Credo pairs, or Sanctus-Agnus pairs), were
commonly composed during the 14th and early 15th centuries. Complete Masses by
a single composer were the norm by the middle of the 15th century, and the form
of the Mass, with the possibilities for large-scale structure inherent in its
multiple movement format, was the main focus of composers within the area of
sacred music; it was not to be eclipsed until the motet and related forms
became more popular in the first decades of the 16th century. Most 15th-century
Masses were based on a cantus firmus, usually from a Gregorian chant, and most
commonly put in the tenor voice. The cantus firmus sometimes appeared
simultaneously in other voices, using a variety of contrapuntal techniques.
Later in the century, composers such as Guillaume Dufay, Johannes Ockeghem, and
Jacob Obrecht, used secular tunes for cantus firmi. This practice was accepted
with little controversy until prohibited by the Council of Trent in 1562. In
particular, the song "L'homme armé" has a long history with composers; more
than 40 separate Mass settings exist. Other techniques for organizing the
cyclic Mass evolved by the beginning of the 16th century, including the
paraphrase technique, in which the cantus firmus was elaborated and ornamented,
and the parody technique, in which several voices of a polyphonic source, not
just one, were incorporated into the texture of the Mass. Paraphrase and parody
supplanted cantus-firmus as the techniques of choice in the 16th century:
Palestrina alone wrote 51 parody masses. Yet another technique used to organize
the multiple movements of a Mass was canon. The earliest Masses based entirely
on canon are Johannes Ockeghem's "Missa prolationum", in which each movement is
a prolation canon on a freely-composed tune, and the "Missa L'homme armé" of
Guillaume Faugues, which is also entirely canonic but also uses the famous tune
"L'homme armé" throughout. Pierre de La Rue wrote four separate canonic masses
based on plainchant, and one of Josquin des Prez's mature Masses, the "Missa Ad
fugam", is entirely canonic and free of borrowed material. The "Missa Sine
nomine", literally "Mass without a name", refers to a Mass written on freely
composed material. Sometimes these Masses were named for other things, such as
Palestrina's famous "Missa Papae Marcelli", the Mass of Pope Marcellus, and
many times they were canonic Masses, as in Josquin's "Missa Sine nomine". Many
famous and influential masses were composed by Josquin des Prez, the single
most influential composer of the middle Renaissance. At the end of the 16th
century, prominent representatives of "a cappella" choral counterpoint included
the Englishman William Byrd, the Castilian Tomás Luis de Victoria and the
Roman Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina, whose "Mass for Pope Marcellus" is
sometimes credited with saving polyphony from the censure of the Council of
Trent. By the time of Palestrina, however, most composers outside of Rome were
using other forms for their primary creative outlet for expression in the realm
of sacred music, principally the motet and the madrigale spirituale; composers
such as the members of the Venetian School preferred the possibilities inherent
in the new forms. Other composers, such as Orlande de Lassus, working in Munich
and comfortably distant from the conservative influence of the Council of
Trent, continued to write Parody Masses on secular songs. Monteverdi composed
Masses in stile antico, the "Missa in illo tempore" was published in 1610, one
"Messa a 4 da cappella" in 1641 as part of "Selva morale e spirituale" along
with single movements of the Mass in stile concertato, another "Messa a 4 da
cappella" was published after his death, in 1650. Baroque through Romantic. The
early Baroque era initiated stylistic changes which led to increasing
dispartity between masses written entirely in the traditional polyphonic manner
(stile antico), whose principal advancements were the use of the basso continuo
and the gradual adoption of a wider harmonic vocabulary, and the mass in modern
style with solo voices and instrumental obbligatos. Composers such as Henri
Dumont (1610–1684) continued to compose plainsong settings, distinct from and
more elaborate than the earlier Gregorian chants. A further disparity arose
between the festive missa solemnis and the missa brevis, a more compact
setting. Composers like Fux in the 18th century continued to cultivate the
stile antico mass, which was suitable for use on weekdays and at times when
orchestral masses were not practical or appropriate, and in 19th century
Germany the Cecilian movement kept the tradition alive. The Italian style
cultivated orchestral masses including soloists, chorus and obbligato
instruments, spread to the German-speaking Catholic countries north of the
Alps, and used instruments for color and created dialogues between solo voices
and chorus that was to become characteristic of the 18th century Viennese
style. The so-called "Neapolitan" or "cantata" mass style also had much
influence on 18th century mass composition with its short sections set as self-
contained solo arias and choruses in a variety of styles. The 18th century
Viennese mass combines operatic elements from the cantata mass with a trend in
the symphony and concerto to organize choral movements. The large scale masses
of the first half of the century still have Glorias and Credos divided into
many movements, unlike smaller masses for ordinary churches. Many of Mozart's
masses are in missa brevis form, as are some of Haydn's early ones. Later
masses, especially of Haydn, are of symphonic structure, with long sections
divided into fewer movements, organized like a symphony, with soloists used as
an ensemble rather than as individuals. The distinction between concert masses
and those intended for liturgical use also came into play as the 19th century
progressed. Major works. After the Renaissance, the mass tended not to be the
central genre for any one composer, yet some of the most famous of all musical
works of the Baroque, Classical, and Romantic periods are masses. Many of the
most famous of the great masses of the Romantic era were Requiem masses. 20th
and 21st century. By the end of the 19th century composers were combining
modern elements with the characteristics of Renaissance polyphony and
plainchant, which continued to influence 20th century composers, possibly
fueled by the Motu Proprio (1903) of Pope Pius X. The revival of choral
celebration of Holy Communion in the Anglican Church in the late 19th century
marked the beginning several liturgical settings of Mass texts in English,
particularly for choir and organ. The movement for liturgical reform has
resulted in revised forms of the Mass, making it more functional by using a
variety of accessible styles, popular or ethnic, and using new methods such as
refrain and response to encourage congregational involvement. Nevertheless, the
mass in its musical incarnation continues to thrive beyond the walls of the
church, as is evident in many of the 21st century masses listed here which were
composed for concert performance rather than in service of the Roman Rite.
Major Works. In the 20th century, composers continued to write masses, in an
even wider diversity of style, form and function than before. Masses written
for the Anglican liturgy. These are more often known as 'Communion Services',
and differ not only in that they are settings of English words, but also, as
mentioned above, in that the Gloria usually forms the last movement. Sometimes
the Kyrie movement takes the form of sung responses to the Ten Commandments, 1
to 9 being followed by the words 'Lord have mercy upon us and incline our
hearts to keep this law', and the tenth by 'Lord have mercy upon us and write
all these thy laws in our hearts, we beseech thee'. Since the texts of the
'Benedictus qui venit' and the 'Agnus Dei' do not actually feature in the
liturgy of the 1662 Book of Common Prayer, these movements are often missing
from some of the earlier Anglican settings. Charles Villiers Stanford composed
a Benedictus and Agnus in the key of F major which was published separately to
complete his service in C. With reforms in the Anglican liturgy, the movements
are now usually sung in the same order that they are in the Roman Catholic
rite, leading, according to some, to the musical integrity of the settings
being somewhat compromised. Choral settings of the Creed, the most substantial
movement, are rarely performed in Anglican cathedrals now. Musical reforms of
Pius X. These regulations carry little if any weight today, especially after
the changes of the Second Vatican Council. Quite recently, Pope Benedict XVI
has encouraged a return to chant as the primary music of the liturgy, as this
is explicitly mentioned in the documents of the Second Vatican Council,
specifically Sacrosanctum Concilium 116. Missa brevis (short mass). In
addition, a number of composers wrote shorter masses, "Missae breves",
containing some, if not all, of the same texts as "standard" masses, but
shorter in duration. Often, the "Gloria" or "Credo" movements, which have the
longest texts of the standard mass movements, are omitted.
