Mass (liturgy) "Mass" is one of the names by which the sacrament of the
Eucharist is called in the Roman Catholic Church, Latin liturgical rites,
Western Rite Orthodox Churches, as well as in similar celebrations in Old
Catholic Churches, in some Anglican parishes, and in many Lutheran Churches.
Apart from "Eucharist" others are the "Lord's Supper", the "Breaking of Bread",
the "Eucharistic assembly (synaxis)", the "memorial of the Lord's Passion and
Resurrection", the "Holy Sacrifice", the "Holy and Divine Liturgy" and "Holy
Communion". In these denominations, the term "Mass" often colloquially refers
to the entire church service in general. In general, Protestants avoid the term
"Mass" and use such terms as "Divine Service" or "service of worship", for
doctrinal reasons. For the celebration of the Eucharist in Eastern churches,
including those in full communion with the Holy See, other terms such as the
"Divine Liturgy", the "Holy Qurbana" and the "Badarak" are normal. The term
"Mass" is derived from the Late Latin word "missa" (dismissal), a word used in
the concluding formula of Mass in Latin: ""Ite, missa est"" ("Go; it is the
dismissal"). "In antiquity, "missa" simply meant 'dismissal'. In Christian
usage, however, it gradually took on a deeper meaning. The word 'dismissal' has
come to imply a 'mission'. These few words succinctly express the missionary
nature of the Church". (Pope Benedict XVI, "Sacramentum caritatis", 51) The
Roman Catholic Church distinguishes between the Mass in its understanding and
what some Anglicans and Lutherans call the Mass, since it considers that they
lack the sacrament of orders and therefore "have not preserved the genuine and
total reality of the Eucharistic mystery." On the other hand, historically, the
Lutheran Church has stated that the Lutheran Mass is "the only Mass founded in
the Scriptures of God, in accordance with the plain and incontestable
institution of the Saviour." Mass in the Catholic Church. The Catholic Church
sees the Mass or Eucharist as "the source and summit of the Christian life", to
which the other sacraments are oriented. The term "Mass" is generally used only
in the Latin Church, while the Byzantine-Rite Eastern Catholic Churches use the
analogous term "Divine Liturgy" and other Eastern Catholic Churches have terms
such as Holy Qurbana. Within the fixed structure outlined below, which is
specific to the Roman Rite, the Scripture readings, the antiphons sung or
recited during the entrance procession or communion, and certain other prayers
vary each day according to the liturgical calendar. For more information
regarding the structure and history of Mass in the Roman Rite see Mass
(Catholic Church) Introductory Rites. The priest enters, with a deacon, if
there is one, and altar servers (who may act as crucifer, torch-bearers and
thurifer). He then invites those present to take part in the Act of Penitence,
which concludes with the priest's prayer of absolution, "which, however, lacks
the efficacy of the Sacrament of Penance." The Kyrie, eleison (Lord, have
mercy), is sung or said, followed by the Gloria in excelsis Deo (Glory to God
in the highest), an ancient praise, if appropriate for the liturgical season.
Liturgy of the Word. On Sundays and solemnities, three Scripture readings are
given. On other days there are only two. If there are three readings, the first
is from the Old Testament (a term wider than "Hebrew Scriptures", since it
includes the Deuterocanonical Books), or the Acts of the Apostles during
Eastertide. The first reading is followed by a psalm, either recited or sung
responsorially. The second reading is from the New Testament, typically from
one of the Pauline epistles. The final reading and high point of the Liturgy of
the Word is the proclamation of the Gospel, read by the deacon or priest. At
least on Sundays and Holy Days of Obligation, a homily, a sermon that draws
upon some aspect of the readings or the liturgy of the day, is then given.
Finally, the Creed is professed on Sundays and solemnities, and it is desirable
that in Masses celebrated with the people the Universal Prayer or Prayer of the
Faithful should usually follow. Liturgy of the Eucharist. The Liturgy of the
Eucharist begins with the ceremonial placing of the gifts of bread and wine on
the altar, after which the congregation stands, as the priest gives the
exhortation to pray, "Pray, brethren, that my sacrifice and yours may be
acceptable to God, the almighty Father." The congregation responds: "May the
Lord accept the sacrifice at your hands, for the praise and glory of his name,
for our good, and the good of all his holy Church." The priest then pronounces
the variable prayer over the gifts. The Eucharistic Prayer, "the centre and
high point of the entire celebration", then begins with a dialogue between
priest and people. The priest continues with one of many Eucharistic Prayer
thanksgiving prefaces, which lead to the reciting of the Sanctus acclamation.
The Eucharistic Prayer includes the epiclesis, a prayer that the gifts offered
may by the power of the Holy Spirit become the body and blood of Christ. The
central part is the Institution Narrative and Consecration, recalling the words
and actions of Jesus at his Last Supper, which he told his disciples to do in
remembrance of him. Immediately after the Consecration and the display to the
people of the consecrated elements, the priest says: "The mystery of faith",
and the people pronounce the acclamation, using one of the three prescribed
formulae. It concludes with a doxology, with the priest lifting up the paten
with the host and the deacon (if there is one) the chalice, and the singing or
recitation of the Amen by the people. Communion rite. All together recite or
sing the "Lord's Prayer" ("Pater Noster" or "Our Father"). The priest
introduces it with a short phrase and follows it up with a prayer called the
embolism and the people respond with the doxology. The sign of peace is
exchanged and then the "Lamb of God" ("Agnus Dei" in Latin) litany is sung or
recited, while the priest breaks the host and places a piece in the main
chalice; this is known as the rite of fraction and commingling. The priest then
presents the transubstantiated elements to the congregation, saying: "Behold
the Lamb of God, behold him who takes away the sin of the world. Blessed are
those called to the supper of the Lamb." Then all repeat: "Lord, I am not
worthy that you should enter under my roof, but only say the word and my soul
shall be healed." The priest then receives Communion and, with the help, if
necessary, of extraordinary ministers, distributes Communion to the people, who
usually approach in procession. Concluding rite. The deacon, or in his absence,
the priest himself then dismisses the people, choosing one of four formulas, of
which the first is "Ite, missa est" in Latin or its equivalent in other
languages. The congregation responds: "Thanks be to God." The priest and other
ministers then leave, often to the accompaniment of a recessional hymn. Mass in
Anglicanism. "Mass" is one of many terms used to describe the Eucharist in the
Anglican tradition. More frequently, the term used is either "Holy Communion,"
"Holy Eucharist," or "the Lord's Supper." Occasionally the term used in Eastern
churches, "the Divine Liturgy", is also employed. In the English-speaking
Anglican world, the term used identifies the Eucharistic theology of the one
using it. "Mass" is an Anglo-Catholic term. Structure of the rite. The liturgy
is divided into two main parts: The Liturgy of the Word (Gathering, Proclaiming
and Hearing the Word, Prayers of the People)and the Liturgy of the Eucharist
(together with the Dismissal), but the entire liturgy itself is also properly
referred to as the Holy Eucharist. The sequence of the liturgy are almost
identical to the Roman Rite, except the Confession of Sin ends the Liturgy of
the Word in the Anglican rites in North America, while in the Roman Rite and in
Anglican rites in the rest of the world the Confession is near the beginning of
the service. Special Masses. The Anglican tradition includes separate rites for
Nuptial Masses, Funeral Masses, and votive Masses. The Eucharist is an integral
part of many other sacramental services, including ordination and Confirmation.
Ceremonial. Some Anglo-Catholic parishes use Anglican versions of the
Tridentine Missal, such as the English Missal, "The Anglican Missal", or
American Missal, for the celebration of mass, all of which are intended
primarily for the celebration of the Eucharist. Many Anglo-Catholic parishes in
the Church of England use "A Manual of Anglo-Catholic Devotion" (successor to
the earlier "A Manual of Catholic Devotion"). In the Episcopal Church USA, a
traditional-language, Anglo-Catholic adaptation of the 1979 Book of Common
Prayer has been published ("An Anglican Service Book"). All of these books
contain such features as meditations for the presiding celebrant(s) during the
liturgy, and other material such as the rite for the blessing of palms on Palm
Sunday, propers for special feast days, and instructions for proper ceremonial
order. These books are used as a more expansively Catholic context in which to
celebrate the liturgical use found in the Book of Common Prayer and related
liturgical books. These are often supplemented in Anglo-Catholic parishes by
books specifying ceremonial actions, such as "A Priest's Handbook" by Dennis G.
Michno, "Ceremonies of the Eucharist", by Howard E. Galley, and "Ritual Notes"
by E.C.R. Lamburn. Other guides to ceremonial include the General Instruction
of the Roman Missal, "Ceremonies of the Modern Roman Rite" (Peter Elliott),
"Ceremonies of the Roman Rite Described" (Adrian Fortescue), and "The Parson's
Handbook" (Percy Dearmer). In Evangelical Anglican (i.e. Protestant) parishes,
the rubrics detailed in the Book of Common Prayer are considered normative.
Mass in Lutheranism. In the Book of Concord, Article XXIV ("Of the Mass") of
the Augsburg Confession (1530) begins thus: "Falsely are our churches accused
of abolishing the Mass; for the Mass is retained among us, and celebrated with
the highest reverence. We do not abolish the Mass but religiously keep and
defend it... we keep the traditional liturgical form... In our churches Mass is
celebrated every Sunday and on other holy days, when the sacrament is offered
to those who wish for it after they have been examined and absolved (Article
XXIV)". Martin Luther rejected parts of the Roman Rite Catholic Mass,
specifically the Canon of the Mass), which, as he argued, did not conform with
. In that verse, the Old Testament priests, who needed to make a sacrifice for
sins on a regular basis, are contrasted with the single priest Christ, who
offers his body only once as a sacrifice. The theme is carried out also in , ,
and . He composed as a replacement a revised Latin-language rite, "Formula
missae" in 1523 and the vernacular Deutsche Messe in 1526. In German, the
Scandinavian languages, Finnish, and some English Lutherans, use the word
"Mass" for their corresponding service, but in most English-speaking churches,
they call it the "Divine Service", "Holy Communion, or "the Holy Eucharist".
The celebration of the Mass in Lutheran churches follows a similar pattern to
other traditions, starting with public confession (Confiteor) by all and a
Declaration of Grace said by the priest or pastor. Followed by the "Introit",
"Kyrie", "Gloria", collect, the readings with an alleluia (alleluia is not said
during Lent), homily (or sermon) and recitation of the Nicene Creed. The
Service of the Eucharist includes the General intercessions, Preface, Sanctus
and Eucharistic Prayer, elevation of the host and chalice and invitation to the
Eucharist. The Agnus Dei is chanted while the clergy and assistants first
commune followed by lay communicants. Postcommunion prayers and the final
blessing by the priest ends the Mass. A Roman Catholic or Anglican of the
Anglo-Catholic party would find its elements familiar, in particular the use of
the sign of the cross, kneeling for prayer and the Eucharistic Prayer, bowing
to the processional crucifix, kissing the altar, incense (among some),
chanting, and vestments. Lutheran churches often celebrate the Eucharist each
Sunday, if not at every worship service. This is in keeping with Luther's
preference and the Lutheran confessions. Also, eucharistic ministers take the
sacramental elements to the sick in hospitals and nursing homes. The practice
of weekly communion is increasingly the norm again in most Lutheran parishes
throughout the world. This restoration of the weekly Mass has been strongly
encouraged by the bishops and pastors of the larger Lutheran bodies. The
celebration of the Eucharist may be included in weddings, funerals, retreats,
the dedication of a church building and at annual synod conventions. The Mass
is also an important aspect of ordinations and confirmations in Lutheran
churches. External links. Roman Catholic doctrine Present form of the Roman
rite of the Mass Tridentine form of the Roman rite of the Mass Anglican
Doctrine and practice Lutheran doctrine
