Megachurch A megachurch is a church having 2,000 or more in average weekend
attendance. The Hartford Institute's database lists more than 1,300 such
Protestant churches in the United States. According to that data, approximately
50 churches on the list have attendance ranging from 10,000 to 47,000. While
3,000 individual Catholic parishes (churches) have 2,000 or more attendants for
an average Sunday Mass, these churches are not seen as part of the megachurch
movement. Globally, these large congregations are a significant development in
Protestant Christianity. While generally associated with the United States, the
phenomenon has spread worldwide. In 2007, five of the ten largest Protestant
churches were in South Korea. The largest mega church in the United States is
Lakewood Church in Houston, Texas with more than 40,000 members every weekend
and the current largest megachurch in the world is South Korea's Yoido Full
Gospel Church, with more than 830,000 members as of 2007. History. The origins
of the megachurch movement, with a large number of local congregants who return
on a weekly basis can be traced to the 1950s. There were large churches earlier
in history, but they were considerably rarer. Examples include Charles
Spurgeon's Baptist Metropolitan Tabernacle in London which attracted 5,000
weekly for years in the late 19th century, and religious broadcaster Aimee
Semple McPherson's Angelus Temple in Los Angeles, which was similarly large.
The advent of television in the 1950s, and the Internet in the 1990s and 2000s
have been seen as a motivator for megachurches as megachurch services are often
broadcast. Leadership Network's research director Warren Bird places the total
number of megachurches in the U.S. at over 1,600 in 2012. Criticism. A common
criticism of megachurches is that they draw members away from other churches.
This has led to use of the derisive term, "big box churches". The majority of
North American churchgoers attend small churches of fewer than 200 members.
Critics of megachurches claim that such churches are more concerned with
entertainment than religion. Al Sharpton has claimed that such churches focus
on personal morality issues while ignoring social justice. Critics have also
raised issues with the application of corporate business models, e.g., from
Wal-Mart; a seeker-friendly approach, intensive market research, heavy reliance
upon opinion polls, polished advertising targeted at affluent young
professionals, unconventional worship styles and Eastern influences. Some
megachurches, such as the Christian Open Door, are sometimes criticized by
former members and anti-cult associations for an alleged use of cultic
practices. A number of pastors of megachurch have also faced allegations of
sex- and drug-related crimes. These include but are not limited to Ted Haggard,
who admitted to methamphetamine use, paying to have sex with a male prostitute,
and having sex with a male member of his congregation, and Eddie Long, who is
accused of luring two male teenagers into attending his church and forcing sex
upon them. Also, Earl Paulk was accused of child molestation and a number of
affairs, including committing an adultery with his wife's sister and fathering
a child by her. Another concern with megachurches is their tax-exempt status.
These churches generate millions of dollars in revenue and are not subject to
the same disclosures that charities are on tax-exempt revenues. This has
received attention from the US Senate. A megachurch was investigated by a media
outlet for allegedly illegal contributions to the political campaigns of
Republican candidates and one has been accused of embezzlement.
