Mephistopheles Mephistopheles (also "Mephistophilus, Mephistophilis,
Mephostopheles, Mephisto, Mephastophilis" and variants) is a demon featured in
German folklore. He originally appeared in literature as the demon in the Faust
legend, and he has since appeared in other works as a stock character version
of the Devil. In the Faust legend. The name is associated with the Faust legend
of a scholar — based on the historical Johann Georg Faust — who wagers his
soul with the Devil. The name appears in the late 16th century Faust chapbooks.
In the 1725 version which was read by Goethe, "Mephostophiles" is a devil in
the form of a greyfriar summoned by Faust in a wood outside Wittenberg. The
name "Mephistophiles" already appears in the 1527 "Praxis Magia Faustiana",
printed in Passau, alongside pseudo-Hebrew text. It is best explained as a
purposely obscure pseudo-Greek or pseudo-Hebrew formation of Renaissance magic.
From the chapbook, the name enters Faustian literature and is also used by
authors from Marlowe down to Goethe. In the 1616 edition of "The Tragical
History of Doctor Faustus", "Mephostophiles" became "Mephistophilis". The word
derives from the Hebrew "mephitz", meaning "destroyer", and "tophel", meaning
"liar"; "tophel" is short for "tophel shequer", the literal translation of
which is "falsehood plasterer". The name can also be a combination of three
Greek words: "me" as a negation, "phos" meaning light, and "philis" meaning
loving, making it mean "not-light-loving", possibly parodying the Latin
"Lucifer" or "light-bearer". Mephistopheles in later treatments of the Faust
material frequently figures as a title character: in Meyer Lutz'
"Mephistopheles, or Faust and Marguerite" (1855), Arrigo Boito's "Mefistofele"
(1868), Klaus Mann's "Mephisto", and Franz Liszt's Mephisto Waltzes. Outside
the Faust legend. Shakespeare mentions "Mephistophilus" in the "Merry Wives of
Windsor" (Act1, Sc1, line 128), and by the 17th century the name became
independent of the Faust legend. According to Burton Russell, "That the name is
a purely modern invention of uncertain origins makes it an elegant symbol of
the modern Devil with his many novel and diverse forms." Interpretations of
Mephistopheles. Although Mephistopheles appears to Faustus as a devil — a
worker for Satan — critics claim that he does not search for men to corrupt
but comes to serve and ultimately collect the souls of those who are already
damned. Farnham explains, "Nor does Mephistophiles first appear to Faustus as a
devil who walks up and down in earth to tempt and corrupt any man encountered.
He appears because he senses in Faustus’ magical summons that Faustus is
already corrupt, that indeed he is already 'in danger to be damned'."
Mephistopheles is already trapped in his own hell by serving the Devil. He
warns Faustus of the choice he is making by "selling his soul" to the Devil:
"Mephistophilis, an agent of Lucifer, appears and at first advises Faust not to
forgo the promise of heaven to pursue his goals”. Farnham adds to his theory,
“… enters an ever-present private hell like that of Mephistophiles”.
Mephistopheles: What kind of angel? Certain critics have viewed the Faust story
as a distortion of Christianity. Susan Snyder interprets the play by Marlowe as
an “inverted Saint’s life”, complete with the “sinful” early life (a
student of divinity), “conversion” (to the Devil), reception into the
Church (of Lucifer), “temptation” (by the Good Angel) which is overcome by
help (of the Bad Angel), miracles and beatific visions (of the pagan Helen),
and the final reception into the house of the Lord (Lucifer).” However,
Mephistopheles does warn Faustus of his regret for losing God and the joys of
heaven. He wants Faustus’ soul but also may want to save him from the mistake
he made. "Christianity speaks of hell for those who cast it aside. But, says he
to Mephistopheles as he delivers to him the agreement to surrender his soul at
the end of twenty-four years, 'I think hell’s a fable.' 'Ay,' says
Mephistopheles, 'think so still, till experience change thy mind.'"
Mephistopheles' relationship with Faustus. In "Doctor Faustus", Mephistopheles
acts as a guide to Faustus. Mephistopheles is not only a speaker for the Devil,
but he is also seen as a possible lover to the character. In the play, Faustus
asks Mephistopheles for a wife and, when he returns, the woman is just a devil
in disguise as a woman. According to Hammill, “the wife that brings
demonstrates that marriage is not a signifier that can stabilize the gender.
The play... instead replaces this wife with a series of courtesans in an
economy of homosocial exchange.” Hammill also explains that Mephistopheles
brings Faustus a wife who is not actually a woman because he wants to bring up
sexual tension between Faustus and himself. This article describes the
conversation between the two characters during this scene as “barely legible
as male friendship”. The article goes on to explain that the conversation is
no longer considered to be friendly because the women whom they are discussing
appear to have very masculine features. According to another article, Marlowe
was homosexual. Orgel argues that “Marlowe's [… imagination was essentially
homosexual”. In “Myth, Psychology, and Marlowe’s Doctor Faustus”,
Kenneth Golden explains Mephistopheles' role representing Faustus' alter ego
constructed from his suppressed feelings.
