Merkabah mysticism Merkabah mysticism (or Chariot mysticism) is a school of
Jewish mysticism centered on visions such as found in Ezekiel chapter 1, or in
the hekhalot literature, concerning stories of ascents to the heavenly
"palaces." The main corpus of the Merkabah literature was composed in Israel in
the period 200‚Äì700CE, although later references to the Chariot tradition can
also be found in the literature of Chassidei Ashkenaz in the Middle Ages. A
major text in this tradition is the "Maaseh Merkabah" ("Works of the Chariot").
Etymology. The noun "merkabah" "thing to ride in, cart" is derived from the
consonantal root "" with general meaning "to ride"). The word "chariot" is
found 44 times in the Masoretic text of the Hebrew Bible - most of them
referring to normal chariots on earth and although the concept of the Merkabah
is associated with Ezekiel's vision (1:4-26), the word isn't explicitly written
in Ezekiel 1. However, when left untranslated in English the Hebrew term
"merkabah" (Hebrew: , , and ) relates to the throne-chariot of God in prophetic
visions. It is most closely associated with the vision in Ezekiel chapter 1 of
the four-wheeled vehicle driven by four "hayyot" ("living creatures"), each of
which has four wings and the four faces of a man, lion, ox, and eagle.
Ezekiel's vision of the chariot. According to the verses in Ezekiel and its
attendant commentaries, his vision consists of a chariot made of many heavenly
beings driven by the "Likeness of a Man." Four beings form the basic structure
of the chariot. These beings are called the "living creatures" (Hebrew ◊ó◊ô◊ï◊™
"khayyot"). The bodies of the creatures are "like that of a human being", but
each of them has four faces, corresponding to the four directions the chariot
can go (north, east south and west). The faces are that of a man, a lion, an ox
(later changed to a cherub in Ezekiel 10:14) and an eagle. Since there are four
angels and each has four faces, there are a total of sixteen faces. Each Chayot
angel also has four wings. Two of these wings spread across the length of the
chariot and connected with the wings of the angel on the other side. This
created a sort of 'box' of wings that formed the perimeter of the chariot. With
the remaining two wings, each angel covered its own body. Below, but not
attached to the feet of the "Chayot" angels are other angels that are shaped
like wheels. These wheel angels, which are described as "a wheel inside of a
wheel", are called ""Ophanim"" ◊ê◊ï◊§◊ ◊ô◊ù (lit. wheels, cycles or ways).
These wheels are not directly under the chariot, but are nearby and along its
perimeter. The angel with the face of the man is always on the east side and
looks up at the "Likeness of a Man" that drives the chariot. The "Likeness of a
Man" sits on a throne made of sapphire. The Bible later makes mention of a
third type of angel found in the Merkaba called ""Seraphim"" (lit. "burning")
angels. These angels appear like flashes of fire continuously ascending and
descending. These "Seraphim" angels powered the movement of the chariot. In the
hierarchy of these angels, "Seraphim" are the highest, that is, closest to God,
followed by the "Chayot", which are followed by the "Ophanim." The chariot is
in a constant state of motion, and the energy behind this movement runs
according to this hierarchy. The movement of the "Ophanim" is controlled by the
"Living creatures" while the movement of the "Chayot" is controlled by the
"Seraphim". The movement of all the angels of the chariot are controlled by the
"Likeness of a Man" on the Throne. Jewish commentary. The earliest Rabbinic
merkabah commentaries were exegetical expositions of the prophetic visions of
God in the heavens, and the divine retinue of angels, hosts, and heavenly
creatures surrounding God. The earliest evidence suggests that merkabah
homiletics did not give rise to ascent experiences - as one rabbinic sage
states: "Many have expounded upon the merkabah without ever seeing it." One
mention of the merkabah in the Talmud notes the importance of the passage: "A
great issue‚Äîthe account of the merkavah; a small issue‚Äîthe discussions of
Abaye and Rava Talmudic sages." The sages Rabbi Yochanan Ben Zakkai (d. ca. 80
CE) and later, Rabbi Akiva (d. 135) were deeply involved in merkabah exegesis.
Rabbi Akiva and his contemporary Rabbi Ishmael ben Elisha are most often the
protagonists of later merkabah ascent literature. Prohibition against study.
The Talmudic interdictions concerning merkabah speculation are numerous and
widely held. Discussions concerning the merkabah were limited to only the most
worthy sages, and admonitory legends are preserved about the dangers of
overzealous speculation concerning the merkabah. For example, the secret
doctrines might not be discussed in public: "Seek not out the things that are
too hard for thee, neither search the things that are above thy strength. But
what is commanded thee, think thereupon with reverence; for it is not needful
for thee to see with thine eyes the things that are in secret." It must be
studied only by exemplary scholars: "Ma'aseh Bereshit must not be explained
before two, nor Ma'aseh Merkabah before one, unless he be wise and understands
it by himself," Further commentary notes that the chapter-headings of Ma'aseh
Merkabah may be taught, as was done by R. ·∏§iyya. According to Yer. ·∏§ag. ii.
1, the teacher read the headings of the chapters, after which, subject to the
approval of the teacher, the pupil read to the end of the chapter, although
Rabbi Zera said that even the chapter-headings might be communicated only to a
person who was head of a school and was cautious in temperament. According to
R. Ammi, the secret doctrine might be entrusted only to one who possessed the
five qualities enumerated in Isaiah iii. 3 (being experienced in any of five
different professions requiring good judgement), and a certain age is, of
course, necessary. When R. Johanan wished to initiate R. Eliezer in the Ma'aseh
Merkabah, the latter answered, "I am not yet old enough." A boy who recognized
the meaning of (Ezek. i. 4) was consumed by fire (·∏§ag. 13b), and the perils
connected with the unauthorized discussion of these subjects are often
described (·∏§ag. ii. 1; Shab. 80b). Further analysis. Beyond the rabbinic
community, Jewish apocalyptists also engaged in visionary exegeses concerning
the divine realm and the divine creatures which are remarkably similar to the
rabbinic material. A small number of texts unearthed at Qumran indicate that
the Dead Sea community also engaged in merkabah exegesis. Recently uncovered
Jewish mystical texts also evidence a deep affinity with the rabbinic merkabah
homilies. The merkabah homilies eventually consisted of detailed descriptions
of multiple layered heavens (usually seven in number), often guarded over by
angels, and encircled by flames and lightning. The highest heaven contains
seven palaces ("hekhalot"), and in the innermost palace resides a supreme
divine image (God's Glory or an angelic image) seated on a throne, surrounded
by awesome hosts who sing God's praise. When these images were combined with an
actual mystical experiential motif of individual ascent (paradoxically called
"descent" in most texts) and union is not precisely known. By inference,
contemporary historians of Jewish mysticism usually date this development to
the third century CE. Again, there is a significant dispute among historians
over whether these ascent and unitive themes were the result of some foreign,
usually Gnostic, influence, or a natural progression of religious dynamics
within rabbinic Judaism. Maimonides. Maimonides' 12th Century work, "Guide for
the Perplexed" is in part intended as an explanation of the passages Ma'aseh
Bereshit and Ma'aseh Merkabah. In the third volume, Maimonides commences the
exposition of the mystical passage of the mystic doctrines found in the
merkavah passages, while justifying this "crossing of the line" from hints to
direct instruction. Maimonides explains basic mystical concepts via the
Biblical terms referring to Spheres, elements and Intelligences. In these
chapters, however, there is still very little in terms of direct explanation. A
Hasidic explanation. Hasidic philosophy explains that the Merkaba is a multi-
layered analogy that offers insight into the nature of man, the ecosystem, the
world and teaches us how to become better people. The four Chayot angels
represent the basic archetypes that God used to create the current nature of
the world. Ophanim, which means "ways", are the ways these archetypes combine
to create actual entities that exist in the world. For instance, in the basic
elements of the world, the lion represents fire, the ox/earth, the man/water,
and the eagle/air. However, in practice, everything in the world is some
combination of all four, and the particular combination of each element that
exist in each thing are its particular Ophanim or ways. In another example, the
four Chayot represent spring, summer, winter and autumn/fall. These four types
of weather are the archetypal forms. The Ophanim would be the combination of
weather that exists on a particular day, which may be a winter-like day within
the summer or a summer like day within the winter. The Man on the throne
represents God, who is controlling everything that goes on in the world, and
how all of the archetypes He set up should interact. The Man on the throne,
however, can only drive when the four angels connect their wings. This means
that God will not be revealed to us by us looking at all four elements (for
instance) as separate and independent entities. However, when one looks at the
way that earth, wind, fire and water (for instance) which all oppose each other
are able to work together and coexist in complete harmony in the world, this
shows that there is really a higher power (God) telling these elements how to
act. This very lesson carries over to explain how the four basic groups of
animals and the four basic archetypal philosophies and personalities reveal a
higher, godly source when one is able to read between the lines and see how
these opposing forces can and do interact in harmony. A person should strive to
be like a Merkaba, that is to say, he should realize all the different
qualities, talents and inclinations he has (his angels). They may seem to
contradict, but when one directs his life to a higher goal such as doing God's
will (the man on the chair driving the chariot) he will see how they all can
work together and even complement each other. Ultimately, we should strive to
realize how all of the forces in the world, though they may seem to conflict,
can unite when one knows how to use them all to fulfill a higher purpose;
namely to serve God. Maaseh Merkabah. "Maaseh Merkabah" ("Working of the
Chariot") is the modern name given to a "hechalot" text, discovered by scholar
Gershom Scholem. "Works of the Chariot" dates from late Hellenistic period,
after the end of the Second Temple period following the destruction of the
Second Temple in 70 CE when the physical cult ceased to function. The idea of
making a journey to the heavenly "hekhal" seems to be a kind of
spiritualization of the pilgrimages to the earthly "hekhal" that were now no
longer possible. It is a form of pre-Kabbalah Jewish mysticism that teaches
both of the possibility of making a sublime journey to God and of the ability
of man to draw down divine powers to earth; it seems to have been an esoteric
movement that grew out of the priestly mysticism already evident in the Dead
Sea Scrolls and some apocalyptic writings (see the studies by Rachel Elior).
Several movements in Jewish mysticism and, later, students of the Kabbalah have
focused on these passages from Ezekiel, seeking underlying meaning and the
secrets of Creation in what they argued was the metaphoric language of the
verses. Due to the concern of some Torah scholars that misunderstanding these
passages as literal descriptions of God's image might lead to blasphemy or
idolatry, there was great opposition to studying this topic without the proper
initiation. Jewish biblical commentaries emphasize that the imagery of the
merkaba is not meant to be taken literally; rather the chariot and its
accompanying angels are analogies for the various ways that God reveals himself
in this world. Hasidic philosophy and kabbalah discuss at length what each
aspect of this vision represents in this world, and how the vision does not
imply that God is made up of these forms. Jews customarily read the Biblical
passages concerning the merkaba in their synagogues every year on the holiday
of Shavuot, and the merkabah is also referenced in several places in
traditional Jewish liturgy. Hekhalot literature. The main interests of Hekhalot
literature are accounts of mystical ascents into heaven, divine visions, and
the summoning and control of angels, usually for the purpose of gaining insight
into Torah. The "locus classicus" for these practices is the biblical accounts
of the Chariot vision of Ezekiel and the Temple vision of Isaiah (Chap. 6). It
is from these, and from the many extra-canonical apocalyptic writings of
heavenly visitations, that hekhalot literature emerges. Still, it is
distinctive from both Qumran literature and apocalyptic writings for several
reasons, chief among them being that hekhalot literature is not at all
interested in eschatology, largely ignores the unique status of the priesthood,
has little interest in fallen angels or demonology, and it "democratizes" the
possibility of divine ascent. In their visions, these mystics would enter into
the celestial realms and journey through the seven stages of mystical ascent:
the Seven Heavens and seven throne rooms. Such a journey is fraught with great
danger, and the adept must not only have made elaborate purification
preparation, but must also know the proper incantations, seals and angelic
names needed to get past the fierce angelic guards, as well as know how to
navigate the various forces at work inside and outside the palaces. At times,
heavenly interlocutors will reveal divine secrets. In some texts, the
mystic‚Äôs interest extends to the heavenly music and liturgy, usually
connected with the angelic adorations mentioned in Isiah 6:3. The mantra-like
repetitive nature of the liturgies recorded in many of these compositions seems
meant to encourage further ascent. The ultimate goal of the ascent varies from
text to text. In some cases, it seems to be a visionary glimpse of God, to
"Behold the King in His Beauty." Others hint at "enthronement," that the adept
be accepted among the angelic retinue of God and be given an honored (god-
like?) seat. One text actually envisions the successful pilgrim getting to sit
in God's "lap." Scholars such as Peter Schaefer and Elliot Wolfson see an
erotic theology implied in this kind of image, though it must be said sexual
motifs, while present in highly attenuated forms, are few and far between if
one surveys the full scope of the literature. Literary works related to the
Hekhalot tradition that have survived in whole or in part include "Hekhalot
Rabbati" (or "Pirkei Hekhalot"), "Hekhalot Zutarti", 3rd Enoch (also known as
"Hebrew Enoch"), and "Maaseh Merkabah." In addition there are many smaller and
fragmentary manuscripts that seem to belong to this genre, but their exact
relationship to Maaseh Merkabah mysticism and to each other is often not clear
(Dennis, 2007, 199-120). Key texts. The ascent texts are extant in four
principal works, all redacted well after the third but certainly before the
ninth century CE. They are: 1) "Hekhalot Zutartey" ("The Lesser Palaces"),
which details an ascent of Rabbi Akiva; 2) "Hekhalot Rabbati" ("The Greater
Palaces"), which details an ascent of Rabbi Ishmael; 3) "Ma'aseh Merkabah"
("Account of the Chariot"), a collection of hymns recited by the "descenders"
and heard during their ascent; and 4) "Sepher Hekhalot" ("Book of Palaces,"
also known as "3 Enoch"), which recounts an ascent and divine transformation of
the biblical figure Enoch into the archangel Metatron, as related by Rabbi
Ishmael. A fifth work provides a detailed description of the Creator as seen by
the "descenders" at the climax of their ascent. This work, preserved in various
forms, is called "Shi'ur Qomah" ("Measurement of the Body"), and is rooted in a
mystical exegesis of the Song of Songs, a book reputedly venerated by Rabbi
Akiva. The literal message of the work was repulsive to those who maintained
God's incorporeality; Maimonides (d. 1204) wrote that the book should be erased
and all mention of its existence deleted. While throughout the era of merkabah
mysticism the problem of creation was not of paramount importance, the treatise
"Sefer Yetzirah" ("Book of Creation") represents an attempted cosmogony from
within a merkabah milieu. This text was probably composed during the seventh
century, and evidence suggests Neoplatonic, Pythagoric, and Stoic influences.
It features a linguistic theory of creation in which God creates the universe
by combining the 22 letters of the Hebrew alphabet, along with emanations
represented by the ten numerals, or sefirot. Heikhalot literature and "Four
Entered Pardes". Moshe Idel, Gershom Scholem, Joseph Dan, and others have
raised the natural question concerning the relationship between the "chambers"
portion of the Heichalot literature and the Bavli's treatment of "The Work of
the Chariot" in the presentation and analysis of such in the Gemara to tractate
Hagigah of the Mishna. This portion of the Babylonian Talmud, which includes
the famous "four entered pardes" material, runs from 12b-iv (wherein the
Gemara's treatment of the "Work of Creation" flows into and becomes its
treatment of "The Work of the Chariot") to and into 16a-i. references are to
the Art Scroll pagination. By making use of the Rabbinically paradigmatic
figures of Rabbi Akiva and Rabbi Ishmael in their writings, the generators of
the Heikhalot literature, quite arguably, seem to be attempting to show some
sort of connection between their writings and the Chariot/Throne study and
practice of the Rabbinic Movement in the decades immediately following upon the
destruction of the Temple. However, in both the Jerusalem Talmud and the
Babylonian Talmud the major players in this Chariot/Throne endeavor are,
clearly, Rabbi Akiva and Elisha ben Abuyah who is referred to as "Akher."
Neither Talmud presents Rabbi Ishmael as a player in Merkabah study and
practice. In the long study on these matters contained in " 'The Written' as
the Vocation of Conceiving Jewishly" J W; 2006 the hypothesis is offered and
defended that "Rabbi Ishmael ben Elisha" (more often, simply "Rabbi Ishmael")
is in fact a Rabbinically sanctioned cognomen for Elisha ben Abuyah who, as is
well known, apostatized from the Rabbinic Movement. The argument is that
through this indirection Rabbinic offialdom was able to integrate into the
Gemaric give and take of argumentation and analysis the huge body of halakhic
and hermeneutical teachings of this great Torah scholar without, however,
honoring his equally significant apostasy. To be sure, in the accounting of
this figure's mystical study and practice the pejorative (in context) "Akher"
is used instead of "Rabbi Ishmael." This is because Elisha ben Abuyah's
teachings under the heading of "The Work of the Chariot" came to be considered
heretical in contrast to his halakhic and hermeneutical teachings which were
generally admired‚Äîand whose weighty influence, in any case, could not be
ignored. All of this indicates that the generators of the Heikhalot literature
were indeed savvy in choosing "Rabbi Ishmael" as paradigmatic in their own
writings as a means of relating their own endeavors to the mystical study and
practices of the tannaim in the early decades following upon the destruction of
the Temple. Both Akiva and the "Ishmaelic Akher" traded upon the "two-thrones"/
"two-powers"-in-Heaven motif in their respective Merkabah-oriented
undertakings. Akiva's version is memorialized in the Bavli Gemara to tractate
Hagigah at 14a-ii wherein Akiva puts forth the pairing of Hashem and "David" in
a messianic version of that mystical motif. Immediately after this Akivian
"solution" to the puzzle of thrones referred to in Song of Songs and the two
thrones spoken of in Daniel, Chapter Seven, the text presents Akiva as being
pressured‚Äîand then acquiescing to‚Äîa domesticated version of this twoness
theme for the single Jewish God which would be acceptable to Rabbinic
officialdom. The text offers Justice and Charity [tsadaqqa as the middot of God
which are enthroned in Heaven. 14a-ii Akher's non-Messianic and Metatron-
oriented version of this "two-thrones"/"two-powers"-in-Heaven motif is
discussed at length in the entry "Paradigmatia" of the above-mentioned study.
The generic point in all of this is that by the time of the final editing of
the Mishna this whole motif (along with other dimensions of Merkabah-oriented
study and practice) came to be severely discouraged by Rabbinic officialdom.
Those who still pursued these kinds of things were marginalized by the Rabbinic
Movement over the next several centuries becoming, in effect, a separate
grouping responsible for the Heikhalot literature. In the "four-entered-pardes"
section of this portion of the Bavli Gemara on tractate Hagigah, it is the
figure of Akiva who seems to be lionized. For of the four he is the only one
presented who ascended and descended "whole." The other three were broken, one
way or another: Ben Azzai dies soon after; Ben Zoma is presented as going
insane; and worst of all, "Akher" apostatizes. This putative lionization of
Rabbi Akiva occurs at 15b-vi-16a-i of our Gemara section Christianity.
According to Timo Eskola, early Christian theology and discourse was influenced
by the Jewish Merkabah tradition. Similarly, Alan Segal and Daniel Boyarin
regard Paul's accounts of his conversion experience and his ascent to the
heavens as the earliest first person accounts we have of a Merkabah mystic in
Jewish or Christian literature. Conversely, Timothy Churchill has argued that
Paul's Damascus road encounter does not fit the pattern of Merkabah. In
Christianity, the man, lion, ox, and eagle are used as symbols for the four
evangelists (or gospel-writers), and appear frequently in church decorations.
These Creatures are called Zo√´ (or the Tetramorph), and surround the throne of
God in Heaven, along with twenty-four elders and seven spirits of God
(according to Revelation 4:1-11).
