Methodism Methodism (from - "methodos", "pursuit of knowledge") is a movement
of Protestant Christianity represented by a number of denominations and
organizations, claiming a total of approximately seventy million adherents
worldwide. The movement traces its roots to John Wesley's evangelistic revival
movement within Anglicanism. His younger brother Charles was instrumental in
writing much of the hymnody of the Methodist Church. George Whitefield, another
significant leader in the movement, was known for his unorthodox ministry of
itinerant open-air preaching. The Methodist Church is known for its missionary
work, and its establishment of hospitals, universities, orphanages, soup
kitchens, and schools to follow Jesus' command to spread the Good News and
serve all people. Wesley, along with his brother, founded the Holy Club while
they were at Oxford, where John was a fellow and later a lecturer at Lincoln
College. The holy club met weekly and they systematically set about living a
holy life. They were branded as "Methodist" by students at Oxford who derided
the methodical way they ordered their lives. Wesley took the attempted mockery
and turned it into a title of honour. Initially Whitefield and the Wesleys
merely sought reform, by way of a return to the gospel, within the Church of
England, but the movement spread with revival and soon a significant number of
Anglican clergy became known as Methodists in the mid-18th century. The
movement did not form a separate denomination in England until after John
Wesley's death in 1791. Although Wesley and the majority of his followers were
decidedly Arminian in their theological outlook, George Whitefield, Howell
Harris, and Selina Hastings, Countess of Huntingdon were notable for being
Calvinistic Methodists, and the Presbyterian Church of Wales originated from
the preaching of Harris and Whitfield. The influence of Whitefield and Lady
Huntingdon on the Church of England was a factor in the founding of the Free
Church of England in 1844. Through vigorous missionary activity Methodism
spread throughout the British Empire and, mostly through Whitefield's preaching
during what historians call the First Great Awakening, colonial America. After
Whitefield's death in 1770, however, American Methodism entered a more lasting
Wesleyan and Arminian phase of development. Early Methodists were drawn from
all levels of society, including the aristocracy, but the Methodist preachers
took the message to labourers and criminals who tended to be left outside
organized religion at that time. Wesley himself thought it wrong to preach
outside a church building until persuaded otherwise by Whitefield. Doctrinally,
the branches of Methodism following the Wesleys are Arminian, while those
following Harris and Whitefield are Calvinistic. Wesley maintained the Arminian
doctrines that were dominant in the 18th-century Church of England, while
Whitefield adopted Calvinism through his contacts with Calvinists in Scotland
and New England. This caused serious strains on the relationship between
Whitefield and Wesley, with Wesley becoming quite hostile toward Whitefield in
what had been previously very close relations. Whitefield consistently begged
Wesley not to let these differences sever their friendship and, in time their
friendship was restored, though this was seen by many of Whitefield's followers
to be a doctrinal compromise. As a final testimony of their friendship, John
Wesley's sermon on Whitefield's death is full of praise and affection.
Methodism has a wide variety of forms of worship, ranging from high church to
low church in liturgical usage. Both Whitefield and the Wesleys themselves
greatly valued the Anglican liturgy and tradition, and the Methodist worship in
"The Book of Offices" was based on the 1662 Book of Common Prayer. History.
Wesleyan revival. The Methodist revival originated in Epworth, North
Lincolnshire, England. It began with a group of men, including John Wesley and
his younger brother Charles, as a movement within the Church of England in the
18th century. The movement focused on Bible study and a methodical approach to
scriptures and Christian living. The name "methodist" was a pejorative name
given to a small society of students at Oxford who met together between 1729
and 1735 for the purpose of mutual improvement, given because of their
methodistic habits. They were accustomed to receiving communion every week,
fasting regularly, and abstaining from most forms of amusement and luxury. They
also frequently visited the sick and the poor, as well as prisoners. The early
Methodists acted against perceived apathy in the Church of England, preaching
in the open air and establishing Methodist societies wherever they went. These
societies were divided into groups called "classes" — intimate meetings where
individuals were encouraged to confess their sins to one another and to build
each other up. They also took part in love feasts which allowed for the sharing
of testimony, a key feature of early Methodists. George Whitefield, another
significant leader in the movement, and one of the Wesley brothers' fellow
students at Oxford, became well known for his unorthodox ministry of itinerant
open-air preaching. Methodist preachers were notorious for their enthusiastic
sermons and often accused of fanaticism. In those days, many members of
England's established church feared that new doctrines promulgated by the
Methodists, such as the necessity of a new birth for salvation, of
justification by faith, and of the constant and sustained action of the Holy
Spirit upon the believer's soul, would produce ill effects upon weak minds.
Theophilus Evans, an early critic of the movement, even wrote that it was "the
natural Tendency of their Behaviour, in Voice and Gesture and horrid
Expressions, to make People mad." In one of his prints, William Hogarth
likewise attacked Methodists as "enthusiasts" full of ""Credulity, Superstition
and Fanaticism"." But the Methodists resisted the many attacks against their
movement. John Wesley came under the influence of the Moravians, and of the
Dutch theologian Jacobus Arminius, while George Whitefield adopted Calvinistic
views. Consequently, their followers separated, those of Whitefield becoming
Calvinistic Methodists. Wesleyan Methodists have followed Arminian theology.
Missions to America. In 1766, Reverend Laurence Coughlan arrived in
Newfoundland and opened a school at Black Head in Conception Bay. In the late
1760s, two Methodist lay preachers emigrated to America and formed societies.
Philip Embury began the work in New York at the instigation of fellow Irish
Methodist Barbara Heck. Soon, Captain Webb from the British Army aided him. He
formed a society in Philadelphia and traveled along the coast. In 1770, two
authorized Methodist preachers, Richard Boardman and Joseph Pilmoor, arrived
from the British Connexion. They were immediately preceded by the unauthorized
Robert Williams who quietly set about supporting himself by publishing American
editions of Wesley's hymnbooks without obtaining permission to do so. These men
were soon followed by others, including Francis Asbury. Asbury reorganized the
mid-Atlantic work in accordance with the Wesleyan model. Internal conflict
characterized this period. Missionaries displaced most of the local preachers
and irritated many of the leading lay members. During the American Revolution,
"the mid-Atlantic work" (as Wesley called it) diminished, and, by 1778, the
work was reduced to one circuit. Asbury refused to leave. He remained in
Delaware during this period. Robert Strawbridge began a Methodist work in
Maryland at the same time as Embury began his work in New York. They did not
work together and did not know of each other's existence. Strawbridge ordained
himself and organized a circuit. He trained many very influential assistants
who became some of the first leaders of American Methodism. His work grew
rapidly both in numbers and in geographical spread. The British missionaries
discovered Strawbridge's work and annexed it into the American connection.
However, the native preachers continued to work side-by-side with the
missionaries, and they continued to recruit and dispatch more native preachers.
Southern Methodism was not dependent on missionaries in the same way as mid-
Atlantic Methodism. Up until this time, with the exception of Strawbridge, none
of the missionaries or American preachers was ordained. Consequently, the
Methodist people received the sacraments at the hands of ministers from
established Anglican churches. Most of the Anglican priests were Loyalists who
fled to England, New York or Canada during the war. In the absence of Anglican
ordination, a group of native preachers ordained themselves. This caused a
split between the Asbury faction and the southern preachers. Asbury mediated
the crisis by convincing the southern preachers to wait for Wesley's response
to the sacramental crisis. That response came in 1784. At that time, Wesley
sent the Rev. Dr. Thomas Coke to America to form an independent American
Methodist church. The native circuit riders met in late December. Coke had
orders to ordain Asbury as a joint superintendent of the new church. However,
Asbury turned to the assembled conference and said he would not accept it
unless the preachers voted him into that office. This was done, and from that
moment forward, the general superintendents received their authority from the
conference. Later, Coke convinced the general conference that he and Asbury
were bishops and added the title to the discipline. It caused a great deal of
controversy. Wesley did not approve of 'bishops' who had not been ordained by
bishops. By the 1792 general conference of the Methodist Episcopal Church, the
controversy relating to episcopal power boiled over. Ultimately, the delegates
sided with Bishop Asbury. However, the Republican Methodists split off from the
Methodist Episcopal Church (MEC) in 1792. Also, William Hammet (a missionary
ordained by Wesley who traveled to America from Antigua with Bishop Coke), led
a successful revolt against the MEC in 1791. He opposed Bishop Asbury and the
episcopacy. He formed his people into the American Primitive Methodist Church
(not directly connected with the British Primitive Methodist Church). Both
American churches operated in the Southeast and presaged the episcopal debates
of later reformers. Regardless, Asbury remained the leading bishop of early
American Methodism and did not share his "appointing" authority until Bishop
McKendree was elected in 1808. Coke had problems with the American preachers.
His authoritarian style alienated many. Soon, he became a missionary bishop of
sorts and never had much influence in America. Beliefs. Most Methodists
identify with the Arminian conception of free will, through God's prevenient
grace, as opposed to the theological determinism of absolute predestination.
This distinguishes Methodism from the Calvinist tradition prevalent in Reformed
churches. In strongly Reformed areas such as Wales, however, Calvinistic
Methodists remain, also called the Presbyterian Church of Wales. The Calvinist
Countess of Huntingdon's Connexion was also strongly associated with the
Methodist revival. John Wesley is studied by Methodist ministerial students and
trainee local preachers for his interpretation of Church practice and doctrine.
One popular expression of Methodist doctrine is in the hymns of Charles Wesley.
Since enthusiastic singing was a part of the early Evangelical movement,
Wesleyan theology took root and spread through this channel. Methodism affirms
the traditional Christian belief in the triune Godhead: Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit, as well as the orthodox understanding of the consubstantial humanity
and divinity of Jesus. Most Methodists also affirm the Apostles' Creed and the
Nicene Creed. In devotional terms, these confessions are said to embrace the
biblical witness to God's activity in creation, encompass God's gracious self-
involvement in the dramas of history, and anticipate the consummation of God's
reign. Sacramental theology within Methodism tends to follow the historical
interpretations and liturgies of Anglicanism. This stems from the origin of
much Methodist theology and practice within the teachings of John and Charles
Wesley, both of whom were priests of the Church of England. As affirmed by the
Articles of Religion, Methodists recognize two Sacraments as being ordained of
Christ: Baptism and Holy Communion. Methodism also affirms that there are many
other Means of Grace which often function in a sacramental manner, but most
Methodists do not recognize them as being Dominical sacraments. Methodists,
stemming from John Wesley's own practices of theological reflection, make use
of tradition, drawing primarily from the teachings of the Church fathers, as a
source of authority. Though not infallible like holy Scripture, tradition may
serve as a lens through which Scripture is interpreted (see also "Prima
scriptura" and the Wesleyan Quadrilateral). Theological discourse for
Methodists almost always makes use of Scripture read inside the great
theological tradition of Christendom. It is a historical position of the church
that any disciplined theological work calls for the careful use of reason. By
reason, it is said, one reads and is able to interpret Scripture coherently and
consistently. By reason one determines whether one's Christian witness is
clear. By reason one asks questions of faith and seeks to understand God's
action and will. Methodism insists that personal salvation always implies
Christian mission and service to the world. Scriptural holiness entails more
than personal piety; love of God is always linked with love of neighbours and a
passion for justice and renewal in the life of the world. Ecumenical relations
with other branches of Christianity. In October 1999, an executive committee of
the World Methodist Council resolved to explore the possibility of its Member
Churches becoming associated with the doctrinal agreement which had been
reached by the Catholic Church and Lutheran World Federation (LWF). In May
2006, the International Methodist-Catholic Dialogue Commission completed its
most recent report, entitled "The Grace Given You in Christ: Catholics and
Methodists Reflect Further on the Church," and submitted the text to Methodist
and Catholic authorities. In July of the same year, in Seoul, South Korea, the
Member Churches of the World Methodist Council (WMC) voted to approve and sign
a "Methodist Statement of Association" with the Joint Declaration on the
Doctrine of Justification (JDDJ), the agreement which was reached and
officially accepted in 1999 by the Catholic Church and the Lutheran World
Federation and which proclaimed that "Together we confess: By grace alone, in
faith in Christ’s saving work and not because of any merit on our part, we
are accepted by God and receive the Holy Spirit, who renews our hearts while
equipping and calling us to good works... as sinners our new life is solely due
to the forgiving and renewing mercy that God imparts as a gift and we receive
in faith, and never can merit in any way," affirming "fundamental doctrinal
agreement" concerning justification between the Catholic Church, the LWF, and
the World Methodist Council. This is not to say there is perfect agreement
between the three denominational traditions; while Catholics and Methodists
believe that salvation involves cooperation between God and man, Lutherans
believe that God brings about the salvation of individuals without any
cooperation on their part. Commenting on the ongoing dialogues with Catholic
Church leaders, Rev. Ken Howcroft, Methodist minister and the Ecumenical
Officer for the Methodist Church of Great Britain, noted that "these
conversations have been immensely fruitful." Methodists are increasingly
recognizing that the 15 centuries prior to the Reformation constitute a shared
history with Catholics, and are gaining new appreciation for neglected aspects
of the Catholic tradition. There are, however, important unresolved doctrinal
differences separating Roman Catholicism and Methodism, which include "the
nature and validity of the ministry of those who preside at the Eucharist, the
precise meaning of the Eucharist as the sacramental ‘memorial’ of
Christ’s saving death and resurrection, the particular way in which Christ is
present in Holy Communion, and the link between eucharistic communion and
ecclesial communion. In the 1960s, the Methodist Church of Great Britain made
ecumenical overtures to the Church of England, aimed at denominational union.
Formally, these failed when they were rejected by the Church of England's
General Synod in 1972; conversations and co-operation continued, however,
leading in 2003 to the signing of a covenant between the two churches. From the
1970s onward, the Methodist Church also started several Local Ecumenical
Projects (LEPs, later renamed Local Ecumenical Partnerships) with local
neighbouring denominations, which involved sharing churches, schools and in
some cases ministers. In many towns and villages there are United Churches
which are sometimes with Anglican or Baptist churches, but most commonly are
Methodist and URC, simply because in terms of belief, practice and
churchmanship, many Methodists see themselves as closer to the United Reformed
Church than to other denominations such as the Church of England. In the 1990s
and early 21st century, the British Methodist Church was involved in the
Scottish Church Initiative for Union, seeking greater unity with the
established and Presbyterian Church of Scotland, the Scottish Episcopal Church
and the United Reformed Church in Scotland. Methodist Churches in the United
States have also strengthened ties with other denominations. In April 2005,
bishops in the United Methodist Church approved "A Proposal for Interim
Eucharistic Sharing." This document was the first step toward full communion
with the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America (ELCA). The ELCA approved this
same document in August 2005. At the 2008 General Conference, the United
Methodist Church approved full communion with the Evangelical Lutheran Church
in America. The UMC is also in dialogue with the Episcopal Church for full
communion by 2012. The two denominations are working on a document called
"Confessing Our Faith Together." Great Britain. The original body founded as a
result of Wesley's work was later known as the Wesleyan Methodist Church.
Schisms within the original (Wesleyan) Methodist church, and independent
revivals, led to the formation of a number of separate denominations calling
themselves Methodist. The largest of these were the Primitive Methodist church,
deriving from a revival at Mow Cop in Staffordshire, the Bible Christians and
the Methodist New Connexion. The original church became known as the Wesleyan
Methodist Church to distinguish it from these bodies. In 1907, a union of
smaller groups with the Methodist New Connexion and Bible Christian Church
brought about the British "United Methodist Church", then the three major
streams of British Methodism united in 1932 to form the current Methodist
Church of Great Britain. The Wesleyan Reform Union and the Independent
Methodist Connexion still remain separate. The Primitive Methodist Church had
branches in the USA which still continue. Traditionally, Methodism was
particularly prominent in Cornwall and (in its Calvinistic form)in Wales, both
regions noted for their non-conformism and distrust of the Church of England.
It was also very strong in the old mill towns of Yorkshire and Lancashire,
where the Methodists stressed that the working classes were equal to the upper
classes in the eyes of God. British Methodism does not have bishops; however,
it has always been characterized by a strong central organization, the
Connexion, which holds an annual Conference (note that the Church retains the
18th century spelling "connexion" for many purposes). The Connexion is divided
into Districts in the charge of a Chairman (who may be male or female).
Methodist districts often correspond approximately, in geographical terms, to
counties – as do Church of England dioceses. The districts are divided into
circuits governed by the Circuit Meeting and led and administrated principally
by a superintendent minister. Ministers are appointed to Circuits rather than
to individual churches (though some large inner-city churches, known as Central
Halls, are designated as circuits in themselves – Westminster Central Hall,
opposite Westminster Abbey in central London is the best known). Most circuits
have fewer ministers than churches, and the majority of services are led by lay
local preachers, or by supernumerary ministers (ministers who have retired,
called supernumerary because they are not counted for official purposes in the
numbers of ministers for the circuit in which they are listed). The
superintendent and other ministers are assisted in the leadership and
administration of the Circuit by lay Circuit Stewards, who collectively with
the ministers form what is normally known as the Circuit Leadership Team. The
Methodist Council also helps to run a number of schools, including two leading
Public Schools in East Anglia: Culford School and The Leys. It helps to promote
an all round education with a strong Christian ethos. United States. The First
Great Awakening was a religious movement among colonials in the 1730s and
1740s. The English Calvinist Methodist preacher George Whitefield played a
major role, traveling across the colonies and preaching in a dramatic and
emotional style, accepting everyone as his audience. The new style of sermons
and the way people practiced their faith breathed new life into religion in
America. People became passionately and emotionally involved in their religion,
rather than passively listening to intellectual discourse in a detached manner.
People began to study the Bible at home, which effectively decentralized the
means of informing the public on religious matters and was akin to the
individualistic trends present in Europe during the Protestant Reformation. The
first American Methodist bishops were Thomas Coke and Francis Asbury, whose
boyhood home, "Bishop Asbury Cottage", in West Bromwich, England, is now a
museum. Upon the formation of the Methodist Episcopal Church in America at the
Baltimore Christmas Conference in 1784, Coke (already ordained in the Church of
England) ordained Asbury a deacon, elder, and bishop each on three successive
days. Circuit riders, many of whom were laymen, traveled by horseback to preach
the gospel and establish churches until there was scarcely any crossroad
community in America without a Methodist expression of Christianity. One of the
most famous circuit riders was Robert Strawbridge who lived in the vicinity of
Carroll County, Maryland soon after arriving in the Colonies around 1760. The
Second Great Awakening was a nationwide wave of revivals, from 1790 to 1840. In
New England, the renewed interest in religion inspired a wave of social
activism among Yankees; Methodism grew rapidly and established several
colleges, notably Boston University. In the "burned over district" of western
New York, the spirit of revival burned brightly. Methodism saw the emergence of
a Holiness movement. In the west, especially at Cane Ridge, Kentucky and in
Tennessee, the revival strengthened the Methodists and the Baptists. Disputes
over slavery placed the church in difficulty in the first half of the 19th
century, with the northern church leaders fearful of a split with the South,
and reluctant to take a stand. The Wesleyan Methodist Connexion (later became
The Wesleyan Church) and the Free Methodist Churches were formed by staunch
abolitionists, and the Free Methodists were especially active in the
Underground Railroad, which helped to free the slaves. Finally, in a much
larger split, in 1845 at Louisville, the churches of the slaveholding states
left the Methodist Episcopal Church and formed The Methodist Episcopal Church,
South. The northern and southern branches were reunited in 1939, when slavery
was no longer an issue. In this merger also joined the Methodist Protestant
Church. Some southerners, conservative in theology, and strongly
segregationist, opposed the merger, and formed the Southern Methodist Church in
1940. The Third Great Awakening from 1858 to 1908 saw enormous growth in
Methodist membership, and a proliferation of institutions such as colleges
(e.g., Morningside College). Methodists were often involved in the "Missionary
Awakening" and the Social Gospel Movement. The awakening in so many cities in
1858 started the movement, but in the North it was interrupted by the Civil
War. In the South, on the other hand, the Civil War stimulated revivals,
especially in Lee's army. In 1914–1917 many Methodist ministers made strong
pleas for world peace. To meet their demands, President Woodrow Wilson (a
Presbyterian), promised "a war to end all wars." In the 1930s many Methodists
favored isolationist policies. Thus in 1936, Methodist Bishop James Baker, of
the San Francisco Conference, released a poll of ministers showing 56% opposed
warfare. However, the Methodist Federation did call for a boycott of Japan,
which had invaded China and was disrupting missionary activity there. In
Chicago, sixty-two local African Methodist Episcopal churches voted their
support for the Roosevelt administration's policy, while opposing any plan to
send American troops overseas to fight. When war came in 1941, the vast
majority of Methodists strongly supported the national war effort, but there
were also a few (673) conscientious objectors. The United Methodist Church was
formed in 1968 as a result of a merger between the Evangelical United Brethren
(EUB) and the Methodist Church. The former church had resulted from mergers of
several groups of German Methodist heritage. There was no longer any need or
desire to worship in the German language. The merged church had approximately 9
million members as of the late 1990s. While United Methodist Church in America
membership has been declining, associated groups in developing countries are
growing rapidly. American Methodist churches are generally organized on a
"connectional" model, related but not identical to that used in Britain.
Pastors are assigned to congregations by bishops, distinguishing it from
presbyterian government. Methodist denominations typically give lay members
representation at regional and national meetings (conferences) at which the
business of the church is conducted, making it different from most episcopal
government (The Episcopal Church USA, however, has a representational polity
giving lay members, priests, and bishops voting privileges). This connectional
organizational model differs further from the congregational model, for example
of Baptist, and Congregationalist Churches, among others. In addition to the
United Methodist Church, there are over 40 other denominations that descend
from John Wesley's Methodist movement. Some, such as the African Methodist
Episcopal Church, the AME Zion Church, the Free Methodist Church, the Wesleyan
Church (formerly Wesleyan Methodist Connection), the Congregational Methodist
Church and First Congregational Methodist Church are explicitly Methodist. The
Primitive Methodist Church is a continuing branch of the former British
Primitive Methodist Church. Others do not call themselves Methodist, but are
related to varying degrees. The Evangelical Church was formed by a group of EUB
congregations who dissented from the merger which formed the United Methodist
Church. The United Methodist Church has also taken steps to strengthen ties
with its fellow Methodist churches, as well as other Protestant denominations
in the United States. Since 1985, the UMC has been exploring a possible merger
with three historically African-American Methodist denominations: the African
Methodist Episcopal Church, the African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church, and
the Christian Methodist Episcopal Church. A "Commission on Pan Methodist
Cooperation and Union" formed in 2000 to carry out work on such a merger. The
holiness revival was primarily among people of Methodist persuasion , who felt
that the church had once again become apathetic, losing the Wesleyan zeal. Some
important events of this revival were the writings of Phoebe Palmer during the
mid-19th century, the establishment of the first of many holiness camp meetings
at Vineland, New Jersey in 1867, and the founding of Asbury College (1890), and
other similar institutions in the US around the turn of the 20th century. From
its beginning in England, Methodism laid emphasis on social service and
education. Numerous originally Methodist institutions of higher education were
founded in the United States in the early half of the 19th century, and today
altogether there are about twenty universities and colleges named as
"Methodist" or "Wesleyan" still in existence. Additionally, the Methodist
Church has created a number of Wesley Foundation establishments on college
campuses. These ministries are created to reach out to students, and often
provide student housing to a few students in exchange for service to the
ministry. United Methodist elders and pastors may marry and have families. They
are placed in congregations by their bishop. Elders and pastors can either ask
for a new appointment or their church can request that they be re-appointed
elsewhere. If the elder is a full-time pastor, the church is required to
provide either a house or a housing allowance for the pastor. Whereas most
American Methodist worship is modeled after the Anglican Communion's Book of
Common Prayer, a unique feature was the once practiced observance of the season
of Kingdomtide, which encompasses the last thirteen weeks before Advent, thus
dividing the long season after Pentecost into two discrete segments. During
Kingdomtide, Methodist liturgy emphasizes charitable work and alleviating the
suffering of the poor. This practice was last seen in "The book of Worship for
Church and Home" by The United Methodist Church, 1965, and "The Book of Hymns",
1966. While some congregations and their pastors might still follow this old
calendar, the Revised Common Lectionary, with its naming and numbering of Days
in the Calendar of the Church Year, is used widely. However, congregations who
strongly identify with their African American roots and tradition would not
usually follow the Revised Common Lectionary. Adding more complexity to the
mix, there are United Methodist congregations who orient their worship to the
"free" church tradition, so particular liturgies are not observed. "The United
Methodist Book of Worship" and "The Hymns of the United Methodist Church" are
voluntarily followed in varying degrees. Such churches employ the liturgy and
rituals therein as optional resources, but their use is not mandatory. Social
principles and participation in movements. From the movement’s beginnings,
with its roots in Wesleyan theology, Methodism has distinguished itself as a
religious movement strongly tied to social issues. As father of the movement,
John Wesley injected much of his own social philosophy into the movement as a
whole. Wesley’s personal social philosophy was characterized by “an
instructive reluctance to criticize existing institutions was overborne by
indignation at certain abuses which cried out for rectification.” The
Methodist Church’s responses to injustices in society are embodiments of the
Wesleyan traditions of mercy and justice. At the end of the 19th- and beginning
of the 20th-centuries, the Methodist Church responded strongly to what it
regarded as social ills (i.e. gambling, use of intoxicating beverages, etc.)
with attention to the Methodist doctrines of sanctification and perfection
through Christ. In the United States, today’s United Methodist Church
continues to embody Methodist traditions in their response to social needs
through the General Board of Church and Society and the General Board of Global
Ministries. In the United States, the United Methodist Church is the second-
largest sponsor of Boy Scout units, with 11078 chartered units, representing
over 370,000 youth members; by way of contrast, the Mormon Church, which
sponsors a total of 37,882 units - over three times as many - can boast a total
youth membership of slightly over 420,000, only a 13.5% increase over the UMC's
total. Attitudes toward slavery. Like most other national organizations, the
Methodist Church experienced tensions and rifts over the slavery dispute. Both
sides of the argument used the doctrines of the movement and scriptural
evidence to support their case. The initial statement of the Methodist position
on slavery was delivered in the Conference minutes from 1780’s annual
conference. After a comprehensive statement of the varied reasons slavery goes
against “the laws of God, man, and nature,” the Conference answered in the
affirmative to the question, “do we pass our disapprobation on all our
friends who keep slaves and advise their freedom?” This position was put into
action in 1783. Preachers from the Baltimore Conference were required, under
threat of suspension, to free their slaves. By 1784, similar requirements were
made of Methodists as a whole, laity and clergy alike. The negative reaction to
this requirement was so strong that it had to be abandoned, but the rule was
kept in the Book of Discipline. As slavery disputes intensified in the 19th
century, there emerged two doctrines within the Methodist Church. Churches in
the South were primarily proslavery, while northern churches started
antislavery movements. The apologia of the Southern churches was largely based
in Old Testament scriptures, which often represent slavery as a part of the
natural order of things. New Testament writings were sometimes used to support
the case for slavery as well. Some of the writings of Paul, especially in
Ephesians, instruct slaves to remain obedient to their masters. Southern
ideology also argued that slavery was beneficial for slaves, as well as their
owners, saying that they were offered protections from many ills because of
their slavery. The antislavery movement in northern churches strengthened and
solidified in response to the pro-slavery apologia of Southern churches. Civil
War and Reconstruction. Many Northerners had only recently become religious
(thanks to the Second Great Awakening) and religion was a powerful force in
their lives. No denomination was more active in supporting the Union than the
Methodist Episcopal Church. Carwardine argues that for many Methodists, the
victory of Lincoln in 1860 heralded the arrival of the kingdom of God in
America. They were moved into action by a vision of freedom for slaves, freedom
from the terror unleashed on godly abolitionists, release from the Slave
Power's evil grip on the state, and a new direction for the Union. Methodists
formed a major element of the popular support for the Radical Republicans with
their hard line toward the white South. Dissident Methodists left the church.
The Methodist family magazine "Ladies' Repository" promoted Christian family
activism. Its articles provided moral uplift to women and children. It
portrayed the War as a great moral crusade against a decadent Southern
civilization corrupted by slavery. It recommended activities that family
members could perform in order to aid the Union cause. During Reconstruction
the Methodists took the lead in helping form Methodist churches for Freedmen,
and moving into Southern cities even to the point of taking control, with Army
help, of buildings that had belonged to the southern branch of the church. To
help the Freedmen the church set up the Freedmen’s Aid Society focused on
creating an educational system for former slaves. This organization, along with
the church’s Department of Education for Negroes of the Board of Education,
helped provide education to former slaves and their children. Within three
months of its organization, the Freedmen’s Aid Society had begun work in the
South. By the end of the first year, the society had more than fifty teachers.
Education of young people. The Methodist church has always been strongly
oriented towards the religious lives of the young. In 1848, the General
Conference stated, “when the Church has collected...a great population born
within bosom, she cannot fulfill her high mission unless she takes measure to
prevent this population from being withdrawn from under her care in the period
of its youth.” The first two American bishops of the Methodist Church, Thomas
Coke and Francis Asbury, opened a preparatory school in Abingdon, Maryland in
1787. The school was a strict environment, with seven hours a day devoted to
study. The venture ended when a fire destroyed the building in which the school
was housed. In the 1870s, there was a broad movement toward incorporating
Sunday schools into the doctrines of churches as a way to take ownership of the
Christian education of children. This was the first great interdenominational
movement the United States had ever seen. Methodists invested heavily in the
cause of Christian education because of their emphasis on the child’s right
to and ability to “respond to divine influences from the beginning.”
Beginning after World War II, the Methodist churches in the United States
continued developing, at a much greater pace, ministries on Universities,
Colleges, Junior Colleges and other higher education institutions, on campuses
of both church-owned and state schools throughout the United States and Canada,
and to a lesser degree in Australia, New Zealand and the United Kingdom.
Methodism boasts the largest number of higher education ministries, including
teaching positions, of any Protestant denomination in the world in close
competition with the Southern Baptist Convention. This emphasis is, in part, a
reflection of the Methodist movement's earliest roots in The Oxford Holy Club,
founded by John Wesley, his brother Charles, George Whitefield and others as a
response to what they saw as the pervasive permissiveness and debauchery of
Oxford University, and specifically Lincoln College when they attended. It is
from the Holy Club that the earliest Methodist societies were formed and
spread. Temperance movement. The temperance movement was the social concern
which most broadly captured the interest and enthusiasm of the Methodist
Church. The movement was strongly tied to John Wesley’s theology and social
principles. Wesley’s abhorrence of alcohol use was taken up by American
Methodists, many of whom were active and prominent leaders within the movement.
The temperance movement appealed strongly to the Methodist doctrines of
sanctification and Christian perfection. The Methodist presentation of
sanctification includes the understanding that justification before God comes
through faith. Therefore, those who believe are made new in Christ. The
believer’s response to this sanctification then is to uphold God’s word in
the world. A large part of this, especially in the late-19th century, was “to
be their brother’s keepers, or [...] their brother’s brothers.” Because
of this sense of duty toward the other members of the church, many Methodists
were personally temperate out of a hope that their restraint would give
strength to their brothers. The Methodist stance against drinking was strongly
stated in the Book of Discipline. Initially, the issue taken was limited to
distilled liquors, but quickly evolved into teetotalism and Methodists were
commonly known to abstain from all alcoholic beverages. In 1880, the general
conference included in the Discipline a broad statement which included,
“Temperance is a Christian virtue, Scripturally enjoined.” Due to the
temperate stance of the church, the practice of Eucharist was altered — to
this day, Methodist churches most commonly use grape juice symbolically during
Communion rather than wine. The Methodist church distinguished itself from many
other denominations in their beliefs about state control of alcohol. Where many
other denominations, including Roman Catholics, Protestant Episcopalians,
Lutherans, and Unitarians, believed that the ill-effects of liquor should be
controlled by self-discipline and individual restraint, Methodists believed
that it was the duty of the government to enforce restrictions on the use of
alcohol. In 1904, the Board of Temperance was created by the General Conference
to help push the Temperance agenda. The women of the Methodist Church were
strongly mobilized by the temperance movement. In 1879, a Methodist woman,
Frances E. Willard, was voted to the presidency of the Women’s Christian
Temperance Union, an organization which was characterized by heavy Methodist
participation. To this day, the Women’s Division of the General Board of
Global Missions holds property across on Capitol Hill in Washington, DC, which
was built using funds provided by laypeople. Women of the church were
responsible for 70% of the $650,000 it cost to construct the building in 1922.
The building was intended to serve as the Methodist Church’s social reform
presence of the Hill. The Board of Temperance, Prohibition and Public Morals
was especially prominent within the building. Other countries. An estimated 75
million people worldwide belong to the Methodist community, however the number
has gone into steady decline, especially in North America, where an increasing
number of people are leaving the old-line churches to join theologically
conservative denominations. Almost all Methodist churches are members of a
consultative body called the World Methodist Council, which is headquartered at
Lake Junaluska, North Carolina, in the United States. Caribbean. Methodism came
to the Caribbean in 1760 when the planter, lawyer and Speaker of the Antiguan
House of Assembly – Nathaniel Gilbert III (~1719–1774) returned to his
sugar estate home in Antigua. Antigua. The story is often told that in 1755,
Nathaniel Gilbert, while convalescing, read a treatise of John Wesley, ""An
Appeal to men of Reason and Religion"" sent to him by his brother Francis. As a
result of having read this book Gilbert, two years later, journeyed to England
with three of his slaves and there in at drawing room meeting arranged in
Wandsworth on 15 January 1759, met the preacher John Wesley. He returned to the
West Indies that same year and on his subsequent return began to preach to his
slaves in Antigua. When Nathaniel Gilbert died in 1774 his work in Antigua was
continued by his brother Francis Gilbert to approximately 200 Methodists.
However, within a year Francis took ill and had to return to England and the
work was carried on by Sophia Campbell (""a Negress"") and Mary Alley (""a
Mulatto""), two devoted women who kept the flock together with Class and Prayer
meetings as best as they could. On 2 April 1778, John Baxter , a local preacher
and skilled shipwright from Chatham in England, landed at "English" harbour in
Antigua (now called Nelson's Dockyard) where he was offered a post at the naval
dockyard. Baxter was a Methodist and had heard of the work of the Gilberts and
their need for a new preacher. He began preaching and meeting with the
Methodists leaders, and within a year the Methodist community had grown to 600
persons. By 1783 the first Methodist Chapel was built in Antigua, with John
Baxter as the local preacher, where its wooden structure now seated some 2,000
people. St. Barts. It was at this time, in 1785, that William Turton
(1761–1817) a Barbadian son of a planter, met John Baxter in Antigua, and
later as layman assisted in the Methodist work in the Swedish colony of St.
Bartholomew from 1796. In 1786 the missionary endeavour in the Caribbean was
officially recognised by the Conference in England, and that same year Rev. Dr.
Thomas Coke, having been made Superintendent of the Church two years previously
in America by Wesley, was travelling to Nova Scotia, but providence forced his
ship to Antigua. Jamaica. Later Edward Fraser (1798-Aft.1850) a privileged
Barbadian slave who in 1818 moved to Bermuda and subsequently met the new
minister James Dunbar. The Nova Scotia Methodist Minister noted young Fraser's
sincerity and commitment to his congregation and encouraged him by appointing
him as assistant. By 1827 Fraser assisted in building a new chapel, was later
freed, admitted to the Methodist Ministry to serve in Antigua and Jamaica.
Barbados. Ann Gill (1779–1866) a free-born coloured woman of reasonable
comfort who, following Rev. William J. Shrewsbury's 1820's preachings used
Civil Disobedience in an attempt to thwart magistrate rulings that prevented
parishioners holding prayer meetings, to the point of paying and extraordinary
£1700.00 in hopes to build a new chapel and having militia appointed by the
Governor to protect her home from demolition. In 1884 an attempt was made at
autonomy with the formation of two West Indian Conferences, however by 1903 the
venture had failed. It was not until the 1960s that another attempt was made at
autonomy. This second attempt resulted in the emergence of the Methodist Church
in the Caribbean and the Americas (MCCA) in May 1967. In the island of Barbados
Francis Godson (1864–1953) became a Methodist who, having served briefly in
several of the Caribbean islands, eventually immersed himself in helping those
in hardship of the first world war in Barbados and later was appointed to the
Legislative Council there and fought for the Pensioners. He was later followed
by renowned Barbadian Augustus Rawle Parkinson (1864-19??) who also was the
first principal of the Wesley Hall School in Barbados (which celebrated its 125
anniversary back in September 2009). In more recent times in Barbados, Victor
Alphonso Cooke (born 1930) and Lawrence Vernon Harcourt Lewis (born 1932) are
strong influences on the Methodist Church on the island. Their contemporary and
late member of the Dalkeith Methodist Church, was the former secretary of the
University of the West Indies, consultant of the "Canadian Training Aid
Programme" and a man of letters – Francis Woodbine Blackman (1922–2010) –
it was his research and published works that enlightened much of this
information on Caribbean Methodism. Africa. The adherents of Methodism in
Africa are now estimated to number 20 million. The latest figures indicate that
the continent's largest groups of Methodists are in Sudan, East Africa, South
Africa, Congo-Zaire, Zimbabwe and Liberia. Ghana. The Methodist Church Ghana
came into existence as a result of the missionary activities of the Wesleyan
Methodist Church, inaugurated with the arrival of Joseph Rhodes Dunwell to the
Gold Coast (Ghana) in 1835. Like the mother church, the Methodist Church in
Ghana was established by people of Protestant background. Roman Catholic and
Anglican missionaries came to the Gold Coast from the 15th century. A school
was established in Cape Coast by the Anglicans during the time of Philip
Quaque, a Ghanaian priest. Those who came out of this school had scriptural
knowledge and scriptural materials supplied by the Society for the Propagation
of Christian Knowledge. A member a resulting Bible study groups, William De-
Graft, requested Bibles through captain Potter of the ship "Congo". Not only
were Bibles sent, but also a Methodist missionary. In the first eight years of
the Church’s life, 11 out of 21 missionaries who worked in the Gold Coast
died. Thomas Birch Freeman, who arrived at the Gold Coast in 1838 was a pioneer
of missionary expansion. Between 1838 and 1857 he carried Methodism from the
coastal areas to Kumasi in the Asante hinterland of the Gold Coast. He also
established Methodist Societies in Badagry and AbeoKuta in Nigeria with the
assistance of William De-Graft. By 1854, the church was organized into circuits
constituting a district with T.B. Freeman as chairman. Freeman was replaced in
1856 by William West. The district was divided and extended to include areas in
the then Gold Coast and Nigeria by the synod in 1878, a move confirmed at the
British Conference. The district were Gold Coast (Ghana) District, with T.R.
Picot as chairman and Yoruba and Popo District, with John Milum as chairman.
Methodist evangelization of northern Ghana began in 1910. After a long period
of conflict with the colonial government, missionary work was established in
1955. Paul Adu was the first indigenous missionary to northern Ghana. In July
1961, the Methodist Church in Ghana became autonomous, and was called the
Methodist Church Ghana, based on a deed of foundation, part of the church's
"Constitution and Standing Orders". The Methodist Church Ghana has a total
membership of close to 600,000. The church has 15 dioceses, 3,814 societies,
1,066 pastors, 15,920 local preachers, 24,100 lay leaders, many schools, an
orphanage, hospitals and clinics. Southern Africa. Methodism in Southern Africa
began as a result of lay Christian work by an Irish soldier of the English
Regiment, John Irwin, who was stationed at the Cape and began to hold prayer
meetings as early as 1795. The first Methodist lay preacher at the Cape, George
Middlemiss, was a soldier of the 72nd regiment of the British Army stationed at
the Cape in 1805. This foundation paved the way for missionary work by:
Methodist missionary societies from Great Britain, many of whom sent
missionaries with the 1820 English settlers to the Western and Eastern Cape.
Among the most notable of the early missionaries were Barnabas Shaw and William
Shaw. The largest group was the Wesleyan Methodist Church, but there were a
number of others that joined together to form the Methodist Church of South
Africa, later known as The Methodist Church of Southern Africa. The Methodist
Church of Southern Africa is the largest mainline Christian denomination in
South Africa – 7.3% of the South African population recorded their religious
affiliation as 'Methodist' in the last national census.Serving on the Frontiers
of Society by Clive J. Pillay published 1999 Mozambique. The "Igreja Metodista
Unida" is one of the largest Christian denominations of Mozambique. Asia.
China. Methodism was brought to China in the fall of 1847 by the Methodist
Episcopal Church. The first missionaries sent out were Judson Dwight Collins
and Moses Clark White, who sailed from Boston 15 April 1847, and reached
Foochow 6 September. They were followed by Henry Hickok and Robert Samuel
Maclay, who arrived 15 April 1848. In 1857 it baptized the first convert in
connection with its labors. In August 1856, a brick church, called the "Church
of the True God" (真神 ), the first substantial church building erected at
Foochow by Protestant Missions, was dedicated to the worship of God. In the
winter of the same year another brick church, located on the hill in the
suburbs on the south bank of the Min, was finished and dedicated, called the
"Church of Heavenly Peace" (天安 ). In 1862, the number of members was 87.
The Foochow Conference was organized by Isaac W. Wiley on 6 December 1867, by
which time the number of members and probationers had reached 2,011. Rev. Hok
Chau 周學 (also known as Lai-Tong Chau, 周勵 ) was the first Chinese
ordained minister of the South China District of the Methodist Church
(incumbent 1877-1916). Benjamin Hobson (1816-1873), a medical missionary sent
by the London Missionary Society in 1839, set up a highly successful Wai Ai
Clinic ( 愛醫館) Liang Fa (Leung Fat in Cantonese, 梁發, 1789-1855,
ordained by the London Missionary Society), Hok Chau and others worked there.
Rev. Liang (age 63) baptized Chau (quite young) in 1852. The Methodist Church
based in England sent missionary George Piercy to China. In 1851, Piercy went
to Guangzhou (Canton), where he worked in a trading company. In 1853, he
started a church in Guangzhou. In 1877, Chau was ordained by the Methodist
Church, where he pastored for 39 years. In 1867, the mission sent out the first
missionaries to Central China, who began work at Kiukiang. In 1869 missionaries
were also sent to the capital city Peking, where they laid the foundations of
the work of the North China Mission. In November 1880, the West China Mission
was established in Sichuan Province. In 1896 the work in the Hinghua prefecture
(modern-day Putian) and surrounding regions was also organized as a Mission
Conference. In 1947, the Methodist Church in the Republic of China celebrated
its centennial. In 1949, however, the Methodist Church moved to Taiwan with the
Kuomintang government. On 21 June 1953, the Taipei Methodist Church was
erected, then local churches and chapels with a baptized membership numbering
over 2,500. Various types of educational, medical and social services are
provided (including Tunghai University). In 1972 the Methodist Church in the
Republic of China became autonomous and the first bishop was installed in 1986.
India. Methodism came to India twice, in 1817 and in 1856, according to P.
Dayanandan who has done extensive research on the subject. Dr. Thomas Coke and
six other missionaries set sail for India on New Year's Day in 1814. Dr. Coke,
then 66, died en route. Rev. James Lynch was the one who finally arrived in
Madras (present day Chennai) in 1817 at a place called Black Town (Broadway),
later known as George Town. Lynch conducted the first Methodist missionary
service on 2 March 1817, in a stable. The first Methodist church was dedicated
in 1819 at Royapettah. A chapel at Broadway (Black Town) was later built and
dedicated on 25 April 1822. This church was rebuilt in 1844 since the earlier
structure was collapsing. At this time there were about 100 Methodist members
in all of Madras, and they were either Europeans or Eurasians (European and
Indian descent). Among those names associated with the founding period of
Methodism in India are Elijah Hoole & Thomas Cryer, who came as missionaries to
Madras. In 1857, the Methodist Episcopal Church started its work in India, and
with prominent Evangelists like William Taylor the Emmanuel Methodist Church,
Vepery, was born in 1874. Famous evangelist Bishop James Mills Thoburn
established the Thoburn Memorial Church in calcutta (Kolkata) in 1873 and the
famous Calcutta Boys' School in 1877. In 1947 the Wesleyan Methodist Church in
India merged with Presbyterians, Anglicans and other Protestant churches to
form the Church of South India while the American Methodist Church remained
affiliated as the Methodist Church in southern Asia (MCSA) to the mother church
in USA- the United Methodist Church till 1981, when by an enabling act the
Methodist Church in India (MCI) became an autonomous church in India. Today,
the Methodist Church in India is governed by the General Conference of the
Methodist Church of India headed by 6 Bishops, with headquarters at Methodist
Centre, 21 YMCA Road, Mumbai, India... Malaysia and Singapore. Missionaries
from Britain, North America, and Australia founded Methodist churches in many
Commonwealth countries. These are now independent and many of them are stronger
than the former "mother" churches. In addition to the churches, these
missionaries often also founded schools to serve the local community. A good
example of such schools are the Methodist Boys' School in Kuala Lumpur,
Malaysia and Anglo-Chinese School, Methodist Girls' School and Fairfield
Methodist Schools in Singapore. Philippines. The beginnings of Methodism in the
Philippines islands grow from the American invasion of the Philippines
following the Spanish-American War. On 21 June 1898, the American executives of
the Mission Society of the Methodist Episcopal Church expressed their desire to
join other Protestant denominations in starting mission work in the islands and
to enter into any comity agreement that would facilitate the establishment of
such mission. The first Protestant worship service was conducted on 28 August
1898 by an American military chaplain named Rev. George C. Stull. Rev. Stull
was an ordained Methodist minister from the Montana Annual Conference of The
Methodist Episcopal Church (Later became The United Methodist Church in 1968).
Methodist and Wesleyan traditions in the Philippines are shared by three of the
largest mainline Protestant churches in the country – The United Methodist
Church, "Iglesia Evangelica Metodista En Las Islas Filipinas" (IEMELIF)
(Evangelical Methodist Church in the Philippine Islands), and The United Church
of Christ in the Philippines. There are also evangelical Protestant churches in
the country with Methodist and Wesleyan tradition like The Wesleyan Church of
the Philippines, Inc. Free Methodist Church of the Philippines, and the Church
of the Nazarene in the Philippines. There are also the IEMELIF Reform Movement
(IRM), The Wesleyan (Pilgrim Holiness) Church of the Philippines, the
Philippine Bible Methodist Church, Inc., the Pentecostal Free Methodist Church,
Inc., the Fundamental Christian Methodist Church, The Reformed Methodist
Church, Inc., The Methodist Church of the Living Bread, Inc., and the Wesley
Evangelical Methodist Church & Mission, Inc. There are three Episcopal Areas of
the United Methodist Church in the Philippines namely: Baguio Episcopal Area,
Davao Episcopal Area and Manila Episcopal Area. A call for autonomy within
groups in The United Methodist Church was discussed at many conferences led
mostly by bishop candidates. Only in 2010 did decisive action led to the
establishment of the "Ang Iglesia Metodista sa Pilipinas", with groups in
Palawan, Bataan, Zambales, Pangasinan, Bulacan. Aurora, Nueva Ecija, Metro
Manila Area, some part of Pampanga, and Cavite. It was led by Bishop Lito C.
Tangonan, Rev. George Buenaventura, Chita Milan and Atty. Joe Frank E. Zuñiga.
The group finally declared its full autonomy and incorporated legally with
Securities and Exchange Commission of the Philippines and was approved on
December 7, 2011 with papers held for by present procurators. It now has 126
local churches all over the Philippines. Rev. Lito Tangonan becomes the first
bishop of the autonomous church and was consecrated March 17, 2012. South
Korea. One of the strongest current Methodist churches in the world is that of
South Korea. There are many Korean-language Methodist churches in North America
catering to Korean-speaking immigrants, not all of which are named as
Methodist. There are several denominations that are of Wesleyan and Methodist
heritage, but are not explicitly Methodist. The first missionary sent out was
R. S. Mclay, who sailed from Japan 1884, and was given the authority of medical
and schooling permission from Gojong, Korean Emperor. Next year, H. G.
Apenzeller from North Methodist church, who arrived 5 April 1885, started to
evangelize with Dr. Scranton and his mother. They established "Jeongdon
Metheodist Church"( 동감리교회), "Sangdong Pharmacy Store"(상동약국)
becoming "Sangdong Methodist Church"(상동감리교회) and "Baejae School"
(배재학당). In 1895, there were Bishop E. R. Hendrix and Dr. C. F. Reid
from South Methodist Church, who established "Jonggyo Methodist Church"
(종교감리교회) and "Baewha School"(배화학당). In 1930, the Korean
Methodist Church was reunited as "Joseon Methodist Church"
(기독교조 감리회) before United Methodist Church in U.S. The Korean
Methodist Church has 11 bishops and 12 Annual Conferences in the Republic of
Korea. The Korean Methodist Church is also a strong Methodist Church for
international mission, sending missionaries to 76 countries in the world.
Europe. There are small Methodist Churches in most European countries, the
strongest outside the British Isles being in Germany. A few of these derive
from links with the American rather than the British church. There is a degree
of co-operation between the individual Methodist churches in Europe, including
European Methodist Council, and European Methodist Youth & Children Ireland.
The Methodist Church in Ireland covers the entire island of Ireland; including
Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland. Eric Gallagher was the head of
the Church in the 1970s. He was one of the group of Protestant churchmen who
met with Provisional IRA officers in Feakle, County Clare to try to broker
peace. The meeting was unsuccessful due to a Garda raid on the hotel. The
church suffered a split in Ireland in 1973 when a group of churches formed the
Fellowship of Independent Methodist Churches. Another strong Methodist movement
in Ireland is the Church of the Nazarene which takes its roots from American
Methodism as opposed to British whilst still rejecting episcopal polity.
France. In France, the Methodist movement was founded in the 1820s by Charles
Cook near Nîmes and Montpellier, for example in the village of Congénies in
Languedoc, where there had been a Quaker community since the 18th century.
Several sections of the Methodist Church joined the Reformed Church of France
in 1938. The Methodist Church exists today in France under various names. The
best-known is the "UEEM" "(l'Union de l'Eglise Evangélique Méthodiste de
France)", the Union of Evangelical Methodist Churches of France. It is the
fruit of a fusion in 2005 between the "Methodist Church of France" and the
"Union of Methodist Churches" (in France). The UEEM is a part of the world
organization, the United Methodist Church. The Reverend Emmanuel Briglia.
founded in 1998 an independent conservative, high-church Anglican/Methodist
mission in South-East France named the Mission Méthodiste Episcopale du Var.
and commonly named "Mission anglicane méthodiste du Christ-Roi" (Anglican
Methodist mission of Christ the King). This small community has sought to
retain the original link between Methodism and Anglicanism. It has acted since
September 2011 as an Anglo-Catholic chaplaincy. Hungary. The first Methodist
missions in Hungary were established in 1898 in the German-speaking Bácska
region (since 1918 part of the Serbian province of Vojvodina) and in 1905 in
Budapest. The church in Hungary split in 1974-5 over the question of
interference by the communist state. Today, the Hungarian Methodist Church has
40 congregations in 11 districts. The seceding Hungarian Evangelical Fellowship
also considers itself a Methodist church. It has 8 full congregations and
several mission groups, and runs a range of charitable organizations: hostels
and soup kitchens for the homeless, a non-denominational theological college, a
dozen schools of various kinds, and four old people's homes. The Fellowship was
granted official church status by the state in 1981. Both Methodist churches
lost official church status under discriminatory legislation passed in 2011,
limiting the number of recognized churches to 14. However, the list of
recognized churches was lengthened to 32 at the end of February 2012. This gave
recognition to the Hungarian Methodist Church and to two other Methodist-
derived denominations – the Salvation Army, which was banned in Hungary in
1949 but returned in 1990, and currently has four congregations, and the Church
of the Nazarene, which entered Hungary in 1996 – but not to the Hungarian
Evangelical Fellowship. The legislation has been strongly criticized by the
Venice Commission of the Council of Europe as discriminatory. The Hungarian
Methodist Church, the Salvation Army, and the Church of the Nazarene have
formed an association mainly for publishing purposes. The Hungarian Evangelical
Fellowship also has a publishing arm. Italy. The Italian Methodist Church
("OPCEMI – Opera per le Chiese Evangeliche Metodiste in Italia) is small,
with c.5,000 members. Since 1975 it is in a formal covenant partnership with
the Waldensian Church. The Italian Methodist Church was previously an overseas
district of the British Methodist Church. Bertrand Tipple, pastor of the
American Methodist Church in Rome, founded a college there. Russia. The
Methodist Church established several strongholds in Russia – Saint Petersburg
in the west and the Vladivostok region in the east, with big Methodist centers
right in the middle, in Moscow and Ekaterinburg (former Sverdlovsk). Methodists
began their work in the west amongst Swedish immigrants in 1881 and started
their work in the east in 1910. On 26 June 2009, Methodists celebrated the
120th year since Methodism arrived in Czarist Russia by erecting a new
Methodist centre in Saint Petersburg. A Methodist presence was continued in
Russia for 14 years after the Russian Revolution of 1917 through the efforts of
Deaconess Anna Eklund. In 1939, political antagonism stymied the work of the
Church and Deaconess Anna Eklund was coerced to return to her native Finland.
After 1989, the collapse of the Soviet Union gave way to the surge of religious
freedoms and people's hunger for spiritual and hopeful message. During the
1990s, Methodism experienced a powerful wave of revival in the nation. Three
sites in particular carried the torch - Samara, Moscow and Ekaterinburg. Today,
The United Methodist Church in Eurasia has 116 congregations, each with a
native pastor. There are currently 48 students enrolled in residential and
extension degree programs at the United Methodist Seminary in Moscow. North
America. Bermuda. Bermuda's Methodist Synod, is a separate presbytery of the
United Church of Canada's Maritime Conference. Canada. The father of Methodism
in Canada was William Black who began preaching in settlements along the
Petitcodiac River of New Brunswick in 1781. A few years afterwards, Methodist
Episcopal circuit riders from New York State began to arrive in Canada West at
Niagara, and the north shore of Lake Erie in 1786, and at the Kingston region
on the northeast shore of Lake Ontario in the early 1790s. At the time the
region was part of British North America and became part of Upper Canada after
the Constitutional Act of 1791. Upper and Lower Canada were both part of the
New York Episcopal Methodist Conference until 1810 when they were transferred
to the newly formed Genesee Conference. Reverend Major George Neal began to
preach in Niagara in October 1786, and was ordained in 1810 by Bishop Philip
Asbury, at the Lyons, New York Methodist Conference. He was Canada's first
saddlebag preacher, and travelled from Lake Ontario to Detroit for 50 years
preaching the gospel. The spread of Methodism in the Canadas was seriously
disrupted by the War of 1812 but quickly gained lost ground after the Treaty of
Ghent was signed in 1815. In 1817 the British Wesleyans arrived in the Canadas
from the Maritimes but by 1820 had agreed, with the Episcopal Methodists, to
confine their work to Lower Canada (present-day Quebec) while the later would
confine themselves to Upper Canada (present-day Ontario). In 1828 Upper
Canadian Methodists were permitted by the General Conference in the United
States to form an independent Canadian Conference and, in 1833, the Canadian
Conference merged with the British Wesleyans to form the Wesleyan Methodist
Church in Canada. The Methodist Church of Canada was an 1884 union of
pioneering groups. In 1925, they merged with the Presbyterians, then by far the
largest Protestant communion in Canada, most Congregationalists, Union Churches
in Western Canada, and the American Presbyterian Church in Montreal, to form
the United Church of Canada. In 1968, the Evangelical United Brethren Church's
Canadian congregations joined after their American counterparts joined the
United Methodist Church. Oceania. Australia. Various branches of Methodism in
Australia merged in the 20 years from 1881, with a union of all groups except
the Lay Methodists forming the Methodist Church of Australasia in 1902. In 1945
the Rev. Dr. Kingsley Ridgway offered himself as a Melbourne based "field
representative" for a possible Australian branch of the Wesleyan Methodist
Church of America, after meeting an American serviceman who was a member of
that denomination. The Wesleyan Methodist Church of Australia was founded on
his work. The Methodist Church of Australasia merged with the majority of the
Presbyterian Church of Australia and the Congregational Union of Australia in
1977, becoming the Uniting Church.Wesley Mission in Pitt Street Sydney is not
only the largest parish in the Uniting Church but also strongly in the Wesleyan
tradition. The Wesleyan Methodist Church of Australia continues to operate
independently. There are also other independent Methodist congregations, some
of which were established by, or have been impacted by, Tongan immigrants.
Fiji. As a result of the early efforts of missionaries, most of the natives of
the Fiji Islands were converted to Methodism in the 1840s and 1850s. Most
ethnic Fijians are Methodists today (the others are largely Roman Catholic),
and the Methodist Church of Fiji and Rotuma is in important social force. New
Zealand. The Methodist Church of New Zealand was the fourth most frequent
religious affiliation chosen by those who declared one in the 2006 national
census. Samoan Islands. In 1868, Piula Theological College was established in
Lufilufi on the north coast of Upolu island in Samoa and serves as the main
headquarters of the Methodist church in the country. The college includes the
historic Piula Monastery as well as Piula Cave Pool, a natural spring situated
beneath the church by the sea. The Methodist Church is the third largest
denomination throughout the Samoan Islands, in both Samoa and American Samoa.
Tonga. Methodism had a particular resonance with the inhabitants of Tonga.
somewhat more than a third of Tongans adhered to the Methodist tradition.
Methodism is represented on the island by a number of churches including the
Free Church of Tonga and the Free Wesleyan Church, which the largest church in
Tonga. The royal family of the country are prominent members, and the late king
was a lay preacher.
