Metropolitan bishop In Christian churches with episcopal polity, the rank of
metropolitan bishop, or simply metropolitan, pertains to the diocesan bishop or
archbishop (then more precisely called metropolitan archbishop) of a
metropolis; that is, the chief city of a historical Roman province,
ecclesiastical province, or regional capital. Before the establishment of
patriarchs (beginning in AD 325), metropolitan was the highest episcopal rank
in the Eastern rites of the Church. They presided over synods of bishops, and
were granted special privileges by canon law and sacred tradition. The Early
Church structure generally followed the Roman imperial practice, with one
bishop ruling each city and its territory. The bishop of the provincial
capital, the metropolitan, enjoyed certain rights over other bishops in the
province, later called suffragans. Orthodox. In the Eastern Orthodox Churches,
the title is used variously. In the Greek Churches archbishops are ranked above
metropolitans in precedence, as in the case of Archbishop Demetrios of America,
who is the Primate of the Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of America, and primates
of local churches below patriarchal rank are generally designated as
archbishops. The reverse is true for the Slavic Churches (Russian Orthodox,
Bulgarian Orthodox, etc. with exception of Serbian Orthodox Church and
Macedonian Orthodox Church where Archbishop is ranked above Metropolitans) and
for the Romanian Orthodox Church, where metropolitans rank above archbishops
and the title can be used for primatial sees as well as important cities. In
neither case do metropolitans have any special authority over other ruling
bishops within their provinces. However, metropolitans (archbishops in the
Greek Orthodox Church) are the chairmen of their respective synods of bishops,
and have special privileges. Roman Catholic. In the Roman Catholic Church,
ecclesiastical provinces, composed of several neighbouring dioceses, are each
headed by a metropolitan, the archbishop of the diocese designated by the Pope.
The other bishops are known as suffragan bishops. The metropolitan's powers
over dioceses other than his own are normally limited to The metropolitan also
has the liturgical privilege of celebrating sacred functions throughout the
province, as if he were a bishop in his own diocese, provided only that, if he
celebrates in a cathedral church, the diocesan bishop has been informed
beforehand. The metropolitan is obliged to request the pallium, a symbol of the
power that, in communion with the Church of Rome, he possesses over his
ecclesiastical province. This holds even if he had the pallium in another
metropolitan see. It is the responsibility of the metropolitan, with the
consent of the majority of the suffragan bishops to call a provincial council,
decide where to convene it, and determine the agenda. It is his prerogative to
preside over the provincial council. No provincial council can be called if the
metropolitan see is vacant. All Latin Rite metropolitans are archbishops;
however, some archbishops are not metropolitans, as there are a few instances
where an archdiocese has no suffragans or is itself suffragan to another
archdiocese. Titular archbishops (i.e. ordained bishops who are given an
honorary title to a now-defunct archdiocese; e.g. many Vatican officials and
papal nuncios and apostolic delegates are titular archbishops) are never
metropolitans. As of April 2006, 508 archdioceses were headed by metropolitan
archbishops, 27 archbishops were not metropolitans, and there were 89 titular
archbishops. See also Catholic Church hierarchy for the distinctions. Eastern
Catholic. In the Eastern Catholic Churches, the metropolitan is the head of
those autonomous particular Churches that, though they consist of several
eparchies, are not large enough to be placed under the authority of a patriarch
or a major archbishop. They are therefore somewhat more subject than
patriarchal or major archiepiscopal Churches to oversight by the pope and the
Congregation for the Oriental Churches. Anglican. In the Anglican Communion, a
metropolitan is generally the head of an ecclesiastical province (or cluster of
dioceses) and ranks immediately under the primate of the national church (who
is often also a metropolitan). Most metropolitans, but not all, are styled
archbishop.
