Metrical psalter A metrical psalter is a kind of Bible translation: a book
containing a metrical translation of all or part of the Book of Psalms in
vernacular poetry, meant to be sung as hymns in a church. Some metrical
psalters include melodies or even harmonizations. The composition of metrical
psalters was a large enterprise of the Protestant Reformation, especially in
its Calvinist manifestation. Biblical basis. During the Protestant Reformation,
a number of Bible texts were interpreted as requiring reforms in the music used
in worship. The Psalms were particularly commended for singing; asks, "Is
anyone happy? Let him sing songs of praise." states "Let the word of Christ
dwell in you richly as you teach and admonish one another with all wisdom, and
as you sing psalms, hymns and spiritual songs with gratitude in your hearts to
God." The Reformers, taking their cue from these Scriptures and from Erasmus,
shared a common interest in Scripture that would be singable. Various Reformers
interpreted these texts as imposing strictures on sacred music. The psalms,
especially, were felt to be commended to be sung by these texts. A revival of
Gregorian chant, or its adaptation to the vernacular, was apparently not
considered. Instead, the need was felt to have metrical vernacular versions of
the Psalms and other Scripture texts, suitable to sing to metrical tunes and
even popular song forms. Following the regulative principle of worship, many
Reformed churches adopted the doctrine of exclusive psalmody: every hymn sung
in worship must be an actual translation of a Psalm or some other Biblical
passage. Some Reformed churches, especially the Calvinists, rejected the use of
instrumental music and organs in church, preferring to sing all of the music "a
cappella". Even today, the Reformed Presbyterian Church of North America, the
Free Presbyterian Church of Scotland, and other Reformed churches of the
Scottish tradition maintain this practice. The psalters themselves. During the
pre-reformation days, it was not customary for lay members of a church's
congregation to communally sing hymns. Singing was done by the priests and
other clergy; communal singing of Gregorian chant was the function of
professional choirs, or among communities of monks and nuns. John Calvin,
inspired by Erasmus's comments, desired singable versions of the Psalms and
other Christian texts for the communal use of the Reformed churches. The French
metrical psalter. One of the greatest metrical psalters produced during the
Reformation, the Genevan Psalter, was authored for the Protestant churches of
France and Geneva (called the Huguenots). It has been in uninterrupted use to
the present day by the Huguenot and other French-speaking Protestant churches.
The texts of the French Psalter were brought together from two independent
sources: the poet Clément Marot and the theologian Théodore de Bèze. Marot
and Beza's psalms appeared in a number of different collections, published
between 1533 and 1543; in the latter year Marot published "Cinquante Pseaumes",
a collection of 50 psalms rendered into French verse. The full psalter
containing all 150 canonical Psalms, plus the gospel canticle "Cantique de
Siméon" ("Song of Simeon"), appeared in 1562. The French psalms were set to
Gregorian and popular, secular, sometimes unpublished melodies that were
harmonized and altered for congregational singing. Music for the Genevan
psalter was furnished by Loys Bourgeois and others like Guillaume Franc and a
certain Maistre Pierre. The composer Claude Goudimel harmonized these melodies
with great variation in the complexity of the music. In some cases each part
matches note for note, while others are contrapuntal or even motets. Even more
elaborate musical arrangements were composed in the seventeenth-century by
Paschal de l'Estocart and Jan Pieterszoon Sweelinck. The Dutch metrical
psalter. A metrical psalter was also produced for the Calvinist Reformed Church
of the Netherlands by Petrus Datheen in 1566. This Psalter borrowed the hymn
tunes from the Genevan Psalter and consisted of a literal translation of Marot
and Beza's French translation. The Dutch psalter was revised on orders of the
Dutch legislature in 1773, in a revision which also added non-paraphrase hymns
to the collection. This psalter also continues in use among the Reformed
community of the Netherlands, and was recently revised in 1985. In 1968 a new
metrical psalmbook appeared, which is incorporated in the Dutch hymnbook;
"Liedboek voor de kerken" of 1973. Metrical psalters in German. The Genevan
Psalms were translated into German by Ambrosius Lobwasser (1515–1585) in 1573
"Psalter des königlichen Propheten Davids" and were sung a capella to
Goudimel's harmonies for over two centuries. The Lowasser- psalms are still in
use in the Amish congregations in North America, who took them with the Swiss
Hymnbooks to the New World. The music edition of 1576 was reprinted in 2004,
which was a result of the International Psalm Symposion in Emden. In 1798 the
German pastor in Den Haag Matthias Jorissen gave out his: "Neue Bereimung der
Psalmen" which replaced the old-fashioned psalm book for nearly 200 years. The
present Hymnbook (1996) of the Evangelical-reformed Churches and the Old
Reformed Churches of Germany contains the complete psalter with many psalms of
Matthias Jorissen and other authors. It was an important decision of the synods
to retain the psalms in the hymnbook with the Genevan tunes. The need and
interest in the complete Jorissen- Psalter led to different new editions in
1931, 1951 and 2006. The last one was given out for singing of the people and
not for scientific use only. Today, psalms make up a quarter (102) of the
Protestant hymn book from 1998 in German Switzerland. Metrical psalters in
English. Robert Crowley. first complete English metrical psalter and the first
to include musical notation was "The Psalter of Dauid newely translated into
Englysh metre in such sort that it maye the more decently, and wyth more delyte
of the mynde, be reade and songe of al men". Printed in 1549, it was the work
of Robert Crowley and was printed by him, Richard Grafton and/or Stephen
Mierdman. Crowley's psalter is a rare example of two-color printing (red and
black on the first four leaves) in this era, which makes it visually resemble
medieval manuscript psalters. (Christopher Tye and Francis Seager later
included musical notation in their psalters, and the Sternhold and Hopkins
psalter eventually incorporated a basic tune with the Anglo-Genevan edition of
1556. John Day's "The Whole Book of Psalmes" (1562) contained sixty-five psalm
tunes.) Crowley also included a calendar for calculating feast days as in the
Book of Common Prayer, to which Crowley's psalter appears to be intended as a
supplement. The music provided in Crowley's psalter is similar to the Gregorian
tones of the Latin Sarum Rite psalter, and it can be found in "Grove's
Dictionary of Music and Musicians". A single note is given for each syllable in
each verse, in keeping with Archbishop Thomas Cranmer's mandate for the
reformed Edwardian liturgy. The goal was to emphasize simplicity and to
encourage attentiveness to what was being sung by omitting complex vocal
ornamentation. In addition to the Psalms, Crowley's psalter includes English
versions of the canticles Te Deum, Benedictus, Magnificat, Nunc Dimittis,
Quicumque Vult, and Benedicite. These are the "Cantica Prophetarium" retained
in the Book of Common Prayer from the Sarum psalter — key parts of the Divine
Office. Crowley's lyrics are mainly based on Leo Jud's "Biblia Sacrosancta",
which was in turn a fresh translation from the Hebrew that maintained fidelity
to its lyrical arrangement. Crowley rendered all the psalms in simple iambic
fourteeners which conform to the single, short, four-part tune that is printed
at the beginning of the psalter. Sternhold and Hopkins Psalter. Thomas
Sternhold published his first, short collection of nineteen "Certayn Psalmes"
between mid-1547 and early 1549. In December of 1549, his posthumous "Al such
psalmes of Dauid as Thomas Sternehold ... didde in his life time draw into
English Metre" was printed, containing thirty-seven psalms by Sternhold and, in
a separate section at the end, seven psalms by John Hopkins. This collection
was taken to the Continent with Protestant exiles during the reign of Mary
Tudor, and editors in Geneva both revised the original texts and gradually
added more over several editions. In 1562, the publisher John Day brought
together most of the psalm versions from the Genevan editions and many new
psalms by John Hopkins, Thomas Norton, and John Markant to make up "The Whole
Booke of Psalmes, Collected into English Meter" . In addition to metrical
versions of all 150 psalms, the volume included versified versions of the
Apostles' Creed, the "Magnificat", and other biblical passages or Christian
texts, as well as several non-scriptural versified prayers and a long section
of prose prayers largely drawn from the "English Forme of Prayers" used in
Geneva. In 1621, Thomas Ravenscroft published an expanded edition of the
Sternhold and Hopkins Psalter; Ravenscroft's edition added many more psalm
tunes, some of which were composed since the first publication by leading late
Tudor and early Stuart English composers such as Thomas Morley, Thomas Tallis,
John Dowland, and Thomas Tomkins. Another musical contributor to this volume
was John Milton, senior, the father of the poet. By any objective measure of
circulation, Sternhold and Hopkins's psalter were a success. As a separate
volume, they were re-printed more than 200 times between 1550 and 1640; in
addition, they were included in most editions of the Geneva Bible, and also
most versions of the "Book of Common Prayer". They continued to be in regular
use in some congregations until the late eighteenth century. Other versified
psalms in English. Sir Philip Sidney made verse versions of the first 43
psalms. After he died in 1586, his sister, Mary Sidney Herbert, the Countess of
Pembroke, completed the translation of the final two-thirds of the psalter.
Together they used a dazzling array of stanza forms and rhyme schemes--as many
as 145 different forms for the 150 psalms. The Sidney Psalter was not published
in its complete form until the twentieth century, but it was widely read in
manuscript, and influenced such later poets as John Donne and George Herbert.
Later English metrical psalters. But by the time better metrical psalms were
made in English, the belief that every hymn sung in church had to be a Biblical
translation had been repudiated by the Church of England. A flowering of
English hymnody had occurred under writers such as Isaac Watts and Charles
Wesley, but their hymns were freed from the stricture that each verse had to be
a translation of a scriptural text. Attitudes towards the Biblical text itself
had also changed, with closer emphasis being paid on its exact phrasing. This
new regard for the letter of the Biblical text diminished the appeal of the
psalters' previous versions; those who sang them no longer felt they were
singing Scripture. The success of these newer hymns has largely displaced the
belief that each hymn must be a direct translation of Scripture. Now, many
hymnals contain Biblical references to the passages that inspired the authors,
but few are direct translations of Scripture like the metrical psalters were.
Metrical psalter in Gaelic. The Scottish Gaelic Psalter was produced by the
Synod of Argyll. By 1658, the first fifty psalms had been translated into
ballad metre due to the work of Dugald Campbell, John Stewart and Alexander
McLaine. A manuscript of the final 100 psalms was produced in 1691 with the
entire Gaelic psalter, with revisions to the 'first fifty' being produced in
1694. The Gaelic Metrical Psalms are used to this day in the Scottish Highland
Presbyterian Churches where the practice of lining out is used,in accordance
with the Westminster Assembly of Divines Directory for Public Worship. The
corpus of tunes has shrunk over the years with only about twenty-four in
general use. Modern-day metrical psalters. Many churches continue to use
metrical psalters today. For example, the Reformed Presbyterian Church of North
America (RPCNA) produced psalm books based on the Scots Metrical Psalter, with
the intention of making the words more modern and the translation more
accurate. These were produced in 1889 (a split-leaf brown book), 1911
(unpopular due to musical complexity), 1920 (a green book) and 1929 (also
green, an expanded version of the 1920 one), 1950 (a blue book), and 1973 (a
maroon one) called The Book of Psalms for Singing. A further revision has been
undertaken by the RPCNA, again for the purposes of making the words more
modern, and also to replace some of the more difficult-to-sing tunes, such as
Psalm 62B, with tunes that are easier to sing. The new edition, The Book of
Psalms for Worship, was released in 2009. The Reformed Presbyterian Church of
Ireland, however, produced a split leaf version of the Scots Metrical Psalter,
but with additional "Alternative versions" of the words included as the second
half of the book. These were culled from a number of sources, including the
RPCNA books mentioned above. Whenever a new version was necessary, they merely
expanded their old book, without removing any of the old translations. One of
these editions was produced in 1979. They were available in staff or sol-fa. A
revised Psalter in more modern idiom was published in 2004 under the title The
Psalms for Singing. The Melbourne Congregation of the Presbyterian Church of
Eastern Australia produced The Complete Book of Psalms for Singing with Study
Notes in 1991. Music in staff format is provided in a variety of meters to
mostly established tunes. The texts draw from the best of older versions but
providing much new material with an emphasis on accuracy. The Free Church of
Scotland published Sing Psalms in 2003, being a completely new translation.It
is available in words only, and Staff and Sol-fa split leaf formats.
