Michael (archangel) Michael ( (pronounced ), "Micha'el" or "Mîkhā'ēl"; ,
"Mikhaḗl"; or "Míchaël"; , "Mīkhā'īl") is an archangel in Jewish,
Christian, and Islamic teachings. Roman Catholics, the Eastern Orthodox,
Anglicans, and Lutherans refer to him as Saint Michael the Archangel and also
simply as "Saint Michael". Orthodox Christians refer to him as the "Taxiarch
Archangel Michael" or simply Archangel Michael. In Hebrew, "Michael" means "who
is like God" ("mi"-who, "ke"-as or like, "El"-deity), which is traditionally
interpreted as a rhetorical question: "Who is like God?" (which expects an
answer in the negative) to imply that "no one" is like God. In this way,
Michael is reinterpreted as a symbol of humility before God. In the Hebrew
Bible Michael is mentioned three times in the Book of Daniel, once as a "great
prince who stands up for the children of your people". The idea that Michael
was the advocate of the Jews became so prevalent that in spite of the
rabbinical prohibition against appealing to angels as intermediaries between
God and his people, Michael came to occupy a certain place in the Jewish
liturgy. In the New Testament Michael leads God's armies against Satan's forces
in the Book of Revelation, where during the war in heaven he defeats Satan. In
the Epistle of Jude Michael is specifically referred to as an "archangel".
Christian sanctuaries to Michael appeared in the 4th century, when he was first
seen as a healing angel, and then over time as a protector and the leader of
the army of God against the forces of evil. By the 6th century, devotions to
Archangel Michael were widespread both in the Eastern and Western Churches.
Over time, teachings on Michael began to vary among Christian denominations.
Scriptural references. Hebrew Bible. In view of this, Michael is seen as
playing an important role as the protector of Israel, and later of the
Christian Church. Although the three references to Michael in the Book of
Daniel 10:13, 10:21 and 12:1 are to the same individual who acts in similar
ways in all three cases, the last one is set at the "end times" while the first
two refer to local time in Persia. These are the only three references to
Archangel Michael in the Hebrew Bible. The references to the "captain of the
host of the Lord" encountered by Joshua in the early days of his campaigns in
the Promised Land () have at times been interpreted as Michael the Archangel,
but there is no theological basis for that assumption, given that Joshua then
worshiped this figure, and angels are not to be worshiped. Some scholars also
point that the figure may refer to God himself. In the book of Joshua's account
of the fall of Jericho, Joshua "looked up and saw a man standing in front of
him with a drawn sword in his hand". When the still unaware Joshua asks which
side of the fight the Archangel is on, the response was, "neither...but as
commander of the army of the Lord I have now come". New Testament. After the
conflict, Satan is thrown to earth along with the fallen angels, where he
("that ancient serpent called the devil") still tries to "lead the whole world
astray". A reference to an "archangel" also appears in the First Epistle to the
Thessalonians This archangel who heralds the second coming of Christ is not
named, but is probably Michael. Qur'an. Michael (Arabic: ميخائيل,
"Mikhail" ميكائيل, "Mikael" ), is one of the two archangels mentioned in
the Qur'an, alongside Jibreel (Gabriel). In the Qur'an, Michael is mentioned
once only, in Sura 2:98: "Whoever is an enemy to God, and His angels and His
messengers, and Jibreel and Mikhail! Then, lo! God (Himself) is an enemy to the
disbelievers." Some Muslims believe that the reference in Sura 11:69 is
Michael, one of the three angels who visited Abraham. Religious traditions.
Judaism. According to rabbinic Jewish tradition, Michael acted as the advocate
of Israel, and sometimes had to fight with the princes of the other nations
(cf. Daniel 10:13) and particularly with the angel Samael, Israel's accuser.
Michael's enmity with Samael dates from the time when the latter was thrown
down from heaven. Samael took hold of the wings of Michael, whom he wished to
bring down with him in his fall; but Michael was saved by God. Michael is also
said to have had a dispute with Samael over the soul of Moses. The idea that
Michael was the advocate of the Jews became so prevalent that in spite of the
rabbinical prohibition against appealing to angels as intermediaries between
God and his people, Michael came to occupy a certain place in the Jewish
liturgy. There were two prayers written beseeching him as the prince of mercy
to intercede in favor of Israel: one composed by Eliezer ha-Kalir, and the
other by Judah ben Samuel he-Hasid. But appeal to Michael seems to have been
more common in ancient times. Thus Jeremiah is said to have addressed a prayer
to him. "When a man is in need he must pray directly to God, and neither to
Michael nor to Gabriel." The rabbis declare that Michael entered upon his role
of defender at the time of the biblical patriarchs. Thus, according to Rabbi
Eliezer ben Jacob, it was Michael who rescued Abraham from the furnace into
which he had been thrown by Nimrod (Midrash Genesis Rabbah xliv. 16). It was
Michael, the "one that had escaped" (Genesis 14:13), who told Abraham that Lot
had been taken captive (Midrash Pirke R. El.), and who protected Sarah from
being defiled by Abimelech. He announced to Sarah that she would bear a son and
he rescued Lot at the destruction of Sodom. Midrash. It is said that Michael
prevented Isaac from being sacrificed by his father by substituting a ram in
his place, and saved Jacob, while yet in his mother's womb, from being killed
by Samael. Later Michael prevented Laban from harming Jacob.("Pirke De-Rabbi
Eliezer", xxxvi). It was Michael who wrestled with Jacob and who afterward
blessed him. The midrash "Exodus Rabbah" holds that Michael exercised his
function of advocate of Israel at the time of the Exodus also, when Satan (as
an adversary) accused the Israelites of idolatry and declared that they were
consequently deserving of death by drowning in the Red Sea. Michael is also
said to have destroyed the army of Sennacherib. Christianity. Early Christian
views and devotions. The early Christians regarded some of the martyrs such as
Saint George, and Saint Theodore, as military patrons ; but to St Michael they
gave the care of their sick and he was first venerated as a healer in Phrygia
(modern-day Turkey). The earliest and most famous sanctuary to Saint Michael in
the ancient near east was also associated with healing waters. It was the
"Michaelion" built in early 4th century by Emperor Constantine at Chalcedon, on
the site of an earlier Temple called "Sosthenion". A painting of the Archangel
slaying a serpent became a major art piece at the Michaelion after Constantine
defeated Licinius near there in 324, eventually leading to the standard
iconography of Archangel Michael as a warrior saint slaying a dragon. The
Michaelion was a magnificent church and in time became a model for hundreds of
other churches in Eastern Christianity which spread devotions to the Archangel.
In the 4th century, Saint Basil the Great's homily ("De Angelis") placed Saint
Michael over all the angels. He was called ""Archangel"" because he is the
prince of the other angels. Into the 6th century, the view of Michael as a
healer continued in Rome, when after a plague the sick slept at night in the
church of "Castel Sant'Angelo" (dedicated to him for saving Rome), waiting for
his manifestation. In the 6th century the growth of devotions to the saint in
the Western Church were manifested by the feasts dedicated to him, as recorded
in the Leonine Sacramentary. The 7th century Gelasian Sacramentary included the
feast ""S. Michaelis Archangeli"", as did the 8th century Gregorian
Sacramentary. Some of these documents refer to a no longer extant "Basilica
Archangeli" on via Salaria in Rome. The angelology of Pseudo-Dionysius which
was widely read as of the 6th century gave Michael a rank in the celestial
hierarchy. Later, in the 13th century, others such as Bonaventure believed that
he is the prince of the Seraphim, the first of the nine angelic orders.
According to Saint Thomas Aquinas ("Summa" Ia. 113.3), he is the Prince of the
last and lowest choir, the angels. Roman Catholicism. Roman Catholics often
refer to Michael as "Saint Michael", a title that does not indicate
canonisation, any more than it does for Saint Peter and Saint Paul. He is
generally referred to in Christian litanies as "Saint Michael", as in the
Litany of the Saints. In the shortened version of this litany used in the
Easter Vigil, he alone of the angels and archangels is mentioned, omitting
Saint Gabriel and Saint Raphael. In the Roman Catholic teachings Saint Michael
has four main roles or offices. His first role is the leader of the Army of God
and the leader of heaven's forces in their triumph over the powers of hell. He
is viewed as the angelic model for the virtues of the "spiritual warrior", with
the conflict against evil at times viewed as the "battle within". The second
and third roles of Michael in Catholic teachings deal with death. In his second
role, Michael is the angel of death, carrying the souls of all the deceased to
heaven. In this role, at the hour of death, Michael descends and gives each
soul the chance to redeem itself before passing, thus consternating the devil
and his minions. Catholic prayers often refer to this role of Michael. In his
third role, he weighs souls in his perfectly balanced scales (hence Michael is
often depicted holding scales). In his fourth role, St Michael, the special
patron of the Chosen People in the Old Testament, is also the guardian of the
Church; it was thus not unusual for the angel to be revered by the military
orders of knights during the Middle Ages. This role also extends to his being
the patron saint of a number of cities and countries. Roman Catholicism
includes traditions such as the "Prayer to Saint Michael" which specifically
asks for the faithful to be "defended" by the saint. The "Chaplet of Saint
Michael" consists of nine salutations, one for each choir of angels. It should
be noted that the Roman Catholic traditions and teachings concerning St.
Michael the Archangel are "not" required beliefs and practices but rather are
strongly encouraged as a means of individuals and congregations increasing in
spiritual strength against evil. Eastern and Oriental Orthodoxy. The Eastern
Orthodox accord Michael the title "Archistrategos", or "Supreme Commander of
the Heavenly Hosts." The Eastern Orthodox pray to their guardian angels and
above all to Michael and Gabriel. The Eastern Orthodox have always had strong
devotions to angels, and the trend continues to date with the term "Bodiless
Powers" applied to them. A number of feasts dedicated to Archangel Michael are
celebrated by the Eastern Orthodox throughout the year. Archangel Michael is
mentioned in a number of Eastern Orthodox hymns and prayer, and his icons are
widely used within Eastern Orthodox churches. In many Eastern Orthodox icons,
Christ is accompanied by a number of angels, Michael being a predominant figure
among them. In Russia many monasteries, cathedrals, court and merchant churches
are dedicated to the Chief Commander Michael, and most Russian cities have a
church or chapel dedicated to the Archangel Michael. The place of Michael in
the Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria is a saintly intercessor, where he is
seen as the one who presents to God the prayers of the just, who accompanies
the souls of the dead to heaven, who defeats the devil. He is celebrated
liturgically on the 12th of each month. In Alexandria, a church was dedicated
to him in the early fourth century on the 12th of the month of Ba'unah. On the
12th of the month of Hathor is the celebration of Michael's appointment in
heaven, where Michael became the chief of the angels. Protestant views. Most
Protestant Christians (excluding Anglicans) generally reject the intercession
of saints as a whole. However, an unofficial Anglican prayer of preparation
before Mass includes a confession to "Michael the Archangel" as well as other
saints such as John the Baptist. Protestant denominations generally recognize
only two archangels, Michael and Gabriel, usually emphasizing Michael, unlike
Judaism, Roman Catholicism, and Eastern Orthodoxy which may at times recognize
seven (and in rare cases eight) archangels, with Michael, Gabriel, and Raphael
generally regarded with an elevated status, e.g. being the only archangels
honored by name in Catholicism. Some early Protestant scholars identified
Michael with the pre-incarnate Christ, basing their view, partly on the
juxtaposition of the "child" and the archangel in Revelation 12, and partly on
the attributes ascribed to him in Daniel. Similarly in 1751 Anglican bishop
Robert Clayton held that Michael was the Logos and Gabriel the Holy Spirit, an
extreme position which resulted in his prosecution, just before he died.
Michael continues to be recognized among Protestants by key churches dedicated
to him, e.g. St. Michaelis Church, Hamburg, a famous Lutheran Church which
appears on the coins of the European Union. At Bach's time, the annual feast of
Michael and all the angels on 29 September was regularly celebrated with a
festive service, for which Bach composed several cantatas, for example the
chorale cantata "Herr Gott, dich loben alle wir, BWV 130" in 1724. Jehovah's
Witnesses. Jehovah's Witnesses believe Michael to be another name for Jesus
Christ in heaven, in his pre-human and post-resurrection existence. They assert
that, because a definite article is used at Jude 9 when referring to "Michael
the Archangel", and because the term "archangel" is used only in the singular
in the Bible, never clearly in the plural, that therefore Michael is the only
archangel, and therefore synonymous with Jesus, who is described at as
descending "with a cry of command, with the voice of an archangel, and with the
sound of the trumpet". They also understand Jesus as saying in Book of
Revelation 3:12 that on "the one that conquers" he will write "that new name of
mine". They believe the prominent roles assigned to Michael at Daniel 12:1 and
Revelation 12:7; 19:14, 16 are identical to Jesus' roles, as the one chosen to
lead God's people, and as the one who "stands up", identifying them as the same
spirit being. Because they identify Michael with Jesus, he is therefore
considered the first and greatest of all God's heavenly sons, God's chief
messenger who takes the lead in vindicating God's sovereignty, sanctifying his
name, fighting the wicked forces of Satan, and protecting God's covenant people
on earth. Jehovah's Witnesses also identify Michael with the "Angel of the
Lord" who led the Israelites in the wilderness. Seventh-day Adventists.
Seventh-day Adventists believe that Michael is another name for the Heavenly
Christ, and another name for the Word-of-God (as in John 1) before He became
incarnate as Jesus. "Archangel" (meaning "Chief of the Angels") was the
leadership position held by the Word-of-God as Michael while among the angels.
So according to Adventist theology, Michael was considered the "eternal Word",
and not a created being or created angel, and the one by whom all things were
created. The Word was then born incarnate as Jesus. Seventh-day Adventists
believe the name "Michael" is significant in showing who it is, just as
"Immanuel" (which means "God with us") is about who Jesus is. They believe that
name "Michael" signifies "one who is God" and that as the "Archangel" or "chief
or head of the angels" He led the angels and thus the statement in identifies
Jesus as Michael. Seventh-day Adventists believe that the term 'Michael' is but
one of the many titles applied to the Son of God, the second person of the
Godhead. But, according to Adventists, such a view does not in any way conflict
with the belief in His full deity and eternal pre-existence, nor does it in the
least disparage His person and work. In the Seventh-day Adventist view, the
statement in : ""For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven, with a shout,
with the voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God"" identifies Jesus
as Archangel, which is Michael. And the Seventh-day Adventists believe that
also confirms that Jesus and Michael are the same. Seventh-day Adventists
believe there is and can only be one archangel and that one Archangel is named
Michael and yet in Scripture is shown as doing what also applies to Christ even
from the beginning, so is Christ pre-incarnate. There was a perception that
Adventists were relegating Jesus to something less than divine or less than God
but that is not valid since Seventh-day Adventism theology teaches and is
expressly Trinitarian. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Latter-
day Saints (also known informally as Mormons) believe that Michael is Adam, the
Ancient of Days (Dan. 7), a prince, and the patriarch of the human family and
that Michael assisted Jehovah (the heavenly form of Jesus Christ) in the
creation of the world under the direction of God the Father. Feasts, patronages
and orders. Feasts. In the Roman Catholic calendar of saints, Anglican Calendar
of Saints, and the Lutheran Calendar of Saints, the archangel's feast is
celebrated on Michaelmas Day. The day is also considered the feast of Saints
Gabriel, and Raphael or the "Feast of Saint Michael and All Angels". On the
Western Christian calendar the feast is celebrated on 29 September. In the
Eastern Orthodox Church, Saint Michael's principal feast day is November 8
(November 21 by most Orthodox churches since they use the Julian calendar),
where he is honored along with the rest of the ""Bodiless Powers of Heaven""
(i.e. angels) as their Supreme Commander, and the "Miracle at Chonae" is
commemorated on September 6. Patronages and orders. In late medieval
Christianity, Michael, together with Saint George, became the patron saint of
chivalry and is now also considered the patron saint of police officers and the
military. In mid to late 15th century, France was one of only four courts in
Western Christendom without an order of knighthood. Later in the 15th century,
Jean Molinet glorified the primordial feat of arms of the archangel as "the
first deed of knighthood and chivalrous prowess that was ever achieved." Thus
Michael was the natural patron of the first chivalric order of France, the
Order of Saint Michael of 1469. In the British honours system, a chivalric
order founded in 1818 is also named for these two saints, the Order of St
Michael and St George. The Order of Michael the Brave is Romania's highest
military decoration. Apart from his being a patron of warriors, the sick and
the suffering also consider Archangel Michael their patron saint. Based on the
legend of his 8th century apparition at Mont-Saint-Michel, France, the
Archangel is the patron of mariners in this famous sanctuary. After the
evangelisation of Germany, where mountains were often dedicated to pagan gods,
Christians placed many mountains under the patronage of the Archangel, and
numerous mountain chapels of St. Michael appeared all over Germany. He has been
the patron saint of Brussels since the Middle Ages. The city of Arkhangelsk in
Russia is named for the Archangel. Ukraine and its capital Kiev also consider
Michael their patron saint and protector. An Anglican sisterhood dedicated to
Saint Michael under the title of the Community of St Michael and All Angels was
founded in 1851. The Congregation of Saint Michael the Archangel (CSMA), also
known as the "Michaelite Fathers", is a religious order of the Roman Catholic
Church founded in 1897. Legends. Judaism. There is a legend which seems to be
of Jewish origin, and which was adopted by the Copts, to the effect that
Michael was first sent by God to bring Nebuchadnezzar (c. 600 BC) against
Jerusalem, and that Michael was afterward very active in freeing his nation
from Babylonian captivity. According to midrash Genesis Rabbah, Michael saved
Hananiah and his companions from the Fiery furnace. Michael was active in the
time of Esther: "The more Haman accused Israel on earth, the more Michael
defended Israel in heaven". It was Michael who reminded Ahasuerus that he was
Mordecai's debtor; and there is a legend that Michael appeared to the high
priest Hyrcanus, promising him assistance. Christendom. The Orthodox Church
celebrates the Miracle at Chonae on September 6. The legend states that the
pagans directed a stream against the sanctuary of St Michael to destroy it, but
Archippus (the custodian) prayed to Michael, the archangel appeared and split
the rock to open up a new bed for the stream, directing the flow away from the
church and sanctifying forever the waters which came from the new gorge. The
spring which came forth after this event is said to have special healing
powers. The legend existed in earlier times, but the 5th-7th century texts that
refer to the miracle at Chonae formed the basis of specific paradigms for
"properly approaching" angelic intermediaries for more effective prayers within
the Christian culture. There is a late 5th century legend in Cornwall, UK that
the Archangel appeared to fishermen on St Michael's Mount. According to author
Richard Freeman Johnson this legend is likely a nationalistic twist to a myth.
Cornish legends also hold that the mount itself was constructed by giants and
that King Arthur battled a giant there. The legend of the apparition of the
Archangel at around 490 AD at a secluded hilltop cave on Monte Gargano in Italy
gained a following among the Lombards in the immediate period thereafter, and
by the 8th century pilgrims arrived from as far away as England. The Roman
Breviary then recorded it on May 8, the date on which the Lombards attributed
their 663 victory over the Greek Neopolitan to the intercession of the
Archangel. The Sanctuary of Monte Sant'Angelo at Gargano is a major Catholic
pilgrimage site. According to Roman legends, while a devastating plague
persisted in Rome, Archangel Michael appeared with a sword over the mausoleum
of Hadrian, in apparent answer to the prayers of Pope St Gregory I the Great
(c. 590-604) that the plague should cease. After the plague ended, in honor of
the occasion, the pope called the mausoleum ""Castel Sant'Angelo"" (Castle of
the Holy Angel), the name by which it is still known. According to Norman
legend, Michael is said to have appeared to St Aubert, Bishop of Avranches, in
708, giving instruction to build a church on the rocky islet now known as Mont
Saint-Michel. In 966 the Duke of Normandy commissioned a Benedictine abbey on
the mount, and it remains a major pilgrimage site. A Portuguese Carmelite nun,
Antónia d'Astónaco, had reported an apparition and private revelation of the
Archangel Michael who had told to this devoted Servant of God, in 1751, that he
would like to be honored, and God glorified, by the praying of nine special
invocations. These nine invocations correspond to invocations to the nine
choirs of angels and origins the famous Chaplet of Saint Michael. This private
revelation and prayers were approved by Pope Pius IX in 1851. From 1961 to
1965, four young schoolgirls had reported several apparitions of Archangel
Michael in the small village of Garabandal, Spain. At Garabandal, the
apparitions of the Archangel Michael were mainly reported as announcing the
arrivals of the Virgin Mary. The Catholic Church has neither approved nor
condemned the Garabandal apparitions. Art and literature. In literature. In the
English epic poem "Paradise Lost" by John Milton, Michael commands the army of
angels loyal to God against the rebel forces of Satan. Armed with a sword from
God's armory, he bests Satan in personal combat, wounding his side. Artistic
depictions. Most Jewish teachings interpret the Second Commandment as against
the use of "graven images" as visual art. Islamic art's focus on calligraphy,
rather than painting and sculpture, similarly derives from the association of
idolatry with the depiction of human or angelic forms. In Christian art,
Archangel Michael may be depicted alone or with other angels such as Gabriel.
Some depictions with Gabriel date back to the 8th century, e.g. the stone
casket at Notre Dame de Mortain church in France. The widely reproduced image
of "Our Mother of Perpetual Help", an icon of the Cretan school, depicts
Michael on the left carrying the lance and sponge of the crucifixion of Jesus,
with Gabriel on the right side of Mary and Jesus. In many depictions Michael is
represented as an angelic warrior, fully armed with helmet, sword, and shield.
The shield may bears the Latin inscription "Quis ut Deus". He may be standing
over a serpent, a dragon, or the defeated figure of Satan, whom he sometimes
pierces with a lance. The iconography of Michael slaying a serpent goes back to
the early 4th century, when Emperor Constantine defeated Licinius at the Battle
of Adrianople in 324 AD, not far from the "Michaelion" a church dedicated to
Archangel Michael. Constantine felt that Licinius was an agent of Satan, and
associated him with the serpent described in the Book of Revelation (). After
the victory, Constantine commissioned a depiction of himself and his sons
slaying Licinius represented as a serpent - a symbolism borrowed from the
Christian teachings on the Archangel to whom he attributed the victory. A
similar painting, this time with the Archangel Michael himself slaying a
serpent then became a major art piece at the Michaelion and eventually lead to
the standard iconography of Archangel Michael as a warrior saint. In other
depictions Michael may be holding a pair of scales in which he weighs the souls
of the departed and may hold the book of life (as in the Book of Revelation),
to show that he takes part in the judgment. However this form of depiction is
less common than the slaying of the dragon. Michelangelo depicted this scene on
the altar wall of the Sistine Chapel. In Byzantine art Michael was often shown
as a princely court dignitary, rather than a warrior who battled Satan or with
scales for weighing souls on the Day of Judgement.
