Millennialism Millennialism (from millennium, Latin for "thousand years"), or
chiliasm in Greek, is a belief held by some Christian denominations that there
will be a Golden Age or Paradise on Earth in which "Christ will reign" for 1000
years prior to the final judgment and future eternal state (the "World to Come"
of the "New Heavens" and "New Earth"). This belief is derived primarily from
the Book of Revelation 20:1–6. Millennialism as such is a specific form of
Millenarianism. Among Christians who hold this belief, this is not the "end of
the world", but rather the penultimate age, the age just prior to the end of
Satan's worldwide system in anticipation of a New Heavens and a New Earth under
Jehovah's kingdom reign (Rev. 21:1). Some believe that between the millennium
proper and the end of the world there will be a brief period in which a final
battle with Satan will take place. After this follows the Last Judgment. Before
Christianity, millennialism was first a doctrine of Zoroastrianism. It held
that there were successive thousand-year periods, each of which will end in a
cataclysm of heresy and destruction, until the final destruction of evil and of
the spirit of evil by a triumphant king of peace at the end of the final
millennial age (supposed by some to be the year 2000). "Then Saoshyant makes
the creatures again pure, and the resurrection and future existence occur"
("Zand-i Vohuman Yasht 3:62"). Various other social and political movements,
both religious and secular, have also been linked to millennialist metaphors by
scholars. Early church and premillennialism (chiliasm). Melito of Sardis is
frequently listed as a second century proponent of premillennialism. The
support usually given for the supposition is that Jerome on Ezek. 36 and
Gennadius Dogm. Eccl., Ch. 52 both affirm that he was a decided millenarian.”
Around 220, there were some similar influences on Tertullian though only with
very important and extremely optimistic (if not perhaps even postmillennial
modifications and implications). On the other hand, 'Christian Chiliastic'
ideas were indeed advocated in 240 by Commodian; in 250 by the Egyptian Bishop
Nepos in his Refutation of Allegorists; in 260 by the almost unknown Coracion;
and in 310 by Lactantius. Into the late fourth century, the Bishop known as
Ambrose of Milan had millennial leanings (Ambrose of Milan. Book II. On the
Belief in the Resurrection, verse 108). The first known opponent of Christian
chiliasm was Marcion, in the 2nd century, who most Christians feel was an early
heretic. "The Catholic Encyclopedia" noted that in the 2nd century proponents
of "Gnosticism rejected millenarianism". Chiliasm was, however, according to
the interpretation of non-chiliasts, condemned as a heresy in the 4th century
by the Church, which included the phrase "whose Kingdom shall have no end" in
the Nicene Creed in order to rule out the idea of a Kingdom of God which would
last for only 1000 literal years. Despite some writers' belief in
millennialism, it was a decided minority view, as expressed in the nearly
universal condemnation of the doctrine over a gradual period of time, beginning
with Augustine of Hippo. Millennialism is strongly rejected as a heresy by the
Orthodox Church. In AD 230, the Synod of Iconium declared that baptisms
performed by the Montanist sect were invalid. The Ecumenical Council of
Constantinople in AD 381 supported the Synod of Iconium and further declared
millennialism to be a heresy. In a letter to Queen Gerberga of France around
950, Adso of Montier-en-Der established the idea of a "last World Emperor" who
would conquer non-Christians before the arrival of the Antichrist. Reformation
and beyond. Christian views on the future order of events diversified after the
Protestant reformation (c.1517). In particular, new emphasis was placed on the
passages in the Book of Revelation which seemed to say that Satan would be
locked away for 1000 years, but then released on the world in a final battle
(Rev. 20:1-6). Previous Catholic and Orthodox theologians had no clear or
consensus view on what this actually meant (only the concept of an end of the
world coming unexpected, "like a thief in a night", and the concept of "the
antichrist" were almost universally held). Millennialist theories try to
explain what this "1000 years of Satan in chains" would be like. Various types
of millennialism exist with regard to Christian Eschatology, especially within
Protestantism, such as Premillennialism, Postmillennialism, and Amillennialism.
The first two refer to different views of the relationship between the
"millennial Kingdom" and Christ's second coming. Premillennialism sees Christ's
second advent as preceding the millennium, thereby separating the second coming
from the final judgment. In this view, "Christ's reign" will be physical.
Postmillennialism sees Christ's second coming as subsequent to the millennium
and consequent with the final judgment. In this view "Christ's reign" (during
the millennium) will be spiritual in and through the church. Amillennialism
basically denies a future literal 1000 year Kingdom and sees the church age
metaphorically described in Rev. 20:1-6. In this view, "Christ's reign" is
current in and through the church. Millennialism. A millennium is a period of
one thousand years, and, in particular, Christ's thousand-year rule on this
earth, either directly preceding or immediately following the Second Coming
(and the Day of Judgement). The millennium reverses the previous period of evil
and suffering; it rewards the virtuous for their courage while punishing the
evil-doers, with a clear separation of saints and sinners. The vision of a
thousand-year period of bliss for the faithful, to be enjoyed here on earth
("heaven on earth"), exerted an irresistible power. Although the picture of
life in the millennial era is almost willfully obscure and hardly more
appealing than that of, say, the Golden Age, what has made the millennium much
more powerful than the Golden Age or Paradise myths are the activities of the
sects and movements that it has inspired. Throughout the ages, hundreds of
sects were convinced that the millennium was imminent, about to begin in the
very near future, with precise dates given on many occasions. Premillennial
sects look for signs of Christ's imminent return. Other chiliast sects, such as
the prophetic Anabaptist followers of Thomas Müntzer, have believed that the
millennium had already begun, with only their own members having realized this
fact. Consequently, they have attempted to live out their own vision of
millennial life, radically overturning the beliefs and practices of the
surrounding society. In doing so, they offered a model of the good life and
expressed their hope that soon the rest of the world would follow and live like
they did. See Christian eschatology for a discussion of "premillennialism" and
"postmillennialism". Utopianism. The early Christian concept had ramifications
far beyond strictly religious concern during the centuries to come, as it was
blended and enhanced with ideas of utopia. It was believed that the Age of the
Holy Spirit would begin at around 1260, and that from then on all believers
would be living as monks, mystically transfigured and full of praise for God,
for a thousand years until Judgement Day would put an end to the history of our
planet. In the Modern Era, some of the concepts of millennial thinking have
found their way into various secular ideas, usually in the form of a belief
that a certain historical event will fundamentally change human society (or has
already done so). For example, the French Revolution seemed to many to be
ushering in the millennial age of reason. Also, the philosophies of Georg
Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel (1770–1831) and Karl Marx (1818–1883) carried
strong millennial overtones. As late as 1970, Yale law teacher Charles A. Reich
coined the term "Consciousness III" in his best seller "The Greening of
America", in which he spoke of a new age ushered in by the hippie generation.
However, these secular theories generally have little or nothing to do with the
original millennial thinking, or with each other. Judaism. There is a not
dissimilar belief in Judaism. Time is split into 3 periods (1) The world
started in year 1 (= 3761 BC), the epoch. For almost two thousand years there
was nothing, most people were idolatrous and God's presence was not seen in the
world. (2) In 1812 BC, 1948 in Jewish years, Abraham was born. The birth of the
first forefather heralded two thousand years of Godliness. This is the period
of the Bible, the first and second temples in Jerusalem etc. (3) In 70 AD the
Second Temple in Jerusalem was destroyed, and after the Bar Kokhba revolt, Jews
were barred from Jerusalem except for the day of Tisha B'av. This started a
further two thousand years of non-Godliness. Some Jews believe that the Messiah
must come before the end of this period, or by about 2270 AD. Jehovah's
Witnesses. In brief, Jehovah's Witnesses believe that Christ will rule from
heaven for 1,000 years as king over the earth, assisted by 144,000 holy ones.
This will happen after the destruction of the wicked at Armageddon. The
principal purpose of this millennial reign is to resolve the question of who
legitimately deserves to be sovereign of the Earth and of the universe.
Armageddon will be a decisive battle between two opposing forces: on one side,
Christ Jesus together with the holy angels; in opposition, human governments
and institutions (manipulated by wicked spirits), insistent on maintaining
control over humanity. Unlike natural or manmade catastrophes, Christ and his
angels will selectively destroy those humans deemed incorrigible. Planet Earth
will be rid of greed, corruption, and all individuals as well as institutions
who impenitently ruin the earth and impose misery on others. Malevolent
spiritual beings will be restrained and prevented from interfering in human
affairs for the duration of Christ's reign. Unlike fundamentalist Christian
groups who expect the planet Earth to be completely destroyed, Jehovah's
Witnesses' understanding is that the 1,000 year rule is fulfillment of the
Biblical promise of "New Heavens and a New Earth". Christ's kingdom consists of
those who govern (from heaven) and those who are governed (on earth). The
kingdom will accomplish in a relatively short timespan (1,000 years) all the
things human institutions have promised, but failed to deliver, during
thousands of years of rule, and by every form of government imaginable. Jesus
Christ, the Messiah, will be the 'head of state', or King officially designated
by God. In turn, he will delegate authority to 144,000 select individuals, also
chosen by God (Jesus' father) from among humanity. Those chosen have already
proven their complete allegiance to God and to His legitimate right to govern.
The first to be promised this privilege were the faithful apostles of Jesus
Christ in the 1st century. The rulers will be loving and fair, always intent on
the common good of everyone. On the earth,those who survive the great
tribulation (Matt 24:21) and the subsequent destruction of the world ruled By
Satan the Devil (Rev16:16 1 John 5:19 Matt 25:31-40) a just, peaceful, and
equitable earthwide society of humans will be established. With The help of
King Jesus Christ(Heb 2:5), and the chosen (144.000) co-rulers (Rev 5:9,10
Dan7:27) Those who have survived, (Rev7:9)will accept the directions and norms
applied by Christ and his co-rulers from Jehovah God The All-Mighty (Isaiah 42:
5-8). During the millennium, Christ will use his power to cure every sort of
sickness(Rev 22:17), malady, and infirmity; ultimately everyone who accepts
living, by Jehovah God's Righteous standards (Gen 1:28, Exodus 20:1-17)1will
attain perfect health. Guided by the heavenly government, humans will work to
progressively produce an earthwide paradise(Matt 19:27,28) Hunger and poverty
will be completely eliminated(Rev 21:1-5). Humans who died during the prior
milleniums of human history (yet were not deemed incorrigible) will be
resurrected (recreated)(Acts 24:15) on the earth over the course of the
millennium, provided they accept Jehovah's righteous standards (Isaiah 65:
11,20). These will have the opportunity to fully integrate into society(Isaiah
65:17). At the culmination of the millennium, Christ will cede control of
planet Earth to his Father Jehovah(1 Cor 15:28). He himself will acknowledge
and accept Jehovah's right to rule (or sovereignty). The restraints on wicked
spirit creatures will be removed and all humanity will face a test. With full
understanding, each one must individually choose whether to accept or reject
God's sovereignty (right to rule). Those humans and spirit creatures who reject
rule by Jehovah God, showing themselves to be menaces to human society and the
remainder of the universe, will be completely and permanently eliminated. For
many this will literally be a "second" death. Thereafter, obedient humankind
will live forever on the earth and Jehovah God's original purpose for the earth
will be accomplished. Nazism. The most controversial interpretation of the
Three Ages philosophy and of millennialism in general is Adolf Hitler's "Third
Reich" (""Drittes Reich""), which in his vision would last for a thousand years
to come (""Tausendjähriges Reich""), but which ultimately only lasted for 12
years (1933–1945). Although van den Bruck was unimpressed by Hitler when he
met him in 1922 and did not join the Nazi Party, the phrase was nevertheless
adopted by the Nazis to describe the totalitarian state they wanted to set up
when they gained power, which they succeeded in doing in 1933. Later, however,
the Nazi authorities banned the informal use of "Third Reich" throughout the
German press in the summer of 1939, instructing it to use more official terms
such as "German Reich", "Greater German Reich", and "National Socialist
Germany" exclusively. During the early part of the Third Reich many Germans
also referred to Hitler as being the "German Messiah", especially when he
conducted the Nuremberg Rallies, which came to be held at a date somewhat
before the Autumn Equinox in Nuremberg, Germany. Theosophy. The Theosophist
Alice A. Bailey taught that Christ (in her books she refers to the powerful
spiritual being best known by Theosophists as "Maitreya" as "The Christ" or
"The World Teacher", not as "Maitreya") would return “sometime after AD
2025”, and that this would be the New Age equivalent of the Christian concept
of the "Second Coming of Christ". Alice A. Bailey stated that St. Germain
(referred to by Alice A. Bailey in her books as "The Master Rakoczi" or "The
Master R.") is the manager of the executive council of the Christ. According to
Alice A. Bailey, when Christ returns, he will stay the entire approximately
2,000 years period of the Age of Aquarius, and thus the New Age equivalent of
the "Millennial Age", when Maitreya will reign as the spiritual leader of Earth
as the Messiah who will bring World Peace, will not be just a single millennium
but will be the Aquarian "bimillennium". Social movements. Millennial social
movements are a specific form of Millenarianism that are based on some concept
of a one thousand year cycle. Sometimes the two terms are used as synonyms, but
this is not entirely accurate for a purist. Millennial social movements need
not be religious, but they must have a vision of an apocalypse that can be
utopian or dystopian.
