Millerism The Millerites were the followers of the teachings of William Miller
who, in 1833, first shared publicly his belief in the coming Second Advent of
Jesus Christ in roughly the year 1843. Origins. Miller was a prosperous farmer,
a Baptist lay preacher and student of the Bible, living in northern New York,
in the region of that state which has come to be known as the Burned-over
district. Through years of intensive study of symbolic meaning of the
prophecies of Daniel and using the year-day method of prophetic interpretation,
Miller became convinced that the date of Christ's Second Coming was revealed in
Bible prophecy. In September 1822, Miller formally stated his conclusions in a
twenty-point document, including article 15, “I believe that the second
coming of Jesus Christ is near, even at the door, even within twenty-one
years,—on or before 1843.” This document however, remained private for many
years. Miller did eventually share his views—first, to a few friends
privately, and later to some ministerial acquaintances. Initially he was
disappointed at the lack of response from those he spoke to. “To my
astonishment, I found very few who listened with any interest. Occasionally,
one would see the force of the evidence, but the great majority passed it by as
an idle tale.” Miller states that he began his public lecturing in the
village of Dresden, Washington County, New York, some 16 miles from his home,
on “the first Sabbath in August 1833.” However, as Sylvester Bliss points
out, “The printed article from which this is copied was written in 1845. By
an examination of his correspondence, it appears that he must have begun to
lecture in August 1831. So that this date is a mistake of the printer or an
error in Mr. Miller's memory.” In 1832, Miller submitted a series of sixteen
articles to the "Vermont Telegraph"—a Baptist paper. The first of these was
published on May 15, and Miller writes of the public’s response, “I began
to be flooded with letters of inquiry respecting my views, and visitors flocked
to converse with me on the subject.” In 1834, unable to personally comply
with many of the urgent requests for information and the invitations to travel
and preach that he received, Miller published a synopsis of his teachings in a
“little tract of 64 pages.” These he “...scattered, the most of them
gratuitously, sending them in reply to letters of inquiry and to places which I
could not visit.” A national movement. From 1840 onward, Millerism was
transformed from an “obscure, regional movement into a national campaign.”
The key figure in this transformation was Joshua Vaughan Himes—the pastor of
Chardon Street Chapel in Boston, and an able and experienced publisher. Though
Himes did not fully accept Miller’s ideas until 1842, he established the
fortnightly paper "Signs of the Times" to publicize them. The first edition was
published on February 28, 1840, with Himes as editor. It continues to be
published by the Seventh-day Adventist Church as a monthly evangelistic
magazine under the same name. Periodical literature played an important part in
the rapid and widespread dissemination of Millerite beliefs. “From first to
last the power of the press, in this particular form, was one of the foremost
factors in the success of this now vigorous, expanding movement.” In addition
to the "Signs of the Times" based in Boston, Millerite papers were published in
numerous cities including New York, Philadelphia, Rochester, Cleveland, and
Montreal. There were at least 48 Millerite periodicals that circulated in the
period leading up to the Great Disappointment. The majority of these, however,
were quite short-lived—often a new paper was started whenever a Millerite
evangelistic campaign entered a new area. As well as publications based on
geography, the Millerites issued various papers targeting different groups.
"The Advent Message to the Daughters of Zion" focused on female readers, and
was first published in May 1844. "The Advent Shield" was a more academically
orientated paper published in Boston and edited by Joshua Vaughan Himes,
Sylvester Bliss, and Apollos Hale. Its announced purpose was to “defend the
doctrine from the attacks of the enemies, to exhibit the unscriptural position
of the opponents, and furnish the truth to those who were ready to receive
it.” While only three issues were produced: in May 1844, January 1845, and a
final issue in April 1845; it was the largest of the Millerite papers, the
first two issues each having 144 pages, and the final having 250. As the
various dates of Christ’s predicted return approached, Millerite publishing
went into high gear. In May 1843, 21,000 copies of the various Millerite papers
were published for distribution each week. In New York alone, in the five month
period ending April 1843, 600,000 copies of various publications were
distributed. In December 1843, Himes proposed the publication of one million
tracts, while in May 1844, he announced that five million copies of Millerite
publications had been distributed up to that time. A researcher examined the
geographical distribution of correspondents to the Millerite periodical "Signs
of the Times" from 1840 to 1847. Out of a total of 615 correspondents, she
found that the 131 correspondents from New York state provided the largest
group. Vermont provided another 107, with New England (excluding Vermont)
accounting for a further 279. Outside of these areas, representation was
sparse: 23 in New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware and Maryland combined; just 65
from the west—including 20 from Ohio; and only 10 from the Southern states.
While it seems then, that the vast majority of Miller’s followers were of
local origin, his message was not limited to his local area—nor even to
America. Miller preached across the border in Canada’s Eastern Townships on
at least three occasions: in 1835, 1838 and 1840. He made a number of converts
there and gained the support of some of the local clergy. At least five
Millerite papers were published in Canada: the "Faithful Watchman"—published
in Sherbrooke from January 1843; the influential "Voice of Elijah", published
in Montreal from June 1843; the short-lived "Hope of the Church" in St. Thomas
in 1844; "Behold, He Cometh" in Hamilton, and the "Bridegroom’s Herald" in
Toronto, both from mid-1844. Many travellers or emigrants to the United States
who had heard the Second Advent message there returned to their home districts
to preach. From 1841, Millerite evangelists appeared in Great Britain, also,
though he never travelled there himself.In addition to the nearly $1000 that
Miller and Himes spent supplying literature to enquirers and evangelists in
Great Britain; “there is evidence that Liverpool, Bristol, and other ports
local Millerite pioneers borrowed copies of Miller’s works and Adventist
magazines from visiting American sea captains and merchants.” As well as
utilizing imported American literature, two Millerite papers were published
locally in Great Britain: the "Second Advent Harbinger" in Bristol, and the
"British Midnight Cry" in Liverpool. The Millerite message entered Australia
through the Canadian paper "Voice of Elijah". Thomas Playford, living in
Adelaide, was converted thus. Playford spread the Millerite message in
Australia, even publishing a book of his sermons: "Discourses on the Second
Advent of Jesus Christ". Playford’s preaching apparently resulted in a number
of converts. An English Millerite, James William Bonham, apparently sent copies
of "The Midnight Cry" to Van Diemen’s Land (now Tasmania), though no record
remains of their effect. In a similar manner, converts were made in Norway and
Chile. A letter published in "The Midnight Cry" of October 12, 1843, from a Mrs
O. S. Burnham of Kaloa, The Sandwich Islands, (now Hawaii) stated that she and
her husband had accepted the Millerite message and were worshipping with a
small company of believers. Despite the urging of his supporters, Miller never
personally set an exact date for the expected Second Advent. However, in
response to their urgings he did narrow the time-period to sometime in the year
1843, stating: “My principles in brief, are, that Jesus Christ will come
again to this earth, cleanse, purify, and take possession of the same, with all
the saints, sometime between March 21, 1843 and March 21, 1844” March 21,
1844 passed without incident, and the majority of Millerites maintained their
faith. On March 25, Miller wrote to Himes, “I am still looking for the Dear
Savior…. The time, as I have calculated it, is now filled up; and I expect
every moment to see the Savior descend from heaven. I have now nothing to look
for but this glorious hope.” As George R. Knight states, the movement’s
survival was a result of the fact that, “the Millerite leaders had been
‘soft’ on the time…. They allowed for the possibility of small errors in
their calculations and even in some of their historic dates.” In fact, on
February 28, Miller himself had written, “If Christ comes, as we expect, we
will sing the song of victory soon; if not, we will watch, and pray, and preach
until he comes, for soon our time, and all prophetic days, will have been
filled.” Further discussion and study resulted in the brief adoption of a new
date—April 18, 1844, one based on the Karaite Jewish calendar (as opposed to
the Rabbinic calendar). Like the previous date, April 18 passed without
Christ’s return. More study led the Millerites to believe that they had
entered the “tarrying time”—a time of waiting after which Christ would
finally return—spoken of in and . This belief sustained the Millerites
through the months of May to July, 1844. As Knight notes however, this period
represented a “flatness in Millerite evangelism,” when even the Millerite
preachers must have experienced diminished certainty. In August 1844 at a camp-
meeting in Exeter, New Hampshire, everything changed when Samuel S. Snow
presented a message of earth-shattering proportions—what became known as the
“seventh-month” message or the “true midnight cry.” In a complex
discussion based on scriptural typology, Snow presented his conclusion (still
based on the 2300 day prophecy in ), that Christ would return on, “the tenth
day of the seventh month of the present year, 1844.” Again using the calendar
of the Karaite Jews, this date was determined to be October 22, 1844. This
“seventh month message” “spread with a rapidity unparalleled in the
Millerite experience” amongst the general population. The situation caught
many of the established leaders—including Himes and Miller himself, by
surprise. Knight reports that, “There is no evidence that any of the foremost
Millerite preachers accepted this grass-roots development until late September.
Most did not accept it until early October.” The Great Disappointment.
October 22, 1844, that day of great hope and promise, ended like any other day
to the disappointment of the Millerites. Both Millerite leaders and followers
were left generally bewildered and disillusioned. Responses varied: some
Millerites continued to look daily for Christ’s return, others predicted
different dates—among them April, July, and October 1845. Some theorized that
the world had entered the seventh millennium, the “Great Sabbath”, and
that, therefore, the saved should not work. Others acted as children, basing
their belief on Jesus’ words in , “Truly, I say to you, whoever does not
receive the kingdom of God like a child shall not enter it.” O. J. D.
Pickands used to teach that Christ was now sitting on a white cloud, and must
be prayed down. Probably the majority however, simply gave up their beliefs and
attempted to rebuild their lives. Some members rejoined their previous
denominations while a substantial number became Quakers. Post 'Great
Disappointment' Millerism. In the confusion that followed the Great
Disappointment it seemed that almost every Millerite had an opinion—all of
them different. Miller said that in one week he received sixteen different
papers advocating different views, all claiming to be Advent papers. Much of
the responsibility for this proliferation of viewpoints must be shouldered by
Miller, whose Rules of Biblical Interpretation outlined a method of biblical
study that encouraged each person to read the Bible and to “do theology”
for themselves. By mid-1845, doctrinal lines amongst the various Millerite
groups began to solidify, emphasizing their differences—a process Knight
terms “sect building.” During this time three main Millerite groups formed,
in addition to those who had simply given up their beliefs. The first major
division of the Millerite groups who had not completely given up their belief
in Christ’s Second Advent were those who accepted a shut-door theology. This
belief was popularized by Joseph Turner and was based on that key Millerite
passage: —the Parable of the Ten Virgins. The shut door mentioned in verses
11-12 was interpreted as the "close of probation". As Knight explains, “After
the door was shut, there would be no additional salvation. The wise virgins
(true believers) would be in the kingdom, while the foolish virgins and all
others would be on the outside.” The belief became a major issue upon the
publication in January 1845, of an article by Apollos Hale and Turner in "The
Advent Mirror". This article tied the shut-door concept to October 22, 1844,
teaching that the work of general salvation was finished at that date—Christ
came spiritually as the Bridegroom, the wise virgins had entered into the
wedding feast, and the door was then shut on all others. This first group is
commonly known as either the “shut-door” or “spiritualizer” group.
Notably, the stated purpose of the conference was not to debate controversial
doctrines. In fact the invitation was extended only to those Adventists who
“still adhere to the original faith.” The Shut-door Adventists and others
who had developed new doctrines were therefore explicitly excluded. The biggest
draw card was to be the presence of Miller. In fact Himes wrote to Miller on
March 27, 1845, saying, “all depends upon your being there.” The Albany
Conference group of Millerites formed the Evangelical Adventists out of which
rose the Advent Christian Church. The Albany Conference Statement with its
narrowing of beliefs was unacceptable to many. Millerism had been founded on
Miller’s open, non-restrictive approach to Bible study--“It was the freedom
to discover new truths that had drawn so many Christians and Freewill Baptists
to the movement. The new restrictive definitions charted a course that was
unacceptable to many who had joined the movement.” The third major post-
disappointment Millerite group also claimed—like the Hale and Turner led
group—that the October 22 date was correct. Rather than Christ returning
invisibly however, they came to view the event that took place on October 22,
1844 as having been quite different. The theology of this third group appears
to have had its beginnings as early as October 23, 1844—the day after the
Great Disappointment. On that day, during a prayer session with a group of
Advent believers, Hiram Edson became convinced that “light would be given”
and their “disappointment explained.” Some years later, Edson reported on
his experiences following that meeting: "While passing through a large field I
was stopped about midway of the field. Heaven seemed open to my view, and I saw
distinctly and clearly that instead of our High Priest coming out of the Most
Holy of the heavenly sanctuary to come to this earth on the tenth day of the
seventh month, at the end of the 2300 days, that He for the first time entered
on that day the second apartment of that sanctuary; and that He had a work to
perform in the Most Holy before coming to this earth in His Second Coming. That
he came to the marriage at that time; in other words, to the Ancient of days to
receive a kingdom, dominion, and glory; and we must wait for his return from
the wedding." Edson’s experience led him into an extended study on the topic
with O. R. L. Crosier and F. B. Hahn. They came to the conclusion that “the
sanctuary to be cleansed in Daniel 8:14 was not the earth or the church, but
the sanctuary in heaven.” Therefore, the October 22 date marked not the
Second Coming of Christ, but rather a heavenly event. This is the basis for the
later Seventh-day Adventist doctrine of the Investigative Judgement. An article
written by O. R. L. Crosier titled "To All Who Are waiting for Redemption, the
Following is Addressed" summarising their insights, was published in the March
1845 edition of the "Day-Dawn". A more comprehensive article - also by O. R. L.
Crosier and titled "The Law of Moses" was published in the "Day-Star" of
February 7, 1846. It is out of this third Millerite group that the Seventh-day
Adventist Church arose. Influences. Bible Student movement (Jehovah's Witnesses
since 1931) had connections at the very beginning (in the early 2nd half of
19th century) with the Millerite movement. Russell later stated that "I confess
indebtedness to Adventists as well as to other denominations". In light of
this, the Bible Student Movement was influenced by Adventists roots, but did
not emerge from the Millerism movement. Bahá'ís also credit Miller's analysis
of the time of Christ's return. See also Day-year principle for a more complete
review of how William Miller's analysis of the 2300 day prophecy of Daniel 8
matches the Baha'i understanding. Baha'is believe that, although William
Miller's understanding of the location and method of Christ's return was not
accurate, his calculation of the timing was entirely correct.
