Minor orders Minor orders are ranks of church ministry lower than major orders.
The Roman Catholic Church in its Latin Rite traditionally distinguished between
the major orders (holy orders) of bishop, priest, deacon and subdeacon, and
four minor orders, that of acolyte, exorcist, lector and porter (in descending
sequence). In 1972, the minor orders were renamed "ministries", with those of
lector and acolyte being kept throughout the Latin Church. All four minor
orders are still conferred on members of some Roman Catholic religious
institutes and societies of apostolic life authorized to observe the 1962 form
of the Roman Rite. In the Eastern Orthodox Church, the three minor orders in
use are those of subdeacon, cantor and lector. Roman Catholic Church. From the
beginning of the 3rd century there is evidence in Western Christianity of the
existence of what became the four minor orders (acolytes, exorcists,
doorkeepers and readers), as well as of cantors and "fossores" (tomb diggers).
The evidence for readers is probably the earliest. In the West, unlike the
East, where imposition of hands was used, the rite of ordination was by the
handing over to them of objects seen as instruments of the office. The Council
of Sardica (343) mentions the lectorate alone as obligatory before ordination
to the diaconate. The obligation to receive all four minor orders appears to
date only from a time when they ceased to indicate exercise of an actual
function. Even in the early years of the 20th century, no minimum age, other
than that of that of the use of reason, was laid down for receiving minor
orders. However, the 1917 Code of Canon Law laid down that nobody was to be
given clerical tonsure, which had to be received before minor orders, before
beginning the regular course of theological studies. Before the entry into
force of that Code, it was an almost universal custom to confer all four minor
orders at one time, since the bishop was authorized to dispense from the rule
that each order had to be exercised for some time before reception of the next
highest order. Today, as indicated in the 1983 Code of Canon Law, anyone who is
to be ordained to the diaconate must already have received the ministries of
lector and acolyte and exercised them for a suitable period, with an interval
of at least six months between becoming an acolyte and becoming a deacon. The
1917 Code of Canon Law also restricted conferral of tonsure and any order below
that of the presbyterate to those who intended to become priests and who were
judged likely to be worthy priests. Previously, there were lay cardinals and
others, including the famous Franz Liszt, who received minor orders alone. They
could even marry and remain clerics, the status of belonging to the clergy
being at that time conferred through clerical tonsure, provided that they
married only once and that to a virgin; but by the early 20th century a cleric
who married was considered to have forfeited his clerical status. Today, a man
who receives what were previously called minor orders is not yet a cleric,
since today one becomes a cleric only upon ordination to the diaconate, a rule
that applies even to members of institutes authorized to observe the 1962 form
of the Roman Rite, such as the Priestly Fraternity of St. Peter and others
under the care of the Pontifical Commission Ecclesia Dei. In the early 20th
century, Auguste Boudinhon said that, on the grounds that minor orders did not
originate with Jesus or the apostles, the view that minor orders and the
subdiaconate were sacramental, a view held by several medieval theologians, was
no longer held. The slightly earlier G. van Noort said that the view of their
sacramentality, which was held by most scholastic theologians, including Thomas
Aquinas, was then held only by a few, among whom he mentioned Louis Billot
(1846-1931) and Adolphe Tanquerey (1854-1932). In the 1950s, Antonio Piolanti
recognized as orders only episcopacy, priesthood (presbyterate) and diaconate,
the three whose transmission is reserved to bishops. In speaking of the
hierarchical structure of the Church, the Second Vatican Council mentioned only
these three orders, not minor orders or subdiaconate. By Pope Paul VI's motu
proprio "Ministeria quaedam" of 15 August 1972, the term "minor orders" has
been replaced by that of "ministries". Two of what were called minor orders,
those of reader and acolyte, are kept throughout the Latin Church, and national
episcopal conferences are free to use the term "subdeacon" in place of that of
"acolyte". The motu proprio specified the functions of each of these two
ministries, A prescribed interval, as decided by the Holy See and the national
episcopal conference, is to be observed between receiving them. Candidates for
diaconate and for priesthood must receive both ministries and exercise them for
some time before receiving holy orders. Conferral of the minor orders or
ministries is by the ordinary: either a diocesan bishop or someone who is
equivalent in law to a diocesan bishop or, in the case of clerical religious
institutes and societies of apostolic life, a major superior. The two
ministries that are in use throughout the Latin Church could be conferred even
on men who are not candidates for holy orders. Eastern Christianity. Eastern
Christianity traditionally views the subdeacon as a minor order, unlike the
practice of the West which considered it a major order. The other common minor
order is lector (reader). The minor order of porter is mentioned historically
in some service-books, but no longer is given; all of the rights and
responsibilities of each minor order are viewed as contained in the
subdiaconate. The 22 "sui iuris" Eastern Churches that are in union with Rome
have their traditional minor orders, governed by their own particular law. In
all Eastern Catholic Churches, subdeacons are minor clerics, since admission to
major orders is by ordination as deacon. The Byzantine tradition allows for
several orders of minor clerics. The "sui iuris" Byzantine Catholic
Metropolitan Church of Pittsburgh, also called the Byzantine-Ruthenian Church,
has the minor orders of candle bearer, cantor, lector and subdeacon, and in
English uses the term "ordination" for their cheirothesis. The minor orders of
candle bearer and cantor are given before tonsure during ordination to the
lectorate. Eastern Orthodox Churches routinely confer the minor orders of
lector and subdeacon, and some jurisdictions also ordain cantors. Ordination to
minor orders is done by a bishop at any public worship service, but always
outside the context of the Divine Liturgy. The order of taper-bearer is now
used as part of ordination as a lector. The orders of doorkeepers, exorcists,
and acolytes are no longer in common use.
