Mishnah The Mishnah or Mishna (Hebrew: , "repetition", from the verb "shanah" ,
or "to study and review", also "secondary" (derived from the adj. "shani" ) is
the first major written redaction of the Jewish oral traditions called the
"Oral Torah". It is also the first major work of Rabbinic Judaism. It was
redacted 220 CE by Rabbi Yehudah haNasi when, according to the Talmud, the
persecution of the Jews and the passage of time raised the possibility that the
details of the oral traditions dating from Pharisaic times (536 BCE ‚Äì 70 CE)
would be forgotten. It is thus named for being both the one written authority
(codex) secondary (only) to the Tanakh as a basis for the passing of judgment,
a source and a tool for creating laws, and the first of many books to
complement the Bible in certain aspects. The Mishnah is also called "Shas" (an
acronym for "Shisha Sedarim" ‚Äì the "six orders"), in reference to its six
main divisions. Rabbinic commentaries on the Mishnah over the next three
centuries were redacted as the Gemara, which, coupled with the Mishnah,
comprise the Talmud. Unlike the Gemara, which is written primarily in Aramaic,
the majority of the Mishnah is written in Hebrew. European scholars over the
past 1,000 years have termed this variety of the language "Mishnaic Hebrew".
The Mishnah reflects debates between 1st century BCE and 2nd century CE by the
group of rabbinic sages known as the Tannaim. The Mishnah teaches the oral
traditions by example, presenting actual cases being brought to judgment,
usually along with the debate on the matter and the judgment that was given by
a wise and notable rabbi based on the halacha, "mitzvot", and spirit of the
teaching ("Torah") that guided his sentencing. In this way, it brings to
everyday reality the practice of the "mitzvot" as presented in the Bible, and
aims to cover all aspects of human living, serve as an example for future
judgments, and, most important, demonstrate pragmatic exercise of the Biblical
laws, which was much needed at the time when the Second Temple was destroyed
(70 C.E). The Mishnah does not claim to be the development of new laws, but
rather the collection of existing traditions. The Mishnah consists of six
orders (', singular ' ), each containing 7‚Äì12 tractates (', singular ' ; lit.
"web"), 63 in total, and further subdivided into chapters and paragraphs or
verses. The orders and their subjects are: "Zeraim" ("Seeds"), dealing with
prayer and blessings, tithes and agricultural laws (11 tractates), "Moed"
("Festival"), pertaining to the laws of the Sabbath and the Festivals (12
tractates), "Nashim" ("Women"), concerning marriage and divorce, some forms of
oaths and the laws of the nazirite (7 tractates), "Nezikin" ("Damages"),
dealing with civil and criminal law, the functioning of the courts and oaths
(10 tractates), "Kodashim" ("Holy things"), regarding sacrificial rites, the
Temple, and the dietary laws (11 tractates) and "Tehorot" ("Purities"),
pertaining to the laws of purity and impurity, including the impurity of the
dead, the laws of food purity and bodily purity (12 tractates). The word
"Mishnah" can also indicate a single paragraph or verse of the work itself,
i.e. the smallest unit of structure in the Mishnah. Structure. The Mishnah
consists of six orders (', singular ' ), each containing 7‚Äì12 tractates (',
singular ' ; lit. "web"), 63 in total. Each ' is divided into chapters (',
singular ') and then paragraphs or verses (', singular ""). The Mishnah is also
called "Shas" (an acronym for "Shisha Sedarim" ‚Äì the "six orders"). A
mnemonic that is used to remember the sequence of the orders was provided by
Resh Lakish (Shab. 31a) that is based on the verse, "And there shall be "faith"
in your times, "strength", "salvation", "wisdom", and "knowledge"" (Isa. 33:6).
"Faith" refers to Zeraim (Seeds), because a farmer sowing the crop must have
faith to believe God will provide a bountiful harvest. "Your times" refers to
Moed (Festival). "Strength" refers to order Nashim (Women). "Salvation" refers
to Nezikin (Damages) because knowledge of civil law "saves" people from each
other. "Wisdom" refers to order Kodashim (Holy Things) and "knowledge" refers
to order Tehorot (Purities) because they are so difficult to understand. An
acronym is often used, which is another popular mnemonic "Z'MaN NaKaT." The
Mishnah orders its content by subject matter, instead of by biblical context.
Likewise it discusses individual subjects more thoroughly than the Midrash. It
includes a much broader selection of halakhic subjects than the Midrash. The
six orders are: In each order (with the exception of Zeraim), tractates are
arranged from biggest (in number of chapters) to smallest. The word "Mishnah"
can also indicate a single paragraph or verse of the work itself, i.e. the
smallest unit of structure in the Mishnah. The Babylonian Talmud (Hagiga 14a)
states that there were either six hundred or seven hundred orders of the
Mishnah. Hillel the Elder organized them into six orders to make it easier to
remember. The historical accuracy of this tradition is disputed. There is also
a tradition that Ezra the scribe dictated from memory not only the 24 books of
the Tanakh but 60 esoteric books. It is not known whether this is a reference
to the Mishnah, but there is a case for saying that the Mishnah does consist of
60 tractates. (The current total is 63, but Makkot was originally part of
Sanhedrin, and Bava Kamma, Bava Metzia and Bava Batra may be regarded as
subdivisions of a single tractate Nezikin.) Interestingly, Reuvein Margolies
(1889‚Äì1971) posited that there were originally seven orders of Mishnah,
citing a Gaonic tradition on the existence of a seventh order containing the
laws of "Sta"m" (scribal practice) and Berachot (blessings). Omissions. A
number of important laws are not elaborated upon in the Mishnah. These include
the laws of tzitzit, tefillin (phylacteries), mezuzot, the holiday of Hanukkah,
and the laws of gerim (converts). These were later discussed in the minor
tractates. Rabbi Nissim Gaon in his "Hakdamah Le'mafteach Hatalmud" writes that
many of these laws were so well known that it was unnecessary for Rabbi Judah
to discuss them. Reuvein Margolies suggests that as the Mishnah was redacted
after the Bar Kochba revolt, Rabbi Judah could not have included discussion of
Hanukkah which commemorates the Jewish revolt against the Syrian-Greeks (the
Romans would not have tolerated this overt nationalism). Similarly, there were
then several decrees in place aimed at suppressing outward signs of national
identity, including decrees against wearing tefillin and tzitzit; as Conversion
to Judaism was against Roman law, Rabbi Judah would not have discussed this.
David Zvi Hoffman suggests that there existed ancient texts in the form of the
present day Shulchan Aruch that discussed the basic laws of day to day living
and it was therefore not necessary to focus on these laws in the Mishnah.
Authorship. The Mishnah does not claim to be the development of new laws, but
merely the collection of existing oral laws, traditions and traditional wisdom.
The rabbis who contributed to the Mishnah are known as the "Tannaim", of whom
approximately 120 are known. The period during which the Mishnah was assembled
spanned about 130 years, and five generations. Most of the Mishnah is related
without attribution (""). This usually indicates that many sages taught so, or
that Judah haNasi (often called "Rabbi") who redacted the Mishnah together with
his academy/court ruled so. The "halakhic" ruling usually follows that view.
Sometimes, however, it appears to be the opinion of a single sage, and the view
of the sages collectively (, "hachamim") is given separately. The Talmud
records a tradition that unattributed statements of the law represent the views
of Rabbi Meir (Sanhedrin 86a), which supports the theory (recorded by Rav
Sherira Gaon in his famous "Iggeret") that he was the author of an earlier
collection. For this reason, the few passages that actually say "this is the
view of Rabbi Meir" represent cases where the author intended to present Rabbi
Meir's view as a "minority opinion" not representing the accepted law. Rabbi is
credited with publishing the Mishnah, though there have been a few edits since
his time (for example, those passages that cite him or his grandson, Rabbi
Yehuda Nesi'ah; in addition, the Mishnah at the end of Tractate Sotah refers to
the period after Rabbi's death, which could not have been written by Rabbi
himself). According to the Epistle of Sherira Gaon, after the tremendous
upheaval caused by the destruction of the Temple and the Bar Kochba revolt, the
Oral Torah was in danger of being forgotten. It was for this reason that Rabbi
chose to redact the Mishnah. One must also note that in addition to redacting
the Mishnah, Rabbi and his court also ruled on which opinions should be
followed, though the rulings do not always appear in the text. As he went
through the tractates, the Mishnah was set forth, but throughout his life some
parts were updated as new information came to light. Because of the
proliferation of earlier versions, it was deemed too hard to retract anything
already released, and therefore a second version of certain laws were released.
The Talmud refers to these differing versions as "Mishnah Rishonah" ("First
Mishnah") and "Mishnah Acharonah" ("Last Mishnah"). David Zvi Hoffman suggests
that "Mishnah Rishonah" actually refers to texts from earlier Sages upon which
Rabbi based his Mishnah. One theory is that the present Mishnah was based on an
earlier collection by Rabbi Meir. There are also references to the "Mishnah of
Rabbi Akiva", though this may simply mean his teachings in general. It is
possible that Rabbi Akiva and Rabbi Meir established the divisions and order of
subjects in the Mishnah, but this would make them the authors of a school
curriculum rather than of a book. Authorities are divided on whether Rabbi
recorded the Mishnah in writing or established it as an oral text for
memorisation. The most important early account of its composition, the Epistle
of Sherira Gaon, is ambiguous on the point, though the "Spanish" recension
leans to the theory that the Mishnah was written. However, the Talmud records
that, in every study session, there was a person called the "tanna" appointed
to recite the Mishnah passage under discussion. This may indicate that, even if
the Mishnah was reduced to writing, it was not available on general
distribution. Oral law. Before the publication of the Mishnah, Jewish
scholarship was predominantly oral. Rabbis expounded on and debated the Tanakh
(Hebrew: ◊™÷∑÷º◊ ÷∑"◊ö÷∞), the Hebrew Bible, without the benefit of written
works (other than the Biblical books themselves), though some may have made
private notes (""), for example of court decisions. The oral traditions were
far from monolithic, and varied among various schools, the most famous of which
were the House of Shammai and the House of Hillel. The proprietary Aramaic (one
of Judaism's holy languages with Hebrew) word for this type of allowing
systematic disagreement in Jewish law, is "Machloket" or argument. The end of
the Jewish commonwealth in the year 70 CE resulted in an upheaval of Jewish
social and legal norms. The Rabbis were faced with the new reality of Judaism
without a Temple (to serve as the center of teaching and study) and Judea
without autonomy, both serving as sources of pride. It is during this period
that Rabbinic discourse began to be recorded in writing. The earliest recorded
oral law may have been of the midrashic form, in which halakhic discussion is
structured as exegetical commentary on the Torah. But an alternative form,
organized by subject matter instead of by biblical verse, became dominant by
about the year 220 CE, when Rabbi Judah haNasi redacted the Mishnah. In
general, all opinions, even the non-normative ones, were recorded in the
Mishnah and subsequently the Talmud. In modern times, "the law" takes on a
different meaning than discussed in the Mishnah and Talmud. "The law" in
Judaism refers primarily to biblical law, given to the Israelites by God
through Moses, as well as interpretations of the meaning and application of
those rules. Thus, "the Law" is understood to be the religious teachings and
rules given by God. Yet, since religion was infused in every area of life,
rules for governing society, resolution of disputes, and enforcing safety and
public order were also governed by the religious law, leading to an overlap of
religion and modern conceptions of law. Jewish Law Relationship with the Hebrew
Bible. According to the historic view of the Jewish faith, allegorically the
Oral Law ("Torah she-be'al-peh") was also given to Moses at Sinai, and is the
exposition of the Written Law as relayed by the scholarly and other religious
leaders of each generation. This is to relay the authoritative nature of the
Oral Law as authoritative in practical terms, as the traditions of the Oral Law
are considered as the necessary basis for the interpretation, and often for the
reading, of the Written Law. Jews refer to this as the 'messorah' roughly
translated as tradition. In his introduction to Mishneh Torah Maimonides
provides a generation by generation account of the direct line of all those who
transmitted this tradition beginning with Moses himself up until the Mishnaic
era. Jewish law and custom is based not only on a literal reading of the
Tanakh, but on the combined oral and written tradition. Notably, the Mishnah
does not cite a written scriptural basis for its laws: since it is said that
the Oral Law was given simultaneously with the Written Law, the Oral Law
codified in the Mishnah does not derive directly from the Written Law of the
Torah. This is in contrast with the "Midrash halakha", works in which the
sources of the traditionally received laws are identified in the Tanakh, often
by linking a verse to a "halakha". These Midrashim often predate the Mishnah.
The Mishnah also quotes the Torah for principles not associated with law, but
just as practical advice, even at times for humor or as guidance for
understanding historical debates. By 220 CE, much of the Oral Law was edited
together into the Mishnah, and published by Rabbi Judah haNasi. Over the next
four centuries this material underwent analysis and debate, known as "Gemara"
("completion"), in what were at that time the world's two major Jewish
communities, in the land of Israel and in the Babylonian Empire. These debates
eventually came to be edited together into compilations known as the Talmud:
the Talmud Yerushalmi (Jerusalem Talmud) for the compilation in Israel, and
Talmud Bavli (Babylonian Talmud) for the compilation undertaken in Babylon.
Women. From certain contexts of the Mishnah and Talmud it can be derived that
women should not study Mishnah. There were female Tannaic Torah jurists such as
Rabbi Meir's wife, Rabbi Meir's daughter, and the daughter of Haninyah ben
Teradyon Haninyah's daughter is again mentioned as a sage in the non-Talmud 3rd
Century text Tractate Semahot verse 12:13. Rabbi Meir's wife is credited with
teaching him how to understand some verses from Isaiah. In the Mishnah there is
also a reference to certain women teaching men the Torah from behind a curtain,
so that no man would be offended. Beruryah. Beruryah (her name is a standard
Jewish female name meaning 'the clarity of God') is a Tannah mentioned by name
in the Talmud, who has a female name, has orally been transmitted as a female,
and is referred to in the text using the nekava (feminine Hebrew and Aramaic)
adjectives and adverbs. Originally she was believed to be either Rabbi Meir's
wife mentioned above, or Rabbi Chaninyah's daughter mentioned above, however
over the past 3-4 centuries Rabbinic scholars have realized that these
generations do not correspond to Beruryah's law decisions, and life, therefore
she today is just 'Beruryah' and of heretofore unknown lineage. Her law
decisions were minor but set a crucial ancient precedent for modern Jewish
women. She is mentioned at least four times in the Talmudic discourse regarding
her law decrees first Babylonian Talmud Berakhot 10a then in Tosefta Pesahim
62b in Babylonian Talmud Eruvin 53b‚Äì54a and Babylonian Talmud Avodah Zarah
18b. In one case she paskinned din on "klaustra" a rare Greek word referring to
an object, used in the Talmud, unfortunately Rabbi Yehudah Hanassi did not
believe women could be credited with paskining din, as it says 'do not speak
too much to women' (Tannah Rabbi Jesse the Galilean), and therefore credited
the law to Rabbi Joshua who may have been her father. Beruryah however was
actually remembered with great respect in the Talmud where she is lauded to
have been reputed as such a genius that she studied ‚Äúthree hundred Halachot
from three hundred sages in just one day‚Äù (Pesachim 62b). Clearly
contradicting the injunction against women studying Torah. Rashi's Daughters.
Rashi had no sons and taught the Mishnah and Talmud to his daughters, until
they knew it by heart as Jewish tradition teaches, they then transferred their
knowledge of original Mishnah commentary to the Ashkenazi men of the next
generation. Haim Yosef David Azulai, AKA 'The Hid'aa'. The Hida, wrote (Tuv
Ayin, no. 4) woman should not study Mishnah only if they do not want to.'We
cannot force a woman to learn, like we do to boys'. However, if she wants to
learn then not only may she do so on her own, but men may originally teach her,
and she can then teach other women if they so choose. According to the Hida,
the prohibition against teaching women does not apply to a motivated woman or
girl. Other Mizrahi Rabbis disputed this with him. His response to detractors
was that indeed, in truth, there is a prohibition against teaching Mishnah to
any student‚Äîmale or female‚Äîwho one knows is not properly prepared and
motivated, referred to a talmid she-eino hagun (Shulhan Arukh, Yoreh De'ah 246:
7). Babylonian Talmud Berakhos 28a relates that Rabban Gamliel would announce
that any student who is not pure enough so that 'his outer self is like his
inner self' may not enter the study hall. While this approach, requiring
absolute purity, was rejected by other ancient Rabbis, for example 'he who is
not for the name of God, will become for the name of God', and a middle
approach was adopted by Jews as standard. If one has knowledge that a
particular Mishnayot student is definitely bad then he may not be taught. He
claimed that 'it seems that for women there is a higher standard and she must
be motivated in order to have this permission to learn' in his response to the
Mizrahi tradition. Yisrael Meir Kagan. One of the most important Ashkenazic
rabbanim of the past century was Meir Kagan, or the Chofetz Haim. Has made it
clear that Jews can no longer get away with sexist teachings after the
industrial revolution and feminism. Joseph Solevetchik. Rabbi Yoseph
Solevetchik 'amened' the teachings of The Hafetz Haim. Rabbi Solevetchik taught
all religious Ashkenazi Jews with the exception of hardline Hasidim, not
should, or if they show motivation, but must teach their female children
Gemarah like the boy school children. He among others fully institutionlized
the teaching of Mishnah and Talmud to girls, from an autobiography on him by
Rabbi Mayor Twersky called "A Glimpse of the Rav" in R. Menachem Genack ed.,
Rabbi Joseph B. Soloveitchik: Man of Halacha, Man of Faith, page 113: Competing
oral laws and acceptance. It is unclear, according to J. Sussman (Mehqerei
Talmud III), whether there was any writing connected to the Oral Law, or
whether it was entirely oral. Over time, different traditions of the Oral Law
came into being, raising debates about what the laws or their rulings were.
According to the "Mevo Hatalmud" many rulings were given about specific things
that could have been taken out of context or where a ruling was revisited but
the second ruling was not as popularly known. To correct this, Rabbi Yehuda
haNasi took up the redaction of the Mishnah. If something was already there
with no conflict, he used it without changes in language, he reordered and
ruled on where there was conflict, and clarified where context was not given.
The idea was not do this at his own discretion, but rather to examine the
tradition as far back as he could, and only supplement as required. Some Jews
did not accept the written codification of the oral law at all; known as
Karaites, they comprised a significant portion of the world Jewish population
in the 10th and 11th Centuries CE, and remain extant, though they currently
number in the thousands. Mishnah Study. Textual variants. The earliest printed
edition of the Mishnah was published in Naples ("the Napoli edition"). There
have been many subsequent editions, including the late nineteenth century Vilna
edition, which is the basis of the editions now used by the religious public.
As well as being printed on its own, the Mishnah is included in all editions of
the Babylonian and Jerusalem Talmuds. Each paragraph is printed on its own, and
followed by the relevant Gemara discussion. However, that discussion itself
often cites the Mishnah line by line. While the text printed in paragraph form
has generally been standardized to follow the Vilna edition, the text cited
line by line often preserves important variants, which sometimes reflect the
readings of older manuscripts. The nearest approach to a critical edition is
that of Hanoch Albeck. There is also an edition by Yosef Qafi·∏• of the Mishnah
together with the commentary of Maimonides, which compares the base text used
by Maimonides with the Napoli and Vilna editions and other sources. Oral
traditions and pronunciation. The Mishnah was and still is traditionally
studied through "recitation" (out loud). Many medieval manuscripts of the
Mishnah are vowelized, and some of these contain partial Tiberian cantillation.
Jewish communities around the world preserved local melodies for chanting the
Mishnah, and distinctive ways of pronouncing its words. Most vowelized editions
of the Mishnah today reflect standard Ashkenazic vowelization, and often
contain mistakes. The Albeck edition of the Mishnah was vowelized by Hanokh
Yellin, who made careful eclectic use of both medieval manuscripts and current
oral traditions of pronunciation from Jewish communities all over the world.
The Albeck edition includes an introduction by Yellin detailing his eclectic
method. Two institutes at the Hebrew University in Jerusalem have collected
major oral archives which hold (among other things) extensive recordings of
Jews chanting the Mishnah using a variety of melodies and many different kinds
of pronunciation. These institutes are the Jewish Oral Traditions Research
Center and the National Voice Archives (the "Phonoteca" at the Jewish National
and University Library). See below for external links. As a historical source.
Both the Mishnah and Talmud contain little serious biographical studies of the
people discussed therein, and the same tractate will conflate the points of
view of many different people. Yet, sketchy biographies of the Mishnaic sages
can often be constructed with historical detail from Talmudic and Midrashic
sources. Many modern historical scholars have focused on the timing and the
formation of the Mishnah. A vital question is whether it is composed of sources
which date from its editor's lifetime, and to what extent is it composed of
earlier, or later sources. Are Mishnaic disputes distinguishable along
theological or communal lines, and in what ways do different sections derive
from different schools of thought within early Judaism? Can these early sources
be identified, and if so, how? In response to these questions, modern scholars
have adopted a number of different approaches. Cultural references. The most
notable literary work on the composition of the Mishnah is probably Milton
Steinberg's novel As a Driven Leaf. External links. Wikimedia projects.
Wikisource's Open Mishna Project is developing Mishnah texts, commentaries, and
translations. The project is currently available in four languages: Hebrew (the
largest collection), English, French and Portuguese.
