Mitzvah In its primary meaning, the Hebrew word ("commandment", , , Biblical:
'; plural ' , Biblical: '; from ' "command") refers to precepts and
commandments as commanded by God. It is a word used in Judaism to refer to the
613 commandments given in the Torah (at Mount Sinai, where all the Jews
accepted the Torah, saying "We will do, and we will listen") and the seven
rabbinic commandments instituted later for a total of 620. According to the
teachings of Judaism, all moral laws are, or are derived from, divine
commandments. In its secondary meaning, Hebrew ', as with English
"commandment," refers to a moral deed performed as a religious duty. As such,
the term ' has also come to express an act of human kindness. The tertiary
meaning of ' also refers to the fulfillment of a '. The opinions of the
Talmudic rabbis are divided between those who seek the purpose of the ' and
those who do not question them. The latter argue that if the reason for each '
could be determined, people might try to achieve what they see as the purpose
of the ', without actually performing the mitzvah itself ("Lishma"), which
would become self-defeating. The former believe that if people were to
understand the reason and the purpose for each ', it would actually help them
to observe and perform the (some mitzvot are given reasons in the Torah).
Hebrew Bible. The feminine noun ' () occurs over 180 times in the Masoretic
Text of the Hebrew Bible. The first use is in Genesis 26:5 where God says that
Abraham has "obeyed my voice, and kept my charge, my commandments ( '), my
statutes, and my laws." In the Septuagint the word is usually translated with
"entole" (). In Second Temple period funeral inscriptions the epithet "phil-
entolos", "lover of the commandments," was sometimes inscribed on Jewish tombs.
Other words are also used in Hebrew for commands and statutes, for example the
Ten Commandments (עשרת הדיברות) are the "Ten Words". Rabbinical
enumeration. The Tanakh does not state that there are 613 commandments. The
Rabbis came to assume that the Law of the Torah comprised 613 commandments.
According to Rabbi Simlai, as quoted in the Talmud, this enumeration of 613
commandments was representative of the following. Three of the negative
commandments fall under the category of self-sacrifice under Jewish Law,
meaning "one should himself be killed rather than transgress the prohibition."
The number 613 can also be obtained by gematria (a traditional method of number
substitution). The gematria value for the word "Torah" is 611, which
corresponds to the number of commandments given via Moses, with the remaining
two being identified as the first two of the Ten Commandments, which tradition
holds were the only ones given by the Mouth of God Himself. (Jews are also
reminded of the 613 commandments by the "Tzitzit", known as 'fringes' or
'strings'.) According to Rabbi Ishmael, only the principal commandments of
these 613 were given on Mount Sinai, the remainder having been given in the
Tent of Meeting. Rabbi Akiba, on the other hand, was of the opinion that they
were all given on Mount Sinai, repeated in the Tent of Meeting, and declared a
third time by Moses before his death. According to the Midrash, all divine
commandments were given on Mount Sinai, and no prophet could add any new one.
Rabbinical mitzvot. They give rise to the phrase "Keter Torah" ("The Crown of
the Torah") as the numeric value of Keter is 620 (613+7). The divine command is
considered implied in the general law to follow any instructions of the
religious authorities (Deuteronomy 17:11, and 32:7; Shab. 23a). In addition,
many of the specific details of the Biblical mitzvot are only derived via
rabbinical application of the Oral Torah(Mishna/Gemarah); for example, the
reading of the Shema (Deuteronomy 6:4-7), the binding of the tefillin and the
fixing of the mezuzah (Deuteronomy 6:8-9), and the saying of Grace After Meals
(Deuteronomy 8:10). Six constant mitzvot. Out of the 613 Mitzvot mentioned in
the Torah, there are six mitzvot which the Sefer Hachinuch calls "constant
mitzvot": ""We have six mitzvot which are perpetual and constant, applicable at
all times, all the days of our lives"." Academic treatment. In Biblical
criticism, not accepted throughout the Jewish world, these codes are studied
separately, particularly concerning the features unique, or first appearing, in
each. Many of the mitzvot enumerated as being from one or other of these codes
are also present in others, sometimes phrased in a different manner, or with
additional clauses. Also, themes, such as idolatry, sexual behaviour, ritual
cleanliness, and offerings of sacrifice, are shared among all six codes, and
thus, in more religiously motivated theological studies, it is often the case
that the mitzvot are organised instead by theme, rather than the location in
which they are found within the Bible. The Mitzvot and Jewish law. In rabbinic
thought, God's will is the source of, and authority for, every moral and
religious duty. In this way, the Mitzvot thus constitute the Divinely
instituted "rules of conduct". In rabbinic thought, the commandments are
usually divided into two major groups, positive commandments (obligations) –
"mitzvot aseh" [מצות עשה] and negative commandments (prohibitions) –
"mitzvot lo ta'aseh" [מצות לא תעשה]. The system describing the
practical application of the commandments is known as "Halakha", loosely
"Jewish Law". The Halakha is the development of the Mitzvot as contained in the
"written law", via discussion and debate in the Oral law, as recorded in the
rabbinic literature of the classical era, especially the Mishnah and the
Talmud. The Halakha dictates and influences a wide variety of behavior of
traditionalist Jews. Many of these laws concern only special classes of
people—such as kings or Kohanim (the priesthood), Levites, or Nazarites -- or
are conditioned by local or temporary circumstances of the Jewish nation, as,
for instance, the agricultural, sacrificial, and Levitical laws. There is no
authoritative answer accepted within Judaism as to which mitzvot, if any, would
be annulled in the Messianic era. This is a subject of academic debate and, not
being viewed as an immediately practical question, is usually passed over in
favor of answering questions of the practical halachah. It is important to note
that in the Messianic era itself there are different stages. In addition there
is a dispute between Maimonides and Nachmonides whether the ultimate Messianic
state will be bodies with souls or souls alone. So that the various opinions as
to the annulment of Biblical prohibitions need to be understood in this
context.
