Modern Orthodox Judaism Modern Orthodox Judaism (also Modern Orthodox or Modern
Orthodoxy) is a movement within Orthodox Judaism that attempts to synthesize
Jewish values and the observance of Jewish law, with the secular, modern world.
Modern Orthodoxy draws on several teachings and philosophies, and thus assumes
various forms. In the United States, and generally in the Western world,
"Centrist Orthodoxy" – underpinned by the philosophy of "Torah Umadda"
("Torah and Knowledge") – is prevalent. In Israel, Modern Orthodoxy is
dominated by Religious Zionism; however, although not identical, these
movements share many of the same values and many of the same adherents. Modern
Orthodoxy. Modern Orthodoxy comprises a fairly broad spectrum of movements each
drawing on several distinct, though related, philosophies, which in some
combination provide the basis for all variations of the movement today; these
are discussed below. Characteristics. In general, Modern Orthodoxy's "overall
approach.. is the belief that one can and should be a full member of modern
society, accepting the risks to remaining observant, because the benefits
outweigh those risks". Thus, Modern Orthodoxy holds that Jewish law is
normative and binding, while simultaneously attaching a positive value to
interaction with the modern world. In this view, according to Rabbi Saul
Berman, Orthodox Judaism can “be enriched” by its intersection with
modernity; further, “modern society creates opportunities to be productive
citizens engaged in the Divine work of transforming the world to benefit
humanity”. At the same time, in order to preserve the integrity of halakha,
any area of “powerful inconsistency and conflict” between Torah and modern
culture must be filtered out. This includes Modern Orthodox's unequivocal
stance prohibiting its members from engaging in gay and Lesbian relationships.
There is however a difference of opinion as to what stance to take with
individuals who violate halakha in this regard. Additional to this, Modern
Orthodoxy assigns a central role to the "People of Israel". Here two
characteristics are manifest: in general, Modern Orthodoxy places a high
national, as well as religious, significance on the State of Israel, and
institutions and individuals are, typically, Zionist in orientation; relatedly,
involvement with non-orthodox Jews will extend beyond "outreach" to include
institutional relations and cooperation; see further under "Torah Umadda".
Other "core beliefs" are a recognition of the value and importance of secular
studies (see Torah Umadda:Torah and secular knowledge), a commitment to
equality of education for both men and women, and a full acceptance of the
importance of being able to financially support oneself and one's family (see
Torah im Derech Eretz: Earning a livelihood); see below. Ideological spectrum.
The specific expression of Modern Orthodoxy, however, takes many forms, and in
fact, particularly over the past 30 – 40 years, describes a political
spectrum. Among the issues have been the extent to which Modern Orthodoxy
should cooperate with the more liberal denominations, support secular academic
pursuits combined with religious learning, and embrace efforts to give women a
larger role in Jewish learning and worship; the acceptability of modern textual
criticism as a tool for Torah study is also debated. For further discussion,
see Orthodox Judaism: Diversity within Orthodox Judaism; Joseph B.
Soloveitchik: Debate over world view; Torah im Derech Eretz: Interpretation. To
the ideological right, the line between Haredi and Modern Orthodox has blurred
in recent years; some have referred to this trend as "haredization". In
addition to increasing stringency in adherence to Halakha, many Modern Orthodox
Jews express a growing sense of alienation from the larger, secular culture.
("Western civilisation has moved from what was once called the Judeo-Christian
ethic to a consumer-driven, choice-fixated culture... Such a world is not
"chol" but "chiloni", not secular but secularist. It is impermeable to the
values of "kedushah"." ) Here “the balance has tipped heavily in favor of
Torah over madda (secular studies)… many have redefined "madda" as support
for making one's livelihood in the secular world, not culturally or
intellectually engaging with it”. Although defining themeselves as
"centrist", institutions here include the Orthodox Union (Union of Orthodox
Jewish Congregations of America), the Rabbinical Council of America, and the
Rabbi Isaac Elchanan Theological Seminary. Adherents on the ideological left
have begun to develop new institutions that aim to be outward looking whilst
maintaining a discourse between modernity and halakhah. The resultant "Open
Orthodoxy" seeks to re-engage with secular studies, Jews of all denominations
and global issues. Some within this movement have experimented with orthodox
egalitarianism where gender equality solutions are found through halakhah. This
has led to women taking on more leadership roles. Others in this movement are
increasingly re-engaging with social justice issues from a halakhic point of
view. See Yeshivat Chovevei Torah, Shalom Hartman Institute, Hebrew Institute
of Riverdale, Partnership minyan, Shira Hadasha, MigdalOr. The Behaviorally
Modern. It is also noted that, in fact, many Modern Orthodox are
“behaviorally modern” as opposed to "ideologically modern", and, in truth,
fall outside of "Modern" Orthodoxy, at least in the philosophical sense; see
below. The distinction is as follows: The ideologically modern are
“meticulously observant of Halakha”, and their interaction with the secular
comprises a tangible expression of their ideology, wherever it may lie on the
spectrum described. The “behaviorally modern”, on the other hand, define
themselves as "Modern Orthodox" only in the sense that they are neither Haredi
("Ultra-Orthodox") nor Conservative: these, in other words, are “not deeply
concerned with philosophical ideas”, and, often, are not as careful in their
observance. This "Orthodoxy of convenience" has maintained a certain stability
over time: as long as these don't seek to legitimate their behaviour in
halakhic terms, the leadership of the (Modern) Orthodox world have no
particular difficulty with them. Positioning. Given the above, it is clear that
various, highly differing views (or non views) - ranging from traditionalist to
revisionist - are offered under the banner of "Modern Orthodoxy". In fact, even
amongst its leadership there is limited agreement "on the philosophical
parameters of modern Orthodoxy". The boundaries here, with respect to Haredi
and Conservative Judaism have therefore become increasingly indistinct. Some
elements of Haredi Judaism appear to be more receptive to messages that have
traditionally been part of the Modern-Orthodox agenda. Similarly, at Modern
Orthodoxy’s left wing, many appear to align with more traditional elements of
Conservative Judaism. In discussing "Modern Orthodoxy" it is thus also
important to clarify its position with reference to other movements in Judaism:
see Comparison with other movements below. Further, given this wide range of
views, some see the possibility that, in fact, "here is no longer a cohesive,
singular Modern Orthodoxy;" see further below. Philosophy. Modern Orthodoxy
traces its roots to the works of Rabbis Azriel Hildesheimer (1820–1899) and
Samson Raphael Hirsch (1808–1888). While Hildesheimer's role is not disputed
- comprising distinct philosophic and pragmatic contributions - Hirsch's role
is less clear, with some Hirsch scholars arguing that his "Torah im Derech
Eretz" philosophy is in fact at odds with that of Modern Orthodoxy; see further
below and in the Hildesheimer article. Today, the movement is additionally, and
particularly, influenced by the philosophy of Rabbi Joseph B. Soloveitchik and
the closely related Torah Umadda, as well as by the writings of Rabbi Abraham
Isaac Kook. (Religious Zionism, strictly speaking a distinct philosophy, has an
indirect influence.) Torah im Derech Eretz. Hirsch’s "Torah im Derech Eretz"
(תורה עם דרך ארץ – “Torah with the way of the Land”) is a
philosophy of Orthodox Judaism which formalizes a relationship between
halakhically observant Judaism and the modern world. Hirsch held that Judaism
requires the application of Torah philosophy to all human endeavor and
knowledge compatible with it. Thus, secular education becomes a positive
religious duty. "Judaism is not a mere adjunct to life: it comprises all of
life... in the synagogue and the kitchen, in the field and the warehouse, in
the office and the pulpit... with the pen and the chisel". Hirsch's vision,
although not unqualified, extended to the sciences as well as to (German)
literature, philosophy and culture. Torah im Derech Eretz remains influential
to this day in all branches of Orthodox Judaism. Note that , the movement
descended from Hirsch’s Frankfurt community regards itself as positioned,
ideologically, outside of contemporary Modern Orthodoxy; see further below.
Pragmatism. Rabbi Azriel Hildesheimer, along with Rabbi Hirsch, was insistent
that for Orthodox Jews living in the west, there was no possibility to
segregate oneself behind ghetto walls. On the contrary, modern Jewish education
must teach Jews how best to confront and deal with modernity in all of its
aspects. His approach, "Cultured Orthodoxy", was defined as representing
"unconditional agreement with the culture of the present day; harmony between
Judaism and science; but also unconditional steadfastness in the faith and
traditions of Judaism". He was, however, "the pragmatist rather than the
philosopher", and it is his actions, rather than his philosophy, which have
become institutionalized in Modern Orthodoxy, and through which his influence
is still felt. Torah Umadda. "Torah Umadda" (תורה ומדע - "Torah and
secular knowledge") is a philosophy concerning the secular world and Judaism,
and in particular secular knowledge and Jewish knowledge. It envisions a
personal - "as opposed to" philosophic - "synthesis" between Torah scholarship
and Western, secular scholarship, entailing, also, positive involvement with
the broader community. Here, the "individual has absorbed the attitudes
characteristic of science, democracy and Jewish life and responds appropriately
in diverse relations and contexts." The resultant mode of Orthodox Judaism is
referred to as "Centrist Orthodoxy" This philosophy, as formulated today, is to
a large extent a product of the teachings and philosophy of Rabbi Joseph
Soloveitchik (1903–1993), Rosh Yeshiva at Yeshiva University. In "Rav
Soloveitchik's" thought, Judaism, which believes that the world is "very good",
enjoins man to engage in "tikkun olam". "Halakhic Man" must therefore attempt
to bring the sanctity and purity of the transcendent realm into the material
world. Centrist Orthodoxy is the dominant mode of Modern Orthodoxy in the
United States, while Torah Umadda remains closely associated with Yeshiva
University. Torah Umadda is related to Hirsch's "Torah im Derech Eretz", but
see below for a comparison between the two. Religious Zionism. Modern Orthodoxy
draws on the teachings of Rabbi Abraham Isaac Kook (1864–1935)—both as
regards its views on Jewish peoplehood and as regards the (related) interaction
with the secular world. In Israel, the Religious Zionism of the ""Dati Leumi""
(, "National Religious") dominates Modern Orthodoxy. Here too, the ideological
basis is largely drawn from the teachings of Rav Kook, and there is therefore
much overlap; philosophical differences, as well as other "non-modern" forms of
Religious Zionism, are discussed below. Comparison with other movements. As
above, Modern Orthodoxy comprises various approaches, ranging from
traditionalist to revisionist, and the movement apparently overlaps with
Conservative Judaism and with Haredi Judaism at its respective boundaries. At
its centre too, the movement appears to share practices and values with Neo
Orthodoxy and with Religious Zionism. Therefore, in clarifying what Modern
Orthodoxy in fact entails, its positioning must be discussed with reference to
these movements. Haredi Judaism. A fourth difference suggested, relates to the
acceptability of moderation within Jewish law. Both Modern Orthodoxy and Ultra
Orthodoxy regard "Halakha" as divine in origin, and as such, no position is
assumed without justification in the Shulkhan Arukh and in the Acharonim. The
movements differ, however, in their approach to strictures ("chumras") and
leniencies ("kulas"). Modern Orthodoxy holds that strictures are not normative,
rather, these are a matter of personal choice; "severity and leniency are
relevant only in circumstances of factual doubt, not in situations of debate or
varied practice. In the latter situations, the conclusion should be based
solely on the legal analysis". (Note though, that in recent years, many Modern
Orthodox Jews are described as "increasingly stringent in their adherence to
Jewish law".) See Torah Umadda: Moderation. In the Haredi view, on the other
hand, "the most severe position... is the most likely basis for unity and
commonality of practice within the Orthodox community and is therefore to be
preferred". Further, "such severity... results in the greatest certainty that
God's will is being performed." "Haredi" Judaism thus tends to adopt "chumras"
as a norm. As to the contention that Modern Orthodoxy's standards of observance
of halakha are, in fact, "relaxed," as opposed to moderate, see below under
"Criticism". Neo-Orthodoxy/Torah Im Derech Eretz. Both Modern Orthodoxy and ,
the movement directly descended from Hirsch’s Frankfurt community, have
combined Torah and secular knowledge with participation in contemporary western
life, and thus some maintain that there is a degree of practical and
philosophical overlap between the two. The movements are nevertheless distinct,
and in general, Neo-Orthodoxy has taken a more qualified approach than Modern
orthodoxy, emphasizing that followers must exercise caution in engagements with
the secular world. Note though that differences between the movements may be
more than a question of degree: Hirsch scholars argue that Hirschian philosophy
is at odds with that of Modern Orthodoxy, while Modern Orthodox scholars
maintain that Modern Orthodoxy accords with Hirsch's worldview. These
philosophical distinctions (though subtle), manifest in markedly divergent
religious attitudes and perspectives; in fact, Shimon Schwab, second Rabbi of
this community in the United States, is described as being "spiritually very
distant" from Yeshiva University and Modern Orthodoxy. From the viewpoint of
Neo-Orthodoxy, that movement differs from Modern Orthodoxy (and particularly
Centrist Orthodoxy) on three main counts. Religious Zionism. Broadly defined,
Religious Zionism is a movement which embraces the idea of Jewish national
sovereignty, often in connection with the belief in the ability of the Jewish
people to bring about a redemptive state through natural means, and often
attributing religious significance to the modern State of Israel. (This
attitude is rejected by most Haredim - but not all, particularly the Hardal
movement.) Thus, in this sense, Religious Zionism in fact encompasses a wide
spectrum of religious views including Modern Orthodoxy. Note however, that
Modern Orthodoxy, in fact, overlaps to a large extent with "Religious Zionism"
in its narrower form ('Throughout the world a "religious Zionist day school" is
a synonym for a "modern Orthodox day school"' ). At the least, the two are not
in any direct conflict, and generally coexist, sharing both values and
adherents. Further, in practice, except at their extremes, the differences
between Religious Zionism and Modern Orthodoxy in Israel are not pronounced,
and they are often identical, especially in recent years and for the younger
generation. Nevertheless, the two movements are philosophically distinct on two
broad counts. Applying the above distinction, in Israel today, Modern Orthodoxy
- as distinct from (right wing) Religious Zionism - is represented by only a
select group of institutions: the Religious Kibbutz Movement, "Neemanei Torah
V’Avoda", the Meimad political party, and the Shalom Hartman Institute,
Yeshivat Har Etzion / Migdal Oz and Yeshivat Hamivtar / Ohr Torah Stone
Institutions / Midreshet Lindenbaum. (Some would include Yeshivat Hesder Petach
Tikva, Yeshivat Ma'ale Gilboa, and the Tzohar Foundation .) Conservative
Judaism. In general, Modern Orthodoxy does not, therefore, view the process by
which the Conservative movement decides "halakha" as legitimate - or with the
non-normative weighting assigned to particular halakha by the Conservative
movement. In particular, Modern Orthodoxy disagrees with many of Conservative
Judaism’s "halakhic" rulings, particularly as regards issues of
egalitarianism. See further on the Orthodox view and the Conservative view.
Modern Orthodoxy clearly differs from the approach of Reform Judaism and
Reconstructionist Judaism, which do not consider "halakha" to be normative.
Criticism. Given its diverse nature, observations regarding "Modern Orthodoxy"
are likely to be generalizations only; as such, any criticism may be aimed at a
straw man. This section deals with criticism relating to standards of
observance and to social issues; as regards its philosophy see "Criticism"
under Torah Umadda. Standards of observance. Additionally, whereas the Modern
Orthodox position is (generally) presented as "unquestioned allegiance to the
primacy of Torah, and that the apprehension of all other intellectual
disciplines must be rooted and viewed through the prism of Torah", "Haredi"
groups have sometimes compared Modern Orthodoxy with early Reform Judaism in
Germany: Modern Orthodox Rabbis have been criticised for attempting to modify
Jewish law, in adapting Judaism to the needs of the modern world. Note that
claims of this nature have been commonplace within Orthodox Judaism since the
first "reforms" of Samson Raphael Hirsch and Azriel Hildesheimer. Thus, in
Europe of the early 19th century, all of Judaism that differed from the
strictest forms present at the time was called "Reform". Then, as now, Modern
Orthodoxy took pains to distance its "reforms", which were consistent with the
Shulkhan Arukh and poskim, from those of the Reform movement (and the
Conservative movement), which were not. Sociological and philosophical
dilemmas. Some observe that the ability of Modern Orthodoxy to attract a large
following and maintain its strength as a movement is (ironically) inhibited by
the fact that it embraces modernity - its "" - and that it is highly rational
and intellectual.
