Moloch Moloch (representing Semitic מלך "m-l-", a Semitic root meaning
"king")—also rendered as Molech, Molekh, Molok, Molek, Molock, or Moloc—is
the name of an ancient Ammonite god. Moloch worship was practiced by the
Canaanites, Phoenician and related cultures in North Africa and the Levant. As
a god worshipped by the Phoenicians and Canaanites, Moloch had associations
with a particular kind of propitiatory child sacrifice by parents. Moloch
figures in the Book of Deuteronomy and in the Book of Leviticus as a form of
idolatry (Leviticus 18:21: "And thou shalt not let any of thy seed pass through
the fire to Moloch"). In the Hebrew Bible, Gehenna was initially where apostate
Israelites and followers of various Baalim and Caananite gods, including
Moloch, sacrificed their children by fire (2 Chr. 28:3, 33:6; Jer. 7:31, 19:
2–6). Moloch has been used figuratively in English literature from John
Milton's "Paradise Lost" (1667) to Allen Ginsberg's "Howl" (1955), to refer to
a person or thing demanding or requiring a very costly sacrifice. Forms and
grammar. The Hebrew letters מלך ("mlk") usually stand for "melek" 'king'
(Proto-Northwest Semitic "malku") but when vocalized as "mōlek" in Masoretic
Hebrew text, they have been traditionally understood as a proper name
Μολοχ ("molokh") (Proto-Northwest Semitic "Mulku") in the corresponding
Greek renderings in the Septuagint translation, in Aquila, and in the Middle
Eastern Targum. The form usually appears in the compound "lmlk". The Hebrew
preposition "l-" means "to", but it can often mean "for" or "as a(n)".
Accordingly one can translate "lmlk" as "to Moloch" or "for Moloch" or "as a
Moloch", or "to the Moloch" or "for the Moloch" or "as the Moloch", whatever a
"Moloch" or "the Moloch" might be. We also once find "hmlk" 'the Moloch'
standing by itself. Because there is no difference between "mlk" 'king' and
"mlk" 'moloch' in unpointed text, interpreters sometimes suggest "molek" should
be understood in certain places where the Masoretic text is vocalized as
"melek", and vice versa. "Moloch" has been traditionally interpreted as the
name of a god, possibly a god titled "the king", but purposely mispronounced as
"Molek" instead of "Melek" using the vowels of Hebrew "bosheth" "shame". Then
did Solomon build a high place for Chemosh, the abomination of Moab, in the
hill that is before Jerusalem, and "lmlk", the abomination of the Sons of
Ammon. In other passages, however, the god of the Ammonites is named Milcom,
not Moloch (see 1 Kings 11.33; Zephaniah 1.5). The Septuagint reads "Milcom" in
1 Kings 11.7 instead of Moloch. Many English translations accordingly follow
the non-Hebrew versions at this point and render "Milcom". The form "mlkm" can
also mean "their king" as well as Milcom, and therefore one cannot always be
sure in some other passages whether the King of Ammon is intended or the god
Milcom. It has also been suggested that the Ba‘al of Tyre, Melqart "king of
the city" (who was probably the Ba‘al whose worship was furthered by Ahab and
his house) was this supposed god Moloch and that Melqart/Moloch was also Milcom
the god of the Ammonites and identical to other gods whose names contain "mlk".
Other references to "Moloch" use "mlk" only in the context of "passing children
through fire "lmlk"", whatever is meant by "lmlk", whether it means "to Moloch"
or means something else. Though the Moloch sacrifices have traditionally been
understood to mean burning children alive to the god Moloch, some have
suggested a rite of purification by fire instead, though perhaps a dangerous
one. References to passing through fire without mentioning "mlk" appear in ; ;
, 31; 23.37. So this phrase is well documented in scripture, and similar
practices of rendering infants immortal by passing them through the fire, are
indirectly attested in early Greek myth, such as the myth of Thetis and the
myth of Demeter as the nurse of Demophon. Some have responded to the proponents
of this view of the Moloch sacrifices (being only a ritualized "pass between
flame") by pointing out their failure to understand the Hebrew idiom "le
ha'avir ba'esh" to imply "to burn" and their use of anthropological evidence of
suspect relevance to draw parallels to early Hebrew religious practices.
Biblical texts. The word here translated literally as 'seed' very often means
"offspring". The forms containing "mlk" have been left untranslated. The reader
may substitute either "to Moloch" or "as a "molk"". According to Biblical
texts, the laws given to Moses by God expressly forbade the Israelites to do
what was done in Egypt or in Canaan. ‘Do not give any of your children to be
sacrificed to Molek, for you must not profane the name of your God. I am the
LORD. Again, you shall say to the Sons of Israel: Whoever he be of the Sons of
Israel or of the strangers that sojourn in Israel, that gives any of his seed
"l'Molech"; he shall surely be put to death: the people of the land shall stone
him with stones. And I will set my face against that man and will cut him off
from among his people; because he has given of his seed "l'Molech", to defile
my sanctuary, and to profane my holy name. And if the people of the land do at
all hide their eyes from that man, when he gives of his seed "l'Molech", and do
not kill him, then I will set my face against that man, and against his family,
and will cut him off, and all that go astray after him, whoring l'Molech from
among the people. And he defiled the "Tophet", which is in the valley of Ben-
hinnom, that no man might make his son or his daughter pass through the fire
"l'Molech". And they built the high places of the Ba‘al, which are in the
valley of Ben-hinnom, to cause their sons and their daughters to pass through
the fire "l'Molech"; which I did not command them, nor did it come into my mind
that they should do this abomination, to cause Judah to sin. Archaeology. A
temple at Amman (1400–1250 BC) excavated and reported upon by J.B. Hennessy
in 1966, shows possibility of animal and human sacrifice by fire. Classical
Greek and Roman accounts. Later commentators have compared these accounts with
similar ones from Greek and Latin sources speaking of the offering of children
by fire as sacrifices in the Punic city of Carthage, a Phoenician colony.
Cleitarchus, Diodorus Siculus and Plutarch all mention burning of children as
an offering to Cronus or Saturn, that is to Ba‘al Hammon, the chief god of
Carthage. Issues and practices relating to Moloch and child sacrifice may also
have been exaggerated for effect. After the Romans defeated Carthage and
totally destroyed the city, they engaged in post-war propaganda to make their
arch-enemies seem cruel and less civilized. There stands in their midst a
bronze statue of Kronos, its hands extended over a bronze brazier, the flames
of which engulf the child. When the flames fall upon the body, the limbs
contract and the open mouth seems almost to be laughing until the contracted
body slips quietly into the brazier. Thus it is that the 'grin' is known as
'sardonic laughter,' since they die laughing. There was in their city a bronze
image of Cronus extending its hands, palms up and sloping toward the ground, so
that each of the children when placed thereon rolled down and fell into a sort
of gaping pit filled with fire. Diodorus also relates that relatives were
forbidden to weep and that when Agathocles defeated Carthage, the Carthaginian
nobles believed they had displeased the gods by substituting low-born children
for their own children. They attempted to make amends by sacrificing 200
children of the best families at once, and in their enthusiasm actually
sacrificed 300 children. In the book "The History of Sicily from the Earliest
Times" the author recounts the tale slightly differently. He states that the
Carthaginian nobles had actually acquired and raised children not of their own
for the express purpose of sacrificing them to the god. The author states that
during the siege, the 200 high-born children were sacrificed in addition to
another 300 children who were initially saved from the fire by the sacrifice of
these acquired substitutes. ... the whole area before the statue was filled
with a loud noise of flutes and drums so that the cries of wailing should not
reach the ears of the people. Jewish rabbinic commentary. Tophet is Moloch,
which was made of brass; and they heated him from his lower parts; and his
hands being stretched out, and made hot, they put the child between his hands,
and it was burnt; when it vehemently cried out; but the priests beat a drum,
that the father might not hear the voice of his son, and his heart might not be
moved. A rabbinical tradition attributed to the "Yalkout" of Rabbi Simeon, says
that the idol was hollow and was divided into seven compartments, in one of
which they put flour, in the second turtle-doves, in the third a ewe, in the
fourth a ram, in the fifth a calf, in the sixth an ox, and in the seventh a
child, which were all burned together by heating the statue inside. Moloch as
allegory in literature. Milton's "Paradise Lost". In John Milton's "Paradise
Lost" (1667), Moloch is one of the greatest warriors of the fallen angels,
"First MOLOCH, horrid King besmear'd with blood Of human sacrifice, and parents
tears, Though, for the noyse of Drums and Timbrels loud, Their children's cries
unheard that passed through fire To his grim Idol. Him the AMMONITE Worshipt in
RABBA and her watry Plain, In ARGOB and in BASAN, to the stream Of utmost
ARNON. Nor content with such Audacious neighbourhood, the wisest heart Of
SOLOMON he led by fraud to build His Temple right against the Temple of God On
that opprobrious Hill, and made his Grove The pleasant Vally of HINNOM, TOPHET
thence And black GEHENNA call'd, the Type of Hell." He is listed among the
chief of Satan's angels in Book I, and is given a speech at the parliament of
Hell in Book 2:43 – 105, where he argues for immediate warfare against God.
He later becomes revered as a pagan god on Earth. As social or political
allegory. The savage, like ourselves, feels the oppression of his impotence
before the powers of Nature; but having in himself nothing that he respects
more than Power, he is willing to prostrate himself before his gods, without
inquiring whether they are worthy of his worship. Pathetic and very terrible is
the long history of cruelty and torture, of degradation and human sacrifice,
endured in the hope of placating the jealous gods: surely, the trembling
believer thinks, when what is most precious has been freely given, their lust
for blood must be appeased, and more will not be required. The religion of
Moloch — as such creeds may be generically called — is in essence the
cringing submission of the slave, who dare not, even in his heart, allow the
thought that his master deserves no adulation. Since the independence of ideals
is not yet acknowledged, Power may be freely worshipped, and receive an
unlimited respect, despite its wanton infliction of pain. In letters of
Bruckman's Munich Cosmic Circle the name Moloch was used to symbolize a Jewish
God, hostile to life. In "The Gathering Storm (1948)", the first volume of
Winston Churchill's history of World War II, Churchill describes Hitler's
triumph at the moment he finally achieved total power in 1933; ""He had called
from the depths of defeat the dark and savage furies latent in the most
numerous, most serviceable, ruthless, contradictory and ill-starred race in
Europe. He had conjured up the fearful idol of an all-devouring Moloch of which
he was the priest and incarnation."" in Čapek's "War with the Newts". At a
later period and almost universally the Newts themselves came to accept a
different faith, whose origin among them is unknown; this involved adoration of
Moloch, whom they visualized as a giant Newt with a human head; they were
reported to have enormous submarine idols made of cast iron, manufactured to
their orders by Armstrong or Krupp, but no further details ever leaked out of
their cultic rituals since they were conducted under water; they were, however,
believed to be exceptionally cruel and secret. It would seem that this faith
gained ground rapidly because the name Moloch reminded them of the zoological
"molche" or the German "Molch," the terms for Newt. in Allen Ginsberg's "Howl".
In Allen Ginsberg's poem "Howl" (1955), Moloch is used as a metaphor for
capitalism and industrial civilization, and for America, more specifically. The
word is repeated many times throughout Part II of the poem, and begins (as an
exclamation of "Moloch!") in all but the first and last five stanzas of the
section. Moloch whose love is endless oil and stone! Moloch whose soul is
electricity and banks! Moloch whose poverty is the specter of genius! Moloch
whose fate is a cloud of sexless hydrogen! Moloch whose name is the Mind!
References in film. In Giovanni Pastrone's epic film "Cabiria" (1913), the
heroine is saved from being sacrificed to Molech. In Fritz Lang's film
"Metropolis", Freder, the son of Joh Fredersen, the master of Metropolis, uses
the term to describe the horror as he watches his fellow men devoured by their
labours in the workers' city. Freder has a vision in which the large M-Machine
transforms into a monster-like entity, into whose mouth a crowd of bound human
sacrifices, followed by several drones of workers, are led. Aleksandr Sokurov's
film portrait of Hitler he named "Moloch" (1999). Modern research, theories and
concepts. Nineteenth- and early twentieth-century theories. Nineteenth-century
and early twentieth-century archaeology found almost no evidence of a god
called Moloch or Molech. They also characterized Rabbinical traditions about
other gods mentioned in the Tanach as simply legends, and regarded them as
raising doubt about what was said about Moloch. They suggested that such
descriptions of Moloch might be simply taken from accounts of the sacrifice to
Cronus and from the tale of the Minotaur; They found no evidence of a bull-
headed Phoenician god. Some identified Moloch with Milcom, with the Tyrian god
Melqart, with Ba‘al Hammon to whom children were purportedly sacrificed, and
with other gods called "Lord" ("Baʿal") or ("Bel"). These various suggested
equations combined with the popular solar theory hypotheses of the day
generated a single theoretical sun god: Baal. Flaubert's conception. Then
further back, higher than the candelabrum, and much higher than the altar, rose
the Moloch, all of iron, and with gaping apertures in his human breast. His
outspread wings were stretched upon the wall, his tapering hands reached down
to the ground; three black stones bordered by yellow circles represented three
eyeballs on his brow, and his bull's head was raised with a terrible effort as
if in order to bellow. Chapter 13 describes how, in desperate attempt to call
down rain, the image of Moloch was brought to the center of Carthage, how the
arms of the image were moved by the pulling of chains by the priests
(apparently Flaubert's own invention), and then describes the sacrifices made
to Moloch. First grain and animals of various kinds were placed in compartments
within the statue (as in the Rabbinic account). Then the children were offered,
at first a few, and then more and more. The brazen arms were working more
quickly. They paused no longer. Every time that a child was placed in them the
priests of Moloch spread out their hands upon him to burden him with the crimes
of the people, vociferating: "They are not men but oxen!" and the multitude
round about repeated: "Oxen! oxen!" The devout exclaimed: "Lord! eat!" and the
priests of Proserpine, complying through terror with the needs of Carthage,
muttered the Eleusinian formula: "Pour out rain! bring forth!" The victims,
when scarcely at the edge of the opening, disappeared like a drop of water on a
red-hot plate, and white smoke rose amid the great scarlet colour.
Nevertheless, the appetite of the god was not appeased. He ever wished for
more. In order to furnish him with a larger supply, the victims were piled up
on his hands with a big chain above them which kept them in their place. Some
devout persons had at the beginning wished to count them, to see whether their
number corresponded with the days of the solar year; but others were brought,
and it was impossible to distinguish them in the giddy motion of the horrible
arms. This lasted for a long, indefinite time until the evening. Then the
partitions inside assumed a darker glow, and burning flesh could be seen. Some
even believed that they could descry hair, limbs, and whole bodies. Night fell;
clouds accumulated above the Baal. The funeral-pile, which was flameless now,
formed a pyramid of coals up to his knees; completely red like a giant covered
with blood, he looked, with his head thrown back, as though he were staggering
beneath the weight of his intoxication. Italian director Giovanni Pastrone's
silent film "Cabiria" (1914) was largely based on "Salammbo" and included an
enormous image of Moloch modeled on Flaubert's description. American anti-
communist agitator Elizabeth Dilling, and her husband Jeremiah Stokes, wrote an
anti-Semitic book, "The Plot Against Christianity" (1964). Re-released under
the title "The Jewish Religion: Its Influence Today" — with Talmudic writings
annotated by Dilling — it quoted Flaubert's description as if it were
historically accurate. Information from the novel and film still finds its way
into serious writing about Moloch, Melqart, Carthage, and Ba‘al Hammon.
Eissfeldt's theory: a type of sacrifice. In 1921 Otto Eissfeldt, excavating in
the neighbourhood of Salammbó, Carthage, discovered inscriptions with the word
MLK, which in the context meant neither "king" nor the name of any god. He
concluded that it was instead a term for a particular kind of sacrifice, one
which at least in some cases involved human sacrifice. A relief was found
showing a priest holding a child. Also uncovered was a sanctuary to the goddess
Tanit comprising a cemetery with thousands of burned bodies of animals and of
human infants, dating from the 8th century BC down to the destruction of
Carthage in 146 BC. Eissfeldt identified the site as a "tophet", using a Hebrew
word of previously unknown meaning connected to the burning in some Biblical
passages. Most of the children's bodies appeared to be those of newborns, but
some were older, up to about six years of age. Eissfeldt further concluded that
the Hebrew writings were not talking about a god Moloch at all, but about the
"molk" or "mulk" sacrifice, that the abomination was not in worshiping the god
Molech who demanded children be sacrificed to him, but in the practice of
sacrificing human children as a "molk". The Hebrew Bible states that the
Hebrews were strongly opposed to sacrificing first-born children as a "molk" to
Yahweh himself. The relevant Scriptural passages depict Yahweh condemning
Hebrews sacrificing their first-borns; those who did were stoned to death, and
those who witnessed but did not prevent the sacrifice were excommunicated.
Similar "tophets" have since been found at Carthage and other places in North
Africa, and in Sardinia, Malta, and Sicily. In late 1990 a possible "tophet"
consisting of cinerary urns containing bones and ashes and votive objects was
retrieved from ransacking on the mainland just outside of Tyre in the
Phoenician homeland. Discussion of Eissfeldt's theory. From the beginning there
were some who doubted Eissfeldt's theory but opposition was only sporadic until
1970. Prominent archaeologist Sabatino Moscati (who had accepted Eissfeldt's
idea, like most others) changed his opinion and spoke against it. Others
followed. The arguments were that classical accounts of the sacrifices of
children at Carthage were not numerous and were only particularly described as
occurring in times of peril, not necessarily a regular occurrence. Texts
referring to the "molk" sacrifice mentioned animals more than they mentioned
humans. Of course, those may have been animals offered instead of humans to
redeem a human life. And the Biblical decrying of the sacrificing of one's
children as a "molk" sacrifice doesn't indicate one way or the other that all
"molk" sacrifices must involve human child sacrifice or even that a "molk"
usually involved human sacrifice. It was pointed out the phrase "whoring after"
was elsewhere only used about seeking other gods, not about particular
religious practices. Eissfeldt's use of the Biblical word "tophet" was
criticized as arbitrary; even those who believed in Eissfeldt's general theory
mostly took "tophet" to mean something like 'hearth' in the Biblical context,
not a cemetery of some kind. John Day, in his book "Molech: A God of Human
Sacrifice in the Old Testament" (Cambridge, 1989; ISBN 0-521-36474-4), again
put forth the argument that there was indeed a particular god named Molech,
citing a god "mlk" from two Ugaritic serpent charms, and an obscure god Malik
from some god lists who in two texts was equated with Nergal, the Mesopotamian
god of the underworld.
