Moriah Moriah () (Arabic: مروة "Marwah") is the name given to a mountain
range by the Book of Genesis, in which context it is the location of the
sacrifice of Isaac. Traditionally Moriah has been interpreted as the name of
the specific mountain at which this occurred, rather than just the name of the
range. Speculation and debate. In the book of Chronicles it is reported that
the location of Araunah's threshing floor is "in mount Moriah" and that the
Temple of Solomon was built over Araunah's threshing floor. This has led to the
classical rabbinical supposition that this is at the peak of Moriah. Some
interpretations of a biblical passage concerning Melchizedek would indicate
Jerusalem was already a city with a priest at the time of Abraham, and thus is
unlikely to have been founded after this, at the site of a sacrifice made by
Abraham in the wilderness. However the view that Salem refers to Jerusalem
(then Jebus) and not peace (shalome, shelomo) is of heavy debate between many
sects of Jews and Christians. Moria is now the birth place for the Zion
Christian Church (ZCC). In consequence of these traditions, Classical
Rabbinical Literature theorised that the name was a (linguistically corrupted)
reference to the Temple, suggesting translations like "the teaching-place"
(referring to the Sanhedrin that met there), "the place of fear" (referring to
the supposed fear that non-Israelites would have at the Temple), "the place of
myrrh" (referring to the spices burnt as incense). Targum Pseudo-Jonathan
interprets the name as "land of worship", while the Samaritan Targum regards it
as being "land of vision". Most modern biblical scholars, however, regard the
name as a reference to the Amorites, the initial "a" via aphesis; the name is
thus interpreted as meaning "land of the Amorites". This also agrees with the
biblical text as it appears in the Syriac Peshitta – where the near-sacrifice
occurs at the "land of the Amorites", and in the Septuagint, where, for
example, 2 Chronicles 3:1 refers to the location as – "Amōriā". This would
give it the same etymological root as "Hamor", a person's name in the narrative
at Genesis 34 which concerns Shechem. Some scholars also identify it with
"Moreh", the location near Shechem at which Abraham built an altar, according
to Genesis 12:6. Hence a number of scholars believe that "Moriah" refers to a
hill near Shechem, supporting the Samaritan belief that the near-sacrifice of
Isaac occurred on Mount Gerizim – a location near Shechem.
