Mosque A mosque (; Arabic:ŸÖÿ≥ÿ¨ÿØ) is a place of worship for followers of
Islam. The word entered English from a French word which probably derived from
Italian "moschea", a variant of Italian "moscheta", from either Armenian
"mzki·π≠" or Greek ŒºŒ±œÉŒ≥ŒØŒ¥ŒπŒøŒΩ, from Arabic "masjid", meaning "place of
worship" or "prostration in prayer", from the Arabic "sajada", meaning "to bow
down in prayer" or "worship", probably ultimately of Aramaic origin. There are
strict and detailed requirements in Sunni "fiqh" for a place of worship to be
considered a masjid, with places that do not meet these requirements regarded
as "musallas". There are stringent restrictions on the uses of the area
formally demarcated as the masjid (which is often a small portion of the larger
complex), and, in the "Sharia", after an area is formally designated as a
masjid, it remains so until the Last Day. Quba Mosque is the first mosque in
history, and mosques have developed significantly since Quba mosque. Many
mosques have elaborate domes, minarets, and prayer halls. Mosques originated on
the Arabian Peninsula, but are now found in all inhabited continents. The
mosque serves as a place where Muslims can come together for "salah" (prayer)
(, "·π£alƒÅt") as well as a center for information, education, and dispute
settlement. The imam leads the prayer. History. Grand entryways and tall
towers, or minarets, have long been and continue to be closely associated with
mosques. However, the first three masajid were very simple open spaces on the
Arabian Peninsula. Mosques evolved significantly over the next 1,000 years,
acquiring their now-distinctive features and adapting to cultures around the
world. Diffusion and evolution. Mosques were built outside the Arabian
Peninsula as Muslims moved to other parts of the world. Egypt became occupied
by Muslim Arabs as early as 640, and since then so many mosques have appeared
throughout the country that its capital city, Cairo, has acquired the nickname
of "city of a thousand minarets". Egyptian mosques vary in amenities, as some
have Islamic schools ("madrasahs") while others have hospitals or tombs. Built
soon after the conquest of northwest Africa, the first mosque built in this
region is the Great Mosque of Kairouan (in Tunisia) founded by the Umayyad
general Uqba Ibn Nafi during the second half of the 7th century and considered
as the oldest place of worship in the western Islamic world. The Great Mosque
of Kairouan, which is one of the most significant and best preserved examples
of early Islamic mosques, served due to its architectural characteristics as a
model to many later mosques especially in north Africa and Al-Andalus. Mosques
in Sicily and Spain do not primarily reflect the architecture of Visigothic
predecessors, but instead reflect the architecture introduced by the Muslim
Moors. It is hypothesized, however, that there were some elements of pre-
Islamic architecture which were Islamicized into Andalusi and Maghribi
architecture, for example, the distinctive horseshoe arch. The first Chinese
mosque was established in the 8th century in Xi'an. The Great Mosque of Xi'an,
whose current building dates from the 18th century, does not replicate many of
the features often associated with traditional mosques. Instead, it follows
traditional Chinese architecture. It is distinguished from other buildings by
its green roof (Buddhist temples are often built with a yellow roof). Mosques
in western China incorporate more traditional elements seen in mosques in other
parts of the world. Western Chinese mosques were more likely to incorporate
minarets and domes while eastern Chinese mosques were more likely to look like
pagodas. By the 15th century, Islam had become the dominant religion in Java
and Sumatra, Indonesia's two most populous islands. As with Hinduism and
Buddhism before it, the new religion and its accompanying foreign influences
were absorbed and reinterpreted, with mosques given a unique Indonesian/
Javanese interpretation. At the time, Javanese mosques took many design cues
from Hindu, Buddhist, and even Chinese architectural influences. They lacked,
for example, the ubiquitous Islamic dome which did not appear in Indonesia
until the 19th century, but had tall timber, multi-level roofs not too
dissimilar to the pagodas of Balinese Hindu temples still common today. A
number of significant early mosques survive, particularly along the north coast
of Java. These include the Mesjid Agung back in Demak, built in 1474, and the
Grand Mosque of Yogyakarta that feature multi-level roofs. Javanese styles in
turn influenced the architectural styles of mosques among Indonesia's
Austronesian neighbors: Malaysia, Brunei and the southern Philippines. In
India, the first mosque has been claimed as Cheraman Juma Masjid in the early
7th century, but this claim is dubious. They diffused into a majority of India
only during the reign of the Mughal Empire in the 16th and 17th centuries. The
Mughals brought their own form of architecture that included pointed, onion-
shaped domes, as seen in Delhi's Jama Masjid. Mughal style became the dominant
feature in many of the old mosques in India, Pakistan and Bangladesh. Mosques
first arrived in the Ottoman Empire (mostly present-day Turkey) during the 11th
century, when many local Turks converted to Islam. Several of the first mosques
in the Ottoman Empire, such as the Hagia Sophia in present-day Istanbul, were
originally churches or cathedrals in the Byzantine Empire. The Ottomans created
their own design of mosques, which included large central domes, multiple
minarets, and open facades. The Ottoman style of mosque usually included
elaborate columns, aisles, and high ceilings in the interior, while
incorporating traditional elements, such as the "mihrab". Today, Turkey is
still home to many mosques that display this Ottoman style of architecture.
Mosques gradually diffused to different parts of Europe, but the most rapid
growth in the number of mosques has occurred within the past century as more
Muslims have migrated to the continent. Major European cities, such as Rome,
London, and Munich, are home to mosques that feature traditional domes and
minarets. These large mosques in urban centers are supposed to serve as
community and social centers for a large group of Muslims that occupy the
region. However, one can still find smaller mosques in more suburban and rural
regions throughout Europe where Muslims populate, an example of this is the
Shah Jahan Mosque in Woking, the first purpose built mosque in the UK. Mosques
first appeared in the United States in the early 20th century, the likely first
being one in Maine built by Albanian immigrants in 1915. as more immigrants
continue to arrive in the country, especially from South Asia, the number of
American mosques is increasing faster than ever before. Whereas only two
percent of the country's mosques appeared in the United States before 1950,
eighty-seven percent of American mosques were founded after 1970 and fifty
percent of American mosques founded after 1980. Conversion of places of
worship. According to early Muslim historians, towns that surrendered without
resistance and made treaties with the Muslims gave the Muslims permission to
take their churches and synagogues. One of the earliest examples of these kinds
of conversions was in Damascus, Syria, where in 705 Umayyad caliph Al-Walid I
bought the church of St. John from the Christians and had it rebuilt as a
mosque in exchange for building a number of new churches for the Christians in
Damascus. Overall, Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan (Al-Waleed's father) is said to have
transformed 10 churches in Damascus into mosques. The process of turning
churches into mosques was especially intensive in the villages where most of
the inhabitants converted to Islam. The Abbasid caliph al-Ma'mun turned many
churches into mosques. Ottoman Turks converted nearly all churches,
monasteries, and chapels in Constantinople, including the famous Hagia Sophia,
immediately after capturing the city in 1453 into mosques. In some instances
mosques have been established on the places of Jewish or Christian sanctuaries
associated with Biblical personalities who were also recognized by Islam.
Mosques have also been converted for use by other religions, notably in
southern Spain, following the conquest of the Moors in 1492. The most prominent
of them is the Great Mosque of Cordoba. The Iberian Peninsula and southeast
Europe are other regions in the world where such instances occurred once no
longer under Muslim rule. Religious functions. The "masjid jƒÅmi"', a central
mosque, can play a role in religious activities such as teaching the Quran and
educating future imams. Prayers. There are two holidays ("Eids") in the Islamic
calendar, Eid ul-Fitr and Eid al-Adha during which there are special prayers
held at mosques in the morning. These Eid prayers are supposed to be offered in
large groups, and so larger mosques will normally host them for their
congregants as well as the congregants of smaller local mosques. Some mosques
will even rent convention centers or other large public buildings to hold the
large number of Muslims who attend. Mosques, especially those in countries
where Muslims are the majority, will also host Eid prayers outside in
courtyards, town squares or on the outskirts of town in an "Eidgah". Ramadan
events. Islam's holiest month, Ramadan, is observed through many events. As
Muslims must fast during the day during Ramadan, mosques will host "iftar"
dinners after sunset and the fourth required prayer of the day, "maghrib". Food
is provided, at least in part, by members of the community, thereby creating
nightly potluck dinners. Because of the community contribution necessary to
serve iftar dinners, mosques with smaller congregations may not be able to host
the "iftar" dinners daily. Some mosques will also hold "suhoor" meals before
dawn to congregants attending the first required prayer of the day, "fajr". As
with iftar dinners, congregants usually provide the food for suhoor, although
able mosques may provide food instead. Mosques will often invite poorer members
of the Muslim community to share in beginning and breaking the fasts, as
providing charity during Ramadan is regarded in Islam as especially honorable.
Following the last obligatory daily prayer ("Isha"') special, optional
"tarawih" prayers are offered in larger mosques. During each night of prayers,
which can last for up to two hours each night, usually one member of the
community who has memorized the entire Quran (a Hafiz) will recite a segment of
the book. Sometimes, several such people (not necessarily of the local
community) take turns to do this. During the last ten days of Ramadan, larger
mosques will host all-night programs to observe Laylat al-Qadr, the night
Muslims believe that Muhammad first received Quranic revelations. On that
night, between sunset and sunrise, mosques employ speakers to educate
congregants in attendance about Islam. Mosques or the community usually provide
meals periodically throughout the night. During the last ten days of Ramadan,
larger mosques within the Muslim community will host "I øtikƒÅf", a practice in
which at least one Muslim man from the community must participate. Muslims
performing itikaf are required to stay within the mosque for ten consecutive
days, often in worship or learning about Islam. As a result, the rest of the
Muslim community is responsible for providing the participants with food,
drinks, and whatever else they need during their stay. Charity. The third of
the Five Pillars of Islam states that Muslims are required to give
approximately one-fortieth of their wealth to charity as "zakat". Since mosques
form the center of Muslim communities, they are where Muslims go to both give
"zakat" and, if necessary, collect it. Prior to the holiday of Eid ul-Fitr,
mosques also collect a special zakat that is supposed to assist in helping poor
Muslims attend the prayers and celebrations associated with the holiday.
Contemporary political roles. The late 20th century saw an increase in the
number of mosques used for political purposes. Today, civic participation is
commonly promoted in mosques in the Western world. Because of the importance in
the community, mosques are used for preaching peaceful coexistence with non-
believers, even in times of adversity. Large mosques sometimes play a political
role as well. In Islamic countries like Pakistan, Iran, and Iraq (after 2003),
political subjects are preached by imams at Friday congregations on a regular
basis. In other Islamic countries, imams are usually banned from mentioning
political issues. Advocacy. Countries with a minority Muslim population are
more likely than Muslim-majority countries of the Greater Middle East to use
mosques as a way to promote civic participation. American mosques host voter
registration and civic participation drives that promote involving Muslims, who
are often first- or second-generation immigrants, in the political process. As
a result of these efforts as well as attempts at mosques to keep Muslims
informed about the issues facing the Muslim community, regular mosque
attendants are more likely to participate in protests, sign petitions, and
otherwise be involved in politics. Nevertheless, a link between political views
and mosque attendance can still be seen in other parts of the world. Following
the al-Askari Mosque bombing in February 2006, imams and other Islamic leaders
used mosques and Friday prayers as vehicles to call for calm and peace in the
midst of widespread violence. Social conflict. As they are considered important
to the Muslim community, mosques, like other places of worship, can be at the
heart of social conflicts. The Babri Mosque was the subject of such a conflict
up until the early 1990s when it was demolished. Before a mutual solution could
be devised, the mosque was destroyed on December 6, 1992 as the mosque was
built by Babur allegedly on the site of a previous Hindu temple marking the
birthplace of Rama. The controversy surrounded the mosque was directly linked
to rioting in Bombay (present-day Mumbai) as well as bombings in 1993 that
killed 257 people. A February 2006 and June 2007 bombing that seriously damaged
Iraq's al-Askari Mosque, exacerbated tensions that had already existed. Other
mosque bombings in Iraq, both before and after the February 2006 bombing, have
been part of the conflict between the country's groups of Muslims. However,
mosque bombings have not been exclusive to Iraq; in June 2005, a suicide bomber
killed at least 19 people at an Afghan Shia mosque near Jade Maivand. In April
2006, two explosions occurred at India's Jama Masjid. Following the September
11 attacks, several American mosques were targeted in attacks ranging from
simple vandalism to arson. Furthermore, the Jewish Defense League was suspected
of plotting to bomb the King Fahd Mosque in Culver City, California. Similar
attacks occurred throughout the United Kingdom following the 7 July 2005 London
bombings. Outside the Western world, in June 2001, the Hassan Bek Mosque was
the target of vandalism and attacks by hundreds of Israelis. Saudi influence.
Although the Saudi involvement in mosques around the world can be traced back
to the 1960s, it was not until later in the 20th century that the government of
Saudi Arabia became a large influence in foreign mosques. Beginning in the
1980s, the Saudi Arabian government began to finance the construction of
mosques in countries around the world. An estimated US$45 billion has been
spent by the Saudi Arabian government financing mosques and Islamic schools in
foreign countries. "Ain al-Yaqeen", a Saudi newspaper, reported in 2002 that
Saudi funds may have contributed to building as many as 1,500 mosques and 2,000
other Islamic centers. Saudi citizens have also contributed significantly to
mosques in the Islamic world, especially in countries where they see Muslims as
poor and oppressed. Following the fall of the Soviet Union, in 1992, mosques in
war-torn Afghanistan saw many contributions from Saudi citizens. The King Fahd
Mosque in Culver City, California and the Islamic Cultural Center of Italy in
Rome represent two of Saudi Arabia's largest investments in foreign mosques as
former Saudi king Fahd bin Abdul Aziz al-Saud contributed US$8 million and
US$50¬ million to the two mosques, respectively. Architecture. Styles. "Arab-
plan" or hypostyle mosques are the earliest type of mosques, pioneered under
the Umayyad Dynasty. These mosques have square or rectangular plans with an
enclosed courtyard and covered prayer hall. Historically, in the warm Middle
Eastern and Mediterranean climates, the courtyard served to accommodate the
large number of worshippers during Friday prayers. Most early hypostyle mosques
had flat roofs on prayer halls, which required the use of numerous columns and
supports. One of the most notable hypostyle mosques is the Great Mosque of
Cordoba in Spain, the building being supported by over 850 columns. Frequently,
hypostyle mosques have outer arcades so that visitors can enjoy the shade.
Arab-plan mosques were constructed mostly under the Umayyad and Abbasid
dynasties; subsequently, however, the simplicity of the Arab plan limited the
opportunities for further development, the mosques consequently losing
popularity. The first separate brand within mosque designs started appearing in
Persia (Iran). The Persians had inherited a rich architectural legacy from the
earlier Persian dynasties, and they started incorporating elements from earlier
Parthian and Sassanid palace-designs into their mosques, influenced by
buildings such as the Palace of Ardashir and the Sarvestan Palace. Thus,
Islamic architecture started witnessing the introduction of such structures as
domes and large, arched entrances, referred to as "iwans". During Seljuq rule,
as Islamic mysticism was on the rise, the four-iwan arrangement took form. The
four-iwan format, finalized by the Seljuqs, and later inherited by the
Safavids, firmly established the courtyard facade of such mosques, with the
towering gateways at every side, as more important than the actual buildings
themselves, and they typically took the form of a square-shaped, central
courtyard with large entrances at each side, giving the impression of being
gateways to the spiritual world. Soon, a distinctly Persian style of mosques
started appearing that would significantly influence the designs of later
Timurid, and also Mughal, mosque designs. The Ottomans introduced central dome
mosques in the 15th century. These mosques have a large dome centered over the
prayer hall. In addition to having a large central dome, a common feature is
smaller domes that exist off-center over the prayer hall or throughout the rest
of the mosque, where prayer is not performed. This style was heavily influenced
by Byzantine religious architecture with its use of large central domes. Hajja
Soad's mosque took a pyramid shape which is a creative style in Islamic
architecture. The Faisal Mosque in Islamabad, Pakistan in a relatively unusual
design fuses contemporary lines with the more traditional look of an Arab
Bedouin's tent, with its large triangular prayer hall and four minarets.
However, unlike traditional mosque design, it lacks a dome. The mosque's
architecture is a departure from the long history of South Asian Islamic
architecture. It is one of the most outstanding and modern Islamic architecture
examples in the world. Mosques built in Southeast Asia often represent the
Indonesian-Javanese style architecture, which are different from the ones found
throughout the Greater Middle East. The ones found in Europe and North America
appear to have various styles but most are built on Western artchitectural
designs, some are former churches or other buildings that were used by non-
Muslims. In Africa, most mosques are old but the new ones are built to give it
a look of the Greater Middle East. This can be seen in the Abuja National
Mosque in Nigeria and others. Minarets. A common feature in mosques is the
minaret, the tall, slender tower that usually is situated at one of the corners
of the mosque structure. The top of the minaret is always the highest point in
mosques that have one, and often the highest point in the immediate area. The
tallest minaret in the world is located at the Hassan II Mosque in Casablanca,
Morocco. The first mosques had no minarets, and even nowadays the most
conservative Islamic movements, like Wahhabis, avoid building minarets, seeing
them as ostentatious and hazardous in case of collapse. The first minaret was
constructed in 665 in Basra during the reign of the Umayyad caliph Muawiyah I.
Muawiyah encouraged the construction of minarets, as they were supposed to
bring mosques on par with Christian churches with their bell towers.
Consequently, mosque architects borrowed the shape of the bell tower for their
minarets, which were used for essentially the same purpose ‚Äî calling the
faithful to prayer. The oldest standing minaret in the world is the minaret of
the Great Mosque of Kairouan in Tunisia, built between the 8th and the 9th
century, it is a massive square tower consisting of three superimposed tiers of
gradual size and decor. Before the five required daily prayers, a "muezzin"
calls the worshippers to prayer from the minaret. In many countries like
Singapore where Muslims are not the majority, mosques are prohibited from
loudly broadcasting the call to prayer ("adhan"), although it is supposed to be
said loudly to the surrounding community. The adhan is required before every
prayer. However, nearly every mosque assigns a muezzin for each prayer to say
the adhan as it is a recommended practice or "sunnah" of the Islamic prophet
Muhammad. At mosques that do not have minarets, the adhan is called instead
from inside the mosque or somewhere else on the ground. The "iqama", which is
similar to the adhan and said immediately before the start of prayer, is
usually not said from the minaret even if a mosque has one. Mihrab. Mihrab is
semicircular niche in the wall of a mosque that indicates the "qibla"; that is,
the direction of the Kaaba in Mecca and hence the direction that Muslims should
face when praying. The wall in which a "mihrab" appears is thus the ""qibla"
wall." "Mihrab"s should not be confused with the "minbar", which is the raised
platform from which an Imam (leader of prayer) addresses the congregation.
Domes. The domes, often placed directly above the main prayer hall, may signify
the vaults of heaven and the sky. As time progressed, domes grew, from
occupying a small part of the roof near the mihrab to encompassing the whole
roof above the prayer hall. Although domes normally took on the shape of a
hemisphere, the Mughals in India popularized onion-shaped domes in South Asia.
Some mosques have multiple, often smaller, domes in addition to the main large
dome that resides at the center. Prayer hall. The prayer hall, also known as
the "musallah", rarely has furniture; chairs and pews are generally absent from
the prayer hall so as to allow as many worshipers as possible to line the room.
Some mosques have Islamic calligraphy and Quranic verses on the walls to assist
worshippers in focusing on the beauty of Islam and its holiest book, the Quran,
as well as for decoration. Often, a limited part of the prayer hall is
sanctified formally as a masjid in the sharia sense (although the term masjid
is also used for the larger mosque complex as well). Once designated, there are
onerous limitations on the use of this formally designated masjid, and it may
not be used for any purpose other than worship; restrictions that do not
necessarily apply to other areas of the mosque complex (although such uses may
be restricted by the conditions of the "waqf" that owns the mosque). In many
mosques, especially the early congregational mosques, the prayer hall has the
hypostyle form (the roof held up by a multitude of columns). One of the finest
examples of the hypostyle-plan mosques is the Great Mosque of Kairouan (also
known as the Mosque of Uqba) in Tunisia. Usually opposite the entrance to the
prayer hall is the "qiblah" wall, the visually emphasized area inside the
prayer hall. The qiblah wall should, in a properly oriented mosque, be set
perpendicular to a line leading to Mecca, the location of the "Kaaba".
Congregants pray in rows parallel to the qiblah wall and thus arrange
themselves so they face Mecca. In the qiblah wall, usually at its center, is
the mihrab, a niche or depression indicating the direction of Mecca. Usually
the mihrab is not occupied by furniture either. Sometimes, especially during
Friday prayers, a raised "minbar" or pulpit is located to the side of the
mihrab for a "khatib" or some other speaker to offer a sermon ("khutbah"). The
mihrab serves as the location where the imam leads the five daily prayers on a
regular basis. Ablution facilities. As ritual purification precedes all
prayers, mosques often have ablution fountains or other facilities for washing
in their entryways or courtyards. However, worshippers at much smaller mosques
often have to use restrooms to perform their ablutions. In traditional mosques,
this function is often elaborated into a freestanding building in the center of
a courtyard. This desire for cleanliness extends to the prayer halls where
shoes are disallowed to be worn anywhere other than the cloakroom. Thus, foyers
with shelves to put shoes and racks to hold coats are commonplace among
mosques. Contemporary features. Modern mosques have a variety of amenities
available to their congregants. As mosques are supposed to appeal to the
community, they may also have additional facilities, from health clinics to
libraries to gymnasiums, to serve the community. Makeshift and temporary
structures for Islamic worship. A temporary place set aside for Islamic worship
is called a musalla ("Jama'at Khana" in South Asia). A musallah is often not
part of a permanent endowment (waqf), or it is otherwise not intended to become
a permanent legal masjid (as defined in the Sharia). Often musallas are used
while a community looks for a piece of land for a permanent masjid, or the
establishment of a masjid is not practical at the time. They could be located
in rented apartments, industrial units or store fronts. Rules and etiquette.
Mosques, in accordance with Islamic practices, institute a number of rules
intended to keep Muslims focused on worshipping God. While there are several
rules, such as those regarding not allowing shoes in the prayer hall, that are
universal, there are many other rules that are dealt with and enforced in a
variety of ways from mosque to mosque. Prayer leader. Appointment of a prayer
leader is considered desirable, but not always obligatory. The permanent prayer
leader (imam) must be a free honest individual and is authoritative in
religious matters. In mosques constructed and maintained by the government, the
prayer leader is appointed by the ruler; in private mosques, however,
appointment is made by members of the congregation through majority voting.
According to the Hanafi school of Islamic jurisprudence, the individual who
built the mosque has a stronger claim to the title of imam, but this view is
not shared by the other schools. Leadership at prayer falls into three
categories, depending on the type of prayer: five daily prayers, Friday prayer,
or optional prayers. According to the Hanafi and Maliki school of Islamic
jurisprudence, appointment of a prayer leader for Friday service is mandatory
because otherwise the prayer is invalid. The Shafi'i and Hanbali schools,
however, argue that the appointment is not necessary and the prayer is valid as
long as it is performed in a congregation. A slave may lead a Friday prayer,
but Muslim authorities disagree over whether the job can be done by a minor. An
imam appointed to lead Friday prayers may also lead at the five daily prayers;
Muslim scholars agree to the leader appointed for five daily services may lead
the Friday service as well. All Muslim authorities hold the consensus opinion
that only men may lead prayer for men. Nevertheless women prayer leaders are
allowed to lead prayer in front of all-female congregations. Cleanliness. All
mosques have rules regarding cleanliness, as it is an essential part of the
worshippers' experience. Muslims before prayer are required to cleanse
themselves in an ablution process known as "wudu". However, even to those who
enter the prayer hall of a mosque without the intention of praying, there are
still rules that apply. Shoes must not be worn inside the carpeted prayer hall.
Some mosques will also extend that rule to include other parts of the facility
even if those other locations are not devoted to prayer. Congregants and
visitors to mosques are supposed to be clean themselves. It is also undesirable
to come to the mosque after eating something that smells, such as garlic.
Dress. Islam requires that its adherents wear clothes that portray modesty. As
a result, although many mosques will not enforce violations, both men and women
when attending a mosque must adhere to these guidelines. Men are supposed to
come to the mosque wearing loose and clean clothes that do not reveal the shape
of the body. Likewise, it is recommended that women at a mosque wear loose
clothing that covers to the wrists and ankles, and cover their heads with a
"hijab" or other covering. Many Muslims, regardless of their ethnic background,
wear Middle Eastern clothing associated with Arabic Islam to special occasions
and prayers at mosques. Concentration. As mosques are places of worship, those
within the mosque are required to remain respectful to those in prayer. Loud
talking within the mosque, as well as discussion of topics deemed
disrespectful, is forbidden in areas where people are praying. In addition, it
is disrespectful to walk in front of or otherwise disturb Muslims in prayer.
The walls within the mosque have few items, except for possibly Islamic
calligraphy, so Muslims in prayer are not distracted. Muslims are also
discouraged from wearing clothing with distracting images and symbols so as not
to divert the attention of those standing behind them during prayer. In many
mosques, even the carpeted prayer area has no designs, its plainness helping
worshippers to focus. Gender separation. Islamic law does not require men and
women to be separated in the prayer hall; there is nothing written in the Quran
about the issue of space in mosques and gender separation. However, traditional
rules have segregated women and men. By traditional rules, women are most often
told to occupy the rows behind the men. Traditionalists try to argue that
Muhammad preferred women to pray at home rather than at a mosque, and they cite
a "hadith" in which Muhammad supposedly said: "The best mosques for women are
the inner parts of their houses," although women were active participants in
the mosque started by Muhammad. Muhammad told Muslims not to forbid women from
entering mosques. They are allowed to go in. The second Sunni caliph Umar at
one time prohibited women from attending mosques especially at night because he
feared they may be teased by males, so he required them to pray at home.
Sometimes a special part of the mosque was railed off for women; for example,
the governor of Mecca in 870 had ropes tied between the columns to make a
separate place for women. Many mosques today will put the women behind a
barrier or partition or in another room. Mosques in South and Southeast Asia
put men and women in separate rooms, as the divisions were built into them
centuries ago. In nearly two-thirds of American mosques, women pray behind
partitions or in separate areas, not in the main prayer hall; some mosques do
not admit women at all due to the lack of space and the fact that some prayers,
such as the Friday Jummah, are mandatory for men but optional for women.
Although there are sections exclusively for women and children, the Grand
Mosque in Mecca is desegregated. Non-Muslims in mosques. Under most
interpretations of sharia, non-Muslims may be allowed into mosques, as long as
they do not sleep or eat there. A dissenting opinion is presented by followers
of the Maliki school of Islamic jurisprudence, who argue that non-Muslims may
not be allowed into mosques under any circumstances. According to Ahmad ibn
Hanbal, these verses were followed to the letter at the times of Muhammad, when
Jews and Christians, considered monotheists, were still allowed to the Masjid
al-Haram. However, the Umayyad caliph Umar II later forbade non-Muslims from
entering mosques, and his ruling remains in practice in present day Saudi
Arabia. Today, the decision on whether non-Muslims should be allowed to enter
mosques varies. With few exceptions, mosques in the Arabian Peninsula as well
as Morocco do not allow entry to non-Muslims. For example, the Hassan II Mosque
in Casablanca is one of only two mosques in Morocco currently open to non-
Muslims. However, there are also many other places in the west as well as the
Islamic world where non-Muslims are welcome to enter mosques. Most mosques in
the United States, for example, report receiving non-Muslim visitors every
month. Many mosques throughout the United States welcome non-Muslims as a sign
of openness to the rest of the community as well as to encourage conversions to
Islam. In modern-day Saudi Arabia, the Grand Mosque and all of Mecca are open
only to Muslims. Likewise, the Al-Masjid al-Nabawi and the city of Medina that
surrounds it are also off-limits to those who do not practice Islam. For
mosques in other areas, it has most commonly been taken that non-Muslims may
only enter mosques if granted permission to do so by Muslims and if they have a
legitimate reason. All entrants regardless of religious affiliation are
expected to respect the rules and decorum for mosques. In modern Turkey non-
Muslim tourists are allowed to enter any mosque, but there are some strict
rules. Visiting a mosque is allowed only between prayers; visitors are required
to wear long trousers and not to wear shoes, women must cover their heads;
visitors are not allowed to interrupt praying Muslims, especially by taking
photos of them; no loud talk is allowed; and no references to other religions
are allowed (no crosses on necklaces, no cross gestures etc.) Similar rules
apply to mosques in Malaysia, where larger mosques that are also tourist
attractions (such as the Masjid Negara) provide robes and headscarves for
visitors who are deemed inappropriately attired. In certain times and places,
non-Muslims were expected to behave a certain way in the vicinity of a mosque:
in some Moroccan cities, Jews were required to remove their shoes when passing
by a mosque; in 18th century Egypt, Jews and Christians had to dismount before
several mosques in veneration of their sanctity.
