Mount Sinai Mount Sinai ( "·π¨≈´r Sƒ´nƒÅ‚Äô"; or "Jabal M≈´sƒÅ", Egyptian
Arabic Gabal Musa, lit. "Moses' Mountain" or "Mount Moses"; "Har Sinai"), also
known as Mount Horeb, is a mountain in the Sinai Peninsula of Egypt that is the
traditional and most accepted identification of the Biblical Mount Sinai. The
latter is mentioned many times in the Book of Exodus in the Torah, the Bible,
and the Quran. According to Jewish, Christian and Islamic tradition, the
biblical Mount Sinai was the place where Moses received the Ten Commandments.
Geography. Mount Sinai is a high mountain near Saint Catherine in the Sinai
region. It is next to Mount St. Catherine (at , the highest peak in Egypt). It
is surrounded on all sides by higher peaks of the mountain range. Geology.
Mount Sinai's rocks were formed in the late stage of the Arabian-Nubian
Shield's (ANS) evolution. Mount Sinai displays a ring complex that consists of
alkaline granites intruded into diverse rock types, including volcanics. The
granites range in composition from syenogranite to alkali feldspar granite. The
volcanic rocks are alkaline to peralkaline and they are represented by
subaerial flows and eruptions and subvolcanic porphyry. Generally, the nature
of the exposed rocks in Mount Sinai indicates that they originated from
different depths. Religious significance. The biblical Mount Sinai was one of
the most important sacred places in the Abrahamic religions. According to
Bedouin tradition, it was the mountain where God gave laws to the Israelites.
However, the earliest Christian traditions place this event at the nearby Mount
Serbal, at the foot of which a monastery was founded in the 4th century; it was
only in the 6th century that the monastery moved to the foot of Mount
Catherine, following the guidance of Josephus's earlier claim that Sinai was
the highest mountain in the area. Jebel Musa, which is adjacent to Mount
Catherine, was equated with Sinai, by Christians, only after the 15th century.
Christian orthodoxies settled upon this mountain in the third century,
Georgians from the Caucasus moved to the Sinai Peninsula in the fifth century,
and a Georgian colony was formed there in the ninth century. Georgians erected
their own temples in the area of the modern Mount Sinai. The construction of
one such temple was connected with the name of David The Builder, who
contributed to the erecting of temples in Georgia and abroad as well. There
were political, cultural and religious motives for locating the temple on Mount
Sinai. Georgian monks living there were deeply connected with their motherland.
The temple had its own plots in Kartli. Some of the Georgian manuscripts of
Sinai remain there, but others are kept in Tbilisi, St. Petersburg, Prague, New
York, Paris and in private collections. Some modern biblical scholars now
believe that the Israelites would have crossed the Sinai peninsula in a direct
route, rather than detouring to the southern tip (assuming that they did not
cross the eastern branch of the Red Sea/Reed Sea in boats or on a sandbar), and
therefore look for the biblical Mount Sinai elsewhere. The Song of Deborah,
which some textual scholars consider to be one of the oldest parts of the
bible, suggests that Yahweh dwelt at Mount Seir, so many scholars favour a
location in Nabatea (modern Arabia). Alternatively, the biblical descriptions
of Sinai can be interpreted as describing a volcano, and so a small number of
scholars have considered equating Sinai with locations in northwestern Saudi
Arabia; there are no volcanoes in the Sinai Peninsula. St. Catherine's
Monastery. (Greek: ) lies on the Sinai Peninsula, at the mouth of an
inaccessible gorge at the foot of modern Mount Sinai in St. Catherine city in
Egypt at an elevation of 1550 meters. The monastery is Greek Orthodox and is a
UNESCO World Heritage Site. According to the UNESCO report (60100 ha / Ref:
954) and website hereunder, this monastery has been called the oldest working
Christian monastery in the world¬ ‚Äì although the Monastery of Saint Anthony,
situated across the Red Sea in the desert south of Cairo, also lays claim to
that title. Ascent. There are two principal routes to the summit. The longer
and shallower route, "Siket El Bashait", takes about 2.5 hours on foot, though
camels can be used. The steeper, more direct route ("Siket Sayidna Musa") is up
the 3,750 "steps of penitence" in the ravine behind the monastery. Summit. The
summit of the mountain has a mosque that is still used by Muslims. It also has
a Greek Orthodox chapel, constructed in 1934 on the ruins of a 16th century
church, that is not open to the public. The chapel encloses the rock which is
considered to be the source for the biblical Tablets of Stone. At the summit
also is "Moses' cave", where Moses was said to have waited to receive the Ten
Commandments.
