Mourning Mourning is, in the simplest sense, synonymous with grief over the
death of someone. The word is also used to describe a cultural complex of
behaviours in which the bereaved participate or are expected to participate.
Customs vary between different cultures and evolve over time, though many core
behaviors remain constant. Wearing black clothes is one practice followed in
many countries, though other forms of dress are also seen. Those most affected
by the loss of a loved one often observe a period of grieving, marked by
withdrawal from social events and quiet, respectful behavior. People may also
follow certain religious traditions for such occasions. Mourning may also apply
to the death of, or anniversary of the death of, an important individual like a
local leader, monarch, religious figure etc. State mourning may occur on such
an occasion. In recent years some traditions have given way to less strict
practices, though many customs and traditions continue to be followed. Social
customs and dress. Africa. Ethiopia. In Ethiopia, an "Edir" is a traditional
community organization whose members assist each other during the mourning
process. Members make monthly financial contributions forming the Edir's fund.
They are entitled to receive a certain sum of money from this fund, whose rate
varies based on how close the deceased is to the Edir member. The purpose for
such payment is to help cover funeral and other expenses associated with
deaths. Additionally, Edir members comfort the mourners: female members take
turns doing housework, such as preparing food for the mourning family, while
male members usually take the responsibility to arrange the funeral and erect a
temporary tent to shelter guests who come to visit the mourning family. Edir
members are required to stay with the mourning family and comfort them for
three full days. Asia. Japan. The Japanese term for mourning dress is "mofuku"
(喪服). The term refers to either primarily black Western-style formal wear
or to black traditional Japanese clothing worn at funerals and Buddhist
memorial services. Other colors, particularly reds and bright shades, are
considered inappropriate for mourning dress. If wearing Western clothes, women
may wear a single strand of white pearls. Japanese-style mourning dress for
women consists of a five-crested plain black silk kimono, black obi and black
accessories worn over white undergarments, black zori sandals and white tabi
split-toe socks. Women's mourning kimono and accessories are worn only for
mourning. Men's mourning dress consists of clothing worn on extremely formal
occasions: a plain black silk five-crested kimono and black and white or gray
and white striped hakama trousers over white undergarments, black crested haori
jacket with a white closure, white or black zori and white　tabi. It is
customary for Japanese-style mourning dress to be worn only by the immediate
family and very close friends of the deceased; other attendees wear Western-
style mourning dress or subdued Western or Japanese formal wear. Thailand. In
Thailand people will wear black when attending a funeral. Black is considered
the mourning color. Europe. Continental Europe. The custom of wearing unadorned
black clothing for mourning dates back at least to the Roman Empire, when the
"toga pulla", made of dark-colored wool, was worn during periods of mourning.
Through the Middle Ages and Renaissance, distinctive mourning was worn for
general as well as personal loss; after the St. Bartholomew's Day Massacre of
Huguenots in France, Elizabeth I of England and her court are said to have
dressed in full mourning to receive the French Ambassador. Women in mourning
and widows wore distinctive black caps and veils, generally in a conservative
version of the current fashion. In areas of Russia, Czechoslovakia, Greece,
Italy, Mexico, Portugal, and Spain, widows will wear black for the rest of
their lives. The immediate family members of the deceased will wear black for
an extended period of time. Since the 1970s some current mourning practices for
some cultures, even those who have emigrated to the United States, are to wear
black for a period of at least two years, though lifelong black for widows
remains in Europe. White mourning. The color of deepest mourning among medieval
European queens was white. In 1393, Parisians were treated to the unusual
spectacle of a royal funeral carried out in white, for Leo V, King of Armenia,
who died in exile. This royal tradition survived in Spain until the end of the
fifteenth century. In 1993, it was revived by the Spanish-born Queen Fabiola
for the funeral of her husband, King Baudouin I of Belgium. Additionally, in
2004, the four daughters of Queen Juliana of the Netherlands all wore white to
their mother's funeral. The custom for the Queens of France to wear "deuil
blanc" mourning was the origin of the White Wardrobe created in 1938 by Norman
Hartnell for Queen Elizabeth (later the Queen Mother). She was required to make
a State visit to France while in mourning for her mother. United Kingdom.
Today, no special dress or behaviour is obligatory for those in mourning in the
general population, although various ethnic and religious faiths have specific
rituals. Traditionally, however, there were strict social rules to be observed.
By the 19th century, mourning behaviour in England had developed into a complex
set of rules, particularly among the upper classes. For women, the customs
involved wearing heavy, concealing, black clothing, and the use of heavy veils
of black crêpe. The entire ensemble was colloquially known as "widow's weeds"
(from the Old English "Waed" meaning "garment"). Special caps and bonnets,
usually in black or other dark colors, went with these ensembles. There was
special mourning jewelry, often made of jet and with the hair of the deceased
in a locket or brooch. The wealthy could also wear cameos or lockets designed
to hold a lock of the deceased's hair or some similar relic. Widows were
expected to wear special clothes to indicate that they were in mourning for up
to four years after the death, although a widow could choose to wear such
attire for the rest of her life. To change the costume earlier was considered
disrespectful to the decedent and, if the widow was still young and attractive,
suggestive of potential sexual promiscuity. Those subject to the rules were
slowly allowed to re-introduce conventional clothing at specific time periods;
such stages were known by such terms as "full mourning", "half mourning", and
similar descriptions. At half mourning, gray and lavender could be introduced.
Friends, acquaintances, and employees wore mourning to a greater or lesser
degree depending on their relationship with the deceased. In general, servants
wore black armbands when there had been a death in the household. Mourning was
worn for six months for a sibling. Parents would wear mourning for a child for
"as long as they feel so disposed". A widow was supposed to wear mourning for
two years and was not supposed to enter society for twelve months. No lady or
gentleman in mourning was supposed to attend balls. Amongst polite company, the
wearing of simply a black arm band was seen as appropriate only for military
men (or others compelled to wear uniform in the course of their duties).
Wearing a black arm band instead of proper mourning clothes was seen as a
degradation of proper etiquette and to be avoided. Men were expected to wear
mourning suits (not to be confused with morning suits) of black frock coats
with matching trousers and waistcoats. Later, in the inter-war period, as the
frock coat became increasingly rare, the mourning suit consisted of a black
morning coat with black trousers and waistcoat, essentially a black version of
the morning suit worn to weddings and other occasions, which would normally
include colored waistcoats and striped or checked trousers. Formal mourning
culminated during the reign of Queen Victoria. Victoria may have had much to do
with the practice, owing to her long and conspicuous grief over the death of
her husband, Prince Albert. Although fashions began to be more functional and
less restrictive for the succeeding Edwardians, appropriate dress for men and
women, including that for the period of mourning, was still strictly prescribed
and rigidly adhered to. The rules were gradually relaxed, and acceptable
practice for both sexes became to dress in dark colors for up to a year after a
death in the family. By the late 20th century, this no longer applied. Black
had been widely adopted by women in cities as a fashionable color. North
America. United States. Mourning generally followed English forms into the 20th
century. Black dress is still considered proper etiquette for attendance at
funerals, but extended periods of wearing black dress is no longer expected.
However, attendance at social functions such as weddings when a family is in
deep mourning is frowned upon. Men who share their father's given name and
hence use a suffix such as "Junior" retain the suffix at least until the
father's funeral is complete. In the antebellum South, with social mores that
imitated those of England, mourning was just as strictly observed by the upper
classes. In the 19th century, mourning could be quite expensive, as it required
a whole new set of clothes and accessories or, at the very least, overdying
existing garments and taking them out of daily use. For a poorer family, this
was a strain on the resources. At the end of "The Wonderful Wizard of Oz",
Dorothy explains to Glinda that she must return home because her aunt and uncle
cannot afford to go into mourning for her because it was too expensive. The
Pacific. Tonga. In Tonga, family members of deceased persons wear black for an
extended period of time, with large plain Ta'ovala. Often, black bunting is
hung from homes and buildings; and, in the case of the death of royalty, the
entire country adopts mourning dress and black and purple bunting is displayed
from most buildings. State and official mourning. State mourning or, in the
case of a monarchy, court mourning refers to displays of mourning behavior on
the death of a public figure or member of a royal family. The degree and
duration of public mourning is generally decreed by a protocol officer. It was
not unusual for the British court to declare that all citizens should wear full
mourning for a specified period after the death of the monarch, or that the
members of the court should wear full- or half-mourning for an extended period.
On the death of Queen Victoria (January 22, 1901), the "Canada Gazette"
published an "extra" edition announcing that court mourning would continue
until January 24, 1902. It directed the public to wear deep mourning until
March 6, 1901, and half-mourning until April 17, 1901. The black-and-white
costumes designed by Cecil Beaton for the Royal Ascot sequence in "My Fair
Lady" were inspired by the "Black Ascot" of 1910, when the court was in
mourning for Victoria's son, Edward VII. All over the world, States usually
declare a period of official mourning after the death of a Head of State. The
signs may vary but usually include the lowering or posting half-mast of flags
on public buildings. In contrast, in those Commonwealth realms that have one,
the royal standard is "never" flown at half-mast, because there is always a
monarch on the throne. In January 2006, on the death of Jaber Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber
Al-Sabah, the Emir of Kuwait, a mourning period of 40 days was declared. In
Tonga, the official mourning lasts for a year; only afterwards is the royal
heir crowned the new king. On the other hand, the principle of continuity of
the State must be respected. The principle is reflected in the French saying
""Le Roi est mort, vive le Roi!"" king is dead, long live the king!. Regardless
of the formalities of mourning, power must be handed on; if the succession is
uncontested, that is best done immediately. Yet, a short interruption of work
in the civil service may result from one or more days of closing the offices,
especially on the day of the State funeral. Religions and customs.
Confucianism. There are five grades of mourning obligations in the Confucian
Code. A man is expected to honor most of those descended from his great-great-
grandfather, and most of their wives. One's father (and Mother) would merit 27
months. One's grandfather on the male side, as well as one's wife, would be
grade two, or 12 months of austerities. A paternal uncle is grade three at nine
months. Grade four is reserved for one's father's first cousin, maternal
grandparents, siblings and sister's children (five months). First cousins once
removed, second cousins and a man's wife's parents were to get grade five
(three months). Christianity. Eastern Christianity. Orthodox Christians usually
hold the funeral either the day after death or on the third day, and always
during the daytime. In traditional Orthodox communities the body of the
departed would be washed and prepared for burial by family or friends, and then
placed in the coffin in the home. A house in mourning would be recognizable by
the lid of the coffin, with a cross on it, and often adorned with flowers, set
on the porch by the front door. Special prayers are held on the third, seventh
or ninth (number varies in different national church), and 40th days after
death; the third, sixth and ninth or twelfth month; and annually thereafter in
a memorial service, for up to three generations. Kolyva is ceremoniously used
to honor the dead. Sometimes men in mourning will not shave for the 40 days.
Forty seems to have recurring pre-Judaic origins e.g. in the Rites of
Persephone. In Greece and other Orthodox countries, it is not uncommon for
widows to remain in mourning dress for the rest of their lives. When an
Orthodox bishop dies, a successor is not elected until after the 40 days of
mourning are completed, during which period his diocese is said to be
"widowed". The 40th day has great significance in Orthodox religion. That is
the period during which soul of deceased wanders on earth. On 40th day
ascension of his soul occurs. Therefore, it's The most important day in
mourning period, on which special prayers should be held on grave site of
deceased. This custom originates from old Slavic pagan religion and it was
incorporated into Orthodox religion, during the Christianization of old Slavic
nations . As in the Roman Catholic rites, there can be symbolic mourning.
During Holy Week, some temples in the Church of Cyprus draw black curtains
across the icons. The services of Good Friday and Holy Saturday morning are
patterned in part on the Orthodox Christian burial service, and funeral
lamentations. Western Christianity. The European social forms are, in general,
forms of Christian religious expression transferred to the greater community.
In the Roman Catholic Church, the Mass of Paul VI, adopted in 1969, allows
several options for the liturgical color used in Masses for the Dead. Prior to
the liturgical reform, black was the ordinary color for funeral Masses; in the
revised use, several options are available. According to the General
Instruction of the Roman Missal (§346d-e), violet, white, or black vestments
may be worn at Offices and Masses for the dead. Christian Churches often go
into mourning symbolically during the period of Lent to commemorate the
sacrifice and death of Jesus. Customs vary among the denominations and include
the covering or removal of statuary, icons and paintings, and use of special
liturgical colors, such as violet/purple, during Lent and Holy Week. In more
formal congregations, parishioners also dress according to specific forms
during Holy Week, particularly on Maundy Thursday and Good Friday, when it is
still common to wear black or sombre dress or, as mentioned, the liturgical
color purple. Hinduism. Death is not seen as the final "end", but is seen as a
turning point in the seemingly endless journey of the indestructible "atman" or
soul through innumerable bodies of animals and people. Hence, Hinduism
prohibits excessive mourning or lamentation upon death, as this can hinder the
passage of the departed soul towards its journey ahead: ""As mourners will not
help the dead in this world, therefore (the relatives) should not weep, but
perform the obsequies to the best of their power."" Hindu mourning is described
in dharma shastras. It begins immediately after the cremation of the body and
ends on the morning of the thirteenth day. Traditionally the body is cremated
within 24 hours after death; however, cremations are not held after sunset or
before sunrise. Immediately after the death, an oil lamp is lit near the
deceased, and this lamp is kept burning for three days. Hinduism associates
death with ritual impurity for the immediate blood family of the deceased,
hence during these mourning days, the immediate blood family must not perform
any religious ceremonies (except funerals), must not visit temples or other
sacred places, must not serve the sages (holy men), must not give alms, must
not read or recite from the sacred scriptures, nor can they attend social
functions such as marriages, parties, etc. The family of the deceased is not
expected to serve any visiting guests food or drink. It is customary that the
visiting guests do not eat or drink in the house where the death has occurred.
The family in mourning are required to bathe twice a day, eat a single simple
vegetarian meal, and try to cope with their loss. On the day on which the death
has occurred, the family do not cook; hence usually close family and friends
will provide food for the mourning family. White clothing (the color of purity)
is the color of mourning, and many will wear white during the mourning period.
The male members of the family do not cut their hair or shave, and the female
members of the family do not wash their hair until the 10th day after the
death. On the morning of the 10th day, all male members of the family shave and
cut their hair, and female members wash their hair. This day is called "Dasai"
or "Daswan". After "Daswan", some vedic rituals are started. If the deceased
was young and unmarried, the "Narayan Bali" is performed by the Pandits. The
Mantras of "Bhairon Paath" are recited. This ritual is performed through the
person who has given the Mukhagni (Ritual of giving fire to the dead body). On
the morning of the thirteenth day, a Shraddha ceremony is performed. The main
ceremony involves a fire sacrifice, in which offerings are given to the
ancestors and to gods, to ensure the deceased has a peaceful afterlife. Pind
Sammelan is performed to ensure the involvement of the departed soul with that
of God. Typically after the ceremony, the family cleans and washes all the
idols in the family shrine; and flowers, fruits, water and purified food are
offered to the gods. Then, the family is ready to break the period of mourning
and return to daily life. Islam. Mourning is observed in Islam by increased
devotion, receiving visitors and condolences, and avoiding decorative clothing
and jewelry. Loved ones and relatives are to observe a three-day mourning
period. Widows observe an extended mourning period (Iddah), four months and ten
days long, in accordance with the Qur'an 2:234. During this time, she is not to
remarry, move from her home, or wear decorative clothing or jewelry. Grief at
the death of a beloved person is normal, and weeping for the dead is allowed in
Islam. What is prohibited is to express grief by wailing ("bewailing" refers to
mourning in a loud voice), shrieking, tearing hair or clothes, breaking things,
scratching faces, or uttering phrases that make a Muslim lose faith. Directives
for widows. Islamic scholars consider this directive a balance between mourning
a husband's death and protection of the widow from censure that she became
interested in re-marrying too soon after her husband’s death. This is also to
ascertain whether or not a lady is pregnant. Judaism. Judaism looks upon
mourning as a process by which the stricken can re-enter into society, and so
provides a series of customs that make this process gradual. The first stage is
the Shiva (literally meaning seven), which consists of the first seven days
after the funeral. The second stage is the Shloshim (thirty), referring to the
thirty days following the death. In some special cases there are more extended
periods of mourning which can last three months and even one year. Each stage
places lighter demands and restrictions than the previous one in order to
reintegrate the bereaved into normal life. The most known and central stage is
Shiva, which is a Jewish mourning practice in which people adjust their
behaviour as an expression of their bereavement for the week immediately after
the burial. In the West, typically, mirrors are covered and a small tear is
made in an item of clothing to indicate a lack of interest in personal vanity.
The bereaved dress simply and sit on the floor, short stools or boxes rather
than chairs when receiving the condolences of visitors. In some cases relatives
or friends take care or the bereaved's house chores, as cooking and cleaning.
English speakers use the expression "to sit shiva". During the Shloshim the
mourners are no longer expected to sit on the floor or be taken care of
(cooking\cleaning). However some customs still apply. There is a prohibition on
getting married or attending any sort of celebrations and men refrain from
shaving or cutting their hair.
