Musar movement The Musar movement (also Mussar movement) is a Jewish ethical,
educational and cultural movement that developed in the 19th century in Eastern
Europe, particularly among Orthodox Lithuanian Jews. The Hebrew term "Musar"
(מוּסַר), is from the book of "Proverbs" 1:2 meaning moral conduct,
instruction or discipline. The term was used by the Musar movement to refer to
efforts to further ethical and spiritual discipline. The Musar Movement made
significant contributions to Jewish ethics. Early leaders of the Musar
movement. The Musar movement arose among the non-Hasidic Orthodox Lithuanian
Jews, and became a trend in their yeshivas. The movement's founding is
attributed to Rabbi Yisrael Lipkin Salanter (1810–1883), although the roots
of the movements drew on ideas previously expressed in classical Musar
literature. Prior to the founding of the Musar movement, musar was a practice
of the solitary seeker; thanks to Salanter, it became the basis for a popular
social/spiritual movement. Rabbi Yisrael Salanter. Yisrael Lipkin Salanter, a
promising young rabbi with exceptional knowledge of Jewish law living in
Salantai, Lithuania, was initially inspired to dedicate his life to the cause
of spreading Musar by his teacher Rabbi Yosef Zundel Salant (1786–1866).
Zundel Salant was a student of Rabbis Chaim Volozhin and Akiva Eiger whose
profoundly good-hearted and humble behavior and simple lifestyle attracted
Yisrael Salanter's interest, and Zundel Salant allegedly urged Salanter to
focus himself on Musar. Widely recognized as a rabbi of exceptional talent,
Yisrael Salanter became head of a yeshivah in Vilna, where he quickly became
well known in the community for his scholarship. He soon resigned this post to
open up his own Yeshiva at the which he emphasized moral teachings based on the
ethics taught in traditional Jewish rabbinic works, especially Musar
literature. Salanter referred to his approach as the "Musar" approach, using
the Hebrew word for ethical discipline or correction. In seeking to encourage
the study of Musar literature, Salanter had three works of Musar literature
republished in Vilna: Mesillat Yesharim by Moshe Chaim Luzzatto, Tikkun Middot
ha-Nefesh by Solomon ibn Gabirol, and Chesbon Ha-Nefesh by Menachem Mendel
Lefin. He put a special focus on teaching Jewish business ethics, teaching that
just as one checks carefully to make sure his food is kosher, so too should one
check to see if his money is earned in a kosher fashion. Rabbi Salanter set an
example for the Lithuanian Jewish community during the cholera epidemic of
1848, making sure that necessary relief work on Shabbat for Jews was done by
Jews (despite the ordinary prohibition against doing work on Shabbat), and
ordering Jews whose lives were in danger to eat rather than fast on the fast
day of Yom Kippur. In 1848, the Czarist government created the Vilna Rabbinical
School and Teachers' Seminary. Salanter was identified as a candidate to teach
at the school, but he refused the position and, fearing backlash, he left
Vilna. Salanter moved to Kovno, where he established a Musar-focused yeshiva at
the Nevyozer Kloiz, with a student body of approximately 150 students. In 1857
he moved to Germany, By this time his own students from Kovno had begun to set
up their own yeshivot in Kelme, Telz, and elsewhere. Salanter later helped to
found another institution himself, the Kovno Kollel. In Germany, Salanter began
publication of a periodical entitled "Tevunah" dedicated in part to Musar. Many
of Rabbi Salanter's articles from Tevunah were collected and published in
"Imrei Binah" (1878). His "Iggeret ha-Musar" ("ethical letter") was first
published in 1858 and then repeatedly thereafter. Many of his letters were
published in "Or Yisrael", "The Light of Israel," in 1890 (edited by Rabbi
Yitzchak Blazer). Many of his discourses were published in "Even Yisrael"
(1883). Salanter also wrote an essay, "An Essay on the Topic of Reinforcing
those who Learn our Holy Torah," published in a collection of essays entitled
"Etz Peri." This essay is especially important because the concept of the
subconscious appears in the it, well before concept was popularized by Sigmund
Freud. In Salanter's essay, the concept of conscious ("outer" ["chitzoniut"])
and subconscious ("inner" ["penimiut"]) processes and the role they play in the
psychological, emotional and moral functioning of man are developed. Salanter
explains that it is critical for a person to recognize what his subconscious
motivations ["negiot"] are and to work on understanding them. He also teaches
that the time for a person to work on not allowing improper subconscious
impulses to affect him was during times of emotional quiet, when a person is
more in control of his thoughts and feelings. Salanter stresses that when a
person is experiencing an acute emotional response to an event, he is not
necessarily in control of his thoughts and faculties and will not have access
to the calming perspectives necessary to allow his conscious mind to intercede.
Scholar Hillel Goldberg and others have described Salanter as a "psychologist"
as well as a moralist. The second generation of Musar movement leaders. After
Salanter's death, the Musar movement was led by his disciples. His eldest
disciple, Rabbi Simcha Zissel Ziv, directed yeshivas in Kelm and Grobin. His
disciple Rabbi Yitzchak Blazer became the chief rabbi of St. Petersburg in
1861-2, and later led the Kovno kollel. Rabbi Blazer was also responsible for
publishing many of Salanter's writings. A third leading disciple of Salanter,
Rabbi Naftali Amsterdam, became the chief rabbi of Helsinki. The third
generation of Musar movement leaders. In the following generation, leaders of
the Musar movement included Simcha Zissel's student Nosson Tzvi Finkel of
Slobodka, and Rabbi Yosef Yozel Horwitz of Novaradok. The schools founded by
these two men became the largest and most influential schools of Musar. The
Slobodka school founded by Finkel became especially influential, but the
Novaradok school also gained a significant following. Origin of the movement.
This movement began among non-Hasidic Jews as a response to the social changes
brought about by The Enlightenment, and the corresponding Haskalah movement
among many European Jews. In this period of history anti-Semitism, assimilation
of many Jews into Christianity, poverty, and the poor living conditions of many
Jews in the Pale of Settlement caused severe tension and disappointment. Many
of the institutions of Lithuanian Jewry were beginning to break up. Many
religious Jews felt that their way of life was slipping away from them,
observance of traditional Jewish law and custom was on the decline, and what
they felt was worst of all, many of those who remained loyal to the tradition
were losing their emotional connection to the tradition's inner meaning and
ethical core. The Musar controversy. In later years some opposition to the
Musar movement developed in large segments of the Orthodox community. Many
opposed the new educational system that Yisrael Salanter set up, and others
charged that deviations from traditional methods would lead to assimilation no
less surely than the path of classic German Reform Judaism. In 1897, Eliezer
Gordon of the Telshe yeshiva hired a new Musar supervisor, Rabbi Leib Chasman,
who instituted a very strict Musar regime in the yeshiva. Many of the students
opposed this approach, which caused dissent among the student body. At the same
time, dissent against Musar also broke out at the Slobodka Yeshiva. A group of
Lithuanian rabbis then published a declaration in the Hebrew newspaper Ha-
Melitz in opposition to the study of Musar. According to the "YIVO
Encyclopedia", The Musar movement after World War II. Many of the Jews involved
in the Musar movement were killed in the Shoah. Hillel Goldberg has written
that it was only before World War II that Musar was "still a living community."
Some students of the Musar movement, however, settled in the land of Israel and
established Musar yeshivas there. While many former students of the Musar
movement settled in the United States and were involved in a variety of Jewish
institutions, they established no formal institutions dedicated to Musar during
the 20th century. Many traditional yeshivas throughout the world, however,
continued to allot some time during the week for Musar, and this continues
today. This time is often dedicated to the study of Musar literature. 21st
century revival of the Musar movement. At the start of the 21st century, a
significant revival of interest in the Musar movement has occurred in North
America in various sectors of the Jewish world. Within the Orthodox community,
the AishDas Society, founded by Rabbi Micha Berger, and the Salant Foundation,
founded by Rabbi Zvi Miller, are organizations which organize Musar groups,
classes and other teaching events. Elyakim Krumbain and Avi Fertig are Orthodox
rabbis who have also published books which teach Musar from an Orthodox
perspective. To the surprise of some, much of the contemporary revival of Musar
has taken place among non-Orthodox Jews. The Musar Institute, founded by Alan
Morinis, and the Mussar Leadership Program, founded by Rabbi Ira F. Stone, are
among the institutions which have sought to spread the practice of Musar in a
non-Orthodox framework. Morinis' book "Everyday Holiness" (2007) and Stone's
book "A Responsible Life" (2007) have been among the popular books which have
sparked contemporary interest in the Musar movement. Musar has been described
as “an emerging and growing phenomenon” within Reform Judaism, and leaders
of Conservative Judaism have debated whether Musar should stand at the center
of its approach. Geoffrey Claussen of Elon University has argued that the Musar
movement's conception of Jewish practice is especially valuable for
Conservative Judaism. Some Musar groups have no connection with synagogues, but
a number of synagogues have started programs for the study of Musar. For
example, at Temple Chai in Chicago, Illinois, a program known as the "Sunday
School for Grown-ups" has focused on the study of a different character trait
each week. There are also online communities dedicated to the exploration of
Musar and character trait development. For example, madrega.com, which was
founded in March 2009, is a community which encourages members to share
teachings, ideas and learnings about their own personal Musar practice.
