Mysticism Mysticism (; from the Greek , "", meaning 'an initiate') is the
knowledge of, and especially the personal experience of, states of
consciousness, or levels of being, or aspects of reality, beyond normal human
perception, sometimes including experience of and communion with a supreme
being. Classical origins. A "mystikos" was an initiate of a mystery religion.
The Eleusinian Mysteries, (Greek: ) were annual initiation ceremonies in the
cults of the goddesses Demeter and Persephone, held in secret at Eleusis (near
Athens) in ancient Greece. The mysteries began in about 1600 B.C. in the
Mycenean period and continued for two thousand years, becoming a major festival
during the Hellenic era, and later spreading to Rome. Modern understanding. The
present meaning of the term "mysticism" arose via Platonism and
Neoplatonism—which referred to the Eleusinian initiation as a metaphor for
the "initiation" to spiritual truths and experiences—and is the pursuit of
with, identity with, or conscious awareness of an ultimate reality, divinity,
spiritual truth, or God through direct experience, intuition, instinct or
insight. Mysticism usually centers on practices intended to nurture those
experiences. Mysticism may be dualistic, maintaining a distinction between the
self and the divine, or may be nondualistic. Many if not all of the world's
great religions have arisen around the teachings of mystics (including Buddha,
Jesus, Lao Tze, and Krishna); and most religious traditions describe
fundamental mystical experience, at least esoterically. "Enlightenment" or
"Illumination" are generic English terms for the phenomenon, derived from the
Latin "" (applied to Christian prayer in the 15th century) and adopted in
English translations of Buddhist texts, but used loosely to describe the state
of mystical attainment regardless of faith. Conventional religions, by
definition, have strong institutional structures, including formal hierarchies
and mandated sacred texts and/or creeds. Adherents of the faith are expected to
respect or follow these closely, so mysticism is often deprecated or
persecuted. The following table briefly summarizes the major forms of mysticism
within world religions and their basic concepts. Literary forms used by
spiritual teachers. Koans, riddles, contradictions. Zen koans, riddles, and
metaphysical contradictions are intentionally irresolvable tasks or lines of
thought, designed to direct one away from intellectualism and effort towards
direct experience. These can be meant as humorous phrases (see humour, below);
or as serious questions with significant mystical answers. Others believe that
the most edifying understanding of these riddles is that excessive effort
contemplating the impossible can give an individual the opportunity to stop
trying to 'achieve' and start just 'being'. Stories, parables, metaphors.
Parables and metaphor include stories that have a deeper meaning to them:
Perennial philosophy.  Natural and religious mysticism. R. C. Zaehner has
identified two distinctively different mystical experiences: natural and
religious mystical experiences, this being the overarching thesis of his book
"Mysticism Sacred and Profane". Natural mystical experiences are, for example,
experiences of the 'deeper self' or experiences of oneness with nature. Zaehner
argues that the experiences typical of 'natural mysticism' are quite different
from the experiences typical of religious mysticism. In this, Zaehner is
directly opposing the views Aldous Huxley put forward in "The Perennial
Philosophy" according to which the mystical experiences in all religions are
essentially the same. Natural mystical experiences are in Zaehner's view of
less value because they do not lead as directly to the virtues of charity and
compassion. Zaehner is generally critical of what he sees as narcissistic
tendencies in nature mysticism. Skepticism. In "The Emotion Machine", Marvin
Minsky argues that mystical experiences only "seem" profound and persuasive
because the mind's critical faculties are relatively inactive during them:
- Minsky's idea of 'some early Imprimer hiding in the mind' was an echo of
Freud's belief that mystical experience was essentially infantile and
regressive, i.e., a memory of 'Oneness' with the mother. Others (such as Ken
Wilber) countered with the position that Freud had erred by confusing pre-ego
states with trans-ego states, although such arguments hinge on the veracity of
alleged trans-ego states.
