Anasheed Anasheed (Arabic: singular ', plural ', meaning: "chants"; also spelt
"Nasyid" in Malaysia and Indonesia; ; "Naat"), is Islamic vocal music that is
either sung a cappella or accompanied by percussion instruments such as the
daff. In general, Islamic anasheed does not contain lamellaphone instruments,
string instruments, or wind and brass instruments, although digital
remastering—either to mimic percussion instruments or create overtones—is
permitted. This is because some Muslim scholars interpret Islam as prohibiting
the use of musical instruments except for some basic percussion. Anasheeds are
popular throughout the Islamic world. The material and lyrics of anasheed
usually make reference to Islamic beliefs, history, and religion, as well as
current events. . Some Ulema argue that the use of musical instruments is
implicitly prohibited in the Ahadith. The founders of all four of the major
madhabs—schools of thought in Islam—as well as many other prominent
scholars, have debated the legitimacy and use of musical instruments. One such
example of the scholars' opinions is of the famous Muslim scholar, Abu Hanifa,
according to whose madhab, the Hanafi madhab, if a person is known to listen to
such forbidden musical instruments, their testimony is not to be accepted.
Another Islamic scholar, Ibn Taymiyyah, once said that music is like alcohol to
the soul. A majority of Muslim scholars traditionally have held that music with
all its instruments are Haraam: sinful by the hadith, as well as by tradition.
The only instrument commonly used in Anasheeds is the duff, which is a small
hand drum, similar in size to a tambourine, but lacking bells.. Prohibition in
the Qur’an. It is stated in the Qur'an that Qur'an, Chapter 31(Lugman): Verse
6. Some of the closest companions of Muhammad, namely Abdullah ibn Abbas and
Abdullah ibn Mas'ud, state in their Tafsirs (commentaries on the Qur'an) that
“"Laghwal Hadith"” mentioned in the above verse of Qur'an “.. is
singing”. In particular, it is reported that Abd Allah ibn Mas'ud used to
"swear by Allah and say that idle talk is singing." In addition to this basic
evidence, both Sunni and Shi'ite scholars cite several other passages from the
Qu'ran as evidence for the prohibition of musical instruments. Prohibition in
the Hadith. “Narrated Abu 'Amir or Abu Malik Al-Ash'ari (a companion of
Muhammad) that he heard the Prophet saying, "From among my followers there will
be some people who will consider illegal sexual intercourse, the wearing of
silk, the drinking of alcoholic drinks and the use of musical instruments, as
lawful”. However, the isnad of this hadith includes Hisham ibn Ammar, who is
not considered trustworthy. Prohibition in Islamic tradition. Apart from the
evidence that Sunni scholars draw out from the Qur'an and Hadith, many Islamic
scholars throughout Muslim history have agreed that every type of music and
musical instruments is Haraam. These scholars include the four imams, namely
Imam Abu Hanifa, Imam Malik, Imam Shafi'i and Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal. Modern
interpretations. A new generation of nasheed artists use a wide variety of
musical instruments in their art. A lot of new nasheed artist are non-Arabs and
sing in different languages, like English or Turkish. Some of the nasheed bands
are Native Deen, Outlandish and Raihan. Other well-known artists are Yusuf
Islam -formerly known as Cat Stevens -, Sami Yusuf, Junaid Jamshed, Maher Zain,
Mesut Kurtis, Dawud Wharnsby, Zain Bhikha, ANI, the only female Islamic pop
English singer, and many others. As for Arabic nasheed artists -or Munshids-,
some of the well known are Abu Mazen, Abu Rateb, Abu Al joud, Abu Dujanah,
Abdulfattah Owainat, and many others. Some of the well known Arabic nasheed
bands are Al Rawabi, Al I'atisam, Al Baraa', Al Wa'ad and many others.
Appealing to a significant Muslim crowd and also leading to performance of such
artists at Islamic orientated festivals (such as Milad), conferences, concerts
and shows, including ISNA, Celebrate Eid, and Young Muslims. Other artists and
organisations such as Nasheedbay promote an instrument-free stance with
anasheed, differing from the current trends of the increasing usage of
instruments in anasheed.
