Natural theology Natural theology is a branch of theology based on reason and
ordinary experience. Thus it is distinguished from "revealed theology" (or
"revealed religion") which is based on scripture and religious experiences of
various kinds; and also from "transcendental theology", theology from "a
priori" reasoning. Marcus Terentius Varro (116–27 BC) in his (lost)
"Antiquitates rerum humanarum et divinarum" established a distinction of three
kinds of theology: civil (political) ("theologia civilis"), natural (physical)
("theologia naturalis") and mythical ("theologia mythica"). The theologians of
civil theology are "the people", asking how the gods relate to daily life and
the state (imperial cult). The theologians of natural theology are the
philosophers, asking for the nature of the gods, and the theologians of
mythical theology are the poets, crafting mythology. The terminology entered
Stoic tradition and is used by Augustine of Hippo. Natural theology, thus, is
that part of the philosophy of religion dealing with describing the nature of
the gods, or, in monotheism, arguing for or against attributes or non-
attributes of God, and especially the existence of God, purely philosophically,
that is, without recourse to any special or supposedly supernatural revelation.
Physico-theology is the term for a theology based on the constitution of the
natural world, especially derived from perceived elements of "design", which
gave rise to the argument from design for the existence of God, beginning with
the "fifth way" of the "Summa Theologica" by Thomas Aquinas (d. 1274). Key
proponents. Besides Zarathushtra's Gathas, Plato gives the earliest surviving
account of a "natural theology", around 360 BC, in his dialogue "Timaeus" he
states "Now the whole Heaven, or Cosmos, ...we must first investigate
concerning it that primary question which has to be investigated at the outset
in every case,—namely, whether it has existed always, having no beginning of
generation, or whether it has come into existence, having begun from some
beginning". He continues in his "Laws" establishing the existence of the gods
by rational argument, stating "...which lead to faith in the gods? ...One is
our dogma about the soul...the other is our dogma concerning the ordering of
the motion of the stars". Aristotle in his "Metaphysics" argues for the
existence of an "unmoved mover", an argument taken up in medieval scholastics.
From the 8th century, the Mutazilite school of Islam, compelled to defend their
principles against the orthodox Islam of their day, looked for support in
philosophy, and are among the first to pursue a rational Islamic theology,
called "Ilm-al-Kalam" (scholastic theology). The teleological argument was
presented by the early Islamic philosophers, Alkindus and Averroes (founder of
Averroism), while Avicenna (founder of the Avicennism school of Islamic
philosophy) presented both the cosmological argument and ontological argument
in "The Book of Healing" (1027). Thomas Aquinas (c.1225–1274), wrote Summa
Theologica and Summa Contra Gentiles which both present various versions of the
Cosmological argument and Teleological argument, respectively. The Ontological
argument is also presented, but rejected in favor of proofs dealing with cause
and effect alone. Thomas Barlow, Bishop of Lincoln wrote "Execreitationes
aliquot metaphysicae de Deo" (1637) and spoke often of natural theology during
the reign of Charles II. John Ray (1627–1705) also known as John Wray, was an
English naturalist, sometimes referred to as the father of English natural
history. He published important works on plants, animals, and natural theology.
William Derham (1657–1735), was a friend and disciple of John Ray. He
continued Ray's tradition of natural theology in two of his own works, The
"Physico-Theology", published in 1713, and the "Astro-Theology", 1714. These
would later help influence the work of William Paley (see below). In "An Essay
on the Principle of Population", the first edition published in 1798, Thomas
Malthus ended with two chapters on natural theology and population. Malthus—a
devout Christian—argued that revelation would "damp the soaring wings of
intellect", and thus never let "the difficulties and doubts of parts of the
scripture" interfere with his work. William Paley gave a well-known rendition
of the teleological argument for God. In 1802 he published "Natural Theology,
or Evidences of the Existence and Attributes of the Deity collected from the
Appearances of Nature". In this he described the Watchmaker analogy, for which
he is probably best known. Searing criticisms of arguments like Paley's are
found in David Hume's posthumous "Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion".
Thomas Paine wrote the definitive book on the natural religion of Deism, The
Age of Reason (1794–1807). In it he uses reason to establish a belief in
Nature's Designer who man calls God. He also establishes the many instances
that Christianity and Judaism require us to give up our God-given reason in
order to accept their claims to revelation. American education reformer and
abolitionist, Horace Mann (1796–1859) taught political economy, intellectual
and moral philosophy, and natural theology. Professor of chemistry and natural
history, Edward Hitchcock also studied and wrote on natural theology. He
attempted to unify and reconcile science and religion, focusing on geology. His
major work in this area was "The Religion of Geology and its Connected
Sciences" (1851). The Gifford Lectures are lectures established by the will of
Adam Lord Gifford. They were established to "promote and diffuse the study of
Natural Theology in the widest sense of the term—in other words, the
knowledge of God." The term natural theology as used by Gifford means theology
supported by science and not dependent on the miraculous. The Bridgewater
Treatises. In response to the claim in Whewell's treatise that "We may thus,
with the greatest propriety, deny to the mechanical philosophers and
mathematicians of recent times any authority with regard to their views of the
administration of the universe", Charles Babbage published what he called "The
Ninth Bridgewater Treatise, A Fragment". As his preface states, this volume was
not part of that series, but rather his own reflections on the subject. He
draws on his own work on calculating engines to consider God as a divine
programmer setting complex laws underlying what we think of as miracles, rather
than miraculously producing new species on a Creative whim. There was also a
fragmentary supplement to this, posthumously published by Thomas Hill. The
works are of unequal merit; several of them took a high rank in apologetic
literature, but they attracted considerable criticism. One notable critic of
the Bridgewater Treatises was Edgar Allan Poe, who wrote "Criticism". Robert
Knox, an Edinburgh surgeon and leading advocate of radical morphology, referred
to them as the "Bilgewater Treatises", to mock the "ultra-teleological school".
Though memorable, this phrase overemphasises the influence of teleology in the
series, at the expense of the idealism of the likes of Kirby and Roget.
External links. The Bridgewater Treatises
