Nestorianism Nestorianism is a Christological doctrine advanced by Nestorius,
Patriarch of Constantinople from 428–431. The doctrine, which was informed by
Nestorius's studies under Theodore of Mopsuestia at the School of Antioch,
emphasizes the disunion between the human and divine natures of Jesus.
Nestorius' teachings brought him into conflict with some other prominent church
leaders, most notably Cyril of Alexandria, who criticized especially his
rejection of the title "Theotokos" ("Bringer forth of God") for the Virgin
Mary. Nestorius and his teachings were eventually condemned as heretical at the
First Council of Ephesus in 431 and the Council of Chalcedon in 451, leading to
the Nestorian Schism in which churches supporting Nestorius broke with the rest
of the Christian Church. Afterward many of Nestorius' supporters relocated to
Sassanid Persia, where they affiliated with the local Christian community,
known as the Church of the East. Over the next decades the Church of the East
became increasingly Nestorian in doctrine, leading it to be known alternately
as the Nestorian Church. Nestorianism is a form of dyophysitism, and can be
seen as the antithesis to monophysitism, which emerged in reaction to
Nestorianism. Where Nestorianism holds that Christ had two loosely-united
natures, divine and human, monophysitism holds that he had but a single nature,
his human nature being absorbed into his divinity. A brief definition of
Nestorian Christology can be given as: "Jesus Christ, who is not identical with
the Son but personally united with the Son, who lives in him, is one hypostasis
and one nature: human." Both Nestorianism and monophysitism were condemned as
heretical at the Council of Chalcedon. Monophysitism survived and developed
into the Miaphysitism of the modern Oriental Orthodox churches. Following the
exodus to Persia, scholars expanded on the teachings of Nestorius and his
mentors, particularly after the relocation of the School of Edessa to the
Persian city of Nisibis in 489 (where it became known as the School of
Nisibis). Nestorianism never again became prominent in the Roman Empire or
later Europe, though the spread of the Church of the East in and after the 7th
century spread it widely across Asia. However, not all churches affiliated with
the Church of the East appear to have followed Nestorian Christology; indeed,
the modern Assyrian Church of the East, which reveres Nestorius, does not
follow all historically Nestorian doctrine. Nestorian doctrine. Nestorius
developed his Christological views as an attempt to rationally explain and
understand the incarnation of the divine Logos, the Second Person of the Holy
Trinity as the man Jesus Christ. He had studied at the School of Antioch where
his mentor had been Theodore of Mopsuestia; Theodore and other Antioch
theologians had long taught a literalist interpretation of the Bible and
stressed the distinctiveness of the human and divine natures of Jesus.
Nestorius took his Antiochene leanings with him when he was appointed Patriarch
of Constantinople by Eastern Roman Emperor Theodosius II in 428. Nestorius'
teachings became the root of controversy when he publicly challenged the long-
used title "Theotokos" (Bringer forth of God) for the Virgin Mary. He suggested
that the title denied Christ's full humanity, arguing instead that Jesus had
two natures, the divine Logos and the human Jesus. As such he proposed
"Christotokos" (Bringer forth of Christ) as a more suitable title for Mary.
Nestorius' opponents found his teaching too close to the heresy of adoptionism
– the idea that Christ had been born a man who had later been "adopted" as
God's son. Nestorius was especially criticized by Cyril, Pope (Patriarch) of
Alexandria, who argued that Nestorius' teachings undermined the unity of
Christ's divine and human natures at the Incarnation. Some argued that
Nestorius overemphasized Christ's human nature, and others held that the
distinction between human and divine natures implied belief in two Christs.
Nestorius himself always insisted that his views were orthodox, though they
were deemed heretical at the First Council of Ephesus in 431, leading to the
Nestorian Schism, when churches supportive of Nestorius broke away from the
rest of the Christian Church. A more elaborate Nestorian theology developed
from there, which came to see Christ as having two natures united, or
hypostases, the divine Logos and the human Christ. However, this formulation
was never adopted by all churches termed "Nestorian". Indeed, the modern
Assyrian Church of the East, which reveres Nestorius, does not fully subscribe
to Nestorian doctrine, though it does reject the title Theotokos. Nestorian
Schism and early history. Nestorianism became a distinct sect following the
Nestorian Schism, beginning in the 430s. Nestorius had come under fire from
Western theologians, most notably Cyril of Alexandria. Cyril had both
theological and political reasons for attacking Nestorius; on top of feeling
that Nestorianism was an error against true belief, he also wanted to denigrate
the head of a competing patriarchate. Cyril and Nestorius asked Pope Celestine
I to weigh in on the matter. Celestine found that the title "Theotokos" was
orthodox, and authorized Cyril to ask Nestorius to recant. Cyril, however, used
the opportunity to further attack Nestorius, who pleaded with Emperor
Theodosius II to call a council so that all grievances could be aired. In 431
Theodosius called the First Council of Ephesus. However, the council ultimately
sided with Cyril, holding that Christ is one subsistence and nature, and that
the Virgin Mary is the mother of God. The council accused Nestorius of heresy,
and deposed him as patriarch. Nestorianism was officially anathematized, a
ruling reiterated at the Council of Chalcedon in 451. However, a number of
churches, particularly those associated with the School of Edessa, supported
Nestorius – though not necessarily his doctrine – and broke with the
churches of the West. Many of Nestorius' supporters relocated to Sassanid
Persia, home to a vibrant but persecuted Christian minority. Nestorianism and
the Persian Church. Persia had long been home to a Christian community that had
been persecuted by the Zoroastrian majority, which had accused it of Roman
leanings. In 424, the Persian Church declared itself independent of the
Byzantine and all other churches, in order to ward off allegations of foreign
allegiance. Following the Nestorian Schism, the Persian Church increasingly
aligned itself with the Nestorians, a measure encouraged by the Zoroastrian
ruling class. The Persian Church became increasingly Nestorian in doctrine over
the next decades, furthering the divide between Chalcedonian Christianity and
the Nestorians. In 486 the Metropolitan of Nisibis, Barsauma, publicly accepted
Nestorius' mentor, Theodore of Mopsuestia, as a spiritual authority. In 489
when the School of Edessa in Mesopotamia was closed by Byzantine Emperor Zeno
for its Nestorian teachings, the school relocated to its original home of
Nisibis, becoming again the School of Nisibis, leading to a wave of Nestorian
immigration into Persia. The Persian patriarch Mar Babai I (497–502)
reiterated and expanded upon the church's esteem for Theodore, solidifying the
church's adoption of Nestorianism. Now firmly established in Persia, with
centers in Nisibis, Ctesiphon, and Gundeshapur, and several metropolitan sees,
the Nestorian Persian Church began to branch out beyond the Persian Sassanid
Empire. However, through the 6th century the church was frequently beset with
internal strife and persecution from the Zoroastrians. The infighting led to a
schism, which lasted from 521 until around 539, when the issues were resolved.
However, immediately afterward Roman-Persian conflict led to the persecution of
the church by the Sassanid King Khosrau I; this ended in 545. The church
survived these trials under the guidance of Patriarch Mar Abba I, who had
converted to Christianity from Zoroastrianism. The church emerged stronger
after this period of ordeal, and increased missionary efforts farther afield.
Missionaries established dioceses in the Arabian Peninsula and India (the Saint
Thomas Christians). They made some advances in Egypt, despite the strong
Monophysite (Oriental Orthodox) presence there. Missionaries entered Central
Asia and had significant success converting local Tartar tribes. Nestorian
missionaries were firmly established in China during the early part of the Tang
Dynasty (618–907); the Chinese source known as the Nestorian Stele records a
mission under a Persian proselyte named Alopen as introducing Nestorian
Christianity to China in 635. Following the Muslim conquest of Persia,
completed in 644, the Persian Church became a protected "dhimmi" community
under the Rashidun Caliphate. The church and its communities abroad flourished
under the Caliphate; by the 10th century it had fifteen metropolitan sees
within the Caliphate's territories, and another five elsewhere, including in
China and India.
