New moon In astronomy, new moon is the phase of the Moon when it lies closest
to the Sun in the sky as seen from the Earth. More precisely, it is the instant
when the Moon and the Sun have the same ecliptical longitude. The Moon is not
normally visible at this time except when it is seen in silhouette during a
solar eclipse. See the article on phases of the Moon for fuller details. The
original meaning of the phrase new moon was the first visible crescent of the
Moon, after conjunction with the Sun. This takes place over the western horizon
in a brief period between sunset and moonset, and therefore the precise time
and even the date of the appearance of the new moon by this definition will be
influenced by the geographical location of the observer. The astronomical new
moon, sometimes known as the "dark moon" to avoid confusion, occurs by
definition at the moment of conjunction in ecliptical longitude with the Sun,
when the Moon is invisible from the Earth. This moment is unique and does not
depend on location, and in certain circumstances it coincides with a solar
eclipse. The new moon in its original meaning of first crescent marks the
beginning of the month in lunar calendars such as the Muslim calendar, and in
lunisolar calendars such as the Hebrew calendar, Hindu calendars, and Buddhist
calendar. But in the Chinese calendar, the beginning of the month is marked by
the dark moon. Determining new moons: an approximate formula. where N is an
integer, starting with 0 for the first new moon in the year 2000, and that is
incremented by 1 for each successive synodic month; and the result d is the
number of days (and fractions) since 2000-01-01 00:00:00 reckoned in the time
scale known as Terrestrial Time (TT) used in ephemerides. Periodic
perturbations change the time of true conjunction from these mean values. For
all new moons between 1601 and 2401, the maximum difference is 0.592 days =
14h13m in either direction. The duration of a lunation ("i.e." the time from
new moon to the next new moon) varies in this period between 29.272 and 29.833
days, i.e. −0.259d = 6h12m shorter, or +0.302d = 7h15m longer than average.
This range is smaller than the difference between mean and true conjunction,
because during one lunation the periodic terms cannot all change to their
maximum opposite value. See the article on the full moon cycle for a fairly
simple method to compute the moment of new moon more accurately. The long-term
error of the formula is approximately: 1 cy2 seconds in TT, and 11 cy2 seconds
in UT ("cy" is centuries since 2000; see section "Explanation of the formulae"
for details.) Explanation of the formula. The theoretical tidal contribution to
ΔT is about +42 s/cy2 the smaller observed value is thought to be mostly due
to changes in the shape of the Earth. Because the discrepancy is not fully
explained, uncertainty of our prediction of UT (rotation angle of the Earth)
may be as large as the difference between these values: 11 s/cy2. The error in
the position of the Moon itself is only maybe 0.5"/cy2, or (because the
apparent mean angular velocity of the Moon is about 0.5"/s), 1 s/cy2 in the
time of conjunction with the Sun.
