Nicene Creed The Nicene Creed (Latin: ) is the creed or profession of faith
(Greek: ) that is most widely used in Christian liturgy. It is called Nicene ()
because, in its original form, it was adopted in the city of Nicaea (ƒ∞znik in
what is now Turkey) by the first ecumenical council, which met there in the
year 325. The Nicene Creed has been normative for the Anglican Church, the
Church of the East, the Eastern Orthodox Church, the Oriental Orthodox
churches, the Roman Catholic Church including the Eastern Catholic Churches,
the Old Catholic Church, the Lutheran Church and many Protestant denominations,
forming the eponymous mainstream definition of Christianity itself in Nicene
Christianity. The Apostles' Creed, which in its present form is later, is also
broadly accepted in the West, but is not used in the East. One or other of
these two creeds is recited in the Roman Rite Mass directly after the homily on
all Sundays and Solemnities (Tridentine Feasts of the First Class). In the
Byzantine Rite Liturgy, the Nicene Creed is recited on all occasions, following
the Litany of Supplication. In the Roman Catholic Church, the Nicene Creed is
part of the profession of faith required of those undertaking important
functions within the Church. For current English translations of the Nicene
Creed, see English versions of the Nicene Creed in current use. Nomenclature.
In musical settings, particularly when sung in Latin, this Creed is usually
referred to by its first word, "Credo". History. The purpose of a creed is to
act as a yardstick of correct belief, or "orthodoxy". The creeds of
Christianity have been drawn up at times of conflict about doctrine: acceptance
or rejection of a creed served to distinguish believers and deniers of a
particular doctrine or set of doctrines. For that reason a creed was called in
Greek a œÉœçŒºŒ≤ŒøŒªŒøŒΩ (Eng. "sumbolon"), a word that meant half of a broken
object which, when placed together with the other half, verified the bearer's
identity. The Greek word passed through Latin "symbolum" into English "symbol",
which only later took on the meaning of an outward sign of something. The
Nicene Creed was adopted in the face of the Arian controversy. Arius, a Libyan
presbyter in Alexandria, had declared that although the Son was divine, he was
a created being and therefore not co-essential with the Father, and "there was
when he was not," This made Jesus less than the Father, which posed
soteriological challenges for the nascent doctrine of the Trinity. Arius's
teaching provoked a serious crisis. The Nicene Creed of 325 explicitly affirms
the co-essential divinity of the Son, applying to him the term
"consubstantial". The 381 version speaks of the Holy Spirit as worshipped and
glorified with the Father and the Son. The Athanasian Creed describes in much
greater detail the relationship between Father, Son and Holy Spirit. The
Apostles' Creed makes no explicit statements about the divinity of the Son and
the Holy Spirit, but, in the view of many who use it, the doctrine is implicit
in it. The original Nicene Creed of 325. The original Nicene Creed was first
adopted in 325 at the First Council of Nicaea. At that time, the text ended
after the words "We believe in the Holy Spirit", after which an anathema was
added. (For other differences, see Comparison between Creed of 325 and Creed of
381, below.) The Coptic Church has the tradition that the original creed was
authored by Pope Athanasius I of Alexandria. F. J. A. Hort and Adolf Harnack
argued that the Nicene creed was the local creed of Caesarea (an important
center of Early Christianity) brought to the council by Eusebius of Caesarea.
J.N.D. Kelly sees as its basis a baptismal creed of the Syro-Phoenician family,
related to (but not dependent on) the creed cited by Cyril of Jerusalem and to
the creed of Eusebius. Soon after the Council of Nicaea, new formulae of faith
were composed, most of them variations of the Nicene Symbol, to counter new
phases of Arianism. The "Catholic Encyclopedia" identifies at least four before
the Council of Sardica (341), where a new form was presented and inserted in
the Acts of the Council, though it was not agreed on. The
Niceno‚ÄìConstantinopolitan Creed of 381. It is traditionally believed that the
Second Ecumenical Council held in Constantinople in 381 added the section that
follows the words "We believe in the Holy Spirit" (without the words "and the
Son" relative to the procession of the Holy Spirit, which would become a point
of contention in the Great Schism of Orthodoxy from Catholicism); hence the
name "Niceno-Constantinopolitan Creed", referring to the Creed as modified in
the First Council of Constantinople. This is the received text of the Eastern
Orthodox Church, with the exception that in its liturgy it changes verbs from
the plural by which the Fathers of the Council collectively professed their
faith to the singular of the individual Christian's profession of faith.
Byzantine Rite Eastern Catholic Churches use exactly the same form of the
Creed, since the Catholic Church teaches that it is wrong to add "and the Son"
to the Greek verb "·ºêŒ∫œÄŒøœÅŒµœÖœåŒºŒµŒΩŒøŒΩ", but correct to add it to the
Latin "qui procedit", which does not have precisely the same meaning. Doubt has
been cast on this explanation of the origin of the familiar Niceno-
Constantinopolitan Creed, commonly called the Nicene Creed. On the basis of
evidence both internal and external to the text, it has been argued that this
creed originated not as an editing by the First Council of Constantinople of
the original Nicene Creed, but as an independent creed (probably an older
baptismal creed) modified to make it more like the Nicene Creed of 325 and
attributed to the Council of 381 only later. The third Ecumenical Council
(Council of Ephesus of 431) reaffirmed the original 325 version of the Nicene
Creed and declared that "it is unlawful for any man to bring forward, or to
write, or to compose a different ( ‚Äì more accurately translated as used by
the Council to mean ‚Äúdifferent,‚Äù ‚Äúcontradictory,‚Äù and not
‚Äúanother‚Äù) Faith as a rival to that established by the holy Fathers
assembled with the Holy Ghost in Nic√¶a" (i.e. the 325 creed) This statement
has been interpreted as a prohibition against changing this creed or composing
others, but not all accept this interpretation. This question is connected with
the controversy whether a creed proclaimed by an Ecumenical Council is
definitive or whether additions can be made to it. Comparison between Creed of
325 and Creed of 381. The following table, which indicates by brackets the
portions of the 325 text that were omitted or moved in 381, and uses "italics"
to indicate what phrases, absent in the 325 text, were added in 381, juxtaposes
the earlier (325 AD) and later (381 AD) forms of this Creed in the English
translation given in Schaff's work, "Creeds of Christendom". Filioque
controversy. In the late sixth century, the Latin-speaking churches added the
words "and from the Son" ("Filioque") to the description of the procession of
the Holy Spirit, in what Easterners have argued is a violation of Canon VII of
the Third Ecumenical Council, since the words were not included in the text by
either the Council of Nicaea or that of Constantinople. The Vatican has
recently argued that, while these words would indeed be heretical if associated
with the Greek verb "·ºêŒ∫œÄŒøœÅŒµœçŒµœÉŒ∏Œ±Œπ" of the text adopted by the
Council of Constantinople, they are not heretical when associated with the
Latin verb "procedere", which corresponds instead to the Greek verb
"œÄœÅŒøœäŒ≠ŒΩŒ±Œπ", with which some of the Greek Fathers also associated the
same words. Latin has no word with the same overtones as
·ºêŒ∫œÄŒøœÅŒµœçŒµœÉŒ∏Œ±Œπ (·ºêŒ∫œÄŒøœÅŒµœÖœåŒºŒµŒΩŒøŒΩ, in the original Greek
text of the Creed, is the present participle of this verb), and in its
translation can only use the verb "procedere", which is broader in meaning.
Views on the importance of this creed. The view that the Nicene Creed can serve
as a touchstone of true Christian faith is reflected in the name "symbol of
faith", which was given to it in Greek and Latin, when in those languages the
word "symbol" meant a "token for identification (by comparison with a
counterpart)", and which continues in use even in languages in which "symbol"
no longer has that meaning. In the Roman Rite Mass, the Latin text of the
Niceno-Constantinopolitan Creed, with "Deum de Deo" (God from God) and
"Filioque" (and from the Son), phrases absent in the original text, was
previously the only form used for the "profession of faith". The Roman Missal
now refers to it jointly with the Apostles' Creed as "the Symbol or Profession
of Faith or Creed", describing the second as "the baptismal Symbol of the Roman
Church, known as the Apostles' Creed". The liturgies of the ancient Churches of
Eastern Christianity (Eastern Orthodox Church, Oriental Orthodoxy, Assyrian
Church of the East) and the Eastern Catholic Churches), use the Niceno-
Constantinopolitan Creed, never the Western Apostles' Creed. In the Byzantine
Rite Liturgy, the Creed is typically recited by the cantor, who in this
capacity represents the whole congregation. Many, and sometimes all, members of
the congregation join the cantor in rhythmic recitation. It is customary to
invite, as a token of honor, any prominent lay member of the congregation who
happens to be present (e.g. royalty, a visiting dignitary, the Mayor, etc.) to
recite the Creed instead of the cantor. This practice stems from the tradition
that the prerogative to recite the Creed belonged to the Emperor, speaking for
all his people. Some evangelical and other Christians consider the Nicene Creed
helpful and to a certain extent authoritative, but not infallibly so in view of
their belief that only Scripture is truly authoritative. Other groups, such as
the Church of the New Jerusalem, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
Saints, and the Jehovah's Witnesses explicitly reject some of the statements in
the Creed. Ancient liturgical versions. This section is not intended to be a
collection of the texts of all liturgical versions of the Nicene Creed, and
provides only three, the Greek, the Latin, and the Armenian, which are of
special interest. Others are mentioned separately, but without the texts. All
ancient liturgical versions, even the Greek, differ at least to some small
extent from the text adopted by the First Councils of Nicaea and
Constantinople. The Creed was originally written in Greek, owing to the
location of the two councils. But though the councils' texts have
"Œ ŒπœÉœÑŒµœçŒøŒºŒµŒΩ ... ·ΩÅŒºŒøŒªŒøŒ≥Œø·ø¶ŒºŒµŒΩ ...
œÄœÅŒøœÉŒ¥ŒøŒ∫Œø·ø¶ŒºŒµŒΩ" ("we" believe ... confess ... await), the Creed that
the Churches of Byzantine tradition use in their liturgy has "Œ ŒπœÉœÑŒµœçœâ
... ·ΩÅŒºŒøŒªŒøŒ≥·ø∂ ... œÄœÅŒøœÉŒ¥ŒøŒ∫·ø∂" ("I" believe ... confess ...
await), accentuating the personal nature of recitation of the Creed. The Latin
text, as well as using the singular, has two additions: "Deum de Deo" (God from
God) and "Filioque" (and from the Son). The Armenian text has many more
additions, and is included as showing how that ancient church has chosen to
recite the Creed with these numerous elaborations of its contents. An English
translation of the Armenian text is added; English translations of the Greek
and Latin liturgical texts are given at English versions of the Nicene Creed in
current use. Latin liturgical version. The Latin text adds "Deum de Deo" and
"Filioque" to the Greek. On the latter see The Filioque Controversy above.
Inevitably also, the overtones of the terms used, such as "" (pantokratora) and
"omnipotentem" differ ("pantokratora" meaning Ruler of all; "omnipotentem"
meaning omnipotent, Almighty). The implications of this for the interpretation
of "" and "qui ... procedit" was the object of the study "The Greek and the
Latin Traditions regarding the Procession of the Holy Spirit" published by the
Pontifical Council for Promoting Christian Unity in 1996. Again, the terms ""
and "consubstantialem", translated as "of one being" or "consubstantial", have
different overtones, being based respectively on Greek (stable being, immutable
reality, substance, essence, true nature),and Latin "substantia" (that of which
a thing consists, the being, essence, contents, material, substance). "Credo",
which in classical Latin is used with the accusative case of the thing held to
be true (and with the dative of the person to whom credence is given), is here
used three times with the preposition "in", a literal translation of the Greek
"" (in unum Deum ..., in unum Dominum ..., in Spiritum Sanctum ...), and once
in the classical preposition-less construction (unam, sanctam, catholicam et
apostolicam Ecclesiam). Armenian Liturgical Text. English translation of the
Armenian version Other ancient liturgical versions. The version in the Church
Slavonic language, used by several of the Eastern Orthodox Churches and of the
Byzantine Rite Eastern Catholic Churches, is practically identical with the
Greek liturgical version. The versions used by Oriental Orthodoxy differ from
the Greek liturgical version in having "We believe", as in the original text,
instead of "I believe". The Assyrian Church of the East, which is in communion
neither with the Eastern Orthodox Church nor with Oriental Orthodoxy also uses
"We believe". English translations. For English translations of the Nicene
Creed, which of necessity are not as ancient as the above-mentioned versions,
see English versions of the Nicene Creed in current use.
