Names of God in Islam The 99 Names of God or 99 Names of Allah ( ""), are the
Names of God by which Muslims regard God (Allah) and which are described in the
Qur'an, and Sunnah, amongst other places. There is, according to hadith, a
special group of 99 names but no enumeration of them. Thus the exact list is
not agreed upon, and the Names of God (as adjectives, word constructs, or
otherwise) exceed 99 in the Qur'an and Sunnah. According to a hadith narrated
by Abdullah ibn Mas'ud some of the names of God have been hidden from mankind,
therefore there are not only 99 names of God but there are more. Origin. Over
time it became custom to recite a list of 99 Names, compiled by al-Walid ibn
Muslim as an addendum to the hadith. Mahmoud Abdel-Razek (2005) compiled an
alternative list, endorsing only 69 from the list of al-Walid. The Qur'an
refers to the Names of God as God's "most beautiful Names" (Arabic: ) (see the
following sura, Al-A'raf , Al-Isra , Ta-Ha , Al-Hashr ). According to Gerhard
Böwering, The greatest name. The 99 names point to the inherent unity of the
all-embracing Greatest Name(Ismi Azam). In Islamic traditions, it is stated
"The Greatest Name of Allah is the one which if He is called (prayed to) by it,
He will Answer." Personal names. According to Islamic tradition, a Muslim may
not be given any of the 99 names of Allah in exactly the same form. For
example, nobody may be named "al-Malik" (The King), but may be named "Malik"
(King). This is because of the belief that Allah is almighty, and no human
being is the equivalent of Allah, and no human being will ever be the
equivalent of Allah. Muslims are allowed to use the 99 names of Allah for
themselves but should not put 'Al' at the front of them. However the names of
Allah can be combined with the word ""‘Abd-"" which means "servant/Worshiper"
(of Allah) and are commonly used as personal names among Muslims. For example
"‘Abd ar-Raḥmān" ("Servant of the Most Compassionate/the Beneficent"). The
two parts of the name may be written separately (as above) or combined as one
transliterated name; in such a case, the vowel transcribed after ‘"Abd" is
often written as u when the two words are transcribed as one: e.g.,
"Abdurrahman", "Abdul'aziz", "Abdul Jabbar", or even "Abdullah" ("Servant of
Allah"). (This has to do with Arabic case vowels, the final u vowel showing the
normal "quote" nominative/vocative case form: "‘abd-u".) Views of other
religions. Bábí and Bahá'í view. Bahá'í sources state that the 100th name
was revealed as "Bahá’" (an Arabic word بهاء meaning "glory, splendor"
etc.), which is the root word for Bahá'u'lláh and Bahá'í. They also believe
that it is the 'Greatest Name'. The Báb wrote a noted pentagram-shaped tablet
with 360 derivatives of the word "Bahá'" used in it. According to Bahá'í
scholar ‘Abdu’l-Hamíd Ishráq-Khávari, Baha' ad-Din al-`Amili adopted the
pen name ("takhallus") 'Baha' after being inspired by words of Shi'a Imam
Muhammad al-Baqir (the fifth Imam) and Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq (the sixth Imam),
who had stated that the Greatest Name of God was included in either Du'ay-i-
Sahar or A`amaal Ummi Dawud. In the first verse of the Du'ay-i-Sahar, a dawn
prayer for the Ramadan, the name "Bahá" appears four times: "Allahumma inni as
'aluka min Bahá' ika bi Abháh va kulla Bahá' ika Bahí".
