Nirvana Nirvāṇa (; , nibbāna; ) is an ancient Sanskrit term used in Indian
religions to describe the profound peace of mind that is acquired with "moksha"
(liberation). In shramanic thought, it is the state of being free from
suffering. In Hindu philosophy, it is union with the Brahman (Supreme Being).
The word literally means "blown out" (as in a candle) and refers, in the
Buddhist context, to the imperturbable stillness of mind after the fires of
desire, aversion, and delusion have been finally extinguished. Etymology.
Abhidharma. The abhidharma-mahāvibhāsa-sāstra, a sarvastivādin commentary,
3rd century BCE and later, describes the possible etymological interpretations
of the word nirvana. Each of the five aggregates is called a "skandha", which
means "tree trunk". Each skandha informs the study of one's every normal
experience, but eventually leads away from nirvana. Skandha also means "heap"
or "pile" or "mass", like an endless knot's path, or a forest. Overview.
"Nirvana" is a state of 'ultimate' peace. "Nirvana" is a state of release from
a prior state of bondage. Soteriological goal. "Nirvana" is the soteriological
goal within the Indian religions, Hinduism, Jainism, Buddhism, and Sikhism. It
is synonymous with the concept of liberation ("moksha") which refers to release
from a state of suffering after an often lengthy period of committed spiritual
practice. Various names. It has several other names as well. Hinduism uses the
terms Aikantya, Apamarga, Brahma-upalabdhi, Sahaj, Sakshatkara, Sayujya,
Videhalcivalyam and Yogakshemma, while Buddhism also uses the term Bodhi.
Because Nirvana is associated with Samadhi, Hinduism acknowledges it as
Nirvikalpa Samadhi, Buddhism, as Cetovimutti Samadhi and Jainism as Asamprajyat
Samadhi. Mukti is sometimes elaborated on as Atyantiki Mukti, Samipya Mukti (or
Salokja Mukti), and Sadrisya Mukti (or Sqyujja Mukti.) Origins. The concept of
"nirvana" comes from the Yogic traditions of the Sramanas whose origins go back
to at least the earliest centuries of the first millennium BCE. The Pali Canon
contains the earliest written detailed discussion of "nirvana" and the concept
has thus become most associated with the teaching of the historical Buddha. It
was later adopted in the "Bhagavad Gita" of the "Mahabharata". In Buddhism
nirvana is preceded by "bodhi", knowledge into the causal mechanism by which
beings incarnate into material form and experience suffering. Attainment of
Nirvana. It is achieved with the uprooting and final dissolution of the
sankhara ("volitional formations"). According to Indian religions these
sankhara are the cause for the material incarnation of sentient beings. During
the course of many repeated incarnations these sankhara, sometimes referred to
as 'seeds', are strengthened by indulgence in worldly activities. According to
the philosophy of the Indian religions it is the final uprooting of these
formations that characterizes and defines the experience of liberation
("moksha"). They can be weakened by following one of the yogic paths or
"sadhana", described in the major scriptures of the various faiths. According
to the particular tradition, with the experience of "nirvana" the mind
(Buddhism) or soul (Jainism) or spirit (Hinduism) has ended its identity with
material phenomena and experiences a sense of great peace. Buddhism. Sutta
Pitaka. In the Sutta Pitaka "nirvāna" is described as the perfect peace. In
the Dhammapada, the Buddha says of "nirvāna" that it is "the highest
happiness", an enduring happiness qualitatively different from the limited,
transitory happiness derived from impermanent things. The Buddhist path.
Attaining nibbāna, in either the current or some future birth, depends on
effort, and is not pre-determined. Nirvana is the result of following the Noble
Eightfold Path. Uprooting the kleshas. Nirvana is a state of mind that is free
from craving, anger, and other afflicting states. The Buddha saw these
psychological phenomena as the fundamental cause of dukkha. By uprooting the
kleshas one becomes "asankhata" ("unconditioned") free from the obscurations of
the volitional formations. This ultimate state is described by the Buddha as
"deathlessness" (Pali: "amata" or "amāravati"). Karma and rebirth. Until the
final liberation beings wander through samsāra, the impermanent and suffering-
generating realms of desire, form, and formlessness. Samsāra is perpetuated by
craving and ignorance. By uprooting the volitional dispositions one is no
longer subject to further rebirth in samsāra. A liberated person performs
neutral actions (Pali: "kiriya kamma") producing no fruit ("vipaka"), but
nonetheless preserves a particular individual personality. This is the result
of the traces of his or her karmic heritage. Bodhi. "Nirvana" is preceded by
"bodhi", being fully awake to the true nature of reality. One who possesses or
abides in "bodhi" is called a "buddha" or "arahant". Parinirvana. A person can
attain "nirvāna" without dying. When a person who has realized "nirvāṇa"
dies, his death is referred as parinirvana (Pali: "parinibbana"), his "fully
passing away", as his life was his last link to the cycle of death and rebirth
(samsāra), and he will not be reborn again. What happens to a person after his
cannot be known, as it is outside of all conceivable experience. Through a
series of questions, Sariputta brings a monk to admit that he cannot pin down
the Tathagata as a truth or reality even in the present life, so to speculate
regarding the ontological status of an arahant after death is not proper. See
Tathagata#Inscrutable.
