Nontrinitarianism Nontrinitarianism (or antitrinitarianism) refers to
monotheistic belief systems, primarily within Christianity, which reject the
Christian doctrine of the Trinity, namely, the teaching that God is three
distinct "hypostases" or persons and yet co-eternal, co-equal, and indivisibly
united in one essence or "ousia". According to churches that consider
ecumenical council decisions final, trinitarianism was infallibly defined at
the First Ecumenical Council (the Council of Nicaea) in 325 A.D.
Nontrinitarians disagree with the findings of the Council for various reasons,
including the belief that the Bible as they understand it takes precedence over
creeds, or that there was a Great Apostasy prior to the Council. Church and
state in Europe suppressed nontrinitarian belief as heresy from the 4th to 18th
century. Today nontrinitarians represent a small minority of professed
Christians. Nontrinitarian views differ widely on the nature of God, Jesus, and
the Holy Spirit. Various nontrinitarian views, such as Adoptionism,
Monarchianism and Arianism existed prior to the formal definition of the
Trinity doctrine in 325, 360, and 431 AD, at the Councils of Nicaea,
Constantinople, and Ephesus. Nontrinitarianism was later renewed in the
Gnosticism of the Cathars in the 11th through 13th centuries, in the Age of
Enlightenment of the 18th century, and in some groups arising during the Second
Great Awakening of the 19th century. Modern nontrinitarian groups or
denominations include Christadelphians, Christian Scientists, The Church of
Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Mormons), Dawn Bible Students, Friends
General Conference, Iglesia ni Cristo, Jehovah's Witnesses, La Luz del Mundo,
Living Church of God, Oneness Pentecostals, Members Church of God
International, Unitarian Universalist Christians and the United Church of God.
Islam, which considers Jesus a prophet but not divine, has been described as
anti-Trinitarian when compared to Christianity, or in books written for a
Western audience: Islam teaches the absolute indivisibility of a supremely
sovereign and transcendent god (see God in Islam), and is further distinctly
"anti"trinitarian as several verses of the Koran teach that the doctrine of
Trinity is blasphemous. Forms. Most nontrinitarians identify themselves as
Christian. There are some groups that do not describe themselves as either
Christian or Trinitarian. Christian. The Christian Apologists and other Church
Fathers of the 2nd and 3rd centuries, having adopted and formulated the Logos
Christology, considered the Son of God as the instrument used by the supreme
God, the Father, to bring the creation into existence. Justin Martyr,
Theophilus of Antioch, Hippolytus of Rome and Tertullian in particular state
that the internal Logos of God (Gr. "Logos endiathetos", Lat. "ratio"), that is
his impersonal divine reason, was begotten as Logos uttered (Gr. "Logos
proforikos", Lat. "sermo, verbum") and thus became a person to be used for the
purpose of creation. The "Encyclopædia Britannica" states, "To some Christians
the doctrine of the Trinity appeared inconsistent with the unity of God...They
therefore denied it, and accepted Jesus Christ, not as incarnate God, but as
God's highest creature by Whom all else was created... view in the early Church
long contended with the orthodox doctrine." Although the nontrinitarian view
eventually disappeared in the early Church and the Trinitarian view became an
orthodox doctrine of modern Christianity, variations of the nontrinitarian view
are still held by a small number of Christian groups and denominations. Various
views exist regarding the relationships between the Father, Son and Holy
Spirit. Modern Christians. Nontrinitarian doctrine often generates controversy
among mainstream Christians, as most trinitarians consider it heresy not to
believe in the doctrine of the Trinity. At times, segments of Nicene
Christianity reacted with ultimate severity toward nontrinitarian views.
Following the Reformation, among some Protestant groups such as the Unitarians
and Christadelphians, the same views have been accommodated. History. Early
Christianity. Most nontrinitarians take the position that the doctrine of the
earliest form of Christianity (see Apostolic Age) was nontrinitarian, but
(depending on which church) believe rather that early Christianity was either
strictly unitarian or binitarian or modalist. Typically, nontrinitarians
believe Christianity was altered by the edicts of Emperor Constantine I, which
eventually resulted in the adoption of Trinitarian Christianity as the official
religion of the Roman Empire during the reign of Theodosius I. Because it was
during a dramatic shift in Christianity's status that the doctrine of the
Trinity attained its definitive development, nontrinitarians typically consider
the doctrine questionable. Nontrinitarians see the Nicene Creed as an
essentially political document, resulting from the subordination of true
doctrine to state interests by leaders of the Catholic Church, so that the
church became, in their view, an extension of the Roman Empire. Although
nontrinitarian beliefs continued to multiply, and among some people (such as
the Lombards in the west) were dominant for hundreds of years after their
inception, Trinitarians gained prominence in the Roman Empire. Nontrinitarians
typically argue that the primitive beliefs of Christianity were systematically
suppressed (often to the point of death), and that the historical record,
perhaps also including the scriptures of the New Testament, was altered as a
consequence. Some scholars investigating the historical Jesus assert that Jesus
taught neither his own equality with God nor the Trinity (see, for example, the
Jesus Seminar). Nontrinitarians also dispute the veracity of the Nicene Creed
based on its adoption nearly 300 years after the life of Jesus as a result of
conflict within pre-Nicene early Christianity. Nontrinitarians (both Modalists
and Unitarians) also generally claim that Athanasius and others at Nicaea
adopted Greek Platonic philosophy and concepts, and incorporated them in their
views of God and Christ. Nontrinitarians also cite scriptures such as and that
warn the reader to beware the doctrines of men. The author H. G. Wells, later
famous for his contribution to science-fiction, wrote in The Outline of
History: "We shall see presently how later on all Christendom was torn by
disputes about the Trinity. There is no evidence that the apostles of Jesus
ever heard of the Trinity, at any rate from him." The question of why such a
central doctrine to the Christian faith would never have been explicitly stated
in scripture or taught in detail by Jesus himself was sufficiently important to
16th century historical figures such as Michael Servetus as to lead them to
argue the question. The Geneva City Council, in accord with the judgment of the
cantons of Zürich, Bern, Basel, and Schaffhausen, condemned Servetus to be
burned at the stake for this and his opposition to infant baptism. The
"Encyclopædia of Religion and Ethics" describes the five stages that led to
the formulation of the doctrine of the Trinity. Following the Reformation.
Following the Protestant Reformation, and the German Peasants' War of
1524–1525, by 1530 large areas of Northern Europe were Protestant, and forms
of nontrinitarianism began to surface among some "Radical Reformation" groups,
particularly Anabaptists. The first recorded English antitrinitarian was John
Assheton (1548). The Italian humanist "Council of Venice" (1550) and the trial
of Michael Servetus (1553) marked the clear emergence of markedly anti-
Trinitarian Protestants. Though the only organised nontrinitarian churches were
the Polish Brethren who split from the Calvinists (1565, expelled from Poland
1658), and the Unitarian Church of Transylvania (1568-today). Nonconformists,
Dissenters and Latitudinarians in Britain were often Arians or Unitarians, and
the Doctrine of the Trinity Act 1813 allowed nontrinitarian worship in Britain.
In America Arian and Unitarian views were also found among some Millenialist
and Adventist groups, though the Unitarian Church itself began to decline in
numbers and influence after the 1870s. Points of dissent. Scriptural support.
Critics argue that the Trinity, for a teaching described as fundamental, lacks
direct scriptural support, and even some proponents of the doctrine acknowledge
that direct or formal support is lacking. The "New Catholic Encyclopedia" says,
"The doctrine of the Holy Trinity is not taught in the [Old Testament", "The
formulation 'one God in three Persons' was not solidly established a
council...prior to the end of the 4th century". Similarly, "Encyclopedia
Encarta" states: "The doctrine is not taught explicitly in the New Testament,
where the word God almost invariably refers to the Father. [...] The term
"trinitas" was first used in the 2nd century, by the Latin theologian
Tertullian, but the concept was developed in the course of the debates on the
nature of Christ [...]. In the 4th century, the doctrine was finally
formulated". "Encyclopædia Britannica" says: "Neither the word Trinity nor the
explicit doctrine appears in the New Testament, nor did Jesus and his followers
intend to contradict the Shema in the Old Testament: “Hear, O Israel: The
Lord our God is one Lord” (). [...] The doctrine developed gradually over
several centuries and through many controversies. [...] by the end of the 4th
century, under the leadership of Basil of Caesarea, Gregory of Nyssa, and
Gregory of Nazianzus (the Cappadocian Fathers), the doctrine of the Trinity
took substantially the form it has maintained ever since." The "Anchor Bible
Dictionary" states: "One does not find in the NT the trinitarian paradox of the
coexistence of the Father, Son, and Spirit within a divine unity." Questions
over Jesus as "Almighty God". Nontrinitarians claim that there is no Scriptural
backing for the doctrine of the co-equal divinity of Jesus. They point to
verses that purport to demonstrate that Jesus himself questioned even being
called even "good" in deference to God in the parable of the rich young ruler
(); that the Father is greater than he ); that he disavowed omniscience as the
Son (; in ) that he "learned obedience" (); that he was called the 'firstborn
of all creation' () and 'the beginning of God's creation' (); that he referred
to ascending to "my Father, and to your Father; and to my God, and to your God"
() and that he said "the Father is the only true God" (). Additionally, Jesus
quoted when saying in The most important is this: "Hear, O Israel, the Lord our
God, the Lord is one." It has been pointed out that in the original Greek in
Mark 12, there are no "plural modifiers" in that Greek word there for "one"
(eis), but that in Mark 12 it is simply a masculine singular "one". They also
argue to show that "Elohim" (sometimes trans. "gods") does not hint at any form
of plurality, but rather to majesty pointing to the Hebrew dialect and grammar
rules that render this title in nearly all circumstances with a singular verb.
Raymond E. Brown, who remained a devout Catholic and Trinitarian, nevertheless
wrote that , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , and are "texts that seem to imply that
the title God was not used for Jesus" and are "negative evidence which is often
somewhat neglected in Catholic treatments of the subject." Trinitarians, and
nontrinitarians who also hold Jesus Christ as Almighty God (such as the
Modalists), claim these statements are based on Jesus' existence as the Son of
God in human flesh; that he is therefore both God and man, who became "lower
than the angels, for our sake," () and that he was tempted as humans are
tempted, but did not sin (). Some nontrinitarians counter the belief that the
Son was limited only during his earthly life by citing "the head of Christ God"
(), placing Jesus in an inferior position to the Father even after his
resurrection and exaltation. They also cite and , indicating that Jesus became
glorified and exalted after ascension to heaven, and to , , and , regarding
Jesus as a distinct personality in heaven, still with a lesser position than
the Father, all after Christ's ascension. Views on allegedly Trinitarian
passages in scripture. Nontrinitarian Christians such as Jehovah's Witnesses
argue that a person who is really seeking to know the truth about God is not
going to search the Bible hoping to find a text that he can construe as fitting
what he already believes. They say it is noteworthy at the outset that most of
the texts used as “proof” of the Trinity actually mention only two persons,
not three; so nontrinitarians claim that even if the trinitarian explanation of
the texts were correct, these would not prove that the Bible teaches the
Trinity. - The contention with this verse is that there is a distinction
between God and the Logos (or "the Word"). Trinitarians contend that the third
part of the verse (John 1:1c) translates as "and the Word was God", pointing to
an equivalence between God and the Logos. Nontrinitarians contend that the
Koine Greek (""kai theos ên ho logos"") should instead be translated as "and
the Word was a god", basing this on the contention that the section is an
example of an anarthrous, that is, ""theos"" lacks the definite article,
meaning its use was indefinite - "a god", which could denote either Almighty
God or a divine being in general. Nontrinitarians also contend that had the
author of John's gospel wished to say "and the Word was God" that he could have
easily written ""kai ho theos ên ho logos"", but he did not. In this way,
nontrinitarians contend that the Logos would be considered to be the pre-
existent Jesus, who is wholly distinct from God. Alternatively, others argue
that the Greek should be translated as "and the Logos was divine" (with "theos"
being an adjective), and the Logos being interpreted as God's "plan" or
"reasoning" for salvation. Thus, according to Modalists, when "the Logos became
flesh" in , it is not interpreted to be a pre-existent Jesus being incarnated,
but rather the "plan" or "eternal mind" of God being manifested in the birth of
the man Jesus. () referring to Psalms 82:6-8. The word "gods" in verse 6 and
"God" in verse 8 is the same Hebrew word "'elohim", which means, "gods in the
ordinary sense; but specifically used (in the plural thus, especially with the
article) of the supreme God; occasionally applied by way of deference to
magistrates; and sometimes as a superlative", and can also refer to powers and
potentates, in general, or as "God, god, gods, rulers, judges or angels". and
as "divine ones, goddess, godlike one" The first explanation is perhaps the
most plausible, in that the Greek forms used in the text do not denote two
descriptions of one personage, but two personages described separately. A
nontrinitarian would link this witnessing of Thomas to Jesus's saying that, to
paraphrase, "He who sees me, sees the Father", and would point out that this
text affirms the doctrine that Jesus is Lord but only God the Father is
absolute deity, and hence the Lord of Jesus. Because "no one can come to the
Father except through me (Jesus)", it is necessary however to call Jesus "Lord"
(a requirement of belief in the New Testament), which is exactly what Thomas
did when he believed. Terminology. Nontrinitarians state that the doctrine of
the Trinity relies on non-Biblical terminology, that the term "Trinity" is not
found in Scripture and that the number three is never clearly associated with
God necessarily, other than within the Comma Johanneum which is of spurious or
disputed authenticity. They argue that the only number clearly unambiguously
ascribed to God in the Bible is one, and that the Trinity, literally meaning
three-in-one, ascribes a co-equal threeness to God that is not explicitly
biblical. Nontrinitarians cite other examples of terms not found in the Bible;
multiple "persons" in relation to God, the terms "God the Son", "God-Man", and
"God the Holy Spirit", and "eternally begotten". While the Trinitarianism term
hypostasis is found in the Bible, it is used only once in reference to God
where it states that Jesus is the express image of God's person. The Bible does
not explicitly use the term in relation to the Holy Spirit nor explicitly
mentions the Son having a distinct hypostasis from the Father. Nontrinitarians
state that the major term Homoousios (of the same essence) was introduced into
the Creed at the First Council of Nicaea. In support of this they cite, Pier
Franco Beatrice: "The main thesis of this paper is that "homoousios" came
straight from Constantine's Hermetic background. [...] The Plato recalled by
Constantine is just a name used to cover precisely the Egyptian and Hermetic
theology of the "consubstantiality" of the Logos-Son with the Nous-Father,
having recourse to a traditional apologetic argument. [...] Constantine's
Hermetic interpretation of Plato's theology and consequently the emperor's
decision to insert "homoousios" in the Creed of Nicaea." Trinitarians maintain
that these ideas are implied within scripture and were necessary additions of
the Nicene Era to counter the doctrine of Arianism. Holy Spirit. It is also
argued that the vast majority of scriptures that Trinitarians offer in support
of their beliefs refer to the Father and to Son, but not to the Holy Spirit.
Some nontrinitarians, including Jehovah's Witnesses, believe that the Holy
Spirit is not a person but the active force of God. Non-Trinitarian views of
the Holy Spirit. Non-trinitarian views about the Holy Spirit differ in certain
ways from mainstream Christian doctrine and generally fall into several
distinct categories. Unitarian and Arian. Groups with Unitarian theology such
as Polish Socinians, the 18th-19th Century Unitarian Church, Christadelphians
conceive of the Holy Spirit not as a person but an aspect of God's power.
Christadelphians believe that the phrase "Holy Spirit" refers to God's power or
mind/character, depending on the context. Though Arius himself believed that
the Holy Spirit is a person or high Angel, that had a beginning, modern Arian
or Semi-Arian Christian groups such as Dawn Bible Students and Jehovah's
Witnesses believe, the same as Unitarian groups, that the Holy Spirit is not an
actual person but is God's "power in action", like God's divine "breath" or
"energy", which had no beginning, that he uses to accomplish his will and
purpose in creation, redemption, sanctification, and divine guidance, and they
do not typically capitalize the term. They define the Holy Spirit as "God's
active force", and they believe that it proceeds only from the Father. A
Jehovah's Witness brochure quotes Alvan Lamson: "...the Father, Son, and...
Holy Spirit not as co-equal, not as one numerical essence, not as Three in
One... The very reverse is the fact." Binitarianism. Armstrongites, such as the
Living Church of God, believe that the Logos and God the Father are co-equal
and co-eternal, but they do not believe that the Holy Spirit is an actual
person, like the Father and the Son. They believe the Holy Spirit is the Power,
Mind, or Character of God, depending on the context. They teach, "The Holy
Spirit is the very essence, the mind, life and power of God. It is not a Being.
The Spirit is inherent in the Father and the Son, and emanates from Them
throughout the entire universe". Mainstream Christians characterise this
teaching as the heresy of Binitarianism, the teaching that God is a "Duality",
or "two-in-one", rather than three. Modalist groups. Oneness Pentecostalism, as
with other modalist groups, teach that the Holy Spirit is a "mode" of God,
rather than a distinct or separate person from the Father. They instead teach
that the Holy Spirit is just another name for God the Father. According to
Oneness theology, the Holy Spirit essentially "is" the Father. The United
Pentecostal Church teaches that there is no personal distinction between God
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit. These two titles "Father" and "Holy
Spirit" (as well as others) do not reflect separate "persons" within the
Godhead, but rather two different ways in which the one God reveals himself to
his creatures. Thus, the Old Testament speaks of "The Lord God and his Spirit"
in Isaiah 48:16, but this does not indicate two "persons" according to Oneness
theology. Rather, "The Lord" indicates God in all of His glory and
transcendence, while the words "His Spirit" refer to God's own Spirit that
moved upon and spoke to the prophet. The Oneness view is that this does not
imply two "persons" any more than the numerous scriptural references to a man
and his spirit or soul (such as in Luke 12:19) imply two "persons" existing
within one body. Latter Day Saints. In the Latter-day Saint movement, the Holy
Ghost (usually synonymous with "Holy Spirit.") is considered the third distinct
member of the "Godhead" (Father, Son and Holy Ghost), and to have a body of
"spirit," which makes him unlike the Father and the Son who are said to have
bodies "as tangible as man's." According to LDS doctrine, the Holy Spirit is
believed to be a person, however having a body of spirit, he is able to pervade
all worlds. Latter-day Saints believe that the Holy Spirit is part of the
"Divine Council", but that the Father is greater than both the Son and the Holy
Spirit. According to official Latter-day Saint teaching, the Father, Son, and
Spirit are three distinct "Gods" joined in purpose as "one Godhead". Because of
this, some view Latter-day Saint theology as a form of "tri-theism". Judaism.
The "holy spirit" (also transliterated "ruah ha-qodesh") is a term used in the
Hebrew Bible (Tanakh) and Jewish writings to refer to the Spirit of Yahweh.
(The expression in Hebrew is: יהוה .קָדְשְׁך) The Hebrew term
"ruakh kodeshka", without the definite article, also occurs. The Holy Spirit in
Judaism generally refers to the divine aspect of prophecy and wisdom. It also
refers to the divine force, quality, and influence of the Most High God, over
the universe or over his creatures, in given contexts. It is not considered a
separate person of God, but rather God's divine breath or moving power. Other
groups. The Unity Church interprets the religious terms Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit metaphysically, as three aspects of mind action: mind, idea, and
expression. They believe this is the process through which all manifestation
takes place. As a movement that developed out of Christianity, Rastafari has
its own unique interpretation of both the Holy Trinity and the Holy Spirit.
Although there are several slight variations, they generally state that it is
Haile Selassie who embodies both God the Father and God the Son, while the Holy
(or rather, ""Hola"") Spirit is to be found within Rasta believers (see 'I and
I'), and within every human being. Rastas also say that the true church is the
human body, and that it is this church (or ""structure"") that contains the
Holy Spirit. Inter-religious dialogue. The Trinity doctrine is integral in
inter-religious disagreements with the other two main Abrahamic religions,
Judaism and Islam; the former rejects Jesus' divine mission entirely, and the
latter accepts Jesus as a human prophet and the Messiah but not as the son of
God. The concept of trinity is totally rejected, with Quranic verses calling
the doctrine of the Trinity blasphemous. Many within Judaism and Islam also
accuse Christian Trinitarians of practicing polytheism—believing in three
gods rather than just one. Purported pagan origins. Many nontrinitarians
contend that the doctrine of the Trinity is a prime example of Christianity
borrowing from Indo-European and Egyptian pagan sources. According to them,
after the death of the Apostles their simpler idea of God was lost and the
doctrine of the Trinity took its place due to the Church's accommodation of
pagan ideas. Those who argue for a pagan basis note that as far back as
Babylonia, the worship of pagan gods grouped in threes, or triads, was common,
and that this influence was also prevalent among the Celts, as well as in
Egypt, Greece, and Rome. In ancient India, the concept of the trio—Brahma the
creator, Shiva the destroyer, and Vishnu the preserver dates back to millennia
before Christ. At the very least, they suggest that Greek philosophy brought a
late influence into the creation of the doctrine. Some nontrinitarians also
find a link between the doctrine of the Trinity and the Egyptian Christian
theologians of Alexandria, suggesting that Alexandrian theology, with its
strong emphasis on the deity of Jesus, served to infuse Egypt's pagan religious
heritage into Christianity. They charge the Church with adopting these Egyptian
tenets after adapting them to Christian thinking by means of Greek philosophy.
As evidence of this, they point to the widely acknowledged synthesis of
Christianity with Platonic philosophy evident in Trinitarian formulas appearing
by the end of the 3rd century. Hence, beginning with the Constantinian period,
they allege, these pagan ideas were forcibly imposed on the churches as
Catholic doctrine rooted firmly in the soil of Hellenism. Most groups
subscribing to the theory of a Great Apostasy generally concur in this thesis.
The early apologists, including Justin Martyr, Tertullian and Irenaeus,
frequently discussed the parallels and contrasts between Christianity, Paganism
and other syncretic religions, and answered charges of borrowing from paganism
in their apologetical writings. Hellenic influences. "The Absolute Being, the
Father, who had begotten all things, gave an especial grace to the Archangel
and First-born Logos (Word), that standing between, He might sever the creature
from the Creator. The same is ever the Intercessor for the dying mortal before
the immortal God, and the Ambassador and the Ruler to the subject. He is
neither without beginning of days, as God is, nor is He begotten, as we are,
but is something between these extremes, being connected with both." "The
apologists [such as Justin Martyr and Irenaeus began to claim that Greek
culture pointed to and was consummated in the Christian message, just as the
Old Testament was. This process was done most thoroughly in the synthesis of
Clement of Alexandria. It can be done in several ways. You can rake through
Greek literature, and find (especially in the oldest seers and poets)
references to ‘God’ which are more compatible with monotheism than with
polytheism (so at length Athenagoras.) You can work out a common chronology
between the legends of prehistoric (Homer) Greece and the biblical record (so
Theophilus.) You can adapt a piece of pre-Christian Jewish apologetic, which
claimed that Plato and other Greek philosophers got their best ideas indirectly
from the teachings of Moses in the Bible, which was much earlier. This theory
combines the advantage of making out the Greeks to be plagiarists (and
therefore second-rate or criminal), while claiming that they support
Christianity by their arguments at least some of the time. Especially this
applied to the question of God."
