Nontheistic religions Nontheistic religions are traditions of thought within
religions, some otherwise aligned with theism, others not, in which nontheism
informs religious beliefs or practices. Nontheism has been applied to the
fields of Christian apologetics and general liberal theology, and plays
significant roles in Buddhism and Hinduism. Buddhism. Although Buddhism has a
vast number of scriptures and practices, the fundamental core of Buddhism, the
Four Noble Truths and the Noble Eightfold Path do not have any mention of any
god(s) or any notion of worship of any deity. They are purely ethical and
meditative guidelines based on the truths of psychological suffering due to
impermanence. Since the time of the Buddha, the refutation of the existence of
a creator has been seen as a key point in distinguishing Buddhist from non-
Buddhist views. The Buddha said that gods ("Devas") exist, though he portrayed
them as mortal and, in some cases, deluded. He did not center his teaching
around these gods, but instead around the explanation of dukkha (suffering,
imperfection) and attaining freedom from it. Although the Buddha did affirm a
positive belief in the existence of gods, he stated that they are not to be
worshiped and are themselves in the cycle of samsara. The question of a Creator
God, however, was answered by Buddha in the Brahmajala Sutta. The Buddha
denounced the view of a Creator and sees that such notions are related to the
false view of eternity, and like the 61 other views, this belief causes
suffering when one is attached to it and relates to these views with desire,
hatred and delusion. At the end of the Sutta the Buddha says he knows these 62
views and he also knows the truth that surpasses them. There are however,
pantheistic elements in the doctrine of Adi-Buddha, among others present in
Buddhism. Belief and practice.  Relative and ultimate truth. Some revolutionary
Buddhist teachers teach that mention of divine beings in the scriptures does
not refer to actual existing gods, but was a language employed by Buddha to
bring about a meaning, which was subsequently misunderstood. An example of this
is Ajahn Buddhadasa of Thailand. The majority of teachers, however, disagree
with this revolutionary interpretation, and teach the orthodox teaching (from
the Pali Canon and Mahayana Sutras) that conventional gods do exist and can
influence our lives. These gods, however, cannot give people enlightenment, and
they are themselves unenlightened and unaware of the true Dhamma. "... so you
should realize that all the names of the bodhisattvas Christianity. A few
liberal Christian theologians, define a "nontheistic God" as "the ground of all
being" rather than as a personal divine being. John Shelby Spong refers to a
theistic God as "a personal being with expanded supernatural, human, and
parental qualities, which has shaped every religious idea of the Western
world." From a nontheist, naturalist, and rationalist perspective, the concept
of divine grace appears to be the same concept as luck. Many of them owe much
of their theology to the work of Christian existentialist philosopher Paul
Tillich, including the phrase "the ground of all being". Another quotation from
Tillich is, "God does not exist. He is being itself beyond essence and
existence. Therefore to argue that God exists is to deny him." This Tillich
quotation summarizes his conception of God. He does not think of God as a being
which exists in time and space, because that constrains God, and makes God
finite. But all beings are finite, and if God is the Creator of all beings, God
cannot logically be finite since a finite being cannot be the sustainer of an
infinite variety of finite things. Thus God is considered beyond being, above
finitude and limitation, the power or essence of being itself. With amazing
courage Tillich boldly says that the God of the multitudes does not exist, and
further, that to believe in His existence is to believe in an idol and
ultimately to embrace superstition. God cannot be an entity among entities,
even the highest. He is being-in-itself. In this sense Tillich's God is like
the God of Spinoza and the God of Hegel. Both Spinoza and Hegel were denounced
for their atheism by the theologians of the past because their God was not a
Being or an Entity. Tillich, however, is one of the foremost theologians of our
time. Nontheist Friend. A nontheist Friend or an atheist Quaker is someone who
affiliates with, identifies with, engages in and/or affirms Quaker practices
and processes, but who does not accept a belief in a theistic understanding of
God, a Supreme Being, the divine, the soul or the supernatural. Like theistic
Friends, nontheist Friends are actively interested in realizing centered peace,
simplicity, integrity, community, equality, love, happiness and social justice
in the Society of Friends and beyond. Hinduism. Hinduism is generally regarded
as being characterised by extremely diverse beliefs and practises. In the words
of R.C. Zaehner, "it is perfectly possible to be a good Hindu whether one's
personal views incline toward monism, monotheism, polytheism, or even atheism."
He goes on to say that it is a religion that neither depends on the existence
or non-existence of God or Gods. More broadly, Hinduism can be seen as having
three more important strands: one featuring a personal Creator or Divine Being,
one that emphasises an impersonal Absolute and a third pluralistic and non-
absolute. Some scholars regard devotion to a personal deity as the ultimate
reality is the last and perhaps most significant stage of Hinduism's
development. This article will focus on the latter two traditions - which can
be seen as nontheistic. Although the Vedas are broadly concerned with the
completion of ritual, there are some elements that can be interpreted as either
nontheistic or precursors to the later developments of the nontheistic
tradition. The oldest Hindu scripture, the Rig Veda mentions that 'There is
only one god though the sages may give it various names' (1.164.46). Max
Müller termed this henotheism, and it can be seen as indicating one, non-dual
divine reality, with little emphasis on personality. The famous Nasadiya Sukta,
the 129th Hymn of the tenth and final Mandala (or chapter) of the Rig Veda,
considers creation and asks "The gods came afterwards, with the creation of
this universe. /Who then knows whence it has arisen?". This can be seen to
contain the intuition that there must be a single principle behind all
phenomena: 'That one' (tad ekam), self-sufficient, to which distinctions cannot
be applied. It is with the Upanishads, reckoned to be written in the first
millennia (coeval with the ritualistic Brahmanas), that the Vedic emphasis on
ritual was challenged. The Upanishads can be seen as the expression of new
sources of power in India. Also, separate from the Upanishadic tradition were
bands of wandering ascetics called Vadins whose largely nontheistic notions
rejected the notion that religious knowledge was the property of the Brahmins.
Many of these were shramanas, who represented a non-Vedic tradition rooted in
India's pre-Aryan history. The emphasis of the Upanishads turned to knowledge,
specifically the ultimate identity of all phenomena. This is expressed in the
notion of Brahman, the key idea of the Upanishads, and much later
philosophizing has been taken up with deciding whether Brahman is personal or
impersonal. The understanding of the nature of Brahman as impersonal is based
in the definition of it as 'ekam eva advitiyam' (Chandogya Upanishad 6.2.1) -
it is one without a second and to which no substantive predicates can be
attached. Further, both the Chandogya and Brihadaranyaka Upanishads assert that
the individual atman and the impersonal Brahman are one. The mahāvākya
statement Tat Tvam Asi, found in the Chandogya Upanishad, can be taken to
indicate this unity. The latter Upanishad uses the negative term Neti neti to
'describe' the divine. Classical Samkhya, Mimamsa, early Vaisheshika and early
Nyaya schools of Hinduism do not accept the notion of an omnipotent creator God
at all. While the Sankhya and Mimamsa schools no longer have significant
followings in India, they are both influential in the developent of later
schools of philosophy. The Yoga of Patanjali is the school that probably owes
most to the Samkhya thought. This school is dualistic, in the sense that there
is a division between 'spirit' (Sanskrit: purusha) and 'nature' (Sanskrit:
prakṛti). It holds Samadhi or 'concentrative union' as its ultimate goal and
it does not consider God's existence as either essential or necessary to
achieving this. The Bhagavad Gita, contains both passages which bear a monistic
reading and others which bear a theistic reading. Generally, the book as a
whole has been interpreted by some who see it as containing a primarily
nontheistic message, and by others who stress its theistic message. These
broadly either follow after either Sankara or Ramanuja An example of a
nontheistic passage might be "The supreme Brahman is without any beginning.
That is called neither being nor non-being." Which was interpreted by Sankara
to mean that Brahman can only be talked of in terms of negation of all
attributes - 'Neti neti'. The Advaita Vedanta of Gaudapada and Sankara rejects
theism as a consequence of its insistence that Brahman is "Without attributes,
indivisible, subtle, inconceivable, and without blemish, Brahman is one and
without a second. There is nothing other than He." This means that it lacks
properties usually associated with God such as omniscience, perfect goodness,
omnipotence, and additionally is identical with the whole of reality, rather
than being a causal agent or ruler of it. Jainism. Jain scriptures reject God
as the creator of universe. According to Jain doctrine, the universe and its
constituents - soul, matter, space, time, and principles of motion have always
existed. Jainism is a dualistic religion, with the universe made up of matter
and souls. Jain text claims that the universe consists of Jiva (life force or
souls), and Ajiva (lifeless objects).Similarly, the soul of each living being
is unique and uncreated . The universe, and the matter and souls within it, are
eternal and uncreated, and there is no omnipotent creator god in Jainism.
Jainism offers an elaborate cosmology, including Heavenly beings/Devas. These
Heavenly beings are not viewed as creators, they are subject to suffering and
change like all other living beings, and portray them as mortal. Jains believe
that the soul can attain "godhood"; however none of these supernatural beings
exercise any sort of creative activity. Furthermore, according to the Jain
concept of divinity, any soul who destroys its karmas and desires, achieves
liberation/Nirvana. A soul who destroys all its passions, and desires, has no
desire to interfere in the working of the universe. If godliness is defined as
the state of having freed one's soul from karmas and the attainment of
enlightenment/Nirvana and a God as one who exists in such a state, then those
who have achieved such a state can be termed Gods/Tirthankara. Besides
scriptural authority, Jains also employ syllogism and deductive reasoning to
refute creationist theories. Various views on divinity and the universe held by
the vedics, sāmkhyas, mimimsas, Buddhists, and other school of thoughts were
criticized by Jain Ācāryas, such as Jinasena in Mahāpurāna.
