Norse mythology Norse mythology, a subset of Germanic mythology, is the overall
term for the myths, legends and beliefs about supernatural beings of Norse
pagans. It flourished prior to the Christianization of Scandinavia, during the
Early Middle Ages, and passed into Nordic folklore, with some aspects surviving
to the modern day. The mythology from the Romanticist Viking revival came to be
an influence on modern literature and popular culture. Norse mythology is the
study of the myths told in Germanic countries (Germany, The Netherlands,
Denmark, Sweden, Norway, Iceland, Faroe Islands) during the pre-Christian
times, especially during the Viking Age. Sources. The "Prose" or "Younger Edda"
was written in the early 13th century by Snorri Sturluson, who was a leading
skáld, chieftain, and diplomat in Iceland. It may be thought of primarily as a
handbook for aspiring skálds. It contains prose explications of traditional
"kennings," or compressed metaphors found in poetry. These prose retellings
make the various tales of the Norse gods systematic and coherent. The "Poetic
Edda" (also known as the "Elder Edda") was committed to writing about 50 years
after the "Prose Edda." It contains 29 long poems, of which 11 deal with the
Germanic deities, the rest with legendary heroes like Sigurd the Volsung (the
Siegfried of the German version "Nibelungenlied"). Although scholars think it
was transcribed later than the other Edda, the language and poetic forms
involved in the tales appear to have been composed centuries earlier than their
transcription. Besides these sources, there are surviving legends in Norse
folklore. Some of these can be correlated with legends appearing in other
Germanic literature e.g. the tale related in the Anglo-Saxon "Battle of
Finnsburgh" and the many allusions to mythological tales in "Deor". When
several partial references and tellings survive, scholars can deduce the
underlying tale. Additionally, there are hundreds of place names in the Nordic
countries named after the gods. A few runic inscriptions, such as the Rök
Runestone and the Kvinneby amulet, make references to the mythology. There are
also several runestones and image stones that depict scenes from Norse
mythology, such as Thor's fishing trip, scenes depicting Sigurd (Sigfried) the
dragon slayer, Odin and Sleipnir, Odin being devoured by Fenrir, and one of the
surviving stones from the Hunnestad Monument appears to show Hyrrokkin riding
to Baldr's funeral (DR 284). In Denmark, one image stone depicts Loki with
curled dandy-like mustaches and lips that are sewn together and the British
Gosforth cross shows several mythological images. Cosmology. In Norse mythology
there are "nine worlds" ("Níu Heimar in Old Norse"), each joined to the other
via the "World Tree" Yggdrasil. A list of these worlds can only be deduced from
the limited sources given to us in the two eddas. A complete list of the nine
worlds is never mentioned entirely, in either of the eddas. Each world also had
significant places within. Valhalla is Odin's hall located in Asgard. It was
also home of the Einherjar, who were the souls of the greatest warriors. These
warriors were selected by the Valkyries. The Einherjar would help defend the
gods during Ragnarok. These worlds are connected by Yggdrasil, the world tree,
with Asgard at its top. Chewing at its roots in Niflheim is Nidhogg, a
ferocious serpent or dragon. Asgard can be reached by Bifrost, a rainbow bridge
guarded by Heimdall, a god who can see and hear for a hundred leagues.
Supernatural beings. Numerous beings exist in Norse mythology, including the
Æsir and Vanir, two groups of gods, the Jötnar/Jättar (Giants), the Álfar/
Alver (Elves) and the Dvergar/Dvärgar (Dwarves). The distinction between Æsir
and Vanir is relative, for the two are said to have made peace, exchanged
hostages and reigned together after the events of the Æsir–Vanir War. In
addition, there are many other beings: Fenrir the gigantic wolf, Jörmungandr
the sea-serpent (or "worm") that is coiled around Midgard, and Hel, ruler of
Helheim. These three monsters are described as the progeny of Loki. Other
creatures include Huginn and Muninn (thought and memory, respectively), the two
ravens who keep Odin, the chief god, apprised of what is happening on earth,
since he gave an eye to the Well of Mimir in his quest for wisdom, Geri and
Freki Odin's two wolves, Sleipnir, Loki's eight legged horse son belonging to
Odin and Ratatoskr, the squirrel which scampers in the branches of Yggdrasil.
"Völuspá". In the "Poetic Edda" poem "Völuspá" ("Prophecy ["spá"] of the
völva"), Odin, the chief god of the Norse pantheon, has conjured up the spirit
of a dead völva and commanded this spirit to reveal the past and the future.
She is reluctant; she cries, "What do you ask of me? Why tempt me?" Since she
is already dead, she shows no fear of Odin, and continually taunts him, "Well,
would you know more?" But Odin insists: if he is to fulfill his function as
king of the gods, he must possess all knowledge. Once the völva has revealed
the secrets of past and future, she falls back into oblivion: "I sink now".
Abiogenesis and anthropogenesis. According to Norse myth, the beginning of life
was fire and ice, with the existence of only two worlds: Muspelheim and
Niflheim. When the warm air of Muspelheim hit the cold ice of Niflheim, the
jötunn Ymir and the icy cow Auðhumla were created. Ymir's foot bred a son and
a man and a woman emerged from his armpits, making Ymir the progenitor of the
Jötnar. Whilst Ymir slept, the intense heat from Muspelheim made him sweat,
and he sweated out Surtr, a jötunn of fire. Later Ýmir woke and drank
Auðhumla's milk. Whilst he drank, the cow Audhumbla licked on a salt stone. On
the first day after this a man's hair appeared on the stone, on the second day
a head and on the third day an entire man emerged from the stone. His name was
Búri and with an unknown jötunn female he fathered Borr (Bor), the father of
the three gods Odin, Vili and Ve. When the gods felt strong enough they killed
Ymir. His blood flooded the world and drowned all of the jötunn, except two.
But jötnar grew again in numbers and soon there were as many as before Ymir's
death. Then the gods created seven more worlds using Ymir's flesh for dirt, his
blood for the Oceans, rivers and lakes, his bones for stone, his brain as the
clouds, his skull for the heaven. Sparks from Muspelheim flew up and became
stars. One day when the gods were walking they found two tree trunks. They
transformed them into the shape of humans. Odin gave them life, Vili gave them
mind and Ve gave them the ability to hear, see, and speak. The gods named them
Askur and Embla and built the kingdom of Middle-earth for them; and, to keep
out the jötnar, the gods placed a gigantic fence made of Ymir's eyelashes
around Middle-earth. The völva goes on to describe Yggdrasill and three norns;
Urður (Wyrd), Verðandi and Skuld. She then describes the war between the
Æsir and Vanir and the murder of Baldur, Óðinn's (Odin) handsome son whom
everyone but Loki loved. (The story is that everything in existence promised
not to hurt him except mistletoe. Taking advantage of this weakness, Loki made
a projectile of mistletoe and tricked Höður, Óðinn's (Odin) blind son and
Baldur's brother, into using it to kill Baldur. Hel said she would revive him
if everyone in the nine worlds wept. A female jötunn - Thokk, who may have
been Loki in shape-shifted form - did not weep.) After that she turns her
attention to the future. Ragnarök. Ragnarök("Twilight of the Gods"), also
called Götterdämmerung, means the end of the cosmos in Norse mythology. It
will be preceded by Fimbulvetr, the winter of winters. Three such winters will
follow each other with no summers in between. Conflicts and feuds will break
out, even between families, and all morality will disappear. This is the
beginning of the end. The wolf Skoll will finally devour the sun, and his
brother Hati will eat the moon, plunging the earth darkness. The stars will
vanish from the sky. The cock Fjalar will crow to the giants and the golden
cock Gullinkambi will crow to the gods. A third cock will raise the dead. The
earth will shudder with earthquakes, and every bond and fetter will burst,
freeing the terrible wolf Fenrir. The sea will rear up because Jormungand, the
Midgard Serpent, is twisting and writhing in fury as he makes his way toward
the land. With every breath, Jormungand will stain the soil and the sky with
his poison. The waves caused by the serpent's emerging will set free the ship
Naglfar, and with the giant Hymir as their commander, the giants will sail
towards the battlefield. From the realm of the dead a second ship will set
sail, and this ship carries the inhabitants of hell, with Loki as their
helmsman. The fire giants, led by the giant Surt, will leave Muspell in the
south to join against the gods. Surt, carrying a sword that blazes like the sun
itself, will scorch the earth. Meanwhile, Heimdall will sound his horn, calling
the sons of Odin and the heroes to the battlefield. From all the corners of the
world, gods, giants, dwarves, demons and elves will ride towards the huge plain
of Vigrid ("battle shaker") where the last battle will be fought. Odin will
engage Fenrir in battle, and Thor will attack Jormungand. Thor will be
victorious, but the serpent's poison will gradually kill the god of thunder.
Surt will seek out the swordless Freyr, who will quickly succumb to the giant.
The one-handed Tyr will fight the monstrous hound Garm and they will kill each
other. Loki and Heimdall, age-old enemies, will meet for a final time, and
neither will survive their encounter. The fight between Odin and Fenrir will
rage for a long time, but finally Fenrir will seize Odin and swallow him.
Odin's son Vidar will at once leap towards the wolf and kill him with his bare
hands, ripping the wolf's jaws apart. Then Surt will fling fire in every
direction. The nine worlds will burn, and friends and foes alike will perish.
The earth will sink into the sea. After the destruction, a new and idyllic
world will arise from the sea and will be filled with abundant supplies. Some
of the gods will survive, others will be reborn. Wickedness and misery will no
longer exist and gods and men will live happily together. The descendants of
Lif and Lifthrasir will inhabit this earth. Kings and heroes. The mythological
literature relates the legends of heroes and kings, as well as supernatural
creatures. These clan and kingdom founding figures possessed great importance
as illustrations of proper action or national origins. The heroic literature
may have fulfilled the same function as the national epic in other European
literatures, or it may have been more nearly related to tribal identity. Many
of the legendary figures probably existed, and generations of Scandinavian
scholars have tried to extract history from myth in the sagas. Sometimes the
same hero resurfaces in several forms depending on which part of the Germanic
world the epics survived such as Weyland/Völund and Siegfried/Sigurd, and
probably Beowulf/Bödvar Bjarki. Other notable heroes are Hagbard, Starkad,
Ragnar Lodbrok, Sigurd Ring, Ivar Vidfamne and Harald Hildetand. Notable are
also the shieldmaidens who were ordinary women who had chosen the path of the
warrior. These women function both as heroines and as obstacles to the heroic
journey. Norse worship. Centres of faith. The Nordic tribes rarely or never had
temples in a modern sense. The Blót, the form of worship practiced by the
ancient Scandinavian and Germanic people, resembled that of the Celts and
Balts. It occurred either in sacred groves, at home, or at a simple altar of
piled stones known as a "horgr." However, there seem to have been a few more
important centres, such as Skiringssal in Norway, Lejre in Denmark and Uppsala
in Sweden. Adam of Bremen claims that there was a temple at Uppsala with three
wooden statues of Odin (the chief god), Thor (the god of thunder) and Freyr
(the god of love). Priests. While a kind of priesthood seems to have existed,
it never took on the professional and semi-hereditary character of the Celtic
druidical class. This was because the shamanistic tradition was maintained by
women, the Völvas. It is often said that the Germanic kingship evolved out of
a priestly office. This priestly role of the king was in line with the general
role of gothi, who was the head of a kindred group of families (for this social
structure, see norse clans), and who administered the sacrifices. Human
sacrifice. A unique eye-witness account of Germanic human sacrifice survives in
Ibn Fadlan's account of a Rus ship burial, where a slave-girl had volunteered
to accompany her lord to the next world. More indirect accounts are given by
Tacitus, Saxo Grammaticus and Adam von Bremen. However, the Ibn Fadlan account
is actually a burial ritual. Current understanding of Norse mythology suggests
an ulterior motive to the slave-girl's 'sacrifice'. It is believed that in
Norse mythology a woman who joined the corpse of a man on the funeral pyre
would be that man's wife in the next world. For a slave girl to become the wife
of a lord was an obvious increase in status. Although both religions are of the
Indo-European tradition, the sacrifice described in the Ibn Fadlan account is
not to be confused with the practice of Sati. The "Heimskringla" tells of
Swedish King Aun who sacrificed nine of his sons in an effort to prolong his
life until his subjects stopped him from killing his last son Egil. According
to Adam of Bremen, the Swedish kings sacrificed male slaves every ninth year
during the Yule sacrifices at the Temple at Uppsala. The Swedes had the right
not only to elect kings but also to depose them, and both king Domalde and king
Olof Trätälja are said to have been sacrificed after years of famine. Odin,
also known as all father, hung himself in order to gain his own knowledge,
thereby allowing him to know all in the world. A possible practice of Odinic
sacrifice by strangling has some archeological support in the existence of
bodies such as Tollund Man that perfectly preserved by the acid of the Jutland
peatbogs, into which they were cast after having been strangled. However,
scholars possess no written accounts that explicitly interpret the cause of
these stranglings, which could obviously have other explanations. Interactions
with Christianity. An important note in interpreting this mythology is that
often the closest accounts that scholars have to "pre-contact" times were
written by Christians. The "Younger Edda" and the "Heimskringla" were written
by Snorri Sturluson in the 13th century, over two hundred years after Iceland
became Christianized. This results in Snorri's works carrying a large amount of
Euhemerism. Virtually all of the saga literature came out of Iceland, a
relatively small and remote island, and even in the climate of religious
tolerance there, Snorri was guided by an essentially Christian viewpoint. The
"Heimskringla" provides some interesting insights into this issue. Snorri
introduces Odin as a mortal warlord in Asia who acquires magical powers,
settles in Sweden, and becomes a demi-god following his death. Having undercut
Odin's divinity, Snorri then provides the story of a pact of Swedish King Aun
with Odin to prolong his life by sacrificing his sons. Later in the
Heimskringla, Snorri records in detail how converts to Christianity such as
Saint Olaf Haraldsson brutally converted Scandinavians to Christianity. Trying
to avert civil war, the Icelandic parliament voted in Christianity, but for
some years tolerated heathenry in the privacy of one's home. Sweden, on the
other hand, had a series of civil wars in the 11th century, which ended with
the burning of the Temple at Uppsala. In England, Christianization occurred
earlier and sporadically, rarely by force. Conversion by coercion was sporadic
throughout the areas where Norse gods had been worshipped. However, the
conversion did not happen overnight. Christian clergy did their utmost to teach
the populace that the Norse gods were demons, but their success was limited and
the gods never became "evil" in the popular mind in most of Scandinavia. The
length of time Christianization took is illustrated by two centrally located
examples of Lovön and Bergen. Archaeological studies of graves at the Swedish
island of Lovön have shown that the Christianization took 150–200 years, and
this was a location close to the kings and bishops. Likewise in the bustling
trading town of Bergen, many runic inscriptions have been found from the 13th
century, among the Bryggen inscriptions. One of them says "may Thor receive
you, may Odin own you", and a second one is a galdra which says "I carve curing
runes, I carve salvaging runes, once against the elves, twice against the
trolls, thrice against the thurs". The second one also mentions the dangerous
Valkyrie Skögul. Another contrast in Norse beliefs is the Gimle, the supposed
"high heaven", which is thought to be a Christian addition to Norse mythology,
and the Ragnarokk, the "fate" of Æsir gods. This seems to be a Christian
addition to the native mythology, since it ends the "reign" of the Æsir gods.
There are few accounts from the 14th to the 18th century, but the clergy, such
as Olaus Magnus (1555) wrote about the difficulties of extinguishing the old
beliefs. The story related in "Þrymskviða" appears to have been unusually
resilient, like the romantic story of Hagbard and Signy, and versions of both
were recorded in the 17th century and as late as the 19th century. In the 19th
and early 20th century Swedish folklorists documented what commoners believed,
and what surfaced were many surviving traditions of the gods of Norse
mythology. However, the traditions were by then far from the cohesive system of
Snorri's accounts. Most gods had been forgotten and only the hunting Odin and
the jötunn-slaying Thor figure in numerous legends. Freyja is mentioned a few
times and Baldr only survives in legends about place names. Other elements of
Norse mythology survived without being perceived as such, especially concerning
supernatural beings in Scandinavian folklore. Moreover, the Norse belief in
destiny has been very firm until modern times. Since the Christian hell
resembled the abode of the dead in Norse mythology one of the names was
borrowed from the old faith, "Helvíti" i.e. "Hel's punishment". Many elements
of the Yule traditions persevered, such as the Swedish tradition of
slaughtering the pig at Christmas (Christmas ham), which originally was part of
the sacrifice to Freyr. Modern influences. The Nordic gods have left numerous
traces in modern vocabulary and elements of every day western life in most
North Germanic language speaking countries. An example of this is some of the
names of the days of the week: modelled after the names of the days of the week
in Latin (named after Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus, and Saturn), the names for
Tuesday through to Friday were replaced with Nordic equivalents of the Roman
gods and the names for Monday and Sunday after the Sun and Moon. In
Scandinavia, Saturday is called "Lørdag", the "Bath Day", in English and
Dutch, "Saturn" was not replaced, while in German, Saturday was renamed after
the definition of Sabbath (meaning the day of rest). Viking revival. Early
modern editions of Old Norse literature begins in the 16th century, e.g.
"Historia de gentibus septentrionalibus" (Olaus Magnus, 1555) and the first
edition of the 13th century "Gesta Danorum" (Saxo Grammaticus), in 1514. The
pace of publication increased during the 17th century with Latin translations
of the Edda (notably Peder Resen's "Edda Islandorum" of 1665). The renewed
interest of Romanticism in the Old North had political implications and the
Geatish Society, of which poet and historian Erik Gustaf Geijer was a founder-
member, popularized this myth to a great extent. A focus for early British
enthusiasts was George Hicke, who published a "Linguarum vett. septentrionalium
thesaurus" in 1703–5. In the 1780s, Denmark offered to cede Iceland to
Britain in exchange for Crab Island (West Indies), and in the 1860s Iceland was
considered as a compensation for British support of Denmark in the Slesvig-
Holstein conflicts. During this time, British interest and enthusiasm for
Iceland and Nordic culture grew dramatically.'" Germanic Neopaganism.
Romanticist interest in the Old North gave rise to Germanic mysticism involving
various schemes of occultist "Runology", notably following Guido von List and
his "Das Geheimnis der Runen" (1908) in the early 20th century. Since the
1970s, there have been revivals of the old Germanic religion as Germanic
Neopaganism ("Ásatrú") in both Europe and the United States. Modern popular
culture. Norse mythology influenced Richard Wagner's use of literary themes
from it to compose the four operas that make up "Der Ring des Nibelungen" ("The
Ring of the Nibelung"). The Viking metal music genre focuses on Viking age and
Norse Mythology as inspiration for lyrics. Examples include Bathory,
Falkenbach, among others. A broader definition of "viking metal" may also
include Viking-themed or norse-themed Folk metal (Turisas, Ensiferum,
Finntroll, Týr), Doom metal (Doomsword), and Death metal (Amon Amarth).
Subsequently, J. R. R. Tolkien's writings, especially "The Silmarillion"(Which
was later written by Tolkein's son with his notes about middle-earth), were
heavily influenced by the indigenous beliefs of the pre-Christian Northern
Europeans. As his related novel "The Lord of the Rings" became popular,
elements of its fantasy world moved steadily into popular perceptions of the
fantasy genre. In many fantasy novels today can be found such Norse creatures
as elves, dwarves, and frost jötnar. Another prominent appearance of Norse
mythology in popular culture is in the Marvel Universe. In the Marvel Universe,
the Norse and related elements play a prominent part, especially Thor who has
been one of the longest running superheroes for the company. The Asgardians are
interpreted as not being gods in a literal sense, but their godlike powers are
of supernatural origin. This reinvention of the Norse deities has been featured
in the Marvel Cinematic Universe film franchise and is the plot focus of the
2011 film "Thor" and elaborated in the 2012 crossover film "The Avengers", and
is yet to be explored further in the 2013 sequel "". There is also a video game
series entitled The Elder Scrolls where one of the playable characters is a
Norse-like race named the Nords who live in the northern province of Tamriel,
Skyrim (Also the name of the fifth game in the series). The gameworld does
include Giants, Elves, and a few ice age creatures. The game includes folklore
& anthropology similar to that of the real pre-Christian Norse. For instance,
what would be Valhalla is called Sovngarde. Architecture of the Skyrim Nords is
also heavily influenced by actual Norse architecture. The video game Max Payne
contains many allusions to Norse mythology, particularly the myth of Ragnarök.
Most of the elements in the game are named for figures from Norse mythology.
The fantasy novels Runemarks and Runelight, by "Chocolat" author Joanne Harris,
are strongly influenced by Norse mythology and tell the story of surviving
Norse gods in a world post-Ragnarok. See also. "Spelling of names in Norse
mythology often varies depending on the nationality of the source material. For
more information see Old Norse orthography".
