Number of the Beast The Number of the Beast (, "Arithmos tou Thēriou") is the
numerical value of the name of the person symbolised by the beast from the sea,
the first of two symbolic beasts described in chapter 13 of the Book of
Revelation. In most manuscripts of the New Testament the number is 666, but the
variant 616 is found in critical editions of the Greek text, such as the Novum
Testamentum Graece. Most scholars believe that the number of the beast (v.18)
equates to Emperor Nero, whose name in Greek when transliterated into Hebrew,
retains the value of 666, whereas his Latin name transliterated into Hebrew, is
616; The "mark of the beast" (v.16,17) is used to distinguish the beast's
followers. Revelation 13:17 says that the mark is "the name of the beast or the
number of his name". Because of this, it is widely thought among
dispensationalists that the mark will be some future representation of the
actual number 666. It has also been speculated that the "mark" may be an
Imperial Roman seal, or the Emperor's head on Roman coins. Revelation 13:17-18.
Summary. Revelation 13 concerns the vision of the author John of Patmos's
vision of two beasts. The first beast emerges from the sea having seven heads,
inscribed with blasphemous names, reflecting the titles given to Roman emperors
("Lord and Saviour", "Saviour of the World"), considered to be blasphemies in
the eyes of Christians. This is followed by a second beast who emerges from the
earth and "speaks like a dragon". He derives his authority from the first
beast, and probably represents the emperor himself. It is the duty of the
second beast to ensure that everyone is required to bear the mark of the first
beast on their right hand or forehead, "And that no man might buy or sell, save
he that had the mark, or the name of the beast, or the number of his name."
(Revelation 13:17). The vision of the first beast concludes with a riddle where
John reveals the number of the Beast and its significance: "Here is wisdom. Let
him that hath understanding count the number of the beast: for it is the number
of a man; and his number "is" Six hundred threescore "and" six."(Revelation 13:
18). 666. The "Number of the Beast" is described in the passage of Revelation
13:15–18 and the actual number is only mentioned once, in verse 18. In the
Greek manuscripts, the number is rendered in Greek numerical form as χξϛʹ,
or sometimes literally as , "hexakósioi hexēkonta héx", "six hundred and
sixty-six". There are several interpretation-translations for the meaning of
the phrase ""Here is Wisdom, Let him that hath understanding count the number
of the beast"" where the peculiar Greek word ψηφισάτω ("psefisato") is
used. Possible translations include not only "to count", "to reckon" but also
"to vote" or "to decide". 17καὶ ἵνα μή τις δύνηται
ἀγοράσαι ἢ πωλῆσαι εἰ μὴ ὁ ἔχων τὸ
χάραγμα, τὸ ὄνομα τοῦ θηρίου ἢ τὸν
ἀριθμὸν τοῦ ὀνόματος αὐτοῦ. 18Ὧδε ἡ
σοφία ἐστίν· ὁ ἔχων τὸν νοῦν ψηφισάτω
τὸν ἀριθμὸν τοῦ θηρίου· ἀριθμὸς γὰρ
ἀνθρώπου ἐστί· καὶ ὁ ἀριθμὸς αὐτοῦ
χξϛʹ. 17καὶ ἵνα μή τις δύνηται ἀγοράσαι ἢ
πωλῆσαι εἰ μὴ ὁ ἔχων τὸ χάραγμα, τὸ
ὄνομα τοῦ θηρίου ἢ τὸν ἀριθμὸν τοῦ
ὀνόματος αὐτοῦ. 18ὧδε ἡ σοφία ἐστίν· ὁ
ἔχων νοῦν ψηφισάτω τὸν ἀριθμὸν τοῦ
θηρίου, ἀριθμὸς γὰρ ἀνθρώπου ἐστίν· καὶ
ὁ ἀριθμὸς αὐτοῦ ἑξακόσιοι ἑξήκοντα ἕξ.
616. Other Revelation manuscripts such as Papyrus 115 and Codex Ephraemi
Rescriptus (C; Paris, one of the four great uncial codices) reads the "number
of the beast" in (13:18) as . P115 (P. Oxy. 4499), located at Oxford
University’s Ashmolean Museum, dates to around 300 CE. The manuscript is one
of the oldest fragments of Revelation containing Chapters 2-15. It agrees with
both Codices Alexandrinus and Ephraemi Rescriptus, two of the best known
witnesses to Revelation. However, only "Codex Ephraemi" agrees with the number
616, which is argued to be the original reading of the Greek text, written out
as: , "hexakosioi deka hex" (lit. "six hundred and sixteen"). Although Irenaeus
(2nd century AD) affirmed the number to be 666 and reported several scribal
errors of the number, he knew about the 616 reading, but did not adopt it
(Haer. v.30,3). However, several centuries later, correcting the existing Latin
language version of the New Testament, commonly referred to as the Vetus
Latina, Jerome left 616 in. "The number 666 has been substituted for 616 either
by analogy with 888, the number of Jesus (Deissmann), or because it is a
triangular number, the sum of the first 36 numbers (1+2+3+4+5+6...+36 = 666)".
The number 616 can still be found in the Latin version of Tyconius and an
ancient Armenian version (ed. Conybaere, 1907). Identities. Calculations. "Here
is wisdom. Let him who has understanding calculate the number of the beast, for
it is the number of a man: His number is 666." (Rev.13:18-NKJV) Numbers were
represented by letters in Koine Greek and Ancient Hebrew. The practice of
converting Greek letters into Greek numerals is known as isopsephy. In Hebrew,
the practice is known as gematria, where every letter corresponds to a number.
The sum of these numbers gives a numeric value to a word or name. Candidates.
Victorinus of Pettau (d. c. 303) gives the names Teitan, Antemos ("opponent"),
Diclux ("double-dealer") and Genserikos; the last he calls Gothic. As it is
plainly Genseric, the Vandal king, who captured Rome in 455 AD, the passage as
whole can not go back to Victorinus, who belonged to the 3rd century. It is
not, however surprising that the commentary should be brought up to date, after
Genseric became notorious through the sack of Carthage and of Rome. Of the
other names in Victorinus only Diclux needs mention. It is said to be the Latin
counterpart of Teitan and by reckoning each letter at its value in Roman
numerals, the total of 666 is again given. Beatus of Liébana (c. 730 – c.
800), a Spanish monk, gives eight names among which are Damnatus ("Damned"),
Antichristus ("Antichrist"), and Acxyme ("for aichime or achine=666"). The
numerical interpretation of Antichristus is based on the order of letters in
the Latin alphabet, a = 1 to x = 300, but the accusative must be taken and
spelled Antechristum. Arethas of Caesarea (b. c. 860) in his Commentary on
Revelation gives seven names: Lampetis ("the lustrous one"), o Niketes
(victor), Teitan, Palai baskanos ("ancient sorcerer"), Kakos Odegos ("bad
guide"), Alethes Blaberos ("really harmful"), and Amnos Adikos ("unjust lamb")
each of which gives a total of 666. Most of these names are repeated by Arethas
of Caesarea, who in his Commentary adds Teitan from Irenaeus and o Niketes
("the winner"). Neron Caesar. It is widely accepted by many scholars that Roman
Emperor Nero (ruling 54-68) is the first Beast of Revelation 13. This
interpretation was received by enumerating his name and title "Neron Caesar" to
the "Number of the Beast". An Aramaic scroll from Murabba'at, dated to "the
second year of Emperor Nero", refers to him by his name and title where in
Hebrew it is "Nron Qsr" (Pronounced "Nerōn Kaisar"), and in Latin it is "Nro
Qsr" (Pronounced "Nerō Kaisar"). In the Nero Redivivus legend, a belief that
Nero returns to life is noted that "After Nero's suicide in AD 68, there was a
widespread belief, especially in the eastern provinces, that he was not dead
and somehow would return (Suetonius, LVII; Tacitus, Histories II.8; Dio,
LXVI.19.3). Suetonius (XL) relates how court astrologers had predicted Nero's
fall but that he would have power in the east. At least three false claimants
did present themselves as Nero redivivus (resurrected)." It has also been
suggested that Nero's return to power would be through emperor Domitian, whose
style of rulership resembled that of Nero and who put the people of Asia
(Lydia) under heavy taxation. Mark of the Beast. Imperial seal. The mark A.
Gk., "charagma", χάραγμα, in Revelation 13:16 had been attributed to the
imperial seal of the Roman Empire that was used on official documents during
the 1st and 2nd centuries. In the reign of Emperor Decius (249–251 AD), those
who did not possess the certificate of sacrifice (libellus) to Caesar could not
pursue trades, a prohibition that conceivably goes back to Nero. The
significance of this imperial seal had been paralleled to verse 17. Currency.
In 66, when Nero was emperor, about the time some scholars say Revelation was
written, the Jews revolted against Rome and coined their own money. The Greek
word translated as "mark" (of the beast), χάραγμα, also means "stamped
money, coin" or the "impress" on the coin hence, "no one buys or sells without
the "money" of the beast." New Testament scholar Craig C. Hill suggests that
the mark symbolized the all-embracing economic power of Rome, whose very
coinage bore the emperor's image and conveyed his claims to divinity (e.g., by
including the sun's rays in the ruler's portrait). Zealot Christians from the
1st century refused to carry, look at, or manufacture coins bearing any sort of
idolatrous image. Thus it had become increasingly difficult for Christians to
function in a world in which public life, including the economic life of the
trade guilds, required participation in idolatry. Adela Yarbro Collins further
denotes that the refusal to use Roman coins resulted in the condition where "no
man might buy or sell" (Rev.13:17). A similar view is offered by Craig R.
Koester, "As sales were made, people used coins that bore the images of Rome's
gods and emperors. Thus each transaction that used such coins was a reminder
that people were advancing themselves economically by relying on political
powers that did not recognize the true God." Tefillin. The passage is also seen
as an antithetical parallelism to the Jewish institution of "tefillin" which
are Hebrew Bible texts worn bound to the arm and the forehead during daily
prayer. Instead of binding their allegiance to God to their arm and head, the
place is instead taken with people's allegiance to The Beast. Belief systems.
In the writings of the Bahá'í Faith, `Abdu'l-Bahá states that the numerical
value given to the beast referred to the year when the Umayyad ruler Muawiyah
I, who opposed the Imamate, according to the beliefs of the Shi'ites, took
office as Caliph in 661 AD, (see also the scholarly accepted year of birth of
Jesus about 666 years before as well as the concept of Mawali who were non-Arab
Muslims but not treated as other Muslims) who continued to pay the tax required
of nonbelievers and were excluded from government and the military, and thus
bore a social "mark". Jehovah's Witnesses believe that The Beast for which 666
stands symbolizes many unified governments, harmonizing with the symbolic
depiction of past governments (denoted as "kings") in the Book of Daniel as
wild beasts. The Beast is said to have "a human number" in that the governments
that the beast symbolizes are all of a human origin, they aren't made up of
spirit or demon entities. Furthermore, the number 666 "itself all point to one
unmistakable conclusion— gross shortcoming and failure in the eyes of
Jehovah," thus imperfection (7 is used by God in many ways to indicate
perfection such as days in the week, hence 6 is the number of imperfection,
falling short of 7). In Kabbalistic Judaism the number 666 represents the
creation and perfection of the world. The world was created in 6 days, and
there are 6 cardinal directions (North, South, East, West, Up, Down). Seventh-
day Adventists believe that the Mark of the Beast (but not the number 666)
refers to a future, universal, legally enforced Sunday-worship. "Those who
reject God's memorial of creatorship—the Bible Sabbath—choosing to worship
and honor Sunday in the full knowledge that it is not God's appointed day of
worship, will receive the 'mark of the beast. "The Sunday Sabbath is purely a
child of the Papacy. It is the mark of the beast."
