Old Testament The Old Testament is a Christian term for a collection of
religious writings of ancient Israel that form the major and first section of
Christian Bibles, in contrast to the Christian New Testament which deals
explicitly with the 1st century Christianity. The Hebrew Canon approved by
Rabbinic Judaism included only certain Hebrew/Aramaic books but not all. Some
of these scriptures vary markedly between differing Christian denominations;
Protestants accept only the Hebrew Bible's canon but divide it into 39 books,
while Catholics, the Eastern Orthodox, Coptic and Ethiopian churches recognise
a considerably larger collection. The books can be broadly divided into the
Pentateuch, which tells how God selected Israel to be his chosen people; the
history books telling the history of the Israelites from their conquest of
Canaan to their defeat and exile in Babylon; the poetic and "wisdom" books
dealing, in various forms, with questions of good and evil in the world; and
the books of the biblical prophets, warning of the consequences of turning away
from God. For the Israelites who were its original authors and readers these
books told of their own unique relationship with God and their relationship
with proselytes, but the overarching messianic nature of Christianity has led
Christians from the very beginning of the faith to see the Old Testament as a
preparation for the New Covenant and New Testament. Content. The Old Testament
contains 39 (Protestant) or 46 (Catholic) or more (Orthodox and other) books,
divided, very broadly, into the Pentateuch (meaning "five books"), the
historical books, the "wisdom" books and the prophets. The difference of seven
books between the Catholic and Protestant canons stems from the fact that the
early Christians used a Greek translation of the Jewish scriptures, called the
Septuagint. The Protestant churches later dropped those books which were not
accepted by the Jews. The following table shows the arrangement of the holy
books in the Jewish Bible and the Old Testament "(Jewish bibles count 24 books,
as shown here, but Christian bibles divide Samuel, Kings, Chronicles, Ezra-
Nehemiah and the Minor Prophets, bringing the total to 39; books additional to
the Hebrew Bible in italics):" Composition. The first five books - Genesis,
Exodus, Leviticus, book of Numbers and Deuteronomy - make up the Torah, the
story of Israel from the Genesis creation narrative to the death of Moses. Few
scholars today doubt that it reached its present form in the Persian period
(538-332 BC), and that its authors were the elite of exilic returnees who
controlled the Temple at that time. The books of Joshua, Judges, Samuel and
Kings follow, forming a history of Israel from the Conquest of Canaan to the
Siege of Jerusalem c.587 BC: there is a broad consensus among scholars that
these originated as a single work (the so-called "Deuteronomistic history")
during the Babylonian exile of the 6th century BC. The two Books of Chronicles
cover much the same material as the Pentateuch and Deuteronomistic history and
probably date from the 4th century BC. Chronicles links with the books of Ezra
and Nehemiah, which were probably finished during the 3rd century BC. Catholic
and Orthodox Old Testaments contain two (Catholic Old Testament) to four
(Orthodox) Books of Maccabees, written in the 2nd and 1st centuries BC. The
history books make up around half the total content of the Old Testament. Of
the remainder, the books of the various prophets - Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel,
Daniel and the twelve "minor prophets" - were written between the 8th and 6th
centuries BC, with the exceptions of Jonah and Daniel, which were written much
later. The "wisdom" and other books - Job, Proverbs and so on - date from
between the 5th century BC and the 2nd or 1st BC, with the exception of some of
the Psalms. Themes. God is consistently depicted as the one who created the
world and guides its history. He is not, however, consistently presented as the
only god who exists. Nevertheless, he is always depicted as the only God whom
Israel is to worship, and both Jews and Christians have always interpreted the
bible as an affirmation of the oneness of God. The Old Testament stresses the
special relationship between God and his chosen people, Israel, but includes
instructions for proselytes as well. This relationship is expressed in the
biblical covenant (contract) between the two, received by Moses. The law codes
in books such as Exodus and especially Deuteronomy are the terms of the
contract: Israel swears faithfulness to Yahweh, and God swears to be Israel's
special protector and supporter. Further themes in the Old Testament include
salvation, redemption, judgement, obedience and disobedience, faith and
faithfulness, among others. Throughout there is a strong emphasis on ethics and
ritual purity, both of which God demands, although some of the prophets and
wisdom writers seem to question this, arguing that God demands social justice
above purity, and perhaps does not even care about purity at all. The Old
Testament's moral code enjoins fairness, intervention on behalf of the
vulnerable, and the duty of those in power to administer justice righteously.
It forbids murder, bribery and corruption, deceitful trading, and many sexual
misdemeanors. All morality is traced back to God, who is the source of all
goodness. The question of evil plays a large part in the Old Testament. The
problem the Old Testament authors faced was that a good God must have had just
reason for bringing disaster (meaning notably, but not only, the Babylonian
exile) upon his people. The theme is played out, with many variations, in books
as different as the histories of Kings and Chronicles, the prophets like
Ezekiel and Jeremiah, and in the wisdom books like Job and Ecclesiates. From
scripture to canon: formation of the Old Testament. Greek, Latin and Protestant
Old Testaments. The process by which scriptures became canons and Bibles was a
long one, and its complexities account for the many different Old Testaments
which exist today. By about the 5th century BC Jews saw the five books of the
Torah (the Old Testament Pentateuch) as having authoritative status; by the 2nd
century BC the Prophets had a similar status, although without quite the same
level of respect as the Torah; beyond that, the Jewish scriptures were fluid,
with different groups seeing authority in different books. The scriptures were
translated into Greek between about 280-130 BC. At this stage (i.e., around the
time of Christ) there was no collection of these scriptures - the various texts
were read as separate scrolls. It was only in the early centuries of the
Christian era that the scriptures began to be bound together into books and
that Bibles as we know them today came to be invented. The Greek translations,
called the Septuagint, contained several books (using that term loosely) not
found in the modern Hebrew Bible (1-2 Esdras, Judith, Tobit, 1-4 Maccabees,
Wisdom of Solomon, Sirach, Baruch, and numerous additions to other books),
based loosely on chronology and "literary typology" (i.e. subject matter). It
continues in use to this day as the Old Testament of the Eastern Orthodox
Church. In 331, Constantine I commissioned Eusebius to deliver fifty Bibles for
the Church of Constantinople. Athanasius recorded Alexandrian scribes around
340 preparing Bibles for Constans. Little else is known, though there is plenty
of speculation. For example, it is speculated that this may have provided
motivation for canon lists, and that Codex Vaticanus and Codex Sinaiticus are
examples of these Bibles. Together with the Peshitta and Codex Alexandrinus,
these are the earliest extant Christian Bibles. There is no evidence among the
canons of the First Council of Nicaea of any determination on the canon,
however, Jerome (347-420), in his "Prologue to Judith", makes the claim that
the Book of Judith was "found by the Nicene Council to have been counted among
the number of the Sacred Scriptures". In Western Christianity or Christianity
in the Western half of the Roman Empire, Latin had displaced Greek as the
common language of the early Christians, and about 400 AD Pope Damasus I
commissioned Jerome, the leading scholar of the day, to produce an updated
Latin bible to replace the Vetus Latina. Sometime in the centuries after the
Septuagint (exactly when is disputed) the Rabbis (Jewish religious scholars and
teachers) defined the Jewish canon, which is a much shorter canon of only 24
books, and Jerome used it (commonly called the Hebrew Bible) instead of the
Greek Old Testament as the basis for his translation, citing "Hebraica Veritas"
(Latin: Truth of the Hebrew). His Vulgate (i.e. common language) Old Testament
became the standard bible used in the Western Church, specifically as the
Sixto-Clementine Vulgate, while the Churches in the East continued, and still
continue, to use the Septuagint. Jerome had wanted to drop all the books that
did not appear in the Hebrew Bible, but St Augustine, a bishop and another
great scholar of the day, opposed him and won the argument, notably at the
Council of Carthage on 28 August 397. In the 16th century the Protestant
reformers reopened the debate, and sided with Jerome, but only for their own
congregations: yet although Protestant Bibles now have only those books that
appear in the Jewish Bible, they have them in the order of the Greek Bible. The
Catholic Church, largely in reaction to this attack on tradition, officially
adopted a canon, the Canon of Trent, which can be seen as following Augustine's
Carthaginian Councils or the Council of Rome, and includes most, but not all,
of the Septuagint (3 Ezra and 3 and 4 Maccabees are excluded); the Anglicans
after the English Civil War adopted a compromise position, restoring the 39
Articles and keeping the extra books that were excluded by the Westminster
Confession of Faith, but only for private study and for reading in churches,
while Lutherans kept them for private study, gathered in an appendix as
Biblical Apocrypha. Other versions. While the Hebrew, Greek and Latin versions
of the Hebrew Bible are the best known Old Testaments, there were others. At
much the same time as the Septuagint was being produced, translations were
being made into Aramaic, the language of Jews living in Palestine and the Near
East and likely the language of Jesus: these are called the Aramaic Targums,
from a word meaning "translation", and were used to help Jewish congregations
understand their scriptures. For Aramaic Christians there was a Syriac
translation of the Hebrew Bible called the Peshitta, as well as versions in
Coptic (the everyday language of Egypt in the first Christian centuries,
descended from ancient Egyptian), Ethiopic (for use in the Ethiopian church,
one of the oldest Christian churches), Armenian (Armenia, a former kingdom, now
part of modern northeast Turkey, was the first to adopt Christianity as its
official religion), and Arabic. Christian theology and the Old Testament.
Christianity is based on the claim that the historical Jesus was also the
supernatural Christ, the Saviour. This claim is in turn based on Jewish
understandings of the meaning of the Hebrew term messiah, which, like the Greek
"Christ", means "anointed". In the Hebrew Scriptures it describes a king
anointed with oil on his accession to the throne: he becomes "The LORD's
anointed" or Yahweh's Anointed. By the time of Jesus, some Jews expected that a
flesh and blood descendant of David (the "Son of David") would come to
establish a real Jewish kingdom in Jerusalem, instead of the Roman province;
others stressed the Son of Man, a distinctly other-worldly figure who would
appear as a judge at the end of time; and some harmonised the two by expecting
a this-worldly messianic kingdom which would last for a set period and be
followed by the other-worldly age or World to Come. Some thought the Messiah
was already present, but unrecognised due to Israel's sins; some thought that
the Messiah would be announced by a fore-runner, probably Elijah (as promised
by the prophet Malachi, whose book now ends the Old Testament and precedes
Mark's account of John the Baptist). None predicted a Messiah who suffers and
dies for the sins of all the people. The story of Jesus' death therefore
involved a profound shift in meaning from the tradition of the Old Testament.
The name "Old Testament" reflects Christianity's understanding of itself as the
fulfillment of Jeremiah's prophesy of a New Covenant (which is similar to
"testament" and often conflated) to replace the existing covenant between God
and Israel (Jeremiah 31:31). The emphasis, however, has shifted from Judaism's
understanding of the covenant as an eternal contract between God and Israel to
one between God and those who are "in Christ".
