Omniscience Omniscience (), mainly in religion, is the capacity to know
everything that there is to know. In particular, Hinduism and the Abrahamic
religions (Judaism, Christianity, Baha'i and Islam) believe that there is a
divine being who is omniscient. An omniscient point-of-view, in writing, is to
know everything that can be known about a character, including past history,
thoughts, feelings, etc. In Latin, "omnis" means "all" and "sciens" means
"knowing". Definitions. Some modern Christian theologians argue that God's
omniscience is inherent rather than total, and that God chooses to limit his
omniscience in order to preserve the freewill and dignity of his creatures.
John Calvin, among other theologians of the 16th century, comfortable with the
definition of God as being omniscient in the total sense, in order for worthy
beings' abilities to choose freely, embraced the doctrine of predestination.
Controversies. Omnipotence (unlimited power) is sometimes understood to also
imply the capacity to know everything that will be. Nontheism often claims that
the very concept of omniscience is inherently contradictory. Whether
omniscience, particularly regarding the choices that a human will make, is
compatible with free will has been debated by theists and philosophers. The
argument that divine foreknowledge is not compatible with free will is known as
theological fatalism. Generally, if humans are truly free to choose between
different alternatives, it is very difficult to understand how God could know
what this choice will be. Various responses have been proposed to this
argument. One possible solution is that God could know every possible life one
might live, but allows for free will according to laws set in place that cannot
be contradicted. God would know all possible ways to live and all the outcomes,
but a human being with free will would choose which specific life to actually
live out, one decision at a time. God would allow for the ability to choose,
and to not have full power over all in what was chosen by a human being each
step of the way. God would be all-knowing in terms of infinite specific details
of every possible life you could live. God created knowledge. Some theists
argue that God created all knowledge and has ready access thereto. This
statement invokes a circular time contradiction: presupposing the existence of
God, before knowledge existed, there was no knowledge at all, which means that
God was unable to possess knowledge prior to its creation. Alternately if
knowledge was not a "creation" but merely existed in God's mind for all time
there would be no contradiction. In Thomistic thought, which holds God to exist
outside of time due to his ability to perceive everything at once, everything
which God knows in his mind already exists. Hence, God would know of nothing
that "was not" in existence (or else it would exist), and God would also know
everything that "was" in existence (or else it would not exist), and God would
possess this knowledge of what did exist and what did not exist at any point in
the history of time. The circular time contradiction can suppose anything
concerning God, such as the creation of life, meaning before God created life,
he wasn't alive. Moreover to assume any more attributes, to then say God is
merciful, but before the creation of mercy, he wouldn't have been merciful, and
before the creation of the concept of negation (meaning to assume something as
not), no one would have any concept of what is not. These apparent
contradictions, however, presuppose that such attributes are separately defined
and detached from God, which is not necessarily so. It is not a given that
attributes which can be assigned to or used to describe mankind, can be equally
(or even similarly) ascribed to God. Take good and evil for example: goodness
is biblically defined as that which is of God; it is intrinsic to his being and
is revealed most prominently through his provision of Old Testament Law, the
keeping of which is the very definition of goodness and the neglecting of which
(on even the slightest of grounds), is the epitome of evil. A similar argument
could be laid down concerning God's omniscience (i.e. knowledge). It even
eludes the idea a lot more even to assume the concept of "nothing" or negation
was created, therefore it is seemingly impossible to conceive such a notion
where it draws down to a paradox. To assume that knowledge in Plato's sense as
described to be a belief that's true, it then means that before everything came
into being, it was all to be conceived as total imagination by God until the
set of truth. One verse "God created man in his own Image" states that God
imagined the form of humans, taking image as a root word for imagine,
mistakenly understood as man to look like God. verse from Genesis 1 is in the
Hebrew Scriptures. The word 'Image' is translated from two hebrew words
'demuth' - likeness or similitude and 'tselem'- an obscure word which
translates as image or idol. It is difficult, therefore to make a case for the
author's reading of this verse to mean 'God imagined the form of humans' The
above definitions of omniscience cover what is called "propositional knowledge"
("knowing that"), as opposed to "experiential knowledge" ("knowing how"). That
some entity is omniscient in the sense of possessing all possible propositional
knowledge does not imply that it also possesses all possible experiential
knowledge. Opinions differ as to whether the propositionally omniscient God of
the theists is able to possess all experiential knowledge as well. But it seems
at least obvious that a divine infinite being conceived of as necessary
infinitely knowledgeable would also know "how", for example, a finite person
dying feels like as He [God would have access to all knowledge including the
obvious experiences of the dying human. There is a third type of knowledge:
"practical" or "procedural knowledge" ("knowing how to do"). If omniscience is
taken to be "all" knowledge then all knowledge of all types would be fully
known and comprehended. The omniscience paradox of creating information and
knowledge. The Omniscience Paradox can be defined by these questions, Hence,
What is GOD without existence? This question is interesting when you consider
other religious beliefs or GOD concepts such as Pantheism, or metaphysical
naturalism to where essentially existence itself and its rules and laws in
their totality are considered GOD, or a belief over having a personal GOD to
which would be slave to require existence and its rules just as much as
anything else in and of existence would be. It is here where it can be argued
that it's impossible to get a higher or maximum concept of God since existence,
as an entity itself, would be the totality of causality, every force to cause,
every effect from cause, everything in and of existence, every governing rule
or law, every property and attribute, and the very necessity and essence value
of all there is, was, could be, or ever will be. Existence itself would thus be
the sum infinite total of information and expression of. Under this context,
it's understood that conscious entities can not exist without cause, or
represent first cause (see also ). ""The uncreate, the unoriginate, the
immortal, the boundless, the eternal, the immaterial, the good, the creative,
the just, the enlightening, the unchangeable, the passionless, the
uncircumscribed, the uncontained, the unlimited, the indefinable, the
invisible, the inconceivable, the wanting nothing, the having absolute power
and authority, the life-giving, the almighty, the infinitely powerful, the
sanctifying and communicating, the containing and sustaining all things, and
the providing for all all these and the like He possesses by His nature. They
are not received from any other source; on the contrary, it is His nature that
communicates all good to His own creatures in accordance with the capacity of
each."" ""And yet again, there is His knowing of all things by a simple act of
knowing. And there is His distinctly seeing with His divine, all-seeing, and
immaterial eye all things at once"" These eight attributes have been defended
by many theologians and philosophers such as Richard Swinburn, William Craig
and Donald Wacome Though as defended by those above, it's often questioned by
others These very questions seem to show a deeper paradox, and defy the very
attributes given to such a concept of a GOD. Omniscient Solipsism from a
designer's perspective I =: reference to the designer, and to all the
information that gives "I" an Identity, or things existence, and value. In this
regard, we see can see how one might try and argue how such an omniscient
entity's creative actions might be argued as actualizing its omniscience to
instantiate a reality that is distinct from this entity's self as generated
properties. Or in Panentheism terms, as projected or imagined entities within
its own mind. In this case, all possibly created entities are said to be
literally a part of the omniscient being's own mind, and thus making all things
argued to be other than itself as self-imagined and projected non-entities.
Thus this being's creative action and self-limitation makes reality and
individualism impossible as the very act of creation is the action of itself,
or just of its own imagination. This again however would defy omniscience, and
would again claim the creation of new information, even if imagined, from a
position of boundless and limitless omniscience, or a position of already
infinitely knowing everything there could ever be known. Thus again the Paradox
shows omniscience to be a self-refuting argument as an attribute or property of
such a proposed omniscient entity. It's seemingly impossible to reconcile
omniscience as an attribute of a being without becoming a self-defying victim
to its own attribute(s). Omniscience vs free will. A question arises : an
omniscient entity knows everything even about his/her/its own decisions in the
future, does it therefore forbid any free will to that entity ? "See :
Determinism, Freewill and argument from free will" Anterograde omniscience.
Anterograde omniscience is the type of omniscience used to incorporate complete
knowledge of the future into God. A common objection towards free-will is the
fact that God knows the future, and what is already known is not considered
part of free-will, thus is considered predestination. Such objections however
are very controversial and have been refuted by proponents of Divine
Omniscience. The alleged paradox arises from a misunderstanding of Divine
knowledge. The common misconception is that God predicts the future. This
however is a false assumption. The Divine Being who is Eternal does not predict
human actions but rather post-dicts them from the future. As such human free
will is actualized without any paradoxes. If the future was given the
definition of Physics, it can be drawn down to this. The past is something
that's known, the future is something that is not known but may have an
infinite series of possible branched time-lines and the present is the
eliminator of possibilities. God knowing the future does not determine it as
his knowledge is not a deterministic process emanating from the past but rather
a knowledge that exists in the present and future actualized by human free
action. The future exists as a web of possibilities whose outcome is known by
the Omniscient Being but not predictively from the past, but rather post-
dictively from the present and future. The mistake that is often made here is
to confuse the human being's understanding of his actions and of physical
phenomena with the knowledge possessed by the Diving Being. The two are not the
same and once this is understood, all seeming claims of paradox are resolved.
Another possible response is to state that God knows the future but does not
influence it. One may posit that God knows all possible future events, meaning
that he would see an infinite number of timelines laid out on a plane, and such
time lines would still remain to exist even if not chosen. Such a God would
know every possible way of how something was going to be. He would know all the
mathematical probabilities for example of obtaining event A and would also know
if a free agent like a human being would cause A to happen. By virtue of self-
control God allows humans to shape and morph their lives on their own accord.
This way any seeming paradoxes are resolved as one can have a world with an
Omnipotent, Omniscient and Free God, while simultaneously actualizing the
possibility of free agency within the created order such as that seen in human
beings. The preceding explanation in fact contradicts omniscience. The event(s)
he foresaw must happen by the very nature of him being all knowing. If his
knowledge isn't deterministic it would be possible for humans to behave in a
manner he didn't foresee but doing so would go outside the realm(s) of his
knowledge which is presupposed to be infinite. And if one wants to appeal the
mysterious nature of God and his ways being above ours, it begs the question as
to why anyone is saying anything about him begin with. Non-theological uses.
Game theory studies omniscience; in the context of a game players can be
omniscient. The field of literary analysis and criticism can discuss
omniscience in the point of view of a narrator. An omniscient narrator, almost
always a third-person narrator, can reveal insights into characters and
settings that would not be otherwise apparent from the events of the story and
which no single character could be aware of. A collection of surveillance
techniques which together contribute to much disparate knowledge about the
movements, actions, conversation, appearance, etc. of an individual (or
organisation) is sometimes called omniscient technology. The word "omniscient"
characterizes a fictional character in the Devin Townsend album "Ziltoid the
Omniscient". Theological representations. If "N" is true, then nobody knows
that "N" is true; and if "N" is false, then it is not the case that nobody
knows that "N" is true, which means that somebody knows that "N" is true. And
if somebody knows that "N" is true, then "N" is true; therefore, "N" is true in
any case. But if "N" is true in any case, then it is logically true and nobody
knows it. What is more, the logically true "N" is not only not known to be true
but also impossibly known to be true, for what is logically true is impossibly
false. Sentence "N" is a logical counter-example to the unqualified definition
of "omniscience", but it does not undermine the qualified one. If "B" is true,
then God (or any other person) does not believe that "B" is true and thus
doesn't know that "B" is true. Therefore, if "B" is true, then there is a truth
(viz. ""B" is true") which God doesn't know. And if "B" is not true (= false),
then God falsely believes that "B" is true. But to believe the falsity that "B"
is true is to believe the truth that "B" is not true. Therefore, if "B" is not
true, then there is a truth (viz. ""B" is not true") which God doesn't know.
So, in any case there is a truth that God does not and cannot know, for
knowledge implies true belief.
