Omnipotence Omnipotence (from : "all ") is unlimited power. Monotheistic
religions generally attribute omnipotence to only the deity of whichever faith
is being addressed. In the monotheistic philosophies of Abrahamic religions,
omnipotence is often listed as one of a deity's characteristics among many,
including omniscience, omnipresence, and omnibenevolence. Meanings. Under many
philosophical definitions of the term "deity", senses 2, 3 and 4 can be shown
to be equivalent. However, on all understandings of omnipotence, it is
generally held that a deity is able to intervene in the world by superseding
the laws of physics, since they are not part of its nature, but the principles
on which it has created the physical world. However many modern scholars (such
as John Polkinghorne) hold that it is part of a deity's nature to be consistent
and that it would be inconsistent for a deity to go against its own laws unless
there were an overwhelming reason to do so. The word "Omnipotence" derives from
the Latin term "Omni Potens", meaning "All-Powerful" instead of "Infinite
Power" implied by its English counterpart. The term could be applied to both
deities and Roman Emperors. Being the one with "All the power", it was not
uncommon for nobles to attempt to prove their Emperor's "Omni Potens" to the
people, by demonstrating his effectiveness at leading the Empire. Scholastic
definition. Thomas Aquinas acknowledged difficulty in comprehending a deity's
power. Aquinas wrote that while "all confess that God is omnipotent...it seems
difficult to explain in what God's omnipotence precisely consists." In the
scholastic understanding, omnipotence is generally understood to be compatible
with certain limitations or restrictions upon a deity's power, as opposed to
implying infinite number of contingent kinds of abilities: there are certain
things, however trivial or absurd, that even an omnipotent deity cannot do.
Medieval theologians drew attention to some of the fairly trivial examples of
restrictions upon the power of a deity. So, the statement "a deity can do
anything" is only sensible with an assumed suppressed clause, "that implies the
perfection of true power." This standard scholastic answer allows that
creaturely acts such as walking can be performed by humans but not by a deity.
Rather than an advantage in power, human acts such as walking, sitting or
giving birth were possible only because of a "defect" in human power. The
ability to 'sin', for example, is not a power but a defect or an infirmity. In
response to questions of a deity performing impossibilities (such as making
square circles) Aquinas says that "Nothing which implies contradiction falls
under the omnipotence of God." In psychology. Early Freudianism saw a feeling
of omnipotence as intrinsic to early childhood. 'As Freud and Ferenczi have
shown, the child lives in a sort of megalomania for a long period...the
"fiction of omnipotence"'. At birth. 'the baby "is" everything "as far as he
knows" - "all powerful"...every step he takes towards establishing his own
limits and boundaries will be painful because he'll have to lose this original
God-like feeling of omnipotence'. Freud considered that in a neurotic 'the
"omnipotence" which he ascribed to his thoughts and feelings...is a frank
acknowledgement of a relic of the old megalomania of infancy'. In some
narcissists, the 'period of primary narcissism which subjectively did not need
any objects and was entirely independent...may be retained or regressively
regained..."omnipotent" behavior'. D. W. Winnicott took a more positive view of
a belief in early omnipotence, seeing it as essential to the child's well-
being; and "good-enough" mothering as essential to enable the child to 'cope
with the immense shock of loss of omnipotence' - as opposed to whatever
'prematurely forces it out of its narcissistic universe'. Rejection or
limitation. Some monotheists reject the view that a deity is or could be
omnipotent, or take the view that, by choosing to create creatures with
freewill, a deity has chosen to limit divine omnipotence. In Conservative and
Reform Judaism, and some movements within Protestant Christianity, including
process theology and open theism, deities are said to act in the world through
persuasion, and not by coercion (for open theism, this is a matter of
choice—a deity could act miraculously, and perhaps on occasion does
so—while for process theism it is a matter of necessity—creatures have
inherent powers that a deity cannot, even in principle, override). Deities are
manifested in the world through inspiration and the creation of possibility,
not necessarily by miracles or violations of the laws of nature. The rejection
of omnipotence often follows from either philosophical or scriptural
considerations, discussed below. Philosophical grounds. Process theology
rejects unlimited omnipotence on a philosophical basis, arguing that
omnipotence as classically understood would be less than perfect, and is
therefore incompatible with the idea of a perfect deity. The idea is grounded
in Plato's oft-overlooked statement that "being is power." For example, though
someone might control a lump of jelly-pudding almost completely, the inability
of that pudding to stage any resistance renders that person's power rather
unimpressive. Power can only be said to be great if it is over something that
has defenses and its own agenda. If a deity's power is to be great, it must
therefore be over beings that have at least some of their own defenses and
agenda. Thus, if a deity does not have absolute power, it must therefore embody
some of the characteristics of power, and some of the characteristics of
persuasion. This view is known as dipolar theism. The most popular works
espousing this point are from Harold Kushner (in Judaism). The need for a
modified view of omnipotence was also articulated by Alfred North Whitehead in
the early 20th century and expanded upon by the aforementioned philosopher
Charles Hartshorne. Hartshorne proceeded within the context of the theological
system known as process theology. Scriptural grounds. In the Authorized King
James Version of the Bible, as well as several other versions, in Revelation
19:6 it is stated "...the Lord God omnipotent reigneth" (the original Greek
word is παντοκράτωρ, "all-mighty"). Although much of the narrative
of the Old Testament describes the Judeo-Christian God as interacting with
creation primarily through persuasion, and only occasionally through force.
However, it could further be argued that the ability to conflict with truth is
not an appropriate representation of accepted definitions of power, which
negates the assertion that a deity does not have infinite powers. Psalms 33:8-
9: Let all the earth fear the LORD: let all the inhabitants of the world stand
in awe of him. For he spoke, and it was done; he commanded, and it stood fast.
Genesis 17:1: And when Abram was ninety years old and nine, the LORD appeared
to Abram, and said unto him, I am the Almighty God; walk before me, and be thou
perfect. (The Hebrew word used here is "shadday") Jeremiah 32:27: Behold, I am
the LORD, the God of all flesh: is there any thing too hard for me? At his
command a storm arose and covered the sea. (Psalm 107:25) Several parts of the
New Testament claim Jesus to be one with the Father, who is omnipotent, and
others show Jesus to have some separation from the Father and even self-imposed
limitations on his power. (Gospel of John) Paradoxes. Combining omnipotence
with omniscience can yield the difficulty of whether or not a deity can pose a
question to which the deity would not know the answer.  Uncertainty and other
views. All the above stated claims of power are each based on scriptual grounds
and upon empirical human perception. This perception is limited to our senses.
The power of a deity is related to its existence.There are however other ways
of perception like: reason, intuition, revelation, divine inspiration,
religious experience, mystical states, and historical testimony. According to
the Hindu philosophy the essence of God or Brahman can never be understood or
known since Brahman is beyond both existence and non-existence, transcending
and including time, causation and space, and thus can never be known in the
same material sense as one traditionally 'understands' a given concept or
object. So presuming there is a god-like entity consciently taking actions, we
cannot comprehend the limits of a deity's powers. Since the current laws of
physics are only known to be valid in this universe, it is possible that the
laws of physics are different in parallel universes, giving a God-like entity,
more power. If the number of universes is unlimited, then the power of a
certain God-like entity is also unlimited, since the laws of physics may be
different in other universes, and accordingly making this entity omnipotent.
Unfortunately concerning a multiverse there is a lack of empirical correlation.
To the extreme there are theories about realms beyond this multiverse (Nirvana,
Chaos, Nothingness). Also trying to develop a theory to explain, assign or
reject omnipotence on grounds of logic has little merit, since being omnipotent
would mean the omnipotent being is above logic. A view supported by René
Descartes He issues this idea in his Meditations on First Philosophy. Allowing
assumption that a deity exists, further debate may be provoked that said deity
is consciously taking actions. It could be concluded from an emanationism point
of view, that all actions and creations by a deity are simply flows of divine
energy (the flowing Tao in conjunction with qi is often seen as a river; Dharma
(Buddhism) the law of nature discovered by Buddha has no beginning or end.)
Pantheism and/or panentheism sees the universe/multiverse as 'the body of God',
making 'God' everybody and everything. So if one does something, actually 'God'
is doing it. We are 'God's' means according to this view. In the Taoist
religious or philosophical tradition, the Tao is in some ways equivalent to a
deity or the logos. The Tao is understood to have inexhaustible power, yet that
power is simply another aspect of its weakness.
