Four Marks of the Church The Four Marks of the Church is a term describing four
specific adjectives—"one", "holy", "catholic" and "apostolic"—indicating
four major distinctive marks or distinguishing characteristics of the Christian
Church. The belief that the Church is characterized by these four particular
"marks" was first expressed by the First Council of Constantinople in the year
381 in its revision of the Nicene Creed, in which it included the statement:
""believe in one, holy, catholic, and apostolic Church."" In Protestant
theology these are sometimes called the attributes of the Church. They are
still professed today in the Nicene Creed, recited in the liturgy of Catholic,
Orthodox, Anglican, and many Protestant churches' worship services. While
specific "doctrines", based on both tradition and different interpretations of
the Bible, distinguish one Church or denomination from another, largely
explaining why there are so many different ones, the Four Marks, when defined
the same way, represent a summary of what historically have been considered the
most important affirmations of the Christian faith. History. The ideas behind
the Four Marks have been in the Church since early Christianity. Allusions to
them can be found in the writings of 2nd century early Church Father and
bishop, Ignatius of Antioch. They were not established in doctrine until the
First Council of Constantinople in 381 as an antidote to certain heresies that
had crept into the Church in its early history. There the Council elaborated on
the Nicene Creed, established by the First Council of Nicea 56 years before by
adding to the end a section that included the affirmation: "believe in one,
holy, catholic, and apostolic Church." The phrase has remained in versions of
the Nicene Creed to this day. In some languages, for example, German, the Latin
"catholica" was substituted by "Christian" before the Reformation, though this
was an anomaly and continues in use by some Protestant churches today. Hence,
"holy "catholic"" becomes "holy "Christian"." Roman Catholics believe the title
"one, holy, catholic and apostolic Church" only to be applicable to the
Catholic Church, as they believe it was directly founded by Christ in the first
century. Further, they maintain that the Catholic Church, under the Pope as the
Bishop of Rome, is "the one, true Church of Christ" that does not include those
groups that have emerged from the Protestant Reformation. They are considered
by Roman Catholics to be "false" claimants. The Eastern Orthodox Church, in
disagreement with the Roman Catholic, regards itself as the historical and
organic continuation of the original Church founded by Christ and his apostles.
The Four Marks. According to the Book of the Acts of the Apostles, describing
the earliest days of the Church, the Apostolic Age, “They devoted themselves
to the apostles’ teaching and fellowship, to the breaking of bread and the
prayers." Since Catholic and Orthodox Christians consider their Churches to be
"the one, true Church of Christ" and Protestants to be "false" claimants, there
is no agreement among all Christians as to the exact definition of the
adjectives "one" and "catholic" in the Creed. One. "There is "one" Lord, "one"
faith, "one" baptism, "one" God and Father of all who is over all and through
all and in all."" "One" describes the unity of the body of Christ. These words
from the Creed speak of the followers of Jesus Christ as united in their belief
in one God, one Lord, Jesus Christ. The Church is one because as the Church's
members we are joined together by Jesus" He prays for Christians to have unity,
saying this unity will provide the most compelling evidence to the world that
he is the Savior of the world. Holy. The word "holy" means "set apart for a
special purpose by and for God". It does not imply that the members of the
Church are free from sin, nor that the institution of the Church cannot sin.
Christ's Church is holy because it "is" Christ's Church: "...upon this rock I
will build my Church." Jesus founded his Church to continue his redemptive and
sanctifying work in the world. Christians understand the holiness of the
universal Church to derive from Christ's holiness. Catholic. Shortly before
convoking the council that inserted into the Nicene Creed the description of
the church as catholic, Emperor Theodosius I, issued the Edict of Thessalonica,
which limited the ecclesiastical application of this term to upholders of the
teaching of the First Council of Nicaea. These alone were authorized to use the
title of Catholic Christians, while others were ordered to be called heretics.
The word "catholic" means "universal" according to most Western
interpretations, pronouncing the universality of Christ's church. It refers to
the wholeness and totality of all true believers in Jesus as the Christ. The
Church as the Body of Christ is not limited to a time, place, race or culture.
Protestants believe that it encompasses every Christian of any denomination,
even though they each hold to certain distinctive doctrines, beliefs,
practices, and social views. The phrase "all nations" in the above quote of the
Great Commission implies universality, making Christ's Church on Earth open to
all: all classes, all genders, all nationalities. Apostolic. This describes its
origin and beliefs as rooted in the teachings of the Apostles of Jesus (cf. the
1913 Webster's Dictionary). All Christians understand "apostolic" to mean that
there is continuity in the church's teachings from the apostles throughout
history, not just in the first century. The Eastern Orthodox Church and the
Roman Catholic Church also claim that each of their respective Churches alone
is the true Church, although they believe that both Churches have "Apostolic
Succession" of the priesthood. They, as well as the churches of Oriental
Orthodoxy and the Church of the East, also believe that their bishops derive
their authority through a direct line of laying on of hands from the apostles.
Protestantism, on the other hand, holds that apostolic continuity is preserved
through the written word: as Milne put it, "A church is apostolic as it
recognizes in practice the supreme authority of the apostolic scriptures."
