Organizational structure of Jehovah's Witnesses Jehovah's Witnesses are
organized in a hierarchical arrangement they call a "theocracy", which they
believe is an earthly expression of God's heavenly organization. Based in the
Watch Tower Society's Brooklyn, New York headquarters, the organization is
headed by the Governing Body of Jehovah's Witnesses, with members of the Body
and "helpers" organized into six committees responsible for various
administrative functions within the global Witness community, including
publication, assembly programs and evangelizing activity. The Governing Body
and its committees supervise operations of thirty "zones", with nearly one
hundred "branch offices" worldwide. Each branch office oversees activities of
Jehovah's Witnesses in a particular country or region, and may include
facilities for the publication and distribution of Watch Tower Society
literature. Directly appointed by the Governing Body, branch committees make
local appointments and perform other administrative functions for
congregations, which are organized within "circuits" and "districts". The
Governing Body directly appoints "traveling overseers" as its representatives
to supervise activities at various levels—"circuit overseers" visit circuits
of about twenty congregations; "district overseers" work with the circuit
overseers of a number of adjoining circuits; "zone overseers" visit groups of
branch offices in a particular zone and report back to the Governing Body. Each
congregation is served by a group of locally recommended, branch-appointed male
"elders" and "ministerial servants". Elders take responsibility for
congregational governance, pastoral work, setting meeting times, selecting
speakers and conducting meetings, directing the public preaching work, and
creating "judicial committees" to investigate and decide disciplinary action
for cases that are seen as breaching scriptural laws. Ministerial servants
fulfill clerical and attendant duties, but may also teach and conduct meetings.
Governing Body. The organization is directed by the Governing Body, based in
the Watchtower Society's Brooklyn, New York headquarters—an all-male group
that varies in size, but since December 2010 has comprised seven
members,Schroeder died March 8, 2006 ("The Watchtower", September 15, 2006,
page 31)Sydlik died April 18, 2006 ("The Watchtower", January 1, 2007, page
8)Barber died April 8, 2007 ("The Watchtower", October 15, 2007, page 31)Jaracz
died June 9, 2010 ("The Watchtower", November 15, 2010, page 23)Barr died
December 4, 2010 ("The Watchtower", May 15, 2011, page 6) each of whom claims
to be of the "anointed" class with a hope of heavenly life (whereas most
Jehovah's Witnesses hope to be resurrected in an earthly paradise). There are
no elections for membership; new members are selected by the existing body.
Each of its members serves as chairman, with the position rotating among
members alphabetically each year. Until late 2012, the Governing Body described
itself as the representative and "spokesman" of God's "faithful and discreet
slave class" (approximately 10,000 Jehovah's Witnesses who profess to be
"anointed"), providing "spiritual food" for Witnesses worldwide on behalf of
the "faithful and discreet slave class". In practice it sought neither advice
nor approval from other "anointed" Witnesses when formulating policies and
doctrines, or when producing material for publications and conventions. At the
2012 Annual Meeting of the Watch Tower Society, the "faithful and discreet
slave" was defined as referring to the Governing Body only. From 1944, Watch
Tower publications had made occasional references to a "governing body",
identifying it with the board of directors of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract
Society of Pennsylvania. In October 1971, four additional men joined the seven
members of the Society's board of directors on what became known as a separate,
expanded Governing Body. The Governing Body was then for the first time
formally defined, indicating that it provided the religion with direction,
guidance and regulation, although all doctrinal and publishing decisions
continued to be made by, or were subject to, the approval of the Society's
president. Organizational changes at the highest levels of the Watchtower
Society in 1976 significantly increased the powers and authority of the
Governing Body and reduced those of the Watch Tower Society president. The
Governing Body directs six committees made up of its full members and its
"helpers"; the six committees are responsible for various administrative
functions within the Witness community, including personnel, publishing,
evangelizing activity, school and assembly programs, writing, and coordination.
The full Body directly appoints all zone, district and circuit overseers,
collectively referred to as "traveling overseers", and also appoints branch
office committee members. Only branch committeemen and traveling overseers are
referred to as "representatives of the Governing Body". In the last decade, the
Governing Body has reiterated its overall oversight role but has delegated
other Witnesses, typically branch committee members, to serve as corporate
executives and directors of Watch Tower and other incorporated entities. Branch
offices. Jehovah's Witnesses operate 98 branch offices worldwide, grouped into
thirty global "zones", each under the oversight of a "zone overseer" who visits
each of his assigned branches every few years, auditing operations, counseling
branch committeemen, department heads, and missionaries, and reporting back to
the Governing Body. Each branch office is referred to as Bethel. The United
States branch office, spread across three New York State locations with a staff
of more than 5000, also serves as the international headquarters. Branch
offices, operated by Witness volunteers known as "Bethel families", produce and
distribute Bible-based literature and communicate with congregations within
their jurisdiction. Full-time staff at branch offices take a vow of poverty and
are considered members of a religious order. Each branch is overseen by a
committee of three or more elders, which is appointed by the Governing Body. A
Service Department in each branch corresponds with congregations and supervises
the work of traveling overseers. Branch offices may also have printing,
translation, legal and Hospital Information Services departments. Traveling
overseers. Jehovah's Witnesses use the term "traveling overseer" to refer to
either a zone, circuit or district overseer. All overseers are elders; zone,
district and circuit overseers are directly appointed by the Governing Body. A
branch may appoint any local elder as a "temporary" or "substitute" circuit
overseer; circuit overseers typically perform such substitute assignments for
several years before receiving a regular appointment. Additional training is
provided at their "School for Traveling Overseers", and ongoing pastoral care
is provided to them by typically elderly former traveling overseers. In 1995,
Witnesses reported that 4374 district and circuit overseers cared for 78,620
congregations, an average of about 18 congregations each. The majority of
traveling overseers are "circuit overseers"; they oversee circuits of about
twenty congregations, performing twice-yearly week-long visits with each.
During his visit, the circuit overseer delivers talks to the congregation and
meets with the elders, ministerial servants and pioneers. He typically works
with various members of the congregation in the house-to-house preaching work,
and may also conduct personal Bible studies and pastoral calls. "District
overseers" are appointed to oversee a number of circuits; his responsibilities
include spending a week with the circuit overseer of each circuit, and teaching
students of the Watch Tower Society's Bible School for Single Brothers.
District overseers have a large role in planning and presenting circuit
assemblies. A district overseer may also care for a small circuit, and a
circuit overseer may occasionally serve as a district overseer. Jehovah's
Witnesses are instructed to "participate in a joyful interchange of
encouragement" with traveling overseers, and to render them "double honor", a
biblical term they believe includes cooperation and hospitality. Traveling
overseers are generally members of a religious order who have taken a vow of
poverty; they are provided with vehicles, healthcare, and lodging, and their
expenses are reimbursed by the branch office. Congregations are encouraged to
contribute to a specific fund for that purpose. Congregations. Congregations
are usually based on geographical area or language spoken, and may have as few
as ten or as many as two hundred members. In cities with more than one
congregation, a "city overseer" may be appointed by the branch to take care of
issues that affect congregations citywide; his responsibilities are limited, as
the branch office usually deals directly with each congregation. Congregations
meet for religious services at Kingdom Halls, which may be shared by two or
more congregations. If a small group of Witnesses is isolated by geography or
language, it may have some or all of its meetings at a different time and place
to the rest of the congregation, under the supervision of that congregation's
body of elders. Branch offices record and recognize geographically isolated and
foreign-language groups. If a group intends to become a new congregation, the
area's circuit overseer submits an application to the branch office. Each
congregation is assigned a "territory"; members are requested to attend the
congregation of the territory in which they reside. Members also meet in
smaller "field service groups", often at private homes, prior to engaging in
organized door-to-door preaching. Each field service group has an appointed
"group overseer" (an elder) or "group servant" (a ministerial servant).
Witnesses are instructed to devote as much time as possible to preaching
activities ("witnessing" or "field service"), and to provide a monthly report
to their congregation summarizing their preaching activity. Jehovah's Witnesses
consider all baptized Witnesses to be ministers. Participants in organized
preaching activity are referred to as "publishers". The Watchtower Society only
counts as members those who are approved and active as publishers.
Congregations are governed by local "elders", who are assisted by "ministerial
servants". Elders and ministerial servants are appointed in each congregation
for handling various religious and administrative duties. Only male members may
serve in the capacity of elder or ministerial servant. In smaller
congregations, one man may handle multiple positions until another qualified
candidate is available. Baptized female members may perform some of their
duties only if a baptized male is unavailable; female Witnesses leading in
prayer or teaching are required to wear a head covering. Elders. Each
congregation has a body of elders, who are responsible for teaching the
congregation. Elders maintain general responsibility for congregational
governance, pastoral work, selecting speakers and conducting meetings,
directing the public preaching work and creating "judicial committees" to
investigate and decide disciplinary action for cases that are seen as breaching
scriptural laws. Ministerial servants. Ministerial servants, equivalent to
deacons, are appointed to assist the elders with routine work, including the
supply of literature to the congregation, accounts, maintaining the Kingdom
Hall, and operating audio equipment. They also present various parts at the
meetings. Ministerial servants are appointed in a similar manner to elders.
Baptized publishers. Baptized publishers are members who have been publicly
baptized following conversion to the faith. Jehovah's Witnesses do not practice
infant baptism, and previous baptisms performed by other denominations are not
considered valid. Prior to baptism, they are required to respond to a series of
questions to assess their suitability, and to make a personal dedication to
serve God. Baptisms are typically performed at assemblies and conventions. From
the moment of baptism, the organization officially considers the person to be
one of Jehovah's Witnesses, and an ordained minister. Regular publisher do not
have a specific quota of hours for preaching each month, although publishers
are requested to "set goals such as reaching national average of hours for
publishers". Publishers are typically each required to report at least one hour
per month to be counted as a 'regular publisher'. Only whole hours are
reported; incomplete hours are carried over to the next month. Elders may allow
certain publishers to count fifteen-minute increments if special circumstances
limit them, such as advancing age or limiting health. Publishers who fail to
report for one month are termed "irregular"; those who do not report for six
consecutive months are classed as "inactive". The terms "irregular" and
"inactive" are used to indicate members in need of 'spiritual assistance' from
the local congregation elders. Yearly reports of congregation activity are
compiled and published annually in a "Yearbook of Jehovah's Witnesses". Those
habitually 'irregular' or 'inactive' are usually restricted from serving in any
special capacity. Children. When accompanied by adults, children of baptized
Witnesses may participate in organized preaching without formally qualifying.
However, only those who are publishers are counted in the religion's official
membership statistics. Children of Witness parents may be asked to participate
in demonstrations at congregation meetings and assemblies, or as models and
actors in materials published by the Watch Tower Society. Unbaptized
publishers. "Unbaptized publishers" are persons who are not yet baptized, but
who have requested and been granted approval to join in the congregation's
formal ministry. They must demonstrate a basic knowledge of Jehovah's
Witnesses' doctrines to the elders, state their desire to be one of Jehovah's
Witnesses, and conform to the organization's understanding of moral standards.
Their congregation handbook states that a person hoping to qualify as an
unbaptized publisher should already be "an active associate of Jehovah's
Witnesses", that is, he or she should regularly attend congregation meetings.
Prior to 1988, unbaptized publishers were referred to as "approved associate",
"unbaptized associates" or "regularly associating". The terms were discontinued
due to the view that mere meeting attendance constitutes neither approval of
nor commitment to the faith. Students. The term "Bible student", sometimes
informally referred to as a "Bible study", is generally used by Witnesses to
refer to an individual who takes part in their religious study program (though
all witnesses consider themselves to be students of the Bible). The purpose of
the Bible study program is for the student to become baptized as one of
Jehovah's Witnesses. Students usually have their study with the same Witness
for the duration of the study program, often being the member who first
encounters them while preaching. Interested individuals initially contacted by
a member of the opposite sex are typically assigned a study conductor of their
own gender. A student typically meets with their study conductor once each week
at the student's home or other suitable location. The study program involves
consideration of a Bible-based publication that addresses Jehovah's Witnesses'
core beliefs. Each paragraph is read aloud by the conductor or student, and the
student answers pre-printed questions from the material in the paragraph.
Students are encouraged to look up cited scriptures in the Bible and include
them in their responses. Each Bible study is typically conducted with an
individual or family, though in some cases many people may take part. Students
are invited to attend and even comment at congregation meetings. If they attend
meetings regularly and are considered to demonstrate progress toward becoming
an unbaptized publisher, they may receive a copy of the monthly newsletter "Our
Kingdom Ministry", and may also qualify to join the congregation's "Theocratic
Ministry School". Students may also attend reading-improvement or literacy
classes in congregations where these additional courses are held. Associates.
Individuals who attend meetings of Jehovah's Witnesses but are not involved in
preaching are occasionally referred to in Watch Tower Society publications as
"associates" or as being "associated with the congregation". Attendance figures
for Witness events include "Jehovah's Witnesses and associates"; such
statistics may be cited for comparison of Witness numbers with membership
figures of other religions, but only those sharing in their ministry are
counted by Jehovah's Witnesses when reporting their official statistics.
Unbaptized individuals who attend meetings of Jehovah's Witnesses are not
subject to congregation discipline, though elders may privately warn members of
the congregation about individuals considered to constitute "an unusual threat
to the flock."
