Oriental Orthodoxy Oriental Orthodoxy is the faith of those Eastern Christian
Churches that recognize only the first three ecumenical councils — the First
Council of Nicaea, the First Council of Constantinople and the First Council of
Ephesus. They rejected the dogmatic definitions of the Council of Chalcedon
held in 451 AD in Chalcedon. Hence, these Oriental Orthodox Churches are also
called Old Oriental Churches, Miaphysite Churches, or the Non-Chalcedonian
Churches, known to Western Christianity and much of Eastern Orthodoxy as
Monophysite Churches (although the Oriental Orthodox themselves reject this
description as inaccurate, having rejected teachings of both Nestorius and
Eutyches). These churches are in full communion with each other but not with
the Eastern Orthodox Churches. Slow dialogue towards restoring communion began
in the mid-20th century. Despite the potentially confusing nomenclature
(Oriental meaning Eastern), Oriental Orthodox churches are distinct from those
that are collectively referred to as the Eastern Orthodox Church. The Oriental
Orthodox communion comprises six churches: Coptic Orthodox, Ethiopian Orthodox,
Eritrean Orthodox, Syriac Orthodox, Malankara Orthodox Syrian Church or Indian
Orthodox Church and Armenian Apostolic churches. These churches, while being in
communion with one another, are hierarchically independent. The Oriental
Orthodox Churches and the rest of the Church split over differences in
Christological terminology. The First Council of Nicaea (325) declared that
Jesus Christ is God, that is to say, "consubstantial" with the Father; and the
First Council of Ephesus (431) that Jesus, though divine as well as human, is
only one being (hypostasis). Twenty years after Ephesus, the Council of
Chalcedon declared that Jesus is one person in two complete natures, one human
and one divine. Those who opposed Chalcedon likened its doctrine to the
Nestorian heresy, condemned at Ephesus, that Christ was two distinct beings,
one divine (the Logos) and one human (Jesus). History. The schism between the
Oriental Orthodox and the rest of Christendom occurred in the 5th century. The
separation resulted in part from the refusal of Pope Dioscorus, Patriarch of
Alexandria and the other 13 Egyptian Bishops, to accept the Christological
dogmas promulgated by the Council of Chalcedon, which held that Jesus is in two
natures: one divine and one human. They would accept only "of or from two
natures" but not "in two natures." To the hierarchs who would lead the Oriental
Orthodox, the latter phrase was tantamount to accepting Nestorianism, which
expressed itself in a terminology incompatible with their understanding of
Christology. Nestorianism was understood as seeing Christ in two separate
natures, human and divine, each with different actions and experiences; in
contrast Cyril of Alexandria advocated the formula "one nature of the Incarnate
Word of God," stressing the unity of the Incarnation over all other
considerations. It is not entirely clear that Nestorius himself was a
Nestorian. The Oriental Orthodox churches were therefore often called
Monophysite, although they reject this label, as it is associated with
Eutychian Monophysitism; they prefer the term "Miaphysite" churches. Oriental
Orthodox Churches reject what they consider to be the heretical Monophysite
teachings of Apollinaris of Laodicea and Eutyches, the Dyophysite definition of
the Council of Chalcedon, and the Antiochene Christology of Theodore of
Mopsuestia, Nestorius of Constantinople, Theodoret of Cyrus, and Ibas of
Edessa. Christology, although important, was not the only reason for the
Alexandrian Church's refusal to accept the declarations of the Council of
Chalcedon; political, ecclesiastical and imperial issues were hotly debated
during that period. In the years following Chalcedon the patriarchs of
Constantinople intermittently remained in communion with the non-Chalcedonian
patriarchs of Alexandria, Antioch, Jerusalem, (see Henotikon) while Rome
remained out of communion with the latter and in unstable communion with
Constantinople. It was not until 518 that the new Byzantine Emperor, Justin I
(who accepted Chalcedon), demanded that the Church in the Roman Empire accept
the Council's decisions. Justin ordered the replacement of all non-Chalcedonian
bishops, including the patriarchs of Antioch and Alexandria. The extent of the
influence of the Bishop of Rome in this demand has been a matter of debate.
Justinian I also attempted to bring those monks who still rejected the decision
of the Council of Chalcedon into communion with the greater church. The exact
time of this event is unknown, but it is believed to have been between 535 and
548. St Abraham of Farshut was summoned to Constantinople and he chose to bring
with him four monks. Upon arrival, Justinian summoned them and informed them
that they would either accept the decision of the Council or lose their
positions. Abraham refused to entertain the idea. Theodora tried to persuade
Justinian to change his mind, seemingly to no avail. Abraham himself stated in
a letter to his monks that he preferred to remain in exile rather than
subscribe to a faith contrary to that of Athanasius. By the 20th century the
Chalcedonian schism was not seen with the same importance, and from several
meetings between the authorities of the Holy See and the Oriental Orthodoxy,
reconciling declarations emerged in the common statement of the Syriac
Patriarch (Mar Ignatius Zakka I Iwas) and the Pope (John Paul II) in 1984.
According to the canons of the Oriental Orthodox Churches, the four bishops of
Rome, Alexandria, Ephesus and Antioch were all given status as Patriarchs; in
other words, the ancient apostolic centres of Christianity, by the First
Council of Nicaea (predating the schism) — each of the four patriarchs was
responsible for those bishops and churches within his own area of the Universal
Church, (with the exception of the Patriarch of Jerusalem, who was independent
of the rest). Thus, the Bishop of Rome has always been held by the others to be
fully sovereign within his own area, as well as "First-Among-Equals", due to
the traditional belief that the Apostles Saint Peter and Saint Paul were
martyred in Rome. The technical reason for the schism was that the bishops of
Rome and Constantinople excommunicated the non-Chalcedonian bishops in 451 for
refusing to accept the "in two natures" teaching, thus declaring them to be out
of communion. Recent declarations indicate that the Holy See now regards itself
as being in a state of partial communion with the other patriarchates. The
highest office in Oriental Orthodoxy is that of Patriarch. There are Patriarchs
within the local Oriental Orthodox communities of the Armenian, Coptic,
Eritrean, Ethiopian, and Syrian Orthodox Churches. The title of Pope, as used
by Pope Shenouda III of Alexandria (Pope of the Coptic Orthodox Church) has the
meaning of 'Father' and is not a jurisdictional title. However, the Coptic Pope
holds the honor of being "first among equals", as the Ecumenical Patriarch does
among the Eastern Orthodox, and as such he functions as the president of pan-
jurisdictional gatherings of the Oriental Orthodox. Geographical distribution.
Oriental Orthodoxy is a dominant religion in Armenia (94%), the ethnically
Armenian Nagorno-Karabakh Republic (95%), and in Ethiopia (43%, the total
Christian population being 62%), especially in two regions in Ethiopia: Amhara
(82%) and Tigray (96%), as well as the chartered city of Addis Ababa (75%). It
is also one of two dominant religions in Eritrea (50%). It is a minority in
Egypt (9%), Sudan (3–5% out of the 15% of total Christians), Syria (2–3%
out of the 10% of total Christians), Lebanon (10% of the 40% of Christians in
Lebanon) and Kerala, India (7% out of the 20% of total Christians in Kerala).
In terms of total number of members, the Ethiopian Church is the largest of all
Oriental Orthodox Churches, and is second among all Orthodox Churches among
Eastern and Oriental Churches (exceeded in number only by the Russian Orthodox
Church). Internal disputes. There are numerous ongoing internal disputes within
the Oriental Orthodox Churches. These disputes result in lesser or greater
degrees of impaired communion. Armenian Apostolic. The least divisive of these
disputes is within the Armenian Apostolic Church, between the Catholicosate of
Etchmiadzin and the Catholicosate of the Great House of Cilicia. The division
of the two Catholicosates stemmed from frequent relocations of Church
headquarters due to political and military upheavals. The division between the
two Sees intensified during the Soviet period. By some Western Bishops and
clergy the Holy See of Etchmiadzin was seen as a captive Communist puppet.
Sympathizers of this established congregations independent of Etchmiadzin,
declaring loyalty instead to the See based in Antelias in Lebanon. The division
was formalized in 1956 when the Antelias (Cilician) See broke away from the
Echmiadzin See. Though recognising the supremacy of the Catholicos of All
Armenians, the Catholicos of Cilicia administers the clergy and dioceses
independently. The dispute, however, has not at all caused a breach in
communion between the two churches. Oriental Orthodox Indians. The next least
divisive dispute is among Indians who are Oriental Orthodox. This dispute is
between two jurisdictional bodies among Oriental Orthodox Indians: the Jacobite
Syrian Christian Church and the Malankara Orthodox Syrian Church. The former is
an archdiocese of the Syriac Orthodox Church. It experiences a certain degree
of autonomy, but is ultimately responsible to the Syriac Orthodox Patriarch of
Antioch. The latter, on the other hand, is entirely independent of the Syriac
Orthodox Church, rejecting any form of jurisdictional submission to the Syriac
Patriarch. Though the church was united for a brief period from 1958 to 1975.
In 1972, then Patriarch Ignatius Ya`qub III excommunicated the Indian
Catholicos Baselios Augen I, when the Malankara Orthodox Syrian Church
questioned the infamous patriarchal bull which denied the priesthood of St.
Thomas. The current Syriac Patriarch, Ignatius Zakka I Iwas, maintains this
excommunication. However, the Catholicos Baselios Augen I, or his successors,
never excommunicated Ignatius Ya`qub III in retribution nor removed the clause
that maintains Syrian Patriarchs Spiritual authority from its constitution.
Occasional confusions. Indo-Persian Architecture of a Malankara Orthodox Syrian
Church. It is a mix of Hindu and Persian Christian religious architecture]] --
> The Assyrian Church of the East is sometimes incorrectly described as an
Oriental Orthodox church, though its origins lie in disputes that predated the
Council of Chalcedon and it follows a different Christology from Oriental
Orthodoxy. The historical Church of the East was the church of Persia, and
declared itself separate from the state church of the Roman Empire in 424 –
27 years before Chalcedon. Theologically, the Church of the East was affiliated
with the dyophysite doctrine of Nestorianism, and thus rejected the First
Council of Ephesus, which declared Nestorianism heretical in 431. The
Christology of the Oriental Orthodox churches in fact developed as a reaction
to Nestorian Christology, which emphasizes the distinctness of the human and
divine natures of Christ. There are many overlapping ecclesiastical
jurisdictions in India, mostly with a Syriac liturgical heritage centered in
the state of Kerala. The autonomous Malankara Jacobite Syriac Orthodox Church,
which comes under the Syriac Orthodox Church is quite often confused with the
Malankara Orthodox Syrian Church as the latter uses a similar name.
