Original sin Original sin, also called ancestral sin, is, according to a
Christian theological doctrine, humanity's state of sin resulting from the fall
of man. This condition has been characterized in many ways, ranging from
something as insignificant as a slight deficiency, or a tendency toward sin yet
without collective guilt, referred to as a "sin nature", to something as
drastic as total depravity or automatic guilt of all humans through collective
guilt. The concept of "original sin" was first alluded to in the 2nd century by
Irenaeus, Bishop of Lyons in his controversy (written in Greek) with the
dualist Gnostics. Its scriptural foundation is based on the New Testament
teaching of Paul the Apostle ( and ). Tertullian, Cyprian, Ambrose and
Ambrosiaster considered that mankind shares in Adam's sin, transmitted by human
generation. Augustine's formulation of original sin was popular among
Reformers, such as Martin Luther and John Calvin who equated original sin with
concupiscence, affirming that it persisted even after baptism and completely
destroyed freedom. Within Roman Catholicism, the Jansenist movement, which the
Church then declared heretical, also maintained that original sin destroyed
freedom of will. The doctrine is not found in Judaism or in Islam. History of
the doctrine. The Apostolic Fathers and the Apologists mostly dealt with topics
other than original sin. The doctrine of original sin was first developed in
the 2nd-century Irenaeus, Bishop of Lyons's struggle against Gnosticism.
Irenaeus contrasted their doctrine with the view that the Fall was a step in
the wrong direction by Adam, with whom, Irenaeus believed, his descendants had
some solidarity or identity. Irenaeus believed that Adam's sin had grave
consequences for humanity, that it is the source of human sinfulness, mortality
and enslavement to sin, and that all human beings participate in his sin and
share his guilt. The Greek Fathers emphasized the cosmic dimension of the Fall,
namely that since Adam human beings are born into a fallen world, but held fast
to belief that man, though fallen, is free. They thus did not teach that human
beings are deprived of free will and involved in total depravity, which is one
understanding of original sin. During this period the doctrines of human
depravity and the inherently sinful nature human flesh were taught by Gnostics,
and orthodox Christian writers took great pains to counter them. Christian
Apologists insisted that God's future judgment of humanity implied humanity
must have the ability to live righteously. Augustine. Augustine of Hippo (354-
430) taught that Adam's sin is transmitted by concupiscence, resulting in
mankind becoming a "massa damnata" (mass of perdition, condemned crowd), with
much enfeebled, though not destroyed, freedom of will. When Adam sinned, human
nature was thenceforth transformed. Adam and Eve, via sexual reproduction,
recreated human nature. Their descendants now live in sin, in the form of
concupiscence, a term Augustine used in a metaphysical, not a psychological
sense. Augustine insisted that concupiscence was not "a being" but a "bad
quality", the privation of good or a wound. He admitted that sexual
concupiscence ("libido") might have been present in the perfect human nature in
paradise, and that only later it became disobedient to human will as a result
of the first couple's disobedience to God's will in the original sin. In
Augustine's view (termed "Realism"), all of humanity was really present in Adam
when he sinned, and therefore all have sinned. Original sin, according to
Augustine, consists of the guilt of Adam which all humans inherit. As sinners,
humans are utterly depraved in nature, lack the freedom to do good, and cannot
respond to the will of God without divine grace. Grace is irresistible, results
in conversion, and leads to perseverance. Augustine articulated his explanation
in reaction to Pelagianism, which insisted that humans have of themselves,
without the necessary help of God's grace, the ability to lead a morally good
life, and thus denied both the importance of baptism and the teaching that God
is the giver of all that is good. Pelagius claimed that the influence of Adam
on other humans was merely that of bad example. Augustine held that the effects
of Adam's sin are transmitted to his descendants not by example but by the very
fact of generation from that ancestor. A wounded nature comes to the soul and
body of the new person from his/her parents, who experience "libido" (or
"concupiscence"). Augustine's view was that human procreation was the way the
transmission was being effected. He did not blame, however, the sexual passion
itself, but the spiritual "concupiscence" present in human nature, soul and
body, even after baptismal regeneration. Augustine used Ciceronian Stoic
concept of passions, to interpret St. Paul's doctrine of universal sin and
redemption. In that view, also sexual desire itself as well as other bodily
passions were consequence of the original sin, in which pure affections were
wounded by vice and became disobedient to human reason and will. As long as
they carry a threat to the dominion of reason over the soul they constitute
moral evil, but since they do not presuppose consent, one cannot call them
sins. Mankind will be liberated from passions, and pure affections will be
restored only when all sin has been washed away and ended, that is in the
resurrection of the dead. Augustine believed that the only definitive
destinations of souls are heaven and hell. He concluded that unbaptized infants
go to hell as a consequence of original sin. In the later mediaeval period,
some theologians continued to hold Augustine's view, others held that
unbaptized infants suffered no pain at all: unaware of being deprived of the
beatific vision, they enjoyed a state of natural, not supernatural happiness.
Starting around 1300, unbaptized infants were often said to inhabit the "limbo
of infants". The "Catechism of the Catholic Church", 1261 declares: "As regards
children who have died without Baptism, the Church can only entrust them to the
mercy of God, as she does in her funeral rites for them. Indeed, the great
mercy of God who desires that all men should be saved, and Jesus' tenderness
toward children which caused him to say: 'Let the children come to me, do not
hinder them,' allow us to hope that there is a way of salvation for children
who have died without Baptism. All the more urgent is the Church's call not to
prevent little children coming to Christ through the gift of holy Baptism." But
the theory of Limbo, while it "never entered into the dogmatic definitions of
the Magisterium ... remains ... a possible theological hypothesis". Cassian. In
the works of John Cassian (ca. 360 – 435), "Conference" XIII recounts how the
wise monk Chaeremon, of whom he is writing, responded to puzzlement caused by
his own statement that "man even though he strive with all his might for a good
result, yet cannot become master of what is good unless he has acquired it
simply by the gift of Divine bounty and not by the efforts of his own toil"
(chapter 1). In chapter 11, Cassian presents Chaeremon as speaking of the cases
of Paul the persecutor and Matthew the publican as difficulties for those who
say "the beginning of free will is in our own power", and the cases of Zaccheus
and the good thief on the cross as difficulties for those who say "the
beginning of our free will is always due to the inspiration of the grace of
God", and as concluding: "These two then; viz., the grace of God and free will
seem opposed to each other, but really are in harmony, and we gather from the
system of goodness that we ought to have both alike, lest if we withdraw one of
them from man, we may seem to have broken the rule of the Church's faith: for
when God sees us inclined to will what is good, He meets, guides, and
strengthens us: for 'At the voice of thy cry, as soon as He shall hear, He will
answer thee'; and: 'Call upon Me', He says, 'in the day of tribulation and I
will deliver thee, and thou shalt glorify Me'. And again, if He finds that we
are unwilling or have grown cold, He stirs our hearts with salutary
exhortations, by which a good will is either renewed or formed in us." Cassian
did not accept the idea of total depravity, on which Martin Luther was to
insist. He taught that human nature is fallen or depraved, but not totally.
Augustine Casiday states that, at the same time, Cassian "baldly asserts that
God's grace, not human free will, is responsible for 'everything which pertains
to salvation' - even faith." Cassian pointed out that people still have moral
freedom and one has the option to choose to follow God. Colm Luibhéid says
that, according to Cassian, there are cases where the soul makes the first
little turn, but in Cassian's view, according to Casiday, any sparks of
goodwill that may exist, not "directly" caused by God, are totally inadequate
and only "direct" divine intervention ensures spiritual progress. and Lauren
Pristas says that "for Cassian, salvation is, from beginning to end, the effect
of God's grace." Church reaction. Opposition to Augustine's ideas about
original sin, which he had developed in reaction to Pelagianism, arose rapidly,
After a long and bitter struggle the general principles of Augustine's teaching
were confirmed within Western Christianity by many councils, especially the
Second Council of Orange in 529. However, while the Church condemned Pelagius,
it did not endorse Augustine entirely and, while Augustine's authority was
accepted, he was interpreted in the light of writers such as Cassian. Some of
the followers of Augustine identified original sin with concupiscence in the
psychological sense, but this identification was challenged by the 11th-century
Saint Anselm of Canterbury, who defined original sin as "privation of the
righteousness that every man ought to possess", thus separating it from
concupiscence. In the 12th century the identification of original sin with
concupiscence was supported by Peter Lombard and others, but was rejected by
the leading theologians in the next century, chief of whom was Thomas Aquinas.
He distinguished the supernatural gifts of Adam before the Fall from what was
merely natural, and said that it was the former that were lost, privileges that
enabled man to keep his inferior powers in submission to reason and directed to
his supernatural end. Even after the fall, man thus kept his natural abilities
of reason, will and passions. Rigorous Augustine-inspired views persisted among
the Franciscans, though the most prominent Franciscan theologians, such as Duns
Scotus and William of Ockham, eliminated the element of concupiscence.
Protestant reformation. Protestant Reformer John Calvin (1509-1564) developed a
systematic theology of Augustinian Protestantism by interpretation of Augustine
of Hippo's notion of original sin. Calvin believed that humans inherit Adamic
guilt and are in a state of sin from the moment of conception. This inherently
sinful nature (the basis for the Calvinistic doctrine of "total depravity")
results in a complete alienation from God and the total inability of humans to
achieve reconciliation with God based on their own abilities. Not only do
individuals inherit a sinful nature due to Adam's fall, but since he was the
federal head and representative of the human race, all whom he represented
inherit the guilt of his sin by imputation. Redemption by Jesus Christ is the
only remedy. John Calvin defined original sin in his "Institutes of the
Christian Religion" as follows: Council of Trent. The Council of Trent (1545-
1563), while not pronouncing on points disputed among Catholic theologians,
condemned the teaching that in baptism the whole of what belongs to the essence
of sin is not taken away, but is only cancelled or not imputed, and declared
the concupiscence that remains after baptism not truly and properly "sin" in
the baptized, but only to be called sin in the sense that it is of sin and
inclines to sin. In 1567, soon after the close of the Council of Trent, Pope
Pius V went beyond Trent by sanctioning Aquinas's distinction between nature
and supernature in Adam's state before the Fall, condemned the identification
of original sin with concupiscence, and approved the view that the unbaptized
could have right use of will. Christian doctrines. Catholicism. "Catechism of
the Catholic Church", 416-418 The Catholic Church teaches that every human
person born on this earth is made in the image of God. Within man "is both the
powerful surge toward the good because we are made in the image of God, and the
darker impulses toward evil because of the effects of Original Sin."
Furthermore, it explicitly denies that we inherit "guilt" from anyone,
maintaining that instead we inherit our fallen nature. In this it differs from
the Calvinism/Protestant position that each person actually inherits Adam's
guilt, and teaches instead that "original sin does not have the character of a
personal fault in any of Adam's descendants ... but the consequences for
nature, weakened and inclined to evil, persist in man". "In other words, human
beings do not bear any 'original guilt' from Adam and Eve's particular sin."
The Church has always held baptism to be "for the remission of sins", and, as
mentioned in "Catechism of the Catholic Church", 403, infants too have
traditionally been baptized, though not guilty of any actual personal sin. The
sin that through baptism was remitted for them could only be original sin, with
which they were connected by the very fact of being a human. The first
comprehensive theological explanation of this practice of baptizing infants,
guilty of no actual personal sin, was given by Saint Augustine of Hippo, not
all of whose ideas on original sin have been adopted by the Catholic Church.
Indeed the Church has condemned the interpretation of some of his ideas by
certain leaders of the Protestant Reformation. The "Catechism of the Catholic
Church" explains that in "yielding to the tempter, Adam and Eve committed a
"personal sin", but this sin affected "the human nature" that they would then
transmit in a "fallen state" … original sin is called "sin" only in an
analogical sense: it is a sin "contracted" and not "committed" — a state and
not an act" ("Catechism of the Catholic Church", 404). This "state of
deprivation of the original holiness and justice … transmitted to the
descendants of Adam along with human nature" ("Compendium of the Catechism of
the Catholic Church", 76) involves no personal responsibility or personal guilt
on their part (cf. "Catechism of the Catholic Church", 405). Personal
responsibility and guilt were Adam's, who because of his sin, was unable to
pass on to his descendants a human nature with the holiness with which it would
otherwise have been endowed, in this way implicating them in his sin. The
doctrine of original sin thus does not impute the sin of the father to his
children, but merely states that they inherit from him a "human nature deprived
of original holiness and justice", which is "transmitted by propagation to all
mankind" ("Catechism of the Catholic Church", 404). In the theology of the
Catholic Church, original sin is regarded as the general condition of
sinfulness, that is (the absence of holiness and perfect charity) into which
humans are born, distinct from the actual sins that a person commits. This
teaching explicitly states that "original sin does not have the character of a
personal fault in any of Adam's descendants". In other words, human beings do
not bear any "original guilt" from Adam's particular sin, which is his alone.
The prevailing view, also held in Eastern Orthodoxy, is that human beings bear
no guilt for the sin of Adam. The Catholic Church teaches: "By our first
parents' sin, the devil has acquired a certain domination over man, even though
"man remains free"." The Catholic doctrine of the Immaculate Conception of Mary
is that Mary was conceived free from original sin: "the most Blessed Virgin
Mary was, from the first moment of her conception, by a singular grace and
privilege of almighty God and by virtue of the merits of Jesus Christ, Savior
of the human race, preserved immune from all stain of original sin." The
doctrine sees her as an exception to the general rule that human beings are not
immune from the reality of original sin. Eastern Orthodoxy. The Eastern
Orthodox's version of "original sin" originates with the Devil, " for the devil
sinneth from the beginning. (1 John iii. 8)". They acknowledge that the
introduction of ancestral sin into the human race affected the subsequent
environment for mankind (see also traducianism). However, they never accepted
Augustine of Hippo's notions of original sin and hereditary guilt. Orthodox
Churches accept the teachings of John Cassian, as do Catholic Churches eastern
and western, in rejecting the doctrine of Total Depravity, by teaching that
human nature is "fallen", that is, depraved, but not totally. Augustine Casiday
states that Cassian "baldly asserts that God's grace, not human free will, is
responsible for 'everything which pertains to salvation' - even faith." Cassian
points out that people still have moral freedom and one has the option to
choose to follow God. Colm Luibhéid says that, according to Cassian, there are
cases where the soul makes the first little turn, while Augustine Casiday says
that, in Cassian's view, any sparks of goodwill that may exist, not "directly"
caused by God, are totally inadequate and only "direct" divine intervention
ensures spiritual progress. and Lauren Pristas says that "for Cassian,
salvation is, from beginning to end, the effect of God's grace." Eastern
orthodoxy accept the doctrine of ancestral sin. which indicates that "original
sin is hereditary. It did not remain only Adam and Eve's. As life passes from
them to all of their descendants, so does original sin " The Orthodox Church in
America makes clear the distinction between "fallen nature" and "fallen man"
and this is affirmed in the early teaching of the Church whose role it is to
act as the catalyst that leads to true or inner redemption. Every human person
born on this earth bears the image of God undistorted within themselves. In the
Orthodox Christian understanding, they explicitly deny that mankind inherited
"guilt" from anyone. Rather, they maintain that we inherit our fallen nature.
While humanity does bear the consequences of the original, or first, sin,
humanity does not bear the personal guilt associated with this sin. Adam and
Eve are guilty of their willful action; we bear the consequences, chief of
which is death." Methodist. The Methodist Church, founded by John Wesley,
upholds Article VII in the Articles of Religion in the "Book of Discipline of
the Methodist Church": Here is a direct comment on original sin by Wesley.
"“The Scripture does not, that I remember, anywhere say, in express words,
that the sin of Adam is imputed to his children; or, that the sins of believers
are imputed to Christ; or, that the righteousness of Christ is imputed to
believers: but the true meaning of these expressions is sufficiently found in
several places of Scripture.” “Yet since these express words and phrases,
of the imputation of Adam’s sin to us, of our sins to Christ, and of
Christ’s righteousness to us, are not plainly written in Scripture we should
not impose it on every Christian, to use these very expressions. Let every one
take his liberty, either of confining himself to strictly Scriptural language,
or manifesting his sense of these plain Scriptural doctrines, in words and
phrases of his own.” Wesley also stated that strictly speaking, nothing is
sin but a willful transgression of a known commandment of God: "One thing we
should all agree on is that all have sinned and come short of the glory of God,
and are in need of a Savior. I personally feel that the only Scriptural
definition of sin is; sin is the willful transgression of a known commandment
of God." Seventh-day Adventism. Seventh-day Adventists have not held to or been
comfortable with the Augustinian/Calvinistic understanding of original sin,
taught in terms of original guilt, but hold more to what could be termed the
"total depravity" tradition. According to Augustine and Calvin, mankind
inherits not only Adam's depraved nature but also the actual guilt of his
transgression, and Adventist look more toward the Wesleyan model. Early
Adventists Pioneers (such as George Storrs and Uriah Smith) tended to de-
emphasise the morally corrupt nature inherited from Adam, while stressing the
importance of actual, personal sins committed by the individual. They thought
of the "sinful nature" in terms of physical mortality rather than moral
depravity. Traditionally, Adventists look at sin in terms of willful
transgressions, and that Christ triumphed over sin. Adventism believe that
Christ is both our Substitute and our Example. They base their belief on texts
such as "Whosoever committeth sin transgresseth also the law: for sin is the
transgression of the law." (1 John 3:4) The authoritative Adventist position is
outlined by reference to publicly available theological positions available on
the General Conference of the Seventh-day Adventist Church’s official website
on theological doctrine, the Biblical Research Institute. One such article
commenting on original sin can be found here. Other doctrinal views. American
Restoration Movement. In Campbellism, the Restoration Movement Churches'
concept of "original sin" is that Adam and Eve brought sin into the world
through disobedience. Adam's sin made mankind predisposed towards sin so that
every person sins. However, mankind does not share Adam's guilt nor are they
held accountable for his sin. They support the concept that individually, men
and women are held responsible for their own personal sins. They use Ezekiel 18
to reference verses 1-4, where God's people are rebuked for suggesting that
children would die/suffer for their father's sins. Verses 19 and 20, where
guilt is not shared between a son and his father, and verses 30 and 31 where
God's people are judged according to their own ways. A common belief among
Campbellites is that Adam and Eve sinned as a result of their making a wrong
free-will choice when they were tempted by the serpent, and as a result brought
"the knowledge of good and evil" upon themselves and all people after them.
Although man still retains his free-will it is this "knowledge of good and
evil" that makes it difficult for him to live without committing sin. Latter-
day Saints. Therefore, Mormons do not believe that children come into the world
with any guilt, because Jesus Christ atoned for "original guilt". Therefore,
the sins of the parents cannot be answered upon the heads of their children. It
is also considered that children are incapable of committing sin and therefore
have no need of baptism until age eight when they can begin to learn to discern
right from wrong and are thus capable of sin and can be held accountable.
Little children who die before reaching the age of accountability (even though
they are unbaptized) are automatic heirs of salvation and are saved in the
Celestial Kingdom of God through the atonement of Jesus Christ. Furthermore
those who die "without the law" are under no condemnation nor accountability.
Those incapable of understanding right from wrong, such as the mentally
handicapped, are also saved under the atonement of Jesus Christ without
baptism. Any adults who die without a knowledge of God's commands (Law) do need
baptism, which they can receive in the spiritual realm by accepting the Latter-
day Saint vicarious practice of Baptism for the dead. Swedenborgianism. In
Swedenborgianism, exegesis of the first 11 chapters of Genesis from "The First
Church", has a view that Adam is not an individual person. Rather, he is a
symbolic representation of the "Most Ancient Church", having a more direct
contact with heaven than all other successive churches. Swedenborg's view of
original sin is referred to as "hereditary evil", which passes from generation
to generation. It cannot be completely abolished, but can be tempered when
someone reforms their own life, and are thus held accountable only for their
own sins. Original sin and extraterrestrials. In an interview entitled "Aliens
Are My Brother", granted to L'Osservatore Romano, the Vatican newspaper, Father
José Gabriel Funes, director of the Vatican Observatory, stated: "In my
opinion this possibility (of life on other planets) exists"; "intelligent
beings, created by God may exist in outer space" and "some aliens could even be
free from original sin" concluding "there could be (other beings) who remained
in full friendship with their creator". The idea that on other planets beings
could exist in an unfallen state was explored by C. S. Lewis in his novel "Out
of the Silent Planet". And on 5 March 2009, Jesuit Brother Guy Consolmagno,
another astronomer working at the Vatican Observatory, told the BBC, in
relation to the search for Earth-like worlds about to be embarked upon by the
Kepler Space telescope, that "we Jesuits are actively involved in the search
for Earth-like planets. The idea that there could be other intelligent
creatures made by God in a relationship with God is not contrary to traditional
Judeo-Christian thought. The Bible has many references to, or descriptions of,
non-human intelligent beings; after all, that's what angels are. Our cousins on
other planets may even have their own salvation story – including other
examples of the incarnation of the second person of the Trinity. We are open to
whatever the Universe has for us." With regard to the attribution to "the
Vatican" of similar statements by individuals working for the Holy See,
official spokesman Father Federico Lombardi, also a Jesuit, published on 21
February 2009 a declaration that they must not be mistaken for statements of
the Holy See— they are only statements of this individual Jesuit priest.
Criticism. Historian Robin Lane Fox argues that the foundation of the doctrine
of "original sin", that was accepted by the Church, was based on a "mis-
translation" of Paul the Apostle's Epistle to the Romans () by Augustine, in
his "On the Grace of Christ, and on Original Sin".
