Orthodoxy The word orthodox, from Greek "orthos" ("right", "true", "straight")
+ "doxa" ("opinion" or "belief", related to "dokein", "to think"), is generally
used to mean the adherence to accepted norms, more specifically to creeds,
especially in religion. In the narrow sense the term means "conforming to the
Christian faith as represented in the creeds of the early Church". Orthodox
Churches in Slavic-language countries (Bulgaria, Russia, Serbia, Macedonia,
etc.) use a word derived from Old Church Slavonic, "Правосла́виѥ"
("pravosláviye") to mean orthodoxy. The word derives from the Slavonic roots
"право" ("právo", true, right) and "славить" ("slávit", to
praise, to glorify), in effect meaning "the right way to praise God". The
earliest recorded use of the term "orthodox" is in the Codex Iustinianus of
529-534, but "heterodoxy" was in use from the beginning of the first century of
Christianity. Orthodoxy is opposed to "heterodoxy" ("other teaching") or
"heresy". People who deviate from orthodoxy by professing a doctrine considered
to be false are called heretics, while those who, perhaps without professing
heretical beliefs, break from the perceived main body of believers are called
schismatics. The term employed sometimes depends on the aspect most in view: if
one is addressing corporate unity, the emphasis may be on schism; if one is
addressing doctrinal coherence, the emphasis may be on heresy. "Apostasy" is a
violation of orthodoxy that takes the form of complete abandonment of the
faith. A deviation lighter than heresy is commonly called error, in the sense
of not being grave enough to cause total estrangement, while yet seriously
affecting communion. Sometimes error is also used to cover both full heresies
and minor errors. The concept of orthodoxy is prevalent in many forms of
organized monotheism, but orthodox belief is not usually overly emphasized in
polytheistic or animist religions, in which there is often little or no concept
of dogma, and varied interpretations of doctrine and theology are tolerated and
sometimes even encouraged within certain contexts. Syncretism, for example,
plays a much wider role in non-monotheistic (and particularly, non-scriptural)
religion. The prevailing governing idea within polytheism is often orthopraxy
("right practice") rather than "right belief". Christianity. In classical
Christian usage, the term "orthodox" refers to the set of doctrines which were
believed by the early Christians. The Roman Emperor Constantine I initiated a
series of Ecumenical Councils, also known as the First seven Ecumenical
Councils, to try to formalize these doctrines. The most significant of these
early decisions was that between the Homoousian doctrine of Athanasius and
Eustathius (which became Trinitarianism) and the Heteroousian doctrine of Arius
and Eusebius (called Arianism). The Homoousian doctrine, which defined Jesus as
both God and man with the Hypostatic union of the 451 Council of Chalcedon, won
out in the Church and was referred to as "orthodoxy" in most Christian
contexts, since this was the viewpoint of the majority. (The minority Non-
Trinitarian Christians object to this terminology). Following the 1054 Great
Schism, both the Western and Eastern churches continued to consider themselves
uniquely "orthodox" and catholic. Over time the Western church gradually
identified with the "Catholic" label and people of Western Europe gradually
associated the "Orthodox" label with the Eastern church (in some languages the
"Catholic" label is not necessarily identified with the Western church). In
addition, there is a separate Oriental Orthodox communion, as well as other
smaller communions that are commonly classified as "Orthodox". Both the Eastern
Orthodox Church and Oriental Orthodoxy use (with a small difference in plural/
singular form of the verbs "we believe", "we confess", "we await") the original
form of the Nicene Creed developed at the First Council of Constantinople in
381, referred to as the Niceno-Constantinopolitan Creed. In contrast, the Roman
Catholic Church and the Protestant churches of western Christianity add the
phrases "God from God" and "and the Son" (see Filioque clause), and the
Armenian Apostolic Church has many more additions. The addition of "and the
Son" was (along with the Papal supremacy and some other questions) one of the
causes for the East–West Schism formalized in 1054 by simultaneous
proclamations of "Anathema" by the Bishop of Rome (Pope) in the West and the
leadership of the Orthodox Churches (Patriarch) in the East. Aphoristically
said, "The Orthodox Church is evangelical, but not Protestant. It’s orthodox,
but not Jewish. It’s catholic, but not Roman. It isn’t non-denominational
– it’s pre-denominational. It has believed, taught, preserved, defended and
died for the Faith of the Apostles since the day of Pentecost 2000 years ago."
Since the Second Vatican Council (1962-5), changes in the Roman Catholic Church
have led to a gradual "rapprochement" between Catholic Rome and Orthodoxy at
the official level. The institutions' simultaneous revocations of the anathemas
of 1054 were a gesture toward "restoring mutual trust" and a recognition that
there is "a vast area of common ground that the two sides share." Regarding
dogma, Orthodox often believe that Timothy Ware, "The Orthodox Church" (London:
Penguin, 1993), 314-315. For example, in 2008, Patriarch Alexi of All Russia
complained about the presence of Catholic clerics and missionaries in Russia,
noting, "If they consider Orthodoxy to have just as much the grace of God and
salvation as Catholicism, then what is the point of persistent attempts to
convert people to the other faith?" The Russian Church, for example, in a
gesture of good will, does not demand that Roman Catholics "receive
Chrismation" when they convert to Orthodoxy, but allows a simple profession of
faith ("though Anglican and other Protestants are always received by
Chrismation"). The legalism and political power that has shaped Catholicism, as
well as the total authority of the Pope, contrasts with the Orthodox Church,
who keep the doctrine that their Faith is "not of this world." The Orthodox
believe that among the original five Patriarchs and ancient Patriarchates
(i.e., Rome, Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch, and Jerusalem), a "primacy of
honor", not of supremacy, waits for Rome. To use an Orthodox apostolic term, if
the Pope were to return to the Church, he would become "first among equals". To
disassociate the "See of Rome" from this "equalisation," Pope Benedict XVI
recently dropped the title "Patriarch of the West," as he considered the
designation as an attempt to Orientalize Western ecclesiology (or adopt
Orthodox terms). Benedict still considers the five Sees, dating back to the
first millennium, to be "Sister Churches within a certain ecumenical context.
'Who do men say that the Son of man is?' And they said, 'Some say John the
Baptist, others say Elijah; and others Jeremiah or one of the prophets.' He
said to them, 'But who do you say that I am?' Simon Peter replied, 'You are the
Christ, the Son of the Living God.' and Jesus answered him, 'Blessed are you,
Simon Bar-Jonah! For flesh and blood has not revealed this to you, but my
Father Who is in Heaven. And I tell you, you are Peter, and on this rock I will
build my Church, and the powers of death shall not prevail against it. I will
give you the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and whatever you bind on earth
shall be bound in heaven, and whatever you loose on earth shall be loosed in
heaven.' In contrast, the Orthodox understand Christ's words as referring to
all apostles, and His promise as an inheritance to all who confess the same
belief. More specifically, they understand Jesus to be addressing Peter's faith
(his confession of belief) as being the Rock upon which His Church would be
built. This is allegedly shown by the fact that the original Greek uses the
feminine demonstrative pronoun when he says "upon this rock" (ταύτῃ τῇ
πέτρᾳ); whereas, grammatically, if Jesus had been referring to Peter, he
would have used the masculine. Therefore, in the Orthodox Church, Papal
supremacy and infallibility are considered to be human inventions, rather than
stemming from a declaration by Christ. Some Greek Catholics in Ukraine,
Romania, Lebanon, and Syria, worship according to the Byzantine rite, but
follow the primacy of the Pope. In the 17th and 18th Centuries, changes such as
nationalism and threats of attack forced many of these Eastern Catholic
Churches to accept being led by the politically-strong Roman Catholic Church,
who promised them aid if they would convert. National rulers sympathetic to
Catholicism often led this change. Most such churches follow liturgical
practices identical to those of the Orthodox Church. Today, the term "Western
Orthodox" is applied to groups of Orthodox Christians in the United Kingdom,
the United States and such western European countries as Denmark, Finland,
France, Germany and the Netherlands. With the consent of their bishops, they
use a Western rite, and often a Western calendar. This movement is similar to
that of Eastern Catholicism, though it is smaller and more recent, and not
organized along national lines. The term "Oriental Orthodoxy" is used to refer
to non-Chalcedonian eastern Christians. This is in contrast to members of the
Eastern Orthodox Church, who accept the Council of Chalcedon (See Ecumenical
Councils) and generally worship according to the Byzantine Rite. Those
identified as Oriental Orthodox have traditionally been referred to as
Monophysites. They are found in Egypt, Ethiopia, some parts of Syria, Iraq and
Iran, Armenia, and southern India in Kerala State. They accept only the first
three of the ecumenical councils. Since the early twentieth century, some
rapproachment has taken place between these and the Eastern Orthodox Churches,
particularly in Syria. Dialogue among the groups' representatives has resulted
in statements that their longstanding differences have been of phraseology all
along, and a simple misunderstanding by each side of what each church
represents. Eastern Orthodox leaders do not find this entirely satisfactory. In
addition, they hold that it is not within any (national) Church's competence to
use a General Holy Synod to bring about communion with a group, such as any of
the Oriental Orthodox Churches, that had been anathematized by the Church as a
whole. Such Eastern Orthodox Christians hold that it would take another Great
and Holy Council of every Eastern Orthodox bishop together to reverse the
Anathema. Needless to say, the convening of such a Council presents a
considerable obstacle. The longstanding Christian institutions described above
consider developments in Christianity since the nineteenth century to be
unorthodox in the strongest possible sense (or cults). They include within that
category Unitarians, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Mormons),
Jehovah's Witnesses, and some of the more radical forms of Liberal
Christianity. Each of the major ecclesiastical communities continues to
evaluate and grapple with issues that it believes are estrangements or
refinements of perceived orthodoxy. For example, the Roman See often issues
recommendations as to what worship practices it considers orthodox so as to
curb excesses or deficiencies by its prelates. Some evangelicals are pursuing
innovations that more conservative evangelicals consider unorthodox. The latter
refer to the changes as "neo-evangelical", "neo-pentecostal," or "fringe
Charismatic."
