Orthodox Judaism Orthodox Judaism is the approach to religious Judaism which
adheres to the interpretation and application of the laws and ethics of the
Torah as legislated in the Talmudic texts by the Sanhedrin ("Oral Torah") and
subsequently developed and applied by the later authorities known as the
"Gaonim", "Rishonim", and "Acharonim". Orthodox Jews are also called "observant
Jews"; Orthodoxy is known also as "Torah Judaism" or "traditional Judaism".
Orthodox Judaism generally refers to Modern Orthodox Judaism and Haredi Judaism
but can actually include a wide range of beliefs. As of 2001, approximately 13
percent of American Jews and 25 percent of Israeli Jews were Orthodox. Among
American synagogue members, 27 percent attended Orthodox synagogues. History.
Orthodoxy is not a single movement or school of thought. There is no single
rabbinic body to which all rabbis are expected to belong, or any one
organization representing member congregations. In the United States, there are
numerous Orthodox congregational organizations, such as Agudath Israel, the
Orthodox Union, and the National Council of Young Israel; none of which can
claim to represent a majority of all Orthodox congregations. The exact forms of
what later came to be called Judaism during the times of Moses or during the
eras of the "Mishnah" and Talmud cannot be known today, but Orthodox Jews
believe that contemporary Orthodox Judaism maintains the same basic philosophy
and legal framework that existed throughout Jewish history, whereas the other
denominations depart from it. Orthodox Judaism, as it exists today, is an
outgrowth that claims to extend from the time of Moses, to the time of the
"Mishnah" and Talmud, through the development of oral law and rabbinic
literature, until the present time. In response to The Age of Enlightenment,
Jewish Emancipation, and "Haskalah", elements within German Jewry sought to
reform Jewish belief and practice in the early 19th century. They sought to
modernize education in light of contemporary scholarship, they rejected claims
of absolute divine authorship of the Torah, declaring only those biblical laws
concerning 'ethics' to be binding, and stated that the rest of "halakha"
(Jewish law) need not be viewed as normative for Jews in wider society. (see
Reform Judaism). In reaction to the emergence of Reform Judaism, a group of
traditionalist German Jews emerged who supported some of the values of the
Haskalah but who wanted to defend a conservative, traditional interpretation of
Jewish law and tradition. This group was led by those who opposed the
establishnent of a new temple in Hamburg as reflected in the booklet "Ele
Divrei HaBerit". As a group of Reform Rabbis convened in Braunschweig, Rabbi
Jacob Ettlinger of Altona published a manifest in German and Hebrew "Shlomei
Emunei Yisrael" having 177 Rabbis signing on. at this time the first Orthodox
Jewish periodical was launched "Der Treue Zions Waechter" with the Hebrew
supplement "Shomer Zion HaNe'eman" [1845 - 1855. In later years it was Rav
Ettlinger's students Rabbi Samson Raphael Hirsch and Rabbi Azriel Hildesheimer
of Berlin who deepened the awareness and strength of Orthodox Jewry. Rabbi
Samson Raphael Hirsch commented in 1854 thatDan Cohn-Sherbok, "Judaism:
history, belief, and practice", Routledge, 2004, p.264 Hirsch held that Judaism
demands an application of Torah thought to the entire realm of human
experience—including the secular disciplines. His approach was termed the
"Torah im Derech Eretz" approach, or "neo-Orthodoxy." While insisting on strict
adherence to Jewish beliefs and practices, he held that Jews should attempt to
engage and influence the modern world, and encouraged those secular studies
compatible with Torah thought. This pattern of religious and secular
involvement has been evident at many times in Jewish history. Scholars believe
it was characteristic of the Jews in Babylon during the Amoraic and Geonic
periods, and likewise in early medieval Spain, shown by their engagement with
both Muslim and Christian society. It appeared as the traditional response to
cultural and scientific innovation. Some scholars believe that Modern Orthodoxy
arose from the religious and social realities of Western European Jewry. While
most Jews consider Modern Orthodoxy traditional today, some within the Orthodox
community groups to its right consider it of questionable validity. The neo-
Orthodox movement holds that Hirsch's views are not accurately followed by
Modern Orthodoxy. Torah im Derech Eretz and Torah Umadda "Relationship with
Torah im Derech Eretz" for a more extensive listing. In the 20th century, a
segment of the Orthodox population (notably as represented by the World Agudath
Israel movement formally established in 1912) disagreed with Modern Orthodoxy
and took a stricter approach. Such rabbis viewed innovations and modifications
within Jewish law and customs with extreme care and caution. Some observers and
scholars refer to this form of Judaism as "Haredi Judaism", or "Ultra-Orthodox
Judaism". The latter term is controversial, and some consider the label "ultra-
Orthodox" pejorative. Several media entities refrain from using the term
“ultra Orthodox”, including the Religion Newswriters Association; JTA, the
global Jewish news service; and the "Star-Ledger", New Jersey’s largest daily
newspaper, according the New Jersey Press Association. New Jersey attorney
Stephen E. Schwartz, Esq., convinced the "Star-Ledger" to become the first
mainstream newspaper to drop the term. Several local Jewish papers, including
"Jewish Week" in New York and "Jewish Exponent" in Philadelphia have also
dropped use of the term. According to Rabbi Shammai Engelmayer, spiritual
leader of Temple Israel Community Center in Cliffside Park and former executive
editor of "Jewish Week", this leaves “Orthodox” as “an umbrella term that
designates a very widely disparate group of people very loosely tied together
by some core beliefs.” The various approaches have proved resilient. Some
scholars estimate more Jewish men are studying in yeshivot (Talmudical schools)
and Kollelim (post-graduate Talmudical colleges for married (male) students)
than at any other time in history. In 1915 Yeshiva College (later Yeshiva
University) and its Rabbi Isaac Elchanan Theological Seminary was established
in New York, New York for training in an Orthodox milieu. A school branch was
established in Los Angeles, California. A number of other influential Orthodox
seminaries, mostly "Haredi", were established throughout the country, most
notably in New York, Baltimore, Maryland; and Chicago, Illinois. Beth Medrash
Govoha, the Haredi yeshiva in Lakewood, New Jersey is the largest Talmudic
academy in the United States, with a student body of over 5,000 students.
Diversity within Orthodox Judaism. Orthodox Judaism's central belief is that
Torah, including the Oral Law, was given directly from God to Moses and applies
in all times and places. "Haredi" Judaism asserts that it may no longer be
changed in any fashion. As a result, all Jews are required to live in
accordance with the Commandments and Jewish law. Since there is no one Orthodox
body, there is no one canonical statement of principles of faith. Rather, each
Orthodox group claims to be a non-exclusive heir to the received tradition of
Jewish theology, while still affirming a literal acceptance of Maimonides'
thirteen principles. Streams of Orthodoxy. The above differences are realised
in the various subgroups of Orthodoxy, which maintain significant social
differences, and slight differences in understanding Halakha. These groups,
broadly, comprise Modern Orthodox Judaism and Haredi Judaism, with most Hasidic
Jewish groups falling into the latter category. In practice. For guidance in
practical application of Jewish law, the majority of Orthodox Jews appeal to
the Shulchan Aruch ("Code of Jewish Law" composed in the 16th century by Rabbi
Joseph Caro) together with its surrounding commentaries. Thus, at a general
level, there is a large degree of uniformity amongst all Orthodox Jews.
Concerning the details, however, there is often variance: decisions may be
based on various of the standardized codes of Jewish Law that have been
developed over the centuries, as well as on the various "responsa". These codes
and responsa may differ from each other as regards detail (and reflecting the
above differences, on the weight assigned to various issues). By and large,
however, the differences result from the historic dispersal of the Jews and the
consequent development of differences among regions in their practices (see
minhag). Orthodox Judaism emphasizes practicing rules of Kashrut, Shabbat,
Family Purity, and Tefilah (Prayer). Externally, Orthodox Jews can often be
identified by their manner of dress and family lifestyle. Orthodox women will
traditionally dress modestly by keeping most of their skin covered.
Additionally, most married women will cover their hair, most commonly in the
form of a scarf, also in the form of hats, bandannas, or, sometimes, wigs.
Orthodox men traditionally wear a skullcap known as a "kipa" and often fringes
called "tzitzit". Ashkenazi "Haredi" men often grow beards, wear black hats and
suits, indoors and outdoors. Beliefs. Orthodox Judaism is composed of different
groups with intertwining beliefs, practices and theologies, although in their
core beliefs, all Orthodox movements share the same principles. Orthodoxy
collectively considers itself the only true heir to the Jewish tradition. The
Orthodox Jewish movements generally consider all non-Orthodox Jewish movements
to be unacceptable deviations from authentic Judaism; both because of other
denominations' doubt concerning the verbal revelation of Written and Oral
Torah, and because of their rejection of Halakhic precedent as binding. As
such, Orthodox groups characterise non-Orthodox forms of Judaism as heretical;
see the article on Relationships between Jewish religious movements. Orthodox
Judaism affirms monotheism, or the belief in one God. Among the in-depth
explanations of that belief are Maimonidean rationalism, Kabbalistic mysticism,
and Chassidic Philosophy (Chassidut). A few affirm self-limited omniscience
(the theology elucidated by Gersonides in "The Wars of the Lord".) Orthodox
Judaism maintains the historical understanding of Jewish identity. A Jew is
someone who was born to a Jewish mother, or who converts to Judaism in
accordance with Jewish law and tradition. Orthodoxy thus rejects patrilineal
descent as a means of establishing Jewish national identity. Similarly,
Orthodoxy strongly condemns intermarriage. Intermarriage is seen as a
deliberate rejection of Judaism, and an intermarried person is effectively cut
off from most of the Orthodox community. However, some Orthodox Jewish
organizations do reach out to intermarried Jews. Orthodox Judaism holds that
the words of the Torah, including both the Written Law (Pentateuch) and those
parts of the Oral Law which are "halacha leMoshe m'Sinai", were dictated by God
to Moses essentially as they exist today. The laws contained in the Written
Torah were given along with detailed explanations as how to apply and interpret
them, the Oral Law. Although Orthodox Jews believe that many elements of
current religious law were decreed or added as "fences" around the law by the
rabbis, all Orthodox Jews believe that there is an underlying core of Sinaitic
law and that this core of the religious laws Orthodox Jews know today is thus
directly derived from Sinai and directly reflects the Divine will. As such,
Orthodox Jews believe that one must be extremely careful in interpreting Jewish
law. Orthodox Judaism holds that, given Jewish law's Divine origin, no
underlying principle may be compromised in accounting for changing political,
social or economic conditions; in this sense, "creativity" and development in
Jewish law is limited. However, there is significant disagreement within
Orthodox Judaism, particularly between Haredi Judaism and Modern Orthodox
Judaism, about the extent and circumstances under which the proper application
of Halakha should be re-examined as a result of changing realities. As a
general rule, Haredi Jews believe that when at all possible the law should be
maintained as it was understood by their authorities at the haskalah, believing
that it had never changed. Modern Orthodox authorities are more willing to
assume that under scrupulous examination, identical principles may lead to
different applications in the context of modern life. To the Orthodox Jew,
halakha is a guide, God's Law, governing the structure of daily life from the
moment he or she wakes up to the moment he goes to sleep. It includes codes of
behaviour applicable to a broad range of circumstances (and many hypothetical
ones). There are though a number of meta-principles that guide the halakhic
process and in an instance of opposition between a specific halakha and a meta-
principle, the meta-principle often wins out. Examples of Halachic Meta-
Principles are: "Deracheha Darchei Noam"-the ways of Torah are pleasant, "Kavod
Habriyot"-basic respect for human beings, "Pikuach Nefesh"-the sanctity of
human life. Orthodox Judaism holds that on Mount Sinai the Written Law was
transmitted along with an Oral Law. The words of the Torah (Pentateuch) were
spoken to Moses by God; the laws contained in this Written Torah, the
"Mitzvot", were given along with detailed explanations in the oral tradition as
to how to apply and interpret them. Furthermore, the Oral law includes
principles designed to create new rules. The Oral law is held to be transmitted
with an extremely high degree of accuracy. Jewish theologians, who choose to
emphasize the more evolutionary nature of the Halacha point to a famous story
in the Talmud, where Moses is miraculously transported to the House of Study of
Rabbi Akiva and is clearly unable to follow the ensuing discussion. According
to Orthodox Judaism, Jewish law today is based on the commandments in the
Torah, as viewed through the discussions and debates contained in classical
rabbinic literature, especially the Mishnah and the Talmud. Orthodox Judaism
thus holds that the halakha represents the "will of God", either directly, or
as closely to directly as possible. The laws are from the word of God in the
Torah, using a set of rules also revealed by God to Moses on Mount Sinai, and
have been derived with the utmost accuracy and care, and thus the Oral Law is
considered to be no less the word of God. If some of the details of Jewish law
may have been lost over the millennia, they were reconstructed in accordance
with internally consistent rules; see The 13 rules by which Jewish law was
derived. In this world view, the Mishnaic and Talmudic rabbis are closer to the
Divine revelation; by corollary, one must be extremely conservative in changing
or adapting Jewish law. Furthermore, Orthodox Judaism holds that, given Jewish
law's Divine origin, no underlying principle may be compromised in accounting
for changing political, social or economic conditions; in this sense,
"creativity" and development in Jewish law is held to have been limited.
Orthodox Jews will also study the Talmud for its own sake; this is considered
to be the greatest mitzvah of all; see Torah study. Haredi and Modern Orthodox
Judaism vary somewhat in their view of the validity of Halakhic
reconsideration. It is held virtually as a principle of belief among many
Haredi Jews that halakhah never changes. Haredi Judaism thus views higher
criticism of the Talmud as inappropriate, and almost certainly heretical. At
the same time, many self-proclaimed Modern Orthodox Jews do not have a problem
with historical scholarship in this area. See the entry on historical analysis
of the Talmud. Some Modern Orthodox Jews are also somewhat more willing to
consider revisiting questions of Jewish law through Talmudic arguments.
Although in practice such instances are rare, they do exist. Notable examples
include acceptance of rules permitting farming during the Shmita year and
permitting the advanced religious education of women.
