PƒÅli Canon The PƒÅli Canon (Pali: "Tipitaka") is the standard collection of
scriptures in the Theravada Buddhist tradition, as preserved in the PƒÅli
language. It is the most complete extant early Buddhist canon. It was composed
in North India, and preserved orally until it was committed to writing during
the Fourth Buddhist Council in Sri Lanka in 29 BCE, approximately four hundred
and fifty four years after the death of ShƒÅkyamuni. First printing of the
whole Chinese Buddhist Canon was done by imperial order in China in CE 868. The
Vinaya Pitaka and the Sutta Pitaka are remarkably similar to the works of other
early Buddhist schools. The Abhidhamma Pitaka however is a strictly Theravada
collection, and has little in common with the Abhidhamma works recognized by
other Buddhist schools. The Canon in the tradition. The Canon is traditionally
described by the Theravada as the Word of the Buddha (Buddhavacana), though
this is obviously not intended in a literal sense, since it includes teachings
by disciples. The traditional TheravƒÅdin (MahavihƒÅrin) interpretation of the
Pali Canon is given in a series of commentaries covering nearly the whole
Canon, compiled by Buddhaghosa (fl. 4th‚Äì5th century CE) and later monks,
mainly on the basis of earlier materials now lost. Subcommentaries have been
written afterward, commenting further on the Canon and its commentaries. The
traditional TheravƒÅdin interpretation is summarized in Buddhaghosa's
Visuddhimagga. An official view is given by a spokesman for the Buddha Sasana
Council of Burma: the Canon contains everything needed to show the path to
nirvƒÅna; the commentaries and subcommentaries sometimes include much
speculative matter, but are faithful to its teachings and often give very
illuminating illustrations. In Sri Lanka and Thailand, "official" Buddhism has
in large part adopted the interpretations of Western scholars. Although the
Canon has existed in written form for two millennia, its earlier oral nature
has not been forgotten in actual Buddhist practice within the tradition:
memorization and recitation remain common. Among frequently recited texts are
the Paritta. Even lay people usually know at least a few short texts by heart
and recite them regularly; this is considered a form of meditation, at least if
one understands the meaning. Monks are of course expected to know quite a bit
more (see Dhammapada below for an example). A Burmese monk named Vicittasara
even learned the entire Canon by heart for the Sixth Council (again according
to the usual Theravada numbering). Recitation is in Pali as the ritual
language. The relation of the scriptures to Buddhism as it actually exists
among ordinary monks and lay people is, as with other major religious
traditions, problematical: the evidence suggests that only parts of the Canon
ever enjoyed wide currency, and that non-canonical works were sometimes very
much more widely used; the details varied from place to place. Dr. Rupert
Gethin suggests that the whole of Buddhist history may be regarded as a working
out of the implications of the early scriptures. Origins. According to a late
part of the Pali Canon, the Buddha taught the three pitakas. It is
traditionally believed by Theravadins that most of the Pali Canon originated
from the Buddha and his immediate disciples. According to the scriptures, a
council was held shortly after the Buddha's passing to collect and preserve his
teachings. It was recited orally from the 5th century BCE to the first century
BCE, when it was written down. The tradition holds that only a few later
additions were made.In Sri Lanka in the Alu Viharaya Temple the pitakas were
first written Much of the material in the Canon is not specifically
TheravƒÅdin, but is instead the collection of teachings that this school
preserved from the early, non-sectarian body of teachings. According to Peter
Harvey, it contains material which is at odds with later TheravƒÅdin orthodoxy.
He states that "the TheravƒÅdins, then, may have "added" texts to the Canon for
some time, but they do not appear to have tampered with what they already had
from an earlier period." A variety of factors suggest that the early Sri Lankan
Buddhists regarded canonical literature as such and transmitted it
conservatively. Attribution according to scholars. Scholars have both supported
and opposed the various existing views. Views concerning attribution to the
Buddha himself. Various scholars have voiced that some of the contents of the
Pali Canon (and its main teachings) can be attributed to Gautama Buddha.
Richard Gombrich argues that the main preachings of the Buddha (as in the
Vinaya and Sutta Pitaka) probably go back to the Buddha individually. Some
scholars argue that the teachings are coherent and cogent, and must be the work
of a single genius: the Buddha himself, not a committee of followers after his
death. J.W. de Jong has stated that parts of the Pali Canon could very well
have been proclaimed by the Buddha, and subsequently transmitted and developed
by his disciples and, finally, codified in fixed formulas. A. Wynne has said
that the Pali Canon includes texts which go back to the very beginning of
Buddhism, which perhaps include the substance of the Buddha‚Äôs teaching, and
in some cases, maybe even his words. A.K. Warder has stated that there is no
evidence to suggest that the shared teaching of the early schools was
formulated by anyone else than the Buddha and his immediate followers. Some
scholars say that little or nothing goes back to the Buddha. Prof. Ronald
Davidson has little confidence that much, if any, of surviving Buddhist
scripture is actually the word of the historical Buddha Some of these scholars
argue that some passages contradict the main teachings, and that the Buddha
must have been consistent. Some believe only one of the variant teachings can
have been the teaching of the Buddha, and that if the Buddha had taught the
main teachings, contradictory teachings would never have got in. Some believe
that because of this, the Buddha must have taught the divergent teachings, and
that the main teachings were elaborated by his followers after his death. Views
concerning attribution to the period of pre-sectarian Buddhism. Most scholars
do agree that there was a rough body of sacred literature that a relatively
early community maintained and transmitted. Much of the Pali Canon is found
also in the scriptures of other early schools of Buddhism, parts of whose
versions are preserved, mainly in Chinese. Many scholars have argued that this
shared material can be attributed to the period of Pre-sectarian Buddhism. This
is the period before the early schools separated in about the fourth or third
century BCE. Views concerning agnosticism. Some scholars see the Pali Canon as
expanding and changing from an unknown nucleus. Arguments given for an agnostic
attitude include that the evidence for the Buddha's teachings dates from (long)
after his death. Some scholars have said that the application of text-critical
methods derived from Biblical criticism is invalidated by the fact that the
Bible was a written text while the Pali Canon was oral. Some scholars have
stated that it would be hypocritical to assert that nothing can be said about
the doctrine of earliest Buddhism. Dr Gregory Schopen, Professor of Sanskrit,
Tibetan, and Buddhist Studies at the University of Texas at Austin, argues that
it is not until the 5th to 6th centuries CE that we can know anything definite
about the contents of the Canon. This position did not attract much support,
and was criticized by A. Wynne. The earliest books of the Pali Canon. Different
positions have been taken on what are the earliest books of the Canon. The
majority of Western scholars consider the earliest identifiable stratum to be
mainly prose works, the Vinaya (excluding the Parivara) and the first four
nikƒÅyas of the Sutta Pitaka, and perhaps also some short verse works such as
the Suttanipata. However, some scholars, particularly in Japan, maintain that
the Suttanipata is the earliest of all Buddhist scriptures, followed by the
Itivuttaka and Udana. However, some of the developments in teachings may only
reflect changes in teaching that the Buddha himself adopted, during the 45
years that the Buddha was teaching. Most of the above scholars would probably
agree that their early books include some later additions. On the other hand,
some scholars have claimed that central aspects of late works are or may be
much earlier. According to the Sri Lankan Mahavamsa, the Pali Canon was written
down in the reign of King VattagƒÅmini () (1st century BCE) in Sri Lanka, at
the Fourth Buddhist council. Most scholars hold that little if anything was
added to the Canon after this, though Schopen questions this. Texts and
translations. The climate of TheravƒÅda countries is not conducive to the
survival of manuscripts. Apart from brief quotations in inscriptions and a two-
page fragment from the eighth or ninth century found in Nepal, the oldest
manuscripts known are from late in the fifteenth century, and there is not very
much from before the eighteenth. No one edition has all the best readings, and
scholars must compare different editions. Translation: "Pali Canon in English
Translation", 1895-, in progress, 43 volumes so far, Pali Text Society,
Bristol; for details of these and other translations of individual books see
the separate articles. In 1994, the then President of the Pali Text Society
stated that most of these translations were unsatisfactory. Another former
President said in 2003 that most of the translations were done very badly. The
style of many translations from the Canon has been criticized as "Buddhist
Hybrid English", a term invented by Paul Griffiths for translations from
Sanskrit. He describes it as "deplorable", "comprehensible only to the
initiate, written by and for Buddhologists". Selections: see List of Pali Canon
anthologies. Contents of the Canon. As noted above, the Canon consists of three
pitakas. Details are given below. For more complete information, see standard
references on Pali literature. Abhidhamma Pitaka. The traditional position is
that "abhidhamma" refers to the absolute teaching, while the suttas are adapted
to the hearer. Most scholars describe the abhidhamma as an attempt to
systematize the teachings of the suttas: Harvey, Gethin. Cousins says that
where the suttas think in terms of sequences or processes the abhidhamma thinks
in terms of specific events or occasions. By Anney tesloyn Comparison with
other Buddhist canons. The other two main Buddhist canons in use in the present
day are the Chinese Buddhist Canon and the Tibetan Kangyur. The standard modern
edition of the Chinese Buddhist Canon is the Taish≈ç Revised Tripi·π≠aka, with
a hundred major divisions, totaling over 80,000 pages. This includes Vinayas
for the Dharmaguptaka, SarvƒÅstivƒÅda, Mahƒ´≈õƒÅsaka, and MahƒÅsa·πÉghika
schools. It also includes the four major ƒÄgamas, which are analogous to the
Nikayas of the Pali Canon. Namely, they are the Sa·πÉyukta ƒÄgama, Madhyama
ƒÄgama, Dƒ´rgha ƒÄgama, and Ekottara ƒÄgama. Also included are the Dhammapada,
the Itivuttaka, and Milindapanha. There are also additional texts, including
early histories, that are preserved from the early Buddhist schools but not
found in Pali. The canon contains voluminous works of Abhidharma, especially
from the SarvƒÅstivƒÅda school. The Indian works preserved in the Chinese Canon
were translated from Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit, Classical Sanskrit, or from
regional Prakrits. The Chinese generally referred to these simply as "Sanskrit"
(Ch. Ê¢µË™û, F√ ny«î). The Tibetan Kangyur comprises about a hundred volumes
and includes versions of the Vinaya Pitaka, the Dhammapada (under the title
"Udanavarga") and parts of some other books. Due to the later compilation, it
contains comparatively fewer early Buddhist texts than the Pali and Chinese
canons. The Chinese and Tibetan canons are not translations of the Pali and
differ from it to varying extents, but contain some recognizably similar early
works. However, the Abhidharma books are fundamentally different works from the
Pali Abhidhamma Pitaka. The Chinese and Tibetan canons also consist of
MahƒÅyƒÅna s≈´tras and VajrayƒÅna tantras, which, apart from a few tantras,
have no equivalent in the Pali Canon. External links. Pali Canon online. This
site also offers a down loadable program which installs the entire Pali
Tipitaka on your desktop for offline viewing.
