Pantheism Pantheism is a word derived from the Greek roots ' (meaning "all")
and ' (meaning "God"). It is the belief that everything composes an all-
encompassing, immanent God, or that the Universe (or Nature) is identical with
divinity. Pantheists thus do not believe in a personal or anthropomorphic god,
but differ in exact interpretation of the term. Pantheism was popularized in
the modern era as both a theology and philosophy based on the work of Baruch
Spinoza, whose treatise, "Ethics", was an answer to Descartes' famous dualist
theory that the body and spirit are separate. Spinoza held that the two are the
same, and this monism is a fundamental quality of his philosophy. He was
described as a "God-intoxicated man," and used the word God to describe the
unity of all substance. Though the term Pantheism was not coined until after
his death, Spinoza is regarded as the most celebrated advocate of pantheism.
Definitions. There are a variety of definitions of pantheism. Some consider it
a theological and philosophical position concerning God. Viewed as a religious
position, Pantheism has been described as the polar opposite of Atheism. From
this standpoint, Pantheism is the view that everything is part of an all-
encompassing, immanent God. All forms of reality may then be considered either
modes of that "Being", or identical with it. Others hold that Pantheism is a
philosophical position closely related to Atheism. To them, Pantheism is the
view that the Universe and God are identical. History. The first known use of
the term pantheism was by English mathematician Joseph Raphson in his work "De
spatio reali", written in Latin and published in 1697. In "De spatio reali",
Raphson begins with a distinction between atheistic ‘panhylists’ (from the
Greek roots ', "all", and ', "matter"), who believe everything is matter, and
‘pantheists’ who believe in “a certain universal substance, material as
well as intelligent, that fashions all things that exist out of its own
essence.” Raphson found the universe to be immeasurable in respect to a
human's capacity of understanding, and believed that humans would never be able
to comprehend it. The term was borrowed and first used in English by Irish
writer John Toland in his 1705 work "Socinianism Truly Stated, by a pantheist".
He clarified his idea of pantheism in a 1710 letter to Gottfried Leibniz when
he referred to "the pantheistic opinion of those who believe in no other
eternal being but the universe". Although the term "Pantheism" did not exist
before the 17th century, various pre-Christian religions and philosophies can
be regarded as pantheistic. They include some of the Presocratics, such as
Heraclitus and Anaximander. The Stoics were Pantheists, beginning with Zeno of
Citium and culminating in the emperor-philosopher Marcus Aurelius. During the
pre-Christian Roman Empire, Stoicism was one of the three dominant schools of
philosophy, along with Epicureanism and Neoplatonism. The early Taoism of Lao
Zi and Zhuangzi is also sometimes considered pantheistic. The Catholic church
regarded pantheism as heresy. Italian monk Giordano Bruno, burned at the stake
in 1600 for heresy, is considered by some to be a pantheist. Baruch Spinoza's
"Ethics", finished in 1675, was the major source from which pantheism spread.
John Toland was influenced by both Spinoza and Bruno, and sometimes used the
terms 'pantheist' and 'Spinozist' interchangeably. In 1720 he wrote the
"Pantheisticon: or The Form of Celebrating the Socratic-Society" in Latin. In
1785, a major controversy about Spinoza's philosophy known in German as the
Pantheismus-Streit (Pantheism controversy) between critic Friedrich Jacobi and
defender Moses Mendelssohn helped to spread pantheism to many German thinkers
in the late 18th and in the 19th century. For a time during the 19th century
pantheism was the theological viewpoint of many leading writers and
philosophers, attracting figures such as William Wordsworth and Samuel
Coleridge in Britain; Johann Gottlieb Fichte, Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph
Schelling and Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel in Germany; Walt Whitman, Ralph
Waldo Emerson and Henry David Thoreau in the USA. Seen as a growing threat by
the Vatican, it came under attack 1862 in the Syllabus of Errors of Pius IX. In
the mid-eighteenth century, English theologian Daniel Waterland defined
pantheism as: "It supposes God and nature, or God and the whole universe, to be
one and the same substance—one universal being; insomuch that men's souls are
only modifications of the divine substance." In the early nineteenth century,
German theologian Julius Wegscheider defined pantheism as the belief that God
and the world established by God are one and the same. In the late 20th
century, pantheism was often declared to be the underlying "theology" of
Neopaganism, and Pantheists began forming organizations devoted specifically to
Pantheism and treating it as a separate religion. Recent developments. In 2006,
Prominent atheist Richard Dawkins' "The God Delusion" described pantheism as
"sexed-up atheism." In 2008, Albert Einstein's 1954 German letter in which he
dismissed belief in a personal God was auctioned off for more than US$330,000.
Einstein wrote, "We followers of Spinoza see our God in the wonderful order and
lawfulness of all that exists and in its soul ("Beseeltheit") as it reveals
itself in man and animal." in a letter to Eduard Büsching (25 October 1929)
after Büsching sent Einstein a copy of his book "Es gibt keinen Gott".
Einstein responded that the book only dealt with the concept of a personal God
and not the impersonal God of pantheism. "I do not believe in a personal God
and I have never denied this but have expressed it clearly," he wrote in
another letter in 1954. The Vatican mentioned Pantheism in a 2009 Papal
encyclical and a 2010 New Year's Day statement, criticizing Pantheism for
denying the superiority of humans over nature and "seeing the source of man
salvation in nature". Author Ross Douthat, in a review of 2009 film Avatar,
described pantheism as "Hollywood’s religion of choice for a generation now".
In 2011, an 1866 letter written by William Herndon, Abraham Lincoln's law
partner, was auctioned off for US$30,000. In it, Herndon writes of the U.S.
President's evolving religious views, which included Pantheism. The subject is
understandably controversial, but the contents of the letter is consistent with
Lincoln's fairly lukewarm approach to organized religion. Categorizations.
There are multiple varieties of pantheism which can either be placed along
various spectra or in discrete categories. Degree of determinism. American
philosopher Charles Hartshorne used the term Classical Pantheism to describe
the deterministic philosophies of Baruch Spinoza, the Stoics, and other like-
minded figures. Pantheism (All-is-God) is often associated with monism (All-is-
One) and some have suggested that it logically implies determinism: in
Einstein's words, "the past, present, and future are an 'illusion'". This form
of Pantheism is sometimes referred to as "extreme monism", in whichin the words
of one commentator "God decides or determines everything, including our
supposed decisions." Other examples of determinism-inclined pantheisms include
those of Ralph Waldo Emerson, However, some have argued against treating every
meaning of "unity" as an aspect of Pantheism, and there exist versions of
pantheism that exclude determinism. Examples include the beliefs of Friedrich
Wilhelm Joseph Schelling and William James. Degree of theism. Theistically-
inclined pantheisms include Baruch Spinoza and Ibn Arabi. More atheistically-
inclined pantheisms include Ernst Haeckel, D.H. Lawrence, and the recent views
of Paul Harrison and the World Pantheist Movement. Other. In 1896, theologian
J. H. Worman identified seven categories of pantheism: Mechanical or
materialistic (God the mechanical unity of existence); Ontological (abstract
unity, Spinoza); Dynamic; Psychical (God is the soul of the world); Ethical
(God is the universal moral order, Johann Gottlieb Fichte); Logical (Hegel);
and Pure (absorption of God into nature, which Worman equates with atheism).
More recently, Paul D. Feinberg, professor of biblical and systematic theology
at Trinity Evangelical Divinity School, also identified seven categories of
pantheism: Hylozoistic; Immanentistic; Absolutistic monistic; Relativistic
monistic; Acosmic; Identity of opposites; Neoplatonic or emanationistic.
Pantheism in Religion. Hinduism. It is generally asserted that Hindu religious
texts are the oldest known literature containing pantheistic ideas. In Hindu
Sanatana Dharma theology, as per the divine revelations i.e.the Vedas, Brahm/
Parabrahma is the one unchanging, infinite, immanent, and transcendent reality
which is the Divine Ground of all things in this Universe. If one adds two
whole parts the result is one whole and if one whole is subtracted from another
whole the result is another whole - it means there is one whole universe and it
is all prevaded by "Him".Since the universe has come forth from the Divine, all
things and beings are sacred and must be treated so in human thought and
action. The Divine sleeps in minerals, awakens in plants, walks in animals and
thinks in humans. "That is an aggregate; this is an aggregate. The aggregate
come out of the aggregate. Removing the aggregate from the aggregate, the
aggregate still remains". Just as all rivers lead to the one ocean, Hindus
believe that all religious pathways lead to the same eternal truth. Sanatan
Dharma therefore teaches religious tolerance. Even within Hinduism, there are
different approaches to reaching the Divine based on an individual’s own
characteristics. This idea of pantheism is traceable from the Puranas which are
the nearest allegorical representations created for the masses whereas Vedas
were for the highly literate. All Mahāvākyas (Great Sayings) of the
Upanishads, in one way or another, seem to indicate the unity of the world with
the Brahman. It further says, "This whole universe is Brahman, from Brahman to
a clod of earth." Pantheism is a key component of Advaita philosophy. Other
subdivisions of Vedanta do not strictly hold this tenet. Taoism. In the
tradition of its leading thinkers Lao Tzu and Zhuangzi, Taoism is comparable
with Pantheism, as The Tao is always spoken of with profound religious
reverence and respect, similar to the way that Pantheism discusses the
"divinity" of the Universe. The Tao te Ching never speaks of a transcendent
God, but of a mysterious and numinous ground of being underlying all things.
Moreover Taoism stresses the importance of living in harmony with Nature.
Zhuangzi emphasized the pantheistic content of Taoism even more clearly:
"Heaven and I were created together, and all things and I are one." When Tung
Kuo Tzu asked Zhuangzi where the Tao was, he replied that it was in the ant,
the grass, the clay tile, even in excrement: "There is nowhere where it is
not… There is not a single thing without Tao." Other religions. There are
elements of pantheism in some forms of Christianity, Buddhism, Sufism, Judaism,
Gnosticism, Neopaganism, and Theosophy as well as in several tendencies in the
major theistic religions. See also the Neopagan section of Gaia, Eckankar, and
the Church of All Worlds. The Islamic religious tradition, in particular Sufism
and Alevism has a strong belief in the unitary nature of the universe and the
concept that everything in it is an aspect of God itself, although this
perspective leans closer to panentheism and may also be termed Theopanism. Many
traditional and folk religions including African traditional religions and
Native American religions can be seen as pantheistic, or a mixture of pantheism
and other doctrines such as polytheism and animism. Devoted Organizations. Two
organizations that specify the word pantheism in their title formed in the last
quarter of the 20th century. The Universal Pantheist Society, open to all
varieties of pantheists and supportive of environmental causes, was founded in
1975. It has seen decreased activity in recent years. The World Pantheist
Movement is headed by environmentalist and writer Paul Harrison, a former vice
president of the Universal Pantheist Society, from which he resigned in 1996.
The World Pantheist Movement was incorporated in 1999 to focus exclusively on
promoting a naturalistic version of pantheism, considered by some a form of
religious naturalism. It has been described as an example of "dark green
religion" with a focus on environmental ethics. Related concepts. The term
panentheism (from Greek πᾶν (pân) "all"; ἐν (en) "in"; and θεός
(theós) "God"; "all-in-God") was formally coined in Germany in the 19th
century in an attempt to offer a philosophical synthesis between traditional
theism and pantheism, stating that God is substantially omnipresent in the
physical universe but also exists "apart from" or "beyond" it as its Creator
and Sustainer. Thus panentheism separates itself from pantheism, positing the
extra claim that God exists above and beyond the world as we know it. The line
between pantheism and panentheism can be blurred depending on varying
definitions of God, so there have been disagreements when assigning particular
notable figures to pantheism or panentheism. Pandeism is another word derived
from pantheism and is characterized as a combination of reconcilable elements
of pantheism and deism. It assumes a Creator-deity which is at some point
distinct from the universe and then merges with it, resulting in a universe
similar to the pantheistic one in present essence, but differing in origin.
