Papal States The Papal State(s), the State(s) of the Church, the Pontifical
States, the Ecclesiastical States, or the Roman States (, also "Stato della
Chiesa", "Stati della Chiesa", "Stati Pontifici", and "Stato Ecclesiastico"; ,
also "Dicio Pontificia") were among the major historical states of Italy from
roughly the 6th century until the Italian peninsula was unified in 1861 by the
Kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia (after which the Papal States, in less
territorially extensive form, continued to exist until 1870). The Papal States
comprised territories under direct sovereign rule of the papacy, and at its
height it covered most of the modern Italian regions of Romagna, Marche, Umbria
and Lazio. This governing power is commonly called the temporal power of the
Pope, as opposed to his ecclesiastical primacy. The plural "Papal States" is
usually preferred; the singular "Papal State" (equally correct since it was not
a mere personal union) tends to be used (normally with lower-case letters) for
the modern State of Vatican City, an enclave within Italy's national capital,
Rome. The Vatican City was founded in 1929, again allowing the Holy See the
political benefits of territorial sovereignty. Origins. It would, however, be
wrong to suppose that all papal claims of secular jurisdiction, taxation and
service, etc. were exactly defined, or that they applied with equal force all
over a large region of central Italy, or that local warlords or others readily
conceded obedience to Rome. This was no modern state yet, no equivalent to the
contemporary strong monarchies of France or England. Force of tradition and
forceful possession counted more than written deeds of donation. Chambers,
2006, p. xv The Church spent its first three centuries as an unofficial
organization, unable to hold or transfer property in times of persecution.
Early churches congregated in special rooms of well-to-do individuals set aside
for that purpose, and a number of early churches built round the edges of
Ancient Rome were ascribed to patrons who held the property in custody for the
Church: see "titulus". With the Christian emperorship of Constantine I, the
Church's private property grew quickly through the donations of the pious and
the wealthy; the Lateran Palace was the first significant donation, a gift of
Constantine himself. Other donations soon followed, mainly in mainland Italy
but also in the provinces, but the Church held all of these lands as a private
landowner, not as a sovereign entity. When in the fifth century the Italian
peninsula passed under the control of first Odoacer and then the Ostrogoths,
the church organization in Italy, and the bishop of Rome as its head, submitted
to their sovereign authority while asserting their spiritual primacy over the
whole Church. The seeds of the Papal States as a sovereign political entity
were planted in the sixth century. The Eastern Roman (or Byzantine) government
in Constantinople launched a reconquest of Italy that took decades and
devastated the country's political and economic structures; just as those wars
wound down, the Lombards entered the peninsula from the north and conquered
much of the countryside. By the seventh century, Byzantine authority was
largely limited to a diagonal band running roughly from Ravenna, where the
Emperor's representative, or Exarch, was located, to Rome and south to Naples
(the "Rome-Ravenna corridor"). With effective Byzantine power weighted at the
northeast end of this territory, the Bishop of Rome, as the largest landowner
and most prestigious figure in Italy, began by default to take on much of the
ruling authority that Byzantines were unable to project to the area around the
city of Rome. While the Bishops of Rome – now beginning to be referred to as
the Popes – remained "de jure" Byzantine subjects, in practice the Duchy of
Rome, an area roughly equivalent to modern-day Latium, became an independent
state ruled by the Church. The Church's independence, combined with popular
support for the Papacy in Italy, enabled various Popes to defy the will of the
Byzantine emperor; Pope Gregory II even excommunicated Emperor Leo III the
Isaurian during the Iconoclastic Controversy. Nevertheless the Pope and the
Exarch still worked together to control the rising power of the Lombards in
Italy. As Byzantine power weakened, though, the Papacy took an ever larger role
in defending Rome from the Lombards, usually through diplomacy. In practice,
the papal efforts served to focus Lombard aggrandizement on the Exarch and
Ravenna. A climactic moment in the founding of the Papal States was the
agreement over boundaries embodied in the Lombard king Liutprand's "Donation of
Sutri" (728) to Pope Gregory II. Donation of Pepin. When the Exarchate of
Ravenna finally fell to the Lombards in 751, the Duchy of Rome was completely
cut off from the Byzantine Empire, of which it was theoretically still a part.
Pope Stephen II acted to neutralize the Lombard threat by courting the de facto
Frankish ruler, Pepin the Short. With the urging of Pope Zachary to depose the
Merovingian figurehead Childeric III, Pepin was crowned in 751 by Saint
Boniface. Stephen later granted Pepin the title "Patrician of the Romans".
Pepin led a Frankish army into Italy in 754 and 756. Pepin defeated the
Lombards – taking control of northern Italy – and made a gift (called the
Donation of Pepin) of the properties formerly constituting the Exarchate of
Ravenna to the Pope. In 781, Charlemagne codified the regions over which the
Pope would be temporal sovereign: the Duchy of Rome was key, but the territory
was expanded to include Ravenna, the Pentapolis, parts of the Duchy of
Benevento, Tuscany, Corsica, Lombardy and a number of Italian cities. The
cooperation between the Papacy and the Carolingian dynasty climaxed in 800,
when Pope Leo III crowned Charlemagne the first "Emperor of the Romans"
('Augustus Romanorum'). Relationship with the Holy Roman Empire. The precise
nature of the relationship between the Popes and Emperors – and between the
Papal States and the Empire – was disputed. Was the Pope a sovereign ruler of
a separate realm in central Italy, or were the Papal States just a part of the
Frankish Empire over which the Popes had administrative control? (This last was
the view of the late 9th-century "Libellus de imperatoria potestate in urbe
Roma".) Or were the Holy Roman Emperors vicars of the Pope (as a sort of
Archemperor) ruling Christendom, with the Pope directly responsible only for
the environs of Rome and spiritual duties? Events in the 9th century postponed
the conflict: the Holy Roman Empire in its Frankish form collapsed as it was
subdivided among Charlemagne's grandchildren. Imperial power in Italy waned and
the papacy's prestige declined. This led to a rise in the power of the local
Roman nobility, and the control of the Papal States during the early tenth
century by a powerful and corrupt aristocratic family, the Theophylacti. This
period was later dubbed the Saeculum obscurum or "dark age of the papacy", and
sometimes as the "rule by harlots". In practice, the Popes were unable to
exercise effective sovereignty over the extensive and mountainous territories
of the Papal States, and the region preserved its old system of government,
with many small countships and marquisates, each centered upon a fortified
"rocca". Over several campaigns in the mid-tenth century, the German ruler Otto
I conquered northern Italy; Pope John XII crowned him emperor (the first so
crowned in more than forty years), and the two of them ratified the Diploma
Ottonianum, which guaranteed the independence of the Papal States. Yet over the
next two centuries, Popes and Emperors squabbled over a variety of issues, and
the German rulers routinely treated the Papal States as part of their realms on
those occasions when they projected power into Italy. A major motivation for
the Gregorian Reform was to free the administration of the Papal States from
imperial interference, and after the extirpation of the Hohenstaufen dynasty,
the German emperors rarely interfered in Italian affairs. By 1300, the Papal
States, along with the rest of the Italian principalities, were effectively
independent. During the Renaissance the Spanish Emperors fought wars over the
Papal States, often against the Pope. Period of the Avignon papacy. From 1305
to 1378, the Popes lived in the papal enclave of Avignon, surrounded by
Provence, and were under the influence of the French kings in the 'Babylonian
Captivity'. During this Avignon Papacy, local despots took advantage of the
absence of the popes, to establish themselves in nominally papal cities: the
Pepoli in Bologna, the Ordelaffi in Forlì, the Manfredi in Faenza, the
Malatesta in Rimini all gave nominal acknowledgement to their papal overlords
and were declared vicars of the Church. In Ferrara, the death of Azzo VIII
d'Este without legitimate heirs (1308) encouraged Clement to bring Ferrara
under his direct rule: for only nine years, however, was it governed by his
appointed vicar, Robert d'Anjou, King of Naples, before the citizens recalled
the Este from exile (1317); interdiction and excommunications were in vain: in
1332 John XXII was obliged to name three Este brothers as his vicars in
Ferrara. In Rome itself the Orsini and the Colonna struggled for supremacy,
dividing the city's "rioni" between them. The resulting aristocratic anarchy in
the city provided the setting for the fantastic dreams of universal democracy
of Cola di Rienzo, who was acclaimed Tribune of the People in 1347 and met a
violent death in 1354. The Rienzo episode engendered renewed attempts from the
absentee papacy to re-establish order in the dissolving Papal States, resulting
in the military progress of Cardinal Egidio Albornoz, who was appointed papal
legate, and his condottieri heading a small mercenary army. Having received the
support of the archbishop of Milan and Giovanni Visconti, he defeated Giovanni
di Vico, lord of Viterbo, moving against Galeotto Malatesta of Rimini and the
Ordelaffi of Forlì, the Montefeltro of Urbino and the da Polenta of Ravenna,
and against the cities of Senigallia and Ancona. The last holdouts against full
papal control were Giovanni Manfredi of Faenza and Francesco II Ordelaffi of
Forlì. Albornoz, at the point of being recalled in 1357, in a meeting with all
the Papal vicars, April 29, 1357, promulgated the "Constitutiones Sanctæ
Matris Ecclesiæ", which replaced the mosaic of local law and accumulated
traditional 'liberties' with a uniform code of civil law. These "Constitutiones
Egidiane" mark a watershed in the legal history of the Papal States; they
remained in effect until 1816. Pope Urban V ventured a return to Italy in 1367
that proved premature; he returned to Avignon in 1370 During this period the
city of Avignon itself was added to the Papal States; it remained a papal
possession even after the popes returned to Rome, being seized and incorporated
into the by then unitary French state only during the French Revolution.
Renaissance. During the Renaissance, the papal territory expanded greatly,
notably under Popes Alexander VI and Julius II. The Pope became one of Italy's
most important secular rulers as well as the head of the Church, signing
treaties with other sovereigns and fighting wars. In practice, though, most of
the Papal States was still only nominally controlled by the Pope, and much of
the territory was ruled by minor princes. Control was always contested; indeed
it took until the 16th century for the Pope to have any genuine control over
all his territories. Papal responsibilities were often (as in the early 16th
century) in conflict. The Papal States were involved in at least 3 wars in the
first 2 decades. Pope Julius II, the "Warrior Pope", fought on their behalf.
The Reformation began in 1517. Before the Holy Roman Empire fought the
Protestants, its soldiers (including many Protestants), sacked Rome as a side
effect of battles over the Papal States. A generation later the armies of king
Philip II of Spain stomped those of Pope Paul IV over the same issues. This
period saw a gradual revival of the Pope's temporal power in the Papal States.
Throughout the 16th century virtually independent fiefs such as Rimini, (a
possession of the Malatesta family) were brought back under Papal control. This
process culminated in the re-claiming of the powerful Duchy of Ferrara in 1598
and the Duchy of Urbino in 1631. At its greatest extent, in the 18th century,
the Papal States included most of Central Italy — Latium, Umbria, Marche and
the Legations of Ravenna, Ferrara and Bologna extending north into the Romagna.
It also included the small enclaves of Benevento and Pontecorvo in southern
Italy and the larger Comtat Venaissin around Avignon in southern France. French
Revolution and Napoleonic era. The French Revolution proved as disastrous for
the temporal territories of the Papacy as it was for the Roman Church in
general. In 1791 the Comtat Venaissin and Avignon were annexed by France.
Later, with the French invasion of Italy in 1796, the Legations were seized and
became part of the revolutionary Cisalpine Republic. Two years later, the Papal
States as a whole were invaded by French forces, who declared a Roman Republic.
Pope Pius VI died in exile in Valence (France) in 1799. The Papal States were
restored in June 1800 and Pope Pius VII returned, but the French again invaded
in 1808, and this time the remainder of the States of the Church were annexed
to France, forming the "départements" of "Tibre" and "Trasimène". With the
fall of the Napoleonic system in 1814, the Papal States were restored once
more. From 1814 until the death of Pope Gregory XVI in 1846, the Popes followed
a reactionary policy in the Papal States. For instance, the city of Rome
maintained the last Jewish ghetto in Western Europe. There were hopes that this
would change when Pope Pius IX was elected to succeed Gregory and began to
introduce liberal reforms. Italian nationalism and the end of the Papal States.
Italian nationalism had been stoked during the Napoleonic period but dashed by
the settlement of the Congress of Vienna (1814–15), which left Italy divided:
with Sardinia-Piedmont, Tuscany and the other northern states under the rule of
junior cadet branches of the Habsburgs and in the south the Kingdom of the Two
Sicilies was under Bourbon rule. In 1848, nationalist and liberal revolutions
began to break out across Europe; in 1849, a Roman Republic was declared and
Pope Pius IX fled the city. A view of the Papal States from the perspective of
the mid 19th century is readily available. After the Austro-Sardinian War of
1859, much of northern Italy was unified under the House of Savoy, and Giuseppe
Garibaldi led a revolution that overthrew the Bourbon monarchy in the Kingdom
of the Two Sicilies. Afraid that Garibaldi would set up a republican government
in the south, the Sardinians petitioned Emperor Napoleon III of France for
permission to send troops through the Papal States to gain control of the Two
Sicilies, which was granted on the condition that Rome was left undisturbed. In
1860, with much of the region already in rebellion against Papal rule,
Sardinia-Piedmont conquered the eastern two-thirds of the Papal States and
cemented its hold on the south. Bologna, Ferrara, Umbria, the Marches,
Benevento and Pontecorvo were all formally annexed by November of the same
year, and a unified Kingdom of Italy was declared. The Papal States were
reduced to Latium, the immediate neighbourhood of Rome, which was declared
Capital of Italy in March 1861, when the first Italian Parliament met in the
Piedmontese kingdom's old capital, Turin. However, the Italian Government could
not take possession of its capital because Napoleon III kept a French garrison
in Rome in order to protect Pope Pius IX. The opportunity to eliminate the
Papal States came when the Franco-Prussian War began in July 1870, and Napoleon
III had to recall his garrison from Rome. Following the collapse of the Second
French Empire at the Battle of Sedan, widespread public demonstrations demanded
that the Italian Government take Rome. King Victor Emmanuel II sent Count
Gustavo Ponza di San Martino to Pius IX with a personal letter offering a face-
saving proposal that would have allowed the peaceful entry of the Italian Army
into Rome, under the guise of offering protection to the pope. On September 10,
1870, Italy declared war on the Papal States, and the Italian Army, commanded
by General Raffaele Cadorna, crossed the frontier of the then remaining papal
territory on September 11 and advanced slowly toward Rome. The Italian Army
reached the Aurelian Walls on September 19 and placed Rome under a state of
siege. Although the pope's tiny army was incapable of defending the city, Pius
IX ordered it to put up at least a token resistance to emphasize that Italy was
acquiring Rome by force and not consent. This incidentally served the purposes
of the Italian State and gave rise to the myth of the Breach of Porta Pia, in
reality a tame affair involving a cannonade at close range that demolished
without much fuss a 1600-year-old wall in poor repair. The city was captured on
September 20, 1870. Rome and Latium were annexed to the Kingdom of Italy as a
result of a plebiscite the following October. Despite the fact that the
traditionally Catholic powers did not come to the Pope's aid, the papacy
rejected any substantial accommodation with the Italian Kingdom, especially any
proposal which required the Pope to become an Italian subject. Instead the
papacy confined itself (see Prisoner in the Vatican) to the Apostolic Palace
and adjacent buildings in the loop of the ancient fortifications known as the
Leonine City, on Vatican Hill. From there it maintained a number of features
pertaining to sovereignty, such as diplomatic relations, since in canon law
these were inherent in the papacy. In the 1920s, the papacy – then under Pius
XI — renounced the bulk of the Papal States and the Lateran Treaty (or
Concordat) with Italy was signed on February 11, 1929, creating the State of
the Vatican City, forming the sovereign territory of the Holy See, which was
also indemnified to some degree for loss of territory.
