Papal resignation Papal resignation is envisaged as a possibility in canon 332
§2 of the Code of Canon Law and canon 44 §2 of the Code of Canons of the
Eastern Churches. The only conditions for the validity of the resignation are
that it be made freely and be manifested properly. Canon law does not specify
any particular individual or body or people to whom the Pope must manifest his
resignation, leaving perhaps open the possibility of doing so to the Church or
the world in general. But some commentators hold that the college of cardinals
or at least its Dean must be informed, since the cardinals must be absolutely
certain that the Pope has renounced the dignity before they can validly proceed
to elect a successor. The term "abdication" is not used in the official
documents of the Church for resignation by a Pope. Precedents. In 1045, Pope
Benedict IX agreed, for financial advantage, to resign the papacy. Pope Gregory
VI, who to rid the Church of the scandalous Benedict IX had persuaded him to
resign, became his successor. Gregory himself resigned in 1046 because the
arrangement he had entered into with Benedict was considered simoniacal; that
is, to have been paid for. Gregory's successor, Pope Clement II, died in 1047
and Benedict IX became Pope again. The best known example of the resignation of
a Pope is that of Pope Celestine V in 1294. After only five months of
pontificate, he issued a solemn decree declaring it permissible for a Pope to
resign, and then did so himself. He lived two more years as a hermit and was
later canonized. The Papal decree that he issued ended any doubt among
canonists about the possibility of a valid Papal resignation. The last Pope to
resign was Pope Gregory XII (1406–1415), who did so to end the Western
Schism, which had reached the point where there were three claimants to the
Papal throne, Roman Pope Gregory XII, Avignon Antipope Benedict XIII, and Pisan
Antipope John XXIII. Before resigning he formally convened the already existing
Council of Constance and authorized it to elect his successor. Alleged
conditional resignations not put into effect. Before setting out for Paris to
crown Napoleon in 1804, Pope Pius VII (1800–1823), signed a document of
resignation to take effect if he were imprisoned in France. It has been claimed
that during World War II, Pius XII drew up a document with instructions that,
if he were kidnapped by the Nazis, he was to be considered to have resigned his
office, and the Cardinals were to flee to neutral Portugal and elect a
successor. Pope John Paul II wrote a letter of resignation in case if he were
to come down with an incurable disease or if anything happened that would keep
him from fulfilling his duties. Incapacitation. In the years leading up to his
death in 2005, some writers suggested that John Paul II ought to resign due to
his failing health, but Vatican officials denied that he had any intention to
do so. If requested, a diocesan bishop must offer his resignation from the
governance of his diocese on completion of his seventy-fifth year of age and
cardinals are not allowed to join a conclave after reaching eighty. However,
there is no requirement for a Pope to resign upon reaching any particular age.
Since the enactment of these rules concerning diocesan bishops and cardinals,
three Popes, Paul VI, John Paul II and Benedict XVI, reached the age of eighty
during their pontificates but did not resign. Apart from stating that, if the
See of Rome is completely impeded, no innovation is to be made in the
governance of the universal Church, and that the special laws enacted for these
circumstances are to be observed, canon law makes no provision for the
eventuality that a Pope is temporarily or permanently incapacitated for reasons
of health, an assassination attempt or captivity, nor does it indicate what
individual or body or group has the authority to certify that the Pope is
totally impeded from exercising his office.
