Papal coronation A papal coronation was the ceremony of the placing of the
papal tiara on a newly elected pope. The first recorded papal coronation was
that of Pope Celestine II in 1143. Soon after his coronation in 1963, Pope Paul
VI abandoned the practice of wearing the tiara. His successors have chosen not
to resume the coronation practice. As one becomes pope upon consent to a proper
election, the papal inauguration ceremony, with or without coronation, serves
only symbolic purposes. Ritual. When a conclave elects a new pope, he assumes
all of the rights and authority of the papacy immediately upon his acceptance
of election; however, popes traditionally numbered their regnal years from the
date of their coronation. If a newly elected pope is not a bishop, he is
consecrated at once. In accordance with tradition, the right of consecration
belongs to the Dean of the College of Cardinals, in his absence to the Subdean,
and in the absence of both of these, to the senior Cardinal Bishop. If the new
pope is already a bishop, as is normally the case, his election is announced
immediately to the people gathered in Saint Peter's Square and he gives them
his blessing. The episcopal enthronement of the pope takes place in his
cathedral, the Basilica of Saint John Lateran. This ceremony was once combined
with the coronation. During the Avignon papacy, the pope, being in France,
could not be enthroned in his cathedral in Rome. The coronations continued,
while enthronements had to await a return to Rome. When Pope Gregory XI did
return to Rome, the Lateran Palace was badly in need of repair, so the popes
made the Vatican their residence and transferred coronations to Saint Peter's
Basilica. The Lateran Basilica remains the cathedral of Rome, and the
enthronement occurs there. During the "prisoner in the Vatican" period, the
enthronement did not take place. Coronation Mass. The coronation took place on
the first Sunday or Holy Day following the election. It began with a solemn
Papal Mass. During the chanting of Terce, he sat on a throne and all of the
cardinals made what was called their "first obeisance" to him, approaching one
by one and kissing his hand. Then the archbishops and bishops approached and
kissed his feet. Following this, at least from the beginning of the 16th
century, the newly elected pope was carried in state through St. Peter's
Basilica on the "sedia gestatoria", under a white canopy, with the papal
flabella (ceremonial fans) to either side. Instead of the papal tiara, he wore
a jewelled mitre (the episcopal "mitra pretiosa"). Three times, the procession
was stopped, and a bundle of flax lashed to a gilded staff was burnt before the
newly elected pontiff, while a master of ceremonies said: "Pater Sancte, sic
transit gloria mundi" (Holy Father, thus passes the glory of the world) as a
symbolic caution to set aside materialism and vanity. Once at the high altar,
he would begin to celebrate Solemn High Mass with full papal ceremonial. After
the "Confiteor", the pope was seated on the sedia gestatoria, which was resting
on the ground, and the three senior cardinal bishops approached him wearing
mitres. Each in turn placed his hands above him and said the prayer, "Super
electum Pontificem" (over the elected pope). First the Cardinal Bishop of
Albano said:”Deus qui adesse non delignaris ubicumque devota mente invocaris,
adesto quaesumus invocationibus nostris et huic famulo tuo N. quem ad culmen
apostolicum commune iudicium tuae plebis elegit ubertatem supernae
benedictionis infunde, ut sentiat se tuo munere ad hunc apicem pervenisse.”
"Coronation Rites", Reginald Maxwell Woolley, B.D. (Cambridge: at the
University Press, 1915), pp. 160-161. Then the Cardinal Bishop of Porto said:
“Supplicationibus, omnipotens Deus, effectum consuetae pietatis impende, et
gratia Spiritus Sancti hunc famulum tuum N. perfunde; ut qui in capite
ecclesiarum nostrae servitutis mysterio constituitur, tuae virtutis soliditate
roboretur.” Ibid., p. 161. Finally the Cardinal Bishop of Ostia said:”Deus
qui Apostolum tuum Petrum inter caeteros coapostolos primatum tenere voluisti,
eique universae Christianitatis molem superimpostuisti; respice propitius
quaesumus hunc famulum tuum N. quem de humili cathedra violenter sublimatum in
thronum eiusdem apostolorum principis sublimamus: ut sicut profectibus tantae
dignitatis augetur, ita virtutum meritis cumuletur; quatenus ecclesiasticae
universitatis onus, te adiuvante, digne ferat, et a te qui es beatitudo tuorum
meritam vicem recipiat.” Ibid. Then the senior cardinal deacon placed the
pallium on his shoulders saying: Papal Coronation In the 11th and 12th
centuries the "immantatio", or bestowal of the mantum (a papal vestment
consisting of a very long red cope fastened with an elaborate morse) on the
newly elected pope was regarded as especially symbolic of investiture with
papal authority, and was conferred with the words: "I invest thee with the
Roman papacy, that thou rule over the city and the world." As with all Papal
High Masses, the Epistle and the Gospel were read in both Greek and Latin and
the pope communicated at his throne. Coronation. "Accipe tiaram tribus coronis
ornatam, et scias te esse patrem principum et regum, rectorem orbis in terra
vicarium Salvatoris nostri Jesu Christi, cui est honor et gloria in saecula
saeculorum" (Receive the tiara adorned with three crowns and know that thou art
father of princes and kings, the ruler of the world on earth, the vicar of our
Savior Jesus Christ, to whom is honor and glory through all ages). Following
his coronation, the pope imparted the solemn papal blessing "Urbi et Orbi".
Taking possession of the cathedra of the Bishop of Rome. The last act of the
inauguration of a new pope is still the formal taking possession ("possessio")
of his cathedra as Bishop of Rome in the Basilica of St. John Lateran. This is
the final ceremony mentioned in Pope John Paul II's Apostolic Constitution on
the vacancy of the Apostolic See and the election of the Roman Pontiff. The
pope is enthroned in the same manner as other bishops. He is solemnly conducted
to the episcopal throne, and takes possession by seating himself on it. He
receives the kiss of peace and listens to the reading of a passage of Holy
Scripture, whereupon he pronounced an address that used to be called the "sermo
inthronisticus". In ancient times, the letters that the pope sent to the
patriarchs in token of being in communion with them in the same faith were
called "litterae inthronisticae", or "syllabai enthronistikai". Location of the
ceremony. The earliest papal coronations took place in St. John Lateran, the
pope's cathedral. However, for hundreds of years papal coronations have
traditionally taken place in the environs of St. Peter's Basilica, though a
number of coronations took place in Avignon, during the Avignon papacy.
Earlier, Pope Celestine V was twice crowned in L'Aquila. In 1800 Pope Pius VII
was crowned in the crowded church of the Benedictine island monastery of San
Giorgio, Venice, after his late predecessor, Pope Pius VI, had been forced into
temporary exile during Napoleon Bonaparte's capture of Rome. Since the French
seized the tiara along with the previous pope, he was crowned with a papier-
mâché tiara, for which the ladies of Venice gave up their jewels. All
coronations after 1800 took place in Rome. Leo XIII was crowned in the Sistine
Chapel, due to fears that anti-clerical mobs, inspired by Italian unification,
might attack the Basilica and disrupt the ceremony. Benedict XV was also
crowned in the chapel in 1914. Pius XI was crowned at the dais in front of the
High Altar in St. Peter's Basilica. Popes Pius IX, Pius XII, John XXIII and
Paul VI all were crowned in public on the balcony of the basilica, facing
crowds assembled below in St. Peter's Square. Pius XII's 1939 coronation broke
new grounds by being the first to be filmed and the first coronation to be
broadcast live on radio. The ceremony, which lasted for six hours, was attended
by leading dignitaries; these included the heir to the Italian throne, the
Prince of Piedmont, former kings Ferdinand I of Bulgaria and Alfonso XIII of
Spain, the Duke of Norfolk (representing King George VI of the United Kingdom)
and the Irish Taoiseach Éamon de Valera, the last two being in evening dress
(white tie and tails). Paul VI and the coronation. The last pope to be crowned
was Paul VI. Though he decided to cease wearing a papal tiara within weeks of
his coronation, and laid his own on the altar of St. Peter's Basilica in a
gesture of humility, his 1975 Apostolic Constitution, "Romano Pontifici
Eligendo", still prescribed that "the new pontiff is to be crowned by the
senior cardinal deacon." Nevertheless, his successor, John Paul I, opted not to
be crowned and to have a less formal "solemn Mass to mark the start of his
ministry as Supreme Pastor" in September 1978. John Paul II and the coronation.
"Pope John Paul I, whose memory is so vivid in our hearts, did not wish to have
the tiara; nor does his Successor wish it today. This is not the time to return
to a ceremony and an object considered, wrongly, to be a symbol of the temporal
power of the Popes". John Paul II's 1996 Apostolic Constitution, "Universi
Dominici Gregis", now in force, does not specify the form that the "solemn
ceremony of the inauguration of the pontificate" of a new pope should take,
whether with or without a coronation. Existing papal tiaras remain available
for any future pope who may choose to use one, unlikely though it may appear
that it will ever be used again.
