Paradise Paradise is a religious term for a place in which existence is
positive, harmonious and timeless. It is conceptually a counter-image of the
supposed miseries of human civilization, and in paradise there is only peace,
prosperity, and happiness. Paradise is a place of contentment, but it is not
necessarily a land of luxury and idleness. Paradise is often described as a
"higher place", the holiest place, in contrast to Hell. Paradisaical notions
are cross-cultural, often laden with pastoral imagery, and may be cosmogonical
or eschatological or both. In eschatological contexts, paradise is imagined as
an abode of the virtuous dead. In Christian and Islamic understanding, Heaven
is a paradisaical relief, evident for example in the Gospel of Luke when Jesus
tells a penitent criminal crucified alongside him that they will be together in
paradise. In old Egyptian beliefs, the otherworld is Aaru, the reed-fields of
ideal hunting and fishing grounds where the dead lived after judgment. For the
Celts, it was the Fortunate Isle of Mag Mell. For the classical Greeks, the
Elysian fields was a paradisaical land of plenty where the heroic and righteous
dead hoped to spend eternity. The Vedic Indians held that the physical body was
destroyed by fire but recreated and reunited in the Third Heaven in a state of
bliss. In the Zoroastrian Avesta, the "Best Existence" and the "House of Song"
are places of the righteous dead. On the other hand, in cosmological contexts
'paradise' describes the world before it was tainted by evil. So for example,
the Abrahamic faiths associate paradise with the Garden of Eden, that is, the
perfect state of the world prior to the fall from grace, and the perfect state
that will be restored in the World to Come. The concept is a topos' in art and
literature, particularly of the pre-Enlightenment era, a well-known
representative of which is John Milton's "Paradise Lost". A paradise should not
be confused with a utopia, which is an alternative society. Etymology and
semasiology. The word "paradise" entered English from the French "paradis",
inherited from the Latin "paradisus", from Greek "parádeisos"
("παράδεισος"), and ultimately from an Old Iranian root, attested in
Avestan as "pairi.daêza-". The literal meaning of this Eastern Old Iranian
language word is "walled (enclosure)", from "pairi-" "around" + "-diz" "to
create (a wall)". The word is not attested in other Old Iranian languages
(these may however be hypothetically reconstructed, for example as Old Persian
"*paridayda-"). By the 6th/5th century BCE, the Old Iranian word had been
adopted as Akkadian "pardesu" and Elamite "partetas", "domain". It subsequently
came to indicate walled estates, especially the carefully tended royal parks
and menageries. The term eventually appeared in Greek as "parádeisos" "park
for animals" in the "Anabasis" of the early 4th century BCE Athenian gentleman-
scholar Xenophon. Aramaic "pardaysa" similarly reflects "royal park". Hebrew
פרדס ("pardes") appears thrice in the Tanakh; in the Song of Solomon 4:13,
Ecclesiastes 2:5 and Nehemiah 2:8. In those contexts it could be interpreted as
an "orchard" or a "fruit garden". In the 3rd-1st century BCE "Septuagint",
Greek παράδεισος ("parádeisos") was used to translate both Hebrew
"pardes" and Hebrew "", "garden": it is from this usage that the use of
"paradise" to refer to the Garden of Eden derives. The same usage also appears
in Arabic and in the Quran itself as فردوس ("firdaws"). The idea of a
walled enclosure was not preserved in most Iranian usage, and generally came to
refer to a plantation or other cultivated area, not necessarily walled. For
example, the Old Iranian word survives in New Persian "pālīz" (or "jālīz"),
which denotes a vegetable patch. However, the word park, as well as the similar
complex of words that have the same indoeuropean root: garden, yard, girdle,
orchard, court, etc., all refer simply to a deliberately "enclosed" area, but
not necessarily an area enclosed by walls. For the connection between these
ideas and that of the city, compare German ("fence"), English and Dutch
("garden"), or with Nordic "garðr" and Slavic "gard" (both "city"). Religious
use. Judaism. The word "pardes", borrowed from the Persian word, does not
appear before the post-Exilic period (post-538 BCE); it occurs in the Song of
Songs 4:13, Ecclesiastes 2:5, and Nehemiah 2:8, in each case meaning "park" or
"garden", the original Persian meaning of the word, where it describes to the
royal parks of Cyrus the Great by Xenophon in Anabasis. Later in Second Temple
era Judaism "paradise" came to be associated with the Garden of Eden and
prophesies of restoration of Eden, and transferred to heaven. The Septuagint
uses the word around 30 times, both of Eden, (Gen.2:7 etc.) and of Eden
restored (Ezek. 28:13, 36:35) etc. In the Apocalypse of Moses, Adam and Eve are
expelled from paradise (instead of Eden) after having been tricked by the
serpent. Later after the death of Adam, the Archangel Michael carries the body
of Adam to be buried in Paradise, which is in the Third Heaven. Later in
Rabbinical Judaism the word 'Pardes' recurs, but less often in the Second
Temple context of Eden or restored Eden. Tosefta Hagigah14b uses the word of
the veil around mystic philosophy. The Zohar gives the word a mystical
interpretation, and associates it with the four kinds of Biblical exegesis:
"peshat" (literal meaning), "remez" (allusion), "derash" (anagogical), and
"sod" (mystic). The initial letters of those four words then form – "p(a)rd
(e)s", which was in turn felt to represent the fourfold interpretation of the
Torah (in which "sod" – the mystical interpretation – ranks highest).
Christianity. In the 2nd century AD, Irenaeus distinguished paradise from
heaven. In "Against Heresies", he wrote that only those deemed worthy would
inherit a home in heaven, while others would enjoy paradise, and the rest live
in the restored Jerusalem (which was mostly a ruin after the Jewish–Roman
wars but was rebuilt beginning with Constantine the Great). Origen likewise
distinguished paradise from heaven, describing paradise as the earthly "school"
for souls of the righteous dead, preparing them for their ascent through the
celestial spheres to heaven. Tension between these two competing Christian
views of paradise may be responsible for a textual difference in one of the
three New Testament verses using the word, Luke 23:43. For example the two
early Syriac versions translate Luke 23:43 differently. The Curetonian Gospels
read "Today I tell you that you will be with me in paradise", whereas the
Sinaitic Palimpsest reads "I tell you, today you will be with me in paradise".
Likewise the two earliest Greek codices with punctuation disagree: Codex
Vaticanus has a pause mark in the original ink after 'today', whereas Codex
Alexandrinus has the "today in paradise" reading. Today almost all translations
follow the "today in Paradise", although there is some support among classical
Greek scholars for the reading "today that" In Christian art Fra Angelico's
"Last Judgement" painting shows Paradise on its left side. There is a tree of
life (and another tree) and a circle dance of liberated souls. In the middle is
a hole. In Muslim art it similarly indicates the presence of the Prophet or
divine beings. It visually says, 'Those here cannot be depicted.' Slavic
Christianity. Slavic languages, and Romanian which is not Slavic but Slavic-
influenced, have a distinct term for "paradise", "raj" (read "rai") which is
generally agreed to derive from Persian "ray" and co-exists alongside terms
deriving from the Persian word "pardeis". Jehovah's Witnesses. Jehovah's
Witnesses believe that Jehovah's purpose from the start was, and is, to have
the earth filled with the offspring of Adam and Eve as caretakers of a global
paradise. After God had designed this earth for human habitation, however, Adam
and Eve rebelled against Jehovah and so they were banished from the Garden of
Eden, or Paradise. Jehovah's Witnesses believe that the wicked people will be
destroyed at Armageddon and that many of the righteous (those faithful and
obedient to Jehovah) will live eternally in an earthly Paradise. (Psalms 37:9,
10, 29; Prov. 2:21, 22). Joining the survivors will be resurrected righteous
and unrighteous people who died prior to Armageddon (John 5:28, 29; Acts 24:
15). The latter are brought back because they paid for their sins by their
death, and/or also because they lacked opportunity to learn of Jehovah's
requirements prior to dying (Rom. 6:23). These will be judged on the basis of
their post-resurrection obedience to instructions revealed in new "scrolls"
(Rev. 20:12). This provision does not apply to those that Jehovah deems to have
sinned against his holy spirit (Matt. 12:31, Luke 12:5). One of Jesus' last
recorded statements before he died were the words to an evildoer hanging
alongside him on a torture stake, "You will be with me in Paradise".—Luke 23:
43. Witnesses believe scriptures such as Matthew 12:40 and 27:63 and Mark 8:31
and 9:31 show that Jesus himself expected an interval of three days between his
own death and resurrection, making impossible a reunion in Paradise on the same
day as Jesus' ""you will be with me in Paradise"" statement. Mormonism. In
Latter Day Saint theology, paradise usually refers to the spirit world. That
is, the place where spirits dwell following death and awaiting the
resurrection. In that context, "paradise" is the state of the righteous after
death. In contrast, the wicked and those who have not yet learned the gospel of
Jesus Christ await the resurrection in spirit prison. After the universal
resurrection, all persons will be assigned to a particular kingdom or degree of
glory. This may also be termed "paradise". Islam. In the Qur'an, Paradise is
denoted as "jannah" (garden), with the highest level being called "firdaus".
The etymologically equivalent word is derived from the original Avestan
counterpart, and used instead of Heaven to describe the ultimate pleasurable
place after death, accessible by those who pray, donate to charity, read the
Qur'an, believe in: God, the angels, his revealed books, his prophets and
messengers, the Day of Judgement and the afterlife, and follow God's will in
their life. Heaven in Islam is used to describe the Universe. It is also used
in the Qur'an to describe skies in the literal sense, i.e., above earth. In
Islam, the bounties and beauty of Heaven are immense, so much so that they are
beyond the abilities of mankind’s worldly mind to comprehend. The Urantia
Book. The Urantia Book portrays Paradise as the "eternal center of the universe
of universes," and as "the abiding place of the Universal Father, the Eternal
Son, the Infinite Spirit, and their divine co-ordinates and associates." The
book states that paradise is the primal origin and the final destiny for all
spirit personalities, and for all the ascending creatures of the evolutionary
worlds of time and space.
