Particular Church In Catholic canon law, a Particular Church is an ecclesial
community headed by a bishop or someone recognised as the equivalent of a
bishop. Autonomous particular Churches or Rites. There are 23 such autonomous
Churches, one "Western" and 22 "Eastern", a distinction by now more historical
than geographical. The term "sui iuris" means, literally, "of their own law",
or self-governing. Although all of the particular Churches espouse the same
beliefs and faith, their distinction lies in their varied expression of that
faith through their traditions, disciplines, and Canon law. All 23 are in
communion with the Pope in Rome. For this kind of "particular Church" the 1983
"Code of Canon Law" uses the unambiguous phrase "autonomous ritual Church" (in
Latin "Ecclesia ritualis sui iuris)". The 1990 "Code of Canons of the Eastern
Churches", which is instead concerned principally with what the Second Vatican
Council called "particular Churches or rites", has shortened this phrase to
"autonomous Church" (in Latin, "Ecclesia sui iuris"), as in its canon 27: "A
group of Christ’s faithful hierarchically linked in accordance with law and
given express or tacit recognition by the supreme authority of the Church is in
this Code called an autonomous Church." Communion between particular Churches
has existed since the Apostles: "Among these manifold particular expressions of
the saving presence of the one Church of Christ, there are to be found, from
the times of the Apostles on, those entities which are in themselves "Churches"
(32: Cf. Ac 8:1, Ac 11:22, 1 Cor 1:2, 1 Cor 16:19, Gal 1:22, Rev 2, Rev 1:8,
etc.), because, although they are particular, the universal Church becomes
present in them with all its essential elements (33: Cf. PONTIFICAL BIBLICAL
COMMISSION, Unité et diversité dans l'Eglise, Lib. Ed. Vaticana 1989,
especially, pp. 14-28.)" ("Communionis Notio", 7). Local particular Churches.
In Catholic teaching, each diocese (Latin Rite term) or eparchy (Eastern Rite
term) is also a local or particular Church, though it lacks the autonomy of the
particular Churches described above: "A diocese is a section of the People of
God entrusted to a bishop to be guided by him with the assistance of his clergy
so that, loyal to its pastor and formed by him into one community in the Holy
Spirit through the Gospel and the Eucharist, it constitutes one particular
church in which the one, holy, catholic and apostolic Church of Christ is truly
present and active." The 1983 "Code of Canon Law", which is concerned with the
Latin-Rite Church alone and so with only one "autonomous" particular Church,
uses the term "particular Church" only in the sense of "local Church", as in
its canon 373: "It is within the competence of the supreme authority alone to
establish particular Churches; once they are lawfully established, the law
itself gives them juridical personality." The standard form of these local or
particular Churches, each of which is headed by a bishop, is called a diocese
in the Latin Church and an eparchy in the Eastern Churches. At the end of 2011,
the total number of all these jurisdictional areas (or "sees") was 2,834.
Theological significance. Unlike "families" or "federations" of Churches formed
through the grant of mutual recognition by distinct ecclesial bodies, the
Catholic Church considers itself a single Church ("one Body") composed of a
multitude of particular Churches, each of which, as stated, is an embodiment of
the fullness of the one Catholic Church. For the particular Churches within the
Catholic Church, whether autonomous ritual Churches (e.g., Coptic Catholic
Church, Melkite Catholic Church, Armenian Catholic Church, etc.) or dioceses
(e.g., Archdiocese of Birmingham, Archdiocese of Chicago, etc.), are seen as
not simply branches, divisions or sections of a larger body. Theologically,
each is considered to be the embodiment in a particular place or for a
particular community of the one, whole Catholic Church. "It is in these and
formed out of them that the one and unique Catholic Church exists." The local
particular Church of Rome. The Holy See of Rome is seen as the central local
Church. Its bishop, the Pope, is considered to be, in a unique sense, the
successor of Saint Peter, the chief (or "prince") of the Apostles. Quoting the
Second Vatican Council’s document "Lumen Gentium", the "Catechism of the
Catholic Church" states: "The Pope, Bishop of Rome and Peter's successor, 'is
the perpetual and visible source and foundation of the unity both of the
bishops and of the whole company of the faithful.'" All the particular Catholic
Churches — eastern or western, autonomous (rites) or local (dioceses or
eparchies) — are by definition in full communion with the see or local
particular Church of Rome.
