Passover Passover (Hebrew, Yiddish: ◊§÷∂÷º◊°÷∑◊ó "Pesach," Tiberian: , Modern
Hebrew: /Ààpesaœá/ "Pesah, Pesakh," Yiddish: "Peysekh, Paysakh, Paysokh") is a
Jewish festival. It commemorates the story of the Exodus, in which the ancient
Israelites were freed from slavery in Egypt. Passover begins on the 15th day of
the month of Nisan in the Jewish calendar, which is in spring in the Northern
Hemisphere, and is celebrated for seven or eight days. It is one of the most
widely observed Jewish holidays. In the narrative of the Exodus, the Bible
tells that God helped the Children of Israel escape slavery in Egypt by
inflicting ten plagues upon the Egyptians before the Pharaoh would release his
Israelite slaves; the tenth and worst of the plagues was the death of the
Egyptian first-born. The Israelites were instructed to mark the doorposts of
their homes with the blood of a spring lamb and, upon seeing this, the spirit
of the Lord knew to "pass over" the first-borns in these homes, hence the name
of the holiday. There is some debate over where the term is actually derived
from. When the Pharaoh freed the Israelites, it is said that they left in such
a hurry that they could not wait for bread dough to rise (leaven). In
commemoration, for the duration of Passover no leavened bread is eaten, for
which reason it is called "The Festival of the Unleavened Bread". "Matzo" (flat
unleavened bread) is a symbol of the holiday. Together with Shavuot
("Pentecost") and Sukkot ("Tabernacles"), Passover is one of the three
pilgrimage festivals ("Shalosh Regalim") during which the entire Jewish
populace historically made a pilgrimage to the Temple in Jerusalem. Samaritans
still make this pilgrimage to Mount Gerizim, but only men participate in public
worship. Date and duration. The Passover begins on the 15th day of the month of
Nisan, which typically falls in March or April of the Gregorian calendar.
Passover is a spring festival, so the 14th day of Nisan begins on the night of
a full moon after the northern vernal equinox. To ensure that Passover did not
start before spring, the tradition in ancient Israel held that the first day of
Nisan would not start until the barley was ripe, being the test for the onset
of spring. If the barley was not ripe, or various other phenomena indicated
that spring was not yet imminent, an intercalary month (Adar II) would be
added. However, since at least the 4th century, the date has been fixed
mathematically. In Israel, Passover is the seven-day holiday of the Feast of
Unleavened Bread, with the first and last days observed as legal holidays and
as holy days involving abstention from work, special prayer services, and
holiday meals; the intervening days are known as Chol HaMoed ("Weekdays of the
Festival"). Diaspora Jews historically observed the festival for eight days,
and most still do. Reform and Reconstructionist Jews and Israeli Jews, wherever
they are, usually observe the holiday over seven days. The reason for this
extra day is due to enactment of the Sages. It is thought by many scholars that
Jews outside of Israel could not be certain if their local calendars fully
conformed to practice of the Temple at Jerusalem, so they added an extra day.
But as this practice only attaches to certain (major) sacred days, others posit
the extra day may have been added to accommodate people who had to travel long
distances to participate in communal worship and ritual practices; or the
practice may have evolved as a compromise between conflicting interpretations
of Jewish Law regarding the calendar; or it may have evolved as a safety
measure in areas where Jews were commonly in danger, so that their enemies
would not be certain on which day to attack. Karaite Jews and Samaritans use
different versions of the Jewish calendar, which are often out of sync with the
modern Jewish calendar by one or two days. In 2009, for example, Nisan 15 on
the Jewish calendar used by Rabbinical Judaism corresponds to April 9. On the
calendars used by Karaites and Samaritans, "Abib" or "Aviv" 15 (as opposed to
'Nisan') corresponds to April 11 in 2009. The Karaite and Samaritan Passovers
are each one day long, followed by the six day Festival of Unleavened Bread ‚Äì
for a total of seven days. Biblical origin. In the first month, on the
fourteenth day of the month between the two evenings is the Lord's Passover.
And on the fifteenth day of the same month is the feast of unleavened bread
unto the Lord; seven days ye shall eat unleavened bread. In the first day ye
shall have a holy convocation; ye shall do no manner of servile work. And ye
shall bring an offering made by fire unto the Lord seven days; in the seventh
day is a holy convocation; ye shall do no manner of servile work. () The
biblical regulations for the observance of the festival require that all
leavening be disposed of before the beginning of the 15th of Nisan An
unblemished lamb or goat is to be set apart on Nisan 10, and slaughtered on
Nisan 14 at dusk. The literal meaning of the Hebrew is "between the two
evenings", a phrase which is, however, not defined. It is then to be eaten
"that night", Nisan 15, roasted, without the removal of its internal organs
with unleavened bread and bitter herbs. Nothing of the sacrifice on which the
sun rises may be eaten, but must be burned. The sacrifices may only be
performed in a specific place prescribed by God (for Judaism, Jerusalem, and
for Samaritans, Mount Gerizim). The biblical regulations pertaining to the
original Passover also include how the meal is to be eaten: "with your loins
girded, your shoes on your feet, and your staff in your hand; and ye shall eat
it in haste: it is the 's passover" (Exodus 12:11). Some of these details can
be corroborated, and to some extent amplified, in extrabiblical sources. The
removal (or "sealing up") of the leaven is referred to in the Elephantine
papyri, an Aramaic papyrus from 5th century BCE Elephantine in Egypt. The
slaughter of the lambs on the 14th is mentioned in "The Book of Jubilees", a
Jewish work of the Ptolemaic period, and by the Herodian-era writers Josephus
and Philo. These sources also indicate that "between the two evenings" was
taken to mean the afternoon. "Jubilees" states the sacrifice was eaten that
night, and together with Josephus states that nothing of the sacrifice was
allowed to remain until morning. Philo states that the banquet included hymns
and prayers. The Biblical commandments concerning the Passover (and the Feast
of Unleavened Bread) stress the importance of remembering: And thou shalt
remember that thou wast a bondman in Egypt; and thou shalt observe and do these
statutes." () commands, in reference to God's sparing of the firstborn from the
Tenth Plague: And this day shall be unto you for a memorial, and ye shall keep
it a feast to the lord; throughout your generations ye shall keep it a feast by
an ordinance for ever. Etymology. The verb ""pas√ ch"" () is first mentioned in
the Torah account of the Exodus from Egypt (), and there is some debate about
its exact meaning: the commonly held assumption that it means "He passed over",
in reference to God "passing over" the houses of the Hebrews during the final
of the Ten Plagues of Egypt, stems from the translation provided in the
Septuagint ("œÄŒ±œÅŒµŒªŒµœÖœÉŒµœÑŒ±Œπ" in , and "ŒµœÉŒ∫ŒµœÄŒ±œÉŒµŒΩ" in ).
Judging from other instances of the verb, and instances of parallelism, a more
faithful translation may be "he hovered over, guarding." Indeed, this is the
image invoked by the verb in Isaiah 31:5: "As birds hovering, so will the Lord
of hosts protect Jerusalem; He will deliver it as He protecteth it, He will
rescue it as He "passeth over"" (◊õ÷∞÷º◊¶÷¥◊§÷≥÷º◊®÷¥◊ô◊ù
◊¢÷∏◊§◊ï÷π◊™‚Äî◊õ÷µ÷º◊ü ◊ô÷∏◊í÷µ◊ü ◊ô÷∞◊î◊ï÷∏◊î ◊¶÷∞◊ë÷∏◊ê◊ï÷π◊™, ◊¢÷∑◊ú-
◊ô÷∞◊®◊ï÷º◊©÷∏◊Å◊ú÷¥÷∏◊ù; ◊í÷∏÷º◊ ◊ï÷π◊ü ◊ï÷∞◊î÷¥◊¶÷¥÷º◊ô◊ú, ◊§÷∏÷º◊°÷π◊ó÷∑
◊ï÷∞◊î÷¥◊û÷∞◊ú÷¥◊ô◊ò.) () Both meanings become apparent in Exodus 12:23 when
parsed as: the Lord will pass (hover, guard) over the door, and will not suffer
the destroyer (destroying angel is commanded to pass by the children of Israel)
to come in unto your houses to smite. Targum Onkelos translates pesach as "he
had pity". The English term "Passover" is first known recorded in the English
language in William Tyndale's translation of the Bible, later appearing in the
King James Version as well. The term "Pesach" () may also refer to the lamb or
goat which was designated as the Passover sacrifice (called the "Korban Pesach"
in Hebrew). Four days before the Exodus, the Hebrews were commanded to set
aside a lamb.() and inspect it daily for blemishes. During the day on the 14th
of Nisan, they were to slaughter the animal and use its blood to mark their
lintels and door posts. Up until midnight on the 15th of Nisan, they were to
consume the lamb. Each family (or group of families) gathered together to eat a
meal that included the meat of the "Korban Pesach" while the Tenth Plague
ravaged Egypt. In subsequent years, during the existence of the Tabernacle and
later the Temple in Jerusalem, the Passover offering (Hebrew "korban Pesach")
was eaten during the Passover Seder on the 15th of Nisan. However, following
the destruction of the Temple, no sacrifices may be offered or eaten. The
"Seder Korban Pesach", a set of scriptural and Rabbinic passages dealing with
the Passover sacrifice, is customarily recited during or after the "Mincha"
(afternoon prayer) service on the 14th on Nisan. The story of the "Korban
Pesach" is also retold at the Passover Seder,meaning order, and the symbolic
food which represents it on the Seder Plate is usually a roasted lamb or
chicken wing. Passover offering, "korban Pesach". When the Temple in Jerusalem
was standing, the focus of the Passover festival was the Passover sacrifice
(Hebrew "korban Pesach") also known as the "Paschal Lamb"). Every family large
enough to completely consume a young lamb or wild goat was required to offer
one for sacrifice at the Jewish Temple on the afternoon of the 14th day of
Nisan,() and eat it that night, which was the 15th of Nisan (). If the family
was too small to finish eating the entire offering in one sitting, an offering
was made for a group of families. The sacrifice could not be offered with
anything leavened,() and had to be roasted, without its head, feet, or inner
organs being removed () and eaten together with unleavened bread ("matzo") and
bitter herbs ("maror"). One had to be careful not to break any bones from the
offering, () and none of the meat could be left over by morning (). Because of
the Passover sacrifice's status as a sacred offering, the only people allowed
to eat it were those who had the obligation to bring the offering. Among those
who could not offer or eat the Passover lamb were: An apostate (), a servant
(), an uncircumcised man (), a person in a state of ritual impurity, except
when a majority of Jews are in such a state ("Pesahim" 66b), and a non-Jew. The
offering had to be made before a quorum of 30 ("Pesahim" 64b). In the Temple,
the Levites sang Hallel while the priests performed the sacrificial service.
Men and women were equally obligated regarding the offering ("Pesahim" 91b).
Women were obligated, as men, to perform the Korban Pesach and to participate
in a Seder. Today. Today, in the absence of the Temple, the mitzvah of the
"Korban Pesach" is memorialized in the "Seder Korban Pesach", recited in the
afternoon of Nisan 14, and in the form of symbolic food placed on the Passover
Seder Plate, which is usually a roasted shankbone. The eating of the afikoman
substitutes for the eating of the "Korban Pesach" at the end of the Seder meal
(Mishnah Pesachim 119a). Many Sephardi Jews have the custom of eating lamb or
goat meat during the Seder in memory of the "Korban Pesach". Removing all
chametz. Chametz (◊ó◊û◊•, "leavening") is made from one of five types of grains
combined with water and left to stand for more than eighteen minutes. The
consumption, keeping, and owning of "chametz" is forbidden during Passover.
Yeast and fermentation are not themselves forbidden as seen for example by
wine, which is required, rather than merely permitted. According to Halakha,
the ownership of such "chametz" is also proscribed. "Chametz" does not include
baking soda, baking powder or like products. Although these are defined in
English as leavening agents, they leaven by chemical reaction, not by
biological fermentation. Thus, bagels, waffles and pancakes made with baking
soda and matzo meal are considered permissible, while bagels made with
sourdough and pancakes and waffles made with yeast are prohibited. Observant
Jews spend the weeks before Passover in a flurry of thorough housecleaning, to
remove every morsel of "chametz" from every part of the home. Jewish law
requires the elimination of olive-sized or larger quantities of leavening from
one's possession, but most housekeeping goes beyond this. Even the cracks of
kitchen counters are thoroughly scrubbed, for example, to remove any traces of
flour and yeast, however small. Any item or implement that has handled
"chametz" is generally put away and not used during Passover. Some hotels,
resorts, and even cruise ships across America, Europe and Israel also undergo a
thorough housecleaning to make their premises "kosher for Pesach" to cater to
observant Jews. Interpretations for abstinence from leaven or yeast. Some
Scholars suggest that the command to abstain from leavened food or yeast
suggests that sacrifices offered to God involve the offering of objects in
"their least altered state", that would be nearest to the way in which they
were initially made by God. According to other scholars the absence of leaven
or yeast means that leaven or yeast symbolizes corruption and spoiling. In any
case the main entity in Passover according to Judaism is the sacrificial lamb.
Search for, and burning of leaven. Traditionally, Jews do a formal search for
remaining leaven (Hebrew "chametz", as in "bedikat chametz") after nightfall on
the evening before Passover. A blessing is read (◊¢◊ú ◊ë◊ô◊¢◊ï◊® ◊ó◊û◊• ‚Äì "al
biyur chametz", "on the removal of leaven"), and one or more members of the
household proceed from room to room to check that no crumbs remain in any
corner. In very traditional families, the search may be conducted by the head
of the household; in more modern-style families, the children may be the ones
who do the search, under the supervision of their parents. It is customary to
turn off the lights and conduct the search by candlelight, using a feather and
a wooden spoon: candlelight effectively illuminates corners without casting
shadows; the feather can dust crumbs out of their hiding places; and the wooden
spoon which collects the crumbs can be burned the next day with the "chametz".
However, most contemporary Jewish-Orthodox authorities permit using a
flashlight, while some strongly encourage it due to the danger coupled with
using a candle. Because the house is assumed to have been thoroughly cleaned by
the night before Passover, there is some concern that making a blessing over
the search for "chametz" will be for naught ("bracha l'vatala") if nothing is
found. Thus, 10 morsels of bread smaller than the size of an olive are
traditionally hidden throughout the house in order to ensure that some
"chametz" will be found. On the morning of the 14th of Nisan, any leavened
products that remain in the householder's possession, along with the 10 morsels
of bread from the previous night's search, are burned ("s'rayfat chametz"). The
head of the household repeats the declaration of "biyur chametz", declaring any
"chametz" that may not have been found to be null and void "as the dust of the
earth". Should more "chametz" actually be found in the house during the
Passover holiday, it must be burnt as soon as possible. Unlike "chametz", which
can be eaten any day of the year except during Passover, kosher for Passover
foods can be eaten year-round. They need not be burnt or otherwise discarded
after the holiday ends. The sole exception is the historic sacrificial lamb,
which is never part of the modern Jewish holiday but is still a principal
feature of Falashah, Karaite and Samaritan observance. The meat of this lamb,
which is slaughtered and cooked on the evening of Passover, must be completely
consumed before the morning.() Sale of chametz. "Chametz" may be sold rather
than discarded, especially in the case of relatively valuable forms such as
liquor distilled from wheat, with the products being repurchased afterward. In
some cases, they may never leave the house, instead being formally sold while
remaining in the original owner's possession in a locked cabinet until they can
be repurchased after the holiday. Modern observance may also include sealing
cabinets and drawers which contain "Chametz" shut by using adhesive tape, which
serves a similar purpose to a lock but also shows evidence of tampering.
Although the practice of selling "Chametz" dates back many years, some
contemporary rabbinical authorities have come to regard it with disdain ‚Äì
since the supposed "new owner" never takes actual possession of the goods. The
sale of "chametz" may also be conducted communally via a rabbi, who becomes the
"agent" for all the community's Jews through a halakhic procedure called a
"kinyan" (acquisition). Each householder must put aside all the "chametz" he is
selling into a box or cupboard, and the rabbi enters into a contract to sell
all the "chametz" to a non-Jew (who is not obligated to observe the
commandments) in exchange for a small down payment ("e.g." $1.00), with the
remainder due after Passover. This sale is considered completely binding
according to Halakha, and at any time during the holiday, the buyer may come to
take or partake of his property. The rabbi then re-purchases the goods for less
than they were sold at the end of the holiday. Separate dishes. Due to the
Torah injunction not to eat "chametz" during Passover, () observant families
typically own complete sets of serving dishes, glassware and silverware (and in
some cases, even separate dishwashers and sinks) which have never come into
contact with "chametz", for use only during Passover. Under certain
circumstances, some "chametz" utensils can be immersed in boiling water
("hagalat keilim") to purge them of any traces of "chametz" that may have
accumulated during the year. Many Sephardic families thoroughly wash their
year-round glassware and then use it for Passover, as the Sephardic position is
that glass does not absorb enough traces of food to present a problem.
Similarly, ovens may be used for Passover either by setting the self-cleaning
function to the highest degree for a certain period of time, or by applying a
blow torch to the interior until the oven glows red hot (a process called
"libun gamur"). Matzah. A symbol of the Passover holiday is matzo, an
unleavened flatbread made solely from flour and water which is continually
worked from mixing through baking, so that it is not allowed to rise. Matzo may
be made by machine or by hand; the latter type of matzo, called "shmura matzo"
("watched" or "guarded" matzo), is the bread of preference for the Passover
Seder in Orthodox Jewish communities. The Torah contains a Divine commandment
to eat matzo, specifically, on the first night of Passover and to eat only
unleavened bread (in practice, matzo) during the entire week of Passover.
Consequently the eating of matzo figures prominently in the Passover Seder.
There are several explanations for this. The Torah says that it is because the
Hebrews left Egypt with such haste that there was no time to allow baked bread
to rise; thus flat, unleavened bread, matzo, is a reminder of the rapid
departure of the Exodus. Other scholars teach that in the time of the Exodus,
matzo was commonly baked for the purpose of traveling because it preserved well
and was light to carry (making it similar to hardtack), suggesting that matzo
was baked intentionally for the long journey ahead. Matzo has also been called
"Lechem Oni" (Hebrew: "bread of poverty"). There is an attendant explanation
that matzo serves as a symbol to remind Jews what it is like to be a poor slave
and to promote humility, appreciate freedom, and avoid the inflated ego
symbolized by more luxurious leavened bread. the weeks before Passover, matzos
are prepared for holiday consumption. In Orthodox Jewish communities, men
traditionally gather in groups (""chaburas"") to bake a special version of
handmade matzo called ""shmura matzo"", or "guarded matzo", for use at the
Seder. These are made from wheat that is guarded from contamination by chametz
from the time of summer harvest to its baking into matzos five to ten months
later. "Shmura matzo" dough is rolled by hand, resulting in a large and round
matzo. "Chaburas" also work together in machine-made matzo factories, which
produce the typically square-shaped matzo sold in stores. The baking of "shmura
matzo" is labor-intensive, as only 18‚Äì22 minutes is permitted between the
mixing of flour and water to the conclusion of baking and removal from the
oven; however, most are completed within 5 minutes of being kneaded.
Consequently, only a small number of matzos can be baked at one time, and the
"chabura" members are enjoined to work the dough constantly so that it is not
allowed to ferment and rise. A special cutting tool is run over the dough just
before baking to prick any bubbles which might make the matza puff up; this
creates the familiar dotted holes in the matzo. After the matzos come out of
the oven, the entire work area is scrubbed down and swept to make sure that no
pieces of old, potentially leavened dough remain, as any stray pieces are now
"chametz", and can contaminate the next batch of matzo. Fast of the Firstborn.
On the morning of the Passover seder, firstborn sons are commanded to observe
the Fast of the Firstborn which commemorates the salvation of the Hebrew
firstborns. According to Exodus (12:29), God struck down all Egyptian
firstborns while the Israelites were not affected. However, it is customary for
synagogues to conduct a "siyum" (ceremony marking the completion of a section
of Torah learning) right after morning prayers, and the celebratory meal that
follows cancels the firstborn's obligation to fast. Passover seder. These 15
parts parallel the 15 steps in the Temple in Jerusalem on which the Levites
stood during Temple services, and which were memorialized in the 15 Psalms
(#120-134) known as "Shir HaMa'alot" (, "Songs of Ascent"). The seder is
replete with questions, answers, and unusual practices (e.g. the recital of
Kiddush which is not immediately followed by the blessing over bread, which is
the traditional procedure for all other holiday meals) to arouse the interest
and curiosity of the children at the table. The children are also rewarded with
nuts and candies when they ask questions and participate in the discussion of
the Exodus and its aftermath. Likewise, they are encouraged to search for the
"afikoman", the piece of matzo which is the last thing eaten at the seder.
Audience participation and interaction is the rule, and many families' seders
last long into the night with animated discussions and much singing. The seder
concludes with additional songs of praise and faith printed in the Haggadah,
including "Chad Gadya" ("One Little Kid" or "One Little Goat"). Maror. Maror
symbolizes the bitterness of slavery in Egypt. The following verse from the
Torah underscores that symbolism: "And they embittered ("ve-yimareru"
◊ï◊ô◊û◊®◊®◊ï) their lives with hard labor, with mortar and with bricks and with
all manner of labor in the field; any labor that they made them do was with
hard labor" (Exodus 1:14). Four cups of wine. There is a Rabbinic requirement
that four cups of wine are to be drunk during the seder meal. This applies to
both men and women. The Mishnah says (Pes. 10:1) that even the poorest man in
Israel has an obligation to drink. Each cup is connected to a different part of
the seder: the first cup is for Kiddush, the second cup is connected with the
recounting of the Exodus, the drinking of the third cup concludes Birkat
Hamazon and the fourth cup is associated with Hallel. Participation of
children. The four questions. Often the leader of the seder and the other
adults at the meal will use prompted responses from the Haggadah, which states,
"The more one talks about the Exodus from Egypt, the more praiseworthy he is."
Many readings, prayers, and stories are used to recount the story of the
Exodus. Many households add their own commentary and interpretation and often
the story of the Jews is related to the theme of liberation and its
implications worldwide. Afikoman. The "afikoman" ‚Äî an integral part of the
Seder itself ‚Äî is used to engage the interest and excitement of the children
at the table. During the fourth part of the Seder, called "Yachatz", the leader
breaks the middle piece of matzo into two. He sets aside the larger portion as
the "afikoman". Many families use the "afikoman" as a device for keeping the
children awake and alert throughout the Seder proceedings by hiding the
"afikoman" and offering a prize for its return. Alternatively, the children are
allowed to "steal" the "afikoman" and demand a reward for its return. In either
case, the "afikoman" must be consumed during the twelfth part of the Seder,
"Tzafun". Concluding songs. After the Hallel, the fourth glass of wine is
drunk, and participants recite a prayer that ends in "Next year in Jerusalem!".
This is followed by several lyric prayers that expound upon God's mercy and
kindness, and give thanks for the survival of the Jewish people through a
history of exile and hardship. "Echad Mi Yodea" ("Who Knows One?") is a playful
song, testing the general knowledge of the children (and the adults). Some of
these songs, such as "Chad Gadiyah" are allegorical. Hol Hamoed. In Israel,
Passover lasts for seven days with the first and last days being major Jewish
holidays. In Orthodox and Conservative communities, no work is performed on
those days, with most of the rules relating to the observances of Shabbat being
applied. A seder is held on the first day. Outside Israel, in Orthodox and
Conservative communities, the holiday lasts for eight days with the first two
days and last two days being major holidays. A seder is conducted twice, on
both the first and second days. In the intermediate days necessary work can be
performed. Reform Judaism observes Passover over seven days, with the first and
last days being a major holidays. The Seder is held on the first day. Like the
holiday of Sukkot, the intermediary days of Passover are known as Chol HaMoed
(festival weekdays) and are imbued with a semi-festive status. It is a time for
family outings and picnic lunches of matzo, hardboiled eggs, fruits and
vegetables, and Passover treats such as macaroons and homemade candies.
Passover cake recipes call for potato starch or Passover cake flour made from
finely granulated matzo instead of regular flour, and a large amount of eggs to
achieve fluffiness. Cookie recipes use matzo farfel (broken bits of matzo) or
ground nuts as the base. For families with Eastern European backgrounds,
borsht, a soup made with beets, is a Passover tradition. While kosher for
Passover packaged goods are available in stores, some families opt to cook
everything from scratch during Passover week. In Israel, families that do not
kasher their ovens can bake cakes, casseroles, and even meat on the stovetop in
a Wonder Pot, an Israeli invention consisting of three parts: an aluminium pot
shaped like a Bundt pan, a hooded cover perforated with venting holes, and a
thick, round, metal disc with a center hole which is placed between the Wonder
Pot and the flame to disperse heat. Counting of the Omer. Beginning on the
second night of Passover, the 16th day of Nisan, Jews begin the practice of the
Counting of the Omer, a nightly reminder of the approach of the holiday of
Shavuot 50 days hence. Each night after the evening prayer service, men and
women recite a special blessing and then enumerate the day of the Omer. On the
first night, for example, they say, "Today is the first day in (or, to) the
Omer"; on the second night, "Today is the second day in the Omer." The counting
also involves weeks; thus, the seventh day is commemorated, "Today is the
seventh day, which is one week in the Omer." The eighth day is marked, "Today
is the eighth day, which is one week and one day in the Omer," etc. When the
Temple stood in Jerusalem, a sheaf of new-cut barley was presented before the
altar on the second day of Unleavened Bread. Josephus writesJosephus,
Antiquities 3.250-251, in Josephus IV Jewish Antiquities Books I-IV, Loeb
Classical Library, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, 1930, pp. 437-439.
Since the destruction of the Temple, this offering is brought in word rather
than deed. One explanation for the Counting of the Omer is that it shows the
connection between Passover and Shavuot. The physical freedom that the Hebrews
achieved at the Exodus from Egypt was only the beginning of a process that
climaxed with the spiritual freedom they gained at the giving of the Torah at
Mount Sinai. Another explanation is that the newborn nation which emerged after
the Exodus needed time to learn their new responsibilities vis-a-vis Torah and
mitzvot before accepting God's law. The distinction between the Omer
offering‚Äîa measure of barley, typically animal fodder‚Äîand the Shavuot
offering‚Äîtwo loaves of wheat bread, human food‚Äîsymbolizes the transition
process. Seventh day of Passover. "Shvi'i shel Pesach" (◊©◊ë◊ô◊¢◊ô ◊©◊ú ◊§◊°◊ó
"seventh of Passover") is another full Jewish holiday, with special prayer
services and festive meals. Outside the Land of Israel in the Jewish diaspora,
"Shvi'i shel Pesach" is celebrated on both the seventh and eighth days of
Passover. This holiday commemorates the day the Children of Israel reached the
Red Sea and witnessed both the miraculous "Splitting of the Sea," the drowning
of all the Egyptian chariots, horses and soldiers that pursued them, and the
Passage of the Red Sea. According to the Midrash, only the Pharaoh was spared
to give testimony to the miracle that occurred. Hasidic Rebbes traditionally
hold a "tish" on the night of "Shvi'i shel Pesach" and place a cup or bowl of
water on the table before them. They use this opportunity to speak about the
Splitting of the Sea to their disciples, and sing songs of praise to God.
Second Passover. The "Second Passover" (Pesach Sheni) on the 14th of Iyar in
the Hebrew Calendar is mentioned in the Hebrew Bible (Numbers 9:6-13) as a
make-up day for people who were unable to offer the pesach sacrifice at the
appropriate time due to ritual impurity or distance from Jerusalem. Just as on
the first Pesach night, breaking bones from the second Paschal offering
(Numbers 9:12) or leaving meat over until morning (Numbers 9:12) is prohibited.
Today, Pesach Sheni on the 14th of Iyar has the status of a very minor holiday
(so much so that many of the Jewish people have never even heard of it, and it
essentially does not exist outside of Orthodox and traditional Conservative
Judaism). There are not really any special prayers or observances that are
considered Jewish law. The only change in the liturgy is that in some
communities "Tachanun", a penitential prayer omitted on holidays, is not said.
There is a custom, though not Jewish law, to eat just one piece of matzo on
that night. Sermons, liturgy, and song. The story of Passover, with its message
that slaves can go free, and that the future can be better than the present,
has inspired a number of religious sermons, prayers, and songs‚Äîincluding
spirituals (what used to be called "Negro Spirituals"), within the African-
American community. Perhaps in our generation the counsel of our Talmudic sages
may seem superfluous, for today the story of our enslavement in Egypt is kept
alive not only by ritualistic symbolism, but even more so by tragic realism. We
are the contemporaries and witnesses of its daily re-enactment. Are not our
hapless brethren in the German Reich eating "the bread of affliction"? Are not
their lives embittered by complete disenfranchisement and forced labor? Are
they not lashed mercilessly by brutal taskmasters behind the walls of
concentration camps? Are not many of their men-folk being murdered in cold
blood? Is not the ruthlessness of the Egyptian Pharaoh surpassed by the sadism
of the Nazi dictators?And yet, even in this hour of disaster and degradation,
it is still helpful to "visualize oneself among those who had gone forth out of
Egypt." It gives stability and equilibrium to the spirit. Only our estranged
kinsmen, the assimilated, and the de-Judaized, go to pieces under the impact of
the blow...But those who visualize themselves among the groups who have gone
forth from the successive Egypts in our history never lose their sense of
perspective, nor are they overwhelmed by confusion and despair... It is this
faith, born of racial experience and wisdom, which gives the oppressed the
strength to outlive the oppressors and to endure until the day of ultimate
triumph when we shall "be brought forth from bondage unto freedom, from sorrow
unto joy, from mourning unto festivity, from darkness unto great light, and
from servitude unto redemption. Influence on other religions. Christianity. The
Christian feast of Maundy Thursday finds its roots in the Jewish feast of
Passover, the night on which the Last Supper is generally thought to have
occurred. Islam. In Islam, only the Turkic Karaites observe Passover traditions
in the evening following the last day of Tashriq (the evening after the 13th of
Dhu al-Hijjah).
