Patriarch Originally, a patriarch was a man who exercised autocratic authority
as a pater familias over an extended family. The system of such rule of
families by senior males is termed patriarchy. This is a Greek word, a compound
of πατριά ("patria"), "lineage, progeny", esp. by the father's side
(which derives from the word – "patēr" meaning "father") and ("archon")
meaning "leader", "chief", "ruler", "king", etc. Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob are
referred to as the three patriarchs of the people of Israel, and the period
during which they lived is termed the Patriarchal Age. It originally acquired
its religious meaning in the Septuagint version of the Bible. The word has
acquired specific ecclesiastical meanings. In particular, the highest-ranking
bishops in Eastern Orthodoxy, Oriental Orthodoxy, the Roman Catholic Church
(above Major Archbishop and Primate), and the Assyrian Church of the East are
termed "Patriarchs" (and in certain cases also "popes"). The office and
ecclesiastical circumscription (comprising one or more provinces, though
outside his own (arch)diocese he is often without enforceable jurisdiction) of
such a Patriarch is termed a "Patriarchate". Historically, a Patriarch may
often be the logical choice to act as Ethnarch, representing the community that
is identified with his religious confession within a state or empire of a
different creed (as Christians within the Ottoman Empire). Eastern
Christianity. Church of the East. Patriarchs of the Church of the East,
sometimes also referred to as Nestorian, the Church of Persia, the Sassanid
Church, or, in modern times, the Assyrian Church of the East, trace their
lineage of patriarchs back to the 1st century. Catholic Church. Patriarchate of
the West (not extant). In the Pentarchy formulated by Justinian I (527–565),
the emperor assigned as a patriarchate to the Bishop of Rome the whole of
Christianized Europe (including almost all of modern Greece), except for a
small area near Constantinople and along the coast of the Black Sea. He
included in this patriarchate also the western part of North Africa.
Justinian's system was given formal ecclesiastical recognition by the Quinisext
Council of 692, which the see of Rome has, however, not recognized. Popes have
in the past occasionally used the title "Patriarch of the West", without
defining it. Beginning 1863, this title appeared in the annual reference
publication, "Annuario Pontificio", which during 1885 became a semi-official
publication of the Holy See. This publication suppressed the title in its 2006
edition. The Pontifical Council for Promoting Christian Unity explained the
decision in a press release issued later that year. It stated that the title
"Patriarch of the West" had become "obsolete and practically unusable" and that
it was "pointless to insist on maintaining it". Since the Second Vatican
Council, the Latin Church, with which the title could be consider associated,
is now organized as a number of episcopal conferences and their international
groupings. Independent Patriarchs. These Patriarchs are not part of traditional
ecclesiastical communions of either the Eastern or the Catholic variety. Their
sects were generally initiated since about 1900 and reject many of the
teachings of traditional apostolic Christian faith, for example by allowing
women to attempt ordination or by allowing priests to marry "after" ordination.
Mormonism. According to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, a
patriarch is one who has been ordained to the office of Patriarch in the
Melchizedek Priesthood. The term is considered synonymous with the term
evangelist. One of the patriarch's primary responsibilities is to give
patriarchal blessings, as Jacob did to his twelve sons according to the Old
Testament. Patriarchs are typically assigned in each stake (district; the name
derives from Isaiah 54:2 "nlarge the place of thy tent, ... and strengthen thy
stakes") and possess the title for life.
