Tutelary deity A tutelary (also tutelar) is a deity or spirit who is a
guardian, patron or protector of a particular place, geographic feature,
person, lineage, nation, culture or occupation. Both "tutelary" and "tutelar"
can be used as either a noun or an adjective. An analogous concept in
Christianity is the patron saint, or to a lesser degree guardian angel. One
type of tutelary deity is the "genius," the personal deity or "daimon" of an
individual from birth to death. Pierre A. Riffard defines a tutelary spirit as
either the genius (present since birth) or a familiar spirit. Near East and
Mediterranean. Ancient Greece. Plato, "Apology of Socrates", 40 b. The Greeks
also thought deities guarded specific places: for instance, Athena was the
patron goddess of the city of Athens. Ancient Rome. Tutelary deities who guard
and preserve a place or a person are fundamental to ancient Roman religion. The
tutelary deity of an individual was his Genius, or that of a woman her Juno. In
the Imperial era, the Genius of the Emperor was a focus of Imperial cult. An
emperor might also adopt a major deity as his personal patron or tutelary, as
Augustus did Apollo. Precedents for claiming the personal protection of a deity
were established in the Republican era, when for instance the Roman dictator
Sulla advertised the goddess Victory as his tutelary by holding public games "
(ludi)" in her honor. Each town or city had one or more tutelary deities, whose
protection was considered particularly vital in time of war and siege. Rome
itself was protected by a goddess whose name was to be kept ritually secret on
pain of death (for a supposed case, see Quintus Valerius Soranus). The
Capitoline Triad of Juno, Jupiter, and Minerva were also tutelaries of Rome.
The Italic towns had their own tutelary deities. Juno often had this function,
as at the Latin town of Lanuvium and the Etruscan city of Veii, and was often
housed in an especially grand temple on the "arx" (citadel) or other prominent
or central location. The tutelary deity of Praeneste was Fortuna, whose oracle
was renowned. The Roman ritual of "evocatio" was premised on the belief that a
town could be made vulnerable to military defeat if the power of its tutelary
deity were diverted outside the city, perhaps by the offer of superior cult at
Rome. The depiction of some goddesses such as the "Magna Mater" (Great Mother,
or Cybele) as "tower-crowned" represents their capacity to preserve the city. A
town in the provinces might adopt a deity from within the Roman religious
sphere to serve as its guardian, or syncretize its own tutelary with such; for
instance, a community within the "civitas" of the Remi in Gaul adopted Apollo
as its tutelary, and at the capital of the Remi (present-day Rheims), the
tutelary was Mars Camulus. Tutelary deities were also attached to sites of a
much smaller scale, such as storerooms, crossroads, and granaries. Each Roman
home had a set of protective deities: the Lar or Lares of the household or
"familia", whose shrine was a "lararium"; the Penates who guarded the storeroom
"(penus)" of the innermost part of the house; Vesta, whose sacred site in each
house was the hearth; and the Genius of the "paterfamilias", the head of
household. The poet Martial lists the tutelary deities who watch over various
aspects of his farm. The architecture of a granary "(horreum)" featured niches
for images of the tutelary deities, who might include the "genius loci" or
guardian spirit of the site, Hercules, Silvanus, Fortuna Conservatrix ("Fortuna
the Preserver") and in the Greek East Aphrodite and Agathe Tyche. The "Lares
Compitales" were the tutelary gods of a neighborhood "(vicus)", each of which
had a "compitum" (shrine) devoted to these. During the Republic, the cult of
local or neighborhood tutelaries sometimes became rallying points for political
and social unrest. Americas. Native American religion, (see also Animism,
Shamanism) has extensive and varied systems of zoomorphic tutelaries, (also
known as power animals). In Mesoamerica these tutelary power animals are called
Nagual in the Aztec language and Uay in the Maya language. Michael Harner, "The
Sound of Rushing Water", 1968. Africa. In many of the animistic African
religions, tutelaries appear in a variety of forms. The Binou cult of the Dogon
people of Mali have totems around their villages.
