Pauline Christianity Pauline Christianity is a term used to refer to the
Christianity associated with the beliefs and doctrines espoused by Paul of
Tarsus through his writings. Orthodox Christianity relies heavily on these
teachings and considers them to be amplifications and explanations of the
teachings of Jesus. Others perceive in Paul's writings, teachings that are
different from the original teachings of Jesus documented in the canonical
gospels, early Acts and the rest of the New Testament, such as the Epistle of
James. Proponents of the perceived, distinctive Pauline form of Christianity,
include Marcion of Sinope, the 2nd century theologian and excommunicated
heresiarch, who asserted that Paul was the "only" apostle who had rightly
understood the new message of salvation as delivered by Jesus Christ. Opponents
of the same era include the Ebionites and Nazarenes, Jewish Christians who
rejected Paul for straying from "normative" Judaism. "Pauline Christianity", as
an expression, first came into use in the 20th century among scholars who
proposed different strands of thought within Early Christianity, wherein Paul
was a powerful influence. It has come into widespread use among non-Christian
scholars, and depends on the claim that the form of the faith found in the
writings of Paul is different from that found elsewhere in the New Testament,
but also that his influence came to predominate. Reference is made to the large
number of non-canonical texts, some of which have been discovered during the
last 100 years, which show the many movements and strands of thought emanating
from Jesus' life and teaching or which may be contemporary with them, some of
which can be contrasted with Paul's thought. Of the more significant are
Ebionism and Gnosticism. However, there is no universal agreement as to
Gnosticism's relationship either to Christianity in general or the writings of
Paul. The expression is used by modern Christian scholars, such as Ziesler and
Mount, whose interest is in the recovery of Christian origins and the
contribution made by Paul to Christian doctrine, Christian Reconstructionism
and Restorationism. Characteristics of 'Pauline Christianity'. The
characteristics of the critical use of the term take a number of forms. They
are partly political and partly theological. Political. From a political
perspective, Robert Eisenman sees Pauline Christianity as a method of taming a
dangerous sect among radical Jews and making it palatable to Roman authorities.
Pauline Christianity was essentially based on Rome and made use of the
administrative skills which Rome had honed. Its system of organization with a
single bishop for each town was, in Bart Ehrman's view, the means by which it
obtained its hegemony. Theological. The theological aspect is the claim that
Paul transmuted Jesus the Jewish messiah into the universal (in a wider meaning
"catholic") Savior. Pauline theology is also a term referring to the teaching
and doctrines especially espoused by the apostle Paul through his writings.
Mainstream Christianity relies on Paul’s writings as integral to the biblical
theology of the New Testament and regards them as amplifications and
explanations consistent with the teachings of Jesus and other New Testament
writings. Christian scholars generally use the term expressing interest in the
recovery of Christian origins and the contribution made by Paul to Christian
doctrine. Others, especially non-Christian scholars, claim to see a Pauline
distinction different from that found elsewhere in the New Testament, a
distinction that unduly influenced later Christianity. Other views. The use of
the term by Christian scholars, such as John Ziesler, is altogether different.
Pauline Christianity is the development of thinking about Jesus in a gentile
missionary context; Christopher Rowlands concludes that Paul did not materially
alter the teachings of Jesus. Much of this view turns on the significance of
the Council of Jerusalem. According to this view, James decreed that
Christianity was for the Gentiles and not just for the Jews, and quoted the
prophet Amos in support of this position (the "Apostolic Decree" is found in ).
He entrusted Paul among others with bringing their decision to Antioch ().
Christians themselves disagree as to how far there was tension between Paul and
the Jerusalem Church. (See Paul of Tarsus). One difficulty is the tension
between Acts and Paul's letters; another is the disparity between his views in
different letters. Galatians is reserved about the teaching of the Jerusalem
church and is hostile toward Jews (whom he calls "Judaizers") who would impose
Jewish distinctives, codified in the Mosaic Law, on Gentile converts; in Romans
Paul is deeply concerned about the spiritual condition and ultimate destiny of
the Jewish people. Paul's view of the subject. That people saw different
disciples of Christ as representing different teachings was addressed by Paul
himself, in the 1st letter to the Corinthians: (1 Cor 1:10–18) As a
pejorative term. The pejorative use of the expression "Pauline Christianity"
relies in part upon a thesis that Paul's supporters, as a distinct group, had
an undue influence on the formation of the canon of scripture, and also that
certain bishops, especially the Bishop of Rome, influenced the debates by which
the dogmatic formulations known as the Creeds came to be produced, thus
ensuring a Pauline interpretation of the gospel. The thesis is founded on
differences between the views of Paul and the apostles in Jerusalem, and also
between the picture of Paul in the Acts of the Apostles and his own writings,
such that it is claimed that the essential Jewish or Old Testament character of
the faith was lost (see Jewish Christian). Christian anarchists, such as Leo
Tolstoy and Ammon Hennacy, believe Paul distorted Jesus' teachings. Tolstoy
claims Paul was instrumental in the church's "deviation" from Jesus' teaching
and practices, whilst Hennacy believed "Paul spoiled the message of Christ."
According to Tom O'Golo, the Ebionites believed Paul was a false prophet whose
task was not to convert Romans to Christians but Christians to Romans.
Irenaeus, bishop of Lyon, wrote in the latter half of the 2nd century that the
Ebionites rejected Paul as an apostate from the law, using only a version of
the Gospel according to St. Matthew, known as the Gospel of the Ebionites. The
argument made that Christian doctrine (that is, the teachings of Jesus) was
subsequently distorted by Paul and the Church of Rome depends on a view as to
how the canon of Scripture came to be compiled, about which little is known
(for details, see Biblical canon). The earliest references to Paul's writing
are fragmentary: Clement of Rome, writing about AD 95, quotes from Romans;
Ignatius of Antioch (d. AD 115) quotes from 1 Corinthians, Romans, and from 1
Timothy and Titus as if authoritative, not merely as the opinion of one writer.
As to his influence, there are considerable differences of scholarly opinion
concerning how far Paul did in fact influence Christian doctrine. Among the
most radical is G.A. Wells, a professor of German rather than of theology or
history, whose view is that Jesus was a mythical figure and that Christianity
was in good part invented by Paul. More widely influential is the view of the
19th century German theologian F.C. Baur, founder of the Tübingen school, that
Paul was utterly opposed to the disciples, based upon his view that Acts was
late and unreliable and who contended that Catholic Christianity was a
synthesis of the views of Paul and the Judaising church in Jerusalem. Since
Harnack, the Tübingen position has been generally abandoned, though the view
that Paul took over the faith and transformed the Jewish teacher to the Son of
God is still widely canvassed. It depends on a comparison between the books of
the New Testament which cannot be made here, but see Paul of Tarsus, and the
claims of Ultradispensationalists such as E. W. Bullinger who view the
distinction abhorred by the Ebionites as positive and essential doctrine. On
the other side, the idea that Paul invented Christianity is disputed by
numerous Christian writers. Christopher Rowlands contends that, "the extent of
his influence on Christian thought has been overestimated". Thus, though
thirteen letters under his name appear in the New Testament, the great
controversies of the 3rd and 4th centuries were about the Person of Christ and
the nature of God - the so-called Christological and Trinitarian debates -in
which St. Paul does not greatly feature; likewise, the Nicene Creed contains no
doctrine of atonement. Moreover, while the influence of the Church of Rome was
very important in the credal debates, Greek theologians such as Athanasius, the
Cappadocian Fathers, Basil the Great, Gregory of Nazianzus and Gregory of Nyssa
were formidable figures. The resolution of these controversies at the Council
of Chalcedon was not dictated by the Bishop of Rome or Latin Christendom, but
was made more difficult by the necessary task of translating technical terms
between the two languages of Greek and Latin, and not by arguments over Pauline
theology. As for the New Testament itself, there are evident tensions between
the Judaizing party and Paul's views, which are made plain by a comparison
between Acts and Paul's letters. How far Paul is to be taken as anti-Jewish
(pro-Hellenization or Romanization) is a matter of disagreement, but there has
been widespread acknowledgement of the view of W. D. Davies that the essential
Jewishness of Paul's Christian perspective has been underplayed. In Davies'
view, Paul replaced the Torah, the Jewish Law or Mosaic Law, with Christ. In
any case, "the problems with which he wrestles in his letters were probably
typical of many which were facing the Christian sect during this period".
Further, by contrast one of the common features of Protestant churches,
certainly in English-speaking countries and those influenced by the reformers
Martin Luther and John Calvin, is their use of formulations other than the
ancient Creeds, such as the Westminster Confession of Faith, in which Pauline
formulations play a much greater part. Ideas such as justification by faith,
which, though not absent from Catholic formulations, play a much more central
role in Protestant thinking, where they are considered fundamental Christian
truths and essential for defining the Gospel. As to the conclusion that Paul
distorted rather than developed the faith, this depends upon a judgment as to
wherein lies the right path. Henry Chadwick, former Oxford don, commented about
a later controversy: "It was not that the heretics departed from the road; it
was that they took a path along which the road was not subsequently built."
Roman Catholics, Eastern and Oriental Orthodox, conservative Protestants, and
most Messianic Jews contend that Paul's writings were a legitimate
interpretation of the Gospel. Those who disagree with them either argue that
Paul distorted the original and true faith or claim that Christianity is,
largely, his invention. The former include such secular commentators as the
philosophers Friedrich Nietzsche and Bertrand Russell, whose criticisms are
based upon their moral objections to Paul's thought; others thinkers, such as
Slavoj Žižek and Alain Badiou, also agree with this interpretation, but hold
much more positive opinions about Paul's theological influence.
