Pelagianism Pelagianism is a theological theory named after Pelagius (AD 354
‚Äì AD 420/440), although he denied, at least at some point in his life, many
of the doctrines associated with his name. It is the belief that original sin
did not taint human nature and that mortal will is still capable of choosing
good or evil without special Divine aid. This is still sometimes called Limited
Depravity. Thus, Adam's sin was "to set a bad example" for his progeny, but his
actions did not have the other consequences imputed to original sin.
Pelagianism views the role of Jesus as "setting a good example" for the rest of
humanity (thus counteracting Adam's bad example) as well as providing an
atonement for our sins. In short, humanity has full control, and thus full
responsibility, for obeying the Gospel "in addition to" full responsibility for
every sin (the latter insisted upon by both proponents and opponents of
Pelagianism). According to Pelagian doctrine, because humans are sinners by
choice, they are therefore criminals who need the atonement of Jesus Christ.
Sinners are not victims, they are criminals who need pardon. Pelagianism stands
in contrast to two other prominent theological theories: Semipelagianism and
Total Depravity. History. Pelagius was opposed by Saint Augustine, one of the
most influential early Church Fathers. When Pelagius taught that moral
perfection was attainable in this life without the assistance of divine grace
through human free will, Saint Augustine contradicted this by saying that
perfection was impossible without grace because we are born sinners with a
sinful heart and will. The Pelagians charged Augustine on the grounds that the
doctrine of original sin amounted to Manichaeism: the Manichaeans taught that
the flesh was in itself sinful (and they denied that Jesus came in the flesh)
‚Äì and this charge would have carried added weight since contemporaries knew
that Augustine himself had been a Manichaean layman before his conversion to
Christianity. Augustine also taught that a person's salvation comes solely
through an irresistible free gift, the efficacious grace of God, but that this
was a gift that one had a free choice to accept or refuse. Pelagianism was
attacked in the "Council of Diospolis" (also known as Lydda; modern Lod) and
condemned in 418 at the Council of Carthage. These condemnations were ratified
at the Council of Ephesus in 431. The strict moral teachings of the Pelagians
were influential in southern Italy and Sicily, where they were openly preached
until the death of Julian of Eclanum in 455, and in Britain until the coming of
Saint Germanus of Auxerre. In "De causa Dei contra Pelagium et de virtute
causarum", Thomas Bradwardine denounced Pelagians in the 14th century and
Gabriel Biel did the same in the 15th century. Pelagius. Little or nothing is
known about the life of Pelagius. Although he is frequently referred to as a
"British" monk, it is by no means certain where his origins lay. Augustine says
that he lived in Rome "for a very long time" and referred to him as "Brito" to
distinguish him from a different man called Pelagius of Tarentum. Bede refers
to him as "Pelagius Bretto". St. Jerome suggests he was of Scottish descent but
in such terms as to leave it uncertain as to whether Pelagius was from Scotland
or Ireland. Other sources place his origins in Brittany. He was certainly well
known in the Roman province, both for the harsh asceticism of his public life,
as well as the power and persuasiveness of his speech. Until his more radical
ideas saw daylight, even such pillars of the Church as Augustine referred to
him as ‚Äúsaintly.‚Äù Pelagius taught that the human will, as created with its
abilities by God, was sufficient to live a sinless life, although he believed
that God's grace assisted every good work. Pelagius did not believe that all
humanity was guilty in Adam's sin, but said that Adam had condemned humankind
through bad example, and that Christ‚Äôs good example offered humanity a path
to salvation, through sacrifice and through instruction of the will. Jerome
emerged as one of the chief critics of Pelagianism, because, according to him,
sin was a part of human nature and we couldn't help but to sin. Comparison of
teaching. Church Fathers on free will. Many of the Church Fathers taught that
humans have the power of free will and the choice over good and evil. Justin
Martyr said that 'every created being is so constituted as to be capable of
vice and virtue. For he can do nothing praiseworthy, if he had not the power of
turning either way'. 'Unless we suppose man has the power to choose the good
and refuse the evil, no one can be accountable for any action whatever.' (The
First Apology, 43). Tertullian also argued that no reward can be justly
bestowed, no punishment can be justly inflicted, upon him who is good or bad by
necessity, and not by his own choice. (Doctrine of the Will by Asa Mahan,
p.¬ 61). Likewise Origen, and Clement of Alexandria Justin Martyr said, ‚ÄúLet
some suppose, from what has been said by us, that we say that whatever occurs
happens by a fatal necessity, because it is foretold as known beforehand, this
too we explain. We have learned from the prophets, and we hold it to be true,
that punishments, chastisements, and good rewards, are rendered according to
the merit of each man‚Äôs actions. Now, if this is not so, but all things
happen by fate, then neither is anything at all in our own power. For if it is
predetermined that this man will be good, and this other man will be evil,
neither is the first one meritorious nor the latter man to be blamed. And
again, unless the human race has the power of avoiding evil and choosing good
by free choice, they are not accountable for their actions.‚Äù Justin Martyr
said, ‚ÄúI have proven in what has been said that those who were foreknown to
be unrighteous, whether men or angels, are not made wicked by God‚Äôs fault.
Rather, each man is what he will appear to be through his own fault.‚Äù Tatian
said, ‚ÄúWe were not created to die. Rather, we die by our own fault. Our free
will has destroyed us. We who were free have become slaves. We have been sold
through sin. Nothing evil has been created by God. We ourselves have manifested
wickedness. But we, who have manifested it, are able again to reject it.‚Äù
Melito said, ‚ÄúThere is, therefore, nothing to hinder you from changing your
evil manner to life, because you are a free man.‚Äù Theophilus said, ‚ÄúIf, on
the other hand, he would turn to the things of death, disobeying God, he would
himself be the cause of death to himself. For God made man free, and with power
of himself.‚Äù Irenaeus said, ‚ÄúBut man, being endowed with reason, and in
this respect similar to God, having been made free in his will, and with power
over himself, is himself his own cause that sometimes he becomes wheat, and
sometimes chaff.‚Äù Irenaeus said, ‚ÄúLet your light so shine before men, that
they may see your good deeds‚Äô‚Ä¶And ‚ÄòWhy call me, Lord, Lord, and do not do
the things that I say?‚Äô‚Ä¶All such passages demonstrate the independent will
of man‚Ä¶For it is in man‚Äôs power to disobey God and to forfeit what is
good.‚Äù Clement of Alexandria said, ‚ÄúWe‚Ä¶have believed and are saved by
voluntary choice.‚Äù Tertullian said, ‚ÄúI find, then, that man was constituted
free by God. He was master of his own will and power‚Ä¶For a law would not be
imposed upon one who did not have it in his power to render that obedience
which is due to law. Nor again, would the penalty of death be threatened
against sin, if a contempt of the law were impossible to man in the liberty of
his will‚Ä¶Man is free, with a will either for obedience or resistance.
Pelagius's views. ‚ÄúWhenever I have to speak on the subject of moral
instruction and conduct of a holy life, it is my practice first to demonstrate
the power and quality of human nature and to show what it is capable of
achieving, and then to go on to encourage the mind of my listener to consider
the idea of different kinds of virtues, in case it may be of little or no
profit to him to be summoned to pursue ends which he has perhaps assumed
hitherto to be beyond his reach; for we can never end upon the path of virtue
unless we have hope as our guide and compassion‚Ä¶any good of which human
nature is capable has to be revealed, since what is shown to be practicable
must be put into practice." "It was because God wished to bestow on the
rational creature the gift of doing good of his own free will and the capacity
to exercise free choice, by implanting in man the possibility of choosing
either alternative...he could do either quite naturally and then bend his will
in the other direction too. He could not claim to possess the good of his own
volition, unless he was the kind of creature that could also have possessed
evil. Our most excellent creator wished us to be able to do either but actually
to do only one, that is, good, which he also commanded, giving us the capacity
to do evil only so that we might do His will by exercising our own. That being
so, this very capacity to do evil is also good - good, I say, because it makes
the good part better by making it voluntary and independent, not bound by
necessity but free to decide for itself." "Those who are unwilling to correct
their own way of life appear to want to correct nature itself instead." "And
lest, on the other hand, it should be thought to be nature's fault that some
have been unrighteous, I shall use the evidence of the scripture, which
everywhere lay upon sinners the heavy weight of the charge of having used their
own will and do not excuse them for having acted only under constraint of
nature." "Yet we do not defend the good of nature to such an extent that we
claim that it cannot do evil, since we undoubtedly declare also that it is
capable of good and evil; we merely try to protect it from an unjust charge, so
that we may not seem to be forced to do evil through a fault of our nature,
when, in fact, we do neither good nor evil without the exercise of our will and
always have the freedom to do one of the two, being always able to do either."
"Nothing impossible has been commanded by the God of justice and majesty...Why
do we indulge in pointless evasions, advancing the frailty of our own nature as
an objection to the one who commands us? No one knows better the true measure
of our strength than he who has given it to us nor does anyone understand
better how much we are able to do than he who has given us this very capacity
of ours to be able; nor has he who is just wished to command anything
impossible or he who is good intended to condemn a man for doing what he could
not avoid doing." "Grace indeed freely discharges sins, but with the consent
and choice of the believer." "Obedience results from a decision of the mind,
not the substance of the body." "Is it possible then for a man not to sin? Such
a claim is indeed a hard one and a bitter pill for sinners to swallow; it pains
the ears of all who desire to live unrighteous. Who will find it easy now to
fulfil the demands of righteousness, when there are some who find it hard even
to listen to them?" "When will a man guilty of any crime or sin accept with a
tranquil mind that his wickedness is a product of his own will, not of
necessity, and allow what he now strives to attribute to nature to be ascribed
to his own free choice? It affords endless comfort to transgressors of the
divine law if they are able to believe that their failure to do something is
due to inability rather than disinclination, since they understand from their
natural wisdom that no one can be judged for failing to do the impossible and
that what is justifiable on grounds of impossibility is either a small sin or
none at all." "Under the plea that it is impossible not to sin, they are given
a false sense of security in sinning...Anyone who hears that it is not possible
for him to be without sin will not even try to be what he judges to be
impossible, and the man who does not try to be without sin must perforce sin
all the time, and all the more boldly because he enjoys the false security of
believing that it is impossible for him not to sin...But if he were to hear
that he is able not to sin, then he would have exerted himself to fulfil what
he now knows to be possible when he is striving to fulfil it, to achieve his
purpose for the most part, even if not entirely." "Consider first whether that
which is such that a man cannot be without it ought to be described as sin at
all; for everything which cannot be avoided is now put down to nature but it is
impious to say that sin is inherent in nature, because in this way the author
of nature is being judged at fault‚Ä¶ how can it be proper to call sin by that
name if, like other natural things, it cannot be avoided, since all sin is to
be attributed to the free choice of the will, not to the defects of nature?"
Later reactions. How to react to Pelagius has remained a question in Christian
theology. Thomas Bradwardine (c. 1290-1349) wrote "De causa Dei contra Pelagium
et de virtute causarum ad suos Mertonenses". Johann Pupper, also known as
Johannes von Goch (c. 1400-1475), an Augustinian, recommended a return to the
text of the Bible as a remedy for Pelagianism. Later writers, such as Martin
Luther (1483-1546), John Calvin (1509-1564), and Cornelius Jansen (1585-1638)
reacted in different ways against Pelagianism, and evaluations of Lutheran,
Reformed, and Jansenist theologies have often turned on the question of what is
or is not Pelagian. Mormonism (The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
Saints). 2 Nephi 2:27-28, The Book of Mormon Additionally, Latter-day Saints
theology differs from Pelagianism in that it teaches that personal, individual
perfection is only possible through the Atonement of Jesus Christ.
