People of the Book People of the Book ( ′Ahl al-Kitāb) is a term used to
designate non-Muslim adherents to faiths which have a revealed scripture
called, in Arabic, "Ahl-Al-Kitab" ( "the people of the Book" or "people of the
Scripture"). The three types of adherents to faiths that the Qur'an mentions as
"people of the book" are the Jews, Sabians and Christians. In Islam, the Muslim
scripture, the Qur'an, is taken to represent the completion of these
scriptures, and to synthesize them as God's true, final, and eternal message to
humanity. Because the People of the Book recognize the God of Abraham as the
one and only god, as do Muslims, and they practice revealed faiths based on
divine ordinances, tolerance and autonomy is accorded to them in societies
governed by sharia (Islamic divine law). In Judaism the term "People of the
Book" (Hebrew: עם הספר, "Am HaSefer") was used to refer specifically to
the Jewish people and the Torah, and to the Jewish people and the wider canon
of written Jewish law (including the Mishnah and the Talmud). Adherents of
other Abrahamic religions, which arose later than Judaism, were not added. As
such, the appellation is accepted by Jews as a reference to an identity rooted
fundamentally in Torah. In Christianity, the Catholic Church rejects the
similar expression "religion of the book" as a description of the Christian
faith, preferring the term "religion of the Word of God." Nevertheless, other
denominations, such as the Baptists, Methodists, Seventh-day Adventist Church
as well as Puritans and Shakers, have embraced the term "People of the Book."
Definition. The term "People of the Book" in the Qur'an refers to followers of
monotheistic Abrahamic religions that are older than Islam. This includes all
Christians, all Children of Israel (including Jews, Karaites and Samaritans),
and Sabians. Zoroastrianism is believed by scholars and historians to have been
founded between 1000 BCE and 600 BCE, making it older than Christianity and
Islam. It shares similar eschatological views with Christianity and Islam, and
recognizes life after death, Satan (as Angra Mainyu), Heaven, and Hell.
However, it is only regarded as one of the "people of the book" religions in
Iran. This definition is limited to those books that predate the Quran; they
are seen as divine guidance from God to man that has been corrupted. This
definition is not extended to followers of similar texts claiming divine
guidance after the revelation of the Quran, as the Quran is seen as the final
revelation and therefore any following are necessarily false. Islamic scholars
differ on whether Hindus are People of the Book. The Islamic conquest of India
necessitated that the definition be revised, as most India's inhabitants were
followers of the Indian religions. Many of the Muslim clergy of India
considered Hindus as people of the book, and from Muhhammad-bin-Kasim to
Aurangzib, Muslim rulers were willing to consider Hindus as people of the book.
Many Muslims did not treat Hindus as pagans or idol-worshippers, although
Hinduism does not include Adam, Eve, nor the various prophets of Abrahamic
religions. However, the present Muslim and South Asian worlds traditionally
were quite close in culture and trade despite differences in religions since
time immemorial, as evidenced by the development of the Hindu-Arabic numeral
system. It is worth mentioning that early Muslims who visited India believed
they saw the worship of one true God behind the mask of several deities.
Buddhism does not explicitly recognize a monotheistic God or the concept of
prophethood. Muslims however had at one point accorded them the status of
"people of the Book", and Al-Biruni wrote of Buddha as the prophet "burxan". It
is interesting to note the similarity between the Arabic word Sura and the
South Asian word Sutra. However, there is no formal God in Buddhism, although
Buddhism does not specifically oppose monotheism. But, it is explicitly stated
in Buddhist sutras that the worship of an Ishvara (an ancient South Asian term
for a creator god, most likely not referring to the Abrahamic God who may not
have been known in South Asia during the Buddha's lifetime, but given the
context meaning either Shiva, Kali or Brahma ) is unnecessary to the attainment
of Nirvana, as the Buddha believed worshipers are still trapped in an endless
cycle of rebirth (Samsara). Buddhists do not worship Brahma (a Hindu deity) or
"Deva" (an ancient South Asian term for a deity, today meaning either a Hindi
translation of the English "God"/ Latin "Deus" concept Christian Indians tend
to use the term "Parameshvara" or "Supreme Creator God" for the Christian God
the Father or a synonym for the ancient South Asian concept of Brahman). In
Buddhism, the historical Buddha, the celestial and predecessor Buddhas, and the
Buddhas to Be's (Bodhisattvas) fulfill the devotional needs of believers, while
an emphasis is placed on the lack of Creation and Judgement abilities of these
Salvation/Teaching deities. In the Qur'an. Throughout Islamic history, Muslims
have used these ayah (verses) to justify a variety of positions towards non-
Muslims. In some places and times, Muslims showed a great deal of tolerance
towards non-Muslims; in other places and times non-Muslims were treated as
enemies and persecuted. One verse in the Qur'an encourages neutral position
toward all non-Muslims. This verse says, ""Those who follow the Jewish
(scriptures) and the Sabians, Christians, Magians and Polytheists — God will
judge them On the Day of Judgement:"" (22:17). Dhimmi. Historically, a "dhimmi"
was a person who is protected under Islamic law by a pact contracted between
non-Muslims and authorities from their Muslim government: this status was first
made available to non-Muslims who were People of the Book (e.g. Jews and
Christians), but was later extended to include Sikhs, Zoroastrians, Mandeans,
Hindus and Buddhists. People of the Book living in non-Islamic nations were not
considered dhimmis. Non-Muslim People of the Book living in an Islamic nation
under Sharia law were given a number of rights, such as the right to freely
practice their faith in private and to receive state protection. In turn, they
had a legal responsibility, the payment of a special tax called jizya
("tribute") in place of zakat. The social structure of the Ottoman Empire would
serve as an example of how non-Muslims were treated. Because of the Hindu
traditions of Vedanta and Upanishads, and the prominent Hindu theological
perspective that there is a single Reality ("Brahman") from which the world
arises, Hindus eventually have been included as dhimmis. The Yazidi, Druze and
Azali faiths are small post-Islamic monotheistic faiths whose adherents mainly
reside in Muslim-majority countries. Because they number very few and have
seldom disturbed, countered or threatened Muslim authority, they are usually
regarded as dhimmis. The definition of "dhimmi" always excludes followers of
the Bahá'í Faith. This is because the Bahá'í Faith, which grew out of Shi'a
Islam, is a post-Islamic religion which does not accept the finality of
Muhammad's revelation. Instead, Bahá'ís believe in the concept of progressive
revelation, which states that God's will is progressively revealed through
different teachers at different times, and that there will never be a final
revelation. The Ahmadis (usually referred to by Muslims as "Qadianis") of
Pakistan are also not regarded as dhimmis by the vast majority of Muslims. This
is largely due to the fact that their prophet, Mirza Ghulam Ahmad, came over
1,300 years after Muhammad, who is viewed as the "last of the prophets" by
Sunni, Shia, and Ibadi variants of Islam. They differ from other post-Islamic
faiths in Muslim lands because Ahmadis first began as an Islamic reform
movement, threatening the established orthodoxy present in South Asian Islam,
and further was embraced by highly socially upward mobile westernizing Muslim
intellectuals of the day. These factors, compounded with the presence of the
colonial British authorities in India who had overthrown the Muslim Mughal
Empire, led Muslims to view the presence of Ahmadis as a fifth column serving
the British colonizers, and as a threat to "true" Islam. Pakistan to this day
requires its citizens to swear an oath of allegiance to Islam, and declare
Mirza Gulam Ahmad to be an apostate, should they elect to register as a Muslim
for governmental services. Judæo-Christian view. In the early Christian
experience the New Testament was added to the whole Jewish Tanakh, which after
Jerome's translation tended more and more to be bound up as a single volume,
and was accepted as a unified "locus" of authority: ""the" Book." Many
Christian missionaries in Africa, Asia and in the New World, developed writing
systems for indigenous people and then provided them with a written translation
of the Bible. As a result of this work, "People of the Book" became the usual
vernacular locution to refer to Christians among many African, Asian, and
Native American people of both hemispheres. Organizations such as the Wycliffe
Bible Translators and the United Bible Societies, have resulted in availability
of the Bible in 2,100 languages, which has further lent an identification with
the phrase among Christians themselves. Christian converts among evangelized
cultures, in particular, have the strongest identification with the term
"People of the Book" as the first written text produced in their native
language, as with English-speaking people, has often been the Bible. Many
denominations, such as Baptists and the Methodist Church, which are notable for
their mission work, have therefore embraced the term "People of the Book."
Seventh-day Adventists. As stated on its official world website, the Seventh-
day Adventist Church (SDA) also embraces the term People of the Book. As also
noted in its official flagship publication "Adventist World" (February 2010
edition), it is claimed prominent Islamic leaders have endorsed Seventh-day
Adventists as the Qur'an's true People of the Book
