Perpetual virginity of Mary The doctrine of the perpetual virginity of Mary
expresses the Virgin Mary's "real and perpetual virginity even in the act of
giving birth to Jesus the Son of God made Man". According to the doctrine, Mary
was ever-virgin () for the whole of her life, making Jesus her only biological
son, whose conception and birth are held to be miraculous. By the fourth
century, the doctrine had been widely supported by the Church Fathers, and by
the seventh century it had been affirmed in a number of ecumenical councils.
The doctrine is part of the teaching of Catholicism and Anglo-Catholics, as
well as Eastern and Oriental Orthodoxy, as expressed in their liturgies, in
which they repeatedly refer to Mary as "ever virgin". Some early Protestant
reformers such as Martin Luther supported the doctrine. However, later Reformed
teaching largely abandoned it. The doctrine of perpetual virginity is, however,
currently maintained by some Anglican and Lutheran theologians. Doctrine and
representations. The doctrine of the perpetual virginity of Mary, which is
believed "de fide" (i.e. held by Catholics as being an essential part of
faith), states that Mary was a virgin before, during and after giving birth for
all her life. The threefold nature this doctrine (referring to "before",
"during" and "after") thus subsumes the doctrine of the virgin birth of Jesus.
The doctrine of perpetual virginity is also distinct from the dogma of the
Immaculate Conception of Mary, which relates to the conception of the Virgin
Mary herself without any stain ("macula" in Latin) of original sin. The Greek
term "Aeiparthenos" (i.e. "Ever Virgin") is attested to by Epiphanius of
Salamis from the early 4th century. It is widely used in the liturgy of the
Eastern Orthodox Church. The Catechism of the Catholic Church (item 499) also
includes to the term Aeiparthenos and referring to the dogmatic constitution
Lumen Gentium (item 57) states: "Christ's birth did not diminish his mother's
virginal integrity but sanctified it." The doctrine of perpetual virginity is
also held by some Anglican and some Lutheran churches, but not all of those
churches endorse the doctrine. Eastern Orthodox liturgical prayers typically
end with "Remembering our most holy, pure, blessed, and glorious Lady, the
Theotokos and Ever Virgin Mary". The virginity of Mary at the time of her
conception of Jesus is a key topic in Marian art in the Catholic Church,
usually represented as the annunciation to Mary by the Archangel Gabriel that
she would virginally conceive a child to be born the Son of God. Frescos
depicting this scene have appeared in Roman Catholic Marian churches for
centuries. The oldest fresco of the annunciation is a 4th century depiction in
the Catacomb of Priscilla in Rome. Mary's virginity even after her conception
of Jesus is regularly represented in the Christian art of both the Eastern
Orthodox and Oriental Orthodox (as well as in early Western religious art) by
including in Nativity scenes the figure of Salome, whom the Gospel of James
presents as finding that Mary had preserved her virginity even in giving birth
to her son. In many icons, Mary's perpetual virginity is signified by three
stars that appear on her left, her right, and above her or on her head, which
represent her virginity before, during and after giving birth. Development of
the doctrine. Early Church. As of the second century, interest developed within
the early Church regarding the conception of Jesus and the virginity of Mary.
The majority of early Christian writers accepted the virginal conception of
Jesus via reliance on the accounts in the gospels of Luke and Matthew, yet, the
focus of these early discussions was of virginity before birth, not during or
afterwards. The interpretation of the Matthew 1:25 statement that Joseph "knew
her not till she had brought forth her firstborn son" and of the various New
Testament mentions of the brothers (and sisters) of Jesus is discussed below
under the heading "Scripture". Some early writers interpreted Matthew's
statement to mean that Joseph and Mary did have normal marital relations after
Jesus' birth, and that James, Joses, Jude, and Simon were the biological sons
of Mary and Joseph; and, thus, Jesus' half-brothers. A second century document
that paid special attention to Mary’s virginity was originally known as the
"Nativity of Mary", but later became known as the "Protoevangelium of James".
The document tells of Mary’s virginity before giving birth, the miraculous
way in which she gave birth, and her physical virginity even after giving
birth. The work also claims that Jesus' "brothers" and "sisters" are Joseph’s
children from a marriage previous to his union with Mary. However, this text
does not explicitly assert Mary's perpetual virginity after the birth of Jesus.
The "brothers" and "sisters" of Jesus mentioned in the Gospels, and the "James,
the Lord's brother", mentioned in , "the brother of Jesus, who was called
Christ, whose name was James", mentioned by Josephus were thus interpreted by
some texts as not being children of Mary. 2nd to 4th century. There was no full
consensus on the doctrine of perpetual virginity within the early Church by the
end of the second century, e.g. Tertullian (c.160 – c.225) did not teach the
doctrine (although he taught virgin birth), but Irenaeus (c.130 – c.202)
taught perpetual virginity, along with other Marian themes. However, wider
support for the doctrine began to appear within the next century. Origen (185-
254) was emphatic on the issue of the brothers of Jesus, and stated that he
believed them to have been the children of Joseph from a previous marriage.
Helvidius appealed to the authority of Tertullian against the doctrine of
Mary's perpetual virginity, to which Jerome (c.340-419) replied, of Tertullian,
that he was "not a man of the church." By the 4th century, the doctrine of
perpetual virginity had been well attested. For example, references can be
found in the 3rd century writings of Hippolytus of Rome, who called Mary "the
tabernacle exempt from defilement and corruption," and the 4th century works of
Athanasius, Epiphanius, Hilary, Didymus, Ambrose, Jerome, and Siricius
continued the attestations to perpetual virginity - a trend that gathered pace
in the next century. Church Fathers and the Middle Ages. John Chrysostom
(347–407) defended perpetual virginity on a number of grounds, one of which
was Jesus' commands to his mother in Calvary: "Woman, behold your son!" and to
his disciple "Behold, thy mother!" in . Since the second century these two
statements of Jesus from the cross had been the basis of reasonings that Mary
had no other children and "from that hour the disciple took her unto his own
home" because after the deaths of Joseph and Jesus there was no one else to
look after Mary, and she had to be entrusted to the disciple. By the time of
Gregory of Nyssa and Augustine of Hippo, with the increased emphasis on Marian
piety, a wider role for Mary began to appear in the context of the history of
salvation. Augustine himself presented a number of arguments in favor of the
doctrine of perpetual virginity. Early in the 7th century, in the "Short Book
on the Perpetual Virginity of Blessed Mary" Isidore of Seville connected the
Mariological and Christological themes by linking the virginity of Mary to the
divinity of Christ in a single line of argument. The Lateran Council of 649,
attended by Maximus the Confessor, explicitly affirmed the teaching of Mary's
virginity before, during and after birth. This was further affirmed at the
sixth ecumenical council in 680. Another book, "The History of Joseph the
Carpenter" (7th Century), presents Jesus as speaking, at the death of Joseph,
of Mary as "my mother, virgin undefiled". Over the centuries the interpretation
of Mary as an ever virgin bride of the Lord who had taken a vow of perpetual
chastity spread and was in full vogue by the time of Rupert of Deutz in the
12th century. By the 13th century, Thomas Aquinas had fashioned long and
detailed theological arguments in defense of the doctrine and stated that a
denial of the perpetual virginity of Mary would be derogatory to the perfection
of Christ, an insult to the Holy Spirit, and an affront to the dignity of the
Mother of God. Mary, the Second Eve. As of the fourth century, in discussing
God's plan of salvation, a parallel theme began to appear in which Mary's
obedience ("be it unto me according to thy word" in ) and the doctrine of
perpetual virginity were counter-positioned against Adam and Eve, just as
Jesus' obedience was counter positioned against that of Adam in . The concept
of Mary as the Second Eve was first introduced by Justin Martyr around 155 AD.
In this perspective, which was discussed in detail by Irenaeus, supported by
Jerome, and then grew further, the vow of obedience and virginity of Mary
positioned her as the "Second Eve" as part of the plan of salvation, just as
Jesus was positioned as the Second Adam. The theme developed by the Church
Fathers ran parallel to the theme developed by Apostle Paul in when he compared
Adam's sin with the obedience of Jesus to the will of the Father, all the way
to Calvary: "For just as by the one man’s disobedience the many were made
sinners, so by the one man’s obedience the many will be made righteous." In
the same manner, Mary's obedience to the statements of the angel, and her
adherence to her vow of perpetual virginity was seen as a remedy for the damage
caused by Eve. The Second Eve teaching continued to grew among Catholics, and
in discussing perpetual virginity, the 1566 Catechism of the Council of Trent
explicitly taught that while Eve by believing the serpent brought malediction
on the human race, Mary by believing the angel brought benediction to mankind.
The concept of the Second Eve has continued to remain part of Catholic
teachings, e.g. Pope Pius XII referred to it in the encyclical Mystici Corporis
Christi and Pope John Paul II referred to it in a General Audience at the
Vatican in 1980. Protestant Reformation. The start of the Protestant
Reformation at the beginning of the 16th century did not immediately bring
about a rejection of the doctrine of perpetual virginity and several leaders of
the Reformation provided varying degrees of support for it, at times without
directly endorsing it. The early Protestant reformers felt that Scripture
required the acceptance of the virgin birth of Jesus, but only permitted the
acceptance of perpetual virginity. Over time, many Protestant churches stopped
teaching the doctrine and other Protestant churches denied it. Support by early
reformers. Martin Luther believed that Mary did not have other children and did
not have any marital relations with Joseph. The Latin text of the 1537 Smalcald
Articles, written by Martin Luther, used the term "Ever Virgin" to refer to
Mary. The perpetual virginity of Mary was Luther's lifelong belief, even after
he rejected other Marian doctrines. Huldrych Zwingli directly supported
perpetual virginity and wrote: "I firmly believe that , ... forever remained a
pure, intact Virgin." Like Zwingli, the English reformers also supported the
concept of perpetual virginity, but often varied on their reasons for the
support. Luther and Zwingli's support of perpetual virginity was endorsed by
Heinrich Bullinger and was included in the 1566 Second Helvetic Confession.
John Calvin was less emphatic in his open support of the idea, and neither
flatly accepted or rejected it. He cautioned against the idea of "impious
speculation" on the topic of perpetual virginity. However, Calvin rejected
arguments against Mary's perpetual virginity based on the mention in Scripture
of brothers of Jesus that were interpreted to imply that Mary had other
children. The Anglican reformers of the 16th and 17th century supported
perpetual virginity "on the basis of ancient Christian authority". In the 18th
century, John Wesley, one of the founders of Methodism, also supported the
doctrine and wrote that: "... born of the blessed Virgin Mary, who, as well
after as before she brought Him forth, continued a pure and unspotted virgin."
Later Protestant teachings. Many current Protestant churches teach the virgin
birth of Jesus, without teaching that Mary remained a virgin for the rest of
her life. Diarmaid MacCulloch, a historian of the Reformation, wrote that the
reason why the early reformers upheld Mary’s perpetual virginity was that she
was "the guarantee of the Incarnation of Christ", a teaching that was being
denied by the same radicals that were denying Mary’s perpetual virginity.
However, the absence of clear Biblical statements expressing the doctrine, in
combination with the principle of "sola scriptura", kept references to the
doctrine out of the Reformation creeds and, together with the tendency to
associate veneration of Mary with idolatry and the rejection of clerical
celibacy, led to the eventual denial of this doctrine among Protestants, who,
thus uncommitted to the doctrine of perpetual virginity, take the "brothers"
(ἀδελφοί) οf Jesus mentioned in the New Testament most naturally (but
not certainly) to be children of Mary and thus Jesus' half brothers, rather
than his cousins or stepbrothers from a postulated previous marriage of Joseph.
However, some conservative Lutheran scholars such as Franz Pieper (1852–1931)
refused to follow the tendency among Protestants to insist that Mary and Joseph
had marital relations and children after the birth of Jesus. It is implicit in
his "Christian Dogmatics" that belief in Mary's perpetual virginity is the
older and traditional view among Lutherans. He stated, that "we should simply
hold that (Mary) remained a virgin after the birth of Christ because Scripture
does not state or indicate that she later lost her virginity". He taught that
"Christ, our Saviour, was the real and natural fruit of Mary's virginal womb .
. . This was without the cooperation of a man, and she remained a virgin after
that"; and that " Christ . . . was the only Son of Mary, and the Virgin Mary
bore no children besides Him . . . I am inclined to agree with those who
declare that 'brothers' really mean 'cousins' here, for Holy Writ and the Jews
always call cousins brothers". Scripture. Some passages in the New Testament
have been used to voice objections to the doctrine of perpetual virginity,
while other passages have been used to support it. One objection concerns the
mention of brothers and sisters of Jesus, who include James, Joses (the form in
, but "Joseph" in ), Simon, and Jude. They have been interpreted as children of
Joseph and Mary, a view put forward by Tertullian and perhaps by Hegesippus,
but that, when proposed by Helvidius, met with opposition from Jerome, who was
apparently voicing the general Christian opinion at the time. Jerome held that
the "brethren" in question were children of Mary, the mother of James and
Joses, named in and , a sister of Jesus' mother (), making them cousins of
Jesus. Another view, expressed by Eusebius and Epiphanius, is that they were
children of Joseph by an earlier marriage. A modern view is that they were
children of Cleopas, a brother of Joseph according to Hegesippus, and of "Mary,
the mother of James and Joses" seen as sister-in-law, not blood sister of Mary,
the mother of Jesus. The 1978 book "Mary in the New Testament: A Collaborative
Assessment by Protestant and Roman Catholic Scholars" concluded that "it cannot
be said that the New Testament identifies them (the "brothers and sisters" of
Jesus) without doubt as blood brothers and sisters and hence as children of
Mary". This interpretation, although upheld by many, is rejected by writers
such as Howard Marshall. and is considered implausible by Raymond E. Brown. A
passage used to support the doctrine of perpetual virginity is of the sayings
of Jesus on the cross, i.e. the pair of commands first to his mother "Woman,
behold your son!" and then to his disciple "Behold, thy mother!" in . The
Gospel of John then states that "from that hour the disciple took her unto his
own home". Since the time of the Church Fathers this statement has been used to
reason that after the death of Jesus there was no one else in the immediate
family to look after Mary, and she had to be entrusted to the disciple given
that she had no other children. This passage was one of the arguments Pope John
Paul II presented in support of perpetual virginity. John Paul II also reasoned
that the command "Behold your son!" was not simply the entrustment of Mary to
the disciple, but also the entrustment of the disciple to Mary in order to fill
the maternal gap left by the death of her only son on the cross. Islamic
perspective. In Sura 19, the Qur'an declares that Jesus was the result of a
virgin conception (verses 20-22), and some extend this to mean perpetual
virginity of Mary. There is no clear doctrinal belief one way or another as to
whether she retained her virginity after Jesus' birth. In Islam Jesus and Mary
were the only two children not be touched by Satan at the moment of their
birth, for God placed a veil between them and Satan. The Qur'an says that Jesus
was the result of a virgin birth. The account of the annunciation and birth of
Jesus is provided in Sura 3 and 19 of The Qur'an, where an angel is sent to
announce that Mary should expect to bear a son, despite being a virgin.
