Pharisees The Pharisees (Latin "pharis√¶us", -"i"; from Hebrew "pƒïr√ªsh√Æm",
pl. of "pƒÅr√ªsh", meaning ‚Äú"set apart"‚Äù, Qal passive participle of the
verb "pƒÅrƒÅsh", through Greek , - "pharisaios") were at various times a
political party, a social movement, and a school of thought among Jews during
the Second Temple period beginning under the Hasmonean dynasty (140‚Äì37¬ BCE)
in the wake of the Maccabean Revolt. Conflicts between the Pharisees and the
Sadducees took place in the context of much broader and longstanding social and
religious conflicts among Jews dating back to the Babylonian captivity and
exacerbated by the Roman conquest. One conflict was class, between the wealthy
and the poor, as the Sadducees included mainly the priestly and aristocratic
families. Another conflict was cultural, between those who favored
Hellenization and those who resisted it. A third was juridico-religious,
between those who emphasized the importance of the Second Temple with its
cultic rites and services, and those who emphasized the importance of other
Mosaic laws and prophetic values. A fourth point of conflict, specifically
religious, involved different interpretations of the Torah and how to apply it
to current Jewish life, with the Sadducees recognizing only the Written Torah
and rejecting doctrines such as the Oral Torah and the Resurrection of the
Dead. Josephus (37 ‚Äì c. 100¬ CE), himself a Pharisee, claimed that the
Pharisees received the backing and goodwill of the common people, apparently in
contrast to the more elite Sadducees. Pharisees claimed prophetic or Mosaic
authority for their interpretation of Jewish laws, while the Sadducees
represented the authority of the priestly privileges and prerogatives
established since the days of Solomon, when Zadok, their ancestor (disputed;
see Sadducees), officiated as High Priest. Josephus' statement 'common people'
strongly indicates that most Jews were 'just Jewish people' by separating them,
and making them independent of the main liturgical groups. The New Testament
also makes common reference to the common people indicating that the Jewish
identity was independent and stronger than these groups. Paul of Tarsus
indicates that changing liturgical sects in the Diaspora had occurred while
still identifying oneself as 'Jewish' or 'Hebrew' 'circumcised on the eighth
day, of the people of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, the Hebrew of Hebrews;
in regard to the law, I am a Pharisee' Philippians 3:5. After the destruction
of the Second Temple in 70¬ CE, Pharisaic beliefs became the liturgical and
ritualistic basis for Rabbinic Judaism, which ultimately produced the normative
traditional Judaism which is the basis for all contemporary forms of Judaism
except for Karaite Judaism. Outside of Jewish history and writings, the
Pharisees have been made notable by references in the New Testament to
conflicts between themselves and John the Baptist and with Jesus. There are
also several references in the New Testament to Paul of Tarsus being a
Pharisee. And the relationship between Early Christianity and the Pharisees was
not always hostile, as e.g. Gamaliel is often cited as a Pharisaic leader who
was sympathetic to Christians. Christian traditions have been a cause of
widespread awareness of the Pharisees. Sources. The first surviving historical
mention of the Pharisees is from the Jewish-Roman historian Josephus
(37‚Äì100¬ CE), in a description of the "four schools of thought," or "four
sects," into which the Jews were divided in the 1st century CE; the other
schools were the Essenes, who were generally apolitical and who may have
emerged as a sect of dissident priests who rejected either the Seleucid-
appointed or the Hasmonean high priests as illegitimate; the Sadducees, who
were the main antagonists of the Pharisees; and the "fourth philosophy"
possibly associated with the anti-Roman revolutionary groups such as the
Sicarii and the Zealots. Other sects emerged at this time, such as the Early
Christians in Jerusalem and the Therapeutae in Egypt. The book 2 Maccabees
(which in the Catholic tradition is a deuterocanonical book of the Bible)
focuses on the Jews' revolt against the Seleucid king Antiochus IV Epiphanes
and concludes with the defeat of his general, Nicanor, in 161¬ BCE by Judas
Maccabeus, the hero of the work. It was likely written by a Pharisee or someone
sympathetic toward Pharisees, as it includes several theological innovations:
propitiatory prayer for the dead, judgment day, intercession of saints, and
merits of the martyrs. The Mishnah is an authoritative codification of
Pharisaic law, edited by Judah haNasi around 200¬ CE. Most of the authorities
quoted in the Mishnah lived after the destruction of the Temple in 70¬ CE; it
thus marks the beginning of the transition from Pharisaic to Rabbinic (i.e.
modern normative) Judaism. History of Israel (600¬ BCE ‚Äì 160¬ BCE). The
deportation and exile of an unknown number of Jews of the ancient Kingdom of
Judah to Babylon by Nebuchadnezzar II, starting with the first deportation in
597¬ BCE and continuing after the fall of Jerusalem and destruction of the
Temple in 587¬ BCE, resulted in dramatic changes to Jewish culture and
religion. During the 70-year exile in Babylon, Jewish houses of assembly (known
in Hebrew as a "beit knesset" or in Greek as a "synagogue") and houses of
prayer (Hebrew "Beit Tefilah"; Greek œÄœÅŒøœÉŒµœÖœáŒ±ŒØ, "proseuchai") were the
primary meeting places for prayer, and the house of study ("beit midrash") was
the counterpart for the synagogue. In 539¬ BCE the Persians conquered Babylon,
and in 537¬ BCE Cyrus the Great allowed Jews to return to Judea and rebuild the
Temple. He did not, however, allow the restoration of the Judean monarchy,
which left the Judean priests as the dominant authority. Without the
constraining power of the monarchy, the authority of the Temple in civic life
was amplified. It was around this time that the Sadducee party emerged as the
party of priests and allied elites. However, the Second Temple, which was
completed in 515¬ BCE, had been constructed under the auspices of a foreign
power, and there were lingering questions about its legitimacy. This provided
the condition for the development of various sects or "schools of thought,"
each of which claimed exclusive authority to represent "Judaism," and which
typically shunned social intercourse, especially marriage, with members of
other sects. In the same period, the council of sages known as the Sanhedrin
may have codified and canonized the Hebrew Bible (Tanakh), from which,
following the return from Babylon, the Torah was read publicly on market-days.
The Temple was no longer the only institution for Jewish religious life. After
the building of the Second Temple in the time of Ezra the Scribe, the houses of
study and worship remained important secondary institutions in Jewish life.
Outside of Judea, the synagogue was often called a house of prayer. While most
Jews could not regularly attend the Temple service, they could meet at the
synagogue for morning, afternoon and evening prayers. On Mondays, Thursdays and
Sabbaths, a weekly Torah portion was read publicly in the synagogues, following
the tradition of public Torah readings instituted by Ezra. Although priests
controlled the rituals of the Temple, the scribes and sages, later called
"rabbis" ("Heb.": "my master"), dominated the study of the Torah. These sages
identified with the Prophets and maintained an oral tradition that they
believed had originated at Mount Sinai alongside the Torah of Moses. The
Pharisees had its origins in this new group of authorities. The Hellenistic
period of Jewish history began when Alexander the Great conquered Persia in
332¬ BCE. The rift between the priests and the sages developed during this
time, when Jews faced new political and cultural struggles. After Alexander's
death in 323¬ BCE, Judea was ruled by the Egyptian-Hellenic Ptolemies until
198¬ BCE, when the Syrian-Hellenic Seleucid Empire, under Antiochus III, seized
control. Then, in 167¬ BCE, the Seleucid king Antiochus IV invaded Judea,
entered the Temple, and stripped it of money and ceremonial objects. He imposed
a program of forced Hellenization, requiring Jews to abandon their own laws and
customs, thus precipitating the Maccabean Revolt. Jerusalem was liberated in
165¬ BCE and the Temple was restored. In 141¬ BCE an assembly of priests and
others affirmed Simon Maccabeus as high priest and leader, in effect
establishing the Hasmonean dynasty. Emergence of the Pharisees. After defeating
the Seleucid forces, Judas Maccabaeus's nephew John Hyrcanus established a new
monarchy in the form of the priestly Hasmonean dynasty in 152¬ BCE ‚Äî thus
establishing priests as political as well as religious authorities. Although
the Hasmoneans were heroes for resisting the Seleucids, their reign lacked the
legitimacy conferred by descent from the Davidic dynasty of the First Temple
era. The Pharisee ("separatist") party emerged largely out of the group of
scribes and sages who harked back to Ezra and the Great Assembly. The meaning
of their name is unclear; it may refer to their rejection of Hellenic culture
or to their objection to the Hasmonean monopoly on power. It is difficult to
state at what time the Pharisees, as a party, arose. Josephus first mentions
them in connection with Jonathan, the successor of Judas Maccabeus ("Ant."
xiii. 5, ¬ß 9). One of the factors that distinguished the Pharisees from other
groups prior to the destruction of the Temple was their belief that all Jews
had to observe the purity laws (which applied to the Temple service) "outside"
the Temple. The major difference, however, was the continued adherence of the
Pharisees to the laws and traditions of the Jewish people in the face of
assimilation. As Josephus noted, the Pharisees were considered the most expert
and accurate expositors of Jewish law. The Pharisees were one of at least four
major schools of thought within the Jewish religion around the 1st century.
They were also one of several successor groups of the "Hasidim" (the "pious"),
an anti-Hellenistic Jewish movement that formed in the time of the Seleucid
king, Antiochus Epiphanes (175‚Äì163¬ BCE). The social standing and beliefs of
the Pharisees changed over time, such that the role, significance, and meaning
of the Pharisees evolved as political and social conditions in Judea changed.
At no time did any of these sects constitute a majority; most Jews were non-
sectarian. Josephus indicates that the Pharisees received the backing and good-
will of the common people, apparently in contrast to the more elite Sadducees
associated with the ruling classes. In general, whereas the Sadducees were
conservative, aristocratic monarchists, the Pharisees were eclectic, popular,
and more democratic. (Roth 1970: 84) The Pharisaic position is exemplified by
the assertion that "A learned "mamzer" takes precedence over an ignorant High
Priest." (A "mamzer", according to the Pharisaic definition, is an outcast
child born of a forbidden relationship, such as adultery or incest, in which
marriage of the parents could not lawfully occur. The word is often, but
incorrectly, translated as "illegitimate".") Sadducees rejected the Pharisaic
tenet of an oral Torah, and created new interpretations based on a literal
understanding of verses. In their personal lives this often meant an
excessively stringent lifestyle from a Jewish perspective, as they did away
with the oral tradition, and in turn the Pharisaic Jewish understanding of the
Torah. An example of this differing approach is the interpretation of, "an eye
in place of an eye". The Pharisaic understanding was that the value of an eye
was to be paid by the perpetrator. In the Sadducees' view the words were given
a more literal interpretation, in which the offender's eye would be removed.
From the point of view of the Pharisees, the Sadducees wished to change the
Jewish understanding of the Torah. The sages of the Talmud see a direct link
between themselves and the Pharisees, and historians generally consider
Pharisaic Judaism to be the progenitor of Rabbinic Judaism, that is normative,
mainstream Judaism after the destruction of the Second Temple. All "mainstream"
forms of Judaism today consider themselves heirs of Rabbinic Judaism and,
ultimately, the Pharisees. The Hasmonean period. During the Hasmonean period,
the Sadducees and Pharisees functioned primarily as political parties. Although
the Pharisees did not support the wars of expansion of the Hasmoneans and the
forced conversions of the Idumeans, the political rift between them became
wider when a Pharisee suggested that the Hasmonean king Alexander Jannaeus
choose between being king and being High Priest. In response, Alexander Jannai
openly sided with the Sadducees by adopting their rites in the Temple. His
actions caused a riot in the Temple and led to a brief civil war that ended
with a bloody repression of the Pharisees, although at his deathbed the king
called for a reconciliation between the two parties. Alexander was succeeded by
his widow, Salome Alexandra, whose brother was Shimon ben Shetach, a leading
Pharisee. Josephus attests that Salome Alexandra was very favorably inclined
toward the Pharisees and that their political influence grew tremendously under
her reign, especially in the institution known as the Sanhedrin. Upon her death
her elder son Hyrcanus sought support from Pharisees, and her younger son,
Aristobulus, sought the support of the Sadducees. Josephus reports only one
specific conflict between the Pharisees and Hyrcanus. Essentially, criticism by
the Pharisees of Hyrcanus‚Äôs roles as High Priest and ethnarch led to
conflict. This culminated in a civil war that ended when the Roman general
Pompey intervened, and captured Jerusalem in 63¬ BCE. There is, however, good
reason to doubt this account by Josephus. First of all, Josephus reports
elsewhere that the Pharisees did not grow to power until the reign of Queen
Salome Alexandra (JW.1.110) The coins minted under Hyrcanus suggest that
Hyrcanus did not have complete secular authority. Furthermore, this account may
represent a piece of Pharisaic apologetics due to Josephus‚Äô Pharisaic
background. Therefore, this account might represent a historical creation meant
to elevate the status of the Pharisees during the height of the Hasmonean
Dynasty. Later texts like the Mishnah and the Talmud record a host of rulings
by Rabbis, some of whom are believed to be from among the Pharisees, concerning
sacrifices and other ritual practices in the Temple, torts, criminal law, and
governance. In their day, the influence of the Pharisees over the lives of the
common people remained strong and their rulings on Jewish law were deemed
authoritative by many. The Roman period. According to Josephus, the Pharisees
appeared before Pompey asking him to interfere and restore the old priesthood
while abolishing the royalty of the Hasmoneans altogether ("Ant." xiv. 3, ¬ß
2). They regarded Pompey‚Äôs defilement of the Temple in Jerusalem as a divine
punishment of Sadducean misrule. Pompey ended the monarchy and named Hyrcanus
high priest and ethnarch (a lesser title than "king"), the siege of the Temple
Mount coming to a close in 63¬ BCE. Six years later Hyrcanus was deprived of
the remainder of political authority and ultimate jurisdiction was given to the
Proconsul of Syria, who ruled through Hyrcanus's Idumaean associate Antipater,
and later Antipater's two sons Phasael (military governor of Judea) and Herod
(military governor of Galilee). In 40¬ BCE Aristobulus's son Antigonus
overthrew Hyrcanus and named himself king and high priest, and Herod fled to
Rome. In Rome, Herod sought the support of Mark Antony and Octavian, and
secured recognition by the Roman Senate as king, confirming the termination of
the Hasmonean dynasty. According to Josephus, Sadducean opposition to Herod led
him to treat the Pharisees favorably ("Ant." xiv. 9, ¬ß 4; xv. 1, ¬ß 1; 10, ¬ß
4; 11, ¬ß¬ß 5‚Äì6). Herod was an unpopular ruler, perceived as a Roman puppet.
Despite his restoration and expansion of the Second Temple, Herod‚Äôs notorious
treatment of his family and of the last Hasmonaeans further eroded his
popularity. According to Josephus, the Pharisees ultimately opposed him and
thus fell victims (4¬ BCE) to his bloodthirstiness ("Ant." xvii. 2, ¬ß 4; 6,
¬ß¬ß 2‚Äì4). The family of Boethus, whom Herod had raised to the high-
priesthood, revived the spirit of the Sadducees, and thenceforth the Pharisees
again had them as antagonists ("Ant." xviii. 1, ¬ß 4). In the first decades of
Roman rule, the Temple remained the center of Jewish ritual life. According to
the Torah, Jews were required to travel to Jerusalem and offer sacrifices at
the Temple three times a year: Pesach (Passover), Shavuot (the Feast of Weeks),
and Sukkot (the Feast of Tabernacles). The Pharisees, like the Sadducees, were
politically quiescent, and studied, taught, and worshiped in their own way. At
this time serious theological differences emerged between the Sadducees and
Pharisees. The notion that the sacred could exist outside of the Temple, a view
central to the Essenes, was shared and elevated by the Pharisees. The Pharisaic
legacy. At first the values of the Pharisees developed through their sectarian
debates with the Sadducees; then they developed through internal, non-sectarian
debates over the law as an adaptation to life without the Temple, and life in
exile, and eventually, to a more limited degree, life in conflict with
Christianity. These shifts mark the transformation of Pharasaic to Rabbinic
Judaism. Beliefs. Pharisaic views were non-creedal and non-dogmatic, and
heterogeneous. No single tractate of the key Rabbinic texts, the Mishnah and
the Talmud, is devoted to theological issues; these texts are concerned
primarily with interpretations of Jewish law, and anecdotes about the sages and
their values. Only one chapter of the Mishnah deals with theological issues; it
asserts that three kinds of people will have no share in "the world to come:
" those who deny the resurrection of the dead, those who deny the divinity of
the Torah, and Epicureans (who deny divine supervision of human affairs).
Another passage suggests a different set of core principles: normally, a Jew
may violate "any" law to save a life, but in Sanhedrin 74a, a ruling orders
Jews to accept martyrdom rather than violate the laws against idolatry, murder,
or adultery. (Judah haNasi, however, said that Jews must "be meticulous in
small religious duties as well as large ones, because you do not know what sort
of reward is coming for any of the religious duties," suggesting that all laws
are of equal importance). In comparison with Christianity, the Rabbis were not
especially concerned with the messiah or claims about the messiah or ranking
the laws in importance. Monotheism. One belief central to the Pharisees was
shared by all Jews of the time: monotheism. This is evident in the practice of
reciting the "Shema", a prayer composed of select verses from the Torah, at the
Temple and in synagogues; the "Shema" begins with the verses, "Hear O Israel,
the Lord is our God; the Lord is one." According to the Mishna, these passages
were recited in the Temple along with the twice-daily "Tamid" offering; Jews in
the diaspora, who did not have access to the Temple, recited these passages in
their houses of assembly. According to the Mishnah and Talmud, the Men of the
Great Assembly instituted the requirement that Jews both in Judea and in the
diaspora pray three times a day (morning, afternoon and evening), and include
in their prayers a recitation of these passages in the morning ("Shacharit")
and evening ("Ma'ariv") prayers. Wisdom. Pharisaic wisdom was compiled in one
book of the Mishna, "Pirke Avot". The Pharisaic attitude is perhaps best
exemplified by a story about Hillel the Elder, who lived at the end of the 1st
century BCE. A gentile once challenged the sage to explain the law while
standing on one foot. Hillel answered him with the rebuke, "That which is
hateful to you, do not do to your friend. That is the whole Torah; the rest is
the explanation ‚Äì go and study it." Free will and predestination. According
to Josephus, whereas the Sadducees believed that people have total free will
and the Essenes believed that all of a person's life is predestined, the
Pharisees believed that people have free will but that God also has
foreknowledge of human destiny. According to Josephus, Pharisees were further
distinguished from the Sadducees in that Pharisees believed in the resurrection
of the dead. It is likely that Josephus highlighted these differences because
he was writing for a Gentile audience, and questions concerning fate and a life
after death were important in Hellenic philosophy. In fact, it is difficult, or
impossible, to reconstruct a Second Temple Pharisaic theology, because Judaism
itself is non-creedal; that is, there is no dogma or set of orthodox beliefs
that Jews believed were required of Jews. Josephus himself emphasized laws
rather than beliefs when he described the characteristics of an apostate (a Jew
who does not follow traditional customs) and the requirements for conversion to
Judaism (circumcision, and adherence to traditional customs). In fact, the most
important divisions among different Jewish sects had to do with debates over
three areas of law: marriage, Sabbath and religious festivals, and the Temple
and purity. Debates over these and other matters of law continue to define
Judaism more than any particular dogma or creed. The afterlife. Unlike the
Sadducees, the Pharisees also believed in the resurrection of the dead in a
future, messianic age. The Pharisees believed in a literal resurrection of the
body. Practices. A Kingdom of Priests. Fundamentally, the Pharisees continued a
form of Judaism that extended beyond the Temple, applying Jewish law to mundane
activities in order to sanctify the every-day world. This was a more
participatory (or "democratic") form of Judaism, in which rituals were not
monopolized by an inherited priesthood but rather could be performed by all
adult Jews individually or collectively; whose leaders were not determined by
birth but by scholarly achievement. In general, the Pharisees emphasized a
commitment to social justice, belief in the brotherhood of mankind, and a faith
in the redemption of the Jewish nation and, ultimately, humanity. Moreover,
they believed that these ends would be achieved through halakha ("the walk, or
how to walk"), a corpus of laws derived from a close reading of sacred texts.
This belief entailed both a commitment to relate religion to ordinary concerns
and daily life, and a commitment to study and scholarly debate. Many, including
some scholars, have characterized the Sadducees as a sect that interpreted the
Torah literally, and the Pharisees as interpreting the Torah liberally. R'
Yitzhak Isaac Halevi suggests that this was not, in fact, a matter of religion.
He claims that the complete rejection of Judaism would not have been tolerated
under the Hasmonean rule and therefore Hellenists maintained that they were
rejecting not Judaism but Rabbinic law. Thus, the Sadducees were in fact a
political party not a religious sect. However, according to Jacob Neusner, this
view is a distortion. He suggests that two things fundamentally distinguished
the Pharisaic from the Sadducean approach to the Torah. First, Pharisees
believed in a broad and literal interpretation of Exodus (19:3‚Äì6), "you shall
be my own possession among all peoples; for all the earth is mine, and you
shall be to me a kingdom of priests and a holy nation," and the words of 2
Maccabees (2:17): "God gave all the people the heritage, the kingdom, the
priesthood, and the holiness." The Pharisees believed that the idea that all of
the children of Israel were to be like priests was expressed elsewhere in the
Torah, for example, when the Law itself was transferred from the sphere of the
priesthood to every man in Israel (Exodus 19: 29‚Äì24; Deuteronomy 6: 7, 11:
19; comp. 31: 9; Jeremiah 2: 8, 18:18). Moreover, the Torah already provided
some ways for all Jews to lead a priestly life: the precepts concerning unclean
meat were perhaps intended originally for the priests, but were extended to the
whole people (Leviticus 11; Deuteronomy 14:3‚Äì21); the prohibition of cutting
the flesh in mourning for the dead (Deuteronomy 14: 1‚Äì2, Leviticus 19: 28;
comp. Lev. 21: 5). The Pharisees believed that all Jews in their ordinary life,
and not just the Temple priesthood or Jews visiting the Temple, should observe
rules and rituals concerning purification. The Oral Torah. The Pharisees
believed that in addition to the written Torah recognized by both the Sadducees
and Pharisees and believed to have been written by Moses, there exists another
Torah, consisting of the corpus of oral laws and traditions transmitted by God
to Moses orally, and then memorized and passed down by Moses and his successors
over the generations. The Oral Torah functioned to elaborate and explicate what
was written, and the Pharisees asserted that the sacred scriptures were not
complete on their own terms and could therefore not be understood. The sages of
the Talmud believed that the Oral law was simultaneously revealed to Moses at
Sinai, "and" the product of debates among rabbis. Thus, one may conceive of the
"Oral Torah" not as a fixed text but as an ongoing process of analysis and
argument in which God is actively involved; it was this ongoing process that
was revealed at Sinai, and by participating in this ongoing process rabbis and
their students are actively participating in God's ongoing act of revelation.
As Jacob Neusner has explained, the schools of the Pharisees and rabbis were
and are holy Neusner, Jacob "Invitation to the Talmud: a Teaching Book" (1998):
8) The commitment to relate religion to daily life through the law has led some
(notably, Saint Paul and Martin Luther) to infer that the Pharisees were more
legalistic than other sects in the Second Temple Era. The authors of the
Gospels present Jesus as speaking harshly against some Pharisees (Josephus does
claim that the Pharisees were the "strictest" observers of the law, but he
likely meant "most accurate"). It is more accurate to say they were legalistic
in a different way. In some cases Pharisaic values led to an extension of the
law ‚Äî for example, the Torah requires priests to bathe themselves before
entering the Temple. The Pharisees washed themselves before Sabbath and
festival meals (in effect, making these holidays "temples in time"), and,
eventually, before all meals. Although this seems burdensome compared to the
practices of the Sadducees, in other cases, Pharisaic law was less strict. For
example, Jewish law prohibits Jews from carrying objects from a private domain
("reshut ha-yachid") to a public domain ("reshut ha-rabim") on Sabbath. This
law could have prevented Jews from carrying cooked dishes to the homes of
friends for Sabbath meals. The Pharisees ruled that adjacent houses connected
by lintels or fences could become connected by a legal procedure creating a
partnership among homeowners; thereby, clarifying the status of those common
areas as a private domain relative to the members of the partnership. In that
manner people could carry objects from building to building. Innovators or
preservers. The Mishna in the beginning of Avot and (in more detail) Maimonides
in his Introduction to "Mishneh Torah" records a chain of tradition (mesorah)
from Moses at Mount Sinai down to R' Ashi, redactor of the Talmud and last of
the Amoraim. This chain of tradition includes the interpretation of unclear
statements in the Bible (e.g. that the "fruit of a beautiful tree" refers to a
citron as opposed to any other fruit), the methods of textual exegesis (the
disagreements recorded in the Mishna and Talmud generally focus on methods of
exegesis), and Laws with Mosaic authority that cannot be derived from the
Biblical text (these include measurements ("e.g." what amount of an non-kosher
food must one eat to be liable), the amount and order of the scrolls to be
placed in the phylacteries, etc.). The Pharisees were also innovators in that
they enacted specific laws as they saw necessary according to the needs of the
time. These included prohibitions to prevent an infringement of a biblical
prohibition (e.g. one does not take a Lulav on Shabbat "Lest one carry it in
the public domain") called gezeirot, among others. The commandment to read the
Megillah (Book of Esther) on Purim and to light the Menorah on Hanukkah are
Rabbinic innovations. Much of the legal system is based on "what the sages
constructed via logical reasoning and from established practice". Also, the
blessings before meals and the wording of the Amidah. These are known as
Takanot. The Pharisees based their authority to innovate on the verses:
"...according to the word they tell you... according to all they instruct you.
According to the law they instruct you and according to the judgment they say
to you, you shall do; you shall not divert from the word they tell you, either
right or left" (Deuteronomy 17:10‚Äì11) (see "Encyclopedia Talmudit" entry
"Divrei Soferim"). In an interesting twist, Abraham Geiger posits that the
Sadducees were the more hidebound adherents to an ancient Halacha whereas the
Pharisees were more willing to develop Halacha as the times required. See
however, Bernard Revel's "Karaite Halacha" which rejects many of Geiger's
proofs. Significance of debate and study of the law. Just as important as (if
not more important than) any particular law was the value the rabbis placed on
legal study and debate. The sages of the Talmud believed that when they taught
the Oral Torah to their students, they were imitating Moses, who taught the law
to the children of Israel. Moreover, the rabbis believed that "the heavenly
court studies Torah precisely as does the earthly one, even arguing about the
same questions." Thus, in debating and disagreeing over the meaning of the
Torah or how best to put it into practice, no rabbi felt that he (or his
opponent) were in some way rejecting God or threatening Judaism; on the
contrary, it was precisely through such arguments that the rabbis imitated and
honored God. One sign of the Pharisaic emphasis on debate and differences of
opinion is that the Mishnah and Talmud mark different generations of scholars
in terms of different pairs of contending schools. In the first century, for
example, the two major Pharisaic schools were those of Hillel and Shammai.
After Hillel died in 20¬ CE, Shammai assumed the office of president of the
Sanhedrin until he died in 30¬ CE. Followers of these two sages dominated
scholarly debate over the following decades. Although the Talmud records the
arguments and positions of the school of Shammai, the teachings of the school
of Hillel were ultimately taken as authoritative. From Pharisees to Rabbis.
Following the Jewish-Roman Wars, revolutionaries like the Zealots had been
crushed by the Romans, and had little credibility (the last Zealots died at
Masada in 73). Similarly, the Sadducees, whose teachings were so closely
connected to the Temple, disappeared with the destruction of the Second Temple
in 70¬ CE. The Essenes too disappeared, perhaps because their teachings so
diverged from the concerns of the times, perhaps because they were sacked by
the Romans at Qumran. Following the destruction of the Temple, Rome governed
Judea through a Procurator at Caesarea and a Jewish Patriarch and levied the
Fiscus Judaicus. Yohanan ben Zakkai, a leading Pharisee, was appointed the
first Patriarch (the Hebrew word, Nasi, also means prince, or president), and
he reestablished the Sanhedrin at Yavneh (see the related Council of Jamnia)
under Pharisee control. Instead of giving tithes to the priests and sacrificing
offerings at the (now-destroyed) Temple, the rabbis instructed Jews to give
charity. Moreover, they argued that all Jews should study in local synagogues,
because Torah is "the inheritance of the congregation of Jacob" (Deut. 33: 4).
After the destruction of the First Temple, Jews believed that God would forgive
them and enable them to rebuild the Temple an event that actually occurred
within three generations. After the destruction of the Second Temple, Jews
wondered whether this would happen again. When the Emperor Hadrian threatened
to rebuild Jerusalem as a pagan city dedicated to Jupiter, in 132, Aelia
Capitolina, some of the leading sages of the Sanhedrin supported a rebellion
led by Simon Bar Kosiba (later known as Bar Kokhba), who established a short-
lived independent state that was conquered by the Romans in 135. With this
defeat, Jews' hopes that the Temple would be rebuilt were crushed. Nonetheless,
belief in a Third Temple remains a cornerstone of Jewish belief. Romans forbade
Jews to enter Jerusalem (except for the day of Tisha B'av), and forbade any
plan to rebuild the Temple. Instead, it took over the Province of Judea
directly, renaming it Syria Palestina, and renaming Jerusalem Aelia Capitolina.
Romans did eventually reconstitute the Sanhedrin under the leadership of Judah
haNasi (who claimed to be a descendant of King David). They conferred the title
of "Nasi" as hereditary, and Judah's sons served both as Patriarch and as heads
of the Sanhedrin. Post-Temple developments. Regardless of the importance they
gave to the Temple, and despite their support of Bar Koseba‚Äôs revolt, the
Pharisees‚Äô vision of Jewish law as a means by which ordinary people could
engage with the sacred in their daily lives provided them with a position from
which to respond to all four challenges in a way meaningful to the vast
majority of Jews. Their responses would constitute Rabbinic Judaism. During the
Second Temple era, when Jews were divided into sects, the Pharisees were one
sect among many, and partisan. Each sect claimed a monopoly on the truth, and
discouraged marriage between members of different sects. Members of different
sects did, however, argue with one another over the correctness of their
respective interpretations, although there is no significant, reliable record
of such debates between sects. After the destruction of the Second Temple,
these sectarian divisions ended. The Rabbis avoided the term "Pharisee,"
perhaps because it was a term more often used by non-Pharisees, but also
because the term was explicitly sectarian. The Rabbis claimed leadership over
all Jews, and added to the Amidah the "birkat haMinim", a prayer which in part
exclaims, "Praised are You O Lord, who breaks enemies and defeats the
arrogant," and which is understood as a rejection of sectarians and
sectarianism. This shift by no means resolved conflicts over the interpretation
of the Torah; rather, it relocated debates between sects to debates within
Rabbinic Judaism. The Pharisaic commitment to scholarly debate as a value in
and of itself, rather than merely a byproduct of sectarianism, emerged as a
defining feature of Rabbinic Judaism. Thus, as the Pharisees argued that all
Israel should act as priests, the Rabbis argued that all Israel should act as
rabbis: "The rabbis furthermore want to transform the entire Jewish community
into an academy where the whole Torah is studied and kept ... redemption
depends on the "rabbinization" of all Israel, that is, upon the attainment of
all Jewry of a full and complete embodiment of revelation or Torah, thus
achieving a perfect replica of heaven." The Rabbinic Era itself is divided into
two periods. The first period was that of the Tannaim (from the Aramaic word
for "repeat;" the Aramaic root TNY is equivalent to the Hebrew root SNY, which
is the basis for "Mishnah." Thus, Tannaim are "Mishnah teachers"), the sages
who repeated and thus passed down the Oral Torah. During this period rabbis
finalized the canonization of the Tanakh, and in 200 Judah haNasi edited
together Tannaitic judgements and traditions into the Mishna, considered by the
rabbis to be the definitive expression of the Oral Torah (although some of the
sages mentioned in the Mishnah are Pharisees who lived prior to the destruction
of the Second Temple, or prior to the Bar Kozeba Revolt, most of the sages
mentioned lived after the revolt). The second period is that of the "Amoraim"
(from the Aramaic word for "speaker") rabbis and their students who continued
to debate legal matters and discuss the meaning of the books of the Bible. In
Palestine, these discussions occurred at important academies at Tiberias,
Caesarea, and Sepphoris. In Babylonia, these discussions largely occurred at
important academies that had been established at Nehardea, Pumpeditha and Sura.
This tradition of study and debate reached its fullest expression in the
development of the Talmudim, elaborations of the Mishnah and records of
Rabbinic debates, stories, and judgements, compiled around 400 in Palestine and
around 500 in Babylon. In Neusner's view, the rabbinic project, as acted out in
the Talmud, reflected not the world as it was but the world as rabbis dreamed
it should be. According to S. Baron however, there existed "a general
willingness of the people to follow its self imposed Rabbinic rulership".
Although the Rabbis lacked authority to impose capital punishment "Flagellation
and heavy fines, combined with an extensive system of excommunication were more
than enough to uphold the authority of the courts." In fact, the Rabbis took
over more and more power from the Reish Galuta until eventually R' Ashi assumed
the title Rabbana, heretofore assumed by the exilarch, and appeared together
with two other Rabbis as an official delegation "at the gate of King
Yazdegard's court." The Amorah (and Tanna) Rav was a personal friend of the
last Parthian king Artabenus and Shmuel was close to Shapur I King of Persia.
Thus, the Rabbis had significant means of "coercion" and the people seem to
have followed the Rabbinic rulership. Pharisees and Christianity. Outside of
Jewish history and writings, the Pharisees have been made notable by references
in the New Testament to conflicts between themselves and John the Baptist and
with Jesus, and because Nicodemus and Joseph of Arimathea, both members of the
sect, buried Jesus' body at great personal risk. Gamaliel, the highly respected
rabbi and defender of the apostles, was also a Pharisee, and according to some
Christian traditions secretly converted to Christianity (Nonetheless, there is
no evidence of this in the New Testament.). There are also several references
in the New Testament to Paul of Tarsus being a Pharisee. Christian traditions
have been a cause of widespread awareness of (and, according to many Jews,
misconception about or prejudice against) the Pharisees among the world's
roughly two billion Christians. An important binary in the New Testament is the
opposition between law and love. Accordingly, the New Testament, particularly
the Synoptic Gospels, presents especially the leadership of the Pharisees as
obsessed with man-made rules (especially concerning purity) whereas Jesus is
more concerned with God‚Äôs love; the Pharisees scorn sinners whereas Jesus
seeks them out. (The Gospel of John, which is the only gospel where Nicodemus
is mentioned, particularly portrays the sect as divided and willing to debate)
Because of the New Testament's frequent depictions of Pharisees as self-
righteous rule-followers (see also Woes of the Pharisees and Legalism
(theology)), the word "pharisee" (and its derivatives: "pharisaical", etc.) has
come into semi-common usage in English to describe a hypocritical and arrogant
person who places the letter of the law above its spirit. Jews today who
subscribe to Pharisaic Judaism typically find this insulting and some consider
the use of the word to be anti-Semitic. Some have speculated that Jesus was
himself a Pharisee and that his arguments with Pharisees is a sign of inclusion
rather than fundamental conflict (disputation being the dominant narrative mode
employed in the Talmud as a search for truth, and not necessarily a sign of
opposition). Jesus' emphasis on loving one's neighbor (see Great Commandment),
for example, echoes the teaching of the school of Hillel. Jesus' views of
divorce, however, are closer to those of the school of Shammai, another
Pharisee. Others have argued that the portrait of the Pharisees in the New
Testament is an anachronistic caricature. Though a minority of scholars follow
the Augustinian hypothesis, most scholars (including Christians and non-
Christians) date the composition of the Christian gospels to between 70 and
100¬ CE, a time after Christianity had separated from Judaism (and after
Pharisaism emerged as the dominant form of Judaism). Rather than an accurate
account of Jesus' relationship to Pharisees and other Jewish leaders, this view
holds that the Gospels instead reflect the competition and conflict between
early Christians and Pharisees for leadership of the Jews, or reflects
Christian attempts to distance themselves from Jews in order to present
themselves in a more sympathetic (and benign) light to Romans and other
Gentiles ‚Äî thus making them a biased source concerning the conduct of the
Pharisees. Examples of disputed passages include the story of Jesus declaring
the sins of a paralytic man forgiven and the Pharisees calling the action
blasphemy. In the story, Jesus counters the accusation that he does not have
the power to forgive sins and forgives them, and also heals the man. Christians
interpret the Parable of the Paralytic Man as showing that the "man-made"
teachings of the Pharisees had so "blinded their eyes" and "hardened their
hearts", that they were persisting (unlike the crowds) in refusing to credit
his authority. Hence, the New Testament describes Jesus as tackling what he saw
as the Pharisees' non-scriptural judgmentalism concerning sin, disability and
sickness. Some historians, however, have noted that Jesus' actions are actually
similar to and consistent with Jewish beliefs and practices of the time, as
recorded by the Rabbis, that commonly associate illness with sin and healing
with forgiveness. Jews (according to E.P. Sanders) reject the New Testament
suggestion that the healing would have been critical of, or criticized by, the
Pharisees as no surviving Rabbinic source questions or criticizes this
practice. Another argument along the same lines is that according to the New
Testament, Pharisees wanted to punish Jesus for healing a man's withered hand
on Sabbath. No Rabbinic rule has been found according to which Jesus would have
violated Sabbath. Although the New Testament presents the Pharisees as obsessed
with avoiding impurity, Rabbinic texts argue that the Pharisees were concerned
merely with offering means for removing impurities, so that a person could
again participate in the community. According to the New Testament, many
Pharisees objected to Jesus's mission to outcast groups such as beggars and
tax-collectors, but Rabbinic texts actually emphasize the availability of
forgiveness to all. Indeed, much of Jesus' teaching, for example the Sermon on
the Mount, is consistent with that of the Pharisees and later Rabbinic thought.
Some scholars believe that those passages of the New Testament that are
seemingly most hostile to the Pharisees were written sometime after the
destruction of Herod's Temple in 70¬ CE. Only Christianity and Phariseeism
survived the destruction of the Temple, and the two competed for a short time
until the Pharisees emerged as the dominant form of Judaism. Once it had become
clear that most Jews did not consider Jesus to be the messiah (see also
Rejection of Jesus) Christians (among whom were Messianic Jews) sought a number
of new converts from among the gentiles. Christians had to explain why converts
should listen to them rather than the Non-Messianic Jews, concerning the Hebrew
Bible, and also had to dissociate themselves with the rebellious Jews who so
often rejected Roman authority and authority in general. They thus were
perceived to have had presented a story of Jesus that was more sympathetic to
Romans than to Jews. Kararites and Pharisees. ‚ÄúThe names of the months came
up with them from Babylonia.‚Äù (Jerusalem Talmud, Rosh Hashanah 1:2 56d)" "One
of the more common accusations made against Karaites, especially by leaders of
Rabbinic Judaism, is that the Karaite religion is closer to being a Muslim
faith. It's an odd accusation especially to those of us that practice Karaism,
making no sense at all since there is no adherance to the Qur'an and Mohammed
is definitely not seen as a prophet. ".
