Philistines The Philistines (, , , or ; , "Pli≈°tim"), Pleshet or Peleset, were
a people who as part of the Sea peoples appeared in the southern coastal area
of Canaan at the beginning of the Iron Age (circa 1175 BC), most probably from
the Aegean region. According to the Bible, they ruled the five city-states (the
"Philistine Pentapolis") of Gaza, Askelon, Ashdod, Ekron and Gath, from Wadi
Gaza in the south to the Yarqon River in the north, but with no fixed border to
the east. The Bible paints them as the Kingdom of Israel's most dangerous
enemy. Originating somewhere in the Aegean, their population was around 25,000
in the 12th century BC, rising to a peak of 30,000 in the 11th century BC, of
which the Aegean element was not more than half the total, and perhaps much
less. Nothing is known for certain about the language of the Philistines. There
is some limited evidence in favor of the assumption that the Philistines did
originally speak some Indo-European language. A number of Philistine-related
words found in the Bible are not Semitic, and can in some cases, with
reservations, be traced back to Proto-Indo-European roots. Etymology. The
etymology of the word into English is from Old French "Philistin", from
Classical Latin "Philistinus" found in the writings of Josephus, from Late
Greek "Philistinoi" ("Phylistiim" in the Septuagint) found in the writings by
Philo, from Hebrew "Pli≈°tim", (e.g. 1 Samuel 17:36; 2 Samuel 1:20; Judges 14:
3; Amos 1:8), "people of Ple≈°t" ("Philistia"); cf. Akkadian "Palastu",
Egyptian "Parusata". Biblical scholars often trace the word to the Semitic root
"p-l-≈°" () which means "to divide", "go through", "to roll in", "cover", or
"invade". The name of the Philistines in their own language is not known;
however, the Bible also relates them as the people of "Kaftor" (, i.e. Jeremiah
47, Verse 4). "Kaftor" is not of Hebrew or Semitic origin, which supports the
possibility that this word is similar to the name they called themselves.
Another theory, proposed by Jacobsohn and supported by others, is that the name
derives from the attested Illyrian locality "Palaeste", whose inhabitants would
have been called "Palaestƒ´nƒ´" according to normal grammatical practice.
Another historian suggests that the name Philistine is a corruption of the
Greek "phyle histia" ("tribe of the hearth", with the Ionic spelling of
"hestia"). He goes on to suggest that they were responsible for introducing the
fixed hearth to the Levant. This suggestion was raised before archaeological
evidence for the use of the hearths was documented at Philistine sites.
Timeline. "(Dates are approximate)" History. Canaan and the Late Bronze
collapse (1550‚Äì1200 BC). Canaan (meaning the area covering roughly modern
Israel and southern Lebanon) in the Late Bronze Age was a collection of city-
states under the authority of the Egyptians. The cities were very small, really
no more than towns, and were concentrated along the coast and in a few inland
valleys. They were ethnically diverse, so far as can be judged, but they spoke
languages of the West Semitic language family (probably mutually intelligible)
and shared a common culture in many respects, including religion, diet, and
economic and political organization. This common Late Bronze culture collapsed
at the end of the Late Bronze period. The collapse was gradual rather than
sudden, extending over a century or so between 1250 and 1150 BC. Many, but not
all, of the Canaanite cities were destroyed, international trade collapsed, and
the Egyptians withdrew. At the end of this period a new landscape emerges: the
northern Canaanite cities still existed, more or less intact, and became the
Phoenicians; the highlands behind the coastal plains, previously largely
uninhabited, were rapidly filling with villages, largely Canaanite in their
basic culture but without the Bronze Age city-state structure; and along the
southern coastal plain there are clear signs that a non-Canaanite people had
taken over the former Canaanite cities while adopting almost all aspects of
Canaanite culture. Settlement in southern Canaan (c. 1175‚Äì1100 BC). In about
1175 BC, Egypt was threatened with a massive land and sea invasion by the "Sea
Peoples," a coalition of foreign enemies which included the Tjeker, the
Shekelesh, the Deyen, the Weshesh, the Teresh, the Sherden and the "PRST"; the
last group are commonly regarded as identical with the Philistines. They were
comprehensively defeated by Ramses III, who fought them in "Djahi" (the eastern
Mediterranean coast) and at "the mouths of the rivers" (the Nile delta),
recording his victories in a series of inscriptions in his mortuary temple at
Medinet Habu. An additional Egyptian source, Papyrus Harris I, records how the
defeated foe were brought in captivity to Egypt and settled in fortresses. The
Harris papyrus can be interpreted in two ways: either the captives were settled
in Egypt and the rest of the Philistines/Sea Peoples carved out a territory for
themselves in Canaan, or else it was Ramses himself who settled the Sea Peoples
(mainly Philistines) in Canaan as mercenaries. Archaeological evidence
indicates that the Philistines originally settled in a few sites in the south,
such as Ashkelon, Ashdod and Ekron. It was not until several decades later
about 1150 BCE, that they expanded into surrounding areas such as the Yarkon
region to the north (the area of modern Jaffa, where there were Philistine
farmsteads at Tel Gerisa and Aphek, and a larger settlement at Tel Qasile).
Most scholars therefore believe that the settlement of the Philistines took
place in two stages. In the first, dated to the reign of Ramses III, they were
limited to the coastal plain, the region of the Five Cities; in the second,
dated to the collapse of Egyptian hegemony in southern Canaan, their influence
spread inland beyond the coast. Iron Age (8th‚Äì5th centuries BC). The Bible
paints the Philistines as the main enemy of the Israelites prior to the rise of
Assyria in the 8th century BC, with a state of almost perpetual war between the
two peoples. The Philistine cities lost their independence to Tiglath-Pileser
III of Assyria by 732 BC, and revolts in following years were all crushed. They
were subsequently absorbed into the Babylonian and Persian empires, and
disappear as a distinct group by the late 5th century BC. The Philistine
pentapolis were ruled by "seranim" (◊°÷∞◊®÷∏◊ ÷¥◊ô◊ù, "lords"), who acted
together for the common good, though to what extent they had a sense of a
"nation" is not clear without literary sources. Origins. It has been suggested
that the Casluhite Philistines formed part of the "Sea Peoples" who repeatedly
attacked Egypt during the later Nineteenth Dynasty. Though they were eventually
repulsed by Ramses III, he finally resettled them, according to the theory, to
rebuild the coastal towns in Canaan. Papyrus Harris I details the achievements
of the reign of Ramses III. In the brief description of the outcome of the
battles in Year 8 is the description of the fate of the Sea Peoples. Ramses
tells us that, having brought the imprisoned Sea Peoples to Egypt, he "settled
them in strongholds, bound in my name. Numerous were their classes like
hundred-thousands. I taxed them all, in clothing and grain from the storehouses
and granaries each year." Some scholars suggest it is likely that these
"strongholds" were fortified towns in southern Canaan, which would eventually
become the five cities (the Pentapolis) of the Philistines. Israel Finkelstein
has suggested that there may be a period of 25‚Äì50 years after the sacking of
these cities and their reoccupation by the Philistines. It is quite possible
that for the initial period of time, the Philistines were housed in Egypt, only
subsequently late in the troubled end of the reign of Ramses III would they
have been allowed to settle Philistia. Mycenaean archaeology. The connection
between Mycenaean culture and Philistine culture was made clearer by finds at
the excavation of Ashdod, Ekron, Ashkelon, and more recently Gath, four of the
five Philistine cities in Canaan. The fifth city is Gaza. Especially notable is
the early Philistine pottery, a locally made version of the Aegean Mycenaean
Late Helladic IIIC pottery, which is decorated in shades of brown and black.
This later developed into the distinctive Philistine pottery of the Iron Age I,
with black and red decorations on white slip known as Philistine Bichrome ware.
Also of particular interest is a large, well-constructed building covering ,
discovered at Ekron. Its walls are broad, designed to support a second story,
and its wide, elaborate entrance leads to a large hall, partly covered with a
roof supported on a row of columns. In the floor of the hall is a circular
hearth paved with pebbles, as is typical in Mycenaean megaron hall buildings;
other unusual architectural features are paved benches and podiums. Among the
finds are three small bronze wheels with eight spokes. Such wheels are known to
have been used for portable cultic stands in the Aegean region during this
period, and it is therefore assumed that this building served cultic functions.
Further evidence concerns an inscription in Ekron to PYGN or PYTN, which some
have suggested refers to "Potnia", the title given to an ancient Mycenaean
goddess. Excavations in Ashkelon, Ekron, and Gath reveal dog and pig bones
which show signs of having been butchered, implying that these animals were
part of the residents' diet. Among other findings there are wineries where
fermented wine was produced, as well as loom weights resembling those of
Mycenaean sites in Greece. It has been theorized that the latter Philistines
originated among the "Sea Peoples". Modern archaeology has also suggested early
cultural links with the Mycenaean world in Greece. Though the Philistines
adopted local Canaanite culture and language before leaving any written texts
(and later adopted the Aramaic language), an Indo-European origin has been
suggested for a handful of known Philistine words that survived as loanwords in
Hebrew. Philistine language. Nothing is known for certain about the language of
the Philistines. There is some limited evidence in favor of the assumption that
the Philistines did originally speak some Indo-European language. A number of
Philistine-related words found in the Bible are not Semitic, and can in some
cases, with reservations, be traced back to Proto-Indo-European roots. For
example, the Philistine word for captain, 'seren', may be related to the Greek
word "tyrannos" (thought by linguists to have been borrowed by the Greeks from
an Anatolian language, such as Luwian or Lydian). Some of the Philistine names,
such as Goliath, Achish, and Phicol, appear to be of non-Semitic origin, and
Indo-European etymologies have been suggested. Recently, an inscription dating
to the late 10th/early 9th centuries BC with two names, very similar to one of
the suggested etymologies of the popular Philistine name Goliath (Lydian
Alyattes, or perhaps Greek Kalliades) was found in the excavations at Gath. The
appearance of additional non-Semitic names in Philistine inscriptions from
later stages of the Iron Age is an additional indication of the non-Semitic
origins of this group. Culture and religion. Philistine culture was almost
fully integrated with that of Canaan and the Canaanites. The deities they
worshipped were Baal, Astarte, and Dagon, whose names or variations thereof
appear in the Canaanite pantheon as well. The Philistines were also renowned
for both their production and consumption of alcoholic beverages. Numerous
finds have exposed a well-managed spirits industry, from breweries and wineries
to retail outlets that advertised beer, wine, and strong drink. Among the most
numerous artifacts unearthed from Philistine ruins are beer mugs and wine
craters (large drinking bowls). The story of Samson's wedding feast alludes to
the Philistine practice of engaging in week-long drinking parties, as the
Hebrew word "mishkeh", translated as "strong drink" in Judges 14:10, indicates
a "drinking feast." Extrabiblical inscriptions. Inscriptions written by the
Philistines have not yet been found or conclusively identified; however, their
early history is known to scholars from inscriptions in other ancient
documents, such as Ancient Egyptian texts. The Philistines appear in four
different texts from the time of the New Kingdom under the name "Peleset". Two
of these, the inscriptions at Medinet Habu and the Rhetorical Stela at Deir al-
Medinah, are dated to the time of the reign of Ramses III (1186‚Äì1155 BC).
Another was composed in the period immediately following the death of Ramses
III (Papyrus Harris I). The fourth, the Onomasticon of Amenope, is dated to
some time between the end of the 12th or early 11th century BCE. The
inscriptions at Medinet Habu consist of images depicting a coalition of Sea
Peoples, among them the Philistines, who are said in the accompanying text to
have been defeated by Ramses III during his Year 8 campaign. Scholars have been
unable to conclusively determine which images match what peoples described in
the reliefs depicting two major battle scenes. A separate relief on one of the
bases of the Osirid pillars with an accompanying hieroglyphic text clearly
identifying the person depicted as a captive "Peleset" chief is of a bearded
man without headdress. The Rhetorical Stela are less discussed, but are
noteworthy in that they mention the "Peleset" together with a people called the
"Teresh", who sailed "in the midst of the sea". The "Teresh" are thought to
have originated from the Anatolian coast and their association with the
"Peleshet" in this inscription is seen as providing some information on the
possible origin and identity of the Philistines. The Harris Papyrus which was
found in a tomb at Medinet Habu also recalls Ramses III's battles with the Sea
Peoples, declaring that the "Peleset" were "reduced to ashes." Egyptian
strongholds in Canaan are also mentioned, including a temple dedicated to Amun,
which some scholars place in Gaza; however, the lack of detail indicating the
precise location of these strongholds means that it is unknown what impact
these had, if any, on Philistine settlement along the coast. The first mention
in an Egyptian source of the Philistines in conjunction with three of the five
cities that are said in the Hebrew Bible to have made up their pentapolis comes
in the Onomasticon of Amenope. The sequence in question read: "Ashkelon,
Ashdod, Gaza, Assyria, Shubaru [...] "Sherden", "Tjekker", "Peleset", "Khurma"
[...]" Scholars have advanced the possibility that the other Sea Peoples
mentioned were connected to these cities in some way as well. Philistines in
the Bible. The Hebrew text of Genesis 10:14, with regard to the descendants of
Mizraim, reads ""we'et Petrusim we'et Kesluhim 'esher yats'u misham Filistim
we'et Keftorim."" Literally, it says that those whom Mizraim begat included
"the Pathrusim, Casluhim (out of whom came the Philistines), and the
Caphtorim". There is some debate among interpreters as to whether this verse
was originally intended to signify that the Philistines themselves were the
offspring of the Casluhim or the Caphtorim. The Torah does not record the
Philistines as one of the nations to be displaced from Canaan. In Genesis 15:
18-21 the Philistines are absent from the ten nations Abraham's descendants
will displace as well as being absent from the list of nations Moses tells the
people they will conquer (Deut. 7:1, 20:17). God also intentionally directed
the Israelites away from the Philistines upon their exit from Egypt according
to Exodus 13:17. In Genesis 21, Abraham agreed a covenant of kindness with the
Philistine king Avimelech and his descendants. Also, Samson killed many
Philistines and had many skirmishes with them. A few biblical texts, such as
the Ark Narrative and stories reflecting the importance of Gath, seem to
portray Late Iron I and Early Iron II memories. They are mentioned over 250
times, the majority in the Deuteronomistic history (the series of "history"
books from Joshua to 2 Kings), and are depicted as the archenemies of the
Israelites, a serious and recurring threat before being subdued by David.
