Philosophy of religion Philosophy of religion is a branch of philosophy
concerned with questions regarding religion, including the nature and existence
of God, the examination of religious experience, analysis of religious
vocabulary and texts, and the relationship of religion and science. It is an
ancient discipline, being found in the earliest known manuscripts concerning
philosophy, and relates to many other branches of philosophy and general
thought, including metaphysics, logic, and history. Philosophy of religion is
frequently discussed outside of academia through popular books and debates,
mostly regarding the existence of God and problem of evil. The philosophy of
religion differs from religious philosophy in that it seeks to discuss
questions regarding the nature of religion as a whole, rather than examining
the problems brought forth by a particular belief system. It is designed such
that it can be carried out dispassionately by those who identify as believers
or non-believers. As a part of metaphysics. Philosophy of religion has
classically been regarded as a part of metaphysics. In Aristotle's
"Metaphysics", he described first causes as one of the subjects of his
investigation. For Aristotle, "the" first cause was the unmoved mover, a being
which set the universe into motion without itself being in motion, which has
been read as God, particularly when Aristotle's work became prevalent again in
the Medieval West. This Prime Mover, first cause, argument later came to be
called natural theology by rationalist philosophers of the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries. Today, philosophers have adopted the term "philosophy of
religion" for the subject, and typically it is regarded as a separate field of
specialization, although it is also still treated by some, particularly
Catholic philosophers, as a part of metaphysics. In the historical relationship
between metaphysics and philosophy of religion, the traditional objects of
religious discussion have been very special sorts of entities (such as gods,
angels, supernatural forces, and the like) and events, abilities, or processes
(the creation of the universe, the ability to do or know anything, interaction
between humans and gods, and so forth). Metaphysicians (and ontologists in
particular) are focused on understanding what it is for something to "exist"
— what it is for something to be an entity, event, ability, or process.
Because many members of religious traditions believe in things that exist in
profoundly different ways from more everyday things, objects of religious
belief both create particular philosophical problems and define central
metaphysical concepts. Questions asked. Theologians, distinct from philosophers
of religion, often consider the existence of God as axiomatic or self-evident
and explain, justify or support religious claims by rationalization or
intuitive metaphors. In contrast, philosophers of religion examine and critique
the epistemological, logical, aesthetic and ethical foundations inherent in the
claims of a religion. Whereas a theologian elaborates rationally or
experientially on the nature of God, a philosopher of religion is more
interested in asking what may be knowable and opinable regarding religion's
claims. Other questions studied in the philosophy of religion include what, if
anything, would give us good reason to believe that a miracle has occurred,
what is the relationship between faith and reason, what is the relationship
between morality and religion, what is the status of religious language, and
does petitionary prayer (sometimes still called "impetratory prayer") make
sense? Going beyond metaphysics, the philosophy of religion also addresses
questions in areas such as epistemology, philosophy of language, philosophical
logic, and moral philosophy. See also world view. What is God? Among those who
believe in supernatural beings, some believe there is just one God
(monotheism), while others, such as Hindus, believe in many different deities
(polytheism) while maintaining that all are manifestations of one God. Hindus
have a widely followed monistic philosophy that can be said to be neither
monotheistic nor polytheistic. Within these two broad categories (monotheism
and polytheism) there is a wide variety of possible beliefs. For example, among
the monotheists deists believe that the one God is like a watchmaker who wound
up the universe and does not intervene further in the universe, and some
theists believe that God continues to be active in the universe. Ignostics
object that a coherent definition of God must be presented before the question
of the existence of God can be meaningfully discussed. Buddhism deals less with
metaphysics and more with ontological questions and is generally not concerned
with the existence of a creator God but focuses on a state called Nirvana (see
also Mu). Rationality of belief. Positions. There are not mutually exclusive
positions. For example, agnostic theists choose to believe God exists while
asserting that knowledge of God's existence is inherently unknowable.
Similarly, agnostic atheists reject belief in the existence of all deities,
while asserting that whether any such entities exist or not is inherently
unknowable. Natural theology. The attempt to provide proofs or arguments for
the existence of God is one aspect of what is known as "natural theology" or
the "natural theistic project". This strand of natural theology attempts to
justify belief in God by independent grounds. There is plenty of philosophical
literature on faith (especially fideism) and other subjects generally
considered to be outside the realm of natural theology. Perhaps most of
philosophy of religion is predicated on natural theology's assumption that the
existence of God can be justified or warranted on rational grounds. There has
been considerable philosophical and theological debate about the kinds of
proofs, justifications and arguments that are appropriate for this discourse.
The philosopher Alvin Plantinga has shifted his focus to justifying belief in
God (that is, those who believe in God, for whatever reasons, are rational in
doing so) through Reformed epistemology, in the context of a theory of warrant
and proper cognitive function. Other reactions to natural theology are those of
Wittgensteinian philosophers of religion, most notably D. Z. Phillips. Phillips
rejects "natural theology" and its evidentialist approach as confused, in favor
of a grammatical approach which investigates the meaning of belief in God. For
Phillips, belief in God is not a proposition with a particular truth value, but
a form of life. Consequently, the question of whether God exists confuses the
logical categories which govern theistic language with those that govern other
forms of discourse (most notably, scientific discourse). According to Phillips,
the question of whether or not God exists cannot be "objectively" answered by
philosophy because the categories of truth and falsity, which are necessary for
asking the question, have no application in the religious contexts wherein
religious belief has its sense and meaning. In other words, the question cannot
be answered because it cannot be asked without entering into confusion. As
Phillips sees things, the job of the philosopher is not to investigate the
"rationality" of belief in God but to elucidate its meaning. Analytic
philosophy of religion. As with the study of ethics, early analytic philosophy
tended to avoid the study of philosophy of religion, largely dismissing (as per
the logical positivists view) the subject as part of metaphysics and therefore
meaningless. The collapse of logical positivism renewed interest in philosophy
of religion, prompting philosophers like William Alston, John Mackie, Alvin
Plantinga, Robert Merrihew Adams, Richard Swinburne, and Antony Flew not only
to introduce new problems, but to re-open classical topics such as the nature
of miracles, theistic arguments, the problem of evil, (see existence of God)
the rationality of belief in God, concepts of the nature of God, and many more.
Plantinga, Mackie and Flew debated the logical validity of the "free will
defense" as a way to solve the problem of evil. Alston, grappling with the
consequences of analytic philosophy of language, worked on the nature of
religious language. Adams worked on the relationship of faith and morality.
Analytic epistemology and metaphysics has formed the basis for a number of
philosophically-sophisticated theistic arguments, like those of the reformed
epistemologists like Plantinga. Analytic philosophy of religion has also been
preoccupied with Ludwig Wittgenstein, as well as his interpretation of Søren
Kierkegaard's philosophy of religion. Using first-hand remarks (which would
later be published in "Philosophical Investigations", "Culture and Value", and
other works), philosophers such as Peter Winch and Norman Malcolm developed
what has come to be known as "contemplative philosophy", a Wittgensteinian
school of thought rooted in the "Swansea tradition" and which includes
Wittgensteinians such as Rush Rhees, Peter Winch and D. Z. Phillips, among
others. The name "contemplative philosophy" was first coined by D. Z. Phillips
in "Philosophy's Cool Place", which rests on an interpretation of a passage
from Wittgenstein's "Culture and Value." This interpretation was first labeled,
"Wittgensteinian Fideism," by Kai Nielsen but those who consider themselves
Wittgensteinians in the Swansea tradition have relentlessly and repeatedly
rejected this construal as caricature of Wittgenstein's considered position;
this is especially true of D. Z. Phillips. Responding to this interpretation,
Kai Nielsen and D.Z. Phillips became two of the most prominent philosophers on
Wittgenstein's philosophy of religion.
