Pietism Pietism (from the word piety) was a movement within Lutheranism,
lasting from the late 17th century to the mid-18th century and later. It proved
to be very influential throughout Protestantism and Anabaptism, inspiring
Anglican priest John Wesley to begin the Methodist movement and Alexander Mack
to begin the Brethren movement. The Pietist movement combined the Lutheranism
of the time with the Reformed emphasis on individual piety and living a
vigorous Christian life. Though pietism shares an emphasis on personal behavior
with the Puritan movement, and the two are often confused, there are important
differences, particularly in the concept of the role of religion in government.
Forerunners. As forerunners of the Pietists in the strict sense, certain voices
had been heard bewailing the shortcomings of the Church and advocating a
revival of practical and devout Christianity. Amongst them were Christian
mystic Jakob Böhme (Behmen); Johann Arndt, whose work, "True Christianity",
became widely known and appreciated; Heinrich Müller, who described the font,
the pulpit, the confessional and the altar as "the four dumb idols of the
Lutheran Church"; theologian Johann Valentin Andrea, court chaplain of the
landgrave of Hesse; Schuppius, who sought to restore to the Bible its place in
the pulpit; and Theophilus Grossgebauer (d. 1661) of Rostock, who from his
pulpit and by his writings raised what he called "the alarm cry of a watchman
in Sion." Founding. The direct originator of the movement was Philipp Jakob
Spener. Born at Rappoltsweiler in Alsace, France on 13 January 1635, trained by
a devout godmother who used books of devotion like Arndt's "True Christianity",
Spener was convinced of the necessity of a moral and religious reformation
within German Lutheranism. He studied theology at Strasbourg, where the
professors at the time (and especially Sebastian Schmidt) were more inclined to
"practical" Christianity than to theological disputation. He afterwards spent a
year in Geneva, and was powerfully influenced by the strict moral life and
rigid ecclesiastical discipline prevalent there, and also by the preaching and
the piety of the Waldensian professor Antoine Leger and the converted Jesuit
preacher Jean de Labadie. During a stay in Tübingen, Spener read
Grossgebauer's "Alarm Cry", and in 1666 he entered upon his first pastoral
charge at Frankfurt with a profound opinion that the Christian life within
Evangelical Lutheranism was being sacrificed to zeal for rigid Lutheran
orthodoxy. Pietism, as a distinct movement in the German Church, was then
originated by Spener by religious meetings at his house ("collegia pietatis")
at which he repeated his sermons, expounded passages of the New Testament, and
induced those present to join in conversation on religious questions that
arose. In 1675 Spener published his "Pia desideria" or "Earnest Desire for a
Reform of the True Evangelical Church", the title giving rise to the term
"Pietists". This was originally a pejorative term given to the adherents of the
movement by its enemies as a form of ridicule, like that of "Methodists"
somewhat later in England. This work produced a great impression throughout
Germany, and although large numbers of the orthodox Lutheran theologians and
pastors were deeply offended by Spener's book, its complaints and its demands
were both too well justified to admit of their being point-blank denied. A
large number of pastors immediately adopted Spener's proposals. Early leaders.
In 1686 Spener accepted an appointment to the court-chaplaincy at Dresden,
which opened to him a wider though more difficult sphere of labor. In Leipzig a
society of young theologians was formed under his influence for the learned
study and devout application of the Bible. Three magistrates belonging to that
society, one of whom was August Hermann Francke, subsequently the founder of
the famous orphanage at Halle (1695), commenced courses of expository lectures
on the Scriptures of a practical and devotional character, and in the German
language, which were zealously frequented by both students and townsmen. The
lectures aroused, however, the ill-will of the other theologians and pastors of
Leipzig, and Francke and his friends left the city, and with the aid of
Christian Thomasius and Spener founded the new University of Halle. The
theological chairs in the new university were filled in complete conformity
with Spener's proposals. The main difference between the new Pietistic Lutheran
school and the orthodox Lutherans arose from the Pietists' conception of
Christianity as chiefly consisting in a change of heart and consequent holiness
of life. Orthodox Lutherans rejected this viewpoint as a gross simplification,
stressing the need for the church and for sound theological underpinnings.
Spener died in 1705; but, the movement, guided by Francke, fertilized from
Halle the whole of Middle and North Germany. Among its greatest achievements,
apart from the philanthropic institutions founded at Halle, were the revival of
the Moravian Church in 1727 by Count von Zinzendorf, Spener's godson and a
pupil in the Halle School for Young Noblemen, and the establishment of
Protestant missions. Spener's stress on the necessity of a new birth and on a
separation of Christians from the world, (see Asceticism), led to exaggeration
and fanaticism among some followers. Many Pietists soon maintained that the new
birth must always be preceded by agonies of repentance, and that only a
regenerated theologian could teach theology, while the whole school shunned all
common worldly amusements, such as dancing, the theatre, and public games. Some
would say that there thus arose a new form of justification by works. Its
"ecclesiolae in ecclesia" also weakened the power and meaning of church
organization. Through these extravagances a reactionary movement arose at the
beginning of the 18th century; one leader was Valentin Ernst Löscher,
superintendent at Dresden. Later history. As a distinct movement, Pietism had
its greatest strength by the middle of the 18th century; its very individualism
in fact helped to prepare the way for the Enlightenment ("Aufklärung"), which
would take the church in an altogether different direction. Yet some would
claim that Pietism contributed largely to the revival of Biblical studies in
Germany and to making religion once more an affair of the heart and of life and
not merely of the intellect. It likewise gave a new emphasis on the role of the
laity in the church. Rudolf Sohm claimed that "It was the last great surge of
the waves of the ecclesiastical movement begun by the Reformation; it was the
completion and the final form of the Protestantism created by the Reformation.
Then came a time when another intellectual power took possession of the minds
of men." Dietrich Bonhoeffer of the German Confessing Church framed the same
characterization in less positive terms when he called Pietism the last attempt
to save Christianity as a religion: Given that for him religion was a negative
term, more or less an opposite to revelation, this constitutes a rather
scathing judgment. Bonhoeffer denounced the basic aim of Pietism, to produce a
"desired piety" in a person, as unbiblical. Pietism is considered the major
influence that lead to the creation of the "Evangelical Church of the Union" in
Prussia in 1817. The King of Prussia ordered the Lutheran and Reformed churches
in Prussia to unite; they took the name "Evangelical" as a name both groups had
previously identified with. This union movement spread through many German
lands in the 1800s. Pietism, with its looser attitude toward confessional
theology, had opened the churches to the possibility of uniting. The
unification of the two branches of German Protestantism sparked the Schism of
the Old Lutherans. Many Lutherans, called Old Lutherans formed free churches or
immigrated to the United States and Australia where they formed one of the
bodies who formed the Lutheran Church of Australia. (Many immigrants to America
that agreed with the union movement formed German Evangelical Lutheran and
Reformed congregations, later to be gathered as the Evangelical Synod of North
America, which is now a part of the United Church of Christ.) Pietism was a
major influence on John Wesley and others who began the Methodist movement in
18th century Great Britain. John Wesley was influenced significantly by
Moravians (e.g., Zinzendorf, Peter Boehler) and Pietists connected to Francke
and Halle Pietism. The fruit of these Pietist influences can be seen in the
modern American Methodists and members of the Holiness movement. Pietism did
not die out in the 18th century, but was alive and active in the Evangelischer
Kirchenverein des Westens (later German Evangelical Church and still later the
Evangelical and Reformed Church.) The church president from 1901 to 1914 was a
pietist named Dr. Jakob Pister. A discussion of some of the earlier pietist
influence in the Evangelical and Reformed church can be found in Dunn et al.,
"A History of the Evangelical and Reformed Church" Christian Education Press,
Philadelphia, 1962. Further commentary can be found by Rev. Dr. Carl Viehe
under Pietism, Illinois Trails, Washington County. Some vestiges of Pietism
were still present in 1957 at the time of the formation of the United Church of
Christ. However, in the 19th century, there was a revival of confessional
Lutheran doctrine, known as the neo-Lutheran movement. This movement focused on
a reassertion of the identity of Lutherans as a distinct group within the
broader community of Christians, with a renewed focus on the Lutheran
Confessions as a key source of Lutheran doctrine. Associated with these changes
was a renewed focus on traditional doctrine and liturgy, which paralleled the
growth of Anglo-Catholicism in England. Some writers on the history of Pietism
– e.g. Heppe and Ritschl – have included under it nearly all religious
tendencies amongst Protestants of the last three centuries in the direction of
a more serious cultivation of personal piety than that prevalent in the various
established churches. Ritschl, too, treats Pietism as a retrograde movement of
Christian life towards Catholicism. Some historians also speak of a later or
modern Pietism, characterizing thereby a party in the German Church which was
probably at first influenced by some remains of Spener's Pietism in Westphalia,
on the Rhine, in Württemberg, and at Halle and Berlin. The party was chiefly
distinguished by its opposition to an independent scientific study of theology,
its principal theological leader being Hengstenberg, and its chief literary
organ the "Evangelische Kirchenzeitung". Pietism also had a strong influence on
contemporary artistic culture in Germany; though unread today, the Pietist
Johann Georg Hamann held a strong influence in his day. Pietist belief in the
power of individual meditation on the divine – a direct, individual approach
to the ultimate spiritual reality of God – was probably partly responsible
for the uniquely metaphysical, idealistic nature of German Romantic philosophy.
In modern societies where Pietism has had a profound impact its religious
foundations are no longer apparent. Atheistic pietism is a term used by Asgeir
Helgason to describe a pietistic (moralistic) approach to life without
religion. “We have denied the existence of God but kept the pietistic
rules”. Atheistic pietism has been suggested by Helgason, to be one of the
characteristics (traits) of the modern day Swedish national spirit. The term is
first known to have been used by W.H. Mallock in 1879. Economic historian
Murray Rothbard sees modern Progressivism as essentially a deistic form of
Pietism. Further reading. Amongst older works on Pietism are The subject is
dealt with at length in More recent are See also The most extensive and current
edition on Pietism is the four-volume edition in German, covering the entire
movement in Europe and North America Im Auftrag der Historischen Kommission zur
Erforschung des Pietismus herausgegeben von Martin Brecht, Klaus Deppermann,
Ulrich Gäbler und Hartmut Lehmann Key works in English
