Pilgrimage A pilgrimage is a journey or search of moral or spiritual
significance. Typically, it is a journey to a shrine or other location of
importance to a person's beliefs and faith, although sometimes it can be a
metaphorical journey in to someone's own beliefs. Many religions attach
spiritual importance to particular places: the place of birth or death of
founders or saints, or to the place of their "calling" or spiritual awakening,
or of their connection (visual or verbal) with the divine, or to locations
where miracles were performed or witnessed, or locations where a deity is said
to live or be "housed," or any site that is seen to have special spiritual
powers. Such sites may be commemorated with shrines or temples that devotees
are encouraged to visit for their own spiritual benefit: to be healed or have
questions answered or to achieve some other spiritual benefit. A person who
makes such a journey is called a pilgrim. As a common human experience,
pilgrimage has been proposed as a Jungian archetype by Wallace Clift and Jean
Dalby Clift. The Holy Land acts as a focal point for the pilgrimages of the
Abrahamic religions of Judaism, Christianity, and Islam. According to a
Stockholm University study in 2011, these pilgrims visit the Holy Land to touch
and see physical manifestations of their faith, confirm their beliefs in the
holy context with collective excitation, and connect personally to the Holy
Land. Bahá'í Faith. Bahá'u'lláh decreed pilgrimage to two places in the
Kitáb-i-Aqdas: the House of Bahá'u'lláh in Baghdad, Iraq, and the House of
the Báb in Shiraz, Iran. Later, `Abdu'l-Bahá designated the Shrine of
Bahá'u'lláh at Bahji, Israel as a site of pilgrimage. Bahá'í pilgrimage
consists of visiting the holy places in Haifa, Acre, and Bahjí at the Bahá'í
World Centre in northwest Israel, and Bahá'ís can apply to join an organized
nine-day pilgrimage where they are taken to visit the various holy sites, or
attend a shorter three-day pilgrimage. Buddhism. Other pilgrimage places in
India and Nepal connected to the life of Gautama Buddha are: Savatthi,
Pataliputta, Nalanda, Gaya, Vesali, Sankasia, Kapilavastu, Kosambi, Rajagaha,
Varanasi. Christianity. Christian pilgrimage was first made to sites connected
with the birth, life, crucifixion and resurrection of Jesus. Surviving
descriptions of Christian pilgrimages to the Holy Land date from the 4th
century, when pilgrimage was encouraged by church fathers like Saint Jerome and
established by Helena, the mother of Constantine the Great. Pilgrimages also
began to be made to Rome and other sites associated with the Apostles, saints
and Christian martyrs, as well as to places where there have been apparitions
of the Virgin Mary. A popular pilgrimage site in the past and today is Santiago
de Compostela, in Galicia, Spain, in reference to the Apostle St. James, The
Great. Chaucer's The Canterbury Tales recounts the tales told by pilgrims on
their way to Canterbury and the shrine of Saint Thomas Becket. Hinduism.
According to Karel Werner's "Popular Dictionary of Hinduism", "ost Hindu places
of pilgrimage are associated with legendary events from the lives of various
gods... Almost any place can become a focus for pilgrimage, but in most cases
they are sacred cities, rivers, lakes, and mountains." Hindus are encouraged to
undertake pilgrimages during their lifetime, though this practice is not
considered absolutely mandatory. Most Hindus visit sites within their region or
locale. Kumbh Mela: Kumbh Mela is the largest pilgrimage recorded in history.
Kumbh Mela is also credited with the largest gathering of humans in the entire
world. The location is rotated among Allahabad, Haridwar, Nashik, and Ujjain.
Char Dham (Famous Four Pilgrimage sites): The four holy sites Puri, Rameswaram,
Dwarka, and Badrinath (or alternatively the Himalayan towns of Badrinath,
Kedarnath, Gangotri, and Yamunotri) compose the "Char Dham" ("four abodes")
pilgrimage circuit. Old Holy cities as per Puranic Texts: Varanasi formerly
known as Kashi, Allahabad formerly known as Prayag, Haridwar-Rishikesh,
Mathura-Vrindavan, and Ayodhya. Major Temple cities: Puri, which hosts a major
Vaishnava Jagannath temple and Rath Yatra celebration; Katra, home to the
Vaishno Devi temple; Three comparatively recent temples of fame and huge
pilgrimage are Shirdi, home to Sai Baba of Shirdi, Tirumala - Tirupati, home to
the Tirumala Venkateswara Temple; and Sabarimala,where Swami Ayyappan is
worshipped. Shakti Peethas: Another important set of pilgrimages are the
"Shakti Peethas", where the Mother Goddess is worshipped, the two principal
ones being "Kalighat" and "Kamakhya". Islam. The pilgrimage to Mecca (the
"Hajj") is one of the Five Pillars of Islam. It should be attempted at least
once in the lifetime of all able-bodied Muslims who can afford to do so. It is
the most important of all Muslim pilgrimages, and is the largest pilgrimage for
Muslims. Another important place for Muslims is the city of Medina, the second
holiest place in Islam, in Saudi Arabia, where Muhammad rests in "Al-Masjid al-
Nabawi" (the Mosque of the Prophet). The "ihram" (white robes of pilgrimage) is
meant to show equality of all pilgrims in the eyes of Allah: that there is no
difference between a prince and a pauper. "Ihram" is also symbolic for holy
virtue and pardon from all past sins. While wearing the "ihram" in Mecca, a
pilgrim may not shave, clip their nails, wear perfume, swear or quarrel, hunt,
kill any creature, uproot or damage plants, cover the head for men or the face
and hands for women, marry, wear shoes over the ankles, perform any dishonest
acts or carry weapons. If they do any of these their pilgrimage is invalid .
Judaism. The Temple in Jerusalem was the center of the Jewish religion until
its destruction in 70 CE, and all adult men who were able were required to
visit and offer sacrifices ("korbanot"), particularly during Passover, Shavuot
and Sukkot. Following the destruction of the Second Temple and the onset of the
diaspora, the centrality of pilgrimage to Jerusalem in Judaism was
discontinued. In its place came prayers and rituals hoping for a return to Zion
and the accompanying restoration of regular pilgrimages. Until recent
centuries, pilgrimage had been a fairly difficult and arduous adventure. But
now, Jews from many countries make periodic pilgrimages to the holy sites of
their religion. The western retaining wall of the Temple Mount, known as the
Western Wall or Wailing Wall, remains in the Old City of Jerusalem and this has
been the most sacred site for religious Jews. Pilgrimage to this area was off-
limits from 1948 to 1967, when East Jerusalem was controlled by Jordan. There
are numerous lesser Jewish pilgrimage sites, mainly tombs of "tzadikim",
throughout the Land of Israel and all over the world, including: Hebron;
Bethlehem; Mt. Meron; Netivot; Uman, Ukraine; Silistra, Bulgaria; Damanhur,
Egypt; and many others. Meher Baba. The main pilgrimage sites associated with
the spiritual teacher Meher Baba are Meherabad, India, where Baba completed the
"major portion" of his work and where his tomb is now located, and Meherazad,
India, where Baba resided later in his life. Sikhism. "God's name is the real
pilgrimage place which consists of contemplation of the word of God, and the
cultivation of inner knowledge." Eventually, however, Amritsar and Harmandir
Saheb (the Golden Temple) became the centre of the Sikh faith, and if a Sikh
goes on pilgrimage it is usually to this place considered the spiritual and
cultural centre of Sikhs rather than a pilgrimage. Zoroastrianism. The
Zoroastrians take pilgrimage trips in India to the eight Atash Behrams in India
and one in Yazd.
