The Pilgrim's Progress "The Pilgrim's Progress from This World to That Which Is
to Come" is a Christian allegory written by John Bunyan and published in
February, 1678. It is regarded as one of the most significant works of
religious English literature, has been translated into more than 200 languages,
and has never been out of print. Bunyan began his work while in the
Bedfordshire county gaol for violations of the Conventicle Act, which
prohibited the holding of religious services outside the auspices of the
established Church of England. Early Bunyan scholars like John Brown believed
"The Pilgrim's Progress" was begun in Bunyan's second shorter imprisonment for
six months in 1675, but more recent scholars like Roger Sharrock believe that
it was begun during Bunyan's initial, more lengthy imprisonment from 1660–72
right after he had written his spiritual autobiography, "Grace Abounding to the
Chief of Sinners". The English text comprises 108,260 words and is divided into
two parts, each reading as a continuous narrative with no chapter divisions.
The first part was completed in 1677 and entered into the stationers' register
on 22 December 1677. It was licensed and entered in the "Term Catalogue" on 18
February 1678, which is looked upon as the date of first publication. After the
first edition of the first part in 1678, an expanded edition, with additions
written after Bunyan was freed, appeared in 1679. The Second Part appeared in
1684. There were eleven editions of the first part in John Bunyan's lifetime,
published in successive years from 1678 to 1685 and in 1688, and there were two
editions of the second part, published in 1684 and 1686. Plot. First Part.
Christian, an everyman character, is the protagonist of the allegory, which
centres itself in his journey from his hometown, the "City of Destruction"
("this world"), to the "Celestial City" ("that which is to come": Heaven) atop
Mt. Zion. Christian is weighed down by a great burden, the knowledge of his
sin, which he believed came from his reading "the book in his hand," (the
Bible). This burden, which would cause him to sink into Tophet (hell), is so
unbearable that Christian must seek deliverance. He meets Evangelist as he is
walking out in the fields, who directs him to the "Wicket Gate" for
deliverance. Since Christian cannot see the "Wicket Gate" in the distance,
Evangelist directs him to go to a "shining light," which Christian thinks he
sees. Christian leaves his home, his wife, and children to save himself: he
cannot persuade them to accompany him. Obstinate and Pliable go after Christian
to bring him back, but Christian refuses. Obstinate returns disgusted, but
Pliable is persuaded to go with Christian, hoping to take advantage of the
paradise that Christian claims lies at the end of his journey. Pliable's
journey with Christian is cut short when the two of them fall into the Slough
of Despond. It is there that Pliable abandons Christian after getting himself
out. After struggling to the other side of the bog, Christian is pulled out by
Help, who has heard his cries. On his way to the Wicket Gate, Christian is
diverted by Mr. Worldly Wiseman into seeking deliverance from his burden
through the Law, supposedly with the help of a Mr. Legality and his son
Civility in the village of Morality, rather than through Christ, allegorically
by way of the Wicket Gate. Evangelist meets the wayward Christian as he stops
before Mount Sinai on the way to Legality's home. It hangs over the road and
threatens to crush any who would pass it. Evangelist shows Christian that he
had sinned by turning out of his way, but he assures him that he will be
welcomed at the Wicket Gate if he should turn around and go there, which
Christian does. At the Wicket Gate begins the "straight and narrow" King's
Highway, and Christian is directed onto it by the gatekeeper Good Will. In the
Second Part, Good-will is shown to be Jesus himself. To Christian's query about
relief from his burden, Good Will directs him forward to "the place of
deliverance." Christian makes his way from there to the House of the
Interpreter, where he is shown pictures and that portray or dramatize aspects
of the Christian faith and life. Roger Sharrock denotes them "emblems." From
the House of the Interpreter, Christian finally reaches the "place of
deliverance" (allegorically, the cross of Calvary and the open sepulchre of
Christ), where the "straps" that bound Christian's burden to him break, and it
rolls away into the open sepulchre. This event happens relatively early in the
narrative: the immediate need of Christian at the beginning of the story being
quickly remedied. After Christian is relieved of his burden, he is greeted by
three shining ones, who give him the greeting of peace, new garments, and a
scroll as a passport into the Celestial City — these are allegorical figures
indicative of Christian Baptism. Atop the Hill of Difficulty, Christian makes
his first stop for the night at the House Beautiful, which is an allegory of
the local Christian . Christian spends three days here, and leaves clothed with
armour (Eph. 6:11-18), which stands him in good stead in his battle against
Apollyon in the Valley of Humiliation. This battle lasts "over half a day"
until Christian manages to wound Apollyon with his two-edged sword (a reference
to the Bible, Heb. 4:12). "And with that Apollyon spread his dragon wings and
sped away." As night falls Christian enters the Valley of the Shadow of Death.
When he is in the middle of the valley amidst the gloom,terror, and deamons he
hears the words of the Twenty-third Psalm, spoken possibly by his friend
Faithful: "Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will
fear no evil: for thou art with me; thy rod and thy staff they comfort me."
(Psalm 23:4.) As he leaves this valley the sun rises on a new day. Just outside
the Valley of the Shadow of Death he meets Faithful, also a former resident of
the City of Destruction, who accompanies him to Vanity Fair, where both are
arrested and detained because of their disdain for the wares and business of
the fair. Faithful is put on trial, and executed as a martyr. Hopeful, a
resident of Vanity, takes Faithful's place to be Christian's companion for the
rest of the way. Along a rough stretch of road, Christian and Hopeful leave the
highway to travel on the easier By-Path Meadow, where a rainstorm forces them
to spend the night. In the morning they are captured by Giant Despair, who
takes them to his Doubting Castle, where they are imprisoned, beaten and
starved. The giant wants them to commit suicide, but they endure the ordeal
until Christian realizes that a key he has, called Promise, will open all the
doors and gates of Doubting Castle. Using the key, they escape. The Delectable
Mountains form the next stage of Christian and Hopeful's journey, where the
shepherds show them some of the wonders of the place also known as "Immanuel's
Land". As at the House of the Interpreter pilgrims are shown sights that
strengthen their faith and warn them against sinning. On Mount Clear they are
able to see the Celestial City through the shepherd's "perspective glass,"
which serves as a telescope. This device is given to Mercy in the second part
at her request. On the way, Christian and Hopeful meet a lad named Ignorance,
who believes that he will be allowed into the Celestial City through his own
good deeds rather than as a gift of God's grace. Christian and Hopeful meet up
with him twice and try to persuade him to journey to the Celestial City in the
right way. Ignorance persists in his own way that leads to his being cast into
hell. After getting over the River of Death on the ferry boat of Vain Hope
without overcoming the hazards of wading across it, Ignorance appears before
the gates of Celestial City without a passport, which he would have acquired
had he gone into the King's Highway through the Wicket Gate. The Lord of the
Celestial City orders shining ones to take Ignorance to one of the byways to
hell and throw him in. Christian and Hopeful make it through the dangerous
Enchanted Ground into the Land of Beulah, where they ready themselves to cross
the River of Death on foot to Mount Zion and the Celestial City. Christian has
a rough time of it, but Hopeful helps him over; and they are welcomed into the
Celestial City. Second Part. The Second Part of "The Pilgrim's Progress"
presents the pilgrimage of Christian's wife, Christiana; their sons; and the
maiden, Mercy. They visit the same stopping places that Christian visited, with
the addition of Gaius' Inn between the Valley of the Shadow of Death and Vanity
Fair; but they take a longer time in order to accommodate marriage and
childbirth for the four sons and their wives. The hero of the story is
Greatheart, the servant of the Interpreter, who is a pilgrim's guide to the
Celestial City. He kills four giants and participates in the slaying of a
monster that terrorizes the city of Vanity. The passage of years in this second
pilgrimage better allegorizes the journey of the Christian life. By using
heroines, Bunyan, in the Second Part, illustrates the idea that women as well
as men can be brave pilgrims. Alexander M. Witherspoon, professor of English at
Yale University, writes in a prefatory essay: John Bunyan, "The Pilgrim's
Progress", (New York: Pocket Books, Inc., 1957), vi. This is exemplified by the
frailness of the pilgrims of the Second Part in contrast to those of the First:
women, children, and physically and mentally challenged individuals. When
Christiana's party leaves Gaius's Inn and Mr. Feeble-mind lingers in order to
be left behind, he is encouraged to accompany the party by Greatheart: But
brother ... I have it in commission, to comfort the feeble-minded, and to
support the weak. You must needs go along with us; we will wait for you, we
will lend you our help, we will deny ourselves of some things, both
opinionative and practical, for your sake; we will not enter into doubtful
disputations before you, we will be made all things to you, rather than you
shall be left behind. When the pilgrims end up in the Land of Beulah, they
cross over the River of Death by appointment. As a matter of importance to
Christians of Bunyan's persuasion reflected in the narrative of "The Pilgrim's
Progress", the last words of the pilgrims as they cross over the river are
recorded. The four sons of Christian and their families do not cross, but
remain for the support of the church in that place. Geographical and
topographical features behind the fictional places. Scholars have pointed out
that Bunyan may have been influenced in the creation of places in "The
Pilgrim's Progress" by his own surrounding environment. Albert Foster describes
the natural features of Bedfordshire that apparently turn up in "The Pilgrim's
Progress". Vera Brittain in her thoroughly researched biography of Bunyan,
identifies seven locations that appear in the allegory. Other connections are
suggested in books not directly associated with either John Bunyan or "The
Pilgrim's Progress. At least twenty-one natural or man-made geographical or
topographical features from "The Pilgrim's Progress" have been
identified—places and structures John Bunyan regularly would have seen in his
travels on foot or horseback. The entire journey from The City of Destruction
to the Celestial City may have been based on Bunyan's own usual journey from
Bedford, on the main road that runs less than a mile behind his Elstow cottage,
through Ampthill, Dunstable and St Albans, to London. Cultural influence. John
Bunyan himself wrote a popular hymn that encourages a hearer to become a
pilgrim-like Christian: "All Who Would Valiant Be". Because of the widespread
longtime popularity of "The Pilgrim's Progress", Christian's hazards —
whether originally from Bunyan or borrowed by him from the Bible — the
"Slough of Despond", the "Hill Difficulty", "Valley of the Shadow of Death",
"Doubting Castle", and the "Enchanted Ground", his temptations (the wares of
"Vanity Fair" and the pleasantness of "By-Path Meadow"), his foes ("Apollyon"
and "Giant Despair"), and the helpful stopping places he visits (the "House of
the Interpreter", the "House Beautiful", the "Delectable Mountains", and the
"Land of Beulah") have become commonly used phrases proverbial in English. For
example, "One has one's own Slough of Despond to trudge through." Famous
Christian preacher C.H. Spurgeon was influenced by "The Pilgrim's Progress" and
is said to have read the book over 100 times. "Pilgrim's Progress" is listed as
one of Mr Tulliver's books in George Eliot's "The Mill on the Floss". Context
in Christendom. The explicit Protestant theology of "The Pilgrim's Progress"
made it much more popular than its predecessors. Bunyan's plain style breathes
life into the abstractions of the anthropomorphized temptations and
abstractions that Christian encounters and with whom he converses on his course
to Heaven. Samuel Johnson said that "this is the great merit of the book, that
the most cultivated man cannot find anything to praise more highly, and the
child knows nothing more amusing." Three years after its publication (1681), it
was reprinted in colonial America, and was widely read in the Puritan colonies.
Because of its explicit English Protestant theology "The Pilgrim's Progress"
shares the then popular English antipathy toward the Roman Catholic Church. It
was published over the years of the Popish Plot (1678–1681) and ten years
before the Glorious Revolution of 1688, and it shows the influence of John
Foxe's "Acts and Monuments". Bunyan presents a decrepit and harmless giant to
confront Christian at the end of the Valley of the Shadow of Death that is
explicitly named "Pope":John Bunyan, "The Pilgrim's Progress", W.R. Owens, ed.,
Oxford World's Classics (Oxford: University Press, 2003), 66, 299. When
Christian and Faithful travel through Vanity Fair, Bunyan adds the editorial
comment:John Bunyan, "The Pilgrim's Progress", W.R. Owens, ed., Oxford World's
Classics (Oxford: University Press, 2003), 86, 301. In the Second Part while
Christiana and her group of pilgrims led by Greatheart stay for some time in
Vanity, the city is terrorized by a seven-headed beast which is driven away by
Greatheart and other stalwarts. In his endnotes W.R. Owens notes about the
woman that governs the beast: "This woman was believed by Protestants to
represent Antichrist, the Church of Rome. In a posthumously published treatise,
"Of Antichrist, and his Ruine" (1692), Bunyan gave an extended account of the
rise and (shortly expected) fall of Antichrist." Foreign language versions.
Beginning in the 1850s, illustrated versions of "The Pilgrim's Progress" in
Chinese were printed in Hong Kong, Shanghai and Fuzhou and widely distributed
by Protestant missionaries. Hong Xiuquan, the quasi-Christian leader of the
Taiping Rebellion, declared that the book was his favorite reading. The "Third
Part". "The Third Part of the Pilgrim's Progress" was written by an anonymous
author; beginning in 1693, it was published with Bunyan's authentic two parts.
It continued to be republished with Bunyan's work until 1852. This third part
presented the pilgrimage of Tender-Conscience and his companions. Musical
settings. The book was the basis of an opera by Ralph Vaughan Williams,
premiered in 1951; see "The Pilgrim's Progress (opera)". It was also the basis
of a condensed radio adaptation starring John Gielgud, including, as background
music, several excerpts from Vaughan Williams's orchestral works. This radio
version, originally presented in 1942, was newly recorded by Hyperion Records
in 1990, in a performance conducted by Matthew Best. It again starred Gielgud,
and featured Richard Pasco and Ursula Howells. English composer Ernest Austin
set the whole story as a huge narrative tone poem for solo organ, with optional
6-part choir and narrator, lasting approximately 2½ hours. Twin brothers Keith
and Kurt Landaas also composed, recorded, and performed a compelling rock opera
version of the work in the early 1990s. The first act focused on Christian's
journey, the second on that of Christiana, and their teenage son Matthew. A
musical based on the book was presented at the LifeHouse Theater in Redlands,
California, in 2004 and 2008, with book, music and lyrics by Kenneth Wright,
with additional text, music and lyrics by Wayne Scott. In 2007 Cuban based duet
Quidam Pilgrim released a musical setting of the book under the name of
"Pilgrim" combining elements of alternative rock, Celtic, new age and Cuban
folk music. The songs were written in English and Latin, also including one
track in Spanish, these were performed on Cuban national television on several
occasions receiving a positive audience response. References in literature.
Charles Dickens' "Oliver Twist" (1838) is subtitled 'The Parish Boy's
Progress'. In 1847 William Makepeace Thackeray entitled his work "Vanity Fair:
A Novel without a Hero" with the Vanity Fair of "Pilgrim's Progress" in mind.
Mark Twain gave his 1869 travelogue, "The Innocents Abroad", the alternate
title "The New Pilgrims' Progress". In Twain's later work "Adventures of
Huckleberry Finn", Huckleberry Finn mentions "The Pilgrim's Progress" as he
describes the works of literature in the Grangerfords' library. Twain uses this
to satirize the Protestant southern aristocracy. E. E. Cummings also makes
numerous references to it in his prose work, "The Enormous Room". "", a short
story by Nathaniel Hawthorne, recreates Christian's journey in Hawthorne's
time. Progressive thinkers have replaced the footpath by a railroad, and
pilgrims may now travel under steam power. The journey is considerably faster,
but somewhat more questionable... John Buchan was an admirer of Bunyan, and
"Pilgrim's Progress" features significantly in his third Richard Hannay novel,
"Mr Standfast", which also takes its title from one of Bunyan's characters.
Alan Moore in his "League of Extraordinary Gentlemen" enlists "The Pilgrim's
Progress" protagonist, Christian, as a member of the earliest version of this
group, "Prospero's Men", having become wayward on his journey during his visit
in Vanity Fair, stepping down an alleyway and found himself in London in the
1670s, and unable to return to his homeland. This group disbanded in 1690 after
Prospero vanished into the Blazing World; however, some parts of the text seem
to imply that Christian resigned from Prospero's league before its disbanding
and that Christian traveled to the Blazing World before Prospero himself. The
apparent implication is that; within the context of the League stories; the
Celestial City Christian seeks and the Blazing World may in fact be one and the
same. In Louisa May Alcott's "Little Women", whose protagonist Jo reads it at
the outset of the novel, and tries to follow the good example of Bunyan's
Christian. The cartoonist Winsor McCay drew an allegorical comic strip entitled
"A Pilgrim's Progress" in the "New York Evening Telegram". The strip ran from
June 26, 1905 to December 18, 1910. In it, the protagonist Mr. Bunion is
constantly frustrated in his attempts to improve his life by ridding himself of
his burdonsome valise, "Dull Care". C. S. Lewis wrote a book inspired by "The
Pilgrim's Progress" called "The Pilgrim's Regress", in which a character named
John follows a vision to escape from The Landlord, a less friendly version of
The Owner in Pilgrim's Regress. It is an allegory of C. S. Lewis' own journey
from a religious childhood to a pagan adulthood in which he rediscovers his
Christian God. Henry Williamson's "The Patriot's Progress" references the title
of "The Pilgrim's Progress" and the symbolic nature of John Bunyan's work. The
protagonist of the semi-autobiographical novel is John Bullock, the
quintessential English soldier during World War I. The character of Billy
Pilgrim in "Slaughterhouse-5: The Children's Crusade", by Kurt Vonnegut, is a
clear homage to a similar journey to enlightenment experienced by Christian,
although Billy's journey leads him to an existential acceptance of life and of
a fatalist human condition. Vonnegut's parallel to The Pilgrim's Progress is
deliberate and evident in Billy's surname. Charlotte Brontë refers to
"Pilgrim's Progress" in most of her novels, including "Jane Eyre", "Shirley",
and "Villette". Her alterations to the quest-narrative have led to much
critical interest, particular with the ending of "Jane Eyre". A classic science
fiction fan novelette, "The Enchanted Duplicator" by Walt Willis and Bob Shaw,
is explicitly modeled on "The Pilgrim's Progress"; it has been repeatedly
reprinted over the decades since its first appearance in 1954: in professional
publications, in fanzines and as a monograph. Enid Blyton wrote "The Land of
Far Beyond" as a children's version of "Pilgrim's Progress". First published in
1942 by Methuen. The book is briefly referenced in the David Foster Wallace
novel "Infinite Jest", when it is compared to the Eschaton vademecum that is
written by Hal Incandenza. Lois McMasters Bujold quotes "Pilgrim's Progress" in
her short story "Borders of Infinity" set in her science fiction Vorkosigan
Saga. John Steinbeck's novel "The Grapes of Wrath" mentions "The Pilgrim's
Progress" as one of an (anonymous) character's favorite books. Steinbeck's
novel was itself an allegorical spiritual journey by Tom Joad through America
during the Great Depression, and often made Christian allusions to sacrifice
and redemption in a world of social injustice. Christopher Nicholson's
character Tom Page in "The Elephant Keeper" identifies Pilgrim's Progress as
being one of two books he has read; the other being "Gulliver's Travels". Sarah
Orne Jewett's novel "The Country of the Pointed Firs" describes the progressing
of carriages towards a family reunion as a "Pilgrim's Progress".
