Mormonism and polygamy Polygamy (called plural marriage by Mormons in the 19th
century or the Principle by modern fundamentalist practitioners of polygamy)
was taught by leaders of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS
Church) for more than half of the 19th century, and practiced publicly from
1852 to 1890. The Church's practice of polygamy has been highly controversial,
both within Western society and the Church itself. America was both fascinated
and horrified by the practice of polygamy, with the Republican platform at one
time referencing "the twin relics of barbarism - polygamy and slavery." The
private practice of polygamy, or more specifically, polygyny, was instituted in
the 1830s by founder Joseph Smith, Jr. The public practice of polygamy
(“plural marriage”) by the church was announced and defended in 1852 by one
of the Council of the Twelve Apostles, Elder Orson Pratt, by the request of the
church President at that time, Brigham Young. For over 40 years, the church and
the United States were at odds over the issue: the church defended the practice
as a matter of religious freedom, while the federal government aggressively
sought to eradicate it, consistent with prevailing public opinion. Polygamy was
probably a significant factor in the Utah War of 1857 and 1858, given the
Republican attempts to paint Democratic President James Buchanan as weak in his
opposition to both polygamy and slavery. In 1862, the United States Congress
passed the Morrill Act, which prohibited plural marriage in the territories
(including Utah) and dis-incorporated the church. In spite of the law, Mormons
continued to practice polygamy, believing that it was protected by the First
Amendment. In 1879, in Reynolds v. United States, the Supreme Court of the
United States upheld the Morrill Act, stating: "Laws are made for the
government of actions, and while they cannot interfere with mere religious
belief and opinion, they may with practices." In 1890, church president Wilford
Woodruff issued a Manifesto that officially terminated the practice of
polygamy. Although this Manifesto did not dissolve existing plural marriages,
relations with the United States markedly improved after 1890, such that Utah
was admitted as a U.S. state. After the Manifesto, some Mormons continued to
enter into polygamous marriages, but these eventually stopped in 1904 when
church president Joseph F. Smith disavowed polygamy before Congress and issued
a "Second Manifesto" calling for all plural marriages in the church to cease.
Several small "fundamentalist" groups seeking to continue the practice split
from the LDS Church, including the Apostolic United Brethren and the
Fundamentalist Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints. Meanwhile the
church adopted a policy of excommunicating members found practicing polygamy,
and today seeks actively to distance itself from fundamentalist groups that
continue the practice. On its web site, the Church says that “the standard
doctrine of the church is monogamy" and that polygamy was a temporary exception
to the rule. Origin. Many early converts, including Brigham Young, Orson Pratt,
and Lyman Johnson, recorded that Joseph Smith was teaching plural marriage
privately as early as 1831 or 1832. Pratt reported that Smith told some early
members in 1831 and 1832 that plural marriage was a true principle, but that
the time to practice it had not yet come. Lyman Johnson also claimed to have
heard the doctrine from Smith in 1831. Mosiah Hancock reported that his father
was taught about plural marriage in the spring of 1832. William Clayton,
Smith's scribe, recorded early polygamous marriages in 1843, including unions
between Smith and Eliza Partridge, Emily Partridge, Sarah Ann Whitney, Helen
Kimball and Flora Woodworth. Clayton relates: "On the 1st day of May, 1843, I
officiated in the office of an Elder by marrying Lucy Walker to the Prophet
Joseph Smith, at his own residence. During this period the Prophet Joseph took
several other wives. Amongst the number I well remember Eliza Partridge, Emily
Partridge, Sarah Ann Whitney, Helen Kimball and Flora Woodworth. These all, he
acknowledged to me, were his lawful, wedded wives, according to the celestial
order. His wife Emma was cognizant of the fact of some, if not all, of these
being his wives, and she generally treated them very kindly." As early as 1832,
Mormon missionaries worked successfully to convert followers in Maine of
polygamist religious leader Jacob Cochran, who went into hiding in 1830 to
escape imprisonment due to his practice of polygamy. Among Cochran's marital
innovations was 'spiritual wifery', and "tradition assumes that (Cochran)
received frequent consignments of spiritual consorts, and that such were
invariably the most robust and attractive women in the community". The majority
of what became the Quorum of the Twelve in 1835 attended Mormon conferences
held in the center of the Cochranites in 1834 and 1835. Brigham Young, an
apostle in the Twelve, got acquainted with Cochran's followers as he made
several missionary journeys through the Cochranite territory from Boston to
Saco, and later married Augusta Adams Cobb, a former Cochranite. At the time,
the practice was kept secret from non-members, and many church members at
large. Throughout his life, Smith publicly denied having multiple wives.
However, John C. Bennett, a recent convert to the church and the first mayor of
Nauvoo, used ideas of eternal and plural marriage to justify acts of seduction,
adultery and, in some cases, the practice of abortion in the guise of
"spiritual wifery". Bennett was called to account by Joseph and Hyrum Smith,
and was excommunicated from the church. In April 1844, Joseph Smith referred to
polygamy as "John C. Bennett's spiritual wife system" and warned "if any man
writes to you, or preaches to you, doctrines contrary to the Bible, the Book of
Mormon, or the book of Doctrine and Covenants, set him down as an imposter."
Smith mused The practice was publicly announced in Utah in 1852, some five
years after the Mormons arrived in Utah, and eight years after Smith's death.
The doctrine authorizing plural marriage was published in the 1876 version of
Doctrine and Covenants. Plural marriages of early church leaders. Joseph Smith.
The 1843 polygamy revelation, published posthumously, counseled Smith's wife
Emma to accept all of Smith's plural wives, and warns of destruction if the new
covenant is not observed. Smith's wife Emma was publicly and privately opposed
to the practice and Joseph may have married some women without Emma knowing
beforehand. Emma publicly denied that her husband had ever preached or
practiced polygamy, which later became a defining difference between the church
under Brigham Young, and the church under her son Joseph Smith III that she
remained affiliated with until her death at the age of 74. Emma Smith claimed
that the very first time she ever became aware of the 1843 polygamy revelation
was when she read about it in Orson Pratt's booklet "The Seer" in 1853. There
is a subtle difference between 'sealing' (which is a Mormon priesthood
ordinance that binds individuals together in the eternities), and 'marriage' (a
social tradition in which the man and woman agree to be husband and wife in
this life). In those early days of this religion, common practices and
doctrines were not yet well-defined. Even among those who accept the views of
conventional historians, there is disagreement as to the precise number of
wives Smith had: Fawn M. Brodie lists 48, D. Michael Quinn 46, and George D.
Smith 42. The discrepancy is created by the lack of documents to support the
alleged marriages to some of the named wives. A number of Smith's "marriages"
occurred after his death, with the wife being sealed to Joseph via a proxy who
stood in for him. One historian, Todd M. Compton, documented at least 33 plural
marriages or sealings during Smith's lifetime. Richard lloyd Anderson and Scott
H. Faulring came up with a list of 29 wives of Joseph Smith. It is unclear how
many of the women Smith had sexual relations with. Many contemporary accounts
from Smith's time indicate that he engaged in sexual relations with at least
several of his wives. , there are at least twelve early Latter Day Saints who,
based on historical documents and circumstantial evidence, have been identified
as potential Smith offspring stemming from plural marriages. In 2005 and 2007
studies, a geneticist with the Sorenson Molecular Genealogy Foundation showed
"with 99.9 percent accuracy" that five of these individuals were in fact not
Smith descendants: Mosiah Hancock (son of Clarissa Reed Hancock), Oliver Buell
(son of Prescindia Huntington Buell), Moroni Llewellyn Pratt (son of Mary Ann
Frost Pratt), Zebulon Jacobs (son of Zina Diantha Huntington Jacobs Smith), and
Orrison Smith (son of Fanny Alger). The remaining seven have yet to be
conclusively tested, including Josephine Lyon, for whom current DNA testing
cannot provide conclusive evidence either way. Lyon's mother, Sylvia Sessions
Lyon, left her daughter a deathbed affidavit telling her she was Smith's
daughter. Other early church leaders. Church president Brigham Young had 51
wives, and 56 children by 16 of those wives. Church apostle Heber C. Kimball
had 43 wives, and had 65 children by 17 different women. U.S. federal
government actions against polygamy. 1857–1858 Utah War. As The Church of
Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints settled in what became the Utah Territory it
eventually was subjected to the power and opinion of the United States.
Friction first began to show in the James Buchanan administration and federal
troops arrived (see Utah War). President Buchannan, anticipating Mormon
opposition to a newly appointed governor to replace Brigham Young, dispatched
2,500 federal troops to Utah to seat the new governor, thus setting in motion a
series of unfortunate misunderstandings when the Mormons felt threatened in
light of their past history. 1862 Morrill Anti-Bigamy Act. The rest of the
United States for the most part considered plural marriage offensive. On July
8, 1862, President Abraham Lincoln signed the "Morrill Anti-Bigamy Act" into
law, which forbade the practice in US territories. Lincoln told the church that
he had no intentions of enforcing it if they would not interfere with him, and
so the matter was laid to rest for a time. But rhetoric continued, and polygamy
became an impediment to Utah being admitted to the United States. This was not
a concern to Brigham Young, who preached in 1866 that if Utah will not be
admitted to the Union until it abandons polygamy, "we shall never be admitted."
After the Civil War, immigrants to Utah who were not members of the church
continued the contest for political power. They were frustrated by the
consolidation of the members. Forming the Liberal Party, they began pushing for
political changes and to weaken the church's advantage in the territory. In
September 1871, President Brigham Young was indicted for adultery due to his
plural marriages. On January 6, 1879, the Supreme Court upheld the Morrill
Anti-Bigamy Act in Reynolds v. United States. 1882 Edmunds Act. In February
1882, George Q. Cannon, a prominent leader in the church, was denied a non-
voting seat in the House of Representatives due to his polygamous relations.
This revived the issue in national politics. One month later, the Edmunds Act
was passed by Congress, amending the Morrill Act and made polygamy a felony
punishable by a $500 fine and five years in prison. Unlawful cohabitation,
where the prosecution did not need to prove that a marriage ceremony had taken
place (only that a couple had lived together), was a misdemeanor punishable by
a $300 fine and six months imprisonment. It also revoked the right of
polygamists to vote or hold office and allowed them to be punished without due
process. Even if people did not practice polygamy, they would have their rights
revoked if they confessed a belief in it. In August, Rudger Clawson was
imprisoned for continuing to cohabit with wives that he married before the 1862
Morrill Act. 1887 Edmunds-Tucker Act. In 1887, the Edmunds-Tucker Act allowed
the seizure of the church and its property and further extended the punishments
of the Edmunds Act of 1882. In July of the same year, the U.S. Attorney General
filed suit to seize the church and all of its assets. The church was losing
control of the territorial government, and many members and leaders were being
actively pursued as fugitives. Without being able to appear publicly, the
leadership was left to navigate underground. Teaching new marriage and family
arrangements where the principles that could not be openly discussed,
compounded the problems. Those authorized to teach the doctrine had always
stressed the strict covenants, obligations and responsibilities associated with
it—the antithesis of license. But those who heard only rumors, or who chose
to distort and abuse the teaching, often envisioned and sometimes practiced
something quite different. One such person was John C. Bennett, an earlier
mayor of Nauvoo and adviser to Joseph Smith, who twisted the teaching to his
own advantage. Capitalizing on rumors and lack of understanding among general
church membership, he taught a doctrine of "spiritual wifery". He and
associates sought to have illicit sexual relationships with women by telling
them that they were married "spiritually", even if they had never been married
formally, and that the Prophet approved the arrangement. These statements were
false. The Bennett scandal resulted in his excommunication and the disaffection
of several others. Bennett then toured the country speaking against the Latter-
day Saints and published a bitter anti-Mormon exposé charging the Saints with
licentiousness. Those that twisted teachings of polygamy over the years often
caused serious problems and acted as a fuel for distress over the issue,
associated rumors, and misunderstandings. Following the aforementioned passage
of the Edmunds-Tucker Act in 1887, the church found it difficult to operate as
a viable institution. Among other things, this legislation disincorporated the
church, confiscated its properties, and even threatened seizure of its temples.
After visiting priesthood leaders in many settlements, President Woodruff left
for San Francisco on September 3, 1890, to meet with prominent businessmen and
politicians. He returned to Salt Lake City on September 21, determined to
obtain divine confirmation to pursue a course that seemed to be agonizingly
more and more clear. As he explained to church members a year later, the choice
was between, on the one hand, continuing to practice plural marriage and
thereby losing the temples, "stopping all the ordinances therein," and, on the
other, ceasing plural marriage in order to continue performing the essential
ordinances for the living and the dead. President Woodruff hastened to add that
he had acted only as the Lord directed: 1890 Manifesto banning plural marriage.
The final element in President Woodruff's revelatory experience came on the
evening of September 23, 1890. The following morning, he reported to some of
the General Authorities that he had struggled throughout the night with the
Lord regarding the path that should be pursued. The result was a 510-word
handwritten manuscript which stated his intentions to comply with the law and
denied that the church continued to solemnize or condone plural marriages. The
document was later edited by George Q. Cannon of the First Presidency and
others to its present 356 words. On October 6, 1890, it was presented to the
Latter-day Saints at the General Conference and approved. While many church
leaders in 1890 regarded the Manifesto as inspired, there were differences
among them about its scope and permanence. Some leaders were reluctant to
terminate a long-standing practice that was regarded as divinely mandated. As a
result, over 200 plural marriages were performed between 1890 and 1904. 1904
second manifesto banning plural marriage. It was not until 1904, under the
leadership of President Joseph F. Smith, that the church completely banned new
plural marriages worldwide. Not surprisingly, rumors persisted of marriages
performed after the 1890 manifesto, and beginning in January 1904, testimony
given in the Smoot hearings made it clear that plural marriage had not been
completely extinguished. The ambiguity was ended in the General Conference of
April 1904, when President Joseph F. Smith issued the "Second Manifesto", an
emphatic declaration that prohibited plural marriage and proclaimed that
offenders would be subject to church discipline. They declared that any who
participated in additional plural marriages, and those officiating, would be
excommunicated from the church. Those disagreeing with the second manifesto
included apostles Matthias F. Cowley and John W. Taylor who both resigned from
the Quorum of the Twelve. Cowley retained his membership in the church, but
Taylor was later excommunicated. Although the 1904 Manifesto ended the official
practice of new plural marriages, existing plural marriages were not
automatically dissolved. Many Mormons, including prominent church leaders,
maintained existing plural marriages well into the 20th century. In 1943, the
First Presidency discovered apostle Richard R. Lyman was cohabitating with a
woman other than his legal wife. As it turned out, in 1925 Lyman had begun a
relationship which he defined as a polygamous marriage. Unable to trust anyone
else to officiate, Elder Lyman and the woman exchanged vows secretly. By 1943,
both were in their seventies. Lyman was excommunicated on November 12, 1943 at
age 73. The Quorum of the Twelve provided the newspapers with a one-sentence
announcement, stating that the ground for excommunication was violation of the
Law of Chastity, which any practice of post-Manifesto polygamy constituted.
Remnants within sects. Over time, many of those who rejected the LDS Church's
relinquishment of plural marriage formed small, close-knit communities in areas
of the Rocky Mountains. These groups continue to practice 'the principle'
despite the opposition. These people are commonly called Mormon fundamentalists
and may either practice as individuals, as families, or as part of organized
denominations. The official style guide of the church objects to the use of the
term "Mormon fundamentalists" and suggests using the term "polygamist sects" to
avoid confusion about whether the main body of Mormon believers teach or
practice polygamy. Members of these polygamist sects believe that plural
marriage is a requirement for exaltation and entry into the highest "degree" of
the Celestial kingdom (the highest of three Mormon heavens). This belief stems
from statements by 19th century Mormon authorities including Brigham Young,
although some of these leaders gave possibly conflicting statements that a
monogamist may obtain at least a lower degree of "exaltation" through mere
"belief" in polygamy. Thus, plural marriage is viewed as an essential and
fundamental part of the religion. For public relations reasons, the LDS Church
has sought vigorously to disassociate itself from Mormon fundamentalists and
the practice of plural marriage. Although the LDS Church has requested that
journalists not refer to Mormon fundamentalists using the term "Mormon",
journalists generally have not complied, and "Mormon fundamentalist" has become
standard terminology. Mormon fundamentalists themselves embrace the term
"Mormon", and share a common religious heritage with the LDS Church including
canonization of the Book of Mormon. Modern plural marriage theory within the
LDS Church. Although the LDS Church has abandoned the practice of plural
marriage, it has not abandoned the underlying doctrines of polygamy in an
eternal sense. According to the church's sacred texts and pronouncements by its
leaders and theologians, the church leaves open the possibility that it may one
day re-institute the practice. It is the practice of Mormons to seal themselves
to their wives. Inasmuch as a man, unlike a woman, may be sealed to multiple,
sequential wives on earth, it is possible for a man to have multiple wives in
the Celestial Kingdom. LDS reasons for allowing polygamy. As early as the
publication of the Book of Mormon in 1830, LDS doctrine maintained that
polygamy was allowable so long as it was commanded by God. The Book of Jacob
condemned polygamy as adultery, but left open the proviso that "For if I will,
saith the Lord of Hosts, raise up seed unto me, I will command my people;
otherwise, they shall hearken unto these things." Thus, the LDS Church today
teaches that plural marriage can only be practiced when specifically authorized
by God. According to this view, the 1890 Manifesto and/or 1904 Manifesto
rescinded God's prior authorization given to Joseph Smith. However, Bruce R.
McConkie stated in his controversial 1958 book, "Mormon Doctrine", that God
will "obviously" re-institute the practice of polygamy after the Second Coming
of Jesus Christ. This echoes earlier teachings by Brigham Young that the
primary "purpose" of polygamy was to bring about the Millennium. Current
official church teaching materials do not make any mention of the future re-
institution of plural marriage. Multiple sealings when a prior spouse has died.
In the case where a man's first wife dies, and the man remarries, and both of
the marriages involve a sealing, LDS authorities teach that in the afterlife,
the man will enter a polygamous relationship with both wives. Apostle Dallin
Oaks is an example of such a case. Under LDS Church policy, a man whose sealed
wife has died does not have to request any permission beyond having a current
temple recommend and an interview with his bishop to get final permission for a
living ordinance, to be married in the temple and sealed to another woman,
unless the new wife's circumstance requires a cancellation of sealing. However,
a woman whose sealed husband has died is still bound by the original sealing
and must request a cancellation of sealing to be sealed to another man (see
next paragraph for exception to this after she dies). In some cases, women in
this situation who wish to remarry choose to be married to subsequent husbands
in the temple "for time only", and are not sealed to them, leaving them sealed
to their first husband for eternity. As of 1998, however, women who have died
may be sealed to more than one man. On page 72 of the 1998 edition of the
Church Handbook of Instructions, the LDS Church created a new policy that a
woman may also be sealed to more than one man. A woman, however, may not be
sealed to more than one man while she is alive. She may only be sealed to
subsequent partners after both she and her husband(s) have died. Thus, if a
widow who was sealed to her first husband remarries, she may be sealed by proxy
to all of her subsequent husband(s), but only after both she and the subsequent
husbands have died. Church leaders have not clarified if women in such
circumstances will live in a polyandrous relationship in the afterlife.
However, proxy sealings, like proxy baptisms, are merely "offered" to the
person in the afterlife, indicating that the purpose is to allow the woman to
choose the right man to be sealed to. Multiple sealings when marriages end in
divorce. A man who is sealed to a woman but later divorced must apply for a
"sealing clearance" from the First Presidency in order to be sealed to another
woman. This does "not" void or invalidate the first sealing. A woman in the
same circumstances would apply to the First Presidency for a "cancellation of
sealing", (sometimes incorrectly called a "temple divorce") allowing her to be
sealed to another man. This approval voids the original sealing as far as the
woman is concerned. Divorced women who have not applied for a sealing
cancellation are considered sealed to the original husband. However, the LDS
Church teaches that even in the afterlife the marriage relationship is
voluntary. So no man or woman can be forced into an eternal relationship
through temple sealing that they do not wish to be in. On occasion, divorced
women have been granted a cancellation of sealing, even though they do not
intend to marry someone else. In this case, they are no longer considered as
being sealed to anyone and are presumed to have the same eternal status as
unwed women. Proxy sealings where both spouses have died. According to church
policy, after a man has died, he may be sealed by proxy to all of the women to
whom he was legally married while he was alive. The same is true for women;
however, if a woman was sealed to a man while she was alive, all of her
husbands must be deceased before she can be sealed by proxy to them. The LDS
Church teaches that free agency is given to all and that those in the afterlife
would have a choice whether to accept the marriage sealing performed on their
behalf. Criticism of plural marriage. Instances of unhappy plural marriage.
Critics of polygamy in the early LDS Church claim that plural marriages
produced unhappiness in some wives. LDS historian Todd Compton, in his book "In
Sacred Loneliness", described various instances where some wives in polygamous
marriages were unhappy with polygamy. As a means for sexual gratification.
Critics of polygamy in the early LDS Church claim that church leaders
established the practice of polygamy in order to further their immoral desires
for sexual gratification with multiple sexual partners. Critics point to the
fact that church leaders practiced polygamy in secret from 1833 to 1852,
despite a written church doctrine (Doctrine and Covenants 101, 1835 edition)
renouncing polygamy and stating that only monogamous marriages were permitted.
Critics also cite several first-person accounts of early church leaders
attempting to use the polygamy doctrine to enter into illicit relationships
with women. Critics also assert that Joseph Smith instituted polygamy in order
to cover-up an 1835 adulterous affair with a neighbor's daughter, Fanny Alger,
by taking Alger as his second wife. Compton dates this marriage to March or
April 1833, well before Joseph was accused of an affair. However, historian
Lawrence Foster dismisses the marriage of Alger to Joseph Smith as "debatable
supposition" rather than "established fact". Others conclude that many Latter-
day Saints entered into plural marriage based on the belief that it was a
religious commandment, rather than as an excuse for sexual license. For
instance, many of the figures who came to be best associated with plural
marriage, including Church President Brigham Young and his counselor Heber C.
Kimball, expressed revulsion at the system when it was first introduced to
them. Young famously stated that after receiving the commandment to practice
plural marriage in Nauvoo, he saw a funeral procession walking down the street
and he wished he could exchange places with the corpse. He recalled that "I was
not desirous of shrinking from any duty, nor of failing in the least to do as I
was commanded, but it was the first time in my life that I had desired the
grave, and I could hardly get over it for a long time." When Kimball first
heard of the principle, he believed that he would marry elderly women whom he
would care for and who would not be a threat to his first wife Vilate. He was
later shocked to learn that he was to marry a younger woman. His biographer
writes that he "became sick in body, but his mental wretchedness was too great
to allow of his retiring, and he would walk the floor till nearly morning, and
sometimes the agony of his mind was so terrible that he would wring his hands
and weep like a child..." While his wife Vilate had trials "grievous to bear"
as a result of her acceptance of plural marriage, she supported her husband in
his religious duties, and taught her children that "she could not doubt the
plural order of marriage was of God, for the Lord had revealed it to her in
answer to prayer." Apologists also note that, although the revelation
permitting polygamy was not published until 1852, it was actually received by
Joseph Smith sometime in the 1830s. Underage plural marriages. Critics of
polygamy in the early LDS Church claim that church leaders sometimes used
polygamy to take advantage of young girls for immoral purposes. LDS historian
George D. Smith studied 153 men who took plural wives in the early years of the
Latter Day Saint movement, and found that two of the girls were thirteen years
old, 13 girls were fourteen years old, 21 were fifteen years old, and 53 were
sixteen years old. LDS historian Todd Compton documented that Joseph Smith
married girls of age 13 or 14. Historian Stanly Hirshon documented cases of
girls aged 10 and 11 being married to old men. However, it seems that Brigham
Young attempted to stamp out the practice of men being sealed to excessively
young girls. In 1857, he stated "I shall not seal the people as I have done.
Old Father Alread brought three young girls 12 & 13 years old. I would not seal
them to him. They would not be equally yoked together...Many get their
endowments who are not worthy and this is the way that devils are made."
Increase in bachelorhood. As the type of polygamy practiced is polygyny,
critics of the early LDS Church argue that polygamy may have caused a shortage
of brides in the early LDS community, citing quotes by church leader Heber C.
Kimball who is purported to have said (addressing departing missionaries): On
another occasion, he said "You are sent out as shepherds to gather sheep
together; and remember that they are not your sheep ... do not make selections
before they are brought home and put into the fold." Note that the first quote
above is not attested in any Mormon source, but first appeared in a derisive
article in the "New York Times" on May 15, 1860. FairWiki suggests that it may
be a paraphrase of the second quoted statement, which is authentic. The precise
number who participated in plural marriage is not known, but studies indicate a
maximum of 20-25% of LDS adults were members of polygamist households. One
third of the women of marriageable age and nearly all of the church leadership
were involved in the practice. Instances of coercion. Critics of polygamy in
the early LDS Church have documented several cases where deception and coercion
were used to induce marriage, for example citing the case of Joseph Smith who
warned some potential spouses of eternal damnation if they did not consent to
be his wife. In 1893, married LDS Church member John D. Miles traveled to
England and proposed to Caroline Owens, assuring her that he was not
polygamous. She returned to Utah and participated in a wedding, only to find
out after the ceremony that Miles was already married. She ran away, but Miles
hunted her down and raped her. She eventually escaped, and filed a lawsuit
against Miles that reached the Supreme Court and became a significant case in
polygamy case law. Ann Eliza Young, nineteenth wife of Brigham Young, claimed
that Young coerced her to marry him by threatening financial ruin of her
brother.
