Political religion The theory of political religion concerns governmental
ideologies whose cultural and political backing is so strong that it they are
said to attain power equivalent to those of a state religion, to which they
often exhibit significant similarities in both theory and practice. In addition
to basic forms of politics, like parliament and elections, it also holds an
aspect of Sacralization related to the institutions held within the regime and
provides also the inner measures traditionally considered to be a religious
territory, such as Ethics, Values, Symbols, Myths, Rituals and for example a
national Liturgical calendar. Political religions generally vie with existing
traditional religions, and try, if possible, to replace or eradicate them. The
term was given new attention in the United States by the political scientist
Hans Maier. The term is sometimes treated as synonymous with civil religion,
but although some scholars use the terms as equivalent, others see a useful
distinction, using "civil religion" as something weaker, which functions more
as a socially unifying and essentially conservative force, where a political
religion is radically transformational, even apocalyptic. The term is sometimes
used outside academia, often with meanings tangential to or opposite to the
sociological usage (for example, applying it to a church), with the use
intended as a derogatory description of excessive adherence to something
political or ideological. Even when used correctly, supporters of an ideology
will generally reject the application of the term "political religion".
Overview. The term "political religion" draws on the aspects of religion which
can be found in certain secular ideologies. The scientific schools practicing
the study on religious aspects of politics include at least Political science
(for example William Connolly), Sociology (Christoph Deutschmann), History
(Emilio Gentile), Theology (Oliver O'Donovan) and Psychology. A political
religion often occupies the same ethical, psychological and sociological space
as a traditional religion, and as a result it often displaces or co-opts
existing religious organizations and beliefs. The most central definition of a
political religion is the Sacralization of politics, for example an
overwhelming religious feeling when serving one`s country, as in the case of
the Founding Fathers. Although a political religion may co-opt existing
religious structures or symbolism, it does not itself have any independent
spiritual or theocratic elements - it is essentially secular, using religion
only for political purposes, if it does not reject religious faith outright.
Typically a political religion is considered to be secular, but more radical
forms of it are also Transcendental . The first scholars to use the concept of
political religion (or synonyms such as "secular religion", "lay religion" or
"public religion") were Protestant and Catholic intellectuals and theologians,
such as Luigi Sturzo, Adolf Keller, Paul Tillich, Gerhard Leibholz, Waldemar
Gurian, Eric Voegelin, Raymond Aron and Walter Benjamin. They saw it as a
response to the existential void and Nihilism caused by modernity, mass society
and the rise of a bureaucratic state, and in political religions "the rebellion
against the religion of God" reached its climax. They also described them as
‘pseudo-religions’, ‘substitute religions’, ‘surrogate religions’,
‘religions manipulated by man’ and ‘anti-religions’. The secularization
of the twentieth century had created a void which could be filled by an
ideology claiming also a hold on ethical and identitetical matters as well,
making the political religions based on totalitarianism, universalism and
messianic missions (such as Manifest Destiny) possible. Yale political
scientist, Juan Linz and others have noted that secularization of the twentieth
century had created a void which could be filled by a total ideology, making
the political religions of totalitarianism possible. Typical aspects. Key
qualities often (not all are always strongly present) shared by religion
(particularly cults) and political religion include Not all of these aspects
are present in any one "political religion"; this is only a list of some common
aspects. Suppression of religious beliefs. Political religions vie with
existing religions, and try, if possible, to replace or eradicate them. Loyalty
to other entities, such as a church or a deity are often seen to interfere with
loyalty to the political religion. The authority of potential religious leaders
also presents a threat to the authority of the political religion. As a result,
some or all religious sects are either suppressed or banned. An existing sect
may be converted into a state religion, but dogma and personnel may be modified
to suit the needs of the party or state. Where there is suppression of
religious institutions and beliefs, this might be explicitly accompanied by
atheistic doctrine as in state atheism. Juan Linz has posited the friendly form
of separation of church and state as the counterpole of political religion but
describes the hostile form of separation of church and state as moving toward
political religion as found in totalitarianism. Absolute loyalty. Loyalty to
the state or political party and acceptance of the government/party ideology is
paramount. Dissenters may be expelled, ostracized, discriminated against,
imprisoned, "re-educated", or killed. Loyalty oaths or membership in a dominant
(or sole) political party may be required for employment, government services,
or simply as routine. Criticism of the government may be a serious crime.
Enforcements range from ostracism from one's neighbors to execution. In a
fundamental political religion you are either with the system or against the
system. Cult of personality. A political religion often elevates its leaders to
near-godlike status. Displays of leaders in the form of posters or statues may
be mandated in public areas and even private homes. Children may be required to
learn the state's version of the leaders' biographies in school. Historical
cases. Revolutionary France. Revolutionary France was well noted for being the
first state to reject religion altogether. Radicals intended to replace
Christianity with a new state religion, or an atheistic ideology. Maximilien
Robespierre rejected atheistic ideologies and intended to create a new
religion. Churches were closed, and Catholic Mass was forbidden.The Cult of the
Supreme Being was well known for its derided festival, which lead to the
Thermidorian reaction and the fall of Robespierre. Fascism. Italian fascism.
According to Emilio Gentile, "Fascism was the first and prime instance of a
modern political religion." "This religion sacralized the state and assigned it
the primary educational task of transforming the mentality, the character, and
the customs of Italians. The aim was to create a 'new man,' a believer in and
an observing member of the cult of Fascism." "The argument fascism was a
‘political religion’ tends to involve three main claims: I) that fascism
was characterized by a religious form, particularly in terms of language and
ritual; II) that fascism was a sacralized form of totalitarianism, which
legitimized violence in defence of the nation and regeneration of a fascist
'new man'; and III) that fascism took on many of the functions of religion for
a broad swathe of society." Nazism. "Among committed believers, a mythic world
of eternally strong heroes, demons, fire and sword - in a word, the fantasy
world of the nursery - displaced reality." Heinrich Himmler was fascinated by
the occult, and sought to turn the SS into the basis of an official state cult.
Leninism. Klaus-Georg Riegel, in his article "Marxism-Leninism as a political
religion", said "Lenin's utopian design of a revolutionary community of
virtuosi as a typical political religion of an intelligentsia longing for an
inner-worldly salvation, a socialist paradise without exploitation and
alienation, to be implanted in the Russian backward society at the outskirts of
the industrialised and modernised Western Europe." Modern examples. North
Korea. The North Korean government has promulgated Juche as a political
alternative to traditional religion. The doctrine advocates a strong
nationalist propaganda basis and is fundamentally opposed to Christianity and
Buddhism, the two largest religions on the Korean peninsula. Juche
theoreticians have, however, incorporated religious ideas into the state
ideology. According to government figures, Juche is the largest political
religion in North Korea. The public practice of all other religions is overseen
and subject to heavy surveillance by the state. Turkmenistan. During the long
rule of president Saparmurat Niyazov large pictures and statues of him could be
seen in public places in Turkmenistan. In an interview with the television news
program "60 Minutes", Niyazov said the people of Turkmenistan placed them there
voluntarily because they love him so much, and that he did not originally want
them there. In addition, he granted himself the title "Türkmenbaşy", meaning
"Leader of all Ethnic Turkmens" in the Turkmen language. A book purportedly
authored by Niyazov, "Ruhnama" ("Book of the Soul") was required reading in
educational institutions and was often displayed and treated with the same
respect as the Qur'an. The study of Ruhnama in the academic system was scaled
down but to some extent continued after Niyazov's death (in 2006), as of 2008.
