Polytheism Polytheism is the worship or belief in multiple deities usually
assembled into a pantheon of gods and goddesses, along with their own religions
and rituals. Polytheism is a type of theism. Within theism, it contrasts with
monotheism, the belief in a singular God. Polytheists do not always worship all
the gods equally, but can be henotheists, specializing in the worship of one
particular deity. Other polytheists can be kathenotheists, worshiping different
deities at different times. Polytheism was the typical form of religion during
the Bronze Age and Iron Age, up to the Axial Age and the gradual development of
monotheism or pantheism, and atheism. It is well documented in historical
religions of Classical antiquity, especially Greek polytheism and Roman
polytheism, and after the decline of Greco-Roman polytheism in tribal religions
such as Germanic paganism or Slavic mythology. There are various polytheistic
religions practiced today, for example Hinduism, Shintoism, Chinese folk
religion, Thelema, Wicca, Druidry, Taoism, Asatru and Candomble. Terminology.
The term comes from the Greek "poly" ("many") and "theoi" ("gods") and was
first invented by the Jewish writer Philo of Alexandria to argue with the
Greeks. When Christianity spread throughout Europe and the Mediterranean, non-
Christians were just called Gentiles (a term originally used by Jews to refer
to non-Jews) or pagans (locals) or, in a clearly pejorative idolaters
(worshiping "false" gods). The modern usage of the term is first revived in
French through Jean Bodin in 1580, followed by Samuel Purchas's usage in
English in 1614. Gods and divinity. The deities of polytheism are often
portrayed as complex personages of greater or lesser status, with individual
skills, needs, desires and histories; in many ways similar to humans
(anthropomorphic) in their traits, but with additional individual powers,
abilities, knowledge or perceptions. Polytheism cannot be cleanly separated
from the animist beliefs prevalent in most folk religions. The gods of
polytheism are in many cases the highest order of a continuum of supernatural
beings or spirits, which may include ancestors, demons, wights and others. In
some cases these spirits are divided into celestial or chthonic classes, and
belief in the existence of all these beings does not imply that all are
worshipped. Types of deities. Types of deities often found in polytheism may
include Mythology and religion. The theological are those myths which use no
bodily form but contemplate the very essence of the gods: e.g., Kronos
swallowing his children. Since divinity is intellectual, and all intellect
returns into itself, this myth expresses in allegory the essence of divinity.
Myths may be regarded physically when they express the activities of gods in
the world. The psychological way is to regard (myths as allegories of) the
activities of the soul itself and or the soul's acts of thought. The material
is to regard material objects to actually be gods, for example: to call the
earth Gaia, ocean Okeanos, or heat Typhon. The mixed kind of myth may be seen
in many instances: for example they say that in a banquet of the gods, Eris
threw down a golden apple; the goddesses contended for it, and were sent by
Zeus to Paris to be judged. Paris saw Aphrodite to be beautiful and gave her
the apple. Here the banquet signifies the hypercosmic powers of the gods; that
is why they are all together. The golden apple is the world, which being formed
out of opposites, is naturally said to be 'thrown by Eris ' (or Discord). The
different gods bestow different gifts upon the world, and are thus said to
'contend for the apple'. And the soul which lives according to sense - for that
is what Paris is - not seeing the other powers in the world but only beauty,
declares that the apple belongs to Aphrodite. Historical polytheism. Some well-
known historical polytheistic pantheons include the Sumerian gods and the
Egyptian gods, and the classical-attested pantheon which includes the ancient
Greek religion and Roman religion. Post-classical polytheistic religions
include Norse Æsir and Vanir, the Yoruba Orisha, the Aztec gods, and many
others. Today, most historical polytheistic religions are pejoratively referred
to as "mythology", though the stories cultures tell about their gods should be
distinguished from their worship or religious practice. For instance deities
portrayed in conflict in mythology would still be worshipped sometimes in the
same temple side by side, illustrating the distinction in the devotees mind
between the myth and the reality. It is speculated that there was once a Proto-
Indo-European religion, from which the religions of the various Indo-European
peoples derive, and that this religion was an essentially naturalist numenistic
religion. An example of a religious notion from this shared past is the concept
of "*dyēus", which is attested in several distinct religious systems. In many
civilizations, pantheons tended to grow over time. Deities first worshipped as
the patrons of cities or places came to be collected together as empires
extended over larger territories. Conquests could lead to the subordination of
the elder culture's pantheon to a newer one, as in the Greek Titanomachia, and
possibly also the case of the Æsir and Vanir in the Norse mythos. Cultural
exchange could lead to "the same" deity being renowned in two places under
different names, as with the Greeks, Etruscans, and Romans, and also to the
introduction of elements of a "foreign" religion into a local cult, as with
Egyptian Osiris worship brought to ancient Greece. Most ancient belief systems
held that gods influenced human lives. However, the Greek philosopher Epicurus
held that the gods were living, incorruptible, blissful beings who did not
trouble themselves with the affairs of mortals, but who could be perceived by
the mind, especially during sleep. Epicurus believed that these gods were
material, human-like, and that they inhabited the empty spaces between worlds.
Hellenistic religion may still be regarded as polytheistic, but with strong
monistic components, and monotheism finally emerges out of Hellenistic
traditions in Late Antiquity in the form of Neoplatonism and Christian
theology. Ancient Greece. The classical scheme in Ancient Greece of the Twelve
Olympians (the Canonical Twelve of art and poetry) were: Zeus, Hera, Poseidon,
Athena, Ares, Demeter, Apollo, Artemis, Hephaestus, Aphrodite, Hermes and
Dionysus; Hestia stepped down when Dionysus was offered a seat on Mount Olympus
and Hades was often excluded because he dwelt in the underworld. All of the
gods had a power. There was, however, a great deal of fluidity as to whom was
counted among their number in antiquity. Different cities often worshipped the
same deities, sometimes with epithets that distinguished them and specified
their local nature. The Hellenic Polytheism extended beyond mainland Greece, to
the islands and coasts of Ionia in Asia Minor, to Magna Graecia (Sicily and
southern Italy), and to scattered Greek colonies in the Western Mediterranean,
such as Massalia (Marseille). Greek religion tempered Etruscan cult and belief
to form much of the later Roman religion. Folk religion. The animistic nature
of folk beliefs is an anthropological cultural universal. The belief in ghosts
and spirits animating the natural world and the practice of ancestor worship is
universally present in the world's cultures and re-emerges in monotheistic or
materialistic societies as "superstition", belief in demons, tutelary saints,
fairies or extraterrestrials. The presence of a full polytheistic religion,
complete with a ritual cult conducted by a priestly caste, requires a higher
level of organization and is not present in every culture. Explicit polytheism
in contemporary folk religion is found in some African traditional religions as
well as African diasporic religions. In Eurasia, the Kalash are one of very few
instances of surviving polytheism. Also, a large number of polytheistic folk
traditions are subsumed in contemporary Hinduism, although Hinduism is
doctrinally dominated by monist or monotheist theology (Bhakti, Advaita).
Historical Vedic polytheist ritualism survives as a minor current in Hinduism,
known as Shrauta. More widespread is folk Hinduism, with rituals dedicated to
various local or regional deities. Contemporary world religions. Buddhism and
Shinto. In Buddhism, there are higher beings commonly designed (or designated)
as gods, Devas; however, Buddhism, at its core (the original Pali canon), does
not teach the notion of praying nor worship to the Devas or any god(s).
However, there are many gods in Buddhism who end being worshipped in practice.
Worshipping images of Buddha is common, Buddhism has also integrated with the
Chinese Folk Religion and many gods from that religion are considered
Bodhisattvas which means enlighted being. Devas, in general, are beings who
have had more positive karma in their past lives than humans. Their lifespan
eventually ends. When their lives end, they will be reborn as devas or as other
beings. When they accumulate negative karma, they are reborn as either human or
any of the other lower beings. Humans and other beings could also be reborn as
a deva in their next rebirth, if they accumulate enough positive karma;
however, it is not recommended. Buddhism flourished in different countries, and
some of those countries have polytheistic folk religions. Buddhism syncretizes
easily with other religions. Thus, Buddhism has mixed with the folk religions
and emerged in polytheistic variants as well as nontheistic variants. For
example, in Japan, Buddhism, mixed with Shinto, which worships deities called
kami, created a tradition which prays to the deities of Shinto as a form of
Buddha. Thus, there may be elements of worship of gods in some forms of later
Buddhism. The concepts of Adi-Buddha and Dharmakaya are the closest to
monotheism any form of Buddhism comes. All famous sages and Bodhisattvas being
considered as reflections of it. Adi-Buddha is not said to be the creator, but
the originator of all things, being a deity in an Emanationist sense.
Christianity. Historically, most Christian churches have taught that the nature
of God is a "mystery", in the original, technical meaning; something that must
be revealed by special revelation rather than deduced through general
revelation. Among early Christians there was considerable debate over the
nature of Godhead, with some factions arguing for the deity of Jesus and others
calling for an Arian conception of God. These issues of Christology were to
form one of the main subjects of contention at the First Council of Nicaea. The
First Council of Nicaea, held in Nicaea in Bithynia (in present-day Turkey),
convoked by the Roman Emperor Constantine I in 325, was the first (or second,
if one counts the apostolic Council of Jerusalem) ecumenical council of bishops
of the Roman Empire, and most significantly resulted in the first uniform
Christian doctrine, called the Nicene Creed. With the creation of the creed, a
precedent was established for subsequent 'general (ecumenical) councils of
bishops' (synods) to create statements of belief and canons of doctrinal
orthodoxy— the intent being to define unity of beliefs for the State church
of the Roman Empire and eradicate heretical ideas. The purpose of the council
was to resolve disagreements in the Church of Alexandria over the nature of
Jesus in relationship to the Father; in particular, whether Jesus was of the
same substance as God the Father or merely of similar substance. St. Alexander
of Alexandria and Athanasius took the first position; the popular presbyter
Arius, from whom the term Arian controversy comes, took the second. The council
decided against the Arians overwhelmingly. (Of the estimated 250-318 attendees,
all but 2 voted against Arius). Christian orthodox traditions (Eastern
Orthodox, Roman Catholic, Protestant, and Evangelical) follow this decision,
which was codified in 381 and reached its full development through the work of
the Cappadocian Fathers. They consider God to be a triune entity, called the
Trinity, comprising the three "Persons" God the Father, God the Son, and God
the Holy Spirit, the three of this unity are described as being "of the same
substance" (). The true nature of an infinite God, however, is asserted to be
beyond definition, and "the word 'person' is but an imperfect expression of the
idea, and is not biblical. In common parlance it denotes a separate rational
and moral individual, possessed of self-consciousness, and conscious of his
identity amid all changes. Experience teaches that where you have a person, you
also have a distinct individual essence. Every person is a distinct and
separate individual, in whom human nature is individualized. But in God there
are no three individuals alongside of, and separate from, one another, but only
personal self distinctions within the divine essence, which is not only
generically, but also numerically, one." Some critics, especially among Jews
and Muslims, contend that because of the adoption of a Triune conception of
deity, Christianity is actually a form of Tritheism or Polytheism, for example
see Shituf. This concept dates from the teachings of the Alexandrian Church,
which claimed that Jesus, having appeared later in the Bible than his "Father,"
had to be a secondary, lesser, and therefore "distinct" God. This controversy
led to the convention of the Nicaean council in 325 CE. Christians
overwhelmingly assert that monotheism is central to the Christian faith, as the
Nicene Creed (and others), which gives the orthodox Christian definition of the
Trinity, begins: "I believe in one God". Some Christians reject mainstream
trinitarian theology; such as the Jehovah's Witnesses, Mormonism, the
Unitarians, Christadelphians, Church of God General Conference, Socinian; and
some elements of Anabaptism do not teach the doctrine of the Trinity at all. In
addition Oneness Pentecostals reject the creedal formulation of the Trinity,
that there are three distinct and eternal persons in one being, instead
believing that there is one God, a singular spirit who manifests himself in
many different ways, including as the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit.
Deism is a philosophy of religion which arises in the Christian tradition
during the Early Modern period. It postulates that there is a God who however
does not intervene in human affairs. Unitarianism is a Christological doctrine
in contrast with Trinitarian Christianity, postulating that Jesus was a
completely human messiah. Hinduism. Theistic Hinduism is a broad category which
encompasses both monotheistic and polytheistic tendencies and variations on or
mixes of both structures. Hindus venerate God in the form of the Murti, an
icon. The Puja (worship) of the Murti is like a way to communicate with the
formless, abstract divinity (Brahman in Hinduism) which creates, sustains and
dissolves creation. Hindu philosophers and theologians also argue for a
transcendent metaphysical structure with a single divine essence. This divine
essence is usually referred to as Brahman or Atman, but the understanding of
the nature of this absolute divine essence is the line which defines many Hindu
philosophical traditions such as Vedanta. Hindus believe that the decision of
whose path to god is correct will be decided by god only, so everything must be
left to and surrendered unto god and no one should take the matters into his
own hands or use violence. Many lay Hindus believe in different deities
emanating from Brahman, and the majority continues to worship a deity as a
matter of personal belief or tradition as a representation of this supreme
being, as a representation of the 'One God'. Academically speaking, the ancient
Vedic scriptures, upon which Hinduism is derived, describe four authorized
disciplic lines of teaching coming down over thousands of years. (Padma
Purana). Four of them propound that the Absolute Truth is Fully Personal, as in
Judeo-Christian theology. That the Primal Original God is Personal, both
transcendent and immanent throughout creation. He can be, and is often
approached through worship of Murtis, called "Archa-Vigraha", which are
described in the Vedas as likenesses of His various dynamic, spiritual Forms.
This is the Vaisnava theology. The fifth disciplic line of Vedic spirituality,
founded by Shankaracharya, promotes the concept that the Absolute is Brahman,
without clear differentiations, without will, without thought, without
intelligence. In the Smarta denomination of Hinduism, the philosophy of Advaita
expounded by Shankara allows veneration of numerous deities with the
understanding that all of them are but manifestations of one impersonal divine
power, Brahman. Therefore, according to various schools of Vedanta including
Shankara, which is the most influential and important Hindu theological
tradition, there are a great number of deities in Hinduism, such as Vishnu,
Shiva, Ganesha, Hanuman, Lakshmi, and Kali, but they are essentially different
forms of the same "Being". However, many Vedantic philosophers also argue that
all individuals were united by the same impersonal, divine power in the form of
the Atman. Serer religion. In Africa, polytheism in Serer religion dates as far
back to the Neolithic Era (possibly earlier) when the ancient ancestors of the
Serer people represented their "Pangool" on the Tassili n'Ajjer. The supreme
creator deity in Serer religion is Roog. However, there are many deities and
Pangool (singular : "Fangool", the interceders with the divine) in Serer
religion. Each one has its own purpose and serves as Roog's agent on Earth.
Amongst the Cangin speakers, a sub-group of the Serers, Roog is known as Koox.
Neopaganism. "Hard" polytheism is the belief that gods are distinct, separate,
real divine beings not psychological archetypes or personifications of natural
forces. Hard polytheists reject the idea that "all gods are one god." "Hard"
polytheists do not necessarily consider the gods of all cultures as being
equally real, a theological position formally known as integrational polytheism
or omnitheism. This is contrasted with "Soft" polytheism, which holds that gods
may be aspects of only one god, psychological archetypes or personifications of
natural forces. "Soft Polytheism" is prevalent in New Age and syncretic
currents of Neopaganism, as are psychological interpretations of deities as
archetypes of the human psyche. English occultist Dion Fortune was a major
populiser of soft polytheism. In her novel, "The Sea Priestess", she wrote,
"All gods are one god, and all goddesses are one goddess, and there is one
initiator." This phrase is very popular among some Neopagans (notably, Wiccans)
and incorrectly often believed to be just a recent work of fiction. However,
Fortune indeed quoted from an ancient source, the Latin novel The Golden Ass of
Apuleius. Fortune's soft polytheist compromise between monotheism and
polytheism has been described as "pantheism" (Greek: πάν "pan" 'all' and
θεός "theos" 'god'). However, "Pantheism" has a longer history of usage to
refer to a view of an all-encompassing immanent divine. Neopaganism often
blends polytheism with pantheism or panentheism. Wicca. Wicca is a duotheistic
faith created by Gerald Gardner that allows for polytheism. Wiccans
specifically worship the Lord and Lady of the Isles (their names are
oathbound). It is an orthopraxic mystery religion that requires initiation to
the priesthood in order to consider oneself Wiccan. Wicca emphasizes duality
and the cycle of nature. Reconstructionism. Reconstructionists are Neopagans
who apply scholarly disciplines such as history, etymology, archaeology,
linguistics and others to a traditional religion that has been destroyed such
as Norse Paganism, Greek Paganism, Celtic Paganism and others. After
researching his or her path a reconstructionist or "recon" for short will apply
the customs, morals and worldview to the modern day. In general they are
considered "Hard Polytheists" and value historical research over personal
insight.
