Polytheistic reconstructionism Polytheistic reconstructionism
(Reconstructionism) is an approach to Neopaganism first emerging in the late
1960s to early 1970s, and gathering momentum in the 1990s to 2000s.
Reconstructionism attempts to re-establish historical polytheistic religions in
the modern world, in contrast with syncretic movements like Wicca, and
"channeled" movements like Germanic mysticism or Theosophy. History.  The term
"Reconstructionist Paganism" was likely coined by Isaac Bonewits in the late
1970s. Bonewits has said that he is not sure whether he "got this use of the
term from one or more of the other culturally focused Neopagan movements of the
time, or if just applied it in a novel fashion." Margot Adler later used the
term "Pagan Reconstructionists" in the 1979 edition of "Drawing Down the Moon"
to refer to those who claimed to adhere to some sort of historical religion.
This emphasis on reconstruction is in ostensible contrast to more fanciful
approaches to "paganism" in Romanticism, as seen for example in Germanic
mysticism. Reconstructionist Paganism has evolved into Polytheistic
Reconstructionism, and is a distinct movement from the syncreticism and
eclecticism of popular Neopagan culture, and from the Wiccan ritual format that
many Neopagan groups have adopted. Reconstructionist religions are based on the
surviving historical record, and on surviving folk practices of the culture in
question. According to Linzie (2004), the reconstructionist movement originated
around 1970 with early attempts to reconstruct pre-Christian religions, with
Germanic neopaganism in the USA, the UK and Iceland focussing on Norse religion
of the Viking Age, and reconstruction of Hellenic polytheism in Greece, and of
Baltic polytheism with Romuva. In a second phase beginning in the 1990s, these
movements have been joined by serious attempts at reconstructing Roman
polytheism and Celtic polytheism (see Celtic Reconstructionist Paganism). Many
of these groups focus on the 1st millennium AD (with the exception of Greek and
Roman polytheism which is already well-attested in sources of the mid to late
1st millennium BC), up to the period of Christianization of the respective
populations. Most also include folkloric practices that have survived into
recent history or, in some cases, into the present day. Reconstructionism and
Neopaganism. The use of the terms "Pagan" and "Neopagan" to apply to
polytheistic reconstructionists is controversial. Some reconstructionist,
ethnic and indigenous religious groups take great issue with being referred to
as "Pagan" or "Neopagan," viewing "Pagan" as a pejorative term used in the past
by institutions attempting to destroy their cultures and religions. In
addition, reconstructionists may choose to reject the terms "Pagan" and
"Neopagan" in order to distance themselves from aspects of popular Neopaganism,
such as eclecticism, cultural appropriation, the practice of magic, and a
tendency to conduct rituals within a Wiccan-derived format, that they find
irrelevant or even inimical to their religious practice. Even among those
reconstructionist groups who see themselves as part of the broader, Pagan or
Neopagan spectrum, or who simply see some members of the Pagan community as
allies, there is still a refusal to accept or identify with the more
problematic aspects of that community, such as the above-noted eclecticism,
cultural appropriation or Wiccan-inspired ritual structures. Many Polytheistic
Reconstructionists see Reconstructionism as the older current in the Pagan
community, and are unwilling to give up this part of their history simply
because eclectic movements are currently more fashionable.
