Pontiff A pontiff (from Latin "pontifex") was, in Roman antiquity, a member of
the principal college of priests (Collegium Pontificum). The term "pontiff" was
later applied to any high or chief priest and, in Christian ecclesiastical
usage, to a bishop and more particularly to the Bishop of Rome, the Pope or
"Roman Pontiff". Etymology. The English term derives through Old French
"pontif" from Latin "pontifex", a word commonly held to come from the Latin
root words "pons" (bridge) + "facere" (to do, to make), and so to have the
literal meaning of "bridge-builder". This may be only a folk etymology, but it
may also recall antique tasks and magic rites associated with bridges. Ancient
Rome. There were four chief colleges of priests in ancient Rome, the most
illustrious of which was that of the "pontifices". The others were those of the
"augures", the "quindecimviri sacris faciundis", and the "epulones". The same
person could be a member of more than one of these groups. Including the
"pontifex maximus", who was president of the college, there were originally
three or five "pontifices", but the number increased over the centuries,
finally becoming 16 under Julius Caesar. By the third century B.C., the
pontiffs had assumed control of the state religious system. Christianity. The
word "pontiff", though now most often used in relation to a Pope, technically
refers to any bishop. The phrase "Roman Pontiff" is not tautological, but means
"Bishop of Rome", as "Alexandrian Pontiff" means Bishop of Alexandria. In the
same way, the adjective "pontifical" does not refer exclusively to the Pope: a
Pontifical Mass is a Mass celebrated by a bishop, not necessarily by a pope.
From the adjective have been formed the nouns "the Pontifical" (the liturgical
book containing the prayers and ceremonies for rites used by a bishop) and
"pontificals" (the insignia of his order that a bishop uses when celebrating
Pontifical Mass, not papal insignia, such as the papal tiara). Other religions.
Inspiration for the Christian use of the name "pontiff" for a bishop could be
found in the use of the same word (in Latin, "pontifex", not "pontifex
maximus") for the Jewish High Priest in the Vulgate Latin translation of the
Scriptures, where it appears 59 times. For example, in the Vulgate ,
"pontifices" (plural) is the Latin term used for "The Chief Priests", and in
the Letter to the Hebrews "pontifex" (singular) is repeatedly used with
reference to the Jewish High Priest and analogously to Jesus as the High Priest
of Christians. The word has been employed in English also for caliphs (Islam)
and swamis and jagadgurus (Hinduism).
