Pontifex Maximus The Pontifex Maximus (Latin, literally: "greatest pontiff")
was the high priest of the College of Pontiffs ("Collegium Pontificum") in
ancient Rome. This was the most important position in the ancient Roman
religion, open only to patricians until 254 BC, when a plebeian first occupied
this post. A distinctly religious office under the early Roman Republic, it
gradually became politicized until, beginning with Augustus, it was subsumed
into the Imperial office. Its last use with reference to the emperors is in
inscriptions of Gratian (reigned 375–383) who, however, then decided to omit
the words "pontifex maximus" from his title. The word "pontifex" later became a
term used for Christian bishops, including the Bishop of Rome, and the title of
"Pontifex Maximus" was applied within the Roman Catholic Church to the Pope as
its chief bishop. It is not included in the Pope's official titles, but appears
on buildings, monuments and coins of popes of Renaissance and modern times.
Etymology. According to the usual interpretation, the term "pontifex" literally
means "bridge-builder" ("pons" + "facere"); "maximus" literally means
"greatest". This was perhaps originally meant in a literal sense: the position
of bridge-builder was indeed an important one in Rome, where the major bridges
were over the Tiber, the sacred river (and a deity): only prestigious
authorities with sacral functions could be allowed to "disturb" it with
mechanical additions. However, it was always understood in its symbolic sense
as well: the pontifices were the ones who smoothed the "bridge" between gods
and men (Van Haeperen). The interpretation of the word "pontifex" as "bridge-
builder" was that of Dionysius of Halicarnassus and Marcus Terentius Varro,
while Plutarch derived the word from Old Latin "potis" meaning a powerful or
absolute master, while others took it to come from "potis facere" in the sense
of "able to sacrifice". The last derivation is mentioned also by Varro, who
rejected it, but it was the view of Pontifex Maximus Quintus Scaevola. Others
have held that the word was originally "pompifex" (leader of public
processions). The word "pons" originally meant "way" and "pontifex" would thus
mean "maker of roads and bridges". Another opinion is that the word is a
corruption of a similar-sounding but etymologically unrelated Etruscan word for
"priest". Yet another hypothesis considers the word as a loan from the Sabine
language, in which it would mean a member of a college of five, from Osco-
Umbrian "ponte", five. This explanation takes into account the fact that the
college was established by Sabine king Numa Pompilius and the institution is
Italic: the expressions "pontis" and "pomperias" found in the Iguvine Tablets
may denote a group or division of five or by five. The pontifex would thence be
a member of a sacrificial college known as "pomperia" (Latin "quinio"). Origins
in the Regal period. The "Collegium Pontificum" (College of Pontiffs) was the
most important priesthood of ancient Rome. The foundation of this sacred
college and the office of Pontifex Maximus is attributed to the second king of
Rome, Numa Pompilius. Much of what is known about the Regal period in Roman
history is semi-legendary or mythical. The "Collegium" presumably acted as
advisers to the "rex" (king) in religious matters. The "collegium" was headed
by the "pontifex maximus", and all the "pontifices" held their office for life.
But the pontifical records of early Rome were most likely destroyed when the
city was sacked by the Gauls in 387 BC, and the earliest accounts of Archaic
Rome come from the literature of the Republic, most of it from the 1st century
BC and later. According to the Augustan-era historian Livy, Numa Pompilius, a
Sabine, devised Rome's system of religious rites, including the manner and
timing of sacrifices, the supervision of religious funds, authority over all
public and private religious institutions, instruction of the populace in the
celestial and funerary rites including appeasing the dead, and expiation of
prodigies. Numa is said to have founded Roman religion after dedicating an
altar on the Aventine Hill to Jupiter Elicius and consulting the gods by means
of augury. Numa wrote down and sealed these religious instructions, and gave
them to the first Pontifex Maximus, Numa Marcius. Roman Republic. In the Roman
Republic, the Pontifex Maximus was the highest office in the state religion of
ancient Rome and directed the College of Pontiffs. According to Livy, after the
overthrow of the monarchy, the Romans created the priesthood of the "rex
sacrorum", or "king of sacred rites," to carry out certain religious duties and
rituals previously performed by the king. The "rex sacrorum" was explicitly
deprived of military and political power, but the "pontifices" were permitted
to hold both magistracies and military commands. The official residence of the
Pontifex Maximus was the "Domus Publica" ("State House") which stood between
the House of the Vestal Virgins and the Via Sacra, close to the Regia, in the
Roman Forum. His religious duties were carried out from the Regia. Unless the
"pontifex maximus" was also a magistrate at the same time, he was not allowed
to wear the toga praetexta, i.e. toga with the purple border. In artistic
representations, he can be recognized by his holding an iron knife "
(secespita)" or the "patera", and the distinctive robes or toga with part of
the mantle covering the head "(capite velato)", in keeping with Roman practice.
The Pontifex was not simply a priest. He had both political and religious
authority. It is not clear which of the two came first or had the most
importance. In practice, particularly during the late Republic, the office of
Pontifex Maximus was generally held by a member of a politically prominent
family. It was a coveted position mainly for the great prestige it conferred on
the holder; Julius Caesar became pontifex in 73 BC and pontifex maximus in 63
BC. The major Republican source on the pontiffs would have been the theological
writings of Varro, which survive only in fragments preserved by later authors
such as Aulus Gellius and Nonius Marcellus. Other sources are Cicero, Livy,
Dionysius of Halicarnassus, Valerius Maximus, Plutarch's "Life of Numa
Pompilius", Festus' summaries of Verrius Flaccus, and in later writers,
including several of the Church Fathers. Some of these sources present an
extensive list of everyday prohibitions for the Pontifex Maximus; it seems
difficult to reconcile these lists with evidence that many Pontifices Maximi
were prominent members of society who lived normal, non-restricted lives.
Election and number. The number of Pontifices, elected by "co-optatio" (i.e.
the remaining members nominate their new colleague) for life, was originally
five, including the "pontifex maximus". The "pontifices", moreover, could only
come from the old nobility, the patricians. However, in 300 BC/299 BC the "lex
Ogulnia" opened the office of Pontifex Maximus to public election and permitted
the "plebs" (plebeians) to be co-opted as priests, so that part of the
exclusivity of the title was lost. But it was only in 254 BC that Tiberius
Coruncanius became the first plebeian Pontifex Maximus. The "lex Ogulnia" also
increased the number of pontiffs to nine (the "pontifex maximus" included). In
104 BC the "lex Domitia" prescribed that the election of all pontiffs would
henceforward be voted by the "comitia tributa" (an assembly of the people
divided into voting districts); by the same law, only 17 of the 35 tribes
(chosen by lot) of the city could vote. The law's promulgator, L. Domitius
Ahenobarbus, was shortly afterwards elected Pontifex Maximus after the death of
the incumbent Metellus Dalmaticus: something of a personal revenge because, the
previous year, he had expected to be co-opted as a pontiff to replace his late
father, but the pontifical college had appointed another candidate in his
place. The office's next holder, Q. Mucius Scaevola, was also elected under the
same law, though without controversy or opposition since he was a former consul
and long-serving pontiff. This law was abolished in 81 BC by Sulla in his
dictatorship, in the "lex Cornelia de Sacerdotiis", which restored to the great
priestly colleges their full right of "co-optatio" (Liv. Epit. 89; Pseudo-
Ascon. in Divinat. p102, ed. Orelli; Dion Cass. xxxvii.37). Also under Sulla,
the number of pontifices was increased to fifteen, the "pontifex maximus"
included, and Sulla nominated Quintus Caecilius Metellus Pius as the next
holder of the office - the only truly unelected Pontifex Maximus in history,
since even the other pontiffs did not get a vote in the matter. In 63 BC, the
law of Sulla was abolished by the tribune Titus Labienus, and a modified form
of the "lex Domitia" was reinstated providing for election by "comitia tributa"
once again: Gaius Julius Caesar followed Ahenobarbus's precedent by being
elected by public vote, although Caesar at least had previously been a pontiff.
Marcus Antonius later restored the right of "co-optatio" to the college (Dion
Cass. xliv.53), in time for the election of Marcus Aemilius Lepidus. Also under
Julius Caesar, the number of pontifices were increased to sixteen, the pontifex
maximus included - possibly because Caesar's own long absences from Rome
necessitated the appointment of a deputy pontiff for those occasions when
fifteen needed to be present? The number of pontifices varied during the Empire
but is believed to have been regular at fifteen. Extraordinary appointment of
dictators. The office came into its own with the abolition of the monarchy,
when most sacral powers previously vested in the King were transferred either
to the Pontifex Maximus or to the Rex Sacrorum, though traditionally a (non-
political) dictator (see also: basileus, interrex) was formally mandated by the
Senate for one day, to perform a specific rite. According to Livy in his
"History of Rome", an ancient instruction written in archaic letters commands:
"Let him who is the Praetor Maximus fasten a nail on the Ides of September."
This notice was fastened up on the right side of the Temple of Jupiter Optimus
Maximus, next to the chapel of Minerva. This nail is said to have marked the
number of the year. It was in accordance with this direction that the consul
Horatius dedicated the Temple of Jupiter Optimus Maximus in the year following
the expulsion of the kings; from the Consuls the ceremony of fastening the
nails passed to the Dictators, because they possessed greater authority. As the
custom had been subsequently dropped, it was felt to be of sufficient
importance to require the appointment of a Dictator. L. Manlius was accordingly
nominated but his appointment was due to political rather than religious
reasons. He was eager to command in the war with the Hernici. He caused a very
angry feeling among the men liable to serve by the inconsiderate way in which
he conducted the enrolment. At last, in consequence of the unanimous resistance
offered by the tribunes of the plebs, he gave way, either voluntarily or
through compulsion, and laid down his Dictatorship. Since then, this rite has
been performed by the Rex Sacrorum. Duties. The main duty of the Pontifices was
to maintain the "pax deorum" or "peace of the gods." The pontifices had many
relevant and prestigious functions such as being in charge of caring for the
state archives, the keeping the official minutes of elected magistrates (see
"Fasti") and list of magistrates, and they kept the records of their own
decisions ("commentarii") and of the chief events of each year, the so-called
"public diaries", the "Annales maximi". The Pontifex Maximus was also subject
to several taboos. Among them was the prohibition to leave Italy. Plutarch
described Publius Cornelius Scipio Nasica Serapio (141–132 BC) as the first
to leave Italy, after being forced by the Senate to do so, and thus break the
sacred taboo. Publius Licinius Crassus Dives Mucianus (132–130 BC) was the
first to leave Italy voluntarily. Afterwards it became common and no longer
against the law for the Pontifex Maximus to leave Italy. Among the most notable
of those who did was Julius Caesar (63–44 BC). The Pontifices were in charge
of the Roman calendar and determined when intercalary months needed to be added
to synchronize the calendar to the seasons. Since the Pontifices were often
politicians, and because a Roman magistrate's term of office corresponded with
a calendar year, this power was prone to abuse: a Pontifex could lengthen a
year in which he or one of his political allies was in office, or refuse to
lengthen one in which his opponents were in power. This caused the calendar to
become out of step with the seasons; for example, Caesar's crossing of the
Rubicon in January 49 BC actually took place in mid-autumn. Under his authority
as Pontifex Maximus, Gaius Julius Caesar introduced the calendar reform that
created the Julian calendar, with a fault of less than a day per century, and
which remained the standard till the Gregorian reform in the 16th century. It
also, coincidentally, made 46 BC, the year of Julius's third consulship, 445
days long. Roman Empire. After Julius Caesar's assassination in 44 BC, his ally
Marcus Aemilius Lepidus was selected as Pontifex Maximus. Though Lepidus
eventually fell out of political favor and was sent into exile as Augustus
consolidated power, he retained the priestly office until his death in 13 BC,
at which point Augustus was selected to succeed him and given the right to
appoint other pontifices. Thus, from the time of Augustus, the election of
pontifices ended and membership into the sacred college was deemed a sign of
imperial favour. With this attribution, the new office of Emperor was given a
religious dignity and the responsibility for the entire Roman state cult. Most
authors contend that the power of naming the Pontifices was not really used as
an "instrumentum regni", an enforcing power. From this point on, "Pontifex
Maximus" was one of the many titles of the Emperor, slowly losing its specific
and historical powers and becoming simply a referent for the sacral aspect of
imperial duties and powers. During the Imperial period, a promagister (vice-
master) performed the duties of the "pontifex maximus" in lieu of the emperors
whenever they were absent (Van Haeperen). In post-Severan times (post AD 235),
the small number of pagan senators interested in becoming pontiffs led to a
change in the pattern of office holding. In Republican and Imperial times no
more than one family member of a gens was member of the College of Pontiffs,
nor did one person hold more than one priesthood in this collegium. However,
these rules were obviously loosened in the later part of the 3rd century AD. In
periods of joint rule, at first only one of the emperors bore this title, as it
occurred for the first time during the reign of Marcus Aurelius and Lucius
Verus, when only Marcus Aurelius was "pontifex maximus", but later two
"pontifices maximi" could serve together, as Pupienus and Balbinus did in 238
— a situation unthinkable in Republican times. In the crisis of the Third
Century, usurpers did not hesitate to claim for themselves the role not only of
Emperor but of Pontifex Maximus as well. Even the early Christian Emperors
continued to use it; it was only relinquished by Gratian, possibly in AD 376 at
the time of his visit to Rome, or more probably in 383 when a delegation of
pagan senators implored him to restore the Altar of Victory in the Senate
House. Roman Catholic use of the title. It is not clear if the word "Pontifex",
the word used in Latin for the Jewish high priest, as in and , was commonly
used by early 3rd-century Christianity, as it was later, to denote a bishop.
The last traces of Emperors being at the same time chief pontiffs are found in
inscriptions of Valentinian I, Valens, and Gratian (Orelli, Inscript. n1117,
1118). From the time of Theodosius I (r. 379–395), the emperors no longer
appear in the dignity of pontiff, but the title was later applied to the
Christian bishop of Rome. In 382, the Emperor Gratian, at the urging of
Ambrose, removed the Altar of Victory from the Forum, withdrew the state
subsidies that funded many pagan activities and formally renounced the title of
Pontifex Maximus. It is said that Pope Damasus I was the first Bishop of Rome
to assume the title, Other sources say that the use of such titles by bishops,
including the Bishop of Rome, came later. The title pontifex continued to be a
title for both the bishop of Rome and other bishops. In Emperor Theodosius's
edict "De fide catholica" of 27 February 380, enacted in Thessalonica and
published in Constantinople for the whole empire, by which he established
Catholic Christianity as the official religion of the empire, he referred to
Damasus as a "pontifex", while calling Peter an "episcopus" : "... the
profession of that religion which was delivered to the Romans by the divine
Apostle Peter, as it has been preserved by faithful tradition and which is now
professed by the "Pontiff" Damasus and by Peter, "Bishop" of Alexandria ... We
authorize the followers of this law to assume the title Catholic Christians
..." Some see in this an implied significant differentiation, but the title
"pontifex maximus" is not used in the text; "pontifex" is used instead: "...
quamque "pontificem" damasum sequi claret et petrum alexandriae "episcopum"..."
(Theodosian Code XVI.1.2; and Sozomen, "Ecclesiastical History", VII, iv.). The
Encyclopædia Britannica says that Pope Leo I (440–461) assumed the title
"Pontifex Maximus", while other sources say Gregory I (590–604) was the first
pope to employ the title in a formal sense. or on the contrary that Pope
Siricius (384–399) assumed the title. The "Oxford Dictionary of the Christian
Church" says that it was in the 15th century (when the Renaissance stirred up
new interest in ancient Rome) that "Pontifex Maximus" became a regular title of
honour for Popes. While the title "Pontifex Maximus" has for some centuries
been used in inscriptions referring to the Popes, it has never been included in
the official list of papal titles published in the Annuario Pontificio, which
instead includes "Supreme Pontiff of the whole Church" (in Latin, "Summus
Pontifex Ecclesiae Universalis") as the fourth official title, the first being
"Bishop of Rome". The terms "pontifex maximus" and "summus pontifex" were for
centuries used not only of the Bishop of Rome but of other bishops also. Hilary
of Arles (d. 449) is styled "summus pontifex" by Eucherius of Lyons (P. L., L,
773), and Lanfranc is termed "primas et pontifex summus" by his biographer,
Milo Crispin (P. L., CL, 10); they were doubtless originally employed with
reference to the Jewish high-priest, whose place the Christian bishops were
regarded as holding each in his own diocese (I Clement 40), but from the 11th
century they appear to be applied only to the Pope. The Roman title of
"Pontifex Maximus" was rendered in Greek inscriptions and literature of the
time as "ἀρχιερεύς" (literally, "high priest"|) or by a more literal
translation and order of words as "ἀρχιερεὺς μέγιστος"
(literally, "greatest high priest". The term "ἀρχιερεύς" in the
Septuagint text of the Old Testament and is used in the New Testament to refer
to the Jewish high priest. The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church says
that it was in the 15th century that "Pontifex Maximus" became a regular title
of honor for Popes. The title of "Pontifex Maximus", which is now applied to
the pope, though not included in his official list of titles, thus has a very
ancient history, dating back to the times of the Roman Republic. The only title
applied to the Pope that has a longer documented history is the word "pope"
itself (in Greek, "πάππας"), which is found already in the time of Homer.
This title likewise is not included in the official list of his titles, but is
used in official documents (such as the headings of encyclicals and similar
documents) far more commonly than the title "Pontifex Maximus", which is in
practice used in little more than inscriptions of buildings. Tradition of
sovereign as high priest. The practice of religious and secular authority
united in the sovereign has a long history. In ancient Athens, the Archon
basileus was the principal religious dignitary of the state; according to
legend, and as indicated in his title of "Basileus" (meaning "king"), he was
supposed to inherit the religious functions of the king of Athens in earlier
times. Eastern traditions, from the ancient Egyptian to the Japanese, carried
the concept even further, according their sovereigns demigod status. With the
adoption of Christianity, the Roman emperors took it on themselves to issue
decrees on matters regarding the Christian Church. Unlike the Pontifex Maximus,
they did not themselves function as priests, but they acted practically as head
of the official religion, a tradition that continued with the Byzantine
Emperors. In line with the theory of Moscow as the Third Rome, the Russian
Tsars exercised supreme authority over the Russian Orthodox Church. With the
English Reformation, the sovereign of England became Supreme Governor of the
Church of England and insisted on being recognised as such. Much the same
occurred in other countries affected by the Protestant Reformation. Even in
countries where there was no formal break with the Holy See, various sovereigns
assumed similar authority. An example is Joseph II, Holy Roman Emperor, whose
ecclesiastical policy is described in the Catholic Encyclopedia article on him.
A secular equivalent of the ruler as head of religion is that of the
philosopher king, based on a notion in Plato's Republic. Incomplete list of
"Pontifices Maximi". From some indeterminate later date to present, the title
"Pontifex Maximus" is applied to the Popes.
