Port-Royal-des-Champs Port-Royal-des-Champs was an abbey of Cistercian nuns in
Magny-les-Hameaux, in the Vallée de Chevreuse southwest of Paris that launched
a number of culturally important institutions. History. The abbey was
established in 1204, but became famous when its discipline was reformed in 1609
by its abbess, Mother Marie Angelique Arnauld (1591-1661). The Arnauld family
became its patrons and the abbey's subsequent history was directed by a number
of the members of that family. In 1625 most of the nuns moved to a new Port-
Royal in Paris, which subsequently became "Port-Royal de Paris" (or, more
commonly, "Port-Royal") while the older one was known as "Port-Royal des
Champs" ("Port-Royal of the fields"). At the original site, several schools
were founded, which became known as the "Little Schools of Port-Royal" ("Les
Petites-Ecoles de Port-Royal"). These schools became famous for the high
quality of the education they gave. Playwright Jean Racine was a product of
Port-Royal education. In 1634 Jean du Vergier de Hauranne, Abbé de Saint-
Cyran, became spiritual director of the abbey; he was a companion of Jansenius
and the implementer of Jansenism in France. From that point forward, the abbeys
and schools of Port-Royal became intimately associated with that school of
theology. "La logique, ou l'art de penser", the "Logique de Port-Royal", was an
important textbook on logic first published anonymously in 1662 by Antoine
Arnauld and Pierre Nicole, two prominent members of the Jansenist movement;
Blaise Pascal likely contributed considerable portions of the text. As it was
written in the vernacular, it became quite popular and was in use, as a
paradigm of traditional term logic, into the twentieth century, introducing the
reader to logic, and exhibiting strong Cartesian elements in its metaphysics
and epistemology (Arnauld having been one of the main philosophers whose
objections were published, with replies, in Descartes' "Meditations on First
Philosophy". The atmosphere of serious study and Jansenist piety attracted a
number of prominent cultural figures to the movement, including theologian and
mathematician Blaise Pascal. Pascal defended the schools publicly against the
Jesuits in the Jansenist controversies which agitated the French Roman Catholic
Church, writing his Provincial Letters in 1657. Perhaps even more striking,
several important persons of the court were close to Jansenism, such as the
Duke of Luynes or the Duke of Liancourt. Members of the Arnauld family have
managed to have important jobs such as Simon Arnauld de Pomponne, Minister of
Louis XIV. The Jesuits, on the other hand, enjoyed predominance in political
and theological power in France and Europe, providing a personal confessor to
the King, etc. As a result of the Jesuit attacks on Jansenism, the schools of
Port-Royal were regarded as tainted with heresy. Louis XIV wanting peace in the
church, the elementary schools were forcibly closed by papal bull in 1660,
following the formulary controversy. In 1661, the monastery was forbidden to
accept novices, heralding its eventual dissolution. The abbey itself was
abolished by a bull from Pope Clement XI in 1708, the remaining nuns forcibly
removed in 1709, most of the buildings themselves razed in 1710. The chapel,
containing Mère Angélique's tomb, as well as some buildings, still exist in
the vast grounds of what eventually became Paris' leading maternity hospital,
known as Port-Royal Hospital. A celebrated history of Port-Royal and its
influence was written by Charles Augustin Sainte-Beuve in 1837-1859. Ruins. The
remains of the monastery of Port-Royal-des-Champs may still be seen at Magny-
les-Hameaux, in the Chevreuse valley.
