Posek Posek ( , pl. Poskim, ) is the term in Jewish law for "decider"—a legal
scholar who decides the Halakha in cases of law where previous authorities are
inconclusive or in those situations where no halakhic precedent exists. The
decision of a posek is known as a psak din or psak halakha ("ruling of law";
pl. "piskei din", "piskei halakha") or simply a "psak". In Hebrew, פסק is
the root implying to "stop" or "cease"—the posek brings the process of legal
debate to finality. "Piskei din" are generally recorded in the responsa
literature. Formulating a ruling (psak din). In formulating a ruling, a posek
will base the "psak din" on a careful analysis of the relevant underlying legal
principles, as well as a careful study of the "application" of these
principles. A Posek must therefore be thoroughly versed in rabbinic literature,
especially the Babylonian Talmud. The ruling itself is an attempt to apply the
precedents and principles of the Tradition to the question being asked. One
common goal of poskim in this regard is, as far as possible, to be consistent
with the codified law, as well as with the maximal relevant legal precedents,
generally being decisions recorded in the responsa literature. The role of the
Posek. Orthodox Judaism. Poskim play an integral role in Orthodox Judaism in
general and Haredi Judaism in particular. The approach taken here will,
generally, be as above. Thus "poskim" will not overrule a specific law, unless
based on an earlier authority: a posek will generally extend a law to new
situations, but will not "change" the Halakhah; see further under Orthodox
Judaism. Conservative Judaism. Conservative Judaism and Masorti Judaism
approach the idea of "Posek", and Halakha in general, somewhat differently, and
Poskim here apply a relatively lower weighting to precedent, and will thus
frequently re-interpret (or even change) a law through a formal argument; see
Conservative Halakha. Although there are some ""poskim"" in the Conservative
movement - e.g. Rabbis Louis Ginzberg, David Golinkin, Joel Roth, and Elliot
Dorff - the rulings of any one individual rabbi are considered less
authoritative than a consensus ruling. Thus, the Conservative movement's
Rabbinical Assembly maintains a Committee on Jewish Law and Standards, whose
decisions are accepted as authoritative within the American Conservative
movement. At the same time, every Conservative rabbi has the right as "mara
d'atra" to interpret Jewish law for his own community, regardless of the
responsa of the Law Committee.[http://www.uscj.org/
Revised_Standards_fo7505.html] Progressive Judaism. The role of the posek is
somewhat different in Progressive Judaism, as these movements stress individual
autonomy for interpretation of biblical and oral law. Nevertheless, since these
movements consider Jewish law for various decisions, responsa on halakha have
been written by some Reform Rabbis, including Solomon Freehof and Walter Jacob.
Full text collections of Reform responsa are available on the website of the
Central Conference of American Rabbis. [http://ccarnet.org/rabbis-speak/reform-
responsa/]
