Pow-wow (folk magic) Pow-wow is a system of American folk religion and magic
associated with the Pennsylvania Dutch. Origin of the name and practices. Its
name comes from the book "Pow-wows, or, The Long Lost Friend", written by John
George Hohman and first published in German as "Der Lange Verborgene Freund" in
1820. Despite the appropriation of "pow-wow", taken from an Algonquian word for
a gathering of medicine men, the collection is actually a very traditional
collection of European magic spells, recipes, and folk remedies of a type
familiar to students of folklore. The formulas mix prayers, magic words, and
simple rituals to cure simple domestic ailments and rural troubles. Hexwork.
The tradition is also called hex or hex work, or Speilwerk in Pennsylvania
Dutch; its adepts are hexenmeisters. The tradition of Hex signs painted on
Pennsylvania barns in some areas originally relates to this tradition, as the
symbols were pentagrams thought to have talismanic properties; though many
current hex signs are made simply for decoration. Also important to the pow-wow
practitioner was the work Sixth and Seventh Books of Moses, a magical text
attributed to Moses, and claimed as an esoteric sequel to the Biblical Five
Books of Moses, or Pentateuch. Various versions of the work can be traced to
18th and 19th century German sources, while an English translation was
published in New York in 1880 by the German antiquarian, Johann Scheible.
Another characteristic practice of pow-wow magic is the Himmelsbrief or
"heaven's letter" and "Teufelsbrief", a "devil's letter," which presumably is
meant to bestow a curse. Significantly, the "Long Lost Friend" assures its
owner that: A 1988 film, "Apprentice to Murder", stars Donald Sutherland as
"Pow-Wow" doctor John Reese, and Chad Lowe as his young apprentice Lucas Haas.
Reese practices the folk magic rituals in a small Pennsylvanian town which the
residents believe has fallen under a curse. The film makes use of the "Pow Wows
or the Long Lost Friend" cited above.
