Jehovah's Witnesses practices The practices of Jehovah's Witnesses are based on
the Bible teachings of Charles Taze Russell, founder of the Bible Student
movement, and successive presidents of the Watch Tower Society, Joseph Franklin
Rutherford and Nathan Homer Knorr. Since 1976 they have also been based on
decisions made at closed meetings of the religion's Governing Body.
Instructions regarding activities and acceptable behavior are disseminated
through "The Watchtower" magazine and other official publications, and at
conventions and congregation meetings. Jehovah's Witnesses endeavor to remain
"separate from the world", which is regarded as a place of moral contamination
and under the control of Satan, refusing any political and military activity
and limiting social contact with non-Witnesses. Members practice a strict moral
code, which forbids premarital and homosexual sex, adultery, smoking,
drunkenness and drug abuse, and blood transfusions. Discipline within
congregations is maintained by a system of judicial committees, which have the
power to expel members who breach organizational rules and demand their
shunning by other Witnesses. The threat of shunning also serves to deter other
members from dissident behavior. Members are expected to participate regularly
in evangelizing work and attend all congregation meetings, as well as regular
large-scale conventions, which are highly structured and based on material from
Watch Tower Society publications. Worship. for worship and study are held at
Kingdom Halls, and are open to the public. Witnesses are assigned to a
congregation in which "territory" they reside and are expected to attend weekly
meetings as scheduled by the Watch Tower Society and congregation elders. The
meetings are largely devoted to study of the Bible and Witness doctrines;
traditions of mysticism, glossolalia, creed recitation or periods of silent
meditation common in other Christian denominations are absent. During meetings
and in other formal circumstances, Witnesses refer to one another as "Brother"
and "Sister". Sociologist Andrew Holden claims meetings create an atmosphere of
uniformity for Witnesses, intensify their sense of belonging to a religious
community, and reinforce the plausibility of the organization's belief system.
He says they are also important in helping new converts adopt a different way
of life. According to "The Watchtower", one role of the frequency and length of
meetings is to protect Witnesses from becoming "involved in the affairs of the
world." The form and content of the meetings is established by the religion's
Brooklyn headquarters, generally involving a consideration of the same subject
matter worldwide each week. Two meetings each week are divided into five
distinct sections, lasting a total of about four hours. Meetings are opened and
closed with hymns and brief prayers delivered from the platform. Witnesses are
urged to prepare for all meetings by studying Watch Tower literature from which
the content is drawn. Kingdom Halls are typically functional in character, and
contain no religious symbols. Each year, Witnesses from several congregations,
which form a "circuit", gather for one-day and two-day assemblies; several
circuits meet once a year for a three-day "district convention", and several
districts gather every few years for a four-day "international convention".
These larger gatherings are usually held at rented stadiums or auditoriums.
Their most important and solemn event is the celebration of the "Lord's Evening
Meal", or "Memorial of Christ's Death". Weekend meeting. The weekend meeting,
usually held on Sunday, comprises a 30-minute public talk by a congregation
elder or ministerial servant and a one-hour question-and-answer study of a
Bible-based article from "The Watchtower" magazine, with questions prepared by
the Watch Tower Society and the answers provided in the magazine. Members may
use their own words to express the ideas in the printed material, though
personal ideas derived from independent study are discouraged. Midweek meeting.
The midweek meeting, typically held in the evening, includes a question-and-
answer "Congregation Bible Study" (25 minutes) based on a Watch Tower Society
publication,; the "Theocratic Ministry School" (30 minutes), designed to train
Witnesses in public speaking and proselytizing using talks and rehearsals of
doorstop sermons; and the "Service Meeting" (35 minutes), following an agenda
set in the Society's monthly newsletter "Our Kingdom Ministry" to train
Witnesses to participate in the public ministry. Before 2009, the midweek
meeting consisted of the Theocratic Ministry School and the Service Meeting
(each 45 minutes); the Congregation Book Study (1 hour) was typically held on a
separate evening, divided into smaller groups meeting in private homes.
Memorial of Christ's death. Jehovah's Witnesses commemorate Christ's death as a
ransom or "propitiatory sacrifice" by observing the Lord's Evening Meal, or
Memorial. They celebrate it once per year, noting that it was instituted on the
Passover, an annual festival. They observe it on Nisan 14 according to the
ancient Jewish luni-solar calendar. Jehovah's Witnesses are taught that this is
the only celebration the Bible commands Christians to observe. Of those who
attend the Memorial, a small minority worldwide partake of the unleavened bread
and wine. This is because Jehovah's Witnesses believe that the majority of the
faithful have an earthly hope. Only those who believe they have a heavenly
hope, the "remnant" (those still living) of the 144,000 "anointed", partake of
the bread and wine. In 2011, the number of persons who partook worldwide was
11,824, whereas the number who attended was 19,374,737. The Memorial, held
after sunset, includes a talk on the meaning of the celebration and the
circulation among the audience of unadulterated red wine and unleavened bread.
Jehovah's Witnesses believe the bread symbolizes Jesus Christ's body which he
gave on behalf of mankind, and that the wine symbolizes his blood which redeems
from sin. They do not believe in transubstantiation or consubstantiation.
Because many congregations have no members who claim to be anointed, it is
common for no one to partake of the bread and wine. Assemblies and conventions.
Each year, Jehovah's Witnesses hold a "Special Assembly Day" and a two-day
"Circuit Assembly", held in each circuit worldwide. Each circuit comprises
several congregations in a geographical area. These are held either in Assembly
Halls owned by Jehovah's Witnesses, or in rented facilities, such as public
auditoriums. Once a year, Jehovah's Witnesses gather at larger assemblies
called "District Conventions" which are usually three days long (Friday to
Sunday). These conventions consist primarily of Bible-based sermons, including
demonstrations and experiences of their preaching work. They also often feature
live, full-costume dramatic plays re-enacting biblical accounts, such as Moses
and the Plagues of Egypt, and Lot in Sodom and Gomorrah. Every few years,
"International Conventions" are held in selected cities, usually lasting four
days (Thursday to Sunday), with visiting delegates from other countries. The
attendance of some conventions numbers into the hundreds of thousands, with the
largest-ever gathering held in New York in 1958 at Yankee Stadium and Polo
Grounds with a peak attendance exceeding 250,000. Evangelism. Jehovah's
Witnesses believe they are under obligation to God to "give witness" by
participating in organized and spontaneous evangelizing and proselytizing work,
with baptism permitted only for those who demonstrate "regular and zealous"
participation. Baptism is regarded as an automatic ordination as a minister and
from that time Witnesses feel a moral obligation to serve as "publishers",
disseminating Watch Tower doctrines as evangelists of "the Truth". Watch Tower
publications describe house-to-house visitations as the primary work of
Jehovah's Witnesses in obedience to a "divine command" to preach "the Kingdom
good news in all the earth and (make) disciples of people of all the nations".
Children usually accompany their parents and participate in the public
ministry. In addition to taking part in organized door-to-door preaching,
Witnesses are taught that they should seek opportunities to "witness
informally" by starting conversations with people they meet during routine
activities such as shopping or on public transport, and directing the
conversation towards their beliefs. Members who commit themselves to evangelize
for 840 hours per year (an average of 70 hours per month) are called "regular
pioneers". Those who commit themselves to evangelize for 50 hours for one month
are called "auxiliary pioneers", which they may do for consecutive months. Some
Witnesses volunteer for missionary service, and may be invited to receive
specialized training at the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead. These
individuals dedicate, on average, more than 120 hours per month to their work.
Members who are not able to 'pioneer' are told they may maintain the "pioneer
spirit", by spending as much time as they can in preaching and by supporting
the efforts of pioneers. Witnesses are frequently instructed through Watch
Tower Society publications, and at meetings and conventions, to increase the
quality and quantity of their preaching efforts. Watch Tower Society
publications suggest that endurance in public preaching is the means by which
Witnesses attain salvation, and that evangelizing frees them from blood-guilt
regarding individuals who might die at Armageddon without having heard about
God's kingdom. Specialized "territory" maps of residential and commercial areas
are prepared within the boundaries of each congregation's territory and
distributed to publishers who are responsible for preaching within that area.
Witnesses are instructed to fill out monthly report slips on their preaching
activity, listing the hours spent, publications placed with householders, and
the number of "return visits" made to households where interest had been shown
formerly. The reports are used to help measure the "spirituality" of
individuals and to establish the eligibility of men as congregation elders and
ministerial servants. A Witness who fails to report for a month is termed an
"irregular publisher"; one who has not turned in a field service report for six
months consecutively is termed an "inactive publisher". Witnesses have, in the
past, used a wide variety of methods to spread their faith, including
information marches, where members wore sandwich boards and handed out
leaflets, to sound cars (car-mounted phonographs), and syndicated newspaper
columns and radio segments devoted to sermons. Between 1924 and 1957, the
organization operated a radio station, WBBR, from New York. Watch Tower Society
literature. Jehovah's Witnesses make extensive use of Watch Tower Society
literature, including books, magazines, booklets and handbills, to spread their
beliefs and to use as textbooks at their religious meetings. The publications
are produced in many languages, with a small selection available in 500
languages. Their primary journal, "The Watchtower" is published simultaneously
in nearly two hundred languages and, along with "Awake!", available in audio
and electronic formats. Issues of both publications are compiled annually into
bound volumes, and are added yearly to the "Watchtower Library" CD-ROM, which
contains many Witness publications from 1950 onward, and is officially
available to baptized members only. New books, brochures, and other items are
released at their annual conventions. Additionally, a number of audio
cassettes, videocassettes, and DVDs have been produced explaining the group's
beliefs, practices, organization and history. Some of these also provide dramas
based on biblical accounts. Since 1942 all Watch Tower literature has been
published anonymously. Publications were sold to the public until the early
1990s, from which time they were offered gratis, with a request for donations.
The change in policy was first announced in the United States in February 1990,
following the loss of a US Supreme Court court case by Jimmy Swaggart
Ministries on the issue of sales tax exemption for religious groups. The Watch
Tower Society had joined the case as an Amicus curiae, or "friend of the
court". The court ruling would have resulted in the Watch Tower Society having
to pay millions of dollars in sales tax if sales of their literature had
continued. Witnesses are urged to prepare for congregation meetings by studying
the assigned Watch Tower literature, and are expected to read all magazines and
books published by the Society. One analysis noted that each year Witnesses are
expected to read more than 3,000 pages of the Society's publications, according
to its suggested program for personal study. In 1981 this would have included
1,536 pages from "The Watchtower" and "Awake!", 48 pages from "Our Kingdom
Ministry", 384 pages of a book for the congregation book study, 384 pages from
the Yearbook, 360 pages of the Theocratic Ministry School textbook and 258
pages of assembly releases in addition to scheduled weekly Bible reading. Much
of the literature is illustrated extensively, with sociologist Andrew Holden
observing utopian, post-Armageddon images of happy Witnesses in bright sunshine
and pristine environments, often playing with formerly wild animals such as
lions and tigers, in contrast to dark-colored images of unfavorable activities
such as murders, burglaries and promiscuity that highlight the moral dangers
outside the organization. Conversion. To become one of Jehovah's Witnesses, one
must first follow a systematic Bible study course. In time, one must
participate regularly in the preaching work, and attend meetings. One must also
accept Jesus' ransom sacrifice and repent of sins, and make a personal
dedication to God. The elders ask a series of questions to ensure that the
person understands and accepts the beliefs of the Witnesses in preparation for
baptism. Baptisms are normally performed at assemblies and conventions. At
these baptisms, candidates make "public declaration" of their prior dedication
to God. The speaker asks the candidates, "On the basis of the sacrifice of
Jesus Christ, have you repented of your sins and dedicated yourself to Jehovah
to do his will?” After the candidates answer with an affirmative "yes" and
agree that their dedication and baptism "identifies as members of Jehovah’s
Witnesses in association with God’s spirit-directed organization", they
undergo water immersion. Ministers and ordination. Jehovah's Witnesses consider
as "ministers" all adherents who have been approved to engage in formal
evangelizing. Witnesses consider their baptisms to be ordinations; "unbaptized
publishers" are considered "regular ministers" whereas "baptized publishers"
are considered "ordained ministers". Witnesses recognize that many government
and administrative precedents for ministers are not intended to include all
active adherents. For example, only elders assert ecclesiastical privilege and
confessional privilege. Only males may be appointed as elders and ministerial
servants (their term for deacons), and only baptized males may officiate at
weddings, funerals, and baptisms. A female Witness minister may only lead
congregational prayer and teaching in unusual circumstances, and must wear a
head covering while doing so. Outside the congregation, a female minister also
wears a head covering when she leads spiritual teaching in the presence of her
husband, according to the Christian complementarian view. Female headcovering
is not required for other forms of teaching, or when participating in
congregation meetings being led by another. Some courts and government agencies
have recognized that full-time Jehovah's Witnesses appointees, such as
"pioneers" and those in the faith's religious order, qualify for ministerial
exemptions regardless of gender. Discipline. Formal discipline is administered
by congregation elders. In the event that an accusation of serious sin is made
concerning a baptized member, if there is sufficient evidence, a tribunal or
judicial committee is formed to determine guilt, administer help and possibly
apply sanctions. "Disfellowshipping" is the most severe form of discipline
administered. Before taking this step, the judicial committee must determine
that the individual has committed a "serious sin" and that there is no evidence
of true repentance. To judge that repentance is genuine, members of the
judicial committee ask questions and review the actions of the accused member.
Baptized members who spread teachings contrary to the doctrines of Jehovah's
Witnesses can be disfellowshipped for apostasy. Once the decision to
disfellowship has been made, a person has seven days to appeal, after which, if
the person has not appealed, the disfellowshipping will be announced to the
congregation; disfellowshipping does not take effect until the announcement is
made to the congregation. After a person is disfellowshipped, the person is
shunned by all baptized members. Exceptions to this would include cases where a
member was forced to have commercial dealings with a member who is
disfellowshipped, or if the disfellowshipped member is living with family
members who are baptized. In these cases, the Witness are not permitted to
speak about matters pertaining to the religion, except in the case of parents
conducting a bible study with a disfellowshipped minor. The extent to which
disfellowshipped or disassociated relatives living in the same household are
included in family life is left to the discretion of the family. Family members
living outside the home who are disfellowshipped have minimal contact.
"Reproof" involves sins that could lead to disfellowshipping. Ones considered
"truly repentant" are reproved rather than disfellowshipped. Reproof is given
"before all onlookers". If the sin is private in nature, the reproof would
involve just the individual(s) involved. If the sin is known generally by the
entire congregation or the community, an announcement is made informing the
congregation that the person has been reproved. Later, without disclosing names
or private details, one of the elders gives a separate talk ensuring that the
congregation understands the sin, its dangers, and how to avoid it. Reproved
individuals have some congregation privileges restricted, until the elders
decide that the member has regained "spiritual strength." Restrictions may
include not sharing in meeting parts, not commenting at meeting parts, and not
praying for a group. The duration of restrictions depends on the elders. One
cannot "pioneer" or "auxiliary pioneer" for at least one year after reproof is
given. "Marking" is practiced if a person's course of action is regarded as a
violation of Bible principles, reflecting badly on the congregation, but is not
a disfellowshipping offense. The person is strongly counseled. If, after
repeated counsel sessions, the person still pursues the disturbing course, he
might be 'marked', which involves an announcement stating that the actions in
question are wrong, without naming the individual involved. Congregation
members limit social contact with that person. The purpose of this is to shame
the person into correcting their actions. "Marked" individuals are not shunned
completely, but social contact is minimized. Family life. The family structure
is patriarchal. The husband is considered the final authority of family
decisions, as the head of his family. Marriages must be monogamous. Wives
should be submissive to their husbands and husbands are to have deep respect
and love for their wives. Husbands are instructed to treat their wives as Jesus
treated his followers. He should not hurt or mistreat his family in any way.
The father should be hard-working in providing necessities to his family. He
must also provide for them in a spiritual capacity. This includes religious
instruction for the family, and taking the lead in preaching activities.
Parental discipline for children should not be in a harsh, cruel way. Children
are instructed to obey their parents. Married couples are encouraged to speak
with local elders if they are having problems. Married couples can separate in
the case of physical abuse and neglect, or if one partner attempts to hinder
the other from being a Jehovah's Witness. Re-marriage after divorce is
permissible only on the grounds of adultery, based on their understanding of
Jesus' words at Matthew 5:32 and Matthew 19:9. Morality. Jehovah's Witnesses
demand high standards of morality within their ranks. Their view of sexual
behavior reflects conservative Christian views. Abortion is considered murder.
Homosexuality, premarital sex, and extramarital sex are considered “serious
sins”. Smoking, abuse of drugs, and drunkenness are prohibited, though
alcohol is permitted in moderation. Modesty in dress and grooming is frequently
stressed. Entertainment promoting immoral, "demonic", or violent themes is
considered inappropriate. Members are warned that personal grooming such as
beards, long hair or earrings for men, or other styles of dress or grooming
might "stumble" the consciences of others. Gambling by making money through the
losses of others is viewed as a "form of greed", and is prohibited. The trading
of stocks, shares and bonds is viewed as acceptable. Blood. Jehovah's Witnesses
are taught that the Bible prohibits the consumption, storage and transfusion of
blood, based on their understanding of scriptures such as Leviticus 17:10, 11:
"I will even set my face against that soul that eateth blood," and Acts 15:29:
"abstain from ... blood." This standpoint is applied even in emergencies. "The
Watchtower" introduced this view in 1945, and it has developed since then.
Accordingly, the organization has established Hospital Information Services
(HIS), which provides education and facilitation of bloodless surgery. This
service also maintains Hospital Liaison Committees, which support adherents
facing surgery and provide information to the medical community on bloodless
surgery techniques and alternatives to blood. Though accepted by most members,
some within the Jehovah's Witness community do not endorse the doctrine. The
doctrine has drawn criticism from members of the medical community. Spiritual
warfare. Watch Tower Society publications teach that Witnesses are engaged in a
"spiritual, theocratic warfare" against false teachings and wicked spirit
forces they say try to impede them in their preaching work. Based on their
interpretation of Ephesians 6:10-20, they believe their "spiritual war" is
fought with truth, righteousness, the "good news of peace", faith, the hope of
salvation, God's word and prayer. They have advocated the use of "theocratic
war strategy" to protect the interests of God's cause, which would include
hiding the truth from God's "enemies" by being evasive or withholding truthful
or incriminating information from those not entitled by law to know. "The
Watchtower" told Witnesses: "It is proper to cover over our arrangements for
the work that God commands us to do. If the wolfish foes draw wrong conclusions
from our maneuvers to outwit them, no harm has been done to them by the
harmless sheep, innocent in their motives as doves." Separateness. Jehovah's
Witnesses are taught that it is vital to remain "separate from the world" in
harmony with Jesus' description of his followers at John 17:14-16. Watch Tower
publications define the "world" as "the mass of mankind apart from Jehovah’s
approved servants" and teach that it is ruled by Satan and a place of danger
and moral contamination. Witnesses manifest their world-renouncing beliefs in
many ways. They avoid involvement in social controversies, remain politically
neutral, and do not seek public office. The Watch Tower Society has stated that
voting in political elections is a personal conscience decision, though a
Witness who takes any action considered to be a "violation of Christian
neutrality" may face religious sanctions. They refuse participation in
ecumenical and interfaith activities, abstain from celebrating religious
holidays, and reject many customs they claim have pagan origins. They do not
work in industries associated with the military, nor serve in the armed
services, and refuse national military service, which in some countries may
result in their arrest and imprisonment. They do not salute or pledge
allegiance to national flags or sing national anthems or other patriotic songs.
Witnesses are urged to minimize their social contact with non-members because
of perceived dangers of worldly association. Sociologist Andrew Holden
indicated they are highly selective in choosing with whom they spend leisure
time, generally choosing the company of other Witnesses. Many Witnesses
interviewed by Holden reported tensions and ostracism at work because of their
religious beliefs. He reported that many converts to the religion required some
social adjustment as they gradually reduced contact with non-Witness friends.
Association with those outside the organization, commonly termed by Witnesses
as "worldly" and "not in the Truth", is acceptable only when it is viewed as an
opportunity to preach and Witnesses are under considerable pressure from the
Society to show outsiders they are people of high moral fiber. Holden claims
that as a result, Witnesses working with "worldly" colleagues tend to closely
adhere to Watch Tower teachings. Sociologist Ronald Lawson has suggested that
it is the religion's intellectual and organizational isolation—coupled with
the intense indoctrination of adherents, rigid internal discipline and
considerable persecution—that has contributed to the consistency of its sense
of urgency in its apocalyptic message. Celebrations. Weddings, anniversaries,
and funerals are observed, though they avoid incorporating certain traditions
they see to have pagan origins. "The Watchtower" has stated that the use of
wedding rings by Witnesses is acceptable, even though wedding rings may have
first been used by pagans, based on its conclusion that there is no definite
evidence wedding rings were used "as part of false "religious" practices"
(emphasis from original). Witnesses typically observe wedding anniversaries,
with the Watch Tower Society noting that wedding anniversaries apparently do
not stem from pagan origins. Other common celebrations and religious or
national holidays such as birthdays, Halloween, and Christmas are not
celebrated because they believe that these continue to involve "false religious
beliefs or activities." Watch Tower Society publications rule out the
celebration of Mother's Day because of a claimed link with pagan gods and
concerns that giving "special honor and worship" to mothers is a form of
"creature worship" that could turn people away from God. The Society also
directs Witnesses to shun May Day, New Year's Day and Valentine's Day
celebrations because of their pagan origins. Their opposition to birthdays is
said to be based on how the Bible presents them. Watch Tower Society
publications note that the only birthday celebrations explicitly mentioned in
the Bible are those of an unnamed Pharaoh and Herod Antipas, and that both were
associated with executions, and neither celebrant was a servant of God. Though
some religions interpret Job 1:4 to indicate birthday feasts of Job's sons,
Jehovah's Witnesses interpret them as a circuit of feasts from one house to the
next. The Bible does not show Jesus or his apostles celebrating birthdays and
"The Watchtower" claims the absence of any record of the date of the birth of
Jesus or his apostles indicates that "God does not want us to celebrate any of
these birthdays". Construction. International and regional building teams
frequently undertake constructions of Kingdom Halls over the course of one or
two weekends, termed "quick-builds". Larger construction projects, including
building regional Assembly Halls and Bethel offices, factories, residences,
warehouses, and farm facilities, are also performed almost entirely by
volunteer members. Humanitarian efforts. Jehovah's Witnesses provide relief
assistance in disaster-stricken areas for their members and others in the
vicinity. Medicine and clothing were provided to both Hutu and Tutsi Witnesses
during the 1994 Rwandan Genocide. Following Hurricane Katrina, they helped
rebuild houses of Witnesses and others. The Governing Body of Jehovah’s
Witnesses uses "Regional Building Committees" to oversee relief efforts
worldwide. Funding of activities. Jehovah's Witnesses fund their activities,
such as publishing, constructing and operating facilities, evangelism, and
disaster relief via donations. There is no tithing or collection, but members
are reminded to donate to the organization; Witnesses typically provide an
opportunity for members of the public to make donations as they encounter them
in their preaching work. Donation boxes labeled for several purposes are
located in Kingdom Halls and other meeting facilities. Generally there are
contribution boxes for local operating expenses, a Kingdom Hall fund for
helping Witnesses around the world to build Kingdom Halls, and a general fund
for the "Worldwide Work", which includes the printing of literature,
organization of conventions, supporting missionaries and disaster relief, and
other operating expenses of the organization. The accounts (including
donations) and the financial operation of the local congregation are reviewed
monthly and posted on a congregation notice board. Donations are also accepted
via mail, and the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society can be named as a
beneficiary to an estate, and also accepts donations in the form of life
insurance policies, pension plans, bank accounts, certificates of deposit,
retirement accounts, stocks and bonds, real estate, annuities and trusts.
