Prakrit Prakrit (also transliterated as Pracrit) (Sanskrit: , Shauraseni:
पाउद, Maharashtri: पाउअ) is the name for a group of Middle
Indo-Aryan languages, derived from dialects of Old Indo-Aryan languages. The
Ardhamagadhi language ("half Magadhi"), an archaic form of the Magadhi language
which was used extensively to write Jain scriptures, is often considered to be
the definitive form of Prakrit, while others are considered variants thereof.
Prakrit grammarians would give the full grammar of Ardhamagadhi first, and then
define the other grammars with relation to it. For this reason, courses
teaching "Prakrit" are often regarded as teaching Ardhamagadhi. The Pali
language (the liturgical Prakrit language of Theravada Buddhism) tends to be
treated as a special exception from the variants of the Ardhamagadhi language,
as Classical Sanskrit grammars do not consider it as a Prakrit "per se",
presumably for sectarian rather than linguistic reasons. Other Prakrits are
reported in old historical sources, but are no longer spoken (such as Paisaci).
Some modern scholars follow this classification by including all Middle Indo-
Aryan languages under the rubric of "Prakrits", while others emphasise the
independent development of these languages, often separated from the history of
Sanskrit by wide divisions of caste, religion, and geography. While Prakrits
were originally seen as "lower" forms of language, the influence they had on
Sanskrit, allowing it to be more easily used by the common people, as well as
"Sankritization" of Prakrits gave Prakrits progressively higher cultural
cachet. The word "Prakrit" itself has a flexible definition, being defined
sometimes as "original, natural, artless, normal, ordinary, usual", or
"vernacular", in contrast to the literary and religious orthodoxy of Sanskrit.
Alternatively, Prakrit can be taken to mean "derived from an original," which
means evolved in natural way. Prakrit is foremost a native term, designating
"vernaculars" as opposed to Sanskrit. The Prakrits became literary languages,
generally patronized by ancient Indian kings identified with the Kshatriya
Varna of Hinduism, but were regarded as illegitimate by the orthodoxy. The
earliest extant usage of Prakrit is the corpus of inscriptions of Emperor
Asoka. Besides this, Prakrit appears in literature in the form of Pāli Canon
of Theravada Buddhists, Prakrit canon of the Jains, Prakrit grammars and in
lyrics, plays and epics of the times. The various Prakrit languages are
associated with different patron dynasties, with different religions and
different literary traditions, as well as different regions of the Indian
subcontinent. Each Prakrit represents a distinct tradition of literature within
the history of India. Etymology. According to the dictionary of Monier Monier-
Williams, the most frequent meanings of the Sanskrit term ', from which the
word "prakrit" is derived, are "original, natural, normal" and the term is
derived from ', "making or placing before or at first, the original or natural
form or condition of anything, original or primary substance". In linguistic
terms, this is used in contrast with "", "refined". Traditionally, many have
believed that the Prakrits are older than Sanskrit, and that it was from the
Prakrits that Sanskrit was refined. However, from a comparative Indo-European
point of view, Sanskrit (especially Vedic Sanskrit) is closer to reconstructed
Proto-Indo-European than are the Prakrits, so that Sanskrit belongs to a
linguistically earlier stage of history. Some scholars restrict the use of the
term "Prakrit" to the languages used by Hindu and Jain writers only; others
include the Buddhist languages, such as Pali and Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit, and
the inscriptional Prakrits. Other Prakrits include the Gāndhārī, and
Paisāci, which is known through grammarians' statements. The modern languages
of Northern India developed from the Prakrits, after the intermediary stage of
the Apabhramsa language. Dramatic Prakrits. Dramatic Prakrits were those that
were devised specifically for use in dramas and other literature. Whenever
dialogue was written in a Prakrit, the reader would also be provided with a
Sanskrit translation. None of these Prakrits came into being as vernaculars,
but some ended up being used as such when Sanskrit fell out of favor. The
phrase "Dramatic Prakrits" often refers to three most prominent of them:
Sauraseni, Magadhi, and Maharashtri. However, there were a slew of other less
commonly used Prakrits that also fall into this category. These include Pracya,
Bahliki, Daksinatya, Sakari, Candali, Sabari, Abhiri, Dramili, and Odri. There
was an astoundingly strict structure to the use of these different Prakrits in
dramas. Characters each spoke a different Prakrit based on their role and
background; for example, Dramili was the language of "forest-dwellers",
Sauraseni was spoken by "the heroine and her female friends", and Avanti was
spoken by "cheats and rogues". Maharashtri, the root of modern Marathi, is a
particularly interesting case. Maharashtri was often used for poetry and as
such, diverged from proper Sanskrit grammar mainly to fit the language to the
meter of different styles of poetry. The new grammar stuck which leads to the
unique flexibility of vowels lengths, amongst other anomalies, in Marathi.
