Praxis (Eastern Orthodoxy) Orthodox praxis. Orthodox writers use the term
"praxis" to refer to what others, using an English rather than a Greek word,
call practice of the faith, especially with regard to ascetic and liturgical
life. Praxis is key to Eastern Orthodox understanding because it is the basis
of faith and works and the understanding of not separating the two. The
importance of praxis, in the sense of action, is indicated in the dictum of
Saint Maximus the Confessor: "Theology without action is the theology of
demons." Union with God, to which Christians hold that Jesus invited man,
requires not just faith, but correct practice of faith. This idea is found in
the Scriptures (1 Cor 11:2, 2 Thes 2:14) and the Church Fathers, and is linked
with the term "praxis" in Orthodox theology and vocabulary.In the context of
Orthodoxy, praxis is mentioned opposite theology, in the sense of 'theory and
practice'.[http://arts.tuirgin.com/ Rather, it is a word that means, globally,
all that Orthodox "do".Praxis is 'living Orthodoxy'.[http://
www.orthodoxinfo.com/praxis/rose_wv.aspx Praxis is perhaps most strongly
associated with worship. "Orthopraxis" is said to mean "right glory" or "right
worship"only correct (or proper) practice, particularly correct worship, is
understood as establishing the fulness glory given to God. This is one of the
primary purposes of liturgy (divine labor), the work of the people. Some
Orthodox sources maintain that in the West, Christianity has been reduced "to
intellectual, ethical or social categories," whereas right worship is
fundamentally important in our relationship to God, forming the faithful into
the Body of Christ and providing the path to "true religious education."[http:/
/www.sf.goarch.org/religioused/TheOrthodoxDifference.htm A "symbiosis of
worship and work" is considered to be inherent in Orthodox praxis.[http://
www.syrianorthodoxarchdiocese.com/anagalpura.html] Fasting, another key part of
the practice of the Christian faith, is mentioned as part of Orthodox praxis,
in connection with the Sermon on the Mount (Mt 6),and in comparison with the
history and commemorations of Lenten fasts.[http://www.monachos.net/great_lent/
index.shtml Praxis may also refer to proper religious etiquette.[http://
www.orthodoxinfo.com/praxis/index.aspx] Corresponding terminology in Roman
Catholicism. In the Catholic Church, parallel ideas of asceticism and worship
exist. The word used in this regard is the regular English word "practice",
since in English the term "praxis" is not normally used in this sense. The
simplest and most common understanding of the term "practising Catholic", a
minimal interpretation of the phrase, is that the person has been baptized (or
canonically received into full communion with the Catholic Church) and strives
to observe the Church's precept of attending celebration of the Mass or Divine
Liturgy on Sundays and holy days of obligation. Someone who does not fulfil
even this minimum requirement for being considered "practising" is referred to
as a lapsed Catholic. A more ample indication of what practice of the Catholic
faith involves is given in a statement by Bishop Luc Matthys of Armidale, New
South Wales, Australia. Living the Catholic faith involves much more than the
minimum requirements referred to above. Matters such as fasting have
applications that vary according to place and according to the autonomous
particular Church to which Roman Catholics belong. In each of the Eastern
Catholic Churches, practice is generally the same as in the Eastern Church not
in full communion with Rome with which that Catholic Church is associated.
Thus, practice in the Eastern Catholic Churches of Byzantine Rite is identical
with that described above for the Churches that constitute the Eastern Orthodox
Church, but differs from that of, for instance, the Syro-Malabar Catholic
Church or the Latin Church. Within the Latin Rite, there are variations in such
matters in accordance with rules laid down by the episcopal conferences in line
with local conditions and traditions. Modern meaning of "praxis". In English
the word "praxis" is more commonly used in the sense not of practice but with
the meaning given to it by Immanuel Kant, namely application of a theory to
cases encountered in experience or reasoning about what there should be as
opposed to what there is: this meaning Karl Marx made central to his
philosophical ideal of transforming the world through revolutionary activity.
Inspired by Marxism, proponents of Latin American liberation theology have used
the word "praxis" with specific reference to human activity directed towards
transforming the conditions and causes of poverty. Their "liberation theology"
consists then in applying the Gospel to that praxis to guide and govern it.
