Pre-existence Pre-existence, beforelife, or pre-mortal existence refers to the
belief that each individual human soul existed before conception, and at some
point before birth enters or is placed by God into the body. Pre-existence
encompasses both the belief that the soul was created by God at some time prior
to conception and the belief that the soul is co-eternal with God, not created
by him. Alternative positions are traducianism and creationism, which both hold
that the individual human soul does not come into existence until conception.
Ancient Greek thought and Islam affirm pre-existence, but it is generally
denied in Judaism and Christianity. Judaism. In rabbinic literature, the souls
of all humanity are described as being created during the six days of creation
(Book of Genesis). When each person is born, a preexisting soul is placed
within the body. (See Tan., Pekude, 3). In Tractate Sanhedrin, the question is
asked, When does the soul enter the body of the newborn? The answer "at birth"
is rejected in favor of an intermediate stage within the womb, usually
interpreted as 40 days after conception, after which it is traditionally
believed that a baby is taught Torah by an angel. Greek thought. Plato believed
in the pre-existence of the soul, which tied in with his innatism. He thought
that we are born with knowledge from a previous life that is subdued at birth
and must be relearned. He saw all attainment of knowledge not as acquiring new
information, but as remembering previously known information. Before we were
born, we existed in a perfect world where we knew everything. This theory is
similar to reincarnation, though there are differences—for example, Plato
only believed in one earthly life. Christianity. A concept of pre-existence was
advanced by Origen, a Church Father who lived in the second and third century
AD. Origen believed that each human soul was created by God at some time prior
to conception. Church Fathers Tertullian and Jerome held to traducianism and
creationism, respectively, and pre-existence was condemned as heresy in the
Second Council of Constantinople in AD 553. For the children being not yet
born, neither having done any good or evil, that the purpose of God according
to election might stand, not of works, but of him that calleth; It was said
unto her, The elder shall serve the younger. As it is written, Jacob have I
loved, but Esau have I hated. What shall we say then? Is there unrighteousness
with God? God forbid. Origen argued that God could not love Jacob and hate Esau
until Jacob had done something worthy of love and Esau had done something
worthy of hatred, therefore, this passage only means that Jacob and Esau had
not yet done good or evil "in this life" and their conduct "before" this life
was the reason why Esau would serve Jacob. He rejected the position that God
loves or hates a soul based on its inclination toward good or evil, before the
soul actually commits a good or evil act. (God, being the creator of all souls
and their inclinations, knows perfectly well each soul's inclination toward
good or evil.) Before I formed thee in the belly I knew thee; and before thou
camest forth out of the womb I sanctified thee, and I ordained thee a prophet
unto the nations. Those who reject pre-existence simply see this as another
passage about God's foreknowledge. The belief that human souls choose good or
evil totally independently of God's will, which is most often found among
Arminian Christians, means that God does not ultimately determine the will of
each soul. However, "ex nihilo" creation, a belief also commonly found among
Arminians, means that God determined everything that exists, including the will
of each soul, without drawing on anything but himself. The question is
definitively resolved in Calvinism by asserting that all souls act according to
God's sovereign will, and in Mormonism (see below) by asserting that human
souls have always existed and are co-eternal with God. Mormonism. The concept
of pre-mortal existence is an early and fundamental doctrine of Mormonism. In
1833, early in the Latter Day Saint movement, its founder Joseph Smith, Jr.
taught that human souls are co-eternal with God the Father just as Jesus is co-
eternal with God the Father, "Man was also in the beginning with God.
Intelligence, or the light of truth, was not created or made, neither indeed
can be." ...the soul—the mind of man—the immortal spirit. Where did it come
from? All learned men and doctors of divinity say that God created it in the
beginning; but it is not so: the very idea lessens man in my estimation...We
say that God Himself is a self-existing being...Man does exist upon the same
principles...Bible does not say in the Hebrew that God created the spirit of
man. It says, "God made man out of the earth and put into him Adam's spirit,
and so became a living body." The mind or the intelligence which man possesses
is co-equal with God himself...Is it logical to say that the intelligence of
spirits is immortal, and yet that it has a beginning? The intelligence of
spirits had no beginning, neither will it have an end. That is good logic. That
which has a beginning may have an end. There never was a time when there were
not spirits; for they are co-equal with our Father in heaven. After Smith's
death, the doctrine of pre-mortal existence was elaborated by some other Latter
Day Saint leaders, primarily within The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
Saints and its breakoffs. Although the "mind" and "intelligence" of humanity
were still considered to be co-eternal with God, and not created, Brigham Young
introduced the idea that the "spirit", which he distinguished from the "mind"
or "intelligence", was indeed created and not co-eternal with God. Young
postulated that we each had a pre-spirit "intelligence" that later became part
of a spirit "body", which then eventually entered a physical body and was born
on earth. In 1857, Young stated that every person was "a son or a daughter of
Father. In the spirit world their spirits were first begotten and brought
forth, and they lived there with their parents for ages before they came here."
Jesus, however, is the firstborn among all the sons of God—the first begotten
in the spirit, and the only begotten in the flesh. He is our elder brother, and
we, like Him, are in the image of God. All men and women are in the similitude
of the universal Father and Mother, and are literally the sons and daughters of
Deity. This description is widely accepted by modern Latter-day Saints as
fundamental to the plan of salvation. However, there are differences of opinion
as to the nature of the pre-mortal existence in other Latter Day Saint
denominations. The LDS Church teaches that during the pre-mortal existence,
there was a learning process which eventually led to the next necessary step in
the pre-mortal spirits' opportunity to progress. This next step included the
need to gain a physical body that could experience pain, sorrow and joy and
"walk by faith." According to this belief, these purposes were explained and
discussed in "councils in heaven," followed by the War in Heaven where Satan
rebelled against the plan of Heavenly Father. Islam. In Islam, all souls are
believed to have been created in adult form (before earthly life) at the same
time God created the father of Mankind, Adam. The Quran recounts the story of
when the descendants of Adam were brought forth before God to testify that God
alone is the Lord of creation and therefore only He is worthy of worship (Quran
chapter 7, verse 172), so that on the Day of Judgement, people could not make
the excuse that they only worshipped others because they were following the
ways of their ancestors. God then removed the memory of this event from the
minds of Mankind (leaving only an innate awareness that He exists and is One,
known as the Fitra in Islam) and He decreed at which point each and every human
would be born into the physical world.
