Apse In architecture, the apse (Greek αψις (apsis), then Latin "absis":
"arch, vault"; sometimes written "apsis"; plural "apses") is a semicircular
recess covered with a hemispherical vault or semi-dome. In Romanesque,
Byzantine and Gothic Christian abbey, cathedral and church architecture, the
term is applied to a semi-circular or polygonal termination of the main
building at the liturgical east end (where the altar is), regardless of the
shape of the roof, which may be flat, sloping, domed, or hemispherical.
Definition. The apse is the semicircular or polygonal termination to the choir
or aisles of a church. In relation to church architecture it is generally the
name given to where the altar is placed or where the clergy are seated. The
epithet "apsidal" may be applied to the exedra of classical architecture, a
feature of the secular Roman basilica. Features. The domed apse became a
standard part of the church plan in the early Christian era. Smaller subsidiary
apses may be found around the choir or at the ends of transepts. These
proliferating apses are common in later Byzantine architecture and the Ottoman
architecture that developed from it. The term "abse" tends to be reserved for
those at the liturgical east end, with these further spaces called "exhedras"
or "absidal openings". A tetraconch is a church on a central plan with four
abses, one in each direction. An exedra or apse may be reduced in scale to form
a niche within the thickness of walling; a niche does not reveal its presence
by projecting on the exterior. Related features. Presbytery. The presbytery (or
sanctuary), directly to the east beyond the choir is the High Altar, where
there is one (compare communion table). This area is reserved for the clergy.
The word derives from the Greek "presbuteros" meaning "elder". Chevet. In the
beginning of the 13th century in France, the apses were built as radiating
chapels outside the choir aisle, henceforth known as the "chevet" (French,
"headpiece"), when the resulting structure was too complicated to be merely an
"apse". Famous northern French examples of chevets are in the Gothic cathedrals
of Amiens, Beauvais and Reims. Such radiating chapels are found in England in
Norwich and Canterbury cathedrals, but the fully developed feature is
essentially French, though the Francophile connoisseur Henry III introduced it
into Westminster Abbey. Ambulatory. The word "ambulatory" refers to a curving
aisle in the apse that passes behind the altar and choir, giving access to
chapels in the chevet. An "ambulatory" ("walking space") may refer to the
arcade passages that enclose a cloister in a monastery, or to other types of
aisles round the edge of a church building, for example in circular churches.
