Universal priesthood (doctrine) The universal priesthood or the priesthood of
all believers is a Christian doctrine believed by various Protestant
denominations to be derived from several passages of the New Testament. The
exact meaning varies from denomination to denomination, but generally entails a
doctrinal responsibility or right to preach and expound the Christian faith,
and this is appointed to every member of the church. It first came to the
public eye when Martin Luther and his followers wrote, preached, and sang about
a priesthood of all believers. History within Protestantism. Martin Luther,
"Weimar Ausgabe", vol. 6, p. 407, lines 19–25 as quoted in Timothy Wengert,
"The Priesthood of All Believers and Other Pious Myths," page 12 [http://
www.valpo.edu/ils/documents/05_wengert.pdf. "De captivitate Babylonica
ecclesiae praeludium" ["Prelude concerning the Babylonian Captivity of the
church"], "Weimar Ausgabe" 6, 564.6–14 as quoted in Norman Nagel, "Luther and
the Priesthood of All Believers," "Concordia Theological Quarterly" 61 (October
1997) 4:283-84. Other relevant Scripture passages include Exodus 19:5–6,
First Peter 2:4–8, Book of Revelation 1:4–6, 5:6–10, and the Epistle to
the Hebrews. In ancient Israel, priests acted as mediators between God and
people. They ministered according to God's instruction and they offered
sacrifices to God on behalf of the people. Once a year, the high priest would
enter the holiest part of the temple and offer a sacrifice for the sins of all
the people, including all the priests. Although many religions use priests,
most Protestant faiths reject the idea of a priesthood as a group that is
spiritually distinct from lay people. They typically employ professional clergy
who perform many of the same functions as priests such as clarifying doctrine,
administering communion, performing baptisms, marriages, etc. In many
instances, Protestants see professional clergy as servants acting on behalf of
the local believers. This is in contrast to the priest, whom some Protestants
see as having a distinct authority and spiritual role different from that of
ordinary believers. Most Protestants today recognize only Christ as a mediator
between themselves and God (1 Timothy 2:5). The Epistle to the Hebrews calls
Jesus the supreme "high priest," who offered himself as a perfect sacrifice
(Hebrews 7:23–28). Protestants believe that through Christ they have been
given direct access to God, just like a priest; thus the doctrine is called the
priesthood of all believers. God is equally accessible to all the faithful, and
every Christian has equal potential to minister for God. This doctrine stands
in opposition to the concept of a spiritual aristocracy or hierarchy within
Christianity. Articles 4, 5, and 14 of the Augsburg Confession in Robert Kolb
and Timothy J. Wengert, trans. and eds., "The Book of Concord : The Confessions
of the Evangelical Lutheran Church", (Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 2000), 39,
40, 46. The origins of the doctrine within Protestantism are somewhat obscure.
The idea was found in a radical form in Lollard thought. Martin Luther adduced
it in his writings for the purpose of reforming the Christian Church, and it
became a central tenet of Protestantism. The doctrine is strongly asserted
within Methodism and the Plymouth Brethren movement. Within Methodism it can
plausibly be linked to the strong emphasis on social action and political
involvement within that denomination. Within the Plymouth Brethren, the concept
is most usually evidenced in the lack of distinction between "clergy" and
"laity," the refusal to adopt formal titles such as Reverend or Bishop, the
denial of formal ordination, and in some cases the refusal to hire any
"professional staff" or paid Christian workers at all. Baptist movements, which
generally operate on a form of congregational polity, also lean heavily on this
concept. The vast majority of Protestants nonetheless draw some distinction
between their own ordained ministers and lay people. Pastors and ordained
ministers are usually regarded as congregational leaders and theologians who
are well versed with Christian liturgy, scripture, church teachings and are
qualified to lead worship and preach sermons. Some groups during the
Reformation believed that priesthood authority was still needed, but was lost
from the earth. Roger Williams believed, "There is no regularly constituted
church of Christ on earth, nor any person qualified to administer any church
ordinances; nor can there be until new apostles are sent by the Great Head of
the Church for whose coming I am seeking." Another group, the Seekers, believed
that the Roman Catholic Church had lost its authority through corruption and
waited for Christ to restore his true church and authority. Priesthood in non-
Protestant traditions. Roman Catholic, Eastern Orthodox and traditional
Anglican Christians traditionally believe that 1 Peter 2:9 gives responsibility
to all believers for the preservation and propagation of the Gospel and the
Church, as distinct from the liturgical and sacramental roles of the ordained
priesthood and consecrated episcopate (see Apostolic Succession). They and
other Christians also see the ministerial priesthood as being necessary in
accordance with the words of the eucharistic liturgy: "Do this in memory
("anamnesis") of me" (Gospel of Luke 22:19–20; First Corinthians 11:23–25).
The dogmatic constitution "Lumen Gentium" of the Second Vatican Council
specifically highlights the priesthood of all believers. It teaches that the
Church's relationship with God is independent of whatever ordination people
have received, as evidenced by the guidelines and rubrics for personal prayer
when no priest is present. Such Churches have always taught implicitly that a
Christian's personal relationship with God is independent of whatever
ordination they have received. Problems with translations. Much of the
doctrinal confusion on this matter is caused by the difference between the
Greek words "ἱερεύς" ("hiereus" meaning "sacred one") and
"πρεσβύτερος" ("presbyteros" meaning "one with elderhood"), which
are usually both translated in English with the word "priest". The former term
refers to the sacrificial ritual leaders of Judaism, the kohanim, and to those
holding the office of conducting sacrifices in ancient pagan temples, whereas
the latter term refers to an acknowledged elder of a community. The earliest
Christianity is not recorded as ever having created an office of "hiereus",
except to acknowledge Jesus in that role, and as in the Greek of 1 Peter 2:9,
to recognize the Church as having it in a collective sense. The New Testament
records the role of presbyter and/or bishop (or "episkopos" which literally
means "overseer") in the earliest Christian churches as the role ordained by
the Apostles to the earliest acknowledged leaders of the Church. So, to say
that a Christian is a "sacred one" (i.e. "hiereus") is not to say that each
Christian is "one with elderhood" (i.e. "presbyteros").
