Primate (bishop) "For other uses, see Primate (disambiguation)" Primate
(pronounced PRIME-ayt) is a title or rank bestowed on some bishops in certain
Christian churches. Depending on the particular tradition, it can denote either
jurisdictional authority (title of authority) or ceremonial precedence (title
of honour). In many countries, the Primate is based in a city other than the
capital. This often reflects historical circumstances, with the Primate located
in what had been the capital when the country first became Christianized, and
with such geographical disparity helping to preserve the Church's autonomy from
the secular government. Roman Catholic Church. Latin-Rite churches. In the
Western Church, a Primate is an archbishop—or rarely a suffragan or exempt
bishop—of a specific episcopal see (called a "primatial see") which confers
precedence over the bishops of one or more neighboring ecclesiastical
provinces, such as a 'national' church in historical, political, and cultural
terms. Historically, primates were granted privileges including the authority
to call and preside at national synods, the jurisdiction to hear appeals from
metropolitan tribunals, the right to crown the sovereign of the nation, and
presiding at the investiture (installation) of archbishops in their sees. The
office is generally found in the older Catholic countries, and is now purely
honorific, enjoying no effective powers under canon law except for Esztergom
(Gran) in Hungary. An exemption is Poland where the new status of their
episcopal conference states that the Primate of Poland is "durante munere" a
member of the Perpetual Board of the episcopal conference and he has honorary
precedence among Polish bishops (e.g. when carrying on liturgical ceremonies).
Polish primates also actively wear cardinal's vestments, even if they have not
been nominated cardinals, a privilege granted by the Holy See. The title, where
it exists, may be vested in one of the oldest archdioceses in a country. The
see city may no longer have the prominence it had when the diocese was created,
or its circumscription may no longer exist as a state, nation or country —
for example, the Archbishop of Toledo originated as the "Primate of the
Visigothic Kingdom", while the Archbishop of Lyon is the "Primate of the
Gauls". Some of the leadership functions once exercised by primates,
specifically presiding at meetings of the bishops of a nation or region, are
now vested in the president of the national conference of bishops. With the
exception of the President of the Italian Episcopal Conference, these
presidents are elected by the other bishops of the conference for a fixed term
in office. Other former functions of primates, such as hearing appeals from
metropolitan tribunals, are now reserved to the Holy See. The closest
equivalent position in the Eastern Catholic Churches is an exarch. In the order
of precedence of the Catholic Church, primates and exarchs may rank immediately
below major archbishops, and precede metropolitan archbishops. Primates who
have been made cardinals follow the precedence established for cardinals,
unlike the higher ranks enjoying no precedence, not even the right to join a
high order of the sacred college. Regular clergy equivalent. In the modern
confederation of the Benedictine Order, all the Black Monks of St. Benedict
were united under the presidency of an Abbot Primate (Leo XIII, "Summum
semper", 12 July 1893); but the unification, fraternal in its nature, brought
no modification to the abbatial dignity, and the various congregations
preserved their autonomy intact. The loose structure of the Benedictine
Confederation is claimed to have made Pope Leo XIII exclaim that the
Benedictines were "ordo sine ordine" ("an order without order"). The powers of
the Abbot Primate are specified, and his position defined, in a decree of the
Sacred Congregation of Bishops and Regulars dated 16 September 1893. The
primacy is attached to the global Benedictine Confederation whose Primate
resides at Sant'Anselmo in Rome. He takes precedence of all other abbots, is
empowered to pronounce on all doubtful matters of discipline, to settle
difficulties arising between monasteries, to hold a canonical visitation, if
necessary, in any congregation of the order, and to exercise a general
supervision for the regular observance of monastic discipline. The Primatial
powers are only vested in the Abbot Primate to act by virtue of the proper law
of its autonomous Benedictine congregation, which at the present is minimal to
none. However, certain branches of the Benedictine Order seem to have lost
their original autonomy to some extent. In a similar way the Confederation of
Canons Regular of St. Augustine, elects an Abbot Primate as figurehead of the
Confederation and indeed the whole Canonical Order. The Abbots and Superiors
General of the nine congregations of confederated congregations of Canons
Regular elect a new Abbot Primate for a term of office lasting six years. The
Current Abbot General is Rt. Rev. Fr Maurice Bitz, Abbot of St. Pierre, and
Abbot General of the Canons Regular of St. Victor. Informal titles. When
England and Wales was split into three ecclesiastical provinces in 1911, the
pre-existent Archbishop of Westminster was given certain privileges of pre-
eminence constituting him 'chief metropolitan', but without the title of
primate. Similarly the Archbishop of Seoul is informally considered to be the
primate of Korea, although a formal title has never been granted by the
Vatican. Anglican Communion. An Anglican primate is the chief bishop or
archbishop of one of the thirty-eight churches (also known as provinces) of the
Anglican Communion. Some of these provinces are stand-alone ecclesiastical
provinces (such as the Church of the Province of West Africa), while others are
national churches comprising several ecclesiastical provinces (such as the
Church of England). Since 1978, the Anglican primates have met annually for an
Anglican Communion Primates' Meeting at the invitation of the Archbishop of
Canterbury, who is regarded as the chief (though "primus-inter-pares") of the
Anglican primates. While the gathering has no legal jurisdiction, it acts as
one of the informal instruments of unity among the autonomous provinces of the
Communion. In stand-alone ecclesiastical provinces, the Primate is the
metropolitan archbishop of the province. In national churches composed of
several ecclesiastical provinces, the Primate will be senior to the
metropolitan archbishops of the various provinces, and may also be a
metropolitan archbishop. In those churches which do not have a tradition of
archiepiscopacy, the Primate is a bishop styled "Primus" (in the case of the
Scottish Episcopal Church), "Presiding Bishop", "President-Bishop", "Prime
Bishop" or simply "Primate". In the case of the Episcopal Church in the United
States, which is composed of several ecclesiastical provinces, there is a
Presiding Bishop who is its Primate, but the individual provinces are not led
by metropolitans. The Moderators of the United Churches of North and South
India, which are united with other originally non-Anglican churches, and which
are part of the Anglican Communion, while not primates, participate in the
Primates' Meetings. Anglican primates may be attached to a fixed See (e.g., the
Archbishop of Canterbury is invariably the Primate of All England), he or she
may be chosen from among sitting metropolitans or diocesan bishops and retain
their See (as with, for example, the Primate of the Anglican Church of
Australia), or he or she may have no See (as in the Anglican Church of Canada).
Primates are generally chosen by election (either by a Synod consisting of
laity, clergy and bishops, or by a House of Bishops). In some instances, the
primacy is awarded on the basis of seniority among the episcopal college. In
the Church of England, the Primate, like all bishops, is appointed by the
British Sovereign, in his or her capacity as Supreme Governor of the
established church, on the advice of the Crown Appointments Commission. It
should be noted that in the Church of England and in the Church of Ireland, the
metropolitan of the second province has since medieval times also been accorded
the title of Primate (see section "Roman Catholic" above). In England, the
Archbishop of Canterbury is known as the "Primate of All England" while the
Archbishop of York is "Primate of England" (see also Primacy of Canterbury). In
Ireland both the Anglican and Catholic Archbishops of Armagh are titled
"Primate of All Ireland"; while both the Anglican and Catholic Archbishops of
Dublin are titled "Primate of Ireland". As both of these positions pre-date the
1921 partition, they relate to the whole island of Ireland. The junior primates
of these churches do not normally participate in the Primates' Meeting.
