Primacy of the Bishop of Rome The primacy of the Bishop of Rome is an
ecclesiastical doctrine concerning the respect and authority that is due to the
Bishop of Rome from other bishops and their sees. Together with the Filioque
controversy, differences in interpretation of this doctrine have been and
remain the primary causes of schism between the Western and Eastern Orthodox
churches. In the Eastern Orthodox Church, some understand the primacy of the
Bishop of Rome to be merely one of greater honour, treating him as ""primus
inter pares"" ("first among equals"), without effective power over other
churches, while others see primacy as indeed power, the expression,
manifestation and realization in one bishop of the power of all the bishops, an
expression and manifestation of the unity not just of the churches but of the
Church. The Roman Catholic Church attributes to the primacy of the Pope "full,
supreme, and universal power over the whole Church, a power which he can always
exercise unhindered", a power that it attributes also to the entire body of the
bishops united with the pope. The power that it attributes to the pope's
primatial authority has limitations that are official, legal, dogmatic, and
practical, and "it is an error to think that every word uttered by the Pope is
infallible". In 2007, representatives of the Eastern Orthodox Church and the
Roman Catholic Church jointly stated that both East and West accept the fact of
the Bishop of Rome's primacy at the universal level, but that differences of
understanding exist about how the primacy is to be exercised and about its
scriptural and theological foundations. Development of the doctrine. The Roman
Catholic Church accepts that "the New Testament texts offer no sufficient basis
for papal primacy" and that they contain "no explicit record of a transmission
of Peter's leadership". It considers that its doctrine has a developmental
history and that its teaching about matters such as the Trinity, the divinity
of Christ, the union of his two natures in a single person developed as the
result of drawing out from the original revealed truth consequences that were
not obvious at first: "Thanks to the assistance of the Holy Spirit, the
understanding of both the realities and the words of the heritage of faith is
able to grow in the life of the Church 'through the contemplation and study of
believers who ponder these things in their hearts'; it is in particular
'theological research deepens knowledge of revealed truth'". Accordingly, it
would be a mistake to expect to find the modern fully developed doctrine of
papal primacy in the first centuries, thereby failing to recognize the Church's
historical reality. The figure of the pope as leader of the worldwide church
developed over time, as the figure of the bishop as leader of the local church
seems to have appeared later than in the time of the apostles. That the
Christian scriptures, which contain no cut-and-dried answers to questions such
as whether there is forgiveness for post-baptismal sins or whether infants
should be baptized, gradually become clearer in the light of events is a view
expressed, when considering the doctrine of papal primacy, by Cardinal John
Henry Newman, who summed up his thought by saying: "Developments of
Christianity are proved to have been in the contemplation of its Divine Author,
by an argument parallel to that by which we infer intelligence in the system of
the physical world. In whatever sense the need and its supply are a proof of
design in the physical creation, in the same do gaps, if the word may be used,
which occur in the structure of the original creed of the Church, make it
probable that those developments, which grow out of the truths which lie around
them, were intended to complete it." Writers such as Nicholas Afanassieff and
Alexander Schmemann have declared that the phrase "presiding in "agape"", used
of the Church of Rome in the letter that Ignatius of Antioch addressed to it in
the first years of the 2nd century, contains a definition of that Church's
universal primacy; but the Roman Catholic writer Klaus Schatz warns that it
would be wrong to read as statements of the developed Roman Catholic teaching
on papal primacy this letter and the even earlier First Epistle of Clement (the
name of Clement was added only later), in which the Church of Rome intervenes
in matters of the Church of Corinth, admonishing it in authoritative tones,
even speaking in the name of God. It was only later that the expression of
Saint Ignatius could be interpreted as meaning, as agreed by representatives of
both the Roman Catholic and the Eastern Orthodox Churches, that "Rome, as the
Church that 'presides in love' according to the phrase of St Ignatius of
Antioch ("To the Romans", Prologue), occupied the first place in the "taxis",
and that the bishop of Rome was therefore the "protos" among the patriarchs".
The same agreement stated: Basis of claims to primacy. Peter and Paul. The
evolution of earlier tradition established both Peter and Paul as the
forefathers of the bishops of Rome, from whom they received their position as
chief shepherd (Peter) and supreme authority on doctrine (Paul). To establish
her primacy among the churches of the Western half of the empire, the bishops
of Rome relied on a letter written in 416 by Innocent I to the Bishop of
Gubbio, to show how subordination to Rome had been established. Since Peter was
the only apostle (no mention of Paul) to have worked in the West, thus the only
persons to have established churches in Italy, Spain, Gaul, Sicily, Africa, and
the Western islands were bishops appointed by Peter or his successors. This
being the case then, all congregations had to abide by the regulations set in
Rome. This claim to primacy may have been accepted in Italy, but was not so
readily accepted in the rest of the West. Primacy of Peter the apostle. Because
of its association with the supposed position of Peter among the Apostles, the
function that within the Roman Catholic Church is exercised by the Bishop of
Rome among the Bishops as a whole is referred to as the Petrine function, and
is generally believed to be of divine institution, in the sense that the
historical and sociological factors that influenced its development are seen as
guided by the Holy Spirit. Not all Roman Catholic theologians see a special
providential providence as responsible for the result, but most see the papacy,
regardless of its origin, as now essential to the Church's structure. The
presence of Peter in Rome, not explicitly affirmed in but consistent with the
New Testament, is explicitly affirmed by Clement of Rome, Ignatius of Antioch,
Irenaeus of Lyon and other early Christian writers. and no other city has ever
claimed to be the place of his death. The same witnesses imply that Peter was
the virtual founder of the Church of Rome, though not its founder in the sense
of initiating a Christian community there. They also speak of Peter as the one
who initiated its episcopal succession, but speak of Linus as the first
"bishop", while it is commonly held today that the Christians in Rome did not
act a single united community under a single leader until some time in the 2nd
century.  Role of Paul in the founding of the Church of Rome. Irenaeus of Lyon
(AD 189) believed that Peter and Paul had been the founders of the Church in
Rome and had appointed Pope Linus to the office of the episcopate, the
beginning of the Apostolic succession of the Roman see. Although the
introduction of Christianity was not due to them, "the arrival, ministries and
especially the martyrdoms of Peter and Paul were the seminal events which
really constituted the Church of Rome. It was from their time, and not before,
that an orderly and meetly ordained succession of Bishops originated.
Historical development. In later times, theories of various kinds were
advanced, most notably that of an analogy with the position of Saint Peteramong
the twelve Apostles, to explain the fact of this generally recognized presiding
or primatial position of the Church of Rome. The Church of Rome also appealed
to it as justification for certain actions that it took in relation to other
Churches, actions that often met with resistance. Ante-Nicene period. Rome's
role as arbiter. Fr. Nicholas Afanassieff: "The Primacy of Peter" Ch. 4, pgs.
126-127 (c. 1992) Quartodeciman controversy. Towards the end of the 2nd
century, Victor, a bishop of Rome, attempted to resolve theQuartodeciman
controversy by excommunicating churches in the Roman province of Asia. This
incident is cited by some Orthodox Christians as the first example of
overreaching by the Bishop of Rome and resistance of such by Eastern churches.
Laurent Cleenewerck suggests that this could be argued to be the first fissure
between the Eastern and Western churches. The Quartodeciman controversy arose
because Christians in the Roman province of Asia (Western Anatolia) celebrated
Easter at the spring full moon, like the JewishPassover, while the churches in
the rest of the world observed the practice of celebrating it on the following
Sunday ("the day of the resurrection of our Saviour") In 155, Anicetus, Bishop
of Rome presided over a church council at Rome that was attended by a number of
bishops including Polycarp, Bishop of Smyrna. Although the council failed to
reach agreement on the issue, ecclesiastical communion was preserved. A
generation later, synods of bishops in Palestine,Pontus and Osrhoene in the
east, and in Rome and Gaul in the west, unanimously declared that the
celebration should be exclusively on Sunday. In 193, Victor, Bishop of Rome,
presided over a council in Rome and subsequently sent a letter about the matter
to Polycrates of Ephesus and the churches of the Roman province of Asia. In the
same year, Polycrates presided over a council at Ephesus attended by several
bishops throughout that province, which rejected Victor's authority and kept
the province's paschal tradition. Thereupon, Victor attempted to cut off
Polycrates and the others who took this stance from the common unity, but later
reversed his decision after bishops that included SaintIrenaeus, Bishop of
Lugdunum in Gaul, interceded, recommending that Victor adopt the more tolerant
stance of his predecessor, Anicetus. Despite Victor's failure to carry out his
intent to excommunicate the Asian churches, many Catholic apologists point to
this episode as evidence of papal primacy and authority in the early Church,
citing the fact that none of the bishops challenged his right to excommunicate
but rather questioned the wisdom and charity of doing so. Orthodox apologists
argue that Victor had to relent in the end and note that the Eastern Churches
never granted Victor presidency over anything other than the Church of Rome.
Cleenewerck points out that Eusebius of Caesarea simply refers to Victor one of
the "rulers of the Churches", not the ruler of a yet unknown or unformed
'universal Church.' Ultimately, the Quartodeciman controversy not resolved by
papal authority; it was only finally resolved by an ecumenical council, the
First Council of Nicaea The rejection of Bishop Anicetus' position on the
Quartodeciman, by Polycarp and later Polycrates' letter to Pope Victor I has
been used by Orthodox theologians as proof against the argument that the
Churches in Asia Minor accepted papal primacy or the teaching of papal
supremacy. Stephen I. The first bishop to claim primacy in writing was Pope
Stephen I (254-257). The timing of the claim is significant, for it was made
during the worst of the tumults of the third century. There were several
persecutions during this century which hit the Church of Rome hard; Stephen
himself and his immediate successor Pope Sixtus II were martyred. Cyprian of
Carthage(d.258) stressed the Petrine primacy as well as the unity of the Church
and the importance of being in communion with the bishops. For him, "the Bishop
of Rome is the direct heir of Peter, whereas the others are heirs only
indirectly", and he insisted that "the Church of Rome is the root and matrix of
the Catholic Church". Pope Damasus I (366-384) was the first pope to claim that
the primacy of the Church of Rome rested on Peter alone, and the first to refer
to the Roman church as "the Apostolic See" (the see of the Apostle Peter). To
uphold its primacy, the prestige of the city itself was no longer sufficient,
but in the doctrine of apostolic succession (from Peter) the popes had an
unassailable position. After the Edict of Milan. After the Edict of Milan
granted Christianity legal status, Emperor Constantine the Great enriched the
Church of Rome with large buildings such as the Lateran Basilica and Lateran
Palace and the Basilica of Saint Peter, and with endowments. The First Council
of Nicaea gave approval to a church arrangement whereby the bishops of an
imperial province were headed by the bishop (known as the "metropolitan") of
the principal city. This added to the power of the bishops of important cities.
Decretals. The bishops of Rome sent letters which, though largely ineffectual,
provided historical precedents which were subsequently used by supporters of
papal primacy. These letters were known as ‘decretals’ from at least the
time of Siricius (384-399) to Leo I provided general guidelines to follow which
later would become incorporated into canon law. Bishop of Rome becomes "Rector
of the whole Church". The power of the Bishop of Rome increased as the power of
the Emperors gradually diminshed and the imperial authorities tried to bolster
their waning power with religious support. Edicts of the Emperor Theodosius II
and of Valentinian III proclaimed the Roman bishop as "Rector of the whole
Church". The Emperor Justinian, who was living in the East in Constantinople,
in the 6th century published a similar decree. These proclamations did not
create the office of the pope. First Council of Constantinople and its context.
The event that is often considered to have been the first conflict between Rome
and Constantinople was triggered by the elevation of the see of Constantinople
to a position of honour, second only to Rome on the grounds that, as capital of
the eastern Roman empire, it was now the "New Rome". This was promulgated by
the third canon of the First Council of Constantinople (381) which decreed:
"The Bishop of Constantinople, however, shall have the prerogative of honour
after the Bishop of Rome because Constantinople is New Rome." It has been
asserted by many that a synod held by Pope Damasus I in the following year 382
protested against this raising of the bishop of the new imperial capital, just
fifty years old, to a status higher than that of the bishops of Alexandria and
Antioch, and stated that the primacy of the Roman see was established by no
gathering of bishops but by Christ himself. Thomas Shahan says that, according
to Photius too, Pope Damasus approved the council, but he adds that, if any
part of the council were approved by this pope, it could have been only its
revision of the Nicene Creed, as was the case also when Gregory the Great
recognized it as one of the four general councils, but only in its dogmatic
utterances. In Roman Catholic doctrine no council, regardless of who summoned
it or who presided over it, is ecumenical unless it is confirmed or at least
recognized as such by the pope. Relationship with bishops of other cities. Rome
was not the only city that could claim a special role in Christ's Church.
Jerusalem had the prestige of being the city of Christ's death and
resurrection, and an important church council was held there in the 1st
century. Antioch was the place where Jesus' followers were first called
"Christians" {7} (as well as "Catholic") and, with Alexandria, was an important
early center of Christian thought. It is important to note, however, that the
three main apostolic sees of the early Church (i.e. Antioch, Alexandria, and
Rome) were directly related to Peter. Prior to holding the position of Bishop
of Rome, Peter was the Bishop of Antioch. And his disciple, St. Mark the
Evangelist, founded the church in Alexandria. Constantinople became highly
important after Constantine moved his capital there in 330 AD. As early as the
2nd century, the bishop of Rome began to claim his supremacy over all other
bishops, and some church fathers also made this claim for him. Leo I. The
doctrine of the "sedes apostolica" (apostolic see) asserts that every bishop of
Rome, as Peter’s successor, possesses the full authority granted to this
position and that this power is inviolable on the grounds that it was
established by God himself and so not bound to any individual. Pope Leo I (440-
461), with the aid of Roman law, solidified this doctrine by making the bishop
of Rome the legal heir of Peter. Leo argued that the apostle Peter continued to
speak to the Christian community through his successors as bishop of Rome. From
Gregory I to Clement V. The historical and juridical development of the
"primacy of the Roman Pontiff" from Pope Gregory I (590-604) to Pope Clement V
(1305–1314) was a dogmatic evolution in fidelity of the "depositum fidei"
("deposit of faith"). Council of Reims (1049). The Council of Reims, called by
Pope Leo IX in 1049, adopted a dogmatic declaration about the primacy of the
Roman Pontiff as Successor of Peter: "declaratum est quod solus Romanae sedis
pontifex universalis Ecclesiae Primas esset et Apostolicus" (literal
translation is "it was declared that only the bishop/pontiff of the see of Rome
is the primate of the universal Church and apostolic"). East-West Schism. The
dispute about the authority of Roman bishops reached a climax in the year 1054,
when the legate of Pope Leo IX excommunicated Patriarch of Constantinople
Michael I Cerularius. However, as the pope was already dead by this time, the
powers of the Legate also ceased at the moment of the pope's death; so the
Legate's excommunication was technically invalid. Similarly, the ceremony of
excommunication of the pope performed by Michael I was equally invalid as one
cannot be posthumously excommunicated. This event resulted in the schism of the
Greek rite and Latin rite Churches. It did not have the effect of
excommunicating the adherents of the respective Churches however, as the tit-
for-tat excommunications, even had they been valid, would have applied to the
named persons only, not the people of God in general. Post-schism period.
Second Council of Lyon. Pope Gregory X convoked the Second Council of Lyon
(1274) to act on a pledge by Byzantine emperor Michael VIII to reunite the
Eastern church with the West. Wishing to end the Great Schism that divided Rome
and Constantinople, Gregory X had sent an embassy to Michael VIII Palaeologus,
who had reconquered Constantinople, putting an end to the remnants of the Latin
Empire in the East. On 29 June (Feast of Peter & Paul patronal feast of popes),
Gregory X celebrated a Mass in St John's Church, where both sides took part.
The council declared that the Roman church possessed “the supreme and full
primacy and authority over the universal Catholic Church.” The council was
seemingly a success, but did not provide a lasting solution to the schism; the
Emperor was anxious to heal the schism, but the Eastern clergy proved to be
obstinate. Patriarch Joseph of Constantinople abdicated, and was replaced by
John Bekkos, a convert to the cause of union. In spite of a sustained campaign
by Bekkos to defend the union intellectually, and vigorous and brutal
repression of opponents by Michael, the vast majority of Byzantine Christians
remained implacably opposed to union with the Latin "heretics". Michael's death
in December 1282 put an end to the union of Lyon. His son and successor
Andronicus II repudiated the union, and Bekkos was forced to abdicate, being
eventually exiled and imprisoned until his death in 1297. He is to this day
reviled by many in the Eastern Church as a traitor to Orthodoxy. Thus the
primacy of the Pope remains an issue between the Roman Catholic Church and the
Eastern Orthodox Churches. Reformation. The primacy of the Roman Pontiff was
again challenged in 1517 when Martin Luther began preaching against several
practices in the Catholic Church, including some itinerant friars' abuses
involving indulgences. When Pope Leo X refused to support Luther’s position,
Luther claimed belief in an "invisible church" and called the pope the
Antichrist. Luther’s rejection of the primacy of the Roman Pontiff led to the
start of the Protestant Reformation, during which numerous Protestant sects
broke away from the Roman Catholic Church. The Anglican Church also broke away
from the Catholic Church at this time, although for reasons different than
Martin Luther and the Protestants. First Vatican Council. The doctrine of papal
primacy was further developed in 1870 at the First Vatican Council where
ultramontanism achieved victory over conciliarism with the pronouncement of
papal infallibility (the ability of the pope to define dogmas free from error
ex cathedra) and of papal supremacy, i.e., supreme, full, immediate, and
universal ordinary jurisdiction of the pope. The most substantial body of
defined doctrine on the subject is found in Pastor aeternus, the Dogmatic
Constitution on the Church of Christ of Vatican Council I. This document
declares that “in the disposition of God the Roman church holds the
preeminence of ordinary power over all the other churches.” This council also
affirmed the dogma of papal infallibility, deciding that the
“infallibility” of the Christian community extended to the pope himself, at
least when speaking on matters of faith. Vatican I defined a twofold Primacy of
Peter — one in papal teaching on faith and morals (the charism of
infallibility), and the other a primacy of jurisdiction involving government
and discipline of the Church — submission to both being necessary to Catholic
faith and salvation. Vatican I rejected the ideas that papal decrees have "no
force or value unless confirmed by an order of the secular power" and that the
pope’s decisions can be appealed to an ecumenical council "as to an authority
higher than the Roman Pontiff." Paul Collins argues that "(the doctrine of
papal primacy as formulated by the First Vatican Council) has led to the
exercise of untrammelled papal power and has become a major stumbling block in
ecumenical relationships with the Orthodox (who consider the definition to be
heresy) and Protestants." Forced to break off prematurely by secular political
developments in 1870, Vatican I left behind it a somewhat unbalanced
ecclesiology. "In theology the question of papal primacy was so much in the
foreground that the Church appeared essentially as a centrally directed
institution which one was dogged in defending but which only encountered one
externally," Second Vatican Council. At the Second Vatican Council
(1962–1965) the debate on papal primacy and authority re-emerged, and in the
Dogmatic Constitution on the Church "Lumen Gentium", the Roman Catholic
Church's teaching on the authority of the pope, bishops and councils was
further elaborated. Vatican II sought to correct the unbalanced ecclesiology
left behind by Vatican I. The result is the body of teaching about the papacy
and episcopacy contained in the Dogmatic Constitution on the Church, Lumen
Gentium. Vatican II reaffirmed everything Vatican I taught about papal primacy
and infallibility, but it added important points about bishops. Bishops, it
says, are not "vicars of the Roman Pontiff." Rather, in governing their local
churches they are "vicars and legates of Christ". Together, they form a body, a
"college," whose head is the pope. This episcopal college is responsible for
the well-being of the Universal Church. Here in a nutshell are the basic
elements of the Council’s much-discussed communio ecclesiology, which affirms
the importance of local churches and the doctrine of collegiality. In a key
passage about collegiality, Vatican II teaches: "The order of bishops is the
successor to the college of the apostles in their role as teachers and pastors,
and in it the apostolic college is perpetuated. Together with their head, the
Supreme Pontiff, and never apart from him, they have supreme and full authority
over the Universal Church; but this power cannot be exercised without the
agreement of the Roman Pontiff". Much of the present discussion of papal
primacy is concerned with exploring the implications of this passage. 21st
century. Relation with other Christian denominations. In the document
"Responses to some questions regarding certain aspects of the doctrine on the
Church" of 29 June 2007 the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith
reiterated that, in the view of the Roman Catholic Church, the Christian
communities born out of the Protestant Reformation and which lack apostolic
succession in the sacrament of orders are not "Churches" in the proper sense.
The Eastern Christian Church that are not in communion with Rome, such as the
Eastern Orthodox Church, Oriental Orthodoxy and the Assyrian Church of the
East, are Churches in the proper sense and sister Churches of the Catholic
particular Churches, but since communion with the Roman Pontiff is one of the
internal constitutive principles of a particular Church, they lack something in
their condition, while on the other hand the existing division means that the
fullness of universality that is proper to the Church governed by the successor
of St Peter and the bishops in communion with him is not now realised in
history. Efforts at reconciliation. Anglican-Roman Catholic International
Commission. The Anglican-Roman Catholic International Commission (ARCIC)
statement of Venice (1976) states that the ministry of the bishop of Rome among
his brother bishops was "interpreted" as Christ's will for his Church; its
Importance was compared "by analogy" to the position of Peter among the
apostles.  Joint worship service with the Archbishop of Canterbury. At a joint
service during the first official visit of the then Archbishop of Canterbury,
Robert Runcie, to the Vatican, Runcie appealed to Anglicans to consider
accepting papal primacy in a reunified church. At the same time, Pope John Paul
II stressed that his office must be more than a figurehead. "Ut Unum Sint". In
Ut Unum Sint, John Paul II asked the ‘pastors and theologians’ of ‘our
Churches’ – i.e., the RC and the Orthodox Church – to come up with
suggestions about how the primacy could be exercised in ways that would unite
rather than divide. Joint International Commission for Theological Dialogue. In
October 2007, the Joint International Commission for Theological Dialogue, a
joint commission of Orthodox and Catholic theologians, agreed that the pope has
primacy among all bishops of the Church, something which has been universally
acknowledged by both churches since the First Council of Constantinople in 381
(when they were still one Church) though disagreements about the extent of his
authority still continue. The document "draws an analogy among the three levels
of communion: local, regional, and universal, each of which appropriately has a
'first' with the role of fostering communion, in order to ground the rationale
of why the universal level must also have a primacy. It articulates the
principle that primacy and conciliarity are interdependent and mutually
necessary." Speaking of "fraternal relations between bishops" during the first
millennium, it states that "these relations, among the bishops themselves,
between the bishops and their respective "protoi" (firsts), and also among the
"protoi" themselves in the canonical order ("taxis") witnessed by the ancient
Church, nourished and consolidated ecclesial communion. It notes that both
sides agree "that Rome, as the church that 'presides in love' according to the
phrase of St Ignatius of Antioch, occupied the first place in the "taxis"
(order) and that the bishop of Rome was, therefore, the "protos" (first) among
the patriarchs. They disagree, however, on the interpretation of the historical
evidence from this era regarding the prerogatives of the bishop of Rome as
"protos", a matter that was already understood in different ways in the first
millennium"; and "while the fact of primacy at the universal level is accepted
by both East and West, there are differences of understanding with regard to
the manner in which it is to be exercised, and also with regard to its
scriptural and theological foundations". Discussions continued in Aghios
Nikolaos, Crete (a drafting committee) in September–October 2008, Paphos,
Cyprus in October 2009 and Vienna, Austria in September 2010. Igumen Filipp
Ryabykh, the deputy head of the MP Department for External Church Relations
said Opposition to the doctrine. Stephen Ray asserts that "There is little in
the history of the Church that has been more heatedly contested than the
primacy of Peter and the See of Rome. History is replete with examples of
authority spurned, and the history of the Church is no different." The
doctrines of papal primacy and papal supremacy are perhaps the greatest
obstacles to ecumenical efforts between the Roman Catholic Church and the other
Christian churches. Most Eastern Orthodox Christians, for example, would be
quite willing to accord the Bishop of Rome the same respect, deference and
authority as is accorded to any Eastern Orthodox patriarch, but resist granting
him special authority over all Christians. Many Protestants are quite willing
to grant the pope a position of special moral leadership, feel that according
to the pope any more formal authority than that would conflict with the
Protestant principle of solus Christus, i.e., that there can be no
intermediaries between a Christian and God except for Christ. Protestant view.
The topic of the Papacy and its authority is among the main differences between
the Catholic Church and many other Christian denominations. The Bible is
considered to be the sole authority on Christian doctrine and theology, and
that interpretation does not lie solely with one individual ("sola scriptura").
It is argued that Matthew 16:18-19 does not support the authority given to
Peter and that the keys were given not to Peter alone but to the whole church.
Some consider that Jesus was considering the proclamation made my Peter to be
the rock and foundation of the faith. Others say that even if Peter is the
"rock", it does not support exclusive authority and Peter himself believed
Jesus to be the cornerstone of the church (1 Peter 2:7). It is noted that at
the Council of Jerusalem it was James the Just who states the decision of the
council (Acts 15). Orthodox view. The Orthodox church considers the Bishop of
Rome to be the "primus inter pares" ("first among equals"). Many theologians
also believe that Peter is the 'rock' referred to by Jesus . However, in the
keys were given not only to Peter but to all the Apostles equally. Such an
interpretation, it is claimed, has been accepted by many Church Fathers;
Tertullian, Hilary of Poitiers, John Chrysostom, Augustine. It has been argued
that Church councils did not consider papal decisions binding. The Third
Ecumenical Council was called, even though Pope Celestine I condemned Nestorius
as a heretic which Whelton argues shows that the council did not consider the
papal condemnation as definitive. Opposition arguments from Church Councils.
See also Ancient church councils (pre-ecumenical ). Disagreement with papal
directives by Westerners. Disagreements with directives of the popes by groups
and high-ranking individuals of Roman Catholic tradition are by no means
limited to past centuries. A well-known continuing example is that of the
Society of St. Pius X, which acknowledges the primacy of the pope but refuses
to accept papal decrees concerning the liturgy, decrees that were opposed also
by two cardinals of the Church (see Ottaviani Intervention). In 2005 the Roman
Catholic Jesuit Professor John J. Paris disregarded a papal directive on
euthanasia as lacking authority. In 2012, on the occasion of the 50th
anniversary of the opening of the Second Vatican Council, 60 prominent Catholic
theologians put out an official Declaration stating that the papacy at present
is overstepping its authority. Opposition arguments from orthodox doctrine.
Catholic Cardinal and theologian Yves Congar stated Orthodox understanding of
Catholicity. The test of catholicity is adherence to the authority of
"Scripture" and then by the "Holy Tradition" of the church. It is not defined
by adherence to any particular See. It is the position of the Orthodox Church
that it has never accepted the pope as "de jure" leader of the entire church.
All bishops are equal 'as Peter' therefore every church under every bishop
(consecrated in apostolic succession) is fully complete (the original meaning
of "catholic"). Referring to Ignatius of Antioch Carlton says The church is in
the image of the Trinity and reflects the reality of the incarnation. Any
changes to the understanding of the church would reflect a change in the
understanding of the Trinity. Orthodox rebuttal of Catholic arguments. It is
the position of Orthodox Christianity that Roman Catholic arguments in support
of the teaching have relied on proofs from Fathers that have either been
misinterpreted or so taken out of context as to misrepresent their true intent.
It is the position of Orthodox Christianity that a closer examination of those
supposed supports would have the effect of either not supporting the argument
or have the opposite effect of supporting the counter-argument.
