Probabilism In theology and philosophy, probabilism (from Latin "probare", to
test, approve) refers to an ancient Greek doctrine of academic skepticism. It
holds that in the absence of certainty, probably probability is the best
criterion. It can also refer to a 17th century religious thesis about ethics,
or a modern physical-philosophical thesis. Theology. In moral theology,
especially Catholic, it refers especially to the view in casuistry that in
difficult matters of conscience one may safely follow a doctrine that is
probable, for example is approved by a recognized Doctor of the Church, even if
the opposite opinion is more probable. This view was advanced by the Spanish
theologian Bartolomé de Medina (1527–1581) and defended by many Jesuits such
as Luis Molina (1528–1581). It was heavily criticised by Blaise Pascal in his
"Provincial Letters" as leading to moral laxity. Opposed to probabilism is
probabiliorism (Latin "probabilior", "more likely"), which holds that when
there is a preponderance of evidence on one side of a controversy one is
obliged to follow that side, and tutiorism (Latin "tutior", "safer"), which
holds that in case of doubt one must take the morally safer side. A more
radical view, "minus probabilissimus", holds that an action is permissible if a
single opinion allowing that action is available, even if the overwhelming
weight of opinion proscribes it. The doctrine became particularly popular at
the start of the 17th century, as it could be used to support almost any
position or council any advice. By mid-century, such thinking, termed Laxism,
was recognized as scandalous. Philosophy. In ancient Greek philosophy,
probabilism referred to the doctrine which gives assistance in ordinary matters
to one who is skeptical in respect of the possibility of real knowledge: it
supposes that though knowledge is impossible, a man may rely on strong beliefs
in practical affairs. This view was held by the skeptics of the New Academy
("see skepticism and Carneades."). Academic skeptics accept probabilism, while
Pyrrhonian skeptics do not. In modern usage, a probabilist is someone who
believes that central epistemological issues are best approached using
probabilities. This thesis is neutral with respect to whether knowledge entails
certainty or whether skepticism about knowledge is true. Probabilist doctrines
continue to be debated in the context of artificial general intelligence, as a
counterpoint to the use of non-monotonic logic, as the proper form for
knowledge representation remains unclear.
