Process theology Process theology or process thought is a school of thought
influenced by the metaphysical process philosophy of Alfred North Whitehead
(1861–1947) and further developed by Charles Hartshorne (1897–2000). While
there are process theologies that are similar, but unrelated to the work of
Whitehead (such as Pierre Teilhard de Chardin) the term is generally applied to
the Whiteheadian/Hartshornean school. For both Whitehead and Hartshorne, it is
an essential attribute of God to be fully involved in and affected by temporal
processes, an idea that conflicts with traditional forms of theism that hold
God to be in all respects non-temporal (eternal), unchanging (immutable), and
unaffected by the world (impassible). Process theology does not deny that God
is in some respects eternal, immutable, and impassible, but it contradicts the
classical view by insisting that God is in some respects temporal, mutable, and
passible. Process theology is unrelated to the Process Church. Process theology
is an internally diverse field and while there are general directions that they
all take, there are many ongoing debates such as on the nature of God, the
relationship of God and the world, immortality, and interreligious dialogue.
History. Process theology may refer to all forms of theology that emphasise
event, occurrence, or becoming over against substance. In this sense theology
influenced by Hegel is process theology just as much as that influenced by
Alfred North Whitehead. Various theological and philosophical aspects have been
expanded and developed by Charles Hartshorne (1897–2000), John B. Cobb, Jr.,
and David Ray Griffin. A characteristic of process theology each of these
thinkers shared was a rejection of metaphysics that privilege "being" over
"becoming", particularly those of Aristotle and Thomas Aquinas. Hartshorne was
deeply influenced by French philosopher Jules Lequier and by Swiss philosopher
Charles Secrétan who were probably the first ones to claim that in God liberty
of becoming is above his substantiality. Process theology soon influenced a
number of Jewish theologians including Rabbis Max Kadushin, Milton Steinberg
and Levi A. Olan, Harry Slominsky and, to a lesser degree, Abraham Joshua
Heschel. Today some rabbis who advocate some form of process theology include
Bradley Shavit Artson, Lawrence A. Englander, William E. Kaufman, Harold
Kushner, Anton Laytner, Michael Lerner, Gilbert S. Rosenthal, Lawrence Troster,
Donald B. Rossoff, Burton Mindick, and Nahum Ward. Alan Anderson and Deb
Whitehouse have attempted to integrate process theology with the New Thought
variant of Christianity. The work of Richard Stadelmann has been to preserve
the uniqueness of Jesus in process theology. Relationship to liberation
theology. Henry Young combines Black theology and Process theology in his book
"Hope in Process". Young seeks a model for American society that goes beyond
the alternatives of integration of Blacks into white society and Black
separateness. He finds useful the process model of the many becoming one. Here
the one is a new reality that emerges out of the discrete contributions of the
many, not the assimilation of the many to an already established one. Monica
Coleman has combined Womanist theology and Process theology in her book "Making
a Way Out of No Way". In it, she argues that 'making a way out of no way' and
'creative transformation' are complementary insights from the respective
theological traditions. She is one of many theologians who identify both as a
process theologian and feminist/womanist/ecofeminist theologian, which includes
persons such as Sallie McFague, Rosemary Radford Ruether, and Marjorie Hewitt
Suchocki. Relationship to pluralism. Process theology affirms that God is
working in all persons to actualize potentialities. In that sense each
religious manifestation is the Divine working in a unique way to bring out the
beautiful and the good. Additionally, scripture and religion represent human
interpretations of the divine. In this sense pluralism is the expression of the
diversity of cultural backgrounds and assumptions that people use to approach
the Divine. Relationship to the doctrine of the incarnation. The Christ of
process theology does not represent a hypostasis of divine and human persona.
Rather God is incarnate in the lives of all humans when they act according to a
call from God. Jesus fully and in every way responded to the call of God and so
the person of Jesus is theologically understood to be “the divine Word in
human form.” Jesus was not God-man in essence, but fully identified with God
at all moments of life.
