Arab-Israeli peace projects Arab-Israeli peace projects are projects to promote
peace and understanding among Arabs and Israelis in different spheres. Policy
groups. Organizations or institutions which address and analyze policy issues
in a wide range of areas. Also includes major projects or efforts which are
officially carried out by regional institutions, governments, or NGOs. Valley
of Peace initiative. The Valley of Peace initiative is an official joint effort
of the Israeli, Palestinian and Jordanian governments to promote economic
cooperation, and new business initiatives which can help both sides work
together, and create a better diplomatic atmosphere and better economic
conditions. It constitutes a co-existence project, as it is mainly designed to
foster efforts in the private sector, once governments provide the initial
investment and facilities. Joint economic cooperation between Israeli officials
in Gilboa and Palestinian officials in Jenin has begun to have major results
and benefits. In October 2009, a new project got underway promoting tourism and
travel between the two areas. Major new business efforts and tourist
attractions have been initiated in Jenin. The two regions are planning a joint
industrial zone which would bridge the border. Palestinians would produce
locally-made handicrafts and sell them through Gilboa to other regions of the
world. Another possible project is a joint language center, where Israelis and
Palestinians would teach each other Arabic and Hebrew, as well as aspects of
their cultural heritage. In early 2010, President Shimon Peres took an active
and personal role in efforts to promote local business initiatives. Peres
personally led a tour of top Israeli executives through the West Bank, and told
them about many new Palestinian businesses which show much growth potential.
One company highlighted by Peres was the New Generation Technology incubator, a
joint Jewish-Arab effort founded in 2002 which encourages new ideas and
projects in technology and biotechnology. As of 2011, there are about 50
factories in the West Bank industrial region where Jews and Palestinians work
together. Israeli-Palestinian Chamber of Commerce. The Israeli-Palestinian
Chamber of Commerce was founded in 2009. Its chairman is Eival Gilady, and its
CEO is Ofir Gendelman. It has already held its first conference, at which Tony
Blair was the keynote speaker. It is dedicated to promoting development of
joint economic initiatives and businesses. Alliance for Middle East Peace
(ALLMEP). The Alliance for Middle East Peace (ALLMEP) is a group comprising
over 70 leading non-governmental organizations that work to foster
reconciliation between Israelis and Palestinians, as well as Arabs and Jews in
the Middle East. One of ALLMEP's proposals is an independent International Fund
for Israeli-Palestinian Peace to support and encourage efforts to build peace
in the region. Friends of the Earth Middle East. Friends of the Earth Middle
East is an organization which brings together environmental activists from
Israel, Jordan and the Palestinian Territories, to work on common issues. One
of FOEME's major efforts is a regional advocacy project to promote discussion
and sharing of water resources. Mejdi. Middle East Justice and Development
Initiatives (Mejdi) is a local grassroots Palestinian organization which was
founded by Aziz Abu Sarah, a young Palestinian activist who seeks to advocate
cooperation and reconciliation efforts. Mejdi seeks to promote dialogue between
Israelis and Palestinians. one part of its peacemaking efforts is to promote
local economic development, and strengthening of economic cooperation and
Palestinian small businesses. Abu Sarah has been consistently involved in a
range of workshops and efforts in which he has promoted greater efforts towards
reconciliation and dialogue between individual Israelis and Palestinians. Peres
Center for Peace. Peres Center for Peace was founded by Shimon Peres and
carries out various policy analyses to advance efforts for peace. Aix Group.
Formed is 2002, the Aix Group is an Israeli-Palestinian-international economic
study team that conducts research on the economic dimension of the conflict.
Areas of focus include Palestinian refugees, the construction of a territorial
link between the Gaza Strip and the West Bank, development of the Jordan
Valley, infrastructure cooperation, the economic status of Jerusalem.
Foundations and projects. Organizations which promote specific projects aimed
at promoting co-existence and dialogue between the two sides. "Ta'ayush" Arab-
Jewish Partnership. Formed in the fall of 2000, "Ta'ayush" (Arabic for
"coexistence") is a grassroots movement of Arabs and Jews working to break down
the walls of racism and segregation. It engages in daily actions of solidarity
to end the Israeli occupation of the Palestinian territories and to achieve
full civil equality for all Israeli citizens. Ta'ayush Givat Haviva's Jewish-
Arab Center for Peace. Givat Haviva is an education, research and documentation
center, founded in 1949 by Ha'Kibbutz Ha'Arzi Federation; it is located in the
northern Sharon Valley of Israel. According to its website " The mission of
Givat Haviva today is to cope with the major issues that are on the agenda of
Israeli society, and to foster educational initiatives, research and community
work in the fields of peace, democracy, coexistence, tolerance and social
solidarity." Givat Haviva sponsors the Jewish-Arab Center for Peace.
"Established in 1963, the Jewish-Arab Center for Peace is one of the oldest and
most prominent institutions in its field. The common bond of the dozens of
projects conducted in the Center is the struggle for better relations between
Arabs and Jews, better understanding of the essence of democracy and citizens'
rights in Israel, and building bridges with our Arab neighbors." One of the
Center's leading dialogue projects is Face to Face. Givat HavivaHa'Kibbutz
Ha'ArziJewish-Arab Center for Peace Givat Haviva peace projectsFace to Face The
Parents Circle-Families Forum. The Parents Circle-Families Forum (PC-FF) is a
grassroots organization of Palestinian and Israeli families who have lost
immediate family members due to the conflict. Together, they transform their
pain and bereavement into the catalyst for a joint mission of reconciliation
and coexistence in the midst of ongoing violence. PC-FF was founded in 1994 by
Yitzhak Frankenthal who’s son Arik was killed by the Hamas. Today, PC-FF
includes more than 500 members, half Israeli and half Palestinian. The members
conduct dialogue sessions, give lectures, and engage in projects to support
tolerance and reconciliation. Parents Circle creates innovative projects to
spread its message of hope and reconciliation. The Forum firmly believes that
without reconciliation, there will only be a cease fire and not peace. PC-FF
members from Israel and the Palestinian Territories regularly meet even under
nearly impossible circumstances such as right after the Gaza war of 2008-9. The
PC-FF’s flagship program for the general public is its educational program.
High school “Dialogue Encounters” bring two forum members, one Israeli and
one Palestinian to classrooms in Israel, East Jerusalem and the West Bank to
talk to students about the possibility of peace and reconciliation. Close to
40,000 students are reached each year. Green Action. Green Action is an Israeli
non-governmental organization which advocates for environmental activism and
social change, and has brought fair trade and organic Palestinian olive oil to
the Israeli market. Avi Levi, the director, travels frequently to the West Bank
to work with Palestinian farmers, helping them set up and maintain cooperatives
and obtain organic and fair trade certification. The products are packaged
under the SAHA label. SAHA is an acronym for Sachar Hogen, fair trade in
Hebrew, and is also the Arabic word, Saha, meaning well-being or good health.
In addition to olive oil, the main agricultural product of Palestinians in the
West Bank, Green Action also sells za'atar, dibbes, organic fruit jam, herbal
infusion and pressed olives. The olive oil is also sold in bulk worldwide
including to Australia and the US. In the US, Olive Branch Enterprises of
Seattle, Washington buys Green Action in bulk and bottles it under the Peace
Oil label. The Green Action - SAHA Fair Trade Website Peace Oil Olives of
Peace. Olives of Peace is a joint Israeli-Palestinian business venture to sell
olive oil. Through this project, Israelis and Palestinians have carried out
joint training sessions and planning. It has also led to Palestinian oil
production being enriched by Israeli components. It has produced olive oil
which has been sold under the brand name "Olives of Peace." This is related to
Peace Oil (UK) and Peace Oil (USA). Neve Shalom-Wahat Al-Salam (Oasis of
Peace). The Israeli Jewish-Israeli Muslim Village of Neve Shalom – Wāħat
as-Salām (NSWAS) means "Oasis of Peace" in Hebrew and Arabic. NSWAS provides a
remarkable model of longterm coexistence. Formed in 1970 on land donated by the
Roman Catholic Church, NSWAS sits between Jerusalem and Tel Aviv. They organize
humanitarian projects, including providing medical assistance for Palestinians.
They are also home to three schools, two for village and other area children,
and they have a training facility called the School for Peace. The children's
classes run from pre-school through Middle School and are all taught by both
Muslims & Jews in their native languages. The School for Peace however is
designed for adult Arabs and Jews from all over the area to learn about each
other in controlled seminars run by trained Peace Facilitators. NSWAS has had
many notable visitors over the years. Jimmy Carter, Hillary Clinton, and many
others including Roger Waters (aka Pink Floyd) who has performed several
benefit concerts in the small village urging Israel to "Tear Down the WALL!" An
American branch recently incorporated under the name "American Friends of Neve
Shalom" they are a non-profit 501(c)3 organization that raises funds in the US
for NSWAS programs (similar support groups also exist in the EU, and
elsewhere). "Hamidrasha" Jewish-Arab Beit Midrash. "Hamidrasha", a center for
study and fellowship, works to address alienation, estrangement, and mutual
ignorance between Jews and Arabs. Hamidrasha is establishing an inter-cultural
"Beit Midrash" (Hebrew, "House of study"), which will serve as a basis for
mutual personal and communal encounters, and for the study of cultural
narratives and modern texts of both peoples. Jewish, Muslim and Christian men
and women will engage in a true inter-cultural learning experience, with the
goal of making a significant contribution to the ongoing dialogue between Jews
and Arabs, and strengthening their reciprocal ties. "Ir Shalem" co-existence
program. In many ways the city of Jerusalem has been at the center of the
conflict. The Israeli political movement Peace Now in 1994 has created an
initiative called "Ir Shalem", the goal of which is to build a peaceful
equitable and inspiring future for this city, with Jewish and Arab citizens
working together to find solutions based on equity and justice. This program
brings together volunteer architects, planners, lawyers and other professionals
to analyze problems, and offer solutions. Among other efforts, "Ir Shalem" is
developing the first-ever planning model for East Jerusalem that will equitably
meet the needs of the Palestinian community. Ir Shalem Seeds of Peace. Seeds of
Peace was founded in 1993 by John Wallach. He created the Seeds of Peace
International Camp in Otisfield, Maine, USA, and brought together several dozen
Israeli, Palestinian and Egyptian teens. The goal of his organization was to
create new generations of leaders in conflict regions that will no longer
accept outdated and harmful stereotypes about each other. This would occur by
bringing together young leaders from both sides of conflict regions to
literally put a human face on those who were previously perceived as an enemy.
Since that time Arab children from Morocco, Qatar, Yemen, Jordan, Tunisia and
several others have joined. Seeds of Peace camps now operate programs in the
Middle East as well. Seeds of Peace has also branched out into bringing
teenagers together to help resolve the Balkans conflict, the dispute over
Cyprus, racial conflict in Maine and the Indian-Pakistani dispute. Seeds of
Peace Cultural and scientific works and groups. Israeli-Palestinian Science
Organization. The Israeli-Palestinian Science Organization is a nongovernmental
nonprofit established in 2004 to support collaborative research between
scientists in Israel and Palestine. Founding members of IPSO include Nobel
prize winning neuroscientist Torsten Wiesel. The West-Eastern Divan. Founded in
1998 by Israeli-Argentinian pianist and conductor Daniel Barenboim and
Palestinian-American author Edward Said, the West-Eastern Divan (named after an
anthology of poems by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe) promotes a cultural dialogue
between Israelis and Arabs. A principal activity is an orchestra composed
mostly of young Israeli and Arab musicians, who are demonstrating the potential
for collaboration between the two cultures on the universal ideas that are
communicated by great classical music. They have performed throughout the
world. Barenboim has also made this point by going into Palestinian areas and
giving piano recitals and master classes. Comedy For Peace. Comedy for Peace is
a non-political effort to use humor to build trust, understanding and a vision
for peace between Palestinians and Israelis. Comedy for Peace was conceived and
is being organized by Ray Hanania, a Palestinian-American stand-up comedian –
who is married to a Jewish woman. It is Ray’s hope that the power of comedy
combined with the power of two peoples coming together on one stage will help
Palestinians and Israelis find the courage to look past the pain and the
suffering of the conflict and see each other as human beings, as partners and
as people who have no other choice but to struggle together to achieve a
lasting peace. Tolerance Monument. A Tolerance Monument sculpted by Czesław
Dźwigaj in collaboration with Michal Kubiak is situated on a hill marking the
divide between Jewish Armon HaNetziv and Arab Jabel Mukaber, standing opposite
the United Nations headquarters in Jerusalem in a park near Goldman Promenade.
Unveiled in Jerusalem in 2008, it was funded by Polish businessman Aleksander
Gudzowaty as a symbol to promote peace in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Educational efforts. MEET - Middle East Education through Technology. Middle
East Education Through Technology (MEET) is an innovative educational
initiative aimed at creating a common professional language between Israeli and
Palestinian youth. Working together with the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology (MIT), MEET enables its participants to acquire advanced
technological and leadership tools while empowering them to create positive
social change within their own communities. Program founders Yaron Binur, Anat
Binur, and Assaf Harlap became aware that many Israelis and Palestinians never
get a chance to interact with one another on a personal level, even though they
grow up and live a few short miles from one another. Inspired by their
experiences of multicultural cooperation in international educational
institutions, the founders decided that a fast-paced, intensive program in
technology would be an ideal medium to bridge the divide. With this vision,
they created MEET in the summer of 2004. MEET seeks excelling Palestinian and
Israeli high school students; admission into the program is very competitive.
Once admitted, students meet continuously for three years. Their first summer
includes instruction in basic Java programming; this extends into the first
yearlong segment of the program. The second summer includes more advanced
topics in computer science and introduces a business and entrepreneurship
curriculum. The program is capped by a long-term project beginning in the
second yearlong segment and extending into a final summer term. Alumni
activities maintain the student network after graduation. MEET graduates have
been accepted into top universities in the region and abroad, including the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. The skills and bonds of friendship
forged by MEET students, combined with the students' natural talents, prepare
them for a successful future of leadership, achievement, innovation, and
cooperation. Aside from its partnership with MIT, MEET has been supported by
the Hebrew University of Jerusalem (which has donated lab space for the summer
sessions since MEET's inception), Al-Quds University, Sun Microsystems,
Hewlett-Packard, and other national and international organizations, as well as
many individual volunteers from around the world. MEET's Website Hand in Hand
Bilingual Arab-Jewish Schools. runs a network of four bilingual (Arabic and
Hebrew) schools that serve more than 800 students in Jerusalem, the Galilee
(Galil Jewish-Arab School), Wadi Ara (Hand in Hand "Gesher al HaWadi" School)
and Be'er Sheva (the Hagar School). Half the students are Palestinian citizens
of Israel, and the other half are Jewish citizens of Israel. Students study in
both languages simultaneously, and plans call for an eventual expansion to the
12th grade. To Hand in Hand's Website in English The Institute for Circlework.
The Institute for Circlework organizes workshops in Israel that unite Jewish
and Arab women, with a particular focus on women leaders. The intention of
these workshops is to awaken global consciousness, that is, the awareness of
our commonality as members of the human family and of a single planetary
community. Circlework is a method developed by a German-Jewish author and
seminar leader, Jalaja Bonheim (www.jalajabonheim.com), which she has been
practicing and teaching in the United States for 25 years, and in Israel since
2005. Circlework uses circle gatherings to create a field of open-heartedness
and love powerful enough to heal individuals and communities. Circlework is
based on the assumption that the root causes of violence and war lie within us,
and that our own consciousness is where change must begin. The Institute for
Circlework offered its latest series of circles in Israel during the Gaza war.
To read an account, visit their web site. TEC-the Center for Technology,
Education and Cultural diversity. TEC-the Center for Teachnologystrives to
build trust between Arabs and Jews, religious and secular through joint online
courses and initiatives between college students and school children. The
center established in 2003 by the heads of ICT in 3 teaching colleges is funded
by the Mofet Institute Tel Aviv. visit their web site. Political activists.
Groups of political activists who work for peace through efforts based on
political goals and measures. Includes some groups which are composed of
activists from one side of the conflict, and some groups which include
activists from both sides. OneVoice, a project of the Peaceworks Foundation.
According to their website "OneVoice is a global undertaking to: "Amplify the
voice of moderates; Empower Palestinians and Israelis at the grass-roots level
to seize back the agenda away from violent extremists; Achieve broad-based
consensus on core issues, configuring a roadmap for conflict resolutions.
OneVoice...was developed by over two hundred Palestinian, Israeli and
international community leaders...dedicated to strengthen the voice of reason."
This group rejects what they see as left-wing appeasement of Palestinian
terrorism by leftist groups; they reach out to moderate liberal and centrist
Israelis who want to advance the peace process; they reach out to Palestinian
moderates who reject terrorism and suicide-bombings; they work to cultivate a
moderate political leadership on both sides of the Arab-Israeli conflict, and
are trying to pressure both the Israeli government and Palestinian Authority
into reaching a just peace. One Voice: Silent No Longer One Voice FAQ "Seeking
Peace, Pursuing Justice". The Union of Reform Judaism, the congregational arm
of American Reform Judaism, has created a project called "Seeking Peace,
Pursuing Justice". According to their website, their goal is: "to educate and
mobilize North American Jewry to support peace efforts and social justice
causes in Israel... This campaign will encourage the North American Jewish
community to examine the risks and rewards of peace for Israel and the
Palestinians, and to undertake critical, constructive public dialogue on the
most pressing social issues facing Israel today—including the status of Arab
citizens of Israel and other minorities, as well as other issues of inequality
and discrimination." Seeking peace, Pursuing Justice The Abraham Fund.
According to their website, ""The Abraham Fund Initiatives" is a not-for-profit
organization dedicated to promoting coexistence between the Jewish and Arab
citizens of Israel. Through advocacy and awareness campaigns, and by sponsoring
coexistence projects, The Abraham Fund Initiatives fosters increased dialogue,
tolerance and understanding between Arabs and Jews..." The Abraham Fund Brit
Tzedek v'Shalom. Brit Tzedek v'Shalom, the Jewish Alliance for Justice and
Peace, "is a national organization of American Jews committed to Israel's well-
being through the achievement of a negotiated settlement to the long-standing
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. It believes the vast majority of Israelis and
Palestinians long for an enduring peace and that security for Israel can only
be achieved through the establishment of an economically and politically viable
Palestinian state, necessitating an end to Israel's occupation of land acquired
during the 1967 war and an end to Palestinian terrorism. Brit Tzedek believes
that many American Jews share this perspective, but are reluctant to express
themselves for fear they may bring harm to Israel and the Jewish people.
Through education, advocacy, local chapter activities, and work with the media,
it seeks to generate greater dialogue within the American Jewish community in
order to direct U.S. foreign policy toward the realization of a just peace."
Brit Tzedek v'Shalom Brit Shalom/Tahalof Essalam. The Jewish-Palestinian Peace
Alliance consists of both Jewish and Palestinian peace activists working for
reconciliation. It generally favors binational confederation or two-state
coexistence, drawing upon fringe historical and contemporary movements as
varied as Uri Avneri's pan-Semitism, Buberian Zionism, and even aspects of
rightist Canaanism for inspiration. Contributors to its website include Gideon
Levy, Doron Rosenblum, Avraham Burg, Batya Gur, Meron Benvenisti, Shahar
Smooha, Yossi Sarid, David Grossman, Yitzhak Frankenthal, Tony Judt, Rabbi Arik
Ascherman of Rabbis for Human Rights, Gilad Atzmon, and Baruch Kimmerling. Brit
Shalom/Tahalof Essalam Combatants for Peace. Combatants for Peace () is an
organization of Israelis and Palestinians who are veterans of armed conflict,
and have concluded that there can be no solution through violence. The Israeli
members served as combat soldiers in the Israel Defense Forces, while the
Palestinian members "were involved in acts of violence in the name of
Palestinian liberation." The organization, founded in 2005, supports a two-
state solution to the conflict. A statement on their website says, "We call for
the establishment of a Palestinian State, alongside the State of Israel. The
two states can exist in peace and security beside each other." Jews for
Israeli-Palestinian Peace. Jews for Israeli-Palestinian Peace (JIPF) is a small
group founded in Stockholm, Sweden, in 1982, for Swedish Jews who want to
actively work towards a peaceful solution for the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
JIPF's platform include demands for a full Israeli withdrawal, including the
evacuation of the Jewish civilian population, from all territories that came
under Israeli military control as a result of the Six-Day War, the
establishment of a Palestinian Arab state with East Jerusalem as capital and a
"solution" to the issue of the Palestinian refugees. JIPF also advocates and
participates in dialogue with Hamas and other designated terrorist
organizations. Jewish-Muslim dialogue. The American Jewish Committee. While
forcefully speaking out against Islamic anti-Semitism and anti-Israeli
rhetoric, the American Jewish Committee (AJC) has worked since 1985 to enhance
relations between Jews and Muslims. The AJC encourages and engages in dialogue
on many levels with like-minded groups committed to fostering tolerance and
cooperation. Their website states that "The American Jewish Committee has
demonstrated a profound commitment to enhancing relations between Jews and
Muslims, a vital part of its fundamental dedication to the promotion of
interreligious understanding in the United States and around the world.
Rejecting the inevitability of a "clash of civilizations," AJC has instead
insisted on the possibility of a "community of civilizations" by encouraging
dialogue on the highest levels with like-minded groups committed to fostering
tolerance and cooperation. In so doing, we have achieved a number of
breakthroughs in this vital arena. For well over a decade, AJC has dedicated
itself to forging significant relationships with Arab and Muslim leaders around
the world. AJC has traveled extensively in the Muslim world - from Morocco to
Mauritania, through the Middle East and the Gulf states, to Indonesia. We have
met with scores of Muslim leaders, including top officials of Egypt, Turkey,
Jordan, Tunisia, Bosnia, Kuwait, Qatar, Malaysia, and Indonesia, to discuss
topics ranging from relations with Israel and the United States to the
promotion of international Muslim-Jewish dialogue." Seeking to advance Jewish-
Muslim relations In 1986 the AJC publicly condemned the murder by bomb attack
of Alex Odeh (in Oct. 1985), a leader of the American-Arab Anti-Discrimination
Committee in Santa Ana, California. The AJC had a meeting with the Federal
Bureau of Investigation director William Webster about this incident; they
urged action to identify and punish those responsible for anti-Arab bigotry. In
1986 the AJC submitted testimony to the United States House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Criminal Justice, on the topic of violence and discrimination
towards Arab-Americans. In 1991, on the brink of the Allied war against Iraq,
the AJC issued a statement warning the public not to engage in discrimination
towards American Arabs or Muslims. In part, they stated, "We are ever mindful
of what happened to Japanese-Americans as a result of war hysteria shortly
after Japan attacked Pearl Harbor in 1941. Some 120,000 Japanese-Americans,
two-thirds of whom were American citizens, were evacuated and incarcerated in
internment camps... without any evidence whatsoever that they were a threat to
U.S. security. This must not happen again." (AJC statement by executive
director David Harris) From 1992 to 1995 the AJC worked to lobby the United
States government to intervene on behalf on Muslims in Bosnia. In 1993 the AJC
sponsored the first national conference on "Muslims and Jews in North America:
Past, Present and Future" with the Institute for Islamic-Judaic Studies at
University of Denver in October. In 1994 they sponsored the second such
conference. The third conference had to be canceled, when the AJC could not
found Muslim partners who were willing to publicly condemn the current wave of
terrorist attacks on Israel. In 1999 the AJC helped aid Muslims in Kosovo. In
2001 the AJC initiated a new project designed to advance understanding between
Muslims and Jews by publishing two books: "Children of Abraham: An Introduction
to Judaism for Muslims", by Professor Reuven Firestone, a scholar of Islam at
Hebrew Union College in Los Angeles, was written to describe Judaism to
Muslims; "Children of Abraham: An Introduction to Islam for Jews", by professor
Khalid Duran, was written to describe Islam for Jews. Children of Abraham.
Children of Abraham seeks to build an international community of Muslim and
Jewish youth that celebrates their religious identities. Through an engaging
project involving a photographic exploration of Jewish and Muslim communities
around the world, and honest, unflinching online dialogue, participants form a
network of advocates and ambassadors for ground-breaking Muslim-Jewish
relations in six continents. Centre for the Study of Muslim-Jewish Relations.
In July 2007 a new Centre for the Study of Muslim-Jewish Relations was opened
in Cambridge, United Kingdom. It is partly financed by a £1 million
contribution from Richard Stone, a Jewish philanthropist. In the first instance
its students they will study common areas between the two religions. Eventually
work will extend into more controversial areas, including the Israel-Palestine
question. Nonviolent struggle. Albert Einstein Institution. Gene Sharp, senior
scholar of the Albert Einstein Institution has written several books on the use
of nonviolent struggle as a means for fighting dictatorship, war, occupation
and invasion. In particular, his books on the use of nonviolent tactics as
applied to the Arab-Israeli conflict offer a means for Palestinians to organize
a nonviolent that could be more effective in ending the Israeli occupation.
Publications The Jerusalem Peacemakers: Directors: Eliyahu McLean and Sheikh
Abdul Aziz Bukhari (now deceased). This is a network of interfaith peacemakers
working since 2000 to create occasions for interfaith dialogue. Projects
include: The Big Hug of Jerusalem and the Sulha Peace Project. Common methods
used are music, prayer, and listening circles. The goal is to soften hearts
that have been hardened by fear and pain through face-to-face, heart-to-heart,
and soul-to-soul contact. The Unification Movement. Reverend Sun Myung Moon has
initiated several peace projects attempting to defuse hostilities between
Muslims, Jews and Christians. In 2003 28 clergy from the United States toured
Gaza in September 2003, despite the American Consulate's warnings of rocket
attacks. They were warmly welcomed by local Muslim clerics.
