Prophets in Islam Muslims identify the prophets of Islam () as those humans who
were assigned a special mission by God to guide humans. Muslims believe that
every prophet was given a belief to worship God and their respective followers
believed it as well. Each prophet, in Muslim belief, preached the same main
belief, The Oneness of the Divine Creator, worshiping of that One God,
avoidance of idolatry and sin, Day of Resurrection. Each came to preach Islam
at different times in history and some, including Jesus, told of the coming of
the final prophet and messenger of God, who would be named "AHMAD" commonly
known as Muhammad. Each prophet directed a message to a different group of
people, and thus would preach Islam in accordance with the times. Although many
lay Muslims and many Western scholars and writers hold the view that Islam
began with Muhammad in Mecca, this contradicts the Quran, which says that
Muhammad simply was the last prophet who preached the same faith that Adam
preached to his children. Islamic tradition holds that God sent messengers to
every nation. Muslims believe that God finally sent Muhammad to transmit the
message of the Quran, the holy book which, according to Islam, is universal in
its message. The reason the Muslims believe the Quran is universal and will
remain uncorrupted is because they believe that previous Islamic holy books,
namely the Torah given to Moses; the Psalms given to David; and the Gospel
given to Jesus, were for a particular time and community and because they
believe that, even if the books were corrupted, many prophets were still to
come who could tell the people of what was correct in the scripture and warn
them of corruptions. Muhammad therefore, being the last prophet, was vouchsafed
a book which, in Muslim belief, will remain in its true form till the Last Day.
Etymology. In both Arabic and Hebrew, the term "nabī" (plural forms:
"nabiyyūn" and "anbiyāʾ") means "prophet". Forms of this noun occur 75 times
in the Quran. The term "nubuwwah" (meaning "prophethood") occurs five times in
the Quran. The terms "rasūl" (plural: "rusul") and "mursal" (plural:
"mursalūn") denote “messenger” or "apostle" and occur more than 300 times.
The term for a prophetic “message”, "risāla" (plural: "risālāt") appears
in the Quran in ten instances. The Syriac form of "rasūl Allāh" (literally:
"messenger of God"), ', occurs frequently in the apocryphal "Acts of St.
Thomas". The corresponding verb for ', occurs in connection with the prophets
in the Hebrew Bible. The words "prophet" (Arabic: ) and "messenger" (Arabic: ,
) appear several times in the Old Testament and the New Testament. In the
Hebrew Bible the word "prophet" (Hebrew: "navi") occurs more commonly, and the
word "messenger" (Hebrew: "mal'akh") refers to angels (Arabic: , Malāīkah),
But the last book of the Old Testament, the Book of Malachi, speaks of a
messenger that Christian commentators interpret as a reference to the future
prophet John the Baptist. In the New Testament, however, the word "messenger"
becomes more frequent, sometimes in association with the concept of a prophet.
"Messenger" can refer to Jesus, to his Apostles and to John the Baptist.
Prophets and messengers in Islam. The table below charts the twenty-five named
Quran prophets, and reference key elements of their role in Islam. Muslims
believe that many prophets existed, including many not mentioned in the Quran.
The Quran itself refers to at least four other prophets but does not name them.
For "Ahl al-Kitab" (followers of the "Holy Books"), see People of the Book.
Distinguishing between prophets and messengers. All messengers are commonly
considered to be prophets. However not all prophets are considered as
messengers. The Quran, like the quoted passage from the New Testament, may rank
a messenger higher than a prophet. For example, whenever both titles appear
together, "messenger" comes first. Crucially, a messenger delivers a "new
religious law" (Sharia) revealed by God, whereas a prophet continues an old
one. God sends both prophets and messengers as givers of good news and as
admonishers of their people. A messenger will become the witness that God will
take from that community on the Day of Judgment (see the following "sura";
Yunus; An-Nahl; Al-Mu’minoon; Ghafir; An-Nisa; Al-Qasas). Scholars like Javed
Ahmad Ghamidi and Amin Ahsan Islahi maintain that the key difference between
prophets and messengers is that denial of a messenger invites punishment from
God - this is termed as sunnat Allah (one of the ways of God in the Quran).
Thus, for example, denial of Noah's invitation by his people, caused the flood
to come upon them. This is an extension of the view above that messengers
become witnesses to the delivery of the Divine message to their respective
nations, and their nations are judged accordingly by God. Muslims distinguish
between celestial and human messengers. In the Quranic world, God calls the
angels 'messengers' but not prophets. The human messengers, however, also
function as prophets — though not every prophet serves as a messenger. Angels
always carry "orders" to the human prophets or messengers on what to say, what
to do, and so forth. For example, Gabriel - the angel - delivered the Quran to
Muhammad, the prophet and the messenger. Prophethood in Ahmadiyya Islam. Unlike
the majority of Muslims, the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community does not recognize any
difference between a messenger and a prophet. Ahmadiyya belief regards the
terms encountered in the Quran to signify divinely appointed individuals -
"warner" ("nazir"), "prophet", "messenger" - as generally synonymous. Ahmadis
however categorise prophets as law-bearing ones and non-lawbearing ones. The
Ahmadiyya Muslim Community also recognizes Mirza Ghulam Ahmad (1835–1908) as
a Prophet of God, and also sees him as the Promised Messiah and Imam Mahdi of
the latter days and view it. General Information. Status in Islam. The Quran
speaks of the prophets as being the greatest human beings of all time. A
prophet, in the Muslim sense of the term, is a person whom God specially chose
to teach the faith of Islam. Before man was created, God had specifically
selected those men whom He would use as prophets. This does not, however, mean
that every prophet began to prophesy from his birth. Some were called to
prophesy late in life, in Muhammad's case at the age of 40 and in Noah's case
at 480 Others, such as John the Baptist, was called to prophesy while still in
young age and Jesus prophesied while still in his cradle. Scriptures and other
gifts. Holy gifts. The Quran mentions various divinely-bestowed gifts given to
various prophets. These may be interpreted as books or forms of celestial
knowledge. Although all prophets are believed by Muslims to have been immensely
gifted, special mention of 'wisdom' or 'knowledge' for a particular prophet is
understood to mean that some secret knowledge was revealed to him. Other
prophets. Mary, mother of Jesus. A few scholars (such as Ibn Hazm) see Maryam
(Mary) as a "nabi" and a prophetess, since God sent her a message via an angel.
The Quran, however, does not explicitly identify her as a prophet. Islamic
belief regards her as the holiest of women, but not generally as a prophet.
