Protestantism Protestantism is one of the major groupings within Christianity.
It has been defined as "any of several church denominations denying the
universal authority of the Pope and affirming the Reformation principles of
justification by faith alone, the priesthood of all believers, and the primacy
of the Bible as the only source of revealed truth" and, more broadly, to mean
Christianity outside "of a Catholic or Eastern church". It is a movement that
began in Germany in the early 16th century as a reaction against medieval Roman
Catholic doctrines and practices, especially in regard to salvation,
justification, and ecclesiology. The doctrines of the over 33,000 Protestant
denominations vary, but most include justification by grace through faith
alone, known as "Sola Gratia" and "Sola Fide" respectively, the priesthood of
all believers, and the Bible as the supreme authority in matters of faith and
morals, known as "Sola Scriptura", Latin for "by scripture alone". In the 16th
century, the followers of Martin Luther established the evangelical (Lutheran)
churches of Germany and Scandinavia. Reformed churches in Hungary, Scotland,
Switzerland and France were established by John Calvin and other reformers such
as Huldrych Zwingli. In addition, John Knox established a Calvinist communion
in the Church of Scotland and also the Reformed Church in Hungary. The Church
of England became independent of papal authority, and was influenced by some
Reformation principles. There were also reformation movements throughout
continental Europe known as the Radical Reformation which gave rise to the
Anabaptist, Moravian, and other pietistic movements. Etymology. The exact
origin of the term "protestant" is unsure, and may come either from French
"protestant" or German "Protestant". However, it is certain that both languages
derived their word from the , meaning "one who publicly declares/protests",
which refers to the letter of protestation by Lutheran princes against the
decision of the Diet of Speyer in 1529, which reaffirmed the edict of the Diet
of Worms in 1521, banning Martin Luther's 95 theses of protest against some
beliefs and practices of the early 16th century Catholic Church. The term
Protestant was not initially applied to the Reformers, but later was used to
describe all groups protesting Roman Catholic orthodoxy. Since that time, the
term Protestant has been used in many different senses, often as a general term
merely to signify Christians who belong to neither of the Churches of Catholic
tradition (Roman, Orthodox, Miaphysite or Nestorian Churches). Luther's 95
theses. In 1517, Martin Luther, a German Augustinian friar, published the 95
theses. Popular history holds that these were nailed to a church door in the
university town of Wittenberg by Luther himself, but this claim has recently
come under scrutiny (see article on Martin Luther for discussion). Luther's
propositions challenged some portions of Roman Catholic doctrine and a number
of specific practices. Luther was particularly criticizing a common church
practice of the day, the selling of indulgences. In Catholic theology, an
indulgence was the full or partial remission of temporal punishment due for
sins which have already been forgiven. However, Pope Leo X had declared that
indulgences were not only for the remission of temporal punishment, but also
for guilt itself. To Luther, it appeared that selling indulgences was
tantamount to selling salvation, something that he felt was against both
biblical teaching and Roman Catholic doctrine. At the time, Rome was using the
sale of indulgences as a means to raise money for a massive church project, the
construction of St. Peter's Basilica. The "Disputation of Doctor Martin Luther
on the Power and Efficacy of Indulgences" (commonly known as "the 95 theses")
was a request for a formal disputation that criticized the practice of selling
indulgences. This kind of disputation was a common academic exercise during
this era. Luther maintained that justification (salvation) was granted by faith
alone, saying that good works and the sacraments were not necessary in order to
be saved. A copy of the disputation eventually made it to the hands of the
regional bishop, who in turn forwarded the disputation to Rome. Protestant
doctrines. Although the doctrines of Protestant denominations are far from
uniform, some beliefs extending across Protestantism are the doctrines of "sola
scriptura" and "sola fide". Protestant churches generally reject the Catholic
doctrines of papal supremacy and magisterial authority, including both papal
infallibility and the general infallibility of the Church. Because of this,
Protestant ministers and church leaders have somewhat different roles and
authority in their communities than do Catholic, Anglican and Orthodox priests
and bishops. Conservative and liberal. Protestantism has both conservative and
liberal theological strands within it. Protestant styles of public worship tend
to be simpler and less elaborate than those of Roman Catholics, Anglicans, and
Eastern Christians, sometimes radically so, though there are exceptions to this
tendency. Dissension and separations. The reformers soon disagreed among
themselves and divided their movement according to doctrinal
differences—first between Luther and Zwingli, later between Martin Luther and
John Calvin—consequently resulting in the establishment of diverse Protestant
denominations such as the Lutheran, Reformed, Anabaptist, and others. However,
while the first half-dozen mainline denominations came about through
sectarianism and dissent in Europe, most of the subsequent denominations came
about in a non-sectarian manner in America. This initial explosion of
denominations largely came about in the first two Great Awakenings, and the
birth of these denominations was of an entirely different character than that
of the Lutheran, Reformed, Anabaptist, etc. History. The Protestant Reformation
of the early 16th century began as an attempt to reform the Catholic Church.
German theologian Martin Luther wrote his "Ninety-Five Theses" on the sale of
indulgences in 1517. Parallel to events in Germany, a movement began in
Switzerland under the leadership of Ulrich Zwingli. The political separation of
the Church of England from Rome under Henry VIII, beginning in 1529 and
completed in 1536, brought England alongside this broad Reformed movement. The
Scottish Reformation of 1560 decisively shaped the Church of Scotland and,
through it, all other Presbyterian churches worldwide. Following the
excommunication of Luther and condemnation of the Reformation by the Pope, the
work and writings of John Calvin were influential in establishing a loose
consensus among various groups in Switzerland, Scotland, Hungary, Germany and
elsewhere. In the course of this religious upheaval, the German Peasants' War
of 1524–1525 swept through the Bavarian, Thuringian and Swabian
principalities. After the Eighty Years' War (1568–1648) in the Low Countries
and the French Wars of Religion (1562–1598), the confessional division of the
states of the Holy Roman Empire eventually erupted in the Thirty Years' War of
1618–1648. This left Germany weakened and fragmented for more than two
centuries, until the unification of Germany under the German Empire of 1871.
The success of the Counter-Reformation on the Continent and the growth of a
Puritan party dedicated to further Protestant reform polarized the Elizabethan
Age, although it was not until the Civil War of the 1640s that England
underwent religious strife comparable to that which its neighbours had suffered
some generations before. The "Great Awakenings" were periods of rapid and
dramatic religious revival in Anglo-American religious history, generally
recognized as beginning in the 1730s. They have also been described as periodic
revolutions in colonial religious thought. In the 20th century, Protestantism,
especially in the United States, was characterized by accelerating
fragmentation. The century saw the rise of both liberal and conservative
splinter groups, as well as a general secularization of Western society.
Notable developments in the 20th century of US Protestantism was the rise of
Pentecostalism, Christian fundamentalism and Evangelicalism. While these
movements have spilled over to Europe to a limited degree, the development of
Protestantism in Europe was more dominated by secularization, leading to an
increasingly "post-Christian Europe". Major groupings. There are many
independent, non-aligned or non-denominational Trinitarian congregations that
may take any one of these or no particular position on baptism. Other groups
rejecting Protestant label. Some religious movements, such as the The Church of
Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Nontrinitarian movements, and New Religious
Movements are often included in lists of Protestants by some outsiders.
However, neither mainline Protestants nor the groups themselves would consider
the designation appropriate. Some groups associated with the Restoration
Movement also do not consider themselves to be Protestant. In addition, many
groups within the Emerging church do not cleanly fit the moniker and would not
consider themselves part of this movement (or rather, would consider themselves
to have transcended or fulfilled the movement). While having adopted a non-
creedal posture that can include other faiths and secularism, Unitarian
Universalist (UU) congregations acknowledge their roots in American
Protestantism, especially Congregationalist polity. UU services frequently
include elements of Protestant culture, such as organizational structure, hymns
and a sermon. Denominations. Protestants refer to specific groupings of
churches that share in common foundational doctrines and the name of their
groups as "denominations". They are differently named parts of the whole
"church"; Protestants reject the Roman Catholic doctrine that it is the one
true church. Some Protestant denominations are less accepting of other
denominations, and the basic orthodoxy of some is questioned by most of the
others. Individual denominations also have formed over very subtle theological
differences. Other denominations are simply regional or ethnic expressions of
the same beliefs. Because the five solas are the main tenets of the Protestant
faith, Non-denominational groups and organizations are also considered
Protestant. Due to all these factors, an exact count is not possible, but it is
estimated that there are approximately 33,000 Protestant denominations. Various
ecumenical movements have attempted cooperation or reorganization of the
various divided Protestant denominations, according to various models of union,
but divisions continue to outpace unions, as there is no overarching authority
to which any of the churches owe allegiance, which can authoritatively define
the faith. Most denominations share common beliefs in the major aspects of the
Christian faith, while differing in many secondary doctrines, although what is
major and what is secondary is a matter of idiosyncratic belief. There are
about 800 million Protestants worldwide, among approximately 2.1 billion
Christians. These include 170 million in North America, 160 million in Africa,
120 million in Europe, 70 million in Latin America, 60 million in Asia, and 10
million in Oceania. Protestants can be differentiated according to how they
have been influenced by important movements since the magisterial Reformation
and the Puritan Reformation in England. Some of these movements have a common
lineage, sometimes directly spawning later movements in the same groups. Only
general "families" are listed here (due to the above-stated multitude of
denominations); some of these groups do not consider themselves as part of the
Protestant movement, but are generally viewed as such by the public at large.
Since the term "Protestant" often refers to those Christians not of the Roman
Catholic, Anglican, Oriental or Eastern Orthodox faiths, members of the Church
of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints are occasionally called Protestant, but
they do not adhere to most Protestant principles. Neither do they follow
Catholic traditions or creeds. Contrary to traditional Christian practice,
Mormons believe in a Priesthood organization consisting of Prophets, Apostles,
Seventy, Patriarchs, High Priests, Elders, Priests, Teachers, and Deacons.
Latter-day Saints do not hold to the "sola scriptura" principle of the Bible
being the authority of God but in a literal Priesthood authority given to
worthy male members to teach the Gospel and administer its ordinances. Neither
do they hold to the "sola fide" concept of faith in Jesus Christ alone, but
believe in the combined efforts of deity and man to achieve salvation, that
salvation is through the Atonement of Jesus Christ "and" obedience to the laws
and ordinances of the Gospel, and that covenants are made to establish the
standards necessary for salvation. Latter-day Saints have fervent convictions
in Jesus Christ, but due to the radical differences of their additional texts
and belief structure, they are frequently not listed as Christian. Anglicans
and Episcopalians. The original separation of the Church of England (then
including the Church in Wales) and the Church of Ireland from Rome under King
Henry VIII largely took a Catholic form. Through the efforts of Thomas Cranmer,
Archbishop of Canterbury, and Thomas Cromwell, both with Lutheran sympathies,
the churches later assumed a reformed character. In the 19th century some of
the Tractarians proposed that the Church of England and the other Anglican
churches were not Protestant but a "Reformed Catholic" or middle path "(via
media)" between Rome and Protestantism. This assertion was attacked by, among
others, the Church Association. Today, the Anglican Communion continues to be
composed of theologically diverse traditions, from Reformed Sydney Anglicanism
to High-Church Anglo-Catholicism. Theological tenets of the Reformation. The
Five Solas are five Latin phrases (or slogans) that emerged during the
Protestant Reformation and summarize the Reformers' basic differences in
theological beliefs in opposition to the teaching of the Catholic Church of the
day. The Latin word "sola" means "alone", "only", or "single". The use of the
phrases as summaries of teaching emerged over time during the reformation,
based on the overarching principle of "sola scriptura" (by scripture alone).
This idea contains the four main doctrines on the Bible: that its teaching is
needed for salvation (necessity); that all the doctrine necessary for salvation
comes from the Bible alone (sufficiency); that everything taught in the Bible
is correct (inerrancy); and that, by the Holy Spirit overcoming sin, believers
may read and understand truth from the Bible itself, though understanding is
difficult, so the means used to guide individual believers to the true teaching
is often mutual discussion within the church (clarity). The necessity and
inerrancy were well-established ideas, garnering little criticism, though they
later came under debate from outside during the Enlightenment. The most
contentious idea at the time though was the notion that anyone could simply
pick up the Bible and learn enough to gain salvation. Though the reformers were
concerned with ecclesiology (the doctrine of how the church as a body works),
they had a different understanding of the process in which truths in scripture
were applied to life of believers, compared to the Catholics' idea that certain
people within the church, or ideas that were old enough, had a special status
in giving understanding of the text. The second main principle, "sola fide" (by
faith alone), states that faith in Christ is sufficient alone for eternal
salvation. Though argued from scripture, and hence logically consequent to
"sola scriptura", this is the guiding principle of the work of Luther and the
later reformers. As "sola scriptura" placed the Bible as the only source of
teaching, "sola fide" epitomises the main thrust of the teaching the reformers
wanted to get back to, namely the direct, close, personal connection between
Christ and the believer, hence the reformers' contention that their work was
Christocentric. The other solas, as statements, emerged later, but the thinking
they represent was also part of the early reformation. Christ's presence in the
Lord's Supper. The Protestant movement began to coalesce into several distinct
branches in the mid-to-late 16th century. One of the central points of
divergence was controversy over the Lord's Supper. Early Protestants rejected
the Roman Catholic dogma of transubstantiation, which teaches that the bread
and wine used in the sacrificial rite of the Mass lose their natural substance
by being transformed into the Body, Blood, Soul, and Divinity of Christ. They
disagreed with one another concerning the presence of Christ and his body and
blood in Holy Communion. Catholicism. The official view of the Catholic Church
on the matter is that Protestant denominations cannot be considered "churches",
but rather that they are "ecclesial communities" or "specific faith-believing
communities" because their ordinances, doctrines, are not historically the same
as the Catholic sacraments and dogmas, and the Protestant communities have no
sacramental/ministerial priesthood, and therefore lack true apostolic
succession. Contrary to how the Protestant reformers were often characterized,
the concept of a "catholic" or universal Church was not brushed aside during
the Protestant Reformation. On the contrary, the visible unity of the Catholic
Church was an important and essential doctrine of the Reformation. The
Magisterial Reformers, such as Martin Luther, John Calvin, and Ulrich Zwingli,
believed that they were "reforming" the Catholic Church, which they viewed as
having become corrupted. Each of them took very seriously the charges of schism
and innovation, denying these charges and maintaining that it was the Catholic
Church that had left them. In order to justify their departure from the
Catholic Church, Protestants often posited a new argument, saying that there
was no real visible Church with divine authority, only a "spiritual",
"invisible", and "hidden" church— this notion began in the early days of the
Protestant Reformation. Wherever the Magisterial Reformation, which received
support from the ruling authorities, took place, the result was a reformed
national Protestant church envisioned to be a part of the whole "invisible
church", but disagreeing, in certain important points of doctrine and doctrine-
linked practice, with what had until then been considered the normative
reference point on such matters, namely the Papacy and central authority of the
Catholic Church. The Reformed churches thus believed in some form of
Catholicity, founded on their doctrines of the five solas and a visible
ecclesiastical organization based on the 14th and 15th century Conciliar
movement, rejecting the Papacy and Papal Infallibility in favor of Ecumenical
councils, but rejecting the latest ecumenical council, the Council of Trent.
Religious unity therefore became not one of doctrine and identity, but one of
invisible character, wherein the unity was one of faith in Jesus Christ, not
common identity, doctrine, belief, and collaborative action. Today there is a
growing movement of Protestants, especially of the Reformed tradition, that
reject the designation "Protestant" because of its negative "anti-catholic"
connotations, preferring the designation "Reformed", "Evangelical" or even
"Reformed Catholic" expressive of what they call a "Reformed Catholicity" and
defending their arguments from the traditional Protestant Confessions. Radical
Reformation. Unlike mainstream Evangelical (Lutheran), Reformed (Zwinglian and
Calvinist) Protestant movements, the Radical Reformation, which had no state
sponsorship, generally abandoned the idea of the "Church Visible" as distinct
from the "Church Invisible". It was a rational extension of the State-approved
Protestant dissent, which took the value of independence from constituted
authority a step further, arguing the same for the civic realm. Protestant
ecclesial leaders such as Hubmaier and Hofmann preached the invalidity of
infant baptism, advocating baptism as following conversion, called "believer's
baptism", instead. This was not a doctrine new to the reformers, but was taught
by earlier groups, such the Albigenses in 1147. In the view of many associated
with the Radical Reformation, the Magisterial Reformation had not gone far
enough, with radical reformer, Andreas von Bodenstein Karlstadt, for example,
referring to the Lutheran theologians at Wittenberg as the "new papists". A
more political side of the Radical Reformation can be seen in the thought and
practice of Hans Hut, although typically Anabaptism has been associated with
pacifism. Early Anabaptists were severely persecuted by Lutheran, Reformed, and
Roman Catholic civil authorities. Movements. Pietism and Methodism. The German
Pietist movement, together with the influence of the Puritan Reformation in
England in the 17th century, were important influences upon John Wesley and
Methodism, as well as new groups such as the Religious Society of Friends
("Quakers") and the Moravian Brethren from Herrnhut, Saxony, Germany. The
practice of a spiritual life, typically combined with social engagement,
predominates in classical Pietism, which was a protest against the doctrine-
centeredness "Protestant Orthodoxy" of the times, in favor of depth of
religious experience. Many of the more conservative Methodists went on to form
the Holiness movement, which emphasized a rigorous experience of holiness in
practical, daily life. Evangelicalism. Beginning at the end of 18th century,
several international revivals of Pietism (such as the Great Awakening and the
Second Great Awakening) took place across denominational lines, largely in the
English-speaking world. Their teachings and successor groupings are referred to
generally as the Evangelical movement. The chief emphases of this movement were
individual conversion, personal piety and Bible study, public morality often
including Temperance and Abolitionism, de-emphasis of formalism in worship and
in doctrine, a broadened role for laity (including women) in worship,
evangelism and teaching, and cooperation in evangelism across denominational
lines. Some of the Major figures in this movement include Billy Graham, Harold
John Ockenga, John Stott, and Martyn Lloyd-Jones. Adventism. Adventism is a
Christian movement which began in the 19th century, in the context of the
Second Great Awakeningrevival in the United States. The name refers to belief
in the imminent Second Coming (or "Second Advent") of Jesus Christ. It was
started by William Miller, whose followers became known as Millerites. Today,
the largest church within the movement is the Seventh-day Adventist Church. The
Adventist family of churches is regarded today as conservative Protestants.
Although these churches hold much in common, their theology differs on whether
the intermediate state is unconscious sleep or consciousness, whether the
ultimate punishment of the wicked is annihilation or eternal torment, the
nature of immortality, whether or not the wicked are resurrected after the
millennium, and whether the sanctuary of refers to the one in heaven or one on
earth. The movement has encouraged the examination of the New Testament,
leading them to observe the Sabbath. Modernism and Liberalism. Modernism and
Liberalism do not constitute rigorous and well-defined schools of theology, but
are rather an inclination by some writers and teachers to integrate Christian
thought into the spirit of the Age of Enlightenment. New understandings of
history and the natural sciences of the day led directly to new approaches to
theology. Pentecostalism. Pentecostalism, as a movement, began in the United
States early in the 20th century, starting especially within the Holiness
movement. Seeking a return to the operation of New Testament gifts of the Holy
Spirit, speaking in tongues as evidence of the "baptism of the Holy Ghost" or
to make the unbeliever believe became the leading feature. Divine healing and
miracles were also emphasized. Pentecostalism swept through much of the
Holiness movement, and eventually spawned hundreds of new denominations in the
United States. A later "charismatic" movement also stressed the gifts of the
Spirit, but often operated within existing denominations, rather than by coming
out of them. Fundamentalism. In reaction to liberal Bible critique,
fundamentalism arose in the 20th century, primarily in the United States, among
those denominations most affected by Evangelicalism. Neo-orthodoxy. A non-
fundamentalist rejection of liberal Christianity, associated primarily with
Karl Barth and Jürgen Moltmann, neo-orthodoxy sought to counter-act the
tendency of liberal theology to make theological accommodations to modern
scientific perspectives. Sometimes called "Crisis theology", according to the
influence of philosophical existentialism on some important segments of the
movement; also, somewhat confusingly, sometimes called "neo-evangelicalism".
New Evangelicalism. Evangelicalism is a movement from the middle of the 20th
century, that reacted to perceived excesses of Fundamentalism, adding to
concern for biblical authority, an emphasis on liberal arts, cooperation among
churches, Christian Apologetics, and non-denominational evangelization. Paleo-
orthodoxy. Paleo-orthodoxy is a movement similar in some respects to Neo-
evangelicalism but emphasizing the ancient Christian consensus of the undivided
Church of the first millennium AD, including in particular the early Creeds and
councils of the Church as a means of properly understanding the Scriptures.
This movement is cross-denominational and the theological giant of the movement
is United Methodist theologian Thomas Oden. Ecumenism. The ecumenical movement
has had an influence on mainline churches, beginning at least in 1910 with the
Edinburgh Missionary Conference. Its origins lay in the recognition of the need
for cooperation on the mission field in Africa, Asia and Oceania. Since 1948,
the World Council of Churches has been influential, but ineffective in creating
a united Church. There are also ecumenical bodies at regional, national and
local levels across the globe; but schisms still far outnumber unifications.
One, but not the only expression of the ecumenical movement, has been the move
to form united churches, such as the Church of South India, the Church of North
India, The US-based United Church of Christ, The United Church of Canada,
Uniting Church in Australia and the United Church of Christ in the Philippines
which have rapidly declining memberships. There has been a strong engagement of
Orthodox churches in the ecumenical movement, though the reaction of individual
Orthodox theologians has ranged from tentative approval of the aim of Christian
unity to outright condemnation of the perceived effect of watering down
Orthodox doctrine. A Protestant baptism is held to be valid by the Roman
Catholic Church if given with the trinitarian formula and with the intent to
baptize. However, as the ordination of Protestant ministers is not recognized
due to the lack of apostolic succession and the disunity from the Catholic
Church, all other sacraments (except marriage) performed by Protestant
denominations and ministers are not recognized as valid. Therefore, Protestants
desiring full communion with the Catholic Church are not re-baptized (although
they are confirmed) and Protestant ministers who convert are ordained to the
Catholic priesthood after a period of study (cf Apostolicae Curae). In 1999,
the representatives of Lutheran World Federation and Catholic Church signed The
Joint Declaration on the Doctrine of Justification, apparently resolving the
conflict over the nature of Justification which was at the root of the
Protestant Reformation, although Confessional Lutherans reject this statement.
This is understandable, since there is no compelling authority within them. On
July 18, 2006 Delegates to the World Methodist Conference voted unanimously to
adopt the Joint Declaration. Biblical Unitarian Movement. In the mainstream of
the Protestant Reformation there is the Biblical Unitarian Movement. Today,
biblical Unitarianism (or "Biblical Unitarianism" or "biblical unitarianism")
identifies the Christian belief that the Bible teaches God is a singular
person—the Father—and that Jesus is a distinct being, his son. A few
denominations use this term to describe themselves, clarifying the distinction
between them and those churches which, from the late 19th century, evolved into
modern British Unitarianism and, primarily in the United States, Unitarian
Universalism. Italy. In Italy the Biblical Unitarian Movement powered by the
ideas of Sozzini and others is represented today by the churches associated
with the Christian Church in Italy. This Movement in Italy claims a strong
Christian and biblical soul. From the analysis of documents that you can find
on the official site of the CCI, it is clear that the doctrinal position of
this Christian confession of faith is therefore akin to the so-called Biblical
Unitarian movement and on the other hand, far from that of Unitarian
Universalist Association who, although they have the same origin in 1500 AD,
through the centuries have suffered the influence of many non-biblical ideas
(cf. Universalism). The Christian Church in Italy has significant similarities
with the Biblical Unitarian movement, although it maintains a cautious position
on some doctrinal points. Wilbur wrote about the Unitarian Movement: "The
religious movement whose history we are endeavoring to trace...became fully
developed in thought and polity in only four countries, one after another,
namely Poland, Transylvania, England and America. But in each of these it
showed, along with certain individual characteristics, a general spirit, a
common point of view, and a doctrinal pattern that tempt one to regard them as
all outgrowths of a single movement which passed from one to another; for
nothing could be more natural than to presume that these common features
implied a common ancestry. Yet such is not the fact, for in each of these four
lands the movement, instead of having originated elsewhere, and been translated
only after attaining mature growth, appears to have sprung independently and
directly from its own native roots, and to have been influenced by other and
similar movements only after it had already developed an independent life and
character of its own.". From the analysis of documents that you can find on the
official site of the CCI, it is clear that the doctrinal position of this
Christian confession of faith is therefore akin to the so-called Biblical
Unitarian movement and on the other hand, far from that of Unitarian
Universalist Association who, although they have the same origin in 1500 AD,
through the centuries, have suffered the influence of many non-biblical ideas
(cf. Universalism). The Christian Church in Italy believes that God is only One
Person in direct contrast with the doctrine of the Trinity which defines God as
Three coexisting Persons in one Substance (Essence), merged into one being. So
CCI adheres to strict monotheism by believing that Jesus was a perfect and holy
man, virginally begotten in Mary, the promised Christ, the Son of God and that,
as the glorified man, now is at the right hand of God praying for the whole
Church. The movement the Christian Church in Italy was inspired from, rejects
other doctrines taught for centuries, including the soteriological doctrines of
original sin and predestination. The CCI for its peculiarity has no common
trait with other religious movements which exalt Jesus as the only true God, as
for example the Oneness Pentecostalism, the United Pentecostal Church
International and the True Jesus Church.
