Psalms of Asaph The Psalms of Asaph are the twelve psalms numbered 50 and 73-83
in the Book of Psalms in the Hebrew Bible or Old Testament. When the psalms are
labeled as the Psalms of Asaph scholars have discovered that that can mean a
variety of things. Because of the attribution to Asaph it could mean that the
psalms were a part of a collection from the Asaphites (a name commonly used to
identify temple singers). Another possibility is that the psalms could have
been performed in the style or tradition of the guild bearing Asaph's name.
Asaph himself is said to either be the author or the transcriber of these
psalms for some say that he may not have said these psalms but rather that he
transcribed the words of David. There is also a disconnect as to the exact
origin of the association of Asaph with these psalms because some are labeled
as "of Asaph" while others are "for Asaph" and another "a testimony to Asaph."
A specific time period is not known to be associated with these Psalms but most
of the book of Psalms was written in the time of David and Solomon (c. 1010-9-
30 B.C.). Identity of Asaph. In the Old Testament there are three different men
with the name of Asaph. The Asaph identified with these twelve Psalms is said
to be the son of Berechiah which is said to be an ancestor of the Asaphites.
The Asaphites are said to be one of the families or guilds of musicians in the
Jerusalem temple. These pieces of information are clarified in the books of 1
and 2 Chronicles. In the Chronicles it is said that Asaph was a descendant of
Gershom the son of Levi therefore he is identified as a member of the Levites.
He is also known as one of the three Levites commissioned by David to be in
charge of singing in the house of Yaweh. In 1 Chronicles 6:39 David appoints a
man named Heman as the main musician or singer and Asaph as Heman’s right
hand assistant and the Merarites at his left hand. Asaph is also accredited
with performing at the dedication of Solomon’s temple in 2 Chronicles 5:12.
Some of the Psalms of Asaph are not labeled as just from Asaph but as “for
the leader.” Some interpret this to mean that they were written to be read by
an oracle and proclaimed and front of a large audience, or simply that it was a
cue to the lead singer or chief musician. Another characteristic to these
psalms is the use of the word “selah” which has been interpreted many ways.
One way to interpret it is as a direction for the cantor or musicaion and
another is to see it as a signal for a pause. The exact definition or
derivation is not known but it occurs 71 times in 39 Psalms. Elohist psalms.
This section of the book of Psalms is part of a section known as the Elohist
psalms. Psalms 42-83 are referred to as Elohistic because the name "Yaweh" is
avoided and the term "Elohim" is used instead. The Elohistic psalms are divided
into three subdivsions 42-49 are "of the sons of Korah," 51-65, 68-71 are "of
David," and 50, 73-83 are "of Asaph." The Psalms of Asaph. Psalm 50. This Psalm
forecasts the judgment to come and the manifestation of God. It speaks of God
asking to be acknowledged as judge and creator and promising to bestow mercy on
those who turn to him. It ends with a threat followed by a promise. Psalm 73.
Divine providence and the internal battle within one’s soul are the two main
themes of this psalm. It speaks of the journey of self-realization about the
evils around the world but also coming back and realizing the plan of God.
Psalm 74. The theme of this psalm revolves around the first verse “Why, God,
have you cast us off forever?” and forecasts destruction. It comes across as
a cry out to God as to when salvation will come and save them from the depths
of their despair. Amidst the cries of despair a voice of praise to God also
comes through. Psalm 75. The laments of the people are voiced here and their
promise to sing the praises of God at all times is established. This Psalm is
labeled as a song or psalm to the leader, interpreted as the chief Musician or
leader of the community. The leader ends the psalm with a statement about the
wicked being humbled and the righteous being exalted. Psalm 76. This psalm
focuses on elaborating on the incredible saving power of God. It calls the
people to worship and praise God in thanksgiving for his saving power. This
Psalm is also recognized as for the leader. Psalm 77. This Psalm is a psalm of
lament from a community of people crying out to God and asking him to not be
silent in their time of need. The question “Will God let his created people
be destroyed?” is posed. It comes full circle with the end proclaiming the
wonder of God as creator and reflecting on his care of Moses and Aaron. Psalm
78. This psalm urges people to follow the law and is a more historically themed
psalm that is meant to show the people of the time the pattern of God’s
saving mercy. It encourages the passing down from generation to generation the
deeds of God. It reflects specifically on the time of Moses and the Israelites
in the desert. Psalm 79. The focus of this psalm is the importance of prayer in
the midst of calamities specifically the calamity of the reduction of Jerusalem
to ashes by the Babylonian army in 587 B.C. The lament of the community
acknowledges their faults and beg for God’s mercy. Psalm 80. This psalm is
sometimes referred to as a testimony to Asaph and is also another psalsm
labeled as “for the leader.” It highlights the restoration of the nation
through prayer and God’s mercy. It combines hope with a memory of great
sorrow. The images of Israel as a vineyard and God as a shepherd are both
utilized here. Psalm 81. This psalm emphasizes praising a God who saves and a
national return to liturgical worship. The concept of choosing to act on the
desires and wants of humans rather than walking with God and being in his favor
is brought to light in this psalm. It also calls for repentance from the people
to reorder God’s protection upon them. Psalm 82. The stress of this psalm is
placed on judgment both from human judges and from God and declares the strong
bonds between moral and physical order. It comments on the act of God rebuking
the kings and unjust pagan gods of Israel for not treating the poor with
respect. This psalm ends with a prayer for justice. Psalm 83. The last Asaph
psalm and the last Elohistic psalm highlights the lament of the people due to
their fear of the invasion and of Israel. However then it reveals how God is in
control of all occurrences and prays that the current enemy will be destroyed
as all the enemies of the past were destroyed. Other uses of the psalms of
Asaph. Johann Sebastian Bach used the first line of Psalm 50 in his cantata Wer
Dank opfert, der preiset mich BWV 17 and part of Psalm 75 in his cantata wir
danken dir, got, wir danken dir, BWV 29. Some contemporary bands have also
utilized some of these Psalms as basis for their music. Underoath used Psalm 50
as a basis for their song “Salmamir” and Barlow Girl used Psalm 73 as a
basis and title of one of their songs also known as “My God's Enough.”
Psalm 82 is also used in the Common Book of Prayer for funeral ceremonies.
