Puritan The Puritans were a significant grouping of English Protestants in the
16th century, and from 1630 to 1660 in the 17th century, including, but not
also limited to, English Calvinists. Puritanism in this sense was founded by
some Marian exiles from the clergies shortly after the accession of Elizabeth I
of England in 1558, as an activist movement within the Church of England.
Puritans were blocked from changing the established church from within, and
severely restricted in England by laws controlling the practice of religion,
but their views were taken by the emigration of congregations to the
Netherlands and later New England, and by evangelical clergy to Ireland and
later into Wales, and were spread into lay society by preaching and parts of
the educational system, particularly certain colleges of the University of
Cambridge. Puritans took distinctive views on clerical dress. They also opposed
the Episcopal system after the 1619 conclusions of the Synod of Dort were
resisted by English bishops. Puritans felt that the English Reformation was not
sufficient, and still believed that the Church of England was tolerant of
Catholic Church practices. They formed religious groups advocating a greater
“purity” of worship and doctrine. They also desired greater personal and
group piety. They largely adopted Sabbatarian views in the 17th century, and
were influenced by millennialism. The Puritans adopted a Reformed theology and
became in that sense Calvinists. Criticism of Zwingli and Calvin distinguished
some Puritan beliefs from orthodox Calvinism. The early 17th century featured a
growth in the English commercial world and emerging parliamentary opposition to
the royal prerogative. Presbyterians of the Church of Scotland shared many
beliefs with the Puritans. These factors fostered an environment in which the
Puritans were able to gain power. As a result of the First English Civil War
(1642 – 46), the Puritans became the major political force in England. Some
Puritan congregations wanted complete separation from all other Christians.
These independent strands of Puritanism became more prominent in the 1640s
after supporters in the Westminster Assembly were unable to forge a new English
national church. Terminology. The term "Puritan" in the sense of this article
was coined in the 1560s, when it appeared as a term of abuse for those who
found the Elizabethan Religious Settlement of 1559 inadequate. The godly. The
word "Puritan" is applied unevenly to a number of Protestant churches (and
religious groups within the Anglican Church) from the later 16th century
onwards: and Puritans did not originally use the term for themselves. The
practitioners knew themselves as members of particular churches or movements,
and not by a single term. "Precisemen" and "Precisians" were other early
derogatory terms for Puritans, who preferred to call themselves "the godly."
The term "Puritan" cannot strictly be used to describe any new religious group
after the 17th century. Puritans and separatists. Puritans who felt that the
Reformation of the Church of England was not to their satisfaction but who
remained within the Church of England advocating further reforms are known as
"non-separating Puritans". This group differed among themselves about how much
further reformation was necessary. Those who felt that the Church of England
was so corrupt that true Christians should separate from it altogether are
known as "separating Puritans" or simply as "Separatists". Puritan in the wide
sense includes both groups. John Winthrop and the other main leaders of
emigration to New England in 1629 were non-separating Puritans. John Robinson
and William Brewster, however, the Pilgrim leaders, were separatists. There is
no current consensus among historians whether separatists can properly be
counted as Puritans. Especially after the English Restoration of 1660,
separating Puritans were called "Dissenters". The 1662 Uniformity Act caused
almost all Puritan clergy to leave the Church of England. Some became
nonconformist ministers. The movement in England changed radically at this
time, though this change was not as immediate for Puritans in New England.
Puritans and killjoys. In modern usage, the word "puritan" is often used to
describe someone who is strict in matters of sexual morality, disapproves of
recreation, and wishes to impose these beliefs on others. Hedonism and
puritanism are antonyms. This popular image is most accurate as a description
of Puritans in colonial America, who were among the most radical Puritans and
whose social experiment took the form of a theocracy. Peter Gay writes of the
Puritans' standard reputation for "dour prudery" as a "misreading that went
unquestioned in the nineteenth century", commenting how unpuritanical they were
in favour of married sexuality, and in opposition to the Catholic view of
virginity, citing Edward Taylor and John Cotton. Summary history. Puritanism
has a historical importance over a period of a century (followed by 50 years of
development in New England), and general views must contend with the way it
changed character and emphasis almost decade by decade over that time.
Elizabethan Puritanism. Elizabethan Puritanism contended with the Elizabethan
Religious Settlement, with little to show for it. The Lambeth Articles of 1595,
a high-water mark for Calvinism within the Church of England, failed to receive
royal approval. Jacobean Puritanism. The accession of James I brought the
Millenary Petition, a Puritan manifesto of 1603 for reform of the English
church, but James wanted a new religious settlement along different lines. He
called the Hampton Court Conference in 1604, and heard the views of four
prominent Puritan leaders including Chaderton there, but largely sided with his
bishops. Well informed by his education and Scottish upbringing on theological
matters, he dealt shortly with the peevish legacy of Elizabethan Puritanism,
and tried to pursue an eirenic religious policy in which he was arbiter. Many
of his episcopal appointments were Calvinists, notably James Montague who was
an influential courtier. Puritans still opposed much of the Catholic summation
in the Church of England, notably the "Book of Common Prayer", but also the use
of non-secular vestments (cap and gown) during services, the sign of the Cross
in baptism, and kneeling to receive Holy Communion. Although the Puritan
movement was subjected to repression by some of the bishops under both
Elizabeth and James, other bishops were more tolerant, and in many places,
individual ministers were able to omit disliked portions of the "Book of Common
Prayer". The Puritan movement of Jacobean times became distinctive by
adaptation and compromise, with the emergence of "semi-separatism", "moderate
puritanism", the writings of William Bradshaw who adopted the term "Puritan" as
self-identification, and the beginnings of congregationalism. Most Puritans of
this period were non-separating and remained within the Church of England, and
Separatists who left the Church of England altogether were numerically much
fewer. Fragmentation and political failure. The Puritan movement in England was
riven over decades by emigration and inconsistent interpretations of Scripture,
and some political differences that then surfaced. The Westminster Assembly (an
assembly of clergy of the Church of England) was called in 1643. Doctrinally,
the Assembly was able to agree to the Westminster Confession of Faith, a
consistent Reformed theological position. The "Directory of Public Worship" was
made official in 1645, and the larger framework now called the Westminster
Standards was adopted by the Church of Scotland. In England, up to 1660, the
Standards were contested by Independents. The Westminster Divines were, on the
other hand, divided over questions of church polity, and split into factions
supporting a reformed episcopacy, presbyterianism, congregationalism, and
Erastianism. Although the membership of the Assembly was heavily weighted
towards the presbyterians, Oliver Cromwell was a Congregationalist separatist
who imposed his views. The Church of England of the Interregnum was run on
presbyterian lines, but never became a national presbyterian church such as
existed in Scotland, and England was not the theocratic state which leading
Puritans had called for as "godly rule". Great Ejection and Dissenters. At the
time of the English Restoration (1660), the Savoy Conference was called to
determine a new religious settlement for England and Wales. With only minor
changes, the Church of England was restored to its pre-Civil War constitution
under the Act of Uniformity 1662, and the Puritans found themselves sidelined.
A traditional estimate of the historian Calamy is that around 2,400 Puritan
clergy left the Church, in the "Great Ejection" of 1662. At this point, the
term Dissenter came to include "Puritan", but more accurately describes those
(clergy or lay) who "dissented" from the "1662 Book of Common Prayer". Dividing
themselves from all Christians in the Church of England, the Dissenters
established their own separatist congregations in the 1660s and 1670s; an
estimated 1,800 of the ejected clergy continued in some fashion as ministers of
religion (according to Richard Baxter). The government initially attempted to
suppress these schismatic organizations by the Clarendon Code. There followed a
period in which schemes of "comprehension" were proposed, under which
presbyterians could be brought back into the Church of England; nothing
resulted from them. The Whigs, opposing the court religious policies, argued
that the Dissenters should be allowed to worship separately from the
established Church, and this position ultimately prevailed when the Toleration
Act was passed in the wake of the Glorious Revolution (1689). This permitted
the licensing of Dissenting ministers and the building of chapels. The term
Nonconformist generally replaced the term "Dissenter" from the middle of the
eighteenth century. Beliefs. The idea of personal Biblical interpretation,
while central to Puritan beliefs, was shared with most Protestants in general.
Puritans sought both individual and corporate conformity to the teaching of the
Bible, with moral purity pursued both down to the smallest detail as well as
ecclesiastical purity to the highest level. They believed that man existed for
the glory of God; that his first concern in life was to do God's will and so to
receive future happiness. Diversity. Various strands of Calvinist thought of
the 17th century were taken up by different parts of the Puritan movement, and
in particular Amyraldism was adopted by some influential figures (John
Davenant, Samuel Ward, and to some extent Richard Baxter). In the same way,
there is no theory of church polity that is uniquely Puritan, and views
differed beyond opposition to Erastianism (state control), though even that had
its small group of supporters in the Westminster Assembly. Some approved of the
existing church hierarchy with bishops, but others sought to reform the
Episcopal churches on the Presbyterian model. Some separatist Puritans were
Presbyterian, but most were early Congregationalists. The separating
Congregationalists believed the Divine Right of Kings was heresy; but on the
other hand there were many royalist Presbyterians, in terms of allegiance in
the political struggle. Migration also brought out differences. It brought
together Puritan communities with their own regional customs and beliefs. As
soon as there were New World Puritans, their views on church governance
diverged from those remaining in the British Isles, who faced different issues.
Demonology. Puritans believed in demonic forces, as did almost all Christians
of this period. Puritan pastors undertook exorcisms for demonic possession in
some high-profile cases, and believed in some allegations of witchcraft. The
exorcist John Darrell was supported by Arthur Hildersham in the case of Thomas
Darling; Samuel Harsnett, a sceptic on witchcraft and possession, attacked
Darrell. But Harsnett was in the minority, and many clergy, not only Puritans,
took the opposite viewpoint. The possession case of Richard Dugdale was taken
up by the ejected nonconformist Thomas Jollie, and other local ministers, in
1689. The context of the Salem witch trials of 1692-1693 shows the intricacy of
trying to place "Puritan" beliefs as distinctive. The publication of
"Saducismus Triumphatus", an anti-sceptical tract that has been implicated in
the moral panic at Salem, involved Joseph Glanvill (a latitudinarian), Henry
More (a Cambridge Platonist) as editor, and Anthony Horneck, an evangelical
German Anglican, as translator of a pamphlet about a Swedish witch hunt; and
none of these was a Puritan. Glanvill and More had been vehemently opposed in
the 1670s by the sceptic John Webster, an Independent and sometime chaplain to
the Parliamentary forces. Millennialism. Puritan millennialism has been placed
in the broader context of European Reformed views on the millennium and
interpretation of Biblical prophecy, for which representative figures of the
period were Johannes Piscator, Thomas Brightman, Joseph Mede, Johannes Heinrich
Alsted, and John Amos Comenius. Both Brightman and Mede were Puritan by
conviction, and so are identified by their biographers, though neither clashed
with the church authorities. David Brady describes a "lull before the storm" in
which, in the early 17th century, "reasonably restrained and systematic"
Protestant exegesis of the "Book of Revelation" was seen with Brightman, Mede
and Hugh Broughton; after which "apocalyptic literature became too easily
debased" as it became more populist, less scholarly. Within the church, William
Lamont argues, the Elizabethan millennial views of John Foxe became sidelined,
with Puritans adopting instead the "centrifugal" views of Brightman, while the
Laudians replaced the "centripetal" attitude of Foxe to the 'Christian Emperor'
by the national and episcopal Church closer to home, with its royal head, as
leading the Protestant world "iure divino" (by divine right). Viggo Norskov
Olsen writes that Mede "broke fully away from the Augustinian-Foxian tradition,
and is the link between Brightman and the premillennialism of the seventeenth
century". The dam then broke in 1641 when the traditional retrospective
reverence for Thomas Cranmer and other martyred bishops in the "Acts and
Monuments" was displaced by forward-looking attitudes to prophecy, among
radical Puritans. Cultural consequences. Some strong religious views common to
Puritans had direct impacts on culture. Education for the masses was so they
could read the Bible for themselves. But the sexualisation of Restoration
theatre was attacked as strongly as ever, by Thomas Gouge, as Keeble points
out. Puritans eliminated the use of musical instruments in their religious
services, for theological and practical reasons. Church organs were commonly
damaged or destroyed in the Civil War period, for example an axe being taken to
the organ of Worcester Cathedral in 1642. Social consequences and family life.
