Pali PƒÅli (also PƒÅi) is a Middle Indo-Aryan language (of Prakrit group) of
the Indian subcontinent. It is best known as the language of many of the
earliest extant Buddhist scriptures, as collected in the PƒÅi Canon or
"Tipitaka", and as the liturgical language of Theravada Buddhism. Origin and
development. Etymology. The word "PƒÅli" itself signifies "line" or "
(canonical) text". This name for the language seems to have its origins in
commentarial traditions, wherein the "PƒÅli" (in the sense of the line of
original text quoted) was distinguished from the commentary or vernacular
translation that followed it in the manuscript. As such, the name of the
language has caused some debate among scholars of all ages; the spelling of the
name also varies, being found with both long "ƒÅ" and short "a" , and also with
either a retroflex or non-retroflex "l"¬ sound. Both the long ƒÅ and retroflex
·∏∑ are seen in the ISO 15919/ALA-LC rendering, PƒÅ·∏∑i; however, to this day
there is no single, standard spelling of the term, and all four possible
spellings can be found in textbooks. R.¬ C.¬ Childers translates the word as
"series" and states that the language "bears the epithet in consequence of the
perfection of its grammatical structure". Robert C√¶sar Childers argues that
the true or geographical name of the PƒÅli language was Magadhi, and that
because "pƒÅli" means "line, row, series", the early Buddhists extended the
meaning of the term to mean "a series of books", so "Palibhasa" means "language
of the texts". Classification. Pali is a literary language of the Prakrit
language family and was first written down in Sri Lanka in the first
century¬ BCE. Despite scholarship on this problem, there is persistent
confusion as to the relation of to the vernacular spoken in the ancient kingdom
of Magadha, which was located around modern-day BihƒÅr. PƒÅli, as a Middle
Indo-Aryan language, is different from Sanskrit, not only with regard to the
time of its origin but as to its dialectal base since a number of its
morphological and lexical features betray the fact that it is not a direct
continuation of Vedic Sanskrit; rather it descends from a dialect or number of
dialects that were, despite many similarities, different from . Early history.
Theravada Buddhism. Many Theravada sources refer to the PƒÅli language as
"Magadhan" or the "language of Magadha". This identification first appears in
the commentaries, and may have been an attempt by Buddhists to associate
themselves more closely with the Mauryans. The Buddha taught in Magadha, but
the four most important places in his life are all outside of it. It is likely
that he taught in several closely related dialects of Middle Indo-Aryan, which
had a high degree of mutual intelligibility. There is no attested dialect of
Middle Indo-Aryan with all the features of PƒÅli. PƒÅli has some commonalities
with both the Ashokan inscriptions at Girnar in the West of India, and at
Hathigumpha, Bhubaneswar, Orissa in the East. Similarities to the Western
inscription may be misleading, because the inscription suggests that the
Ashokan scribe may not have translated the material he received from Magadha
into the vernacular of the people there. Whatever the relationship of the
Buddha's speech to PƒÅli, the Canon was eventually transcribed and preserved
entirely in it, while the commentarial tradition that accompanied it (according
to the information provided by Buddhaghosa) was translated into Sinhalese and
preserved in local languages for several generations. In Sri Lanka, PƒÅli is
thought to have entered into a period of decline ending around the 4th or
5th¬ century (as Sanskrit rose in prominence, and simultaneously, as Buddhism's
adherents became a smaller portion of the subcontinent), but ultimately
survived. The work of Buddhaghosa was largely responsible for its reemergence
as an important scholarly language in Buddhist thought. The Visuddhimagga and
the other commentaries that Buddhaghosa compiled codified and condensed the
Sinhalese commentarial tradition that had been preserved and expanded in Sri
Lanka since the 3rd¬ century BCE. Early western views. T.¬ W.¬ Rhys Davids in
his book "Buddhist India", and Wilhelm Geiger in his book "PƒÅli Literature and
Language", suggested that Pali may have originated as a form of lingua franca
or common language of culture among people who used differing dialects in North
India, used at the time of the Buddha and employed by him. Another scholar
states that at that time it was "a refined and elegant vernacular of all Aryan-
speaking people". Modern scholarship has not arrived at a consensus on the
issue; there are a variety of conflicting theories with supporters and
detractors. After the death of the Buddha, Pali may have evolved among
Buddhists out of the language of the Buddha as a new artificial language. R. C.
Childers, who held to the theory that PƒÅli was Old Magadhi, wrote: "Had
Gautama never preached, it is unlikely that Magadhese would have been
distinguished from the many other vernaculars of Hindustan, except perhaps by
an inherent grace and strength which make it a sort of Tuscan among the
Prakrits." According to K.¬ R.¬ Norman, it is likely that the viharas in North
India had separate collections of material, preserved in the local dialect. In
the early period it is likely that no degree of translation was necessary in
communicating this material to other areas. Around the time of Ashoka there had
been more linguistic divergence, and an attempt was made to assemble all the
material. It is possible that a language quite close to the PƒÅli of the canon
emerged as a result of this process as a compromise of the various dialects in
which the earliest material had been preserved, and this language functioned as
a lingua franca among Eastern Buddhists in India from then on. Following this
period, the language underwent a small degree of Sanskritisation (i.e.,¬ MIA
bamhana -> brahmana, tta -> tva in some cases). Modern scholarship. According
to A.¬ K.¬ Warder, the PƒÅli language is a Prakrit language used in a region of
western India. Warder associates Pali with the Indian realm ("janapada") of
Avanti, where the Sthavira sect was centered. Following the initial split in
the Buddhist community, the Sthavira branch of Buddhism became influential in
western and southern India, while the MahƒÅsƒÅ·πÉghika branch became
influential in central and eastern India. Akira Hirakawa and Paul Groner also
associate PƒÅli with west India and the Sthavira sect, citing inscriptions at
Girnar in Gujarat, India, which are linguistically closest to the PƒÅli
language. Pali today. Today PƒÅli is studied mainly to gain access to Buddhist
scriptures, and is frequently chanted in a ritual context. The secular
literature of PƒÅli historical chronicles, medical texts, and inscriptions is
also of great historical importance. The great centers of PƒÅli learning remain
in the Theravada nations of Southeast Asia: Burma, Sri Lanka, Thailand, Laos,
and Cambodia. Since the 19th¬ century, various societies for the revival of
Pali studies in India have promoted awareness of the language and its
literature, perhaps most notably the Maha Bodhi Society founded by Anagarika
Dhammapala. In Europe, the Pali Text Society has been a major force in
promoting the study of PƒÅli by Western scholars since its founding in 1881.
Based in the United Kingdom, the society publishes romanized PƒÅli editions,
along with many English translations of these sources. In 1869, the first "Pali
Dictionary" was published using the research of Robert Caesar Childers, one of
the founding members of the Pali Text Society. It was the first Pali translated
text in English and was published in 1872. Childers's dictionary later received
the Volney Prize in 1876. The Pali Text Society was in part founded to
compensate for the very low level of funds allocated to Indology in late 19th-
century England and the rest of the UK; incongruously, the citizens of the UK
were not nearly so robust in Sanskrit and Prakrit language studies as Germany,
Russia, and even Denmark. Without the inspiration of colonial holdings such as
the former British occupation of Sri Lanka and Burma, institutions such as the
Danish Royal Library have built up major collections of PƒÅli manuscripts, and
major traditions of PƒÅli studies. Lexicon. Virtually every word in has
cognates in the other Prakritic Middle Indo-Aryan languages, e.g., the Jain
Prakrits. The relationship to earlier Sanskrit (e.g., Vedic language) is less
direct and more complicated. Historically, influence between Pali and Sanskrit
has been felt in both directions. The Pali language's resemblance to Sanskrit
is often exaggerated by comparing it to later Sanskrit compositionswhich were
written centuries after Sanskrit ceased to be a living language, and are
influenced by developments in Middle Indic, including the direct borrowing of a
portion of the Middle Indic lexicon; whereas, a good deal of later Pali
technical terminology has been borrowed from the vocabulary of equivalent
disciplines in Sanskrit, either directly or with certain phonological
adaptations. Post-canonical Pali also possesses a few loan-words from local
languages where Pali was used (e.g. Sri Lankans adding Sinhalese words to
Pali). These usages differentiate the Pali found in the Sutta Pitaka from later
compositions such as the Pali commentaries on the canon and folklore (e.g., the
stories of the JƒÅtaka commentaries), and comparative study (and dating) of
texts on the basis of such loan-words is now a specialized field unto itself.
Pali was not exclusively used to convey the teachings of the Buddha, as can be
deduced from the existence of a number of secular texts, such as books of
medical science/instruction, in Pali. However, scholarly interest in the
language has been focused upon religious and philosophical literature, because
of the unique window it opens on one phase in the development of Buddhism. Emic
views of Pali. Although Sanskrit was said in the Brahmanical tradition to be
the unchanging language spoken by the gods, in which each word had an inherent
significance, this view of language was not shared in the early Buddhist
tradition, in which words were only conventional and mutable signs. Neither the
Buddha nor his early followers shared the Hindus reverence for the Vedic
language or its sacred texts. This view of language naturally extended to Pali,
and may have contributed to its usage (as an approximation or standardization
of local Middle Indic dialects) in place of Sanskrit. However, by the time of
the compilation of the Pali commentaries (4th or 5th century), Pali was
regarded as the natural language, the root language of all beings. Comparable
to Ancient Egyptian, Latin or Hebrew in the mystic traditions of the West, Pali
recitations were often thought to have a supernatural power (which could be
attributed to their meaning, the character of the reciter, or the qualities of
the language itself), and in the early strata of Buddhist literature we can
already see Pali dharanis used as charms, e.g. against the bite of snakes. Many
people in Theravada cultures still believe that taking a vow in Pali has a
special significance, and, as one example of the supernatural power assigned to
chanting in the language, the recitation of the vows of Angulimala are believed
to alleviate the pain of childbirth in Sri Lanka. In Thailand, the chanting of
a portion of the Abhidhamma is believed to be beneficial to the recently
departed, and this ceremony routinely occupies as much as seven working days.
Interestingly, there is nothing in the latter text that relates to this
subject, and the origins of the custom are unclear. Phonology. With regard to
its phonology, R.¬ C.¬ Childers compared Pali to Italian: "Like Italian, Pali
is at once flowing and sonorous: it is a characteristic of both languages that
nearly every word ends in a vowel, and that all harsh conjunctions are softened
down by assimilation, elision, or crasis, while on the other hand both lend
themselves easily to the expression of sublime and vigorous thought." Vowels.
Long and short vowels are only contrastive in open syllables; in closed
syllables, all vowels are always short. Short and long e and o are in
complementary distribution: the short variants occur only in closed syllables,
the long variants occur only in open syllables. Short and long e and o are
therefore not distinct phonemes. A sound called "anusvƒÅra" (Skt.; Pali:
"nigghahita"), represented by the letter ' (ISO 15919) or ' (ALA-LC) in
romanization, and by a raised dot in most traditional alphabets, originally
marked the fact that the preceding vowel was nasalized. That is, ', ' and '
represented , and . In many traditional pronunciations, however, the anusvƒÅra
is pronounced more strongly, like the velar nasal , so that these sounds are
pronounced instead , and . However pronounced, ' never follows a long vowel;
ƒÅ, ƒ´ and ≈´ are converted to the corresponding short vowels when is added to
a stem ending in a long vowel, e.g. ' becomes ', not , ' becomes ', not *.
Consonants. The table below lists the consonants of Pali. In bold is the
transliteration of the letter in traditional romanization, and in square
brackets its pronunciation transcribed in the IPA. Of the sounds listed above
only the three consonants in parentheses, ·πÖ, ·∏∑, and ·∏∑h, are not distinct
phonemes in Pali: ·πÖ only occurs before velar stops, while ·∏∑ and ·∏∑h are
allophones of single ·∏ç and ·∏çh occurring between vowels. Morphology. Pali is
a highly inflected language, in which almost every word contains, besides the
root conveying the basic meaning, one or more affixes (usually suffixes) which
modify the meaning in some way. Nouns are inflected for gender, number, and
case; verbal inflections convey information about person, number, tense and
mood. Nominal inflection. Pali nouns inflect for three grammatical genders
(masculine, feminine, and neuter) and two numbers (singular and plural). The
nouns also, in principle, display eight cases: nominative or "paccatta" case,
vocative, accusative or "upayoga" case, instrumental or "" case, dative or
"sampadƒÅna" case, ablative, genitive or "sƒÅmin" case, and locative or
"bhumma" case; however, in many instances, two or more of these cases are
identical in form; this is especially true of the genitive and dative cases. a-
stems. a-stems, whose uninflected stem ends in short "a" (), are either
masculine or neuter. The masculine and neuter forms differ only in the
nominative, vocative, and accusative cases. ƒÅ-stems. Nouns ending in ƒÅ () are
almost always feminine. i-stems and u-stems. i-stems and u-stems are either
masculine or neuter. The masculine and neuter forms differ only in the
nominative and accusative cases. The vocative has the same form as the
nominative. Linguistic analysis of a Pali text. The literal meaning is
therefore: "The dharmas have mind as their leader, mind as their chief, are
made of/by mind. If either speaks or acts with a corrupted mind, from that
[cause suffering goes after him, as the wheel a cart follows the foot of a
draught animal." A slightly freer translation by Acharya Buddharakkhita Ardha-
Magadhi. The most archaic of the Middle Indo-Aryan languages are the
inscriptional A≈õokan Prakrit on the one hand and PƒÅli and ArdhamƒÅgadhƒ´
("Half Magadhi") on the other, both literary languages. The Indo-Aryan
languages are commonly assigned to three major groups ‚Äì Old, Middle and New
Indo-Aryan. The classification reflects consecutive stages in a common
linguistic development, but is not merely a matter of chronology: Classical
Sanskrit, as a codified derivate of Vedic Sanskrit, remains mostly
representative of the Old Indo-Aryan stage, even though it continued to
flourish at the same time as the Middle Indo-Aryan languages. Conversely, a
number of the morphophonological and lexical features of the Middle Indo-Aryan
languages betray the fact that they may not be direct continuations of
·πögvedic Sanskrit, the main base of Classical Sanskrit; rather they descend
from other very similar Old-Indo-Aryan dialects which some regard as probably
even more archaic than Rigvedic. (1) The vocalic liquids '·πõ' and '·∏∑' are
replaced by 'a', 'i' or 'u'; (2) the diphthongs 'ai' and 'au' are
monophthongized to 'e' and 'o'; (3) long vowels before two or more consonants
are shortened; (4) the three sibilants of OIA are reduced to one, either '≈õ'
or 's'; (5) the often complex consonant clusters of OIA are reduced to more
readily pronounceable forms, either by assimilation or by splitting; (6) single
intervocalic stops are progressively weakened; (7) dentals are palatalized by a
following '-y-'; (8) all final consonants except '-·πÉ' are dropped unless they
are retained in 'sandhi' junctions. The most conspicuous features of the
morphological system of these languages are: loss of the dual; thematicization
of consonantal stems; merger of the f. 'i-/u-' and 'ƒ´-/≈´-' in one 'ƒ´-/≈´-
' inflexion, elimination of the dative, whose functions are taken over by the
genitive, simultaneous use of different case-endings in one paradigm;
employment of 'mahya·πÉ' and 'tubhya·πÉ' as genitives and 'me' and 'te' as
instrumentals; gradual disappearance of the middle voice; coexistence of
historical and new verbal forms based on the present stem; and use of active
endings for the passive. In the vocabulary, the MIA languages are mostly
dependent on Old Indo-Aryan, with addition of a few so-called 'de≈õƒ´' words of
(often) uncertain origin. Sanskrit. Pali and Sanskrit are very closely related
and the common characteristics of Pali and Sanskrit were always easily
recognized by those in India who were familiar with both. Indeed, a very large
proportion of Pali and Sanskrit word-stems are identical in form, differing
only in details of inflection. The connections were sufficiently well known
that technical terms from Sanskrit were easily converted into Pali by a set of
conventional phonological transformations. These transformations mimicked a
subset of the phonological developments that had occurred in Proto-Pali.
Because of the prevalence of these transformations, it is not always possible
to tell whether a given Pali word is a part of the old Prakrit lexicon, or a
transformed borrowing from Sanskrit. The existence of a Sanskrit word regularly
corresponding to a Pali word is not always secure evidence of the Pali
etymology, since, in some cases, artificial Sanskrit words were created by
back-formation from Prakrit words. The following phonological processes are not
intended as an exhaustive description of the historical changes which produced
Pali from its Old Indic ancestor, but rather are a summary of the most common
phonological equations between Sanskrit and Pali, with no claim to
completeness. Consonants. Assimilations. Total assimilation. Total
assimilation, where one sound becomes identical to a neighboring sound, is of
two types: progressive, where the assimilated sound becomes identical to the
following sound; and regressive, where it becomes identical to the preceding
sound. Epenthesis. An epenthetic vowel is sometimes inserted between certain
consonant-sequences. As with ·πõ, the vowel may be a, i, or u, depending on the
influence of a neighboring consonant or of the vowel in the following syllable.
i is often found near i, y, or palatal consonants; u is found near u, v, or
labial consonants. Exceptions. There are several notable exceptions to the
rules above; many of them are common Prakrit words rather than borrowings from
Sanskrit. Writing. Alphabet with diacritics. King Ashoka erected a number of
pillars with his edicts in at least three regional Prakrit languages in Brahmi
script, all of which are quite similar to Pali. Historically, the first written
record of the Pali canon is believed to have been composed in Sri Lanka, based
on a prior oral tradition. As per the Mahavamsa (the chronicle of Sri Lanka),
due to a major famine in the country Buddhist monks wrote down the Pali canon
during the time of King Vattagamini in 100 BC. The transmission of written Pali
has retained a universal system of alphabetic values, but has expressed those
values in a stunning variety of actual scripts. In Sri Lanka, Pali texts were
recorded in Sinhala script. Other local scripts, most prominently Khmer,
Burmese, and in modern times Thai (since 1893), DevanƒÅgarƒ´ and Mon script
(Mon State, Burma) have been used to record Pali. Since the 19th century, Pali
has also been written in the Roman script. An alternate scheme devised by Frans
Velthuis allows for typing without diacritics using plain ASCII methods, but is
arguably less readable than the standard Rhys Davids system, which uses
diacritical marks. ·∏∑h, although a single sound, is written with ligature of
·∏∑ and h. Transliteration on computers. There are several fonts to use for
Pali transliteration. However, older ASCII fonts such as Leedsbit PaliTranslit,
Times_Norman, Times_CSX+, Skt Times, Vri RomanPali CN/CB etc., are not
recommendable since they are not compatible with one another and technically
out of date. On the contrary, fonts based on the Unicode standard are
recommended because Unicode seems to be the future for all fonts and also
because they are easily portable to one another. Some of the latest fonts
coming with Windows 7 can also be used to type transliterated Pali: "Arial",
"Calibri", "Cambria", "Courier New", "Microsoft Sans Serif", "Segoe UI", "Segoe
UI Light", "Segoe UI Semibold", "Tahoma", and "Times New Roman". And some of
them have 4 styles each hence usable in professional typesetting: "Arial,
Calibri" and "Segoe UI" are sans-serif fonts, "Cambria" and "Times New Roman"
are serif fonts and "Courier New" is a monospace font. Text in ASCII. The
Velthuis scheme was originally developed in 1991 by Frans Velthuis for use with
his "devnag" DevanƒÅgarƒ´ font, designed for the TeX typesetting system. This
system of representing Pali diacritical marks has been used in some websites
and discussion lists. However, as the Web itself and email software slowly
evolve towards the Unicode encoding standard, this system has become almost not
necessary and obsolete.
