Quran The Quran (  ; ', , literally meaning "the recitation"), also
transliterated Qur'an, Koran, Al-Coran, Coran, Kuran, and Al-Qur'an'", is the
central religious text of Islam, which Muslims believe to be the verbatim word
of God (, "Allah"). It is regarded widely as the finest piece of literature in
the Arabic language. The Quran is composed of verses (Ayat) that make up 114
chapters (suras) of unequal length which are classified either as Meccan () or
Medinan () depending upon the place and time of their claimed revelation.
Muslims believe the Quran to be verbally revealed through angel Jibrīl
(Gabriel) from God to Muhammad gradually over a period of approximately 23
years beginning on 22 December 609 CE, when Muhammad was 40, and concluding in
632 CE, the year of his death. Shortly after Muhammad's death the Quran was
compiled into a single book by order of the first Caliph Abu Bakr and at the
suggestion of his future successor Umar. Hafsa, Muhammad's widow and Caliph
Umar's daughter, was entrusted with that Quranic text after the second Caliph
Umar died. When the third Caliph Uthman began noticing slight differences in
pronunciation of the Quranic Arabic by those whose dialect was not that of the
Quraish, he sought Hafsa's permission to use her text and commissioned a
committee to produce a standard copy of the text of Quran to which added
diacritical marks ensured correct pronunciation, and to be set as the standard
dialect, the Quraish dialect, now known as "Fus'ha" (Modern Standard Arabic)
(see Origin and development of the Quran). Five of these original Qurans
(Mus'haf) were sent to the major Muslim cities of the era, with Uthman keeping
one for his own use in Medina. Any variations to standardized text were
invalidated and ordered to be destroyed, all other versions of the Quran copied
by scribes subsequently were from this codex. This process of formalization is
known as the "Uthmanic recension". The present form of the Quran text is
accepted by most scholars as the original version compiled by Abu Bakr. Muslims
regard the Quran as the main miracle of Muhammad, the proof of his prophethood
and the culmination of a series of divine messages that started with the
messages revealed to Adam, regarded in Islam as the first prophet, and
continued with the "Suhuf Ibrahim" (Scrolls of Abraham), the "Tawrat" (Torah or
Pentateuch) of Moses, the "Zabur" ("Tehillim" or Book of Psalms) of David, and
the "Injil" (Gospel) of Jesus. The Quran assumes familiarity with major
narratives recounted in Jewish and Christian scriptures, summarizing some,
dwelling at length on others and in some cases presenting alternative accounts
and interpretations of events. The Quran describes itself as a book of
guidance, sometimes offering detailed accounts of specific historical events,
and often emphasizing the moral significance of an event over its narrative
sequence. Etymology and meaning. The word ' appears about 70 times in the Quran
itself, assuming various meanings. It is a verbal noun ("Arabic verbal noun")
of the Arabic verb ' (), meaning “he read” or “he recited.” The Syriac
equivalent is ', which refers to “scripture reading” or “lesson”. While
most Western scholars consider the word to be derived from the Syriac, the
majority of Muslim authorities hold the origin of the word is ' itself. In any
case, it had become an Arabic term by Muhammad's lifetime. An important meaning
of the word is the “act of reciting”, as reflected in an early Quranic
passage: "“It is for Us to collect it and to recite it ()”". In other
verses, the word refers to “an individual passage recited Muhammad”. Its
liturgical context is seen in a number of passages, for example: ""So when ""
is recited, listen to it and keep silent"". The word may also assume the
meaning of a codified scripture when mentioned with other scriptures such as
the Torah and Gospel. The term also has closely related synonyms that are
employed throughout the Quran. Each synonym possesses its own distinct meaning,
but its use may converge with that of ' in certain contexts. Such terms include
' (“book”); ' (“sign”); and ' (“scripture”). The latter two terms
also denote units of revelation. In the large majority of contexts, usually
with a definite article ("al-"), the word is referred to as the
“revelation” ("wahy"), that which has been “sent down” ("tanzīl") at
intervals. Other related words are: ', meaning "remembrance," used to refer to
the Quran in the sense of a reminder and warning; and ', meaning “wisdom”,
sometimes referring to the revelation or part of it. The Quran has many other
names. Among those found in the text itself are ' (“discernment” or
“criterion”), "Huda (Islam)" (“the guide”), ' (“the remembrance of
God”), "hikmah" (“the wisdom”), and ' (“the word of God”). Another
term is ' (“the book”), though it is also used in the Arabic language for
other scriptures, such as the Torah and the Gospels. The term "mus'haf"
("written work") is often used to refer to particular Quranic manuscripts but
is also used in the Quran to identify earlier revealed books. History.
Prophetic era. Islamic tradition relates that Muhammad received his first
revelation in the Cave of Hira during one of his isolated retreats to the
mountains. Thereafter, he received revelations over a period of twenty-three
years. According to hadith and Muslim history, after Muhammad emigrated to
Medina and formed an independent Muslim community, he ordered a considerable
number of the "sahabah" to recite the Quran and to learn and teach the laws,
which were revealed daily. Companions who engaged in the recitation of the
Quran were called "Qari". Since most "sahabah" were unable to read or write,
they were ordered to learn from the prisoners-of-war the simple writing of the
time. Thus a group of "sahabah" gradually became literate. As it was initially
spoken, the Quran was recorded on tablets, bones and the wide, flat ends of
date palm fronds. Most chapters were in use amongst early Muslims since they
are mentioned in numerous sayings by both Sunni and Shia sources, relating
Muhammad's use of the Quran as a call to Islam, the making of prayer and the
manner of recitation. However, the Quran did not exist in book form at the time
of Muhammad's death in 632. Sahih Bukhari narrates Muhammad describing the
revelations as, "Sometimes it is (revealed) like the ringing of a bell" and
Aisha reported, "I saw the Prophet being inspired Divinely on a very cold day
and noticed the sweat dropping from his forehead (as the Inspiration was
over)". The Islamic studies scholar Welch states in the "Encyclopaedia of
Islam" that he believes the graphic descriptions of Muhammad's condition at
these moments may be regarded as genuine, because he was severely disturbed
after these revelations. According to Welch, these seizures would have been
seen by those around him as convincing evidence for the superhuman origin of
Muhammad's inspirations. However, Muhammad's critics accused him of being a
possessed man, a soothsayer or a magician since his experiences were similar to
those claimed by such figures well known in ancient Arabia. Welch additionally
states that it remains uncertain whether these experiences occurred before or
after Muhammad's initial claim of prophethood. The Quran states that Muhammad
was "ummi", interpreted as illiterate in Muslim tradition. According to Watt,
the meaning of the Quranic term "ummi" is unscriptured rather than illiterate.
Compiling the Mus'haf. According to Shias, Sufis and scarce Sunni scholars, Ali
compiled a complete version of the Quran "mus'haf" immediately after Muhammad's
death. The order of this "mus'haf" differed from that gathered later during
Uthman's era. Despite this, Ali made no objection or resistance against
standardized "mus'haf", but kept his own book. After seventy reciters were
killed in the Battle of Yamama, the caliph Abu Bakr decided to collect the
different chapters and verses into one volume. Thus, a group of reciters,
including Zayd ibn Thabit, collected the chapters and verses and produced
several hand-written copies of the complete book. In about 650, as Islam
expanded beyond the Arabian peninsula into Persia, the Levant and North Africa,
the third caliph Uthman ibn Affan ordered the preparation of an official,
standardized version, to preserve the sanctity of the text (and perhaps to keep
the Rashidun Empire united, which became known as the Uthman Quran). Five
reciters from amongst the companions produced a unique text from the first
volume, which had been prepared on the orders of Abu Bakr and was kept with
Hafsa bint Umar. The other copies already in the hands of Muslims in other
areas were collected and sent to Medina where, on orders of the Caliph, they
were destroyed by burning or boiling. This remains the authoritative text of
the Quran to this day. The Quran in its present form is generally considered by
academic scholars to record the words spoken by Muhammad because the search for
variants in Western academia has not yielded any differences of great
significance. Historically, controversy over the Quran's content has rarely
become an issue, although debates continue on the subject. Significance in
Islam. Muslims believe the Quran to be the book of divine guidance and
direction for humanity and consider the text in its original Arabic to be the
literal word of God, revealed to Muhammad through the angel Gabriel over a
period of twenty-three years and view the Quran as God's final revelation to
humanity. Wahy in Islamic and Quranic concept means the act of God addressing
an individual, conveying a message for a greater number of recipients. The
process by which the divine message comes to the heart of a messenger of God is
"tanzil" (to send down) or "nuzul" (to come down). As the Quran says, "With the
truth we (God) have sent it down and with the truth it has come down." It
designates positive religion, the letter of the revelation dictated by the
angel to the prophet. It means to cause this revelation to descend from the
higher world. According to hadith, the verses were sent down in special
circumstances known as "asbab al-nuzul". However, in this view God himself is
never the subject of coming down. The Quran frequently asserts in its text that
it is divinely ordained, an assertion that Muslims believe. The Quran – often
referring to its own textual nature and reflecting constantly on its assertion
of divine origin – is the most meta-textual, self-referential religious text.
The Quran refers to a written pre-text that records God's speech even before it
was sent down. The issue of whether the Quran is eternal or created was one of
the crucial controversies among early Muslim theologians. Mu'tazilis believe it
is created while the most widespread varieties of Muslim theologians consider
the Quran to be eternal and uncreated. Sufi philosophers view the question as
artificial or wrongly framed. Muslims maintain the present wording of the
Quranic text corresponds exactly to that revealed to Muhammad himself: as the
words of God, said to be delivered to Muhammad through the angel Gabriel.
Muslims consider the Quran to be a guide, a sign of the prophethood of Muhammad
and the truth of the religion. They argue it is not possible for a human to
produce a book like the Quran, as the Quran itself maintains. Therefore an
Islamic philosopher introduces a prophetology to explain how the divine word
passes into human expression. This leads to a kind of esoteric hermeneutics
that seeks to comprehend the position of the prophet by mediating on the
modality of his relationship not with his own time, but with the eternal source
his message emanates from. This view contrasts with historical critique of
western scholars who attempt to understand the prophet through his
circumstances, education and type of genius. The Basic Law of Saudi Arabia
declares the Quran and sunnah the sole constitutional law of the kingdom.
Uniqueness. Muslims believe that the Quran is different from all other books in
ways that are impossible for any other book to be, such that similar texts
cannot be written by humans. These include both mundane and miraculous claims.
The Quran itself challenges any who disagree with its divine origin to produce
a text of a miraculous nature. Scholars of Islam believe that its poetic form
is unique and of a fashion that cannot be written by humans. They also claim it
contains accurate prophecy and that no other book does. Text. The text of the
Quran consists of 114 chapters of varying lengths, each known as a "sura".
Chapters are classed as Meccan or Medinan, depending on when (before or after
Hijra) the verses were revealed. Chapter titles are derived from a name or
quality discussed in the text, or from the first letters or words of the sura.
Muslims believe that Muhammad, on God's command, gave the chapters their names.
Generally, longer chapters appear earlier in the Quran, while the shorter ones
appear later. The chapter arrangement is thus not connected to the sequence of
revelation. Each "sura" except the ninth starts with the "Bismillah", an Arabic
phrase meaning (“In the name of God, Most Gracious, Most Merciful”). There
are, however, still 114 occurrences of the bismillah in the Quran, due to its
presence in verse 27:30 as the opening of Solomon's letter to the Queen of
Sheba. Each sura is formed from several "ayat" (verses), which originally means
a sign or portent sent by God. The number of verses differ from chapter to
chapter. An individual verse may be just a few letters or several lines. The
verses are unlike the highly refined poetry of the pre-Islamic Arabs in their
content and distinctive rhymes and rhythms, being more akin to the prophetic
utterances marked by inspired discontinuities found in the sacred scriptures of
Judaism and Christianity. The actual number of ayat has been a controversial
issue among Muslim scholars since Islam's inception, some recognizing 6,000,
some 6,204, some 6,219, and some 6,236, although the words in all cases are the
same. The most popular edition of the Quran, which is based on the Kufa school
tradition, contains 6,236 "ayat". There is a crosscutting division into 30
parts of roughly equal division, "ajza", each containing two units called
"ahzab", each of which is divided into four parts ("rub 'al-ahzab"). The Quran
is also divided into seven approximately equal parts, "manazil", for it to be
recited in a week. The Quranic text seems to have no beginning, middle, or end,
its nonlinear structure being akin to a web or net. The textual arrangement is
sometimes considered to have lack of continuity, absence of any chronological
or thematic order, and presence of repetition. Fourteen different Arabic
letters form 14 different sets of “Quranic Initials” (the ""Muqatta'at"",
such as A.L.M. of 2:1) and prefix 29 suras in the Quran. The meaning and
interpretation of these initials is considered unknown to most Muslims.
Content. The Quranic verses contain general exhortations regarding right and
wrong and the nature of revelation. Historical events are related to outline
general moral lessons. Verses pertaining to natural phenomena have been
interpreted by Muslims as an indication of the authenticity of the Quranic
message. Literary structure. The Quran's message is conveyed with various
literary structures and devices. In the original Arabic, the chapters and
verses employ phonetic and thematic structures that assist the audience's
efforts to recall the message of the text. Muslims assert (according to the
Quran itself) that the Quranic content and style is inimitable. Richard
Gottheil and Siegmund Fränkel in the "Jewish Encyclopedia" write that the
oldest portions of the Quran reflect significant excitement in their language,
through short and abrupt sentences and sudden transitions. The Quran
nonetheless carefully maintains the rhymed form, like the oracles. Some later
portions also preserve this form but also in a style where the movement is calm
and the style expository. Michael Sells, citing the work of the critic Norman
O. Brown, acknowledges Brown's observation that the seeming "disorganization"
of Quranic literary expression – its "scattered or fragmented mode of
composition," in Sells's phrase – is in fact a literary device capable of
delivering "profound effects – as if the intensity of the prophetic message
were shattering the vehicle of human language in which it was being
communicated." Sells also addresses the much-discussed "repetitiveness" of the
Quran, seeing this, too, as a literary device. Statistics. According to the
estimates made from the Quranic Arabic Corpus the Quran has such statistics:
Interpretation and meanings. "Tafsir". The Quran has sparked a huge body of
commentary and explication ("tafsir"), aimed at explaining the "meanings of the
Quranic verses, clarifying their import and finding out their significance."
Tafsir is one of the earliest academic activities of Muslims. According to the
Quran, Muhammad was the first person who described the meanings of verses for
early Muslims. Other early exegetes included a few Companions of Muhammad, like
Ali ibn Abi Talib, Abdullah ibn Abbas, Abdullah ibn Umar and Ubayy ibn Kab.
Exegesis in those days was confined to the explanation of literary aspects of
the verse, the background of its revelation and, occasionally, interpretation
of one verse with the help of the other. If the verse was about a historical
event, then sometimes a few traditions (hadith) of Muhammad were narrated to
make its meaning clear. Because the Quran is spoken in classical Arabic, many
of the later converts to Islam (mostly non-Arabs) did not always understand the
Quranic Arabic, they did not catch allusions that were clear to early Muslims
fluent in Arabic and they were concerned with reconciling apparent conflict of
themes in the Quran. Commentators erudite in Arabic explained the allusions,
and perhaps most importantly, explained which Quranic verses had been revealed
early in Muhammad's prophetic career, as being appropriate to the very earliest
Muslim community, and which had been revealed later, canceling out or
"abrogating" ("nasikh") the earlier text ("mansukh"). Other scholars, however,
maintain that no abrogation has taken place in the Qur'an. "Ta'wil". Ja'far
Kashfi defines "ta'wil" as 'to lead back or to bring something back to its
origin or archetype'. It is a science whose pivot is a spiritual direction and
a divine inspiration, while the "tafsir" is the literal exegesis of the letter;
its pivot is the canonical Islamic sciences. Muhammad Husayn Tabatabaei says
that according to the popular explanation among the later exegetes, "ta'wil"
indicates the particular meaning a verse is directed towards. The meaning of
revelation ("tanzil"), as opposed to "ta'wil", is clear in its accordance to
the obvious meaning of the words as they were revealed. But this explanation
has become so widespread that, at present, it has become the primary meaning of
"ta'wil", which originally meant "to return" or "the returning place". In
Tabatabaei's view, what has been rightly called "ta'wil", or hermeneutic
interpretation of the Quran, is not concerned simply with the denotation of
words. Rather, it is concerned with certain truths and realities that transcend
the comprehension of the common run of men; yet it is from these truths and
realities that the principles of doctrine and the practical injunctions of the
Quran issue forth. Interpretation is not the meaning of the verse; rather it
transpires through that meaning – a special sort of transpiration. There is a
spiritual reality, which is the main objective of ordaining a law, or the basic
aim in describing a divine attribute—and there is an actual significance a
Quranic story refers to. Corbin (1993), p.46 According to Tabatabaei, there are
acceptable and unacceptable esoteric interpretations. Acceptable "ta'wil"
refers to the meaning of a verse beyond its literal meaning; rather the
implicit meaning, which ultimately is known only to God and can't be
comprehended directly through human thought alone. The verses in question here
refer to the human qualities of coming, going, sitting, satisfaction, anger,
and sorrow, which are apparently attributed to God. Unacceptable "ta'wil" is
where one "transfers" the apparent meaning of a verse to a different meaning by
means of a proof; this method is not without obvious inconsistencies. Although
this unacceptable "ta'wil" has gained considerable acceptance, it is incorrect
and cannot be applied to the Quranic verses. The correct interpretation is that
reality a verse refers to. It is found in all verses, the decisive and the
ambiguous alike; it is not a sort of a meaning of the word; it is a fact that
is too sublime for words. God has dressed them with words to bring them a bit
nearer to our minds; in this respect they are like proverbs that are used to
create a picture in the mind, and thus help the hearer to clearly grasp the
intended idea. Therefore Sufi spiritual interpretations are usually accepted by
Islamic scholars as authentic, as long as certain conditions are met. In Sufi
history, these interpretations were sometimes considered religious innovations
("bid'ah"), as Salafis believe today. However, "ta'wil" is extremely
controversial even amongst Shia. For example, when Ayatollah Ruhallah Khomeini,
the leader of Islamic revolution, gave some lectures about Sura al-Fatiha in
December 1979 and January 1980, protests forced him to suspend them before he
could continue beyond the first two verses of the surah. Levels of meaning.
Unlike the Salafis and Zahiri, Shias and Sufis as well as some other Muslim
philosophers believe the meaning of the Quran is not restricted to the literal
aspect. For them, it is an essential idea that the Quran also has inward
aspects. Henry Corbin narrates a hadith that goes back to Muhammad: "The Qur'an
possesses an external appearance and a hidden depth, an exoteric meaning and an
esoteric meaning. This esoteric meaning in turn conceals an esoteric meaning
(this depth possesses a depth, after the image of the celestial Spheres, which
are enclosed within each other). So it goes on for seven esoteric meanings
(seven depths of hidden depth)." According to this view, it has also become
evident that the inner meaning of the Quran does not eradicate or invalidate
its outward meaning. Rather, it is like the soul, which gives life to the body.
Corbin considers the Quran to play a part in Islamic philosophy, because
gnosiology itself goes hand in hand with prophetology. Commentaries dealing
with the "zahir" (outward aspects) of the text are called "tafsir", and
hermeneutic and esoteric commentaries dealing with the "batin" are called
"ta'wil" (“interpretation” or “explanation”), which involves taking the
text back to its beginning. Commentators with an esoteric slant believe that
the ultimate meaning of the Quran is known only to God. In contrast, Quranic
literalism, followed by Salafis and Zahiris, is the belief that the Quran
should only be taken at its apparent meaning. Translations. Translation of the
Quran has always been a problematic and difficult issue. Many argue that the
Quranic text cannot be reproduced in another language or form. Furthermore, an
Arabic word may have a range of meanings depending on the context, making an
accurate translation even more difficult. Nevertheless, the Quran has been
translated into most African, Asian and European languages. The first
translator of the Quran was Salman the Persian, who translated sura "Al-Fatiha"
into Persian during the 7th century. The first complete translation of the
Quran was completed in 884 CE in Alwar (Sindh, India now Pakistan) by the
orders of Abdullah bin Umar bin Abdul Aziz on the request of the Hindu Raja
Mehruk. The first complete translation of Quran was into Persian during the
reign of Samanids in the 9th century. Islamic tradition holds that translations
were made for Emperor Negus of Abyssinia and Byzantine Emperor Heraclius, as
both received letters by Muhammad containing verses from the Quran. In early
centuries, the permissibility of translations was not an issue, but whether one
could use translations in prayer. In 1936, translations in 102 languages were
known. In 2010, the "Hürriyet Daily News and Economic Review" reported that
the Quran was presented in 112 languages at the 18th International Quran
Exhibition in Tehran. Robert of Ketton's 1143 translation of the Quran for
Peter the Venerable, "Lex Mahumet pseudoprophete", was the first into a Western
language (Latin). Alexander Ross offered the first English version in 1649,
from the French translation of "L'Alcoran de Mahomet" (1647) by Andre du Ryer.
In 1734, George Sale produced the first scholarly translation of the Quran into
English; another was produced by Richard Bell in 1937, and yet another by
Arthur John Arberry in 1955. All these translators were non-Muslims. There have
been numerous translations by Muslims. The English translators have sometimes
favored archaic English words and constructions over their more modern or
conventional equivalents; for example, two widely read translators, A. Yusuf
Ali and M. Marmaduke Pickthall, use the plural and singular "ye" and "thou"
instead of the more common "you". Literary usage. In addition to and largely
independent of the division into "suras", there are various ways of dividing
the Quran into parts of approximately equal length for convenience in reading,
recitation and memorization. The thirty "ajza" can be used to read through the
entire Quran in a week or a month. Some of these parts are known by names and
these names are the first few words by which the " juz' " starts. A " juz' " is
sometimes further divided into two "ahzab", and each "hizb" subdivided into
four "rub 'al-ahzab". A different structure is provided by the "ruku'at",
semantical units resembling paragraphs and comprising roughly ten "ayat" each.
Some also divide the Quran into seven "manazil" to facilitate complete
recitation in a week. Recitation. One meaning of "Quran" is "recitation".
"Tajwid", an Arabic word for elocution, is a set of rules that governs how the
Quran should be recited and is assessed in terms of how accessible the
recitation is to those intent on concentrating on the words. To perform salat
(prayer), a mandatory obligation in Islam, a Muslim is required to learn at
least some "sura" of the Quran (typically starting with the first one, al-
Fatiha, known as the "seven oft-repeated verses," and then moving on to the
shorter ones at the end). Until one has learned al-Fatiha, a Muslim can only
say phrases like "praise be to God" during the salat. A person whose recital
repertoire encompasses the whole Quran is called a "qari, whereas a memoriser
of the Quran is called a "hafiz" ("fem." "Hafaz") (which translate as "reciter"
or "protector," respectively). Muhammad is regarded as the first "qari since he
was the first to recite it. Recitation ("tilawa" تلاوة) of the Quran is a
fine art in the Muslim world. Schools of recitation. These recitations differ
in the vocalization ("tashkil") of a few words, which in turn gives a
complementary meaning to the word in question according to the rules of Arabic
grammar. For example, the vocalization of a verb can change its active and
passive voice. It can also change its stem formation, implying intensity for
example. Vowels may be elongated or shortened, and glottal stops (hamzas) may
be added or dropped, according to the respective rules of the particular
recitation. For example, the name of archangel Gabriel is pronounced
differently in different recitations: Jibrīl, Jabrīl, Jibra'īl, and
Jibra'il. The more widely used narrations are those of Hafs (حفص عن
عاصم), Warsh (ورش عن نافع), Qaloon (قالون عن نافع) and
Al-Duri according to Abu `Amr (الدوري عن أبي عمرو). Muslims
firmly believe that all canonical recitations were recited by Muhammad himself,
citing the respective isnad chain of narration, and accept them as valid for
worshipping and as a reference for rules of Sharia. The uncanonical recitations
are called "explanatory" for their role in giving a different perspective for a
given verse or "ayah". Today several dozen persons hold the title "Memorizer of
the Ten Recitations." Javed Ahmad Ghamidi also purports that there is only one
recitation of Quran, which is called "Qira'at of Hafss" or in classical
scholarship, it is called "Qira'at al-'ammah". The Quran has also specified
that it was revealed in the language of Muhammad's tribe: the Quraysh. However,
the identification of the recitation of Hafss as the "Qira'at al-'ammah" is
somewhat problematic when that was the recitation of the people of Kufa in
Iraq, and there is better reason to identify the recitation of the reciters of
Madinah as the dominant recitation. The reciter of Madinah was Nafi' and Imam
Malik remarked "The recitation of Nafi' is Sunnah." E. W. Lane,
"Arabic–English Lexicon" Writing and printing. Most Muslims today use printed
editions of the Quran. There are many editions, large and small, elaborate or
plain, expensive or inexpensive. Bilingual forms with the Arabic on one side
and a gloss into a more familiar language on the other are very popular. Qurans
are produced in many different sizes. Most are of a reasonable book size, but
there exist extremely large Qurans (usually for display purposes) and very
small Qurans (sometimes given as gifts). An Illuminated Quran from the library
of Tippoo Ṣāḥib was presented to the University of Cambridge by the Court
of Directors of the East India Company in 1806. The volume has two decorated
medallions and two magnificent headpieces containing "Al-Fatiha". The text of
the Quran is followed by some prayers, and a Fal-nāmah. The manuscript is not
dated, but dates of ownership of 1028 A.H./1618 C.E. and 1066 A.H./1655 C.E.
occur at the beginning. Before printing was widely adopted in the 19th century,
the Quran was transmitted in manuscript books made by copyists and
calligraphers. Short extracts from the Quran were printed in the medieval
period from carved wooden blocks, one block per page; a technique already
widely used in China. However there are no records of complete Qurans produced
in this way, which would have involved a very large investment. Mass-produced
less expensive versions of the Quran were produced from the 19th century by
lithography, which allowed reproduction of the fine calligraphy of hand-made
versions. The oldest surviving Quran printed with movable type was produced in
Venice in 1537/1538. It seems to have been prepared for sale in the Ottoman
empire, where all movable type printing using Arabic characters had been
forbidden in 1485. This decree was reversed in 1588, but there remained strong
resistance to adopting movable type printing for any subjects, let alone the
Quran, until the late 19th century. This seems to have been partly from
opposition by the large profession of copyists, and for aesthetic reasons, and
fear of mistakes in the text. Catherine the Great of Russia sponsored a
printing of the Quran in 1787. This was followed by editions from Kazan (1828),
Persia (1833) and Istanbul (1877). It is extremely difficult to render the full
Quran, with all the points, in computer code, such as Unicode. The Internet
Sacred Text Archive makes computer files of the Quran freely available both as
images and in a temporary Unicode version. Various designers and software firms
have attempted to develop computer fonts that can adequately render the Quran.
Since Muslim tradition felt that directly portraying sacred figures and events
might lead to idolatry, it was considered wrong to decorate the Quran with
pictures (as was often done for Christian texts, for example). Muslims instead
lavished love and care upon the sacred text itself. Arabic is written in many
scripts, some of which are complex and beautiful. Arabic calligraphy is a
highly honored art, much like Chinese calligraphy. Muslims also decorated their
Qurans with abstract figures (arabesques), colored inks, and gold leaf. Pages
from some of these antique Qurans are displayed throughout this article.
Relationship with other literature. The Bible. The Quran speaks well of the
relationship it has with former books (the Torah and the Gospel) and attributes
their similarities to their unique origin and saying all of them have been
revealed by the one God. According to Sahih Bukhari, the Quran was recited
among Levantines and Iraqis, and discussed by Christians and Jews before it was
standardized. Its language was similar to the Syriac language. The Quran
recounts stories of many of the people and events recounted in Jewish and
Christian sacred books (Tanakh, Bible) and devotional literature (Apocrypha,
Midrash), although it differs in many details. Adam, Enoch, Noah, Eber, Shelah,
Abraham, Lot, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Job, Jethro, David, Solomon,
Elijah, Elisha, Jonah, Aaron, Moses, Zechariah, John the Baptist, and Jesus are
mentioned in the Quran as prophets of God (see Prophets of Islam). In fact,
Moses is mentioned more in the Quran than any other individual. Jesus is
mentioned more often in the Quran than Muhammad while Mary is mentioned in the
Quran more than the New Testament. Muslims believe the common elements or
resemblances between the Bible and other Jewish and Christian writings and
Islamic dispensations is due to their common divine source, and that the
original Christian or Jewish texts were authentic divine revelations given to
prophets. Similarities with Christian apocrypha. The Quran has been noted to
have certain narratives similarities to the Diatessaron, Protoevangelium of
James, Infancy Gospel of Thomas, Gospel of Pseudo-Matthew and the Arabic
Infancy Gospel. One scholar has suggested that the Diatessaron, as a gospel
harmony, may have led to the conception that the Christian Gospel is one text.
Arab writing. After the Quran, and the general rise of Islam, the Arabic
alphabet developed rapidly into an art form. Although Arabic, as a language and
a literary tradition, was quite well developed by the time of Muhammad's
prophetic activity, it was only after the emergence of Islam, with its founding
scripture in Arabic, that the language reached its utmost capacity of
expression, and the literature its highest point of complexity and
sophistication. Indeed, it probably is no exaggeration to say that the Quran
was one of the most conspicuous forces in the making of classical and post-
classical Arabic literature. The main areas in which the Qur'an exerted
noticeable influence on Arabic literature are diction and themes; other areas
are related to the literary aspects of the Qur'an particularly oaths (q.v.),
metaphors, motifs, and symbols. As far as diction is concerned, one could say
that Qur'anic words, idioms, and expressions, especially "loaded" and formulaic
phrases, appear in practically all genres of literature and in such abundance
that it is simply impossible to compile a full record of them. For not only did
the Qur'an create an entirely new linguistic corpus to express its message, it
also endowed old, pre-Islamic words with new meanings and it is these meanings
that took root in the language and subsequently in the literature... Culture.
Respect for the written text of the Quran is an important element of religious
faith by many Muslims. They believe that intentionally insulting the Quran is a
form of blasphemy. Many Muslims memorize at least some portion of the Quran in
the original Arabic, usually at least the verses needed to perform the contact
prayers (solat). Those who have memorized the entire Quran earn the right to
the title of "Hafiz". The text of the Quran has become readily accessible over
the internet, in Arabic as well as numerous translations in other languages. It
can be downloaded and searched both word-by-word and with Boolean algebra.
Photos of ancient manuscripts and illustrations of Quranic art can be
witnessed. However, there are still limits to searching the Arabic text of the
Quran. Treatment and disposal of the book. Most Muslims treat paper copies of
the Quran with reverence. Based on tradition and a literal interpretation of
sura 56:77–79: ""That this is indeed a Quran Most Honourable, In a Book well-
guarded, Which none shall touch but those who are clean"", many scholars
believe that a Muslim must perform a ritual cleansing with water (wudu) before
touching a copy of the Quran, or "mus'haf", although this view is not
universal. Defiling or dismembering copies of the Quran is considered Quran
desecration. Pulping, recycling, or otherwise discarding worn-out copies of the
text is forbidden. Worn-out, torn, or errant (for example, pages out of order)
Qurans are left free to flow in a river, kept somewhere safe, burned, or buried
in a remote location.
