Rabbi In Judaism, a rabbi () is a teacher of Torah. This title derives from the
Hebrew word ' , meaning "My Master" (irregular plural ◊®◊ë◊ ◊ô◊ù ' ), which is
the way a student would address a master of Torah. The word "master" ◊®◊ë ""
literally means "great one". The basic form of the rabbi developed in the
Pharisaic and Talmudic era, when learned teachers assembled to codify Judaism's
written and oral laws. In more recent centuries, the duties of the rabbi became
increasingly influenced by the duties of the Protestant Christian minister,
hence the title "pulpit rabbis", and in 19th century Germany and the United
States rabbinic activities including sermons, pastoral counseling, and
representing the community to the outside, all increased in importance. Within
the various Jewish denominations there are different requirements for rabbinic
ordination, and differences in opinion regarding who is to be recognized as a
rabbi. All types of Judaism except for Orthodox Judaism and some conservative
strains ordain women and lesbian and gay people as rabbis and cantors.
Etymology. The word "rabbi" derives from the Semitic root R-B-B, in Hebrew
script "rav", which in biblical Aramaic means ‚Äògreat‚Äô in many senses,
including "revered", but appears primarily as a prefix in construct forms.
Although the usage "rabbim" "many" (as 1 Kings 18:25, ◊î÷∏◊®÷∑◊ë÷¥÷º◊ô◊ù) "the
majority, the multitude" occurs for the assembly of the community in the Dead
Sea scrolls there is no evidence to support an association with the later title
"Rabbi." The root is cognate to Arabic ÿ±ÿ®Ÿë "rabb", meaning "lord" (generally
used when talking about God, but also about temporal lords). As a sign of great
respect, some great rabbis are simply called "The Rav". Rabbi is not an
occupation found in the Hebrew Bible, and ancient generations did not employ
related titles such as "Rabban", "Ribbi", or "Rab" to describe either the
Babylonian sages or the sages in Israel. The titles "Rabban" and "Rabbi" are
first mentioned in the Mishnah (c. 200 CE). The term was first used for Rabban
Gamaliel the elder, Rabban Simeon his son, and Rabban Johanan ben Zakkai, all
of whom were patriarchs or presidents of the Sanhedrin. The title "Rabbi"
occurs (in Greek transliteration ·ø•Œ±Œ≤Œ≤ŒØ "rhabbi") in the books of Matthew,
Mark and John in the New Testament, where it is used in reference to "Scribes
and Pharisees" as well as to Jesus. Pronunciation. Sephardic and Yemenite Jews
pronounce this word "ribbƒ´" ; the modern Israeli pronunciation "rabi" is
derived from an 18th century innovation in Ashkenazic prayer books, although
this vocalization is also found in some ancient sources. Other variants are
"r…ôvƒ´" and, in Yiddish, "rebb…ô". The word could be compared to the Syriac
word "rabi". In ancient Hebrew, "rabbi" was a proper term of address while
speaking to a superior, in the second person, similar to a vocative case. While
speaking about a superior, in the third person one could say "ha-rav" ("the
Master") or "rabbo" ("his Master"). Later, the term evolved into a formal title
for members of the Patriarchate. Thus, the title gained an irregular plural
form: "rabbanim" ("rabbis"), and not "rabbay" ("my Masters"). Honor. According
to the Talmud, it is a mitzvah to stand up for a Rabbi or Torah scholar, and
one should also stand for their spouses and address them with respect. Kohanim
are required to honor Rabbis and Torah scholars like everybody else. However,
if one is more learned than the Rabbi or the scholar there is no need to stand.
In many places today and throughout history, Rabbis and Torah scholars had and
still have the power to place individuals who insulted them in excommunication.
Historical overview. The governments of the kingdoms of Israel and Judah were
based on a system of Jewish kings, prophets, the legal authority of the court
of the Sanhedrin and the ritual authority of priesthood. Members of the
Sanhedrin had to receive their "semicha" ("ordination") derived in an
uninterrupted line of transmission from Moses, yet rather than being referred
to as "rabbis" they were more frequently called judges ("dayanim") akin to the
"Shoftim" or "Judges" as in the Book of Judges. All of the above personalities
would have been expected to be steeped in the wisdom of the Torah and the
commandments, which would have made them "rabbis" in the modern sense of the
word. This is illustrated by a two-thousand-year-old teaching in the Mishnah,
"Ethics of the Fathers" ("Pirkei Avot"), which observed about King David, With
the destruction of the two Temples in Jerusalem, the end of the Jewish
monarchy, and the decline of the dual institutions of prophets and the
priesthood, the focus of scholarly and spiritual leadership within the Jewish
people shifted to the sages of the Men of the Great Assembly ("Anshe Knesset
HaGedolah"). This assembly was composed of the earliest group of "rabbis" in
the more modern sense of the word, in large part because they began the
formulation and explication of what became known as Judaism's "Oral Law"
("Torah SheBe'al Peh"). This was eventually encoded and codified within the
Mishnah and Talmud and subsequent rabbinical scholarship, leading to what is
known as Rabbinic Judaism. Sages. The title "Rabbi" was borne by the sages of
ancient Israel, who were ordained by the Sanhedrin in accordance with the
custom handed down by the elders. They were titled "Ribbi" and received
authority to judge penal cases. "Rab" was the title of the Babylonian sages who
taught in the Babylonian academies. After the suppression of the Patriarchate
and Sanhedrin by Theodosius II in 425, there was no more formal ordination in
the strict sense. A recognised scholar could be called "Rab" or "Hacham", like
the Babylonian sages. The transmission of learning from master to disciple
remained of tremendous importance, but there was no formal rabbinic
qualification as such. Middle Ages. Maimonides rules that every congregation is
obliged to appoint a preacher and scholar to admonish the community and teach
Torah, and the social institution he describes is the germ of the modern
congregational rabbinate. In the fifteenth century in Central Europe, the
custom grew up of licensing scholars with a diploma entitling them to be called
"Mori" (my teacher). At the time this was objected to as "hukkat ha-goy"
(imitating the ways of the Gentiles), as it was felt to resemble the conferring
of doctorates in Christian universities. However the system spread, and it is
this diploma that is referred to as "semicha" (ordination) at the present day.
18th‚Äì19th centuries. In 19th-century Germany and the United States, the
duties of the rabbi became increasingly influenced by the duties of the
Protestant Christian minister, hence the title "pulpit rabbis". Sermons,
pastoral counseling, representing the community to the outside, all increased
in importance. Non-Orthodox rabbis, on a day-to-day business basis, now spend
more time on these traditionally non-rabbinic functions than they do teaching,
or answering questions on Jewish law and philosophy. Within the Modern Orthodox
community, rabbis still mainly deal with teaching and questions of Jewish law,
but are increasingly dealing with these same pastoral functions. Orthodox
Judaism's National Council of Young Israel and Modern Orthodox Judaism's
Rabbinical Council of America have set up supplemental pastoral training
programs for their rabbis. Traditionally, rabbis have never been an
intermediary between God and humans. This idea was traditionally considered
outside the bounds of Jewish theology. Unlike spiritual leaders in many other
faiths, they are not considered to be imbued with special powers or abilities.
Ironically, the secular system in most states requires that a Jewish wedding be
performed by an ordained rabbi in order to be legally recognized, even though
there is no such requirement in Jewish law. In other words, the secular system
treats rabbis as the Jewish equivalent to Catholic Priests or Protestant
Ministers, although they are not religious equivalents. Authority. Acceptance
of rabbinic credentials involves both issues of practicality and principle. As
a practical matter, communities and individuals typically tend to follow the
authority of the rabbi they have chosen as their leader (called by some as the
mara d'atra) on issues of Jewish law. They may recognize that other rabbis have
the same authority elsewhere, but for decisions and opinions important to them
they will work through their own rabbi. The same pattern is true within broader
communities, ranging from Hasidic communities to rabbinical or congregational
organizations: there will be a formal or "de facto" structure of rabbinic
authority that is responsible for the members of the community. Ordination.
Traditionally, a person obtains "semicha" ("rabbinic ordination") after the
completion of an arduous learning program in the codes of Jewish law and
responsa. The most general form of "semicha" is "Yore yore" ("he shall teach").
Most Rabbis hold this qualification; they are sometimes called a "moreh
hora'ah" ("a teacher of rulings"). A more advanced form of "semicha" is "Yadin
yadin" ("he shall judge"). This enables the recipient to adjudicate cases of
monetary law, amongst other responsibilities. Although the recipient can now be
formally addressed as a "dayan" ("judge"), the vast majority retain the title
"rabbi." Only a small percentage of rabbis earn this ordination. Although not
strictly necessary, many Orthodox rabbis hold that a "beth din" (court of
Jewish law) should be made up of "dayanim". Orthodox Judaism. An Orthodox
semicha requires the successful completion of a rigorous program encompassing
Jewish law and responsa in keeping with longstanding tradition. Orthodox
rabbinical students work to gain knowledge in Talmud, Rishonim and Acharonim
(early and late medieval commentators) and Jewish law. They study sections of
the Shulchan Aruch (codified Jewish law) and its main commentaries that pertain
to daily-life questions (such as the laws of keeping kosher, Shabbat, and the
laws of family purity). Orthodox rabbis typically study at yeshivas, which are
dedicated religious schools. Modern Orthodox rabbinical students, such as those
at Yeshiva University, study some elements of modern theology or philosophy, as
well as the classical rabbinic works on such subjects. The entrance
requirements for an Orthodox yeshiva include a strong background within Jewish
law, liturgy, Talmudic study, and attendant languages (e.g., Hebrew, Aramaic
and in some cases Yiddish). Since rabbinical studies typically flow from other
yeshiva studies, those who seek a semicha are typically not required to have
completed a university education. There are some exceptions to this rule,
including Yeshiva University, which requires all rabbinical students to
complete an undergraduate degree before entering the program and a Masters or
equivalent before ordination. Yeshivat Chovevei Torah Rabbinical School also
requires an undergraduate degree before entering the program. On March 22,
2009, the Hebrew Institute of Riverdale, an Orthodox Synagogue, held a formal
ceremony officially giving Ms. Sara Hurwitz the title MaHaRa‚ÄùT ‚Äì Manhigah
Halakhtit Ruchanit Toranit. "This title fully reflects everything that
religious leadership is about and welcomes Sara as a full member of the clergy.
Sara is a manhigah halakhtit, a halakhic leader with the authority to answer
questions of Jewish law asked by her congregants and others. Sara is a manhigah
ruchanit, a spiritual leader with the qualifications to offer pastoral care and
spiritual guidance, and the right to lead lifecycle ceremonies within the
framework of halakha. Sara is a manhigah Toranit, with the knowledge to teach
Torah, the written as well as the oral law in every aspect of Jewish learning,"
said Rabbi Avi Weiss, Rabbi of the Hebrew Institute of Riverdale in NY. He
added that Hurwitz was, "‚ÄúMaHaRa‚ÄùT ‚Äì Manhigah Halakhtit Ruchanit Toranit
‚Äì a halakhic, spiritual and Torah leader; A full communal, congregational,
religious leader, a full member of the clergy, leading with the unique voice of
a woman." However, some Orthodox leaders, such as the Rabbinical Council of
America, opposed this move and said it was not in keeping with Orthodoxy; in
any case, Hurwitz was not given the title "rabbi." Hurwitz herself said, "In
fact, Halakha does not support the eradication of women from public leadership
and ritual life." Haredi Judaism. While some Haredi (including Hasidic)
yeshivas (also known as "Talmudical/Rabbinical schools or academies") do grant
official "semicha" ("ordination") to many students wishing to become rabbis,
most of the students within the yeshivas engage in learning Torah or Talmud
without the goal of becoming rabbis or holding any official positions. The
curriculum for obtaining "semicha" ("ordination") as rabbis for Haredi and
Hasidic scholars is the same as described above for all Orthodox students
wishing to obtain the official title of "Rabbi" and to be recognized as such.
Within the Hasidic world, the positions of spiritual leadership are
dynastically transmitted within established families, usually from fathers to
sons, while a small number of students obtain official ordination to become
dayanim ("judges") on religious courts, poskim ("decisors" of Jewish law), as
well as teachers in the Hasidic schools. The same is true for the non-Hasidic
Litvish yeshivas that are controlled by dynastically transmitted rosh yeshivas
and the majority of students will not become rabbis, even after many years of
post-graduate kollel study. Some yeshivas, such as (in New York) and (in
Baltimore, Maryland), may encourage their students to obtain "semicha" and
mostly serve as rabbis who teach in other yeshivas or Hebrew day schools. Other
yeshivas, such as Yeshiva Chaim Berlin (Brooklyn, New York) or the Mirrer
Yeshiva (in Brooklyn and Jerusalem), do not have an official "semicha/
rabbinical program" to train rabbis, but provide semicha on an "as needs" basis
if and when one of their senior students is offered a rabbinical position but
only with the approval of their "rosh yeshivas". Consequently, within the world
of Haredi Judaism, the English word and title of "Rabbi" for "anyone" is often
scorned and derided, because in their view the once-lofty title of "Rabbi" has
been debased in modern times. This is one reason that Haredim will often prefer
using Hebrew names for rabbinic titles based on older traditions, such as:
"Rav" (denoting "rabbi"), "HaRav" ("the [great rabbi"), "Moreinu HaRav" ("our
teacher the rabbi"), "Moreinu" ("our teacher"), "Moreinu VeRabeinu HaRav" ("our
teacher and our rabbi/master the [great rabbi"), "Moreinu VeRabeinu" ("our
teacher and our rabbi/master"), "Rosh yeshiva" ("head [of the yeshiva"), "Rosh
HaYeshiva" ("head the yeshiva"), "Mashgiach" (for Mashgiach ruchani)
("spiritual supervsor/guide"), "Mora DeAsra" ("teacher/decisor" [of the/this
place"), "HaGaon" ("the genius"), "Rebbe" ("[our/my] rabbi"), "HaTzadik" ("the
righteous/saintly"), "ADMOR" ("Adoneinu Moreinu VeRabeinu") ("our master, our
teacher and our rabbi/master") or often just plain "Reb" which is a shortened
form of "rebbe" that can be used by, or applied to, any married Jewish male as
the situation applies. Note: A "rebbetzin" (a Yiddish usage common among
Ashkenazim) or a "rabbanit" (in Hebrew and used among Sephardim) is the
official "title" used for, or by, the wife of any Orthodox, Haredi, or Hasidic
rabbi. "Rebbetzin" may also be used as the equivalent of "Reb" and is sometimes
abbreviated as such as well. Conservative and Masorti Judaism. Conservative
Judaism confers rabbinic ordination after the completion of a rigorous program
in the codes of Jewish law and responsa in keeping with Jewish tradition.
Additional requirements include the study of: the Hebrew Bible, Mishna and
Talmud, the Midrash literature, Jewish ethics and lore, the codes of Jewish
law, the Conservative responsa literature, both traditional and modern Jewish
works on theology and philosophy. Conservative Judaism has less stringent study
requirements for Talmud and responsa study compared to Orthodoxy but adds
following subjects as requirements for rabbinic ordination: pastoral care and
psychology, the historical development of Judaism; and academic biblical
criticism. Entrance requirements to a Conservative rabbinical study include a
strong background within Jewish law and liturgy, knowledge of Hebrew,
familiarity with rabbinic literature, Talmud, etc., and the completion of an
undergraduate university degree. Rabbinical students usually earn a secular
degree (e.g., Master of Hebrew Letters) upon graduation. Ordination is granted
at the Ziegler School of Rabbinic Studies in Los Angeles, the Rabbinical School
of the Jewish Theological Seminary of America in New York, the Schechter
Institute of Jewish Studies in Jerusalem, the Jewish Theological Seminary ‚Äì
University of Jewish Studies of Budapest and the Seminario Rabinico
Latinoamericano in Buenos Aires (Argentina). Most Conservative seminaries train
women and gay and lesbian people as rabbis and cantors. Reform Judaism. Reform
Judaism is a liberal form of Judaism. Its rabbinic studies are mandated in
pastoral care, the historical development of Judaism, and academic biblical
criticism, in addition to the traditional study of rabbinic texts. Rabbinic
students also are required to gain practical rabbinic experience by working at
a congregation. All Reform seminaries train women and lesbian and gay people as
rabbis and cantors. The seminary of Reform Judaism in the United States is
Hebrew Union College-Jewish Institute of Religion. It has campuses in
Cincinnati, New York City, Los Angeles, and in Jerusalem. In the United Kingdom
the Reform and Liberal movements maintain Leo Baeck College for the training of
rabbis, and in Germany the progressive Abraham Geiger College trains Europeans
for the rabbinate. Seminaries unaffiliated with main denominations. There are
several possibilities for receiving rabbinic ordination in addition to
seminaries maintained by the large Jewish denominations. These include
seminaries maintained by smaller denominational movements, and
nondenominational (also called "transdenominational" or "postdenominational")
Jewish seminaries. Interdenominational recognition. Historically and until the
present, recognition of a rabbi relates to a community's perception of the
rabbi's competence to interpret Jewish law and act as a teacher on central
matters within Judaism. More broadly speaking, it is also an issue of being a
worthy successor to a sacred legacy. As a result, there have always been
greater or lesser disputes about the legitimacy and authority of rabbis.
Historical examples include Samaritans and Karaites. The divisions between the
various religious branches within Judaism may have their most pronounced
manifestation on whether rabbis from one movement recognize the legitimacy or
the authority of rabbis in another. As a general rule within Orthodoxy and
among some in the Conservative movement, rabbis are reluctant to accept the
authority of other rabbis whose Halakhic standards are not as strict as their
own. In some cases, this leads to an outright rejection of even the legitimacy
of other rabbis; in others, the more lenient rabbi may be recognized as a
spiritual leader of a particular community but may not be accepted as a
credible authority on Jewish law. These debates cause great problems for
recognition of Jewish marriages, conversions, and other life decisions that are
touched by Jewish law. Orthodox rabbis do not recognize conversions by non-
Orthodox rabbis. Conservative rabbis recognise all conversions done according
to halakha. Finally, the North American Reform and Reconstructionst movemements
recognize patrilineality, under certain circumstances, as a valid claim towards
Judaism, whereas Conservative and Orthodox maintain the position expressed in
the Talmud and Codes that one can be a Jew only through matrilineality (born of
a Jewish mother) or through conversion to Judaism. Women. With some rare
exceptions (see below), women historically have generally not served as rabbis
until the modern era. Today all types of Judaism except for Orthodox Judaism
allow and do have female rabbis. In Orthodox Judaism, women cannot become
rabbis, although there is no prohibition against women learning halakhah that
pertains to them, nor is it any more problematic for a woman to rule on such
issues than it is for any lay person to do so. Rather, the issue lies in the
rabbi's position of communal authority. Following the ruling of the talmud, the
decisors of Jewish law held that women were not allowed to serve in positions
of authority over a community, such as judges or kings. The position of
official rabbi of a community, "mara de'atra" ("master of the place"), has
generally been treated in the responsa as such a position. This ruling is still
followed in traditional and orthodox circles but has been relaxed in branches
like Conservative and Reform Judaism that are less strict in their adherence to
traditional Jewish law. There were some rare cases of women acting as rabbis in
earlier centuries, such as the 17th century Asenath Barzani, who acted as a
rabbi among Kurdish Jews. Hannah Rachel Verbermacher, also known as the Maiden
of Ludmir, was a 19th century Hasidic rebbe, the only female rebbe in the
history of Hasidism. The first formally ordained female rabbi was Regina Jonas,
ordained in Germany in 1935. Since 1972, when Sally Priesand became the first
female rabbi in Reform Judaism, Reform Judaism's Hebrew Union College has
ordained 552 women rabbis (as of 2008). Sandy Eisenberg Sasso became the first
female rabbi in Reconstructionist Judaism in 1974 (one of 110 by 2006); and Amy
Eilberg became the first female rabbi in Conservative Judaism in 1985 (one of
177 by 2006). Lynn Gottlieb became the first female rabbi in Jewish Renewal in
1981, and Tamara Kolton became the very first rabbi (and therefore, since she
was female, the first female rabbi) in Humanistic Judaism in 1999. In 2009
Alysa Stanton became the world's first African-American female rabbi. In
Europe, Leo Baeck College had ordained 30 female rabbis by 2006 (out of 158
ordinations in total since 1956), starting with Jackie Tabick in 1975. The
consensus of the Orthodox Jewish community has been that women are ineligible
to becoming rabbis; the growing calls for Orthodox yeshivas to admit women as
rabbinical students have resulted in widespread opposition among the Orthodox
rabbinate. Rabbi Norman Lamm, one of the leaders of Modern Orthodoxy and Rosh
Yeshiva of Yeshiva University's Rabbi Isaac Elchanan Theological Seminary,
opposes giving semicha to women. "It shakes the boundaries of tradition, and I
would never allow it." (Helmreich, 1997) Writing in an article in the "Jewish
Observer", Moshe Y'chiail Friedman states that Orthodox Judaism prohibits women
from being given semicha and serving as rabbis. He holds that the trend towards
this goal is driven by sociology, and not halakha ("Jewish law"). In his words,
the idea is a "quirky fad." No Orthodox rabbinical association (e.g. Agudath
Yisrael, Rabbinical Council of America) has allowed women to be ordained using
the term "rabbi". However, in the last twenty years Orthodox Judaism has begun
to develop clergy-like roles for women as halakhic court advisors and
congregational advisors. Some Orthodox Jewish women now serve in Orthodox
Jewish congregations in roles that previously were reserved for males,
specifically rabbis. The grammatically correct Hebrew feminine parallel to the
masculine title rabbi is "rabbanit" (◊®◊ë◊ ◊ô◊™) sometimes used for women in
this role. Sara Hurwitz, considered by some the first Orthodox woman rabbi,
following correct Hebrew feminized grammar of rav (◊®◊ë), used the title
"rabba" (◊®◊ë◊î). Other women in Jewish leadership, like Rachel Kohl Finegold
and Lynn Kaye, do not have official titles, but function as de facto assistant
rabbis. In Israel, the Shalom Hartman Institute, founded by Orthodox Rabbi
David Hartman, opened a program in 2009 that will grant semicha to women and
men of all Jewish denominations, including Orthodox Judaism, although the
students are meant to "assume the role of 'rabbi-educators' ‚Äì not pulpit
rabbis- in North American community day schools. Rabbi Aryeh Strikovski
(Machanaim Yeshiva and Pardes Institute) worked in the 1990s with Rabbi Avraham
Shapira (then a co-Chief rabbi of Israel) to initiate the program for training
Orthodox women as halakhic "Toanot" ("advocates") in rabbinic courts. They have
since trained nearly seventy women in Israel. Strikovski states that "The
knowledge one requires to become a court advocate is more than a regular
ordination, and now to pass certification is much more difficult than to get
ordination." Furthermore, Rav Strikovsky granted ordination to Haviva Ner-David
(who is American) in 2006, although she has not been able to find a job as a
rabbi. In Israel a growing number of Orthodox women are being trained as
"yoatzot halakhah". Rahel Berkovits, an Orthodox Talmud teacher at Jerusalem's
Pardes Institute of Jewish Studies, states that as a result of such changes in
Haredi and Modern Orthodox Judaism, "Orthodox women found and oversee prayer
communities, argue cases in rabbinic courts, advise on halachic issues, and
dominate in social work activities that are all very associated with the role a
rabbi performs, even though these women do not have the official title of
rabbi." The use of Toanot is not restricted to any one segment of Orthodoxy; In
Israel they have worked with Haredi and Modern Orthodox Jews. Orthodox women
may study the laws of family purity at the same level of detail that Orthodox
males do at Nishmat, the Jerusalem Center for Advanced Jewish Study for Women.
The purpose is for them to be able to act as halakhic advisors for other women,
a role that traditionally was limited to male rabbis. This course of study is
overseen by Rabbi Yaakov Varhaftig.
