Rabbinic literature Rabbinic literature, in its broadest sense, can mean the
entire spectrum of rabbinic writings throughout Jewish history. However, the
term often refers specifically to literature from the Talmudic era, as opposed
to medieval and modern rabbinic writing, and thus corresponds with the Hebrew
term Sifrut Hazal (ספרות חז"ל; "Literature our sages blessed memory,"
where "Hazal" normally refers "only" to the sages of the Talmudic era). This
more specific sense of "Rabbinic literature"—referring to the Talmudim,
Midrash (Hebrew: מדרש);, and related writings, but hardly ever to later
texts—is how the term is generally intended when used in contemporary
academic writing. On the other hand, the terms meforshim and parshanim
(commentaries/commentators) almost always refer to later, post-Talmudic writers
of Rabbinic glosses on Biblical and Talmudic texts. This article discusses
rabbinic literature in both senses. It begins with the classic rabbinic
literature of the Talmudic era ("Sifrut Hazal"), and then adds a broad survey
of rabbinic writing from later periods. The Midrash. Midrash (pl. "Midrashim")
is a Hebrew word referring to a method of reading details into, or out of, a
Biblical text. The term "midrash" also can refer to a compilation of Midrashic
teachings, in the form of legal, exegetical, homiletical, or narrative writing,
often configured as a commentary on the Bible or Mishnah. There are a large
number of "classical" Midrashic works spanning a period from Mishnaic to Geonic
times, often showing evidence of having been worked and reworked from earlier
materials, and frequently coming to us in multiple variants. A compact list of
these works on is given below; a more thorough annotated list can be found
under Midrash. The timeline below must be approximate because many of these
works were composed over a long span of time, borrowing and collating material
from earlier versions; their histories are therefore somewhat uncertain and the
subject of scholarly debate. In the table, "n.e." designates that the work in
question is not extant except in secondary references. Later works by
historical period. Works of the "Rishonim" (the "early" rabbinical
commentators). The Rishonim are the rabbis of the early medieval period (1000 -
1550) Works of the "Acharonim" (the "later" rabbinical commentators). The
Acharonim are the rabbis from 1550 to the present day. Meforshim. "Meforshim"
is a Hebrew word meaning "(classical rabbinical) commentators" (or roughly
meaning "exegetes"), and is used as a substitute for the correct word perushim
which means "commentaries". In Judaism this term refers to commentaries on the
Torah (five books of Moses), Tanakh, the Mishnah, the Talmud, responsa, even
the siddur (Jewish prayerbook), and more. Classic Torah and Talmud
commentaries. Classical Talmudic commentaries were written by Rashi. After
Rashi the Tosafot were written, which was an omnibus commentary on the Talmud
by the disciples and descendants of Rashi; this commentary was based on
discussions done in the rabbinic academies of Germany and France.
