Raëlism Raëlism, or the Raëlian Movement, is a UFO religion that was founded
in 1974 by Claude Vorilhon, now known as Raël. An adherent of Raelism is a
Raelian. It is numerically the world's largest UFO religion. The Raëlian
Movement teaches that life on Earth was scientifically created by a species of
extraterrestrials, which they call the Elohim. Members of this species appeared
human and when having personal contacts with the descendants of the humans they
made, they previously misinformed (on purpose) early humanity that they were
angels, cherubim or gods. Raëlians believe messengers, or prophets, of the
Elohim include Buddha, Jesus, and others who informed humans of each era. The
founder of Raëlism, members claim, received the final message of the Elohim
and that its purpose is to inform the world about Elohim and that if humans
become aware and peaceful enough, they wish to be welcomed by them. The
Raëlian Church has a quasi-clerical structure of seven levels. Joining the
movement requires an official apostasy from other religions. Raelian ethics
include striving for world peace, sharing, democracy and non-violence.
Sexuality is also an important part of the Raëlian doctrine. The Raëlian
Church has attracted some of its priests and bishops from other religions
despite having liberal views of sexuality. Raël founded Clonaid (originally
Valiant Venture Ltd Corporation) in 1997, but then handed it over to a Raëlian
bishop, Brigitte Boisselier in 2000. In 2002 the company claimed that an
American woman underwent a standard cloning procedure that led to the birth of
a daughter, Eve (b. 26 December 2002). Although few believe the claim, it
nonetheless attracted national authorities, mainstream media, and young adults
to look further into the Raëlians' cult status. The Raëlians frequently use
the swastika as a symbol of peace, which halted Raëlian requests for territory
in Israel, and later Lebanon, for establishing an embassy for
extraterrestrials. The religion also uses the swastika embedded on the Star of
David. Starting around 1991, this symbol was often replaced by a variant star
and swirl symbol as a public relations move, particularly toward Israel.
However, the Raelians have readopted the original version as their official
symbol. History. The beginnings of Raëlism are rooted in the claims of a
former French automobile journalist and race car driver Claude Vorilhon. In his
books "The Book Which Tells the Truth" (1974) and "Extraterrestrials Took Me to
their Planet" (1975), Vorilhon alleges that he had alien encounters with beings
who gave him knowledge of the origins of all major religions. The movement
traces its beginnings to a conference in Paris, France of two thousand people
in 1974. From there, the MADECH organization was born. The name MADECH is a
double acronym in the French language. The first stands for "Movement for the
welcoming of the Elohim, creators of humanity" "(Mouvement pour l‘accueil des
Elohim, créateurs de l'humanité)" while the second stands for "Moses preceded
Elijah and the Christ" "(Moise a devancé Élie et le Christ)". By 1976, Raël
transformed MADECH into the International Raelian Movement. From 1980 to 1992
Raël and his movement became increasingly global. In 1980 Claude Raël's fifth
Raëlian book "Sensual Meditation" was published and formal publication of the
Raëlian Messages in the Japanese language began as part of the Raëlian
mission to Japan. Two years later, Africa became another target area in the
mission to spread the Raëlian messages. On 26 December 2002, Brigitte
Boisselier, a Raëlian Bishop and CEO of a biotechnology company called
Clonaid, announced the birth of baby Eve, supposedly the first-ever human
clone, which at that point ignited much media attention, ethical debate, doubt,
critics, and claims of a hoax. Spokespeople for the movement, such as Claude
Vorilhon, have suggested that this is only first step in achieving a more
important agenda, claiming that accelerated growth process and mind transfer,
in combination with cloning are mechanisms by which eternal life may be
achieved. Member hierarchy. The structure of the Raëlian Church is
hierarchical, with seven levels ascending from level 0 to level 6. The top four
levels consist of "Guides". The level 6 guide, known as the "Guide of Guides",
has the final say on who becomes a level 5 "Bishop Guide" or a level 4 "Priest
Guide". Bishops and priests promote lower-level members one level at a time
during annual seminars. Each bishop or priest can propose a new guide as long
as the candidate is from a level below his or her own. Guides can assist
"Regional Guides"—level 3 and above—in their assigning of non-guide members
to levels 3 ("Assistant Priests"), 2 ("Organizers") and 1 ("Assistant
Organizers"). Members of the Raëlian structure begin as level 0 "trainees"
during annual seminars. The Raelian structure claimed in 2007 to have about
2,300 members, 170 "Raëlian guides", and 41 bishops. Claude Vorilhon has held
the highest position for three seven-year terms. Women-only groups. Women make
up only a third of the membership in the Raëlian Church, though two anecdotes
in the Raëlian Contact newsletter report female majorities joining the
movement's Asian Mongolian chapter. Women such as Brigitte Boisselier, the
Chief Executive Officer of Clonaid, play a powerful role in the Raëlian
Church. There are two major groups of women in the Raëlian Church. The "Order
of Angels", founded in the 1990s, consists of over a hundred Raëlian women who
call for femininity and refinement for all of humanity. The initiation rites
include declaring an oath or making a contract in which one agrees to become
defender of the Raëlian ideology and its founder Raël. The Order of Angels
has its own hierarchy of "rose angels" and "white angels" which, as of 2003,
are six and 160 women, respectively. After the Clonaid human cloning claim made
the headlines, the "Daily Telegraph" wrote that members of the order not only
provided sexual pleasure for Raël, but also helped donate eggs for efforts
towards human cloning. A few days later, "Time" magazine wrote that French
chemist Brigitte Boisselier was an Order of Angels member. Around this time,
cult specialist Mike Kropveld called the Order of Angels "one of the most
transparent movements" he had witnessed, though he was alarmed by the women's
promise to defend Raël's life with their own bodies. Raël has instructed some
women members to play a pro-sex feminist role in the Raëlian Church. "Rael's
Girls" is another group of women in the movement which are against the
suppression of feminine acts of pleasure, including sexual intercourse with men
or women. Rael's Girls solely consists of women who work in the sex industry.
In contrast to the teachings of the world's major religions, the women of
Rael's Girls say there is no reason to repent for performing striptease or
being a prostitute. This organization was set up to counteract the influence of
the "JC's girls" mission of the Christian ex-stripper Heather Veitch. Rael's
Girls and its founder Raël were featured in a pictorial in the October 2004
issue of "Playboy". Rites and practices. Initiation. Ceremony. The major
initiation rite in the Raëlian Church is the "baptism" or "transmission of the
cellular plan" and is performed by upper-level members in the Raëlian clergy
known as guides. In 1979, Raël introduced the "Act of Apostasy" as an
obligation for those preparing for their Raëlian baptism. The Raëlian baptism
is known as transmission of the cellular plan where "cellular" refers to the
organic cells of the body and the "plan" refers to the genetic makeup of the
individual. This Raëlian baptism involves a guide member laying water onto the
forehead of the new member. The practice began on "the first Sunday in April"
of 1976 when Raël baptised 40 Raëlians. Raëlians believe that their genetic
information is recorded by a remote computer and would become recognized during
their final hour when they will be judged by the extraterrestrial Elohim.
Ceremonial dates. Baptisms can only be performed on four special days in the
year. The dates mark anniversaries in the Raëlian calendar. The dates are the
6 August, which marks the anniversary of the atomic bombing of Hiroshima in
1945, 13 December, marking the day that Raël in 1973 says he had his first
personal encounter with one of the extraterrestrial Elohim, 7 October in which
the Elohim, Raël says, took him up in a spacecraft in 1975 and the following
day had meals with Jesus, Buddha, and other past religious figures and the
first Sunday in April, which Raëlians believe is the date when dark-skinned
extraterrestrials created Adam and Eve. Sensual Meditation. Sensual Meditation
is the set of exercises made public by Claude Vorilhon in his book "La
méditation sensuelle". It is practiced by members of International Raelian
Movement (IRM). The first of these exercises is usually taught in Raëlian
Seminars. First Activity: Harmonization with Infinity The first step is to
arrange a setting in which to meditate. Harmonious settings are preferred such
as lying beneath a star-lit night sky, under good weather conditions. Or,
prepare a room, decorated with pleasurable sights, textures, and smells. During
the program of sensual meditation, being undressed or wearing soft silky
material is preferable. Work clothes which are subject to pollutants and
material which constrict blood flow and compress the sexual organs are not
recommended. The goal of a breathing exercise is to improve the oxygenation of
the cells within one's organism in order to balance the chemical secretions
within the body. This involves a few to several minutes of deep regulated
breathing and increasing of one's mental and physical awareness of the
introduction of oxygen inside the many kinds of organs within the human body.
Conscious awareness of these effects is important for a process of bodily
feedback. The next step is to feel, from within oneself, all the cells and
tissues one is made of, and to consciously link them through our central and
peripheral nervous systems. After this feeling is felt throughout the body, one
begins feeling the vibrations and pulses of musical sounds not only by the ears
but through the pores and within the body itself. In the following step, one
feels the animate external environment through the many penetrating vibrations
animating ones body from all angles and radial distances. This attentive
awareness develops the sense of feeling harmony that surround one's organism.
Lastly, one uses this feeling to become aware of the humanity he or she is a
part of. Second Activity: Becoming Aware of Our Life Breathing begins again in
a more physically arousing way by feeling the exchange of air inside the whole
respiratory apparatus including the bronchial tubes inside the lungs, nasal
cavity, and mouth. As the oxygenation is increasingly felt within, one then
begins to feel the heart pulsating and pumping blood within one's chest. While
being highly oxygenated and having the tactile sensuality developed in the
previous exercise, the calming pulse of this blood is felt spreading from the
heart and into the rest of the body. Third Activity: Body Awareness After
having sensually connected the many cells and tissues in the body by developed
the tactile sense of touch from within the body itself and feeling the pulsing
phenomena within the body itself, the sensuality of external senses is
developed. As one closes his or her eyes one begins to develop the sense of
touch and does so intensely by feeling the parts of oneself by enjoying being
the touched and toucher while feeling more intensely with the fingertips. The
taste of one's own skin is then explored. The feeling of oneself talking is
then guided by a hand touching the parts of the head which vibrate during
speech. Then the eyes are opened to discover oneself by appreciating the moving
of one's hands, a bit like a baby, though now one can be fully conscious of his
or her animation. One looks at oneself with new eyes, looking in places where
one would not normally look, as if discovering our physique for the first time
and with attraction rather than aversion. Fourth Activity: Meditation with
Symbol of Infinity Decorations are placed around the room as well as posters to
contemplate for their harmonious expression of various patterns and colors of
lights they reflect. Among them is the symbol of infinity which in Raëlian
cosmology represents the infinitely large particles and infinitely small
particles that dance and intermingle among themselves as an animation which
endures without beginning or end. Fifth Activity: Another Universe - Our
Partner This exercise involves a massage by a partner, not necessarily sexual,
(and vice versa) the purpose of which is to become conscious of one another's
shape and constitution through the sensuous touching. This exercise need not be
erotic when involving gentle kneading of the individual one feels in order to
become aware of their contour of flesh and bones (and vice versa). The
expectation of being touched in certain places turns into pleasure improves
one's unity. This meditation is the last exercise for those without sexual
partners. Sixth Activity: Eroticism and Mutual Excitement After the intense
vaporous breathing exercise, which is performed at the beginning of each
meditation, one lays down with their eyes closed while becoming aware and
feeling another's gaze as it caresses their body which they present to the
gazer. The person lying down anticipates the gaze of the other as though it
were a source of a soft diffuse beam of light. Erogenous zones are later
excited though a very light and delicate massage by the partner of the one
lying down. Sensual feedback is expected between the massager and the massaged
so that individual preferences and sensitivity are accounted for which allows
both partners to receive maximum pleasure from the exchange. After seeing,
touching, and hearing, the senses of taste and of smell are introduced.
Breathing in with the nose enhances smell whereas breathing out through the
mouth allows for exhalation on the skin of the one lying down to occur more
sensually. This, as well as kissing, encourages the exchange of hormones
between the caresser and the caressed. At the end of this exercise, it is
repeated, where the massager now becomes the massaged and the massaged becomes
the massager. Other activities, outreach and advocacy. Throughout the history
of Raëlism, members of the Raëlian Church have toured public settings
advocating masturbation, condoms and birth control. Raëlians hope that
genetically modified food and nanotechnology will allow humankind to eliminate
the obligation to work, in a world that embraces science and technology.
Raëlians have founded Clonaid, a company that envisions that someday human
beings can be scientifically recreated though a process of human cloning, and
Clitoraid, an organization whose mission is to oppose female genital
mutilation. UFO exhibits. Raëlian structure members have set up exhibitions
about their beliefs of extraterrestrial intelligent designers sending crop
circles, UFOs, and spaceships for their arrival at an embassy. While there have
been smaller meetings of Raëlians and non-Raëlians, annual "Raëlian
seminars" have been typically larger. Seminars. Raëlian structure members who
run the seminars have organized group exercises involving meditation with the
senses. James R. Lewis, an authority on fringe religious movements, spoke of
Raëlians who practiced a Raëlian exercise called Sensual Meditation and
discovered "playing fields" where "radical self-reconstruction," "new forms of
authority," and "new modes of self-relating" were encouraged. Music has been a
feature of large gatherings, where at night, Raëlians have had multiethnic
cabaret performances. Seminarists have used colored bracelets to indicate
whether they wanted to be alone, be in a couple, or simply meet people. On a
yearly basis, Raëlian members organize seminars that are often attractive to
the sexually adventurous. News "KNBC" called the annual Raëlian seminars "a
cross between a nudist camp and new-age retreat." A Spanish television agency
reported Raëlian men and women in cross-dressing plays. Activities such as
observations of one's own private parts and masturbation with them disturbed
Brigitte McCann, a "Calgary Sun" reporter who entered one of the Raëlian
seminars. Susan J. Palmer said a French journalist went to a Raëlian Seminar
in 1991 and taped couples having sexual intercourse in tents. These tapes
gained widespread negative publicity—with news stories that described these
practices as perverted and a form of brainwashing. Activism. Raëlians
routinely advocate sex-positive feminism and genetically modified food. They
also have protested against wars and the Catholic Church. Pro-GMO: On 6 August
2003, the first day of Raëlian year 58 AH, a tech article on the "USA Today"
newspaper mentions an "unlikely ally" of the Monsanto Company, the Raëlian
Movement of Brazil. The movement gave vocal support in response to the
company's support for genetically modified organisms particularly in their
country. Brazilian farmers have been using Monsanto's genetically engineered
soy plant as well as the Roundup herbicide to which it was artificially
adapted. The Raëlians spoke against the Brazilian government's ban on GMOs.
Anti-war: In 2006, About 30 Raëlians, some topless, took part in an anti-war
demonstration in Seoul, Korea. In 2003, Raëlians in white alien costumes bore
signs bearing the message "NO WAR ... ET wants Peace, too!" to protest the 2003
Invasion of Iraq. Topless rights of women: Several Raëlian groups in the
United States have organized annual protests, claiming that women should have
the same legal right to go topless in public that men enjoy without fear of
arrest for indecent exposure. This is known as topfreedom. Some have called
this a publicity stunt designed to recruit members. Go Topless Day is their
annual event, with women protesting topless except for nipple pasties to avoid
arrest. It is held near 26 August, the anniversary of the day women were given
the USA right to vote. Anti-Catholic: In 1992 Catholic schools in Montreal,
Canada objected to a proposed condom vending machine as contrary to their
mission. In response, Raëlian guides, in an event dubbed "Operation Condom",
gave the Catholic students ten thousand condoms. The Commissioner of Catholic
schools for Montreal said they could do nothing to stop them. In July 2001,
Raëlians on the streets attracted Italians and Swiss people as they gave
leaflets in protest to over a hundred child molesters in existence among Roman
Catholic clergy in France. They recommended that parents should not send their
children to Catholic confession. The Episcopal vicar of Geneva sued the
Raëlian Church for libel but did not win. The judge did not accept the charges
for the reason that the Raëlians were not attacking the whole of the Catholic
Church. In October 2002, Raëlians in a Canadian anti-clerical parade held
handed out Christian crosses to high school students. They were invited to burn
the crosses in a park not far from Montreal's Mount Royal and to sign letters
of apostasy from the Roman Catholic Church. The Quebec Association of Bishops
called this "incitement to hatred", and several school boards attempted to
prevent their students from meeting Raëlians. Converts from other religions.
Raëlianism is an atheistic religion that does not believe in a god (nor other
deity), but in extraterrestrials. Former clergy of mainstream religions have
joined the Raëlian Church, especially in Quebec. The structure of the movement
had promoted some of them to the level of Priest or Bishop due to "extensive
Bible training and teaching skills". Two ex-Roman Catholic Priests, Victor
Legendre and Charles-Yvan Giroux converted to Raëlianism. A former bishop of
the Church of Christ (Latter Day Saints) joined the Raelian Movement in order
to express his homosexuality. The Raëlian, Mark Woodgate, stated that 8% of
Raëlians worldwide are former Mormons. Religiously mixed couples are common,
especially with spouses who are Christians or Buddhists. Intended controversy.
Susan J. Palmer, a sociologist from Canada, has studied the movement since 1987
and says the movement intentionally stirs a moderate level of controversy to
maintain membership. For example, Rael and the group attempt to tie their views
with topical matters, ranging from Tiger Woods' promiscuity to strained
relations in the Middle East, in regular online postings and press releases.
This view is shared by Mike Kropveld—the executive director of an anti-cult
organization with the name Info-Cult—who says the controversy leads to
criticism by both religious and non-religious people. Raëlian organizers made
deliberate attempts to "shock, titillate, and capture the media's imagination".
The book "Yes to Human Cloning" (2001) attracted media attention after its
release, including segments on "20/20" and "60 Minutes". Biophysicist Gregory
Stock described the Raëlian Clonaid project as "sufficiently quirky to command
instant media attention." It has been estimated that the group received free
publicity worth US$500 million as a result of the Clonaid claim. Mark Hunt, a
lawyer and politician who wished to clone his dead son with the help of the
Clonaid services, was overwhelmed by the height of the media attention and in
an interview said that Clonaid's chief executive had become a "press hog".
Beliefs. Theologian of new religious movements, George D. Chryssides, described
the Raëlian Church as being in an "early developmental stage" and that their
beliefs distance it from a "dominant intellectual climate". Raëlism claims
that all life on Earth, humans included, was created scientifically by Elohim,
members of an extraterrestrial race who appeared similar to small humans and so
were often depicted as angels, cherubs, or gods. Raëlians, who are not
monotheists, believe the correct historical meaning of the word Elohim is the
plural sense, "those who came from the sky". Belief in extraterrestrial Elohim
play a central part in Clonaid's claim of offering cloning services for
homosexual and infertile couples who want a child cloned from a partner's DNA.
Chryssides states that Raëlism is discernible from other UFO religions for its
heavy support for physicalism and repudiation of supernaturalism. Susan J.
Palmer, a social scholar who had long contacts with Raëlians, associated
epiphenomenalism with the belief in Raëlism that mind transfer coupled with
human cloning can implant mind and personality into a new and disease free
body. Raëlians publicly deny the existence of the ethereal soul and a
supernatural god, but they believe that humanity for many generations past will
be resurrected, albeit in a scientific way. Raëlians believe that throughout
the ages, members of the Elohim civilization sent different prophets, including
Moses, Jesus, Buddha and many others whose role was guide humanity and to
prepare humans for the future, all of whom were created as a result of a sexual
union between a human woman and one of the Elohim. To Raëlians, this was
possible because the Elohim had advanced DNA synthesis and genetic engineering.
The Elohim later reduced the frequent visits so that humans were largely left
to progress on their own, until the time of the Apocalypse/Revelation when they
would send their final messenger and disclose themselves at an extraterrestrial
embassy, establishing political and economic ties. Raëlians believe that sex
is a normal, natural and healthy part of life and encourages people to be true
to their natural sexuality. They promote healing from damaging messages from
strict puritanical belief systems and social stigmas that stifle one's natural
sexuality. Acceptance of masturbation, homosexuality, bisexuality,
pansexuality, naturism and any legal, safe and consensual adult activity is
promoted as part of a healthy and long life, and this is used to attract young
converts to the religion. Raelians believe that sexuality is a gift of pleasure
to mankind from the Elohim. The Raëlian book "Let's Welcome our Fathers From
Space" says that new advanced extraterrestrial civilizations will ultimately
practice a final religion or "religion of the infinite" that involves
ubiquitous practice of Sensual Meditation. According to Giancarlo Genta and
Jason Colavito, writers who have influenced Raëlian beliefs include Zechariah
Sitchin and Erich von Däniken. Voluntarism. Raëlians are encouraged to do as
they feel right, whether that matches the rules of the culture in which they
live or not. According to Susan J. Palmer, a majority of loosely affiliated
Raëlian Movement members have often strayed from following rules concerning
"diet, drugs, and sexual activity" as described in the Raëlian books.
Sometimes, they will not attend monthly meetings or pay a tithe in proportion
to their income. Only the more committed members who do follow such rules can
remain in the movement's structure. According to Michel Beluet, the former
director of a Raëlian-built museum called UFOland, the only pressure exerted
on members is to attend annual Raëlian seminars, which allows members
convinced of Raël's enthusiasm to voluntarily tithe. Palmer cited Raël, who
claimed that more than 60% of the Raëlian Movement's members do not tithe.
Dawson College students conducted a survey of the membership in Canada 1991
which found that only one-third of respondents tithed. Human cloning. As
opposed to the scientific definition of reproductive cloning which is simply
the creation of a genetically identical living thing, Raëlians seek to both
genetically clone individuals, rapidly accelerate growth of the clone to
adulthood through a process like guided self-assembly of rapidly expanded cells
or even nanotechnology and then transfer the mind and personality of the donor
into the clone. Raëlians believe humanity can attain eternal life through the
science of cloning. In the final stages of development, hitherto unknown
information contained within undamaged DNA would be enough to bring others back
from the dead including their memories and personality. This would be done by
taking a small sample from someone's body and preserving it at the time when
the level of the brain's efficiency and knowledge is highest. On the day of
death, a cell would be taken from the sample for the cloning to take place, and
the memories and personality would be restored to their peak level. Claude
Vorilhon told lawmakers that banning the development of human cloning was
comparable to outlawing medical advances such "antibiotics, blood transfusions,
and vaccines." Clonaid. Raël founded Valiant Venture Ltd Corporation in 1997,
to research human cloning. The company name was later changed to Clonaid and
handed over to Raëlian bishop, Brigitte Boisselier in 2000. In 2002, Brigitte
Boisselier, as chief executive of Clonaid, claimed that a human baby was
conceived through cloning technology. Around this time, Clonaid's subsidiary
BioFusion Tech claimed to have in possession a cell fusion device that assisted
the cloning of human embryos. The Vatican said that experimenters expressed
"brutal mentality" for attempting to clone human beings. Pope John Paul II
criticized the experiment which he believes threatens the dignity of human
life. In response, the leader of the Raëlian Church dismissed the Pope's
ethical concerns, calling them an "accumulation of religious prejudices." In
response to Raël's association with Clonaid, South Korean immigration
authorities at the airport denied him entry into their country in 2003. This
decision led to the quick cancellation of the planned Raëlian seminar which
seven hundred registered for. Raëlians of South Korea were instructed by Raël
to protest near the center of the country of Ministry of Health and Welfare
that ordered him to leave. Officials detained Raël for nine hours at Incheon
International Airport before he and his wife Sophie de Niverville left for
Tokyo from where they would take another plane on their way back to Canada.
Raël responded by saying that Korean officials treated him like a "North
Korean" and that he would wait for an apology before coming back to Korea.
Sensuality and pleasure. According to the book "Maitreya" by Claude Vorilhon,
love involves experiencing different varieties and possibilities that allow one
to break habits in order to make life more pleasant and interesting and that it
is the only thing which can stop war and injustice that persists in today's
world. Raëlians believe in the right to form new religions or new political
parties as long as they do not promote violence. As individualists, Raëlians
believe that the one who gives the order to harm others is less at fault than
the one who executes it. Raëlians say they encourage adult homosexual,
bisexual, and heterosexual relationships and that society should recognize them
legally. Some Swiss government authorities responded to Raëlians' views about
Sensual Meditation with a fear that Raëlians are a threat to public morals for
supporting liberalized sex education for children. They express the view that
such liberalized sex education teaches youngsters how to obtain sexual
gratification which would encourage sexual abuse of underage children. Views on
pedophilia. Sexual predators and guides who force missionary ideas against
members are excommunicated by the Raëlian Church for a minimum of seven
years—the amount of time Raëlians believe it takes for all of a person's
biological cells to be regenerated. In 2006 Raëlians in Los Angeles,
California condemned acts of pedophilia which Raelians consider a disease,
particularly those associated with celibate Catholic priests, saying that
minors and adults should not be mixed in the act of sex. Authorities of the
Swiss canton of Valais claimed that Raëlians support a doctrine of "complete
sexual liberty", and they denied an application by Raël to live in their area.
The website "Raelianews.org" denied that sexual freedom between consenting
adults in any way implies pedophilia. Structure of the Universe. Raëlian
cosmology as proposed in 1973 by Raël states that the observable universe has
no creator and is infinite in time and finite in size and surrounded by
infinite space. In Raëlian cosmology, our observable universe is an "atom" of
a much larger level of matter (and possibly organism) and subatomic particles
in our bodies also possess universes like our own, but on a much smaller scale.
This pattern, atom within universe within atom, is believed to be infinitely
repetitive, from the infinitely small, to the infinitely large. The Raëlian
Messages by Raël state that humanoid extraterrestrials, who were originally
called under the name "Elohim" (singular: "Eloha"), verified this cosmology
scientifically. Because of the difference of mass, the activity of life inside
in a living thing's atoms would undergo many millennia before enough time
passes for that living thing to take a single step. Raëlians believe the
universe is infinite in time and space and lacks a center. Because of this, one
could not imagine where an ethereal soul would go. The Raëlian cosmology is
meditated upon during the fourth activity in the rite of Sensual Meditation.
Intelligent Design. Creation of life on Earth by extraterrestrials. In his book
"The Message Given to me by Extraterrestrials" (now republished as "Intelligent
Design: Message from the Designers" 2006 ISBN 2-940252-20-3), Claude Vorilhon
claims that on 13 December 1973, he found a spacecraft shaped like a flattened
bell that landed inside Puy de Lassolas, a volcano near the capital city of
Auvergne. A 25,000-year-old human-like extraterrestrial inside the spacecraft
named "Yahweh" said that Elohim was the name that primitive people of Earth
called members of his extraterrestrial race—who were seen as "those who came
from the sky". Yahweh explained that Earth was originally void of life, with
thick clouds and shallow seas, but the Elohim came, broke apart the clouds,
exposed the seas to sunlight, built a continent, and synthesized a global
ecosystem. Solar astronomy, terraformation, nanotechnology, and genetic
engineering allowed Elohim to adapt life to Earth's thermal and chemical
makeup. According to Vorilhon, Elohim contacted about forty people to act as
their prophets on Earth, including Moses, Elijah, Ezekiel, Buddha, John the
Baptist, Jesus, Muhammad, and Joseph Smith. The religions thought to be from
Elohimic origins include Judaism, Buddhism, Christianity, Islam, and Mormonism.
From the Raëlian point of view, religious texts indicate that the Elohim would
return at the age of Apocalypse or Revelation (unveiling of the truth). Humans
from another world would appear to drop down from the sky and meet in the
embassy they have asked Raël to build for them and share their advanced
scientific knowledge with humanity. Thus, one of their stated main goals of the
Raëlian movement is to inform as many people as possible about this
extraterrestrial race. Humanity's chance of creating life on other planets.
Raëlians believe that humanity would be able to create life on other planets
only if humanity is peaceful enough to stop war. In that case, humanity could
travel the distances between stars and create life on another planet. Progress
in terraforming, molecular biology, and cloning would enable these teams to
create continents and life from scratch. Progress in social engineering would
ensure that this creation would have a better chance of both surviving and
having the potential to understand its creators. Research on how civilization
would occur on another planet would allow scientists to decide what traces of
their origin should be left behind so that their role in life creation would
someday be revealed. The progress achieved by the science teams would
ultimately sustain a perpetual chain of life. A coming judgement. Raëlians do
not believe that an ethereal soul exists free of physical confinement.
Raëlians believe that advanced supercomputers of the Elohim are right now
recording the memories and DNA of human beings. When Elohim release this
information for the coming resurrection, people would be brought back from the
dead and the judgments upon them would be realized based on actions in their
past life. People excluded from physical recreation would include those who
achieved nothing positive but were not evil. Vorilhon expressed an interest in
cloning Hitler for war trials and retroactive punishment. Raël also mentioned
cloning as the solution to terrorism by suicide attacks, as the perpetrators
would not be able to escape punishment by killing themselves if the Elohim
recreated them after their attacks. Embassy for Extraterrestrials. Raëlians
believe that life on Earth—as well as many religions of the world—was the
work of extraterrestrial influence. They believe these were scientists and that
ancient people saw them as "gods" and gave the name "Elohim". Raëlians believe
that the Embassy for Extraterrestrials or "Third Temple" is to support an
official contact with Extraterrestrial Elohim and their messengers of the main
religions at the "New Jerusalem". The Raëlian Embassy for Extraterrestrials is
the vision of the International Raëlian Movement to establish an embassy, at a
base cost of $20 million, with a landing pad that would serve as spaceport for
extraterrestrial spaceships. The funding of the embassy has been reported over
time by the media. Its location is intended to be in neutral territory,
preferably Jerusalem, and would be surrounded by acres of campground capable of
supporting about 144,000 people or more than twice the estimated Raëlian
membership as of 2005. On 16 April 1987, the "Chicago Sun-Times" estimated the
funding for the "cosmic kibbutz" at $1 million. In 1997-1998, the funding had
risen to $7 million. By 2001, $9 million had been saved for the embassy, and in
October, the funding had reached $20 million. Proposed architecture and
location. The International Raëlian Movement envisions having an entrance with
an aseptic chamber leading to a conference room for twenty-one people as well
as a dining room of the same capacity. In the plan are seven rooms for the
purpose of receiving human guests into the embassy. The embassy building, along
with the swimming pool, would be in the center of a large park and protected
from trespassing by a wall−a maximum of two stories-to surround the entire
complex's circumference. Trees and bushes are to be planted in the outskirts of
the wall's area. The walls are to have a northern and southern entrance. The
landing pad for the embassy should be able fit a spaceship of twelve meters of
diameter or 39'4" on its terrace. The terrace is to be above the rooms in the
torus, which are for extraterrestrials only. The seven rooms directly
underneath the landing pad would be protected from occupants of other rooms
with a thick metal door. Finally, the International Raëlian Movement wants to
avoid military and radar surveillance of the airspace above the embassy.
Buildings for administration, food and water provisions, and state-of-the-art
sanitation and communication systems are part of this vision. A nearby replica
of the Raëlian Embassy for Extraterrestrials open to the public is expected to
show visitors what it is like inside the real one. On 13 December 1997, the
leader of the International Raëlian Movement had decided to extend the
possibility of building the embassy outside of Jerusalem and also allow that a
significant portion of the embassy property be covered with water. The area of
the proposed embassy property is still envisioned at a minimum of 3.47 square
kilometers, with a radius of at least 1.05 kilometers. A form of meritocracy.
In his book "Geniocracy", Raël outlined his plan for a peaceful worldwide
political union that, while democratic, would require members of the electorate
to meet a minimum standard of intelligence. The thresholds proposed by the
Raëlians are 50% above average for a candidate and 10% above average for a
voter. The world government would also have a global currency, a common
language, and a transformation of militaries of the world into civil police.
Raelians deride the current state-system as inadequate for dealing with
contemporary global issues that are typical of Globalisation, such as
Environmentalism, Social Justice, Human Rights, and the current economic
system. In line with this, Geniocracy proposes a different economic model
called Humanitarianism. Raël recommends a world government with 12 regions.
Inhabitants would vote for which region they want to be part of. After the
regions are defined, they are further divided into 12 sectors after the same
principle of democracy is applied. While sectors of the same region are defined
as having equal numbers of inhabitants, the regions themselves may have
different levels of population, which would be proportional to its voting
power. Status. The current difficulty in the ideas of Geniocracy is that the
means of assessing intelligence are ill-defined. One idea offered by Rael in
Geniocracy is to have specialists such as psychologists, neurologists,
ethnologists, etc., perfect or choose among existing ones, a series of tests
that would define each person's level of intelligence. They should be designed
to measure intellectual potential rather than accumulation of knowledge. The
lack of scientific rigour necessary for inclusion of Geniocracy as properly
testable political ideology can be noted in number of modern and historical
dictatorships as well as oligarchies. Because of the controversies surrounding
Geniocracy, Raël presents the idea as a classic utopia or provocative ideal
and not necessarily a model that humanity will follow. In Raël's book,
"Extraterrestrials took me to their planet", Raël claims that an
extraterrestrial gave him the idea of "Economic Humanitarianism". Under the
establishment of "Economic Humanitarianism", people would not have ownership of
businesses or exploitable goods created by others. Instead, people would rent
each of them for a period of 49 years. The founders would be able to receive
the rents for up to 49 years or when they die, which ever is later. Any rents
not inherited by relatives after 49 years would go to the State. By balancing
inheritances, children would be born with enough financial means to forsake
menial tasks for endeavors that may benefit the whole of humanity. Family
houses could be inherited from generation to generation, free of rent. In his
much later book, "Maitreya", Raël says the road to a world without money is
capitalism and globalisation, as opposed to communism. Capitalism would allow
those who contribute much to society to also contribute to its scientific and
technological development. Under capitalism, society would produce as much
money as it can. The money would become important in the short run as
nanotechnology quickly lowers the cost of goods while putting many people out
of work. Religious symbol. Raelians believe in reclaiming the swastika by
restoring its historical meaning as a symbol of peace and good luck. Swastika
has been used for millennia in the East as a religious symbol of peace and
harmony. In 1991, a Montreal anti-cult organization called Info-Cult made
statements against the Raëlian Church with an article on "Le Devoir", branding
Raëlians as promoters of fascism and racism, due to the church's use of the
swastika as part of their logo and the Raëlian description of an
extraterrestrial global government in which those less than ten percent above
average intelligence are excluded from the electorate. Outside Info-Cult's
office, Raëlians spoke against the act of discriminating against a religious
minority. On 2 January 1992, a dozen people protested against the use of the
swastika in the Raëlian logo in Miami's Eden Roc Hotel. The use of the
swastika and other Raelian practices has led to criticism from the group Hineni
of Florida, a Jewish anti-cult organization. In February 1991, the Raëlian
Church modified their symbol. The official reason given was a request from the
Elohim to change the symbol in order to help in negotiations with Israel for
the building of the Extraterrestrial Embassy to greet the anticipated Elohim
space vessels, although the country continued to deny their request. In 2005,
the Israeli Raëlian Guide Kobi Drori stated that the Lebanese government was
discussing proposals by the Raëlian movement to build their interplanetary
embassy in Lebanon. However, one condition was that the Raëlians not display
their logo on top of the building because it mixes a swastika and a Star of
David. According to Drori, the Raëlians involved declined this offer, as they
wished to keep the symbol as is. From 1991 to 2007, the official Raëlian
symbol in Europe and America did not have the original swastika, but Raël,
founder and leader of the Raëlian Movement decided to make the original
symbol, the Star of David intertwined with a swastika, the only official symbol
of the Raelian Movement worldwide. Controversies. The anti-cult organization
Info-Cult claimed that Geniocracy was a fascist ideology. In 1995, a
parliamentary commission issued a report through the National Assembly of
France that categorized the Raelian Movement (Mouvement Raëlien) as a "secte"
(French word for sect). In 1997, a parliamentary inquiry commission issued a
report through the Belgian Chamber of Representatives that categorized the
Belgian Raelian Movement (Mouvement Raëlien Belge) as a sect. Glenn McGee, the
associate director of the Center for Bioethics at the University of Virginia,
states that part of the sect is a cult while the other part is a commercial
website that collects large sums of money from those interested in human
cloning. The Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor of the United States
Department of State and sociologist Susan J. Palmer have classified the
International Raëlian Movement as a religion. In 2005, two "Wired News"
reporters were welcomed into a Raëlian seminar and had permission to videotape
it. They believe the footage they took makes it clear that the Raelian Movement
is a cult which should disband. A Raëlian guide said in a Wired interview that
he is not ashamed of what is shown and that he has no concerns about this
incident. The estranged former wife of Vorilhon characterised him as a 'cult
leader' and claimed he brought groups of female Raëlians home and held orgies
which affected the children from an early age.
