Rāja yoga Rāja yoga ("royal yoga", "royal union", also known as classical
yoga and aṣṭānga yoga) is concerned principally with the cultivation of
the viewer's "(ṛṣih)" mind using a succession of steps, such as meditation
"(dhyāna, dhyana)" and contemplation "(samādhi, samadhi)". Its object is to
further one's acquaintance with reality "(viveka)", achieve awakening "
(moksha)" and eventually enlightenment, "kaivalya". Rāja yoga was first
described as an eightfold or eight-limbed (aṣṭānga, "ashtanga") path in
the Yoga Sūtras of Patañjali, and is part of the Samkhya tradition. In the
context of Hindu philosophy Rāja Yoga is known simply as yoga. Yoga is one of
the six orthodox ("āstika", existing) schools of Hindu philosophy and forms an
integral part of the spiritual practices of many Hindu traditions. The term
"Rāja Yoga" is a retronym, introduced in the 15th-century Hatha Yoga Pradipika
to distinguish the school based on the Yoga Sūtras of Patañjali from the more
current school of hatha yoga expounded by yogi Swatmarama. Concept. Rāja yoga
is concerned with the mind (citta) and its fluctuations (vṛttis, vortexes,
variations) and how to quiet or master the mind's fluctuations. The mind is
traditionally conceived as the "king", the horseman, of the psycho-physical
(body) structure. Because of the relationship between the mind and the body,
the body must be first "tamed" through self-discipline and purified by means
such as the outer, preliminary five limbs of this eightfold yoga, by hatha yoga
or other means. A good level of overall health and psychological integration
must be attained before the deeper, inner aspects of yoga can be pursued.
Humans have all sorts of addictions and obsessions and these preclude the
attainment of tranquil abiding (meditation). Through restraint (yama) such as
celibacy, abstaining from intoxicants, and careful attention to one's actions
(niyama) of body, speech and mind, the human being becomes more fit to practice
meditation. This yoke that one puts upon oneself (discipline) is another
meaning of the word yoga. Rāja yoga is traditionally referred to as (eight-
limbed) yoga because there are eight aspects to the path to which one must
attend. Patañjali's Yoga Sutras begin with the statement "" (1.2), "Yoga
limits the oscillations of the mind". They go on to detail the ways in which
mind can create false ideations, and advocate arduous, dedicated meditation on
real objects or subjects. This process, it is said, leads to a state of quiet
detachment, vairāgya, in which there is mastery over the thirst (tṛṣṇā,
taṇhā) of the senses. Practices that serve to maintain for the individual
the ability to access this state may be considered rāja yoga practices. Thus
rāja yoga encompasses and differentiates itself from other forms of yoga by
encouraging the mind to avoid the sort of absorption in obsessional practice
(including some traditional practices) that can create false mental objects. In
this sense rāja yoga is called the "king among yogas": all honest yogic
practices are seen as tools in the quest to cleanse karma and obtain mokṣa,
nirvāṇa or kaivalya. Historically, schools of yoga that label themselves
"rāja" offer students a structure of yogic practices and a solid viewpoint on
dharma. Lord Kṛṣṇa describes the yogi as follows: "A yogi is greater than
the ascetic, greater than the empiricist, and greater than the fruitive worker.
Therefore, O Arjuna, in all circumstances be a yogi" (Bg. 6.46). Practice.
Rāja yoga aims at controlling all thought-waves or mental modifications. While
a Hatha Yogi starts his sādhanā, or spiritual practice, with āsanas
(postures) and prāṇāyāma, a rāja yogi starts his sādhanā with the mind
as well as a certain minimum of āsana and prāṇāyāma usually included as a
preparation for the meditation and concentration. In ,27 it is stated that the
word of Īśvara is OM, the Praṇava. Through the sounding of the Word and
through reflection upon its meaning, the Way is found. Eight limbs of Ashtanga
Yoga. They are sometimes divided into the lower and the upper four limbs, the
lower ones—from yama to pranayama—being parallel to the lower limbs of
Hatha Yoga, while the upper ones—from pratyahara to samadhi—being specific
for the "rāja yoga". The upper three limbs practiced simultaneously constitute
the Samyama. Yama. Yama (restraints) consists of five parts: Ahimsa (non-
violence), Satya (truthfulness), Asteya (non-stealing), Brahmacharya meaning
sexual abstinence, and Aparigraha (non-covetousness). Ahimsa is perfect
harmlessness, as well as positive love. The five directives of Yama lay down
behavioral norms as prerequisites for elimination of fear, and contribute to a
tranquil mind. Niyama. Niyama is observance of five canons: Shaucha (internal
and external purity), Santosha (contentment), Tapas (austerity), Svadhyaya
(study of religious books and repetitions of Mantras), and Ishvarapranidhana
(self-surrender to God, and His worship). Niyama, unlike Yama, prescribes
mental exercises to train the mind to control emotions. Asana. Asana in the
sense of a posture that one can hold for a period of time, staying relaxed and
with normal (calm) breathing (or, as some sources say, "without effort"). In
English, the Sanskrit word asana means "seat", the place where one sits; or
posture, position of the body (any position). Asanas (in the sense of Yoga
"posture") are said to derive from the "various positions of animals' bodies"
(whence are derived most of the names of the positions). 84 asanas are
considered to be the main postures, of which the highest are Shirshasan
(headstand) and Padmasan (lotus). physical (blood circulation, inner organs,
glands, muscles, joints and nerve system)
From the "rāja yoga perspective," it is considered that the physical postures
and pranayama serve to prepare the body and mind for the following steps:
"pratyahara, dharana, dhyana" and "samādhi" (withdrawal of the senses,
contemplation, meditation, and state of expanded or transcendental
consciousness, where the activity of the mind ceases and "The Knower and The
Object of Knowledge Become One"). Prāṇāyāma. Prāṇāyāma is made out of
two Sanskrit words (prāṇa = life energy; ayāma = control or modification).
Breathing is the medium used to achieve this goal. The mind and life force are
correlated to the breath. Through regulating the breathing and practicing
awareness on it, one learns to control prana. purak (inhalation)
surya bhedan
All pranayama practice ultimately works toward purification of the nadis
(energy channels) and the awakening of kundalini shakti at the muladhara
chakra. The awakening of kundalini energy (also described as the awakening of
divine consciousness or wisdom), and its ascent to the crown chakra is the
final goal of rāja yoga. Pratyahara. Pratyahara is bringing the awareness to
reside deep within oneself, free from the senses and external world. The Goal
of Pratyahara is not to disrupt the communication from the sense organ to the
brain. The awareness is far removed from the five senses. Pratyahara cannot be
achieved without achievement of the preceding limbs (pranayama, niyama, etc.).
The awareness comes to rest deep in the inner space, and during this time the
yogi's breath will be temporarily suspended. Pratyahara should not just be
likened to concentration or meditation, etc. It is a yogic practice that takes
on adequacy with the prior 8 limbs as prerequisites. Dharana. Real Yoga starts
from concentration. Concentration merges into meditation. Meditation ends in
Samadhi. Retention of breath, Brahmacharya, Satvic (pure) food, seclusion,
silence, Satsanga (being in the company of a guru), and not mixing much with
people are all aids to concentration. Concentration on Bhrakuti (the space
between the two eyebrows) with closed eyes is preferred. The mind can thus be
easily controlled, as this is the seat for the mind. Samadhi. Meditation on OM
with Bhava removes obstacles in Sadhana and helps to attain Samadhi. Avidya
(ignorance), Asmita (egoism), Raga-Dvesha (likes and dislikes), Abhinivesha
(clinging to mundane life) are the five Kleshas or afflictions. Destroy these
afflictions. You will attain Samadhi. In Savikalpa or Sabija, there is Triputi
or the triad (knower, known and knowledge). Savitarka, Nirvitarka, Savichara,
Nirvichara, Sasmita and Saananda are the different forms of Savikalpa Samadhi.
In Nirvikalpa Samadhi, Nirbija Samadhi or Asamprajnata Samadhi there is no
triad. In the last sutra (), Patañjali says the soul reaches its end in
liberation, enlightenment, kaivalya.
