Ramadan Ramadan ( ', ; '; ""; ) is the ninth month of the Islamic calendar;
Muslims worldwide observe this as a month of fasting. This annual observance is
regarded as one of the Five Pillars of Islam. The month lasts 29–30 days
based on the visual sightings of the crescent moon, according to numerous
biographical accounts compiled in hadiths. The word Ramadan comes from the
Arabic root "ramida" or "ar-ramad," which means scorching heat or dryness.
Fasting is wajib (obligatory) for adult Muslims, except those who are ill,
travelling or going through menstrual bleeding. While fasting from dawn until
sunset Muslims refrain from consuming food, drinking liquids, smoking and
sexual relations; and in some interpretations from swearing. According to
Islam, the "sawab" (rewards) of fasting are many, but in this month they are
believed to be multiplied. Fasting for Muslims during Ramadan typically
includes the increased offering of "salat" (prayers) and recitation of the
Quran. In the Quran. The month of Ramadan is that in which was revealed the
Quran; a guidance for mankind, and clear proofs of the guidance, and the
criterion (of right and wrong). And whosoever of you is present, let him fast
the month, and whosoever of you is sick or on a journey, a number of other
days. Allah desires for you ease; He desires not hardship for you; and that you
should complete the period, and that you should magnify Allah for having guided
you, and that perhaps you may be thankful. Thus, according to the Quran,
Muhammad first received revelations in the lunar month of Ramadan. Therefore,
the month of Ramadan is considered to be the most sacred month of the Islamic
calendar, the recording of which began with the Hijra. Beginning of Ramadan.
"Hilāl" (the crescent) is typically a day (or more) after the astronomical new
moon. Since the new moon indicates the beginning of the new month, Muslims can
usually safely estimate the beginning of Ramadan. However, to many Muslims,
this is not in accordance with authenticated Hadiths stating that visual
confirmation per region is recommended. The consistent variations of a day have
existed since the time of Muhammad. Practices during Ramadan. Fasting. Ramadan
is a time of spiritual reflection, improvement and increased devotion and
worship. Muslims are expected to put more effort into following the teachings
of Islam. The fast (sawm) begins at dawn and ends at sunset. In addition to
abstaining from eating and drinking, Muslims also increase restraint, such as
abstaining from sexual relations and generally sinful speech and behavior. The
act of fasting is said to redirect the heart away from worldly activities, its
purpose being to cleanse the soul by freeing it from harmful impurities.
Ramadan also teaches Muslims how to better practice self-discipline, self-
control, sacrifice, and empathy for those who are less fortunate; thus
encouraging actions of generosity and compulsory charity (zakat). It becomes
compulsory for Muslims to start fasting when they reach puberty, so long as
they are healthy, sane and have no disabilities or illnesses. Exemptions to
fasting are travel, menstruation, illness, older age, pregnancy, and breast-
feeding. However, many Muslims with medical conditions insist on fasting to
satisfy their spiritual needs, and healthcare professionals must work with
their patients to reach common ground. Professionals should closely monitor
individuals who decide to persist with fasting. While fasting is not considered
compulsory in childhood, many children endeavour to complete as many fasts as
possible as practice for later life. Those who are unable to fast are obliged
to make up for it. According to the Quran, those ill or traveling ("musaafir")
are exempt from obligation, but still must make up the days missed later on.
Health effects. Fasting does not pose any medical risks to healthy individuals.
A team of cardiologists in the UAE found that people observing Ramadan enjoy a
positive effect on their lipid profile, which means there is a reduction of
cholesterol in the blood. Suhoor. Each day before dawn, Muslims observe a pre-
fast meal called Suhoor. Due to the high diversity of the global Muslim
community (ummah), the typical suhoor or iftar meals vary. A few dates and a
cup of water are typically the first foods to break the fast, while fried
pastries, salads, nuts, legumes, and breads are also common. After stopping a
short time before dawn, Muslims hasten to pray the first prayer of the day, the
Fajr prayer. Iftar. At sunset, families hasten for the fast-breaking meal known
as Iftar. Considering the high diversity of the global Muslim population, it is
impossible to describe typical suhoor or iftar meals. Suhoor can be dinner, or
iftar, leftovers, typical breakfast foods, or ethnic foods. Social gatherings,
many times buffet style, at iftar are frequent, and traditional dishes are
often highlighted. A few dates and a cup of water are usually the first foods
to break the fast, while fried pastries, salads, nuts, legumes, and breads are
common. Traditional desserts are often unavoidable, especially those made only
during Ramadan. Water is usually the beverage of choice, but juice and milk are
also consumed. Soft drinks and caffeinated beverages are consumed to a lesser
extent. In the Middle East, the Iftar meal consists of water, juices, dates,
salads and appetizers, one or more entrees, and dessert. Typical entrees are
"lamb stewed with wheat berries, lamb kebabs with grilled vegetables, or roast
chicken served with chickpea-studded rice pilaf". A rich dessert such as
baklava or kunafeh ("a buttery, syrup-sweetened kadaifi noodle pastry filled
with cheese") concludes the meal. Over time, iftar has grown into banquet
festivals. This is a time of fellowship with families, friends and surrounding
communities, but may also occupy larger spaces at masjid or banquet halls for
100 or more diners. For many around the world, iftar starts with the eating of
one or more (usually three) dates – as Muhammad used to do. Following that,
Muslims adjourn for the Maghrib prayer, the fourth of the five daily prayers,
after which the main meal is served. Charity. Charity is very important in
Islam, and even more so during Ramadan. Zakat, often translated as "the poor-
rate", is obligatory as one of the pillars of Islam; a fixed percentage
required to be given by those with savings. Sadaqa is voluntary charity in
given above and beyond what is required from the obligation of zakat. In Islam
all good deeds are more handsomely rewarded in Ramadan than in any other month
of the year. Consequently, many will choose this time to give a larger portion,
if not all, of the zakat for which they are obligated to give. In addition,
many will also use this time to give a larger portion of sadaqa in order to
maximize the reward that will await them on the Day of Judgment. In many Muslim
countries, it is a common sight to see people giving more food to the poor and
the homeless, and even to see large public areas for the poor to come and break
their fast. It is said that if a person helps a fasting person to break their
fast, then they receive a reward for that fast, without diminishing the reward
that the fasting person got for their fast. Increased prayer and recitation of
the Quran. In addition to fasting, Muslims are encouraged to read the entire
Quran. Some Muslims perform the recitation of the entire Quran by means of
special prayers, called "Tarawih". These voluntary prayers are held in the
mosques every night of the month, during which a whole section of the Quran
("Juz"', which is 1/30 of the Quran) is recited. Therefore, the entire Quran
would be completed at the end of the month. Although, it is not required to
read the whole Quran in the Salatul Tarawih prayers, it is common. Laylat al-
Qadr. Sometimes referred to as "the night of power" or 'the night of decree",
Laylat al-Qadr is considered the most holy night of the year. This is the night
in which Muslims believe the first revelation of the Quran was sent down to
Muhammad stating that this night was "better than one thousand months proper
worship, as stated in Chapter 97:3 of the Qu'ran. Also, generally, Laylat al-
Qadr is believed to have occurred on an odd-numbered night during the last 10
days of Ramadan, i.e., either the night of the 21st, 23rd, 25th, 27th or 29th.
End of Ramadan. Eid ul-Fitr. The Muslim holiday of "Eid ul-Fitr" (, "festivity
of breaking the fast"), sometimes spelled in English as "Eid al-Fitr", marks
the end of Ramadan and the beginning of the next lunar month called "Shawwal"
in Arabic. This first day of the following month is declared after another
crescent new moon has been sighted or the completion of 30 days of fasting if
no visual sighting is possible due to weather conditions. This first day of
"Shawwal" is called "Eid ul-Fitr". "Eid Ul-Fitr" may also be a reference
towards the festive nature of having endured the month of fasting successfully
and returning to the more natural disposition ("fitra") of being able to eat,
drink and resume intimacy with spouses during the day. For the manner in which
the Eid is celebrated, see "Eid ul-Fitr" and "Salat al Eid". Cultural aspects.
Various cultural additions are mistakenly associated as part of the original
celebrations arising from the time of Muhammad, as many of the forms of
celebration in various cultures and countries have added. For example, no
symbols of Ramadan were evident in any scholarly literature of Muhammad's
lifetime, yet in some places Ramadan is met with various decorations. For
example, in some Muslim countries today lights are strung up in public squares,
and across city streets, to add to the festivities of the month. Lanterns have
become symbolic decorations welcoming the month of Ramadan. In a growing number
of countries, they are hung on city streets. The tradition of lanterns as a
decoration becoming associated with Ramadan is believed to have originated
during the Fatimid Caliphate primarily centered in Egypt, where the Caliph Al-
Muizz Lideenillah was greeted by people holding lanterns to celebrate his
ruling. From that time lanterns were used to light mosques and houses
throughout the capital city of Cairo. Shopping malls, places of business, and
people's homes can be seen with stars and crescents, as well as, various
lighting effects, as well. Some Muslim parents, residing in Western countries
mimick modern Christmas celebration traditions, as a means of trying to make
Ramadan a more enjoyable time for their children who are too young to fast and
understand the spiritual significance of the holy month. Some Muslims may use a
"Ramadan calendar" to help their children understand Ramadan. There are 29 or
30 flaps, behind which there may be a small piece of chocolate, a sweet or a
toy. The calendars are similar to and may have developed from advent calendars,
which are popular during the Christmas period. Origins. Origin of the word
Ramadan. Ramadan, as a name for the month, is of Muslim origin. However, prior
to Islam's exclusion of intercalary days from its calendar, the name of this
month was called Natiq and to the intercalary days added always occurred in the
warm season. It is believed that the first revelation to Muhammad was sent down
during the month of Ramadan. Furthermore, God proclaimed to Muhammad that
fasting for His Sake was not a new innovation in monotheism, but rather an
obligation practiced by those truly devoted to The Oneness of God. Pre-Islamic
observation of fasting. During the Jahilliyah (i.e. pre-Islamic period) the
tribe of Quraish and the Jews used to fast on the day of Ashura It marks two
historical events: the day Nuh (Noah) left the Ark, and the day that Musa
(Moses) was saved from the Egyptians by Allah. Ashura may or may not be
referring to the Jewish practice of fasting on Yom Kippur. Abu Zanad, an Arabic
writer from Iraq who lived around 747 A.D. (after the founding of Islam), wrote
that at least one Mandaean community located in northern Iraq observed Ramadan.
