Rama Rama (DevanƒÅgarƒ´: "‡§∞‡§æ‡§Æ" ; ,; "J√ maÃ∞" ; Javanese: "Ramavijaya" ;
Khmer: "·ûñ·üí·ûö·üá·ûö·û∂·ûò Phreah Ream" ; Lao: "‡∫û‡∫£‡∫∞‡∫£‡∫≤‡∫°" "Phra
Ram" ; Malay: "Megat Seri Rama"; Maranao: "Raja Bantugan"; "Ramar"; "Rama";
"Phra Ram") or Ramachandra is the seventh avatar of the god Vishnu in Hinduism,
and a king of Ayodhya in Hindu scriptures. In few Rama-centric sects, Rama is
considered the Supreme Being, rather than an avatar. Rama was born in
Suryavansha (Ikshvaku Vansh) later known as Raghuvansha after king Raghu. As
per Valmiki Ramayana, Bala Kanda Sarga 18, Shlokas 8/9/10, Rama was born on 9th
Day (now celebrated across India as Ram Navmi) in Chaitra Lunar Month in
Ayodhya, India when Moon & Jupiter were rising in the east in Cancer sign and
four other planets (Sun, Mars, Saturn, Venus) were exalted in their exaltation
signs. Using a free Planetarium Software (Planetarium Gold) that uses NASA JPL
data files for planetary positions, Pushkar Bhatnagar has been able to
establish in his research that the star positions at Rama's birth match the
date of "10th Jan 5114BC" around 12:30pm local time; there is no other match
for these planetary positions. As per Based on Puranic genealogy, Rama is
believed by Hindus to have lived in the second Yuga called Treta Yuga, before
Krishna who was born towards the begining of Dwapara Yuga. Rama is
traditionally considered to have appeared in the last quarter of Treta Yuga.
Prior to the eleventh century there were no temples to Rama, since he was
viewed as human. Rama bhakti poetry starts to emerge only in the sixteenth
century. Rama is one of the many popular figures and deities in Hinduism,
specifically Vaishnavism and Vaishnava religious scriptures in South and
Southeast Asia. In Ayodhya, the Indian city believed to be the birthplace of
Rama, he is also worshipped as an infant or Rama Lalla. Most of the details of
Rama's life come from the Ramayana, one of the two great epics of India. Born
as the eldest son of Kausalya and Dasharatha, king of Ayodhya, Rama is referred
to within Hinduism as "Maryada Purushottama", literally "the Perfect Man" or
"Lord of Self-Control" or "Lord of Virtue". Rama is the husband of Sita, whom
Hindus consider to be an Avatar of Lakshmi and the embodiment of perfect
womanhood. Rama's life and journey is one of perfect adherence to dharma
despite harsh tests of life and time. He is pictured as the ideal man and the
perfect human. For the sake of his father's honour, Rama abandons his claim to
Kosala's throne to serve an exile of fourteen years in the forest. His wife
Sita and brother Lakshmana, unable to live without Rama, decide to join him,
and all three spend the fourteen years in exile together. While in exile, Sita
is kidnapped by Ravana, the Rakshasa (Asura) monarch of Lanka. After a long and
arduous search that tests his personal strength and virtue, Rama fights a
colossal war against Ravana's armies. In a war of powerful and magical beings,
greatly destructive weaponry and battles, Rama slays Ravana in battle and
liberates his wife. Having completed his exile, Rama returns to be crowned king
in Ayodhya (the capital of his kingdom) and eventually becomes emperor, rules
with happiness, peace, prosperity and justice‚Äîa period known as "Rama Rajya".
Rama's courage in searching for Sita and fighting a terrible war to rescue his
wife and their honour is complemented by Sita's absolute devotion to her
husband's love, and perfect chastity despite being Ravana's captive. Rama's
younger brothers, namely Lakshmana, Shatrughna and Bharata strongly complement
his piety, virtue and strength, and they are believed by many to belong to the
"Maryada Purushottama" and the Seventh Avatara, mainly embodied by Rama. Rama's
piety and virtue attract powerful and devoted allies such as Hanuman and the
Vanaras of Kishkindha, with whose help he rescues Sita. The legend of Rama is
deeply influential and popular in the societies of the Indian subcontinent and
across South East Asia. Rama is revered for his unending compassion, courage
and devotion to religious values and duty. Etymology. The feminine form of the
adjective, ' is an epithet of the night (Ratri), as is ', the feminine of "",
viz. "the dark one; the black one". Two Ramas are mentioned in the Vedas, with
the patronymics "MƒÅrgaveya" and "Aupatasvini"; another Rama with the
patronymic "JƒÅmadagnya" is the supposed author of a Rigvedic hymn. According
to Monier Monier-Williams, three Ramas were celebrated in post-Vedic times, In
the Vishnu sahasranama, Rama is the 394th name of Vishnu. In the interpretation
of Adi Shankara's commentary, translated by Swami Tapasyananda of the
Ramakrishna Mission, Rama has two meanings: the supreme Brahman who is the
eternally blissful spiritual Self in whom yogis delight, or the One (i.e.,
Vishnu) who out of His own will assumed the enchanting form of Rama, the son of
Dasaratha. Literary sources. The primary source of the life and journey of Rama
is the epic Ramayana as composed by the Rishi Valmiki. The Vishnu Purana also
recounts Rama as Vishnu's seventh avatar, and in the Bhagavata Purana, ninth
skandha, adhyayas 10 & 11, the story of the Ramayana is again recounted in
brief up to and including the slaying of Ravana and Prince Rama's return to
Ayodhya. Additionally, the tales of Rama are reverently spoken of in the epic
"Mahabharata". The epic had many versions across India's regions. However,
other scriptures in Sanskrit reflect the life of Ramayana. The followers of
Madhvacharya believe that an older version of the Ramayana, the mula-Ramayana,
previously existed but is no longer extant. They consider it to be more
authoritative than the version by Valmiki. Another important shortened version
of the epic in Sanskrit is the "Adhyatma Ramayana". The seventh century CE
Sanskrit "Bhatti's Poem" Bha·π≠·π≠ikƒÅvya of Bha·π≠·π≠i who lived in Gujarat,
is a retelling of the epic that simultaneously illustrates the grammatical
examples for PƒÅ·πáini's "A·π£·π≠ƒÅdhyƒÅyƒ´" as well as the major figures of
speech and the Prakrit language. Versions of the Ramayana exist in most major
Indian languages; examples that elaborate on the life, deeds and divine
philosophies of Rama include the epic poem "Ramavataram" by the 12th century
poet Kambar in Tamil, and "Ramcharitmanas", a Hindi version of the Ramayana by
the 16th century saint, Tulsidas. Contemporary versions of the Ramayana include
Sri Ramayana Darshanam by Kuvempu in Kannada and "Ramayana Kalpavrikshamu" by
Viswanatha Satyanarayana in Telugu, both of which have been awarded the
Jnanpith Award. The epic has transformed across the diverse regions of India,
which boast their own unique languages and cultural traditions. The essential
tale of Rama has also spread across Southeast Asia, and evolved into unique
renditions of the epic ‚Äì incorporating local history, folktales, religious
values as well as unique features from the languages and literary discourse.
The "Kakawin Ramayana" of Java, Indonesia, the "Ramakavaca" of Bali, "Hikayat
Seri Rama" of Malaysia, "Maradia Lawana" of the Philippines, "Ramakien" of
Thailand (which calls him "Phra Ram") are great works with many unique
characteristics and differences in accounts and portrayals of the legend of
Rama. The legends of Rama are witnessed in elaborate illustration at the Wat
Phra Kaew temple in Bangkok. The national epic of Myanmar, "Yama Zatdaw" is
essentially the Burmese "Ramayana", where Rama is named "Yama". In the Reamker
of Cambodia, Rama is known as "Preah Ream". In the "Phra Lak Phra Lam" of Laos,
Gautama Buddha is regarded as an incarnation of Rama. Avatara. The "Ramayana"
speaks of how the Goddess Earth (Bhumidevi), came to the Lord Creator, Brahma
begging to be rescued from evil kings who were plundering her resources and
destroying life through bloody wars and evil conduct. The Devs also came to
Brahma fearful of the rule of Ravana, the ten-headed rakshas emperor of Lanka.
Ravana had overpowered the Devs and now ruled the heavens, the earth and the
netherworlds. Although a powerful and noble monarch, he was also arrogant,
destructive and a patron of evil doers. He had boons that gave him immense
strength and was invulnerable to all living and celestial beings, except man
and animals. Brahma, Bhumidevi and the Devas worshipped Vishnu, the Preserver,
for deliverance from Ravana's tyrannical rule. Vishnu promised to kill Ravana
by incarnating as a man ‚Äì the eldest son of Kosala's king Dasaratha.
Also,Goddess Lakshmi,took birth as Sita,in order to accompany her consort
Vishnu and was found by king Janaka of Mithila while he was ploughing a field.
Vishnu's eternal companion, the Ananta Sesha is said to have incarnated as
Lakshmana to stay at his Lord's side on earth. Throughout his life, no one,
except himself and a few select sages (among which are included Vasishta,
Sharabhanga, Agastya and Vishwamitra) know of his destiny. Ram is continually
revered by the many sages he encounters through his life, but only the most
learned and exalted know of his true identity. At the end of the war between
Rama and Ravana, just as Sita passes her "Agni pariskha", Lord Brahma, Indra
and the Devas, the celestial sages and Lord Shiva appear out of the sky. They
affirm Sita's purity and ask him to end this terrible test. Thanking the
Avatara for delivering the universe from the grips of evil, they reveal Ram's
divine identity upon the culmination of his mission. Initiation of the Avatara.
Sage Vishwamitra takes the two princes, Rama and Lakshmana, to his ashram, as
he needs Rama's help in slaying several Rakshasas that have been harassing him
and several other sages living in the area. Rama's first encounter is with a
Rakshasi named Taataka, who is a celestial nymph cursed to take the form of a
demoness. Vishwamitra explains that she has polluted much of the habitat where
the sages reside and there will not be any contentment until she is destroyed.
Rama has some reservations about killing a woman, but since Taataka poses such
a big threat to the Rishis and he is expected to follow their word, he fights
with Taataka and kills her with a poisoned arrow. After her death, the
surrounding forest becomes greener and cleaner. Vishwamitra presents Rama with
several astras and sastras (divine weapons) that will be of use to him in the
future, and Rama masters the knowledge of all the weapons and their uses.
Vishwamitra then tells Rama and Lakshmana that soon, he along with some of his
disciples, will perform a yagna for seven days and nights that will be of great
benefit to the world, and the two princes must keep close watch for the two
sons of Taataka, Mareecha and Subahu, who will try to defile the yagna at all
costs. The princes therefore keep a strong vigil for all of the days, and on
the seventh day they spot Maricha and Subahu coming with a whole host of
Raakshasas ready to pour bones and blood into the fire. Rama points his bow at
the two, and with one arrow kills Subahu, and with the other arrow flings
Mareecha thousands of miles away into the ocean. Lakshmana deals with the rest
of the demons. The yagna is completed successfully Rama also frees Ahalya, the
wife of Gautama Maharishi, from a curse. She was cursed to turn into stone by
her husband after a displeasing incident. However, the dust on Rama's feet
touched the stone and turned it back into a woman again. Gautama Maharishi was
gratified that everything was back to normal again. Sage Vishwamitra then takes
the two princes to the "Swayamvara" ceremony for Sita. The challenge is to
string the bow of Shiva called "Pinaka", and to break it. This task is
considered impossible for any ordinary king or living being, as this is the
personal weapon of Shiva, more powerful, holy and of divine creation than
conceivable. While attempting to string the bow, Rama breaks it in two. This
feat of strength spreads his fame across the worlds and seals his marriage to
Sita, celebrated as "Vivaha Panchami". After Rama weds Sita and the entire
royal family and the Ayodhya army begin their journey back, the great rishi
Parashurama (Bhargava Rama) appears before them, having descended from his
mountainous hermitage. Parashurama is an extremely powerful rishi, responsible
for killing all of the world's tyrannical and oppressive emperors and kings 21
times. He was the sixth Avatara of Vishnu, and finds it unbelievable that
anybody could break the bow of Shiva. Considering himself to still be the most
powerful warrior-rishi on earth, he brings with them the bow of Vishnu, and
intends to challenge Rama to prove his strength by stringing it, and then
fighting a battle with him to prove superiority. Although the entire Ayodhya
army is forestalled by his mystical power, Rama is himself angered. He
respectfully bows to Parashurama, and within a twinkling of an eyelid snatches
the bow of Vishnu, strings it, places an arrow and points it straight at the
challenger's heart. Rama asks Parashurama what he will give as a target to the
arrow in return for his life? At this point, Parashurama feels himself devoid
of the tremendous mystical energy he possessed for so long. He realizes that
Rama is Vishnu incarnate, his successor and definitely his superior. He accepts
Rama's superiority, devotes his tapasya to him, pays homage to Rama and
promises to return to his hermitage and leave the world of men. Rama then
shoots the arrow up into the sky with Vishnu's bow, performing a feat true to
his supreme, divine nature with his natural weapon. His overpowering of
Parashurama and using the supreme weapon with incredible ease and perfection
dazzle the spectators and his relatives, but no one save Parashurama and
Vasishta associate this with his true identity. It is said that the Rama's
arrow is still flying across space, across time and across all of the universe.
The day it will return to earth, it is said, it will bring the end of the
world. Others say that the flying arrow destroys all evil on earth to uphold
dharma and righteousness. Dharma of exile. King Dasaratha announces to Ayodhya
that he plans to crown Rama, his eldest child the "Yuvaraja" ("crown prince").
While the news is welcomed by everyone in the kingdom, the mind of queen
Kaikeyi is poisoned by her wicked maid-servant, Manthara. Kaikeyi, who is
initially pleased for Rama, is made to fear for the safety and future of her
son Bharata. Fearing that Rama would ignore or possibly victimize his youngest
brother for the sake of power, Kaikeyi demands that Dasaratha banish Rama to a
forest exile for fourteen years, and that Bharata be crowned in Rama's place.
She had been granted two boons by the king when she had saved his life a long
time ago in battle, and the queen now used them to serve her purpose. The
king's court and the people are outraged at this turn of events. Dasaratha
loved and cherished Rama dearly, and was in personal turmoil. Completely
estranged now from his younger wife, he abhors the prospect of separation from
Rama. But Rama realizes that the king must not break a solemn promise at any
time, and neither should a son disobey his father's command. Sita joins her
husband in exile despite his discouraging her, as it is her duty and out of
love for Rama that she must be at his side at all times. His younger brother
Lakshmana also immediately decides to join Rama rather than remain in the city.
As he leaves for exile, the people of Ayodhya are deeply saddened and angered
at Dasaratha and Kaikeyi. Dasaratha's heart is broken and he collapses and dies
by the next day, unable to bear the agony of separation from Rama. Despite the
reasoning of Vasishtha and the pleas of his brothers, Rama refuses to return.
Although horrified at the news of his father's death, Rama finds it impossible
that he should break his dead father's word. Rama does not bear any anger
towards Kaikeyi, believing firmly in the power of destiny. According to the
explanation of the classic, this exile actually presents Rama the opportunity
to confront Ravana and his evil empire. Rama and Sita. Rama and Sita are the
protagonists in one of the most famous love stories of all time. Described as
being deeply in love, Sita and Rama are theologically understood as
Incarnations of Lakshmi and Vishnu respectively. When Rama is banished from the
kingdom, he attempts to convince Sita not to join him in a potentially
dangerous and certainly arduous existence in the jungle, but Sita rejects this.
When Rama orders her in his capacity as husband, Sita rejects it, asserting
that it was an essential duty of a wife to be at her husband's side come good
or ill. Rama in turn is assiduously protective and caring for Sita throughout
the exile. When Sita is kidnapped by Ravana, both Sita and Rama undergo great
personal hardships during their separation. Sita protects her chastity
assiduously, and survives over a year in captivity on the strength of her love
and attention to religious values and duty. She is completely unfettered in her
resolve despite Ravana's courting, cajoling and threats. Meanwhile Rama, not
knowing who had kidnapped Sita or where was she taken, often succumbs to
despair and tears, denouncing himself for failing to defend her and agonizing
over her safety and pain. Sita knows that it is in Rama's destiny to fight to
rescue her (she refuses to be rescued thus by Hanuman, who discovers her), but
is deeply anxious for his safety and fearful of Ravana's power. Agni pariksha.
Lord Rama sent a messenger to Ravana that said, "Come to me and I will forgive
you," before he slays Ravana. After Rama slays Ravana and wins the war, Sita
wants to come before him in the state which over a year's imprisonment had
reduced her to, Rama arranges for Sita to be bathed and given beautiful
garments before they are re-united. But even as Sita comes before him in great
excitement and happiness, after hearing a comment from a washer who wonders,
"After a long time near Ravana how can Sita maintain her character?" Rama
decided to prove that his Sita is still like as earlier, so he tells her that
she has to give Agni pariksha. At this sudden turn of events, all the vanaras,
rakshasas, Sugriva, Hanuman and Lakshmana are deeply shocked. Sita begs
Lakshmana to build her a pyre upon which she could end her life, as she could
not live without Rama. At this point, Lakshmana is angered at Rama for the
first time in his life, but following Rama's nod, he builds a pyre for Sita. At
the great shock and sorrow of the watchers, Sita sits into the flames. But to
their greater shock and wonder, she is completely unharmed. Instead, she glows
radiantly from the centre of the pyre. Immediately Rama runs to Sita and
embraces her. He had never doubted her purity for a second, but, as he explains
to a dazzled Sita, the people of the world would not have accepted or honoured
her as a queen or a woman if she had not passed this "Agni pariksha" before the
eyes of hundreds, where Agni would destroy the impure and sinful, but not touch
the pure and innocent. There is a version of Tulsidas's Ramacharitamanasa,
which is popular, which states that Rama had Sita under the protection of Agni
God. After Sita was released it was necessary to bring her out of security of
Agni god. Another version of this, used in Ramanand Sagar's Ramayan, was that
Rama had known Sita was going to be abducted by Ravana ahead of time. So, he
entrusted her to Agni Dev, or the God of Fire. Rama did this so that he, who in
reality was Vishnu, could kill Ravana. Sita, in turn, left behind a "shadow",
or twin-like version of herself behind. The "shadow" Sita had been abducted by
Ravana. Therefore, the lila of Agni Pariksha was to retrieve the genuine Sita
from the temporary care of Agni Dev. Rama explains this to Lakshmana before the
"Pariksha" is done. This version has also been written in the Ram Charit Manas.
Sita's banishment. In the "Uttara Kanda", Rama banishes his wife Sita, even as
she is pregnant, asking Lakshmana to deliver her safely to Rishi Valmiki's
ashram. He does so after receiving word that some of his subjects in Ayodhya
believed that Sita was unfit due to her long captivity in Ravana's city. As a
king is expected to uphold moral principles, Rama reluctantly banished Sita in
order to uphold his duty. Sita probably lives in her kingdom of Mithila but
later in Valmiki's ashram for the education of Lava and Kusha, her sons with
Rama. A legend by Rishi Agastya in the epic states that Vishnu in a previous
age had been cursed by a rishi, whose wife had been killed by Vishnu for
sheltering his enemies escaping from battle. The Rishi condemns Vishnu to be
denied for a long age the companionship of his soul mate, just as Vishnu, by an
inadvertent display of anger, had deprived the rishi of his loving wife. Thus
Rama, Vishnu's incarnation, must live the rest of his life without Sita. Many
Hindus, such as the followers of Sri Vaishnavism, consider this entire section
of the Ramayana to be interpolated, and thus they do not accept the
authenticity of this story claiming that Sita was banished. A general narration
of Ramayana does not state it so. It says that Sita later lived in her father's
kingdom of Mithila with her sons Lava and Kusha as per the North Indian
(especially in Uttar Pradesh and Bihar) custom that children be brought up in
their "nanihal", or maternal grandmother's place. Sita and her sons later live
in Valmiki's ashram for the boys' education and military training. Children.
According to legend, Kusha and Lava are the twin sons of Lord Rama and Sita.
Born in the forest after the banishment of Sita from Ayodhya, the twins were
educated and trained in military skills as their mother took refuge in Sage
Valmiki's ashram, located in a forest on the banks of the River Tamsa. As Rama
performed the Ashvamedha Yajna, a horse strayed into their forest, Rama sent
Hanuman to retrieve the horses. Rama's sons Luv and Kush captured the horses.
Hanuman, seeing Luv and Kush recognised that they were the son's of Rama. He
let them capture him and tie him up. There Hanuman started meditating on the
name Rama. Worried Rama sent his brothers to look for the horses. As they saw
Hanuman tied up and two boys guarding him, they thought that the two boy had
stolen the horses. So Ramas brothers started attacking Luv and Kush. Although
Rama's brothers should have won, but Luv and Kush defeated them all, knocking
them unconscious. Luv and Kush were protected by Hanuman. Then Rama himself
went looking for the horses fearing that Hanuman and his brothers had been
attacked. Rama found his brothers on the floor. He was enraged. He then started
fiercely attacking Luv and Kush not knowing they were his children. Though his
attacks had no effect on them he saw Hanuman meditating. At that moment he knew
that Hanuman was protecting them. Rama then started attacking Hanuman to awaken
him. But none of his weapons had any effect on him either. The sage Valmiki
then awoke the brothers and Hanuman, explaining to Rama that Luv and Kush were
his sons. When Devi Sita found out that Lava and Kusha had defeated Ayodhya's
forces, she proudly revealed their/her identity. Once she had witnessed the
acceptance of her children by Rama, Sita sought final refuge in the arms of her
mother Bhumidevi, the Goddess Mother Earth. Later life. Rama's reign is known
as the Rama Rajya which lasted for 11,000 years. During this period, people
were healthy, satisfied and lived with complete peace and harmony. There was no
evil, no wars, no natural calamity and no diseases. Rama ruled the whole earth
without using military force as all kings submitted themselves to him.Once a
Brahmana came to him, lamenting over his dead 15 year old son and accused Rama
for committing a sin (in those days, nobody had a short life and died of
natural causes). Sage Narada told Rama that a Sudra was doing a penance
somewhere in his kingdom, which was a sin because in the Treta Yuga only
Brahmanas and Kshatriyas were expected to do penances. Vaishyas and Sudras
could attain salvation by doing their duty only. Rama set out in the Pushpaka
Vimana (which Kubera had given it in gratitude for killing Ravana) and
travelled in North, East and Western directions but Rama did not see any sinful
activities. Rama then went out in the southern direction where he found a Sudra
on top of a hill in sirsana position. The Sudra wanted to defeat Indra and
conquer the heavens. Rama then beheaded the Sudra with his sword and left for
Ayodhya to find the Brahmana's son alive.His brothers Bharata and Shatrughna
settled in their later lives. Bharata, with the help of his uncle Yudhajit,
conquered the eastern land of the Gandharvas and ruled it. Shatrughna slew the
Asura Lavana and founded the city of Mathura. Rama acquired a rare gem from
Rishi Agastya which entombed the powers of the gods Indra, Varuna, Yama and
Kubera, which helped the king rule efficiently.After his reign, Rama and his
brothers and his allies peacefully left the earth on the river Sarayu without
abandoning their mortal bodies. Luv and Kush ruled Kosala and continued the
solar race. Maryada Purushottama. 1. At the time when it was normal for kings
to have more than one wife, Rama gave ideal of having a single wife. After Sita
was banished, he was doing penance with a gold statue of Sita. In Balakanda of
Valmiki Ramayana it is written that Rama and Sita resided in each other's
heart. 2. Rama always followed his promise at any cost. In fact, he went to
forest to make his father's promise to Kaikeyi true. Another instance was when,
he had promised the Spirit of Time that during their conversation, if anyone
was to intrude, Rama would have pronounce an instant death sentence upon the
individual. They were intruded upon by his beloved younger brother Lakshmana,
and to keep his part of the promise, pronounced the death sentence. There are
many examples of Rama's promises which he kept. Most important are the promise
to sages to save their lives from Rakshasas, getting back Sugreeva's kingdom,
making Vibhishana the king of Lanka. 3. Excellent friend: Rama had very
touching relations with his friends irrespective of their status. Some of his
friends are Nishada-raja Guha, King of Nishaadas (a caste whose profession was
hunting the birds), Sugreeva (the Vanar king) and Vibhishana a Rakshasa. 4.
Even towards his enemies, Rama showed great nobility and virtue. To gather
information about the enemy army's strengths and weaknesses, Ravana sent two of
his spies, Suka and Sarana, to the Vanara camps. Disguised as Vanaras they
blended into the enemy camp, but Vibhishana saw through their deceit and
presented the two spies to Rama. Rama then asked them what their mission was
and whether they fulfilled it. After listening to them, he sent for a Vanara to
give them a proper tour of all the Vanara camps and give them all the
information they desired about the major soldiers and their strengths. He then
told the spies to give this message to Ravana. "Tomorrow morning, I will
destroy all of Lanka. Keep all sides of your palace well defended and be ready
with all of your men by sunrise." The spies were greatly astonished with Rama's
charisma, courage, and adherence to the codes of war. After Rama gave them
leave, they knew that their king was bound to lose against this virtuous and
courageous man. When Ravana first fought with Rama, Rama defeated him to such
an extent that Ravana lost his charioteer, horses, chariot, flag, weapons and
armor. Though the situation was at his advantage, Rama instead praised Ravana
for a great fight that day, and asked him to retire and take rest, as he must
be quite tired. Ravana was greatly embarrassed at this, but he was also
gratified that Rama saved his life, and this led him to consider for a moment
whether to retreat and give Sita back... Companions. Even as Rama is the ideal
conception of manhood, he is often aided and complemented in different
situations by the characteristics by those who accompany him. They serve Rama
devotedly, at great personal risk and sacrifice. Bharata and Lakshmana. Absent
when Rama is exiled, upon his return Bharata is appalled to learn of the
events. And even though Kaikeyi had done all this for his benefit, Bharata is
angered at the suggestion that he should take Ayodhya's throne. Denouncing his
mother, Bharata proclaims to the city that he would go to the forest to fetch
Rama back, and would serve out his term of exile himself. Although initially
resentful and suspicious, the people of Ayodhya hail Bharata's selfless nature
and courageous act. Despite his fervent pleas to return, Rama asserts that he
must stay in the forest to keep his father's word. He orders Bharata to perform
his duty as king of Ayodhya, especially important after Dasaratha's death, and
orders Shatrughna to support and serve him. Returning saddened to the city,
Bharata refuses to wear the crown or sit on the throne. Instead, he places the
slippers of Rama that he had taken back with him on the throne, and rules
Ayodhya assiduously keeping Rama's beliefs and values in mind. When Rama
finally returns, Bharata runs personally to welcome him back. Bharata is hailed
for his devotion to his elder brother and dharma, distinguished from Lakshmana
as he is left on his own for fourteen years. But he unfailingly denies self-
interest throughout this time, ruling the kingdom only in Rama's image.
Vasishtha proclaims that no one had better learnt dharma than Bharata, and for
this piety he forms an essential part of the conception of perfect manhood, of
the Seventh Avatara of Vishnu. Shatrughna's role to Bharata is akin to that of
Lakshmana to Rama. Believed to be one-quarter of Vishnu incarnated, or as the
incarnation of his eternal companion, Ananta Sesha, Lakshmana is always at
Rama's side. Although unconstrained by Dasaratha's promise to Kaikeyi,
Lakshmana resists Rama's arguments and accompanies him and Sita into the
forest. During the years of exile, Lakshmana constantly serves Rama and Sita
‚Äì building huts, standing guard and finding new routes. When Sita is
kidnapped, Rama blazes with his divine power and in his immense rage, expresses
the desire to destroy all creation. Lakshmana prays and pleads for Rama to calm
himself, and despite the shock of the moment and the promise of travails to
come, begin an arduous but systematic search for Sita. During times when the
search is proving fruitless and Rama fears for Sita, and expresses despair in
his grief and loneliness, Lakshmana encourages him, providing hope and solace.
When Rama in his despair fears that Sugriva has forgotten his promise to help
him trace Sita, Lakshmana goes to Kishkindha to remind the complacent monarch
of his promise to help. But Lakshmana kicks down the city gate and threatens to
destroy Sugriva and the monkey kingdom with his own divine power. Lakshmana is
unable to tolerate Sugriva breaking his vow to Rama while enjoying material and
sensual pleasures while Rama suffers alone. It is only through the diplomatic
intervention of Queen Tara, Sugriva's wife, that Lakshmana is pacified. Tara
then scolds and galvanises Sugriva into honoring his promise to Rama. Sugriva
and Rama are then reconciled with the help of Lakshmana and Tara. And finally
Sugriva appoints Hanuman to find the location of Sita and lead the monkey army
into battle against the demonic forces of Ravana. Lakshmana is uniquely
responsible for slaying Indrajit, the invincible son of Ravana who had
humiliated Indra and the Devas, and outwitted the brothers and the Vanaras on
several occasions. Rishi Agastya later points out that this victory was the
turning point of the conflict. Rama is often overcome with emotion and deep
affection for Lakshmana, acknowledging how important and crucial Lakshmana's
love and support was for him. He also trusts Lakshmana to carry out difficult
orders ‚Äì Lakshmana was asked to take Sita to the ashrama of Valmiki, where
she was to spend her exile. Lakshmana's deep love for Rama, his unconditional
service and sacrifice, as well as qualities of practical judgment and clear-
headedness make him Rama's superior in certain situations and perspectives.
Lakshmana symbolizes a man's duty to his family, brothers and friends, and
forms an essential part of the conception of ideal manhood, that Rama primarily
embodies. Jatayu, Hanuman and Vibheeshana. When Rama and Lakshmana begin the
desperate search to discover where Sita had been taken, after traversing a
distance in many directions, they come across the magical eagle Jatayu, who is
dying. They discover from Jatayu that a rakshasa was flying away with a crying,
struggling Sita towards the south. Jatayu had flown to the rescue of Sita, but
owing to his age and the rakshasa's power, had been defeated. With this, Jatayu
dies in Rama's arms. Rama is overcome with love and affection for the bird
which sacrificed its own life for Sita, and the rage of his death returns to
him in the climactic battle with Ravana. Rama's only allies in the struggle to
find Sita are the Vanaras of Kishkindha. Finding a terrified Sugriva being
hunted by his own brother, king Vali, Rama promises to kill Vali and free
Sugriva of the terror and the unjust charge of plotting to murder Vali. The two
swear everlasting friendship over sacred fire. Rama's natural piety and
compassion, his sense of justice and duty, as well as his courage despite great
personal suffering after Sita's kidnapping inspire devotion from the Vanaras
and Sugriva, but especially Hanuman, Sugriva's minister. Devoted to Rama,
Hanuman exerts himself greatly over the search for Sita. He is the first to
discover that Sita was taken to Lanka, and volunteers to use his divine gifts
in a dangerous reconnaissance of Lanka, where he is to verify Sita's presence.
Hanuman hands Rama's ring to Sita, as a mark of Rama's love and his imminent
intention of rescuing her. Though captured, he candidly delivers Rama's message
to Ravana to immediately release Sita, and when his tail is burned, he flees
and sets Lanka on fire. When Lakshmana is struck down and near death and Rama
overcome with love and concern for his brother, Hanuman flies to the Himalayas
on the urgent mission to fetch the "sanjeevani" medicinal herbs, bringing the
entire mountain to Lanka so that no time is lost in saving Lakshmana. The
Vanaras fight the rakshasas, completely devoted to Rama's cause. They angrily
dismiss Ravana's efforts to create divisions by suggesting that Rama considered
them, monkeys, as mere animals. At the end of the war, Rama worships Brahma,
who restores life to the millions of fallen Vanaras. Before the onset of war,
rakshasa prince Vibheeshana, Ravana's youngest brother comes to join Rama.
Although he loves his brother and Lanka, he fails in repeated efforts to make
Ravana follow religious values and return Sita. Vibheeshana believes that
Ravana's arrogance and callousness will cause the destruction of Lanka, which
is a gross violation of a king's duty, and that Ravana's actions have only
propagated evil. Vibheeshana refuses to defend the evil of Ravana's ways and
inspired by Rama's compassion and piety, leaves Lanka to join the Vanara Army.
His knowledge of rakshasa ways and Ravana's mind help Rama and the Vanaras
overcome black magic and mystical weapons. At the end of the war, Rama crowns
Vibheeshana as the king of Lanka. Vibheeshana, and to a greater extent Hanuman,
embody the perfect devotee in the wider conception of perfect manhood. Rama in
war. When Rama is sixteen years old, he and his brother Lakshmana are taken by
Vishwamitra to the forests, with the purpose of killing rakshasas who are
wrecking the tapasya and sacrifices of brahmins. Rama and Lakshmana are taught
the advanced military arts and given the knowledge of all celestial weapons by
Vishwamitra. Rama proceeds to slay Tadaka, a cursed yaksha demoness. When asked
to slay the demoness, Rama demurs, considering it sinful to kill a woman. But
Vishwamitra explains that evil has no gender. Rama replies that "My father
asked me to follow your orders, I will obey them even if it is a sin" The
killing of Tadaka liberates the yaksha soul who was cursed for a sin, and had
to adopt a rakshasi's body. It restores the purity of the sacrifices of the
brahmins who live nearby, and protects the animals who live in the forest, and
travelers. The main purpose of Vishwamitra's exursion is to conduct his yagna
without interruption from two evil demons, Maricha and Subahu sons of Tadaka.
Rama and Lakshmana guard the sacrifice, and when the two demons appear, Rama
shoots an arrow named Manava Astrathat carries Maricha across the lands and
into the ocean, but does not kill him. Rama and his brother then proceed to
kill Subahu and accompanying demons. Rama explains to Lakshmana that leaving
Maricha alive was an act of compassion, but the others did not heed the point
and chose to attack. During the forest exile, sages plead for protection and
help against evil rakshasas who spoil their sacrifices and religious activities
and terrorize them. Many rakshasas had even killed and eaten sages and innocent
people. At Janasthana, Rama uses his exceptional prowess to single-handedly
kill over fourteen thousand demon hordes led by the powerful Khara, who is a
cousin of Ravana and Dushana. Sagara. Faced with the dilemma of how to cross
the ocean, Rama performs a penance tapasya, fasting and meditating in perfect
dhyana for three days and three nights to Sagara, the Lord of Oceans. The ocean
god does not respond out of arrogance, and Rama on the fourth morning, pointed
the brahmastra towards the ocean. The Vanaras are dazzled and fearful at
witnessing the enraged Rama demolish the oceans, and Lakshmana prays to calm
Rama's mind. Just as Rama invokes the brahmastra, considered the most powerful
weapon capable of destroying all creation, Saagara arises out of the oceans. He
bows to Rama, and begs for pardon. Since lord Rama had to use the weapon, he
suggests Rama re-direct the weapon at a demonic race that lives in the heart of
the ocean. Rama's arrows destroys the demons, and establishes a purer,
liberated environment there. Saagara promises that he would keep the oceans
still for all of Rama's army to pass, and Nala constructs a bridge (Rama's
Bridge) across to Lanka. Rama justifies his angry assault on the oceans as he
followed the correct process of petitioning and worshipping Saagara, but
obtaining the result by force for the greater good. The bridge today is known
as Rama Setu, which supposedly has its existence between India and Sri Lanka,
originates from Rameshwaram, India. In another version of the story, Lord Rama
redirected his missile to the barren Island, and as a result huge volcanic
eruption resulted. This volcano is the one which is found till today at the
southern part of Indian peninsula. Facing Ravana. Rama asserts his dedication
to dharma when he undertakes to offer Ravana a final chance to make peace,
despite his heinous actions and patronage of evil, by immediately returning
Sita and apologizing to both Rama and Sita, but Ravana refuses. In the war,
Rama slays the most powerful rakshasa commanders, including Prahasta, Atikaya
and with Ravana's brother, Kumbhakarna along with hundreds of thousands of
rakshasa soldiers. He outfights Ravana in their first battle, destroying his
chariot and weapons, and severely injuring him, but due to this, he allows him
to live and return to fight another day. But as a human being, Rama also proves
vulnerable on occasion to his enemies. He is put to a deep sleep with Lakshmana
by the "nagapash" of Indrajit, but they recover when Hanuman obtains the
magical medicine according to Vibheesana's advice. In the grand finale of the
battle, Rama engages Ravana, who through the devastation of losing his sons,
his brothers and friends and millions of his warriors, arouses his awesome and
magical powers and makes full use of the boons of Siva and Brahma, and the
magical knowledge of warfare possessed by the greatest of rakshasas. Rama and
Ravana compete fiercely, inflicting severe injuries on one another with the
most powerful weapons that could destroy the universe. After a long and arduous
battle, Rama successfully decapitates Ravana's central head, but an ugly head,
symbolic of all of Ravana's evil powers arises in its place. After another long
battle, Rama decapitates it, only to find another growing in its place. This
cycle continues, and as darkness approaches, Ravana's magical powers increase
in force. Vibheeshana, seeing this then tells Rama something vital. Ravana had
obtained amrita, the nectar of immortality, from the gods. Though he could not
consume it, he nevertheless stored a vessel of it in his stomach. This amrit
was causing his heads to regenerate as soon as they were cut off. Upon the
advice of Agastya, Rama worships Lord Aditya, the Sun, with the famous "Aditya
Hridayam" prayer and then invokes Prasvapna. Rama fires the great arrow that
enters Ravana's chest/stomach and evaporates the store of amrit, finally
killing him. Following Ravana's death, Rama is immediately compassionate. After
investing Vibheeshana as the next king of Lanka, he asks the new king and the
surviving rakshasas to properly cremate their dead king, who he acknowledges
was a great being worthy of respect and admiration, despite his patronage of
evil. Rama Rajya. The end of the war coincides with the end of Rama's tenure of
exile. Flying home on the "Pushpaka Vimana", Rama returns to a joyous Ayodhya.
His mothers, brothers and the people joyously welcome him. The next day, Rama
is invested as the King of Ayodhya, and Emperor of the World. Although he first
asks Lakshmana to become the "yuvaraja", upon the advice of Lakshmana he
invests the position to Bharata, who has had fourteen years of experience as
the ruler of Ayodhya. Rama performs the holy "Ashwamedha" sacrifice, purifying
and establishing dharma across earth. Beyond the "Ramayana", the eleven
thousand years of Rama's rule over the earth represent to millions of modern
Indians a time and age when God as a man ruled the world. There was perfect
justice and freedom, peace and prosperity. There were no natural disasters,
diseases, ailments or ill-fortune of any nature on any living being. There were
no sins committed in the world by any of his people. Always attentive and
accessible to his people, Rama is worshipped and hailed by all ‚Äì the very
symbol of moksha, the ultimate goal and destination of all life, and the best
example of perfect character and human conduct, inspiring human beings for
countless succeeding ages. Rama like other Indian kings went undercover every
night to hear the pleas of his subjects and have a common man's perspective of
his rule. During Rama's tenure as King, the people apparently had no locks on
their doors as they feared no burglaries or other such misfortunes.
International influence. Be it as a manifestation of God or simply as a
legendary hero of myths and folktales, Rama is an immensely revered and
inspirational figure to people across the Indian subcontinent and South East
Asia, as well as increasingly across Western civilization, where the Hindu
epics and values are gaining recognition and popularity. In Jainism, Rama is
enumerated among the nine white "Balas". Rama is a great hero to the adherents
of Agama Hindu Dharma and to the Muslims who practice Abangan, a syncretic form
of Islam and Hinduism, in Indonesia. He is revered by the people throughout
Indochina who otherwise adhere to different forms of Buddhism, Islam and
Hinduism. His regal bearing and fighting prowess is emulated in various Indian
martial arts which in turn influenced various Southeast Asian fighting systems
such as silat. The "Rama Leela" is performed across South East Asia in numerous
local languages and the story has been the subject of art, architecture, music,
folk dance and sculpture. The ancient city of Ayutthaya stands in Thailand, as
the tribute of an ancient Thai kingdom to the great legend. Many ancient and
medieval era kings of India and South East Asia have adopted "Rama" as their
name. A Buddhist version of the tale is found in the Jataka stories, in the
Dasharatha Jataka (Jataka Atthakatha 461) in the Pali vernacular. Here Rama is
represented as a former life of the Buddha as a Bodhisatva and supreme Dharma
King of great wisdom. In the Buddhist tale, he is the king of Varanasi and not
Ayodhya, which is traditionally the capital of Kosala. Reviewers linked the
imagery of the blue-skinned Na'vi in James Cameron's film "Avatar" to Rama as
one of their possible conceptual prototypes. Festivals. The occasion of victory
over Ravana and the rakshasas is celebrated as the 10-day "Vijayadashami", also
known as "Dussehra". The "Ram Leela" is publicly performed in many villages,
towns and cities in India. Rama's return to Ayodhya and his coronation are
celebrated as "Diwali", also known as the "Festival of Lights". The latter two
are the most important and popular festivals in India and for Hindus across the
world. In Malaysia, Diwali is known as "Hari Deepavali", and is celebrated
during the seventh month of the Hindu solar calendar. It is a federal public
holiday. In many respects it resembles the traditions followed in the Indian
subcontinent. In Nepal, Diwali is known as "Tihar" and celebrated during the
October/November period. Here, though the festival is celebrated for five days,
the traditions vary from those followed in India. On the first day, cows are
worshipped and given offerings. On the second day, dogs are revered and offered
special food. On the third day, celebrations follow the same pattern as in
India, with lights and lamps and much social activity. On the fourth day Yama,
the Lord of Death, is worshipped and appeased. On the fifth and final day,
brothers sisters meet and exchange pleasantries. In Guyana, Diwali is marked as
a special occasion and celebrated with a lot of fanfare. It is observed as a
national holiday in this part of the world and some ministers of the Government
also take part in the celebrations publicly.
