Raphael (archangel) Raphael (Standard Hebrew רָפָאֵל, "Rāfāʾēl", "It
is God who heals", "God Heals", "God, Please Heal") is an archangel of Judaism
and Christianity, who in the Judeo-Christian tradition performs all manners of
healing. In Islam, Raphael is the same as Israfel. Raphael is known to be the
funniest of all the angels. Raphael in Judaism. The angels mentioned in the
Torah, the older books of the Hebrew Bible, are without names. Rabbi Shimon ben
Lakish of Tiberias (A.D. 230–270), asserted that all the specific names for
the angels were brought back by the Jews from Babylon, and modern commentators
would tend to agree. Raphael is named in several Jewish apocryphal books (see
below). Raphael in the Book of Enoch. Of seven archangels in the angelology of
post-Exilic Judaism, only Michael, mentioned as archangel (Daniel 12:1; Jude
verse 9) and Gabriel are mentioned by name in the scriptures that came to be
accepted as canonical by all Christians. Raphael is mentioned by name in the
Book of Tobit, which is accepted as canonical by Catholics, Anglicans and
Orthodox. Raphael in Catholicism. The name of the angel Raphael appears only in
the Deuterocanonical "Book of Tobit". The Book of Tobit is considered canonical
by Roman Catholic, Anglican and Orthodox Christians. Raphael first appears
disguised in human form as the travelling companion of Tobit's son, Tobiah
(Greek: Τωβίας/Tobias), calling himself "Azarias the son of the great
Ananias". During the adventurous course of the journey the archangel's
protective influence is shown in many ways including the binding of the demon
in the desert of upper Egypt. After the return and the healing of the blindness
of Tobit, Azarias makes himself known as "the angel Raphael, one of the seven,
who stand before the Lord" Tobit 12:15. Compare the unnamed angels in John's
Revelation 8:2. He is often venerated and patronized as Saint Raphael the
Archangel. Regarding the healing powers attributed to Raphael, we have his
declaration to Tobit ("Tobit", 12) that he was sent by the Lord to heal him of
his blindness and to deliver Sarah, his future daughter-in-law, from the demon
Asmodeus, who abducts and kills every man she marries on their wedding night
before the marriage can be consummated. Among Catholics, he is considered the
patron saint of medical workers, matchmakers, and travelers and may be
petitioned by them or those needing their services. The feast day of Raphael
was included for the first time in the General Roman Calendar in the year 1921,
for celebration on October 24. With the reform of the Roman Catholic Calendar
of Saints in 1969, this feast was transferred to September 29 for celebration
together with Saint Michael and Saint Gabriel. Within limits, the Roman
Catholic Church still authorizes use of the 1962 calendar. The Church of
England also celebrates "Michael and All Angels" on September 29. Raphael has
made an impression on Catholic geography: Saint Raphaël, France and Saint
Raphaël, Quebec, Canada; San Rafaels in Argentina, Bolivia, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Chile, Mexico, Trinidad and Tobago, Peru, the Philippines and in
Venezuela as San Rafael de Mohán and San Rafael de Orituco. In the United
States, San Rafaels inherited from Mexico survive in California (where besides
the city there are San Rafael Mountains), in New Mexico, and in Utah, where the
San Rafael River flows seasonally in the San Rafael Desert. The Archangel also
lends his name to St. Raphael's Cathedral, the seat of the Diocese of Madison,
Wisconsin, to St. Raphael's Cathedral, the seat of the Archdiocese of Dubuque,
and to Mission San Rafael Arcángel in San Rafael, California. In the New
Testament, only the archangels Gabriel and Michael are mentioned by name (Luke
1:9-26; Jude 1:9). Later manuscripts of John 5:1-4 refer to the pool at
Bethesda, where the multitude of the infirm lay awaiting the moving of the
water, for "an angel of the Lord descended at certain times into the pond; and
the water was moved. And he that went down first into the pond after the motion
of the water was made whole of whatsoever infirmity he lay under". Because of
the healing role assigned to Raphael, this particular angel is generally
associated with the archangel. Raphael is sometimes shown as standing atop a
large "fish" or holding a caught fish at the end of a line. This is a reference
to "Book of Tobit (Tobias)", where he told Tobias to catch a fish, and then
uses the gallbladder to heal Tobit's eyes, and to drive away Asmodeus by
burning the heart and liver. Raphael in Islam. Raphael is honored in Islam as
one of the great archangels and is known more commonly as "Israfel" or
"Israfil" in Islamic history. According to the "hadith", he is the angel
responsible for signaling the coming of Judgment Day by blowing the trumpet
(namely Sûr). According to tradition, the trumpet will be blown three times.
The first blow of the trumpet will signal the beginning of Last Day and the
second blow will signal the death of every living thing including angels,
demons and humans and the third blow will signal the time when all the souls
from all ages will be gathered for the Last Judgement. According to the Quran,
an unnamed trumpet-angel, assumed to be Israfel, has been holding his breath,
waiting for Allah's order to blow the Sûr. Raphael in "Paradise Lost". The
angel Raphael, along with many other prominent angels, appears in John Milton's
"Paradise Lost", in which he is assigned by God to re-warn Adam concerning the
sin of eating of the Tree of the knowledge of good and evil. He also expounds
to Adam the War in Heaven in which Lucifer and the demons fell, and the
creation of the Earth.
