Rationalism In epistemology and in its modern sense, rationalism is "any view
appealing to reason as a source of knowledge or justification". In more
technical terms, it is a method or a theory "in which the criterion of the
truth is not sensory but intellectual and deductive". Different degrees of
emphasis on this method or theory lead to a range of rationalist standpoints,
from the moderate position "that reason has precedence over other ways of
acquiring knowledge" to the more extreme position that reason is "the unique
path to knowledge". Given a pre-modern understanding of reason, rationalism is
identical to philosophy, the Socratic life of inquiry, or the zetetic
(skeptical) clear interpretation of authority (open to the underlying or
essential cause of things as they appear to our sense of certainty). In recent
decades, Leo Strauss sought to revive "Classical Political Rationalism" as a
discipline that understands the task of reasoning, not as foundational, but as
maieutic. Rationalism should not be confused with rationality, nor with
rationalization. In politics, rationalism since the Enlightenment historically
emphasized a "politics of reason" centered upon rational choice,
utilitarianism, secularism, and irreligion — the antitheistic tendencies of
this last aspect since having been partly ameliorated by millennials' more
tolerant and utilitarian adoption of methodological, pluralistic rationalist
practices applicable irrespective of religious or political affiliation.
Background. Since the Enlightenment, rationalism is usually associated with the
introduction of mathematical methods into philosophy, as in Descartes, Leibniz,
and Spinoza. This is commonly called continental rationalism, because it was
predominant in the continental schools of Europe, whereas in Britain empiricism
dominated. Rationalism is often contrasted with empiricism. Taken very broadly
these views are not mutually exclusive, since a philosopher can be both
rationalist and empiricist. Taken to extremes the empiricist view holds that
all ideas come to us through experience, either through the external senses or
through such inner sensations as pain and gratification, and thus that
knowledge is essentially based on or derived from experience. At issue is the
fundamental source of human knowledge, and the proper techniques for verifying
what we think we know (see Epistemology). Proponents of some varieties of
rationalism argue that, starting with foundational basic principles, like the
axioms of geometry, one could deductively derive the rest of all possible
knowledge. The philosophers who held this view most clearly were Baruch Spinoza
and Gottfried Leibniz, whose attempts to grapple with the epistemological and
metaphysical problems raised by Descartes led to a development of the
fundamental approach of rationalism. Both Spinoza and Leibniz asserted that,
"in principle", all knowledge, including scientific knowledge, could be gained
through the use of reason alone, though they both observed that this was not
possible "in practice" for human beings except in specific areas such as
mathematics. On the other hand, Leibniz admitted in his book "Monadology" that
"we are all mere Empirics in three fourths of our actions." Rationalism is
predicting and explaining behavior based on logic. Philosophical usage. The
distinction between rationalists and empiricists was drawn at a later period,
and would not have been recognized by the philosophers involved. Also, the
distinction was not as clear-cut as is sometimes suggested; for example,
Descartes and Locke have similar views about the nature of human ideas. The
three main rationalists were all committed to the importance of empirical
science, and in many respects the empiricists were closer to Descartes in their
methods and metaphysical theories than were Spinoza and Leibniz. History. René
Descartes (1596–1650). Descartes thought that only knowledge of eternal
truths including the truths of mathematics, and the epistemological and
metaphysical foundations of the sciences could be attained by reason alone;
other knowledge, the knowledge of physics, required experience of the world,
aided by the scientific method. He also argued that although dreams appear as
real as sense experience, these dreams cannot provide persons with knowledge.
Also, since conscious sense experience can be the cause of illusions, then
sense experience itself can be doubtable. As a result, Descartes deduced that a
rational pursuit of truth should doubt every belief about reality. He
elaborated these beliefs in such works as "Discourse on Method", "Meditations
on First Philosophy", and "Principles of Philosophy". Descartes developed a
method to attain truths according to which nothing that cannot be recognised by
the intellect (or reason) can be classified as knowledge. These truths are
gained "without any sensory experience", according to Descartes. Truths that
are attained by reason are broken down into elements that intuition can grasp,
which, through a purely deductive process, will result in clear truths about
reality. Descartes therefore argued, as a result of his method, that reason
alone determined knowledge, and that this could be done independently of the
senses. For instance, his famous dictum, "cogito ergo sum", is a conclusion
reached a priori i.e. not through an inference from experience. This was, for
Descartes, an irrefutable principle upon which to ground all forms of other
knowledge. Descartes posited a metaphysical dualism, distinguishing between the
substances of the human body (""res extensa"") and the mind or soul (""res
cogitans""). This crucial distinction would be left unresolved and lead to what
is known as the mind-body problem, since the two substances in the Cartesian
system are independent of each other and irreducible. Baruch Spinoza
(1632–1677). The philosophy of Baruch Spinoza is a systematic, logical,
rational philosophy developed in seventeenth-century Europe. Spinoza's
philosophy is a system of ideas constructed upon basic building blocks with an
internal consistency with which Spinoza tried to answer life's major questions
and in which he proposed that "God exists only philosophically." He was heavily
influenced by thinkers such as Descartes, Euclid and Thomas Hobbes, as well as
theologians in the Jewish philosophical tradition such as Maimonides. But his
work was in many respects a departure from the Judeo-Christian tradition. Many
of Spinoza's ideas continue to vex thinkers today and many of his principles,
particularly regarding the emotions, have implications for modern approaches to
psychology. Even top thinkers have found Spinoza's "geometrical method"
difficult to comprehend: Goethe admitted that he "could not really understand
what Spinoza was on about most of the time." His "magnum opus", "Ethics",
contains unresolved obscurities and has a forbidding mathematical structure
modeled on Euclid's geometry. Spinoza's philosophy attracted believers such as
Albert Einstein and much intellectual attention. Gottfried Leibniz
(1646–1716). Leibniz was the last of the great Rationalists who contributed
heavily to other fields such as mathematics. He did not develop his system,
however, independently of these advances. Leibniz rejected Cartesian dualism
and denied the existence of a material world. In Leibniz's view there are
infinitely many simple substances, which he called "monads" (possibly taking
the term from the work of Anne Conway). Leibniz developed his theory of monads
in response to both Descartes and Spinoza. In rejecting this response he was
forced to arrive at his own solution. Monads are the fundamental unit of
reality, according to Leibniz, constituting both inanimate and animate things.
These units of reality represent the universe, though they are not subject to
the laws of causality or space (which he called "well-founded phenomena").
Leibniz, therefore, introduced his principle of pre-established harmony to
account for apparent causality in the world. Immanuel Kant (1724–1804).
Immanuel Kant started as a traditional rationalist, having studied the
rationalists Leibniz and Wolff, but after studying David Hume's works, which
"awoke from [his dogmatic slumbers", he developed a distinctive and very
influential rationalism of his own, which attempted to synthesize the
traditional rationalist and empiricist traditions. Kant named his branch of
epistemology Transcendental Idealism, and he first laid out these views in his
famous work "The Critique of Pure Reason". In it he argued that there were
fundamental problems with both rationalist and empiricist dogma. To the
rationalists he argued, broadly, that pure reason is flawed when it goes beyond
its limits and claims to know those things that are necessarily beyond the
realm of all possible experience: the existence of God, free will, and the
immortality of the human soul. Kant referred to these objects as "The Thing in
Itself" and goes on to argue that their status as objects beyond all possible
experience by definition means we cannot know them. To the empiricist he argued
that while it is correct that experience is fundamentally necessary for human
knowledge, reason is necessary for processing that experience into coherent
thought. He therefore concludes that both reason and experience are necessary
for human knowledge.
