Rebbe Rebbe (רבי) , which means "master, teacher, or mentor," is a Yiddish
word derived from the Hebrew word Rabbi. In accordance with Yiddish
pronunciation norms, the stress is on the first syllable and the final vowel is
sometimes reduced to a schwa, but is other times pronounced "ee." Whilst Rebbe
is a term that refers to many leaders of Jewry, 'Rebbe' or 'Rebbi' when
mentioned in the Talmud is a reference to the redactor of the Mishna, Rabbi
Yehuda HaNasi. In common parlance of modern times, the term 'The Rebbe' is
often used by Hasidim to refer to the leader of a Hasidic movement, for
example, by Lubavitcher Hasidim referring to their Rebbe, Rabbi Menachem Mendel
Schneerson. Usage. In the "Litvishe" world, when not referring to a Chasidic
"Rebbe", the word may be pronounced "Rebbee". Sephardic Jews may pronounce it
as "Ribbi". Terminology and origin. Rebbe come from the Hebrew word rav,
meaning great, and might mean the equivalent of "my master." It was an
honorific originally given to those who had Smicha at the beginning of the
first millennium, though because vowels were not written at the time, it is
impossible to know if it was pronounced rah-bee or r-bee. The English word
rabbi directly comes from this form. In Yiddish, the word became reb-eh (now
commonly spelled rebbe) or just reb. The Sages of the Mishnah known as the
"Tannaim", from the 1st and 2nd centuries of the common era, were known by the
title "Rabbi", for example Rabbi Akiva and Rabbi Shimon bar Yochoy. Rabbi
Yehudah haNasi, the leader of Jewry in Mishnaic Times, was simply called
"Rabbi", meaning ""The" Rebbe of the Generation". The Sages of the Talmud known
as the "Amoraim" from the 3rd, 4th and early 5th centuries, those born in the
Land of Israel, are called "Rabbi"; those born in the diaspora are known by the
title "Rav". The Lubavitcher chasidim have a tradition that the Hebrew letters
that make up the word rebbe are also an acronym for "Rosh Bnei Yisroel",
meaning "a spiritual head of the Children of Israel". Distinctions between
"Rebbe" and "Rav". A Rebbe is sometimes distinct from a 'Rav' or 'Rov' who is
an authoritative Halachic decider and leader of a Jewish, often Chassidic,
community) in that a significant function of a Rav is to answer questions of
"Halacha" (Jewish law). A Chasid has a Rebbe as a spiritual guide and to go and
sometimes an additional Rav for a ruling on an issue of Halachah, Jewish law.
"Chasidim" use the term to denote someone that they perceive not only as the
religious leader of their congregation, but as their spiritual adviser and
mentor. A rebbe is someone whose views and advice are accepted not only on
issues of religious dogma and practice, but in all arenas of life, including
political and social issues. Sprouting "Chasidim" use the concept of a (non-
Chasidic) Rebbe. Example: "I will ask my Rebbe, Rabbi Ploni (so-and-so), for
advice about this personal matter." As a rule, among all Chasidim, Rebbe is
referred to in Hebrew as ""Admor"", an abbreviation for Adoneinu Moreinu
V'Rabeinu, Our Master Our Teacher Our Rebbe, which is now the modern Hebrew
word in Israel for "rebbe" (pl. admorim). Hasidic Rebbe. A Rebbe is generally
taken to mean a great leader of a Hasidic dynasties, also referred to as Grand
Rabbi in English or an ADMOR, a Hebrew abbreviation for Adoneinu-Moreinu-
veRabbeinu" ("our lord/master, teacher/guide and rabbi/teacher"). Rabbi Yisroel
Baal Shem Tov, the founder of Hasidism is regarded by Hasidim, as the first
Hasidic rebbe. During his lifetime he was referred to mainly as "The holy one"
rather than as "Rebbe," and his disciples were "magidim" or "preachers", such
as the Magid of Chernobyl or the Magid of Mezritsh. The first "rebbe" to be
known as such was the Baal Shem Tov's grandson, Rabbi Boruch of Mezhbizh who
was referred to as "The Rebbe" during his lifetime. After him, those who rose
to positions of leadership and their successors began to be called "rebbe". The
title gradually came to suggest a higher spiritual status. Each Hasidic group
refers to its leader as "the rebbe". Hannah Rachel Verbermacher, also known as
the Maiden of Ludmir or the "Ludmirer Moyd", was the only female rebbe in the
history of the Hasidic movement; she lived in the nineteenth century in Ukraine
and Israel. Outside of Hasidic circles the term "Grand Rabbi" has been used to
refer to a rebbe. The practice became widespread in America in the early 1900s
when Hasidic rebbes began to emigrate to the United States and was derived from
the German "Grossrabbiner". Relationship of hasidim to their rebbe. A hasidic
rebbe is generally understood to be an exceptionally righteous person (called a
"tzaddik"). According to Kabbalah (and particularly the chasidic understanding
of Kabbalah), the world is sustained on the "shoulders" of several
exceptionally righteous people in a generation "(tzaddikim)". These people are
understood to have perfected their personal service of God to such an extent
that they become literally and physically aware of God. These righteous
people's perception (of both spiritual and physical, not to mention temporal
matters) transcends the apparent boundaries of existence, such that a Rebbe
will appear to be able to "see the future," or at least have strong insight
into the life and trials of another. Furthermore, a rebbe is said to be able to
affect divine providence. As a result, hasidim in some hasidic circles seek
their rebbe's advice for a variety of concerns: spiritual, physical, and even
business concerns. Furthermore, many people seek the blessing "(brocho)" of a
rebbe (and a chosid will specifically seek the blessing of his own rebbe) for
anything from minor (and all the more so major) physical troubles, to grand
spiritual concerns. Many famous and common stories of a rebbe's intervention
involve women who successfully seek a rebbe's blessing for fertility so that
they can conceive after having been barren for many years. Given a rebbe's
physical awareness of God, and the Rebbe's transcendent perception of
Godliness, many hasidim take special care to observe the specific and sometimes
minute practices of their Rebbe. Even things that seem mundane may nonetheless
be seen by chasidim as incredibly significant. For example, Lubavitcher hasidim
frequently shape their fedoras to match the way that the Lubavitcher Rebbe
shaped his hat-which was more flat than many others. Many Skverer hasidim (of
the Skverer Rebbe in New Square) wear their peyos identical to those of the
Skverer Rebbe. While hasidim do not always follow the specific practices of
their rebbe, the rebbe is able to create practices that may be specific and
unique to his hasidim. For example, Rabbi Aaron Roth ("Reb Areleh", as he was
called) the first rebbe of Shomer Emunim, told his hasidim to pause frequently
while eating their meals in order to keep them from overindulging. A hasid will
usually love his rebbe like a close family member, if not more so. But the
degree and nature of this belief varies depending on the movement. In some
movements the hasidim believe that their rebbe is the ""tzadik hador""
(greatest and holiest saint of the generation) and would regard any thought
that detracts from his perfection and holiness as heresy. Other sects lessen
this idealization to some degree or another. Since many rebbes are sons-in-law
or students of other rebbes, it makes sense that they would view themselves as
subordinate to those other rebbes. Nonetheless, their hasidim remain loyal to
them because of their special loyalty, a family connection, or a belief that a
specific "tzaddik" (though there may be others of greater spiritual stature)
connects best with one's soul. For example, the Kosover Rebbe makes yearly
pilgrimages to the Tosher Rebbe. Nonetheless, his followers remain very loyal
to him. Functions. "Kvitlach". A rebbe has times when Hasidim (and other
petitioners) may come for a private audience. A "kvitel" (Yiddish for "note",
plural "kvitlach") is a note with the name of the petitioner and a short
request for which the rebbe is asked to pray. The formula in which a person's
name is written is one's own Hebrew name, the son/daughter of one's mother's
Hebrew name, such as "Shimon ben Rivkah" (Simeon the son of Rebecca). Hasidim
believe that rebbes read supernaturally "between the lines" of a "kvitel", and
in every Hasidic movement there are numerous anecdotes relating how the rebbe
saw things that were not written in the "kvitel". In most Hasidic groups, the
"kvitel" is written by the rebbe's "gabbai" (secretary), however sometimes the
petitioner writes it on his own. Usually, but with some exceptions, a "pidyon"
(redemption) of cash is customarily handed to the rebbe under the "kvitel",
however this is not obligatory. This is considered to be the conduit through
which the blessing is given, and a redemption for the soul of the petitioner.
("A gift makes its receiver glad" is given as an explanation: a blessing only
comes from a joyous heart.) It is also customary to tip the gabbai, although
this too is not obligatory. "Tish". A rebbe conducts a "tish" (: "feert tish",
literally, "table")—a (communal festive) meal with highly mystical
overtones—on Shabbat and other occasions. At a tish, the rebbe distributes
"shirayim" (lit. remnants) to the Hasidim seated at or gathered round the
table. When a gathering similar to a "tish" is led by a rabbi who is not a
rebbe, it may be referred to as a "botte" (esp. amongst groups from Romania) or
"sheves achim". Hasidic movements. In Israel, some of the best known Hasidic
groups are those of Belz, Boston, Chabad-Lubavitch, Ger, Karlin, Kaliv,
Nadvorna, Slonim, Vizhnitz, and Dushinsky, each having their own Rebbe. Some of
the larger or better known chasidic groups in the United States of America are
Bobov, Chabad-Lubavitch, Klausenburg, Lubavitch, Munkatch, Puppa, Satmar,
Skulen, Skver, Tshernobl. A more complete list of chasidic groups can be found
here. Some Hasidic rebbes have thousands of followers, or disciples, called
Hasidim, whilst others may number only a few hundred. Some rebbes have only a
title, but do not have a following beyond their own family members and a few
congregants in their synagogues. Rebbes often have a synagogue or beis medrash
(study hall) where they pray, learn, and interact with their Hasidim. Rebbes
are usually called by the Yiddish name of the geographic region in which they
or their predecessors gained prominence: e.g., the first Bobover Rebbe lived in
Bobowa, Poland, the first Skulener Rebbe lived in Sculeni, Bessarabia, the
first Munkatcher Rebbe in Munkacs, Ukraine and the first Bostoner Rebbe, served
as a rebbe in Boston, Massachusetts. The Breslover Hasidim do not have a living
rebbe, but continue to follow the previous rebbe of the movement. In the case
of Lubavitch, this is Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneersohn; in the case of
Breslov, it is the founder of the group, Rabbi Nachman of Breslov. Links to
names of Hasidic Rebbes by name of geographic region. Alexander • Alesk •
Amshinov • Anipoli • Apt • Avritch • Belz • Berditchev • Beregsaz
• Biala | Bluzhov • Bobov • Bohush • Boston • Boyan • Burshtin •
Chabad-Lubavitch • Chentshin • Chernobyl • Chernovitz • Cheshenov •
Chortkov • Chust • Cleveland • Deyzh • Dinov • Dombrov • Drohobitch
• Dzikov • Faltichan • Ger • Glogov • Gorlitz • Grodzisk • Grybov
• Hornsteipel • Hornostaypil-Milwaukee • Husiatyn • Izhbitz • Kalov
• Kaminka • Kapust • Karlin-Stolin • Kashou • Kerestir •
Klausenberg • Kobrin • Koidanov Komarno • Kopyczynitz • Korets •
Koson • Kosov • Kotsk • Kozhnitz • Kozlov • Kretchenif • Krula •
Kshanov • Kutna • Kuzmir • Lantzhit • Lechovitsh • Lelov • Liozna
• Liske • Lutsk • Machnovka • Makarov • Makove • Manestrishtze •
Mattersdorf • Melitz • Mezhbizh • Milwaukee • Modzitz • Mogelnitz •
Mosholu • Munkatch • Muzhay • Nadvorna • Narol • Nassod •
Nikolsburg • Novominsk • Ostrof • Ozharov • Pinsk-Karlin • Pilzno •
Pittsburgh • Porisov • Premishlan • Pshemish • Pshevorsk • Pshischa
• Pupa • Rachev • Rachmastrivka • Radomsk • Radoshitz • Radzin •
Ratzfert • Rimanov • Rimnitz • Rizhin • Ropshitz • Sadigura • Sanz
• Sasregen • Sassov • Satmar • Savran • Serdahel • Seret •
Shedlitz • Shenitza • Shepetivka • Shidlovtza • Shinova • Shotz •
Shpikov • Shtefanesht • Skolye • Skula • Skulen • Skver • Slonim
• Sochatshov • Spinka • Stanislav • Stitshin • Strashelye • Stretin
• Strikov • Strizov • Stropkov • Strozhnitz • Sudylkov • Sulitza
• Tshenstechov • Tshenstkovitz • Temishvar • Tolno • Toltchav •
Tosh • Trisk • Tshokava • Vien • Vizhnits • Vurka • Yeruslav •
Zhvill • Zhvil-Mezhbuz • Zidichov • Zidichov-Beregsaz • Zinkov •
Zhmigrod • Zlotchiv • Zutchke • Zychlin Rebbes with non-eponymous
dynasties. Bikovsk • Lizhensk • Lublin • Mezritch • Piasetzne •
Shpola Hasidim without a living rebbe. Breslov • Lubavitch • Malochim
Rebbes not related to Baal Shem Tov Hasidism. Ashlag • Dorog • Dushinsky
• Dzirka • Erlau • Nitra • Mishkenos HoRoim • Shomer Emunim •
Toldos Aharon • Toldos Avrohom Yitzchok
