Reform Judaism Reform Judaism is a phrase that refers to various beliefs,
practices and organizations associated with the Reform Jewish movement in North
America, the United Kingdom and elsewhere. In general, Reform Judaism maintains
that Judaism and Jewish traditions should be modernized and compatible with
participation in the surrounding culture. Many branches of Reform Judaism hold
that Jewish law should be interpreted as a set of general guidelines rather
than as a list of restrictions whose literal observance is required of all
Jews. Similar movements that are also occasionally called "Reform" include the
Israeli Progressive Movement and its worldwide counterpart. Reform Judaism in
North America. Reform Judaism is one of the two North American denominations
affiliated with the World Union for Progressive Judaism. It is the largest
denomination of American Jews today. With an estimated 1.1 million members, it
also accounts for the largest number of Jews affiliated with Progressive
Judaism worldwide. Official bodies of the Reform Movement in North America
include the Union for Reform Judaism, the Central Conference of American
Rabbis, and Hebrew Union College-Jewish Institute of Religion. Reform Judaism
in Britain. UK Reform and Liberal Judaism are the two Progressive movements in
the UK. For details on the relationship between the two progressive movements,
see Progressive Judaism (United Kingdom). Progressive Judaism in Israel. After
a failed attempt in the 1930s to start an Israeli movement, the World Union for
Progressive Judaism tried again in the 1970s and created the movement now known
as the Israeli Progressive Movement. Because the first rabbis in the 1970s were
trained in the United States, the Israeli press and public often refers to the
Israeli Progressive Movement as "Reform". Reform movement in Judaism. Along
with other forms of non-orthodox Judaism, the North American Reform, UK Reform,
UK Liberal Judaism and Israeli Progressive Movement can all trace their
intellectual roots to the Reform movement in Judaism. Elements of Orthodoxy
developed their cohesive identity in reaction to the Reform movement in
Judaism. Although North American Reform, UK Reform, UK Liberal Judaism and
Israeli Progressive Judaism all share an intellectual heritage, they have taken
places at different ends of the non-orthodox spectrum. The North American
Reform movement and UK Liberal Judaism reflect a more radical end. The UK
Reform, and Progressive Israeli movements, along with the North American
Conservative movement and Masorti Judaism, occupy the more conservative end of
the non-orthodox Judaisms.
