Religious ecstasy Religious ecstasy is an altered state of consciousness
characterized by greatly reduced external awareness and expanded interior
mental and spiritual awareness which is frequently accompanied by visions and
emotional/intuitive (and sometimes physical) euphoria. Although the experience
is usually brief in time, there are records of such experiences lasting several
days or even more, and of recurring experiences of ecstasy during one's
lifetime. Subjective perception of time, space and/or self may strongly change
or disappear during ecstasy. Context. "Epithets are very often applied to
mystical experiences including ecstasies without, apparently, any clear idea
about the distinctions that are being made. Thus we find experiences given such
names as nature, religious, aesthetic, neo-platonic, sexual etc. experiences,
where in some cases the name seems to derive from trigger, sometimes from the
overbelief, sometimes from the known standing and beliefs of the mystic, and
sometimes, though rarely, from the nature of the experience.Marghanita Laski,
"Ecstasy in Religious and Secular Experiences." Jeremy P. Tarcher, Inc., Los
Angeles, 1990, ISBN 0-87477-574-4 p.171 Distinguishing traits. Spiritual
ecstasy can be distinguished from spirit possession and hypnosis in that
ecstasy is not accompanied by the experiencing subject losing interior
consciousness or will. Rather, the person experiencing ecstasy notices a
dramatic spiritual awareness heightening, with total will concentration on the
elevation. If the ecstatic state comes about slowly, the subject may notice
changes in his or her physiological responses. But, once brought into complete
ecstasy, the subject ordinarily has no, or very little, external surrounding
physical state awareness. Some external awareness remains in a partial
religious ecstasy. Intense fear may accompany the initial stage of being drawn
into ecstasy. Different religious teachings distinguish and describe several
stages or forms of ecstasy. Exclusive and inclusive views. Religious people may
hold the view that true religious ecstasy occurs only in their religious
context (e.g. as a gift from the supernatural being whom they follow) and it
cannot be induced by natural means (human activities). Trance-like states which
are often interpreted as religious ecstasy can be deliberately induced with
techniques or ecstatic practices; including, prayer, religious rituals,
meditation, breathing exercises, physical exercise, sex, music, dancing,
sweating, fasting, thirsting, and psychotropic drugs. An ecstatic experience
may take place in occasion of contact with something or somebody perceived as
extremely beautiful or holy. It may also happen without any known reason. The
particular technique that an individual uses to induce ecstasy is usually one
that is associated with that individual's particular religious and cultural
traditions. As a result, an ecstatic experience is usually interpreted within
the particular individual religious context and cultural traditions. These
interpretations often include statements about contact with supernatural or
spiritual beings, about receiving new information as a revelation, also
religion-related explanations of subsequent change of values, attitudes and
behavior (e.g. in case of religious conversion). Achieving ecstatic trances is
a shaman activity, who induce ecstasy for such purposes as traveling to heaven
or the underworld, guiding or otherwise interacting with spirits, clairvoyance,
and healing. Some shamans take drugs from such plants as Ayahuasca, peyote and
cannabis (also see cannabis (drug) or certain mushrooms in their attempts to
reach ecstasy, while others rely on such non-chemical means as ritual, music,
dance, ascetic practices, or visual designs as aids to mental discipline.
Examples. Athletes may follow rituals in preparing for contests, which are
dismissed as superstition, but this sports psychology device may help them to
attain advantage in an ecstasy-like state. Yoga provides techniques to attain
an ecstasy state called samādhi. According to practitioners, there are various
ecstasy stages, the highest is called Nirvikalpa Samadhi. Bhakti-yoga,
especially, places emphasis on ecstasy as being one of the fruits of its
practice. In Buddhism, especially in the Pali Canon, there are 8 states of
trance also called absorption. The first four states are called Rupa or,
materially oriented. The next four are called Arupa or non-material. These
eight states are preliminary trances which lead up to final saturation. In
Visuddhimagga, great effort and years of sustained meditation are practiced to
reach the first absorption, and that not all individuals are able to accomplish
it at all. Modern mediator experiences in the Thai Forest Tradition, as well as
other Theravadin traditions, demonstrates that this effort and rarity is
necessary only to become completely immersed in the absorptions and experience
no other sensations. It is possible to experience the absorptions in a less
intense state with much less practice. In the Dionysian Mysteries the initiates
used intoxicants and other trance-inducing techniques (like dance and music) to
remove inhibitions and social constraints, liberating the individual to return
to a natural state. Sufism (the mystical Islam branch) has theoretical and
metaphoric texts regarding ecstasy as a state of connection with Allah. Sufis
practice rituals (dhikr, sema) using body movement and music to achieve the
state. In the monotheistic tradition, ecstasy is usually associated with
communion and oneness with God. However, such experiences can also be personal
mystical experiences with no significance to anyone but the person experiencing
them. Some charismatic Christians practice ecstatic states (called e.g. "being
slain in the Spirit") and interpret these as given by the Holy Spirit. The
firewalkers of Greece dance themselves into a state of ecstasy at the annual
Anastenaria, when they believe themselves under the influence of Saint
Constantine. In hagiography (writings on the subject of Christian saints) many
instances are recorded in which saints are granted ecstasies. According to the
Catholic Encyclopedia religious ecstasy (called "supernatural ecstasy")
includes two elements: one, interior and invisible, in which the mind rivets
its attention on a religious subject, and another, corporeal and visible, in
which the activity of the senses is suspended, reducing the effect of external
sensations upon the subject and rendering him or her resistant to awakening.
The witnesses of a Marian apparition often experience these elements of
ecstasy. Modern Witchcraft traditions may define themselves as "ecstatic
traditions," and focus on reaching ecstatic states in their rituals. The
Reclaiming Tradition and the Feri Tradition are two modern ecstatic Witchcraft
examples. As described by the Indian spiritual teacher Meher Baba, God-
intoxicated souls known as "masts" experience a unique type of spiritual
ecstasy: "asts are desperately in love with God – or consumed by their love
for God. Masts do not suffer from what may be called a disease. They are in a
state of mental disorder because their minds are overcome by such intense
spiritual energies that are far too much for them, forcing them to lose contact
with the world, shed normal human habits and customs, and civilized society and
live in a state of spiritual splendor but physical squalor. They are overcome
by an agonizing love for God and are drowned in their ecstasy. Only the divine
love embodied in a Perfect Master can reach them."
