Religion in Germany "Majority of population is:" Christianity is the largest
religion in Germany with 52 million adherents (2010/2011) (about 62% of
population , 2008: 62.8%. 2006: 67.1%. The second largest religion is Islam
with 4 million adherents (5%) followed by Buddhism and Judaism. During the last
few decades, the two largest churches in Germany (the Protestant Evangelical
Church in Germany (EKD) and the Roman Catholic Church), have lost significant
number of adherents, both are down to roughly 30% (by the end of 2008).. The
percentage of Catholics in West Germany alone, starting in 1965 (43.8%) until
2011 (29.9%), under a united Germany, including the eastern states, reflects
this difference. More than 30% are not affiliated with any church or other
religious body. The most notable losses occurred in the Protestant churches, in
East Germany largely owing to the atheistic policy under the communistic
regime. However since the fall of the communistic regime two decades ago, the
EKD continued losing members, to just below 30% by the end of 2008. Other
churches in Germany are all rather small (equal or less than 0.5%). Since the
reunification of Germany the number of nonreligious people in the Federal
Republic has grown, especially because the former East German states have a
large nonreligious majority. Due to losses of both the Protestant churches and
the Catholic Church in Hamburg, this state has also joined the group of states
with a non-religious majority. History. Roman Catholicism was the sole
established religion in the country in the 15th century, but the Reformation
changed this drastically. In 1517 Martin Luther challenged the Catholic Church
as he saw it as a corruption of Christian faith. Through this, he altered the
course of European and world history and established Protestantism. The Thirty
Years' War (1618–1648) was one of the most destructive conflicts in European
history. The war was fought primarily in what is now Germany, and at various
points involved most of the countries of Europe. The war was fought largely as
a religious conflict between Protestants and Catholics in the Holy Roman
Empire. Religious freedom. Since 1949 the German constitution guarantees
freedom of faith and religion. It also states that no one may be discriminated
against due to their faith or religious opinions. A state church does not exist
in Germany. Religious communities that are of considerable size and stability
and are loyal to the constitution can be recognised as "Körperschaften
öffentlichen Rechtes" (statutory corporation). This gives them certain
privileges, for example being able to give religious instruction in state
schools (as enshrined in the German constitution, though some states are exempt
from this) and having membership fees collected (for a fee) by the German
revenue department as "Church tax". It is a surcharge amounting to between 8 or
9% of the income tax. The status mainly applies to the Roman Catholic Church,
the mainline Protestant EKD, and Jewish communities. There have been numerous
discussions of allowing other religious groups like Jehovah's Witnesses and
Muslims into this system as well. The Muslim efforts were hampered by the
Muslims' own disorganised state in Germany, with many small rivalling
organisations and no central leadership, which does not fit well into a legal
frame that was originally created with well-organized, large Christian churches
in mind. Statistics. According to organizational reportings based on
projections in 2008 about 34.1% Germans have no registered religious
denomination. According to a poll by Der Spiegel magazine, 45% believe in God,
and just a quarter in Jesus Christ. Christianity is the largest religion in
Germany, with around 52 million adherents (62.8%) in 2008 of which 24.5 million
are Protestants (29.9%) belonging to the EKD and 24.9 million are Catholics
(30.0%) in 2008, the remainder belong to small denominations (each
(considerably ) less than 0.5% of the German population). The second largest
religion is Islam with an estimated 3.8 to 4.3 million adherents (4.6 to 5.2%)
followed by Buddhism and Judaism, both with around 200,000 adherents (0.3%).
Hinduism has some 90,000 adherents (0.1%) and Sikhism 75,000 (0.1%). All other
religious communities in Germany have fewer than 50,000 (<0.1%) adherents.
Protestantism is concentrated in the north and east and Roman Catholicism is
concentrated in the south and west. The current Pope, Benedict XVI, was born in
Bavaria. Non-religious people, including atheists and agnostics might make as
many as 55%, and are especially numerous in the former East Germany and major
metropolitan areas. Of the roughly 4 million Muslims, most are Sunnis and
Alevites from Turkey, but there are a small number of Shi'ites and other
denominations. 1.6% of the country's overall population declare themselves
Orthodox Christians, Serbs and Greeks being the most numerous. Germany has
Europe's third-largest Jewish population (after France and the United Kingdom).
In 2004, twice as many Jews from former Soviet republics settled in Germany as
in Israel, bringing the total Jewish population to more than 200,000, compared
to 30,000 prior to German reunification. Large cities with significant Jewish
populations include Berlin, Frankfurt and Munich. Around 250,000 active
Buddhists live in Germany; 50% of them are Asian immigrants. According to the
Eurobarometer Poll 2005, 47% of German citizens agreed with the statement "I
believe there is a God", whereas 25% agreed with "I believe there is some sort
of spirit or life force" and 25% said "I do not believe there is any sort of
spirit, god, or life force". According to a new 2012 poll released by WIN-
Gallup International, 51% of the German citizens said that they are religious,
33% said not religious, 15% said atheist and 1% gave no answer. Christianity.
Christianity is the largest religion in Germany, with the Protestant
Evangelical Church in Germany (EKD) comprising 29.9% as of 31 December 2008
(down 0.3% compared to the 30.2% in the year before) of the population and
Roman Catholicism comprising 30.7% as of Dec. 2008 (also down 0.3% compared to
the year before). Consequently a majority of the German people belong to a
Christian community, although many of them take no active part in church life.
About 1.7% of the population is Orthodox Christian. Independent and
congregational churches exist in all larger towns and many smaller ones, but
most such churches are small. One of these is the confessional Lutheran Church
called Independent Evangelical-Lutheran Church in Germany. Secularism. Before
World War II, about two-thirds of the German population was Protestant and one-
third was Roman Catholic. In the north and northeast of Germany especially,
Protestants dominated. In the former West Germany between 1945 and 1990, which
contained nearly all of Germany's historically Catholic areas, Catholics have
had a small majority since the 1980s. Protestant areas were much more affected
by secularism than predominantly Catholic areas. The predominantly secularised
states, such as Hamburg or the East German states, used to be Lutheran or
United Protestant strongholds. There is a non-religious majority in Hamburg,
Berlin, Brandenburg, Saxony, Saxony-Anhalt, Thuringia and Mecklenburg-
Vorpommern. In the eastern state of Saxony-Anhalt only 19.7 percent belong to
the two big denominations of the country. This is the state where Martin Luther
was born. In eastern Germany both religious observance and affiliation are much
lower than in the rest of the country after forty years of Communist rule. The
government of the German Democratic Republic encouraged an atheist worldview
through institutions such as Jugendweihen (youth consecrations), secular
coming-of-age ceremonies akin to Christian confirmation which all young people
were strongly encouraged to attend (and disadvantaged socially if they did
not). The average church attendance is now one of the lowest in the world, with
only 5% attending at least once per week, compared to 14% in the rest of the
country according to a recent study. The number of christenings, religious
weddings and funerals is also lower than in the West. According to a survey
among German youths (aged between 12 and 24) in the year 2006, 30% of German
youths believe in a personal god, 19% believe in some kind of supernatural
power, 23% share agnostic views and 28% are atheists. Islam. Islam is the
largest minority religion in the country. The large majority of Muslims in
Germany are of Turkish origin (63.2%), followed by smaller groups from
Pakistan, countries of the former Yugoslavia, Arab countries, Iran and
Afghanistan. As of 2006, according to the U.S. Department of State,
approximately 3.2 million Muslims live in Germany. This figure includes the
different denominations of Islam, such as Sunni, Shia, Ahmadiyya and Alevites.
Muslims first came to Germany as part of the diplomatic, military and economic
relations between Germany and the Ottoman Empire in the 18th century. In World
War I about 15,000 Muslim prisoners of war were interned in Berlin. The first
mosque was established in Berlin in 1915 for these prisoners, though it was
closed in 1930. After the West German Government invited foreign workers in
1961, the Muslim population continuously rose. Judaism. Today Germany,
especially its capital Berlin, has the fastest growing Jewish community
worldwide. About ninety thousand Jews from the former Eastern Bloc, mostly from
ex-Soviet Union countries, settled in Germany since the fall of the Berlin
wall. This is mainly due to a German government policy which basically grants
an immigration ticket to anyone from the CIS and the Baltic states with Jewish
heritage, and the fact that today's Germans are seen as significantly more
accepting of Jews than many people in the ex-Soviet realm. Some of the about
60,000 long-time resident German Jews have expressed some mixed feelings about
this immigration that they perceive as making them a minority not only in their
own country but also in their own community. Prior to Nazism, about 600,000
Jews lived in Germany, going back to Roman times or even earlier. Many Jews
from Russia and other former communist countries in Germany adhere to Reform
Judaism. Cults, Sects, Religious movements. The German government as well as
the churches are actively involved in disseminating information and warnings
about sects and cults (in colloquial language the German word is used in both
senses) and new religious movements. In public opinion, minor religious groups
are often referred to as , which can both refer to destructive cults but also
to all religious movements which are not Christian or different from the Roman
Catholicism and the mainstream Protestantism. However, major world religions
like mainstream Orthodox Christianity, Hinduism, Buddhism, Judaism and Islam
are not referred to as . Every Protestant (church whose canonical jurisdiction
extends over one or several states, or ) and Catholic episcopacy has a
( delegate) from whom information about religious movements may be obtained.
The German government also provides information about cults, sects, and new
religious movements. In 1997, the parliament set up a commission for
"Sogenannte Sekten und Psychogruppen" (literally "so-called sects and psychic
groups") which delivered an extensive report on the situation in Germany
regarding NRMs in 1998. In 2002, the Federal Constitutional Court upheld the
governmental right to provide critical information on religious organizations
being referred to as "Sekte", but stated that "defamatory, discriminating, or
falsifying accounts" were illegal.
