Religious humanism Religious humanism is an integration of humanist ethical
philosophy with religious rituals and beliefs that center on human needs,
interests, and abilities. Origins. Humanism as it was conceived in the early
20th century rejected revealed knowledge, theism-based morality and the
supernatural. In the late 20th century the Humanist movement that affirms the
dignity and worth of all people came into conflict with conservative Christian
groups in the United States and "Secular Humanism" became the most popular
element of organized Humanism. Though practitioners of religious humanism did
not officially organize under the name of "humanism" until the late 19th and
early 20th centuries, non-theistic religions paired with human-centered ethical
philosophy date to the Enlightenment era. French Revolution. The Cult of Reason
() was a religion based on deism devised during the French Revolution by
Jacques Hébert, Pierre Gaspard Chaumette and their supporters. In 1793 during
the French Revolution, the cathedral Notre Dame de Paris was turned into a
"Temple to Reason" and for a time Lady Liberty replaced the Virgin Mary on
several altars. Positivism. In the 1850s, Auguste Comte, the Father of
Sociology, founded Positivism, a "religion of humanity". Auguste Comte was a
student and secretary for Claude Henri de Rouvroy, Comte de Saint-Simon, the
Father of French Socialism. Auguste Comte coined the term "altruism".
Humanistic Religious Association. One of the earliest forerunners of
contemporary chartered humanist organizations was the Humanistic Religious
Association formed in 1853 in London. This early group was democratically
organized, with male and female members participating in the election of the
leadership and promoted knowledge of the sciences, philosophy, and the arts.
Ethical Culture. The Ethical Culture movement was founded in 1876. The
movement's founder, Felix Adler, a former member of the Free Religious
Association, conceived of Ethical Culture as a new religion that would strip
away the accumulated unscientific dogmas of traditional religions while
retaining and elevating the ethical message at the heart of all religions.
Adler believed that traditional religions would ultimately prove to be
incompatible with a scientific worldview. He felt that the vital aspects of
religion should not be allowed to fall by the wayside. Religions provided vital
functions in encouraging good works. And religions taught important truths
about the world, albeit these truths were expressed through metaphors that were
not always suited to modern understandings of the world. For example,
monotheistic religions were based on a metaphor of an authoritarian monarchy,
whereas democratic relationships were now understood to be the ideal.
Initially, Ethical Culture involved little in the way of ceremony and ritual.
Rather, Ethical Culture was religious in the sense of playing a defining role
in people's lives and addressing issues of ultimate concern. Some Ethical
Societies have subsequently added a degree of ritual as a means of marking
special times or providing a tangible reminder of humanistic ideals. United
States. Before the term "humanism" was ever coined or even thought of being
integrated into religion it had existed in America in at least an ideological
sense for a very long time. Groups like the Free Religious Association (FRA)
which was formed in 1867 and other less radical groups mainly consisting of
extreme forms of early American Protestants such as the Unitarians and Quakers
had existed from the very first landings of the Europeans in the Western
Hemisphere. In 1915, a Positivist defined the term "humanism" in a magazine for
the British Ethical Societies. Another Unitarian Minister John H. Dietrich read
the magazine and adopted the term to describe his own religion. Dietrich is
considered by some to be the "Father of Religious Humanism" (Olds 1996). In
1929 Charles Francis Potter founded the First Humanist Society of New York
whose advisory board included Julian Huxley, John Dewey, Albert Einstein and
Thomas Mann. Potter was a minister from the Unitarian tradition and in 1930 he
and his wife, Clara Cook Potter, published "". Throughout the 1930s Potter was
a well known advocate of women’s rights, access to birth control, "civil
divorce laws", and an end to capital punishment. A Humanist Manifesto, also
known as Humanist Manifesto I to distinguish it from later Humanist Manifestos,
was written in 1933 primarily by Raymond Bragg and was published with thirty-
four signatories. Unlike the later ones, the first manifesto talked of a new
"religion", and referred to humanism as a religious movement meant to transcend
and replace previous, deity-based religions. However, it is careful not to
outline a creed or dogma. The document outlines a fifteen-point belief system,
which, in addition to a secular outlook, opposes "acquisitive and profit-
motivated society" and outlines a worldwide egalitarian society based on
voluntary mutual cooperation. The Fellowship of Humanity was founded in 1935 by
Reverend A. D. Faupel as one of a handful of "humanist churches" seeded in the
early 20th century as part of the American Religious Humanism movement. It was
the only such organization to survive into the 21st century and is the first
and oldest affiliate of the American Humanist Association. In 1961, Webster's
Third New International Unabridged Dictionary defined religious humanism as "A
modern American movement composed chiefly of non-theistic humanists and
humanist churches and dedicated to achieving the ethical goals of religion
without beliefs and rites resting upon superstition." American Religious
Humanist organizations that have survived into the 21st century include the
HUUmanists, formerly the Friends of Religious Humanism, and the Humanist
Society, formerly the Humanist Society of Friends. A high percentage of members
of Unitarian Universalist congregations today identify themselves as humanists.
HUUmanists is the main representation of religious humanism within the
Unitarian Universalist Association. Related or similar traditions. Some
distinguish religious humanism from Jewish humanism, Christian humanism, and
secular humanism. In the past, humanist versions of major religions, such as
Christian humanism, have arisen. In addition, many Indian religions like
Hinduism, Buddhism and other Asian religions and belief systems like
Confucianism, Taoism, Mohism, Shenism, and Zoroastrianism, that focus on human
nature and action more than theology, were always primarily humanistic.
Currently, however, humanism is dominated almost exclusively by secular
humanism. This has given rise to a newer version of humanist religions which
are similar in philosophy to secular humanism. Secular humanists and revealed
religious humanists primarily differ in their definition of religion and their
positions on supernatural beliefs. They can also diverge in practice since
religious humanists endorse religious ceremonies, rituals, and rites.
Dharmically-derived approaches. The humanist approach to Buddhism shares the
fundamental principle of analysing and evaluating the tradition according to
natural, human values, but the particular interpretations and results various
Buddhist humanists come up with will naturally vary. An early exponent, U
Dhammaloka, combined western freethought and atheist positions with orthodox
Burmese ritual practice and a strong critique of missionary theism. Most
Buddhist groups are more or less humanistic anyway, but there is also a
particular modern Chinese Buddhist organisation that calls itself 'Humanistic
Buddhism'. The teachings of the modern Chinese Buddhist thought of Humanistic
Buddhism encompass all of the Buddhist teachings from the time of Gautama
Buddha to the present. The goal of Humanistic Buddhism is the bodhisattva way,
which means to be an energetic, enlightened, and endearing person who strives
to help all sentient beings liberate themselves. Humanistic Buddhism focuses
more on issues of the world rather than on how to leave the world behind; on
caring for the living, rather than the dead; on benefiting others, rather than
benefiting oneself; and on universal salvation, rather than salvation for only
oneself. Other Buddhist scholars are exploring a humanist method of analysis
and evaluation of the Buddha's teachings based exclusively on the pre-sectarian
early texts, which were probably mainly composed pre-300BCE. The focus of this
form of humanistic Buddhism is analysis of the implicit authority theories
contained in the different stages of evolution of Buddhist tradition, and
critiquing the misunderstanding and misuse of religious 'authority' to justify
abuse of individuals. It also re-emphasises value-pluralism, which is a
humanistic way of reasoning about ethics. Abrahamically-derived approaches.
Another approach, Christian Existential Humanism, related to the work of the
Danish philosopher Søren Kierkegaard, features a humanist perspective grounded
in Christian religious belief; where humanity is something to be excited about,
but not as a replacement for the divine. Many medieval Muslim thinkers pursued
humanistic, rational and scientific discourses in their search for knowledge,
meaning and values. A wide range of Islamic writings on love poetry, history
and philosophical theology show that medieval Islamic thought was open to the
humanistic ideas of individualism, occasional secularism, skepticism and
liberalism. Certain aspects of Renaissance humanism has its roots in the
medieval Islamic world, including the "art of "dictation", called in Latin,
"ars dictaminis"," and "the humanist attitude toward classical language."
Humanistic Judaism is a movement that holds that Jewish culture and Jewish
history, rather than religion, are the source of Jewish identity.
