Religion in India India is the birthplace of four of the world's major
religious traditions; namely Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism and Sikhism.
Throughout its history, religion has been an important part of the country's
culture. Religious diversity and religious tolerance are both established in
the country by law and custom. A vast majority of Indians associate themselves
with a religion. According to the 2001 census, Hinduism is the majority
religion with 80.5% of the population of India. Islam (13.4%), Christianity
(2.3%), Sikhism (1.9%), Buddhism (0.8%) and Jainism (0.4%) are the other minor
religions followed by the people of India. This diversity of religious belief
systems existing in India today is a result of, besides existence and birth of
native religions, assimilation and social integration of religions brought to
the region by traders, travelers, immigrants, and even invaders and conquerors.
Zoroastrianism and Judaism also have an ancient history in India and each has
several thousand Indian adherents. India has the largest population of people
adhering to Zoroastrianism and Bahá'í Faith anywhere in the world. Many other
world religions also have a relationship with Indian spirituality, like the
Baha'i faith which recognizes Lord Buddha and Lord Krishna as manifestations of
God Almighty. Indian diaspora in the West have popularized many aspects of
Hindu philosophy like yoga (meditation), Ayurvedic medicine, divination, karma
and reincarnation to a great extent. The influence of Indians abroad in
spiritual matters has been significant as several organizations such as the
Hare Krishna movement, the Brahma Kumaris, the Ananda Marga and others spread
by Indian spiritual figures. The Muslim population in India is the third
largest in the world. The shrines of some of the most famous saints of Sufism
like Moinuddin Chishti and Nizamuddin Auliya are in India and attract visitors
from all over the world. India is also home to some of the most famous
monuments of Islamic architecture like the Taj Mahal and the Qutb Minar. Civil
matters related to the community are dealt with by the Muslim Personal Law, and
constitutional amendments in 1985 established its primacy in family matters.
The Constitution of India declares the nation to be a secular republic that
must uphold the right of citizens to freely worship and propagate any religion
or faith (with activities subject to reasonable restrictions for the sake of
morality, law and order, etc.). The Constitution of India also declares the
right to freedom of religion as a fundamental right. Citizens of India are
generally tolerant of each other's religions and retain a secular outlook,
although inter-religious marriage is not widely practiced. Inter-community
clashes have found little support in the social mainstream, and it is generally
perceived that the causes of religious conflicts are political rather than
ideological in nature. History. Evolution of Hinduism in India. Hinduism is
often regarded as the oldest religion in the world, with roots tracing back to
prehistoric times, or 5000 years. Over time, Brahmanism gradually became
Hinduism. Hinduism was spread through parts of Southeastern Asia, China, Korea,
and Japan. Hindus worship a god with different forms. (Vishnu the preserver is
an important Hindu deity.) Evidence attesting to prehistoric religion in the
Indian "subcontinent" derives from scattered Mesolithic rock paintings
depicting dances and rituals. Neolithic pastoralists inhabiting the Indus River
Valley buried their dead in a manner suggestive of spiritual practices that
incorporated notions of an afterlife and belief in magic. Other South Asian
Stone Age sites, such as the Bhimbetka rock shelters in central Madhya Pradesh
and the Kupgal petroglyphs of eastern Karnataka, contain rock art portraying
religious rites and evidence of possible ritualised music. The Harappan people
of the Indus Valley Civilization, which lasted from 3300 to 1700 BCE and was
centered around the Indus and Ghaggar-Hakra river valleys, may have worshiped
an important mother goddess symbolising fertility. Excavations of Indus Valley
Civilization sites show seals with animals and "fire‑altars", indicating
rituals associated with fire. A "linga-yoni" of a type similar to that which is
now worshiped by Hindus has also been found. Hinduism's origins include
cultural elements of the Indus Valley Civilization and other Indian
civilizations. The oldest surviving text of Hinduism is the Rigveda, produced
during the Vedic period and dated to 1700–1100 BCE. During the Epic and
Puranic periods, the earliest versions of the epic poems "Ramayana" and
"Mahabharata" were written roughly from 500–100 BCE, although these were
orally transmitted for centuries prior to this period. After 200 CE, several
schools of thought were formally codified in Indian philosophy, including
Samkhya, Yoga, Nyaya, Vaisheshika, Purva-Mimamsa and Vedanta. Hinduism,
otherwise a highly theistic religion, hosted atheistic schools; the thoroughly
materialistic and anti-religious philosophical Cārvāka school that originated
in India around the 6th century BCE is probably the most explicitly atheistic
school of Indian philosophy. Cārvāka is classified as a "nastika"
("heterodox") system; it is not included among the six schools of Hinduism
generally regarded as orthodox. It is noteworthy as evidence of a materialistic
movement within Hinduism. Our understanding of Cārvāka philosophy is
fragmentary, based largely on criticism of the ideas by other schools, and it
is no longer a living tradition. Other Indian philosophies generally regarded
as orthodox include Classical Samkhya and Purva Mimamsa. Rise of Shramana
Religions. Mahavira the 24th Jain Tirthankara (599–527 BC, though possibly
549–477 BC), stressed five vows, including "ahimsa" (non-violence) and
"asteya" (non-stealing). Gautama Buddha, who founded Buddhism, was born to the
Shakya clan just before Magadha (which lasted from 546–324 BCE) rose to
power. Buddha is said to be a descendant of Brahmin Sage Angirasa in many
Buddhist texts. His surname was 'Gautama', some scholars like Dr. Eitel connect
it to the Brahmin Rishi Gautama. His family was native to the plains of
Lumbini, in what is now southern Nepal. Indian Buddhism peaked during the reign
of Asoka the Great of the Mauryan Empire, who patronized Buddhism following his
conversion and unified the Indian subcontinent in the 3rd century BCE. He sent
missionaries abroad, allowing Buddhism to spread across Asia. Indian Buddhism
declined following the loss of royal patronage offered by the Kushan Empire and
such kingdoms as Magadha and Kosala. Some scholars think between 400 BCE and
1000 CE, Hinduism expanded as the decline of Buddhism in India continued.
Buddhism subsequently became effectively extinct in India. Bhakti Movement.
During the 14-17th centuries, when North India was under Muslim rule, The
"bhakti" movement swept through Central and Northern India, initiated by a
loosely associated group of teachers or "sants". Chaitanya Mahaprabhu,
Vallabhacharya, Surdas, Meera Bai, Kabir, Tulsidas, Ravidas, Namdeo, Tukaram
and other mystics spearheaded the Bhakti movement in the North. They taught
that people could cast aside the heavy burdens of ritual and caste, and the
subtle complexities of philosophy, and simply express their overwhelming love
for God. This period was also characterized by a spate of devotional literature
in vernacular prose and poetry in the ethnic languages of the various Indian
states or provinces. Bhakti movement spawned into several different movements
all across North and South India. During the Bhakti Movement, many Hindu groups
regarded as outside the traditional Hindu caste system followed Bhakti
traditions by worshipping/following saints belonging to their respective
communities. For example, Guru Ravidas was a Chamar of Uttar Pradesh; Guru
Parsuram Ramnami was a Chura of Chhatisgarh; and Maharishi Ram Naval was a
Bhangi of Rajasthan. Several of these saints, in their lifetime, even went to
the extent of fighting conversion from foreign missionaries and only
encouraging Hinduism within their communities. For example, in Assam tribals
were led by Gurudev Kalicharan Bramha of the Brahmo Samaj; in Nagaland by Kacha
Naga; and in Central India by Birsa Munda, Hanuman Oaron, Jatra Bhagat and
Budhu Bhagat. Sikhism. Guru Nanak (1469–1539) was the founder of Sikhism. The
Guru Granth Sahib was first compiled by the fifth Sikh guru, Guru Arjan Dev,
from the writings of the first five Sikh gurus and others saints who preached
the concept of universal brotherhood, including those of the Hindu and Muslim
faith. Before the death of Guru Gobind Singh, the Guru Granth Sahib was
declared the eternal guru. Sikhism recognizes all humans as equal before
Waheguru, regardless of colour, caste or lineage. Sikhism rejects the beliefs
of idol worship and circumcision. Introduction of foreign religions.
Introduction of Christianity. The works of scholars and Eastern Christian
writings claim that Christianity was introduced to India by Thomas the Apostle,
who visited Muziris in Kerala in 52 AD and baptized Kerala's Jewish settlements
who are known as Saint Thomas Christians (also known as Syrian Christians or
Nasrani) today. Although the exact origins of Christianity in India remain
unclear, there is a general scholarly consensus that Christianity was rooted in
India by the 3rd century AD, including some communities who used Syriac
liturgically, and it is a possibility that the religion's existence there
extends to as far back as the 1st century. Christianity in India has different
denominations, like Roman Catholicism, Oriental Orthodox Christianity and
Protestantism. Roman Catholic is a denomination practiced by over 17.3 million
people in India which represents less than 2% of the total population. Most
Catholics reside in South India. Goa is home to Roman Catholics. The state
known for its Christian population. Christianity was introduced to Indians
twice. Possibly in the 1st century by St. Thomas, and by Europeans. Europeans
brought Catholicism in the 13th century (Portuguese) and Protestantism in the
18th century (British and American missionaries). It became popular following
European colonisation and Protestant missionary efforts. Advent of Islam.
Though Islam came to India in the early 7th century with the advent of Arab
traders, it started to become a major religion during the Muslim conquest in
the Indian subcontinent. Islam's spread in India mostly took place under the
Delhi Sultanate (1206–1526) and the Mughal Empire (1526-1858), greatly aided
by the mystic Sufi tradition. Communalism. Communalism has played a key role in
shaping the religious history of modern India. As an adverse result of the
British Raj's divide and rule policy, British India was partitioned along
religious lines into two states—the Muslim-majority Dominion of Pakistan
(comprising what is now the Islamic Republic of Pakistan and the People's
Republic of Bangladesh) and the Hindu-majority Union of India (later the
Republic of India). The 1947 Partition of India instigated rioting among
Hindus, Muslims, and Sikhs in Punjab, Bengal, Delhi, and other parts of India;
500,000 died as a result of the violence. The twelve million refugees that
moved between the newly founded nations of India and Pakistan composed one of
the largest mass migrations in modern history. Since its independence, India
has periodically witnessed large-scale violence sparked by underlying tensions
between sections of its majority Hindu and minority Muslim communities. The
Republic of India is secular; its government recognizes no official religion.
Demographics. Hinduism is an ancient religion (although Hinduism is diverse,
with monotheism, henotheism, polytheism, panentheism, pantheism, monism,
atheism, agnosticism, and gnosticism being represented), and Hinduism is also
the largest religious grouping in India; its 828 million adherents (2001)
compose 80.5% of the population. The term "Hindu", originally a geographical
description, derives from the Sanskrit, "Sindhu", (the historical appellation
for the Indus River), and refers to a person from the "land of the river
Sindhu". Islam is a monotheistic religion centred around the belief in one God
and following the example of Muhammad. It is the largest minority religion in
India. According to the 2001 census, India is home to 138 million Muslims, the
world's third-largest Muslim population after those in Indonesia (210 million)
and Pakistan (166 million); they compose 13.4% of the population. Muslims
represent the majority in Jammu and Kashmir and Lakshadweep, and high
concentrations in the states of Andhra Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, West
Bengal, Assam, and Kerala., There has been no particular census conducted in
India with regards to sects, but sources suggest the largest denomination is
Sunni Islam with a substantial minority of Shiite Muslims. Indian sources like
Times of India and DNA reported Indian Shiite population in mid-2005–2006
between 25% and 31% of entire Muslim population of India, which accounts them
in numbers between 40 to 50 million of a total of 157 million. Christianity is
a monotheistic religion centred on the life and teachings of Jesus as presented
in the New Testament; it is the third largest religion of India, making up 2.3%
of the population. St. Thomas is credited with introduction of Christianity in
India. He arrived in Malabar in AD 52. Christians comprise a majority in
Nagaland, Mizoram, and Meghalaya and have significant populations in North-East
India, Goa and Kerala. Buddhism is a dharmic, nontheistic religion and
philosophy. Buddhists form majority populations in the Indian states of
Arunachal Pradesh, and the Ladakh region of Jammu and Kashmir and a large
minority (40%) in Sikkim. Around 8 million Buddhists live in India, about 0.8%
of the population. Jainism is a non-theistic Dharmic religion and philosophical
system originating in Iron Age India. Jains though compose 0.4% (around 4.2
million) of India's population, they are the most richest, highly educated
religion in whole of India. They are mainly concentrated in the states of
Gujarat, Rajasthan, Maharashtra, Karnataka, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh,
Bihar, Haryana, Punjab, Orissa, Tamil Nadu. Although Jainism is usually
believed to be atheistic/non-theistic, Paul Dundas writes, ""While Jainism is,
as we have seen, atheist in the limited sense of rejection of a creator god and
the possibility of the intervention of such a being in human affairs, it
nonetheless must be regarded as a theist religion in the more profound sense
that it accepts the existence of a divine principle, the parmatman, often in
fact referred to as 'God' (e.g. ParPr 114-16), existing in potential state
within all beings"". Paul Dundas writes that most British judges of the 19th
century "had no doubts about the independent nature and origin of Jainism". In
1847, one judge wrote that religious minorities like Jains, Parsis, and Sikhs
"Had nothing or next to nothing in common with brahmanical worship". Another
judge noted in 1874 that Jains could not be subject to Hindu law because "the
term Hindoos means persons within the purview of the shastras, which shastras
are at the bottom of Hindu law. If a person is out of that purview, Hindoo law
cannot be applied to him" According to the Dentsu Communication Institute Inc,
Japan Research Center (2006), 6.6% of Indians stated that they had no religion.
Law. The preamble to the Constitution of India proclaimed India a "sovereign
socialist secular democratic republic". The word "secular" was inserted into
the Preamble by the Forty-second Amendment Act of 1976. It mandates equal
treatment and tolerance of all religions. India does not have an official state
religion; it enshrines the right to practice, preach, and propagate any
religion. No religious instruction is imparted in government-supported schools.
In S. R. Bommai vs. Union of India, the Supreme Court of India held that
secularism was an integral tenet of the Constitution. The right to freedom of
religion is a fundamental right according to the Indian Constitution. The
Constitution also suggests a uniform civil code for its citizens as a Directive
Principle. This has not been implemented until now as Directive Principles are
Constitutionally unenforceable. The Supreme Court has further held that the
enactment of a uniform civil code all at once may be counterproductive to the
unity of the nation, and only a gradual progressive change should be brought
about ("Pannalal Bansilal v State of Andhra Pradesh, 1996"). In "Maharishi
Avadesh v Union of India (1994)" the Supreme Court dismissed a petition seeking
a writ of mandamus against the government to introduce a common civil code, and
thus laid the responsibility of its introduction on the legislature. Major
religious communities not based in India continue to be governed by their own
personal laws. While Muslims, Christians, Zoroastrians, and Jews have personal
laws exclusive to themselves; Hindus, Jains, Buddhists and Sikhs are governed
by a single personal law known as Hindu personal law. Article 25 (2)(b) of the
Constitution of India states that references to Hindus include "persons
professing the Sikh, Jain or Buddhist religion". Furthermore the Hindu Marriage
Act of 1955 defines the legal status of Jains, Buddhists and Sikhs as legal
Hindus but not "Hindus by religion". The only Indian religion exclusively
covered under the secular ("civil") law of India is Brahmoism starting from Act
III of 1872. Aspects. Religion plays a major role in the Indian way of life.
Rituals, worship, and other religious activities are very prominent in an
individual's daily life; it is also a principal organiser of social life. The
degree of religiosity varies among individuals; in recent decades, religious
orthodoxy and observances have become less common in Indian society,
particularly among young urban-dwellers. Rituals. The vast majority of Indians
engage in religious rituals on a daily basis. Most Hindus observe religious
rituals at home. Observation of rituals greatly vary among regions, villages,
and individuals. Devout Hindus perform daily chores such as worshiping puja,
fire scrifice called Yajna at the dawn after bathing (usually at a family
shrine, and typically includes lighting a lamp and offering foodstuffs before
the images of deities), recitation from religious scripts like Vedas, Puranas
singing hymns in praise of gods etc. A notable feature in religious ritual is
the division between purity and pollution. Religious acts presuppose some
degree of impurity or defilement for the practitioner, which must be overcome
or neutralised before or during ritual procedures. Purification, usually with
water, is thus a typical feature of most religious action. Other
characteristics include a belief in the efficacy of sacrifice and concept of
merit, gained through the performance of charity or good works, that will
accumulate over time and reduce sufferings in the next world. Devout Muslims
offer five daily prayers at specific times of the day, indicated by "adhan"
(call to prayer) from the local mosques. Before offering prayers, they must
ritually clean themselves by performing "wudu", which involves washing parts of
the body that are generally exposed to dirt or dust. A recent study by the
Sachar Committee found that 3-4% of Muslim children study in "madrasas"
(Islamic schools). Diet. Dietary habits are significantly influenced by
religion. Almost one-third of Indians practice lacto-vegetarianism; it came to
prominence during the rule of Emperor Ashoka of the Maurya Empire, a promoter
of Buddhism. Vegetarianism is much less common among Sikhs and almost uncommon
among Muslims, Christians, Bahá'ís, Parsis and Jews. Jainism requires monks
and laity, from all its sects and traditions, to be vegetarian.Furthermore, the
religion also bars jains from eating any vegetable that involves digging it
from the ground. This rule, therefore, excludes potatoes, sweet potatoes,
carrots, garlic, peanuts, raddish etc. from Jain diet. Hinduism bars beef
consumption, while Islam bars pork. Ceremonies. Occasions like birth, marriage,
and death involve what are often elaborate sets of religious customs. In
Hinduism, major life-cycle rituals include "annaprashan" (a baby's first intake
of solid food), "upanayanam" ("sacred thread ceremony" undergone by upper-caste
youths), and "shraadh" (paying homage to a deceased individual). For most
people in India, the betrothal of the young couple and the exact date and time
of the wedding are matters decided by the parents in consultation with
astrologers. Muslims practice a series of life-cycle rituals that differ from
those of Hindus, Jains, and Buddhists. Several rituals mark the first days of
life—including whispering call to prayer, first bath, and shaving of the
head. Religious instruction begins early. Male circumcision usually takes place
after birth; in some families, it may be delayed until after the onset of
puberty. Marriage requires a payment by the husband to the wife and the
solemnisation of a marital contract in a social gathering. On the third day
after burial of the dead, friends and relatives gather to console the bereaved,
read and recite the Quran, and pray for the soul of the deceased. Indian Islam
is distinguished by the emphasis it places on shrines commemorating great Sufi
saints. Pilgrimages. Many Hindu families has their own family patron deity or
the "Kuladaivat". This deity is common to a lineage or a clan of several
families who are connected to each other through a common ancestor. The
Khandoba of Jejuri is an example of a Kuladaivat of some Maharashtrian
families; he is a common Kuladaivat to several castes ranging from Brahmins to
Dalits. The practice of worshiping local or territorial deities as Kuladaivats
began in the period of the Yadava dynasty. Other family deities of the people
of Maharashtra are Bhavani of Tuljapur, Mahalaxmi of Kolhapur, Renuka of Mahur,
and Balaji of Tirupati. India hosts numerous pilgrimage sites belonging to many
religions. Hindus worldwide recognise several Indian holy cities, including
Allahabad, Haridwar, Varanasi, Ujjain, Rameshwaram and Vrindavan. Notable
temple cities include Puri, which hosts a major Jagannath temple and Rath Yatra
celebration; Tirumala - Tirupati, home to the Tirumala Venkateswara Temple; and
Katra, home to the Vaishno Devi temple. The Himalayan towns of Badrinath,
Kedarnath, Gangotri, and Yamunotri compose the "Char Dham" ("four abodes")
pilgrimage circuit. The Kumbh Mela (the "pitcher festival") is one of the
holiest of Hindu pilgrimages that is held every four years; the location is
rotated among Allahabad, Haridwar, Nashik, and Ujjain. Among the Eight Great
Places of Buddhism, seven are in India. Bodh Gaya, Sarnath and Kushinagar are
the places where important events in the life of Gautama Buddha took place.
Sanchi hosts a Buddhist stupa erected by the emperor Ashoka. Several Tibetan
Buddhist sites in the Himalayan foothills of India have been built, such as
Rumtek Monastery and Dharamsala. For Muslims, the "Dargah Shareef" of Khwaza
Moinuddin Chishti in Ajmer is a major pilgrimage site. Other Islamic
pilgrimages include those to the Tomb of Sheikh Salim Chishti in Fatehpur
Sikri, Jama Masjid in Delhi, and to Haji Ali Dargah in Mumbai. Dilwara Temples
in Mount Abu, Palitana, Pavapuri, Girnar and Shravanabelagola are notable
pilgrimage sites (tirtha) in Jainism. The Harmandir Sahib in Amritsar is the
most sacred gurdwara of Sikhism, while the Lotus Temple in Delhi is a prominent
house of worship of the Bahá'í faith. Relatively new pilgrimage sites include
the samadhi of Meher Baba in Meherabad, which is visited by his followers from
around the world and the Saibaba temple in Shirdi. Minority Beliefs and Sects.
Hinduism contains many different sub-cultures just like most other religions.
The major aspects outlined above hold true for the majority of the Hindu
population, but not all. Just as each state is home to an individual language,
Hinduism harbors various sub-cultures whose traditions may or may not be shared
by other Indians. A sect from Gujarat called the "Prajapatis" for example, hold
water as the sacred ornament to every meal. Before and after a meal, an
individual is expected to pour water in the palms of their right hand and sip
the water three times. This is often seen as a purification gesture: food is
regarded as being holy and every individual must purify themselves before
touching their food. Other minor sects in India carry no specific name, but
they are uniquely identified by the last names of each family. This convention
is used more frequently in South India than North India. For example, a
relatively prominent sect in southern India prohibits making important
decisions, commencing new tasks, and doing other intellectually or spiritually
engaged actions after sunset. Historians believe that this tradition was
derived from the concept of Rahukaalam, in which Hindus believe that a specific
time period of the day is inauspicious. Stringent family beliefs are thought to
have led to the development of a more constrained religious hierarchy. Over
time, this belief was extended to discourage taking major actions and even
staying awake for long periods of time after sunset. Examples of families which
follow this tradition include "Gudivada", "Padalapalli", "Pantham", and
"Kashyap". Religion and politics. Politics. Religious ideology, particularly
that expressed by the Hindutva movement, has strongly influenced Indian
politics in the last quarter of the 20th century. Many of the elements
underlying India's casteism and communalism originated during the rule of the
British Raj, particularly after the late 19th century; the authorities and
others often politicised religion. The Indian Councils Act 1909 (widely known
as the Morley-Minto Reforms Act), which established separate Hindu and Muslim
electorates for the Imperial Legislature and provincial councils, was
particularly divisive. It was blamed for increasing tensions between the two
communities. Due to the high degree of oppression faced by the lower castes,
the Constitution of India included provisions for affirmative action for
certain sections of Indian society. Growing disenchantment with the Hindu caste
system has led thousands of Dalits (also referred to as "Untouchables") to
embrace Buddhism and Christianity in recent decades. In response, many states
ruled by the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) introduced laws that made them more
difficult; they assert that such conversions are often forced or allured. The
BJP, a ]] party, also gained widespread media attention after its leaders
associated themselves with the Ram Janmabhoomi movement and other prominent
religious issues. A well known accusation that Indian political parties make
for their rivals is that they play vote bank politics, meaning give political
support to issues for the sole purpose of gaining the votes of members of a
particular community. Both the Congress Party and the BJP have been accused of
exploiting the people by indulging in vote bank politics. The Shah Bano case, a
divorce lawsuit, generated much controversy when the Congress was accused of
appeasing the Muslim orthodoxy by bringing in a parliamentary amendment to
negate the Supreme Court's decision. After the 2002 Gujarat violence, there
were allegations of political parties indulging in vote bank politics. During
an election campaign in Uttar Pradesh, the BJP released an inflammatory CD
targeting Muslims. This was condemned by the Communist Party of India (Marxist)
as playing the worst kind of vote bank politics. Caste-based politics is also
important in India; caste-based discrimination and the reservation system
continue to be major issues that are hotly debated. Education. Several
political parties have been accused of using their political power to
manipulate educational content in a revisionist manner. During the Janata Party
government (1977–1979), the government was accused of being too sympathetic
to the Muslim viewpoint. In 2002, the BJP-led NDA government tried to change
the National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT) school
textbooks through a new National Curriculum Framework. Some media referred to
it as the "saffronisation" of textbooks, saffron being the colour of BJP flag.
The next government, formed by the UPA and led by the Congress Party, pledged
to de-saffronise textbooks. Hindu groups alleged that the UPA promoted Marxist
and pro-Muslim biases in school curricula. Conflicts. Communal conflicts have
periodically plagued India since it became independent in 1947. The roots of
such strife lie largely in the underlying tensions between sections of its
majority Hindu and minority Muslim communities, which emerged under the Raj and
during the bloody Partition of India. Such conflict also stems from the
competing ideologies of Hindu fundamentalism versus Islamic fundamentalism and
Islamism; both are prevalent in parts of the Hindu and Muslim populations.
Alongside other major Indian independence leaders, Mahatma Gandhi and his
"shanti sainiks" ("peace soldiers") worked to quell early outbreaks of
religious conflict in Bengal, including riots in Calcutta (now in West Bengal)
and Noakhali District (in modern-day Bangladesh) that accompanied Muhammad Ali
Jinnah's Direct Action Day, which was launched on 16 August 1946. These
conflicts, waged largely with rocks and knives and accompanied by widespread
looting and arson, were crude affairs. Explosives and firearms, which are
rarely found in India, were far less likely to be used. Major post-independence
communal conflicts include the 1984 Anti-Sikh riots, which followed Operation
Blue Star by the Indian Army; heavy artillery, tanks, and helicopters were
employed against the Sikh partisans inside the Harmandir Sahib, causing heavy
damage to Sikhism's holiest Gurdwara. According to the Indian government
estimations, the assault caused the deaths of up to 100 soldiers, 250
militants, and hundreds of civilians. This triggered Indira Gandhi's
assassination by her outraged Sikh bodyguards on 31 October 1984, which set off
a four-day period during which Sikhs were massacred; The Government of India
reported 2,700 Sikh deaths however human rights organizations and newspapers
report the death toll to be 10,000-17,000. In the aftermath of the riot, the
Government of India reported 20,000 had fled the city, however the PUCL
reported "at least" 50,000 displaced persons. The most affected regions were
neighborhoods in Delhi. Human rights organizations and the newspapers believe
the massacre was organized. The collusion of political officials in the
massacres and the failure to prosecute any killers alienated normal Sikhs and
increased support for the Khalistan movement. The Akal Takht, the governing
religious body of Sikhism, most definitely considers the killings to be a
genocide. Other incidents include the 1992 Bombay Riots that followed the
demolition of the Babri Mosque as a result of the Ayodhya debate, and the 2002
Gujarat violence that followed the Godhra Train Burning—in the latter, more
than 2,000 Muslims were killed. Terrorist activities such as the 2005 Ram
Janmabhoomi attack in Ayodhya, the 2006 Varanasi bombings, the 2006 Jama Masjid
explosions, and the 11 July 2006 Mumbai Train Bombings are often blamed on
communalism. Lesser incidents plague many towns and villages; representative
was the killing of five people in Mau, Uttar Pradesh during Hindu-Muslim
rioting, which was triggered by the proposed celebration of a Hindu festival.
Major religious riots, since Independence
