Religious intolerance Religious intolerance is intolerance against another's
religious beliefs or practices or lack thereof. Definition. The mere statement
on the part of a religion that its own beliefs and practices are correct and
any contrary beliefs are incorrect in itself constitutes intolerance (i.e.,
ideological intolerance). On the other hand, religious tolerance would mean
that each person is free to chose his own faith and no other person would have
a right to pass opinions on the faith of an other person. While Christianity
may be the faith of A, Islam may be the faith of B. If A or B try to tell each
other that the other is on the way to hell then that would be intolerance.
Religious intolerance, rather, is when a group (e.g., a society, religious
group, non-religious group) specifically refuses to tolerate practices, persons
or beliefs on religious grounds (i.e., intolerance in practice). Historical
Perspectives. According to the 19th century British historian Arnold Toynbee,
for a religious establishment to persecute another religion for being "wrong"
ironically puts the persecuting religion in the wrong, undermining its own
legitimacy. Contemporary attitude and practice. The constitutions of some
countries contain provisions expressly forbidding the state from engaging in
certain acts of religious intolerance or preference within its own borders;
examples include The First Amendment of the United States Constitution - (the
exception being "manifest destiny" which was manufactured by the prevailing
powers as well as the church, to suspend this "right" for all North American
indigenous peoples, most notably during the 1800s and well into the 1900s. This
is evidenced by the brutality of the infamous boarding schools designed to
"kill the Indian; save the man" by erasing all manner of religious practice,
language, culture, traditions, and beliefs). Article 4 of the Basic Law of
Germany, Article 44.2.1 of the Constitution of The Republic of Ireland, Article
40 of the Estonian Constitution, Article 24 of the Constitution of Turkey and
Article 36 of the Constitution of the People's Republic of China, Article 3
Section 5 of the 1987 Constitution of the Philippines. Other states, whilst not
containing constitutional provisions directly related to religion, nonetheless
contain provisions forbidding discrimination on religious grounds (see, for
example, Article 1 of the French Constitution, article 15 of the Canadian
Charter of Rights and Freedoms and article 40 of the Constitution of Egypt).
These constitutional provisions do not necessarily guarantee that all elements
of the state remain free from religious intolerance at all times, and practice
can vary widely from country to country. Other countries, meanwhile, may allow
for religious preference, for instance through the establishment of one or more
state religions, but not for religious intolerance. Finland, for example, has
the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland and Finnish Orthodox Church as its
official state religions, yet upholds the right of free expression of religion
in article 11 of its constitution. Some countries retain laws forbidding
defamation of religious belief. Some retain laws forbidding all forms of
blasphemy (e.g., Germany where, in 2006, Manfred van H. was convicted of
blasphemy against Islam). This is seen by some as official endorsement of
religious intolerance, amounting to the criminalization of religious views. The
connection between intolerance and blasphemy laws is closest when the laws
apply to only one religion. In Pakistan blasphemy directed against either the
tenets of the Qur'an or the Prophet Mohammed is punishable by either life
imprisonment or death. Apostasy, the rejection of one's old religion, is also
criminalized in a number of countries, notably Afghanistan with Abdul Rahman
being the first to face the death penalty for converting to Christianity. The
United Nations upholds the right to free expression of religious belief in
articles and 18 and 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights while
article 2 forbids discrimination on the basis of religion. Article 18 also
allows for the freedom to change religion. The Declaration is not legally
binding, however the United States chose in 1998 to pass the International
Religious Freedom Act, creating the Commission on International Religious
Freedom, and mandating that the United States government take action against
any country found to violate the religious freedoms outlined in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights. The European Convention on Human Rights, which is
legally binding on all European Union states (following the passage of the
Human Rights Act 1998 in the United Kingdom), makes restricting the rights of
an individual to practice or change their religion illegal in article 9, and
discrimination on the basis of religion illegal in article 14. In its 2000
annual report on international religious freedom, the U.S. State Department
cited China, Myanmar, Iran, Iraq and Sudan for persecuting people for their
religious faith and practices. The report, which covers July 1999 through June
2000, details U.S. policy toward countries where religious freedom is violated
in the view of the U.S. State Department. The advocacy group Freedom House
produced a report entitled "Religious Freedom in the World" in 2000 which
ranked countries according to their religious freedom. The countries receiving
a score of 7, indicating those where religious freedom was least respected,
were Turkmenistan, Iran, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, Myanmar and North Korea. China
was given a score of 6 overall, however Tibet was listed separately in the 7
category. Those countries receiving a score of 1, indicating the highest level
of religious freedom, were Estonia, Finland, Ireland, the Netherlands, Norway
and the United States. Within those countries that openly advocate religious
tolerance there remain debates as to the limits of tolerance. Some individuals
and religious groups, for example, retain beliefs or practices which involve
acts contrary to established law, such as the use of cannabis by members of the
Rastafari movement, the religious use of eagle feathers by non-Native Americans
(contrary to the eagle feather law, 50 CFR 22), or the practice of polygamy
amongst Mormons in the 19th century. The precise definition of "religion", and
to which groups it applies, can also cause controversy, for example the case of
Scientologists who have all rights of religious freedom but complain that the
highest court decided not to grant the status of a Non-profit organization in
several states. Attempts to legislate against acts of religious intolerance
amongst citizens frequently come up against issues regarding the freedom of
speech; whilst in France being convicted of incitement to religious hatred can
carry a maximum of 18 months in prison. An attempt to pass a similar law by
Tony Blair's Labour government in the United Kingdom had to be dropped in
April, 2006 after criticism that it restricted free speech. In Victoria,
Australia the Racial and Religious Tolerance Act 2001 makes illegal "conduct
that incites hatred against, serious contempt for, or revulsion or severe
ridicule of, that other person or class of persons" on the grounds of religious
belief.
