Religion in Canada Religion in Canada encompasses a wide range of groups. The
preamble to the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms refers to "God", and
the monarch carries the title of "Defender of the Faith". However, Canada has
no official religion, and support for religious pluralism (Freedom of religion
in Canada) is an important part of Canada's political culture. The 2001
Canadian census reported that 77% of Canadians claim adherence to Christianity,
followed by no religion at 16%, but rates of religious adherence have been
steadily decreasing. Native American religion in Canada was largely animistic.
This included an intense reverence for spirits and nature. French settlement
beginning in the 17th century established a Roman Catholic francophone
population in Lower Canada, now Quebec, followed by English settlement that
brought Anglicans and other Protestants to Upper Canada, now Ontario. The
religious, cultural, and political antagonism between Canadian Protestants and
Catholics remains a central theme of Canadian history. It has been suggested
that Canada is a secular state, where practice of religion is declining, and
irreligion is on the rise. A majority of Canadians consider religion to be
unimportant. History. To 1800. By 1667 the Jesuits had established a station
near present-day Green Bay, Wisconsin. Before the arrival of Europeans, the
First Nations followed a wide array of mostly animistic religions. See also
Native American mythology. The first Europeans to settle in great numbers in
Canada were French Latin rite Roman Catholics, including a large number of
Jesuits dedicated to converting the natives; an effort that eventually proved
successful. The first large Protestant communities were formed in the Maritimes
after they were conquered by the British. Unable to convince enough British
immigrants to go to the region, the government decided to import continental
Protestants from Germany and Switzerland to populate the region and
counterbalance the Roman Catholic Acadians. This group was known as the Foreign
Protestants. This effort proved successful and today the South Shore region of
Nova Scotia is still largely Lutheran. After the Expulsion of the Acadians a
large number of New England Planters settled on the vacated lands bringing with
them their Congregationalist belief. During the 1770s, guided by Henry Alline,
the New Light movement of the Great Awakening swept through the Atlantic region
converting many of the Congregationalist to the new theology. After Alline's
death many of these Newlights eventually became Baptists, thus making Maritime
Canada the heartland of the Baptist movement in Canada. The Quebec Act of 1774
acknowledged the rights of the Roman Catholic Church throughout Lower Canada in
order to keep the French-Canadians loyal to Britain. The American Revolution
brought about a large influx of Protestants to Canada. United Empire Loyalists,
fleeing the rebellious United States, moved in large numbers to Upper Canada
and the Maritimes. They comprised a mix of Christian groups with a large number
of Anglicans, but also many Presbyterians and Methodists. 19th century. While
Anglicans consolidated their hold on the upper classes, workingmen and farmers
responded to the Methodist revivals, often sponsored by visiting preachers from
America. Typical was Rev. James Caughey, an American sent by the Wesleyan
Methodist Church from the 1840s through 1864. He brought in the converts by the
score, most notably in the revivals in Canada West 1851-53. His technique
combined restrained emotionalism with a clear call for personal commitment,
coupled with followup action to organize support from converts. It was a time
when the Holiness Movement caught fire, with the revitalized interest of men
and women in Christian perfection. Caughey successfully bridged the gap between
the style of earlier camp meetings and the needs of more sophisticated
Methodist congregations in the emerging cities. In the early nineteenth century
in the Maritimes and Upper Canada, the Anglican Church held the same official
position it did in England. This caused tension within English Canada, as much
of the populace was not Anglican. Increasing immigration from Scotland created
a very large Presbyterian community and they and other groups demanded equal
rights. This was an important cause of the 1837 Rebellion in Upper Canada. With
the arrival of responsible government, the Anglican monopoly was ended. In
Lower Canada, the Roman Catholic Church was officially pre-eminent and had a
central role in the colony's culture and politics. Unlike English Canada,
French-Canadian nationalism became very closely associated with Roman
Catholicism. During this period, the Roman Catholic Church in the region became
one of the most reactionary in the world. Known as Ultramontane Catholicism,
the church adopted positions condemning all manifestations of liberalism. In
politics, those aligned with the Roman Catholic clergy in Quebec were known as
"les bleus" (the blues). They formed a curious alliance with the staunchly
monarchist and pro-British Anglicans of English Canada (often members of the
Orange Order) to form the basis of the Canadian Conservative Party. The Reform
Party, which later became the Liberal Party, was largely composed of the anti-
clerical French-Canadians, known as "les rouges" (the reds) and the non-
Anglican Protestant groups. In those times, right before elections, parish
priests would give sermons to their flock where they said things like "Le ciel
est bleu et l'enfer est rouge". This translates as "Heaven/the sky is blue and
hell is red". By the late nineteenth century, Protestant pluralism had taken
hold in English Canada. While much of the elite were still Anglican, other
groups had become very prominent as well. Toronto had become home to the
world's single largest Methodist community and it became known as the
"Methodist Rome". The schools and universities created at this time reflected
this pluralism with major centres of learning being established for each faith.
One, King's College, later the University of Toronto, was set up as a non-
denominational school. The influence of the Orange Order was strong, especially
among Irish Protestant immigrants, and comprised a powerful anti-Catholic force
in Ontario politics; its influence faded away after 1920. The late nineteenth
century also saw the beginning of a large shift in Canadian immigration
patterns. Large numbers of Irish and Southern European immigrants were creating
new Roman Catholic communities in English Canada. The population of the west
brought significant Eastern Orthodox immigrants from Eastern Europe and Mormon
and Pentecostal immigrants from the United States and Ireland 20th century. In
1919-20 Canada's five major Protestant denominations (Anglican, Baptist,
Congregational, Methodist, and Presbyterian) cooperatively undertook the
"Forward Movement." The goal was to raise funds and to strengthen Christian
spirituality in Canada. The movement invoked Anglophone nationalism by linking
donations with the Victory Loan campaigns of the First World War I, and
stressed the need for funds to Canadianize immigrants. Centred in Ontario, the
campaign was a clear financial success, raising over $11 million. However the
campaign exposed deep divisions among Protestants, with the traditional
evangelists speaking of a personal relationship with God and the more liberal
denominations emphasizing the Social Gospel and good works. Both factions
(apart from the Anglicans) agreed on prohibition, which was demanded by the
WCTU. Domination of Canadian society by Protestant and Roman Catholic elements
continued until well into the 20th century, however. Until the 1960s, most
parts of Canada still had extensive Lord's Day laws that limited what one could
do on a Sunday. The English-Canadian elite were still dominated by Protestants,
and Jews and Roman Catholics were often excluded. A slow process of
liberalization began after the Second World War in English-Canada. Overtly
Christian laws were expunged, including those against homosexuality. Policies
favouring Christian immigration were also abolished. The most overwhelming
change occurred in the Quiet Revolution Quebec in the 1960s. In 1950, the
province was one of the most traditional Roman Catholic areas in the world.
Church attendance rates were high, and the school system was largely controlled
by the church. In the 1960s, the Catholic Church lost most of its influence in
Quebec, and religiosity declined sharply. While the majority of Québécois are
still professed Latin rite Roman Catholics, rates of church attendance are
today extremely low, in fact, they are the lowest of any region in North
America today. Common law relationships, abortion, and support for same-sex
marriage are more common in Quebec than in the rest of Canada. English Canada
also underwent secularization. The United Church of Canada, the country's
largest Protestant denomination, became one of the most liberal major
Protestant churches in the world. It is committed to gay rights including
marriage and ordination, and to the ordination of women. The United Church has
seen its membership decline substantially since the 1990s, and other mainline
churches have seen similar declines, while overall church attendance has
increased in the 2000s. In addition, a strong current of evangelical
Protestantism exists outside of Quebec. The largest groups are found in the
Atlantic Provinces and Western Canada, particularly in Alberta, southern
Manitoba and the southern interior and Fraser Valley region of British
Columbia, also known as the "Canadian Bible Belt". There is also a significant
evangelical population in southern Ontario. In these areas, particularly
outside the Greater Toronto Area, the culture is more conservative, somewhat
more in line with that of the Midwestern and southern United States, and same-
sex marriage, abortion, and common-law relationships are less popular. This
movement has grown considerably in the past few years (primarily in those areas
listed above) due to strong influences on public policy and stark divides, not
unlike those in the United States, although the overall proportion of
evangelicals in Canada remains considerably lower and the polarization much
less intense. There are very few evangelicals in Quebec and in the largest
urban areas, which are generally secular, although there are several
congregations above 1000 in most large cities. Religious mix. Census results.
In the Canada 2001 Census, 72% of the Canadian population list Roman
Catholicism or Protestantism as their religion. The Roman Catholic Church in
Canada is by far the country's largest single denomination. Those who listed no
religion account for 16% of total respondents. In British Columbia, however,
35% of respondents reported no religion—more than any single denomination and
more than all Protestants combined. Abrahamic religions. Bahai Faith. The
Canadian community is one of the earliest western communities, at one point
sharing a joint National Spiritual Assembly with the United States, and is a
co-recipient of `Abdu'l-Bahá's Tablets of the Divine Plan. The first North
American woman to declare herself a Bahá'í was Mrs. Kate C. Ives, of Canadian
ancestry, though not living in Canada at the time. Moojan Momen, in reviewing
"The Origins of the Bahá'í Community of Canada, 1898–1948" notes that "the
Magee family... are credited with bringing the Bahá'í Faith to Canada. Edith
Magee became a Bahá'í in 1898 in Chicago and returned to her home in London,
Ontario, where four other female members of her family became Bahá'ís. This
predominance of women converts became a feature of the Canadian Bahá'í
community..." Christianity. The majority of Canadian Christians attend church
infrequently. Cross-national surveys of religiosity rates such as the Pew
Global Attitudes Project indicate that, on average, Canadian Christians are
less observant than those of the United States but are still more overtly
religious than their counterparts in Western Europe. In 2002, 30% of Canadians
reported to Pew researchers that religion was "very important" to them. A 2005
Gallup poll showed that 28% of Canadians consider religion to be "very
important" (55% of Americans and 19% of Britons say the same). Regional
differences within Canada exist, however, with British Columbia and Quebec
reporting especially low metrics of traditional religious observance, as well
as a significant urban-rural divide, while Alberta and rural Ontario saw high
rates of religious attendance. The rates for weekly church attendance are
contested, with estimates running as low as 11% as per the latest Ipsos-Reid
poll and as high as 25% as per "Christianity Today" magazine. This American
magazine reported that three polls conducted by Focus on the Family, Time
Canada and the Vanier Institute of the Family showed church attendance
increasing for the first time in a generation, with weekly attendance at 25 per
cent. This number is similar to the statistics reported by premier Canadian
sociologist of religion, Prof. Reginald Bibby of the University of Lethbridge,
who has been studying Canadian religious patterns since 1975. Although lower
than in the US, which has reported weekly church attendance at about 40% since
the Second World War, weekly church attendance rates are higher than those in
Northern Europe. As well as the large churches — Roman Catholic, United, and
Anglican, which together count more than half of the Canadian population as
nominal adherents — Canada also has many smaller Christian groups, including
Orthodox Christianity. The Egyptian population in Ontario and Quebec (Greater
Toronto in particular) has seen a large influx of the Coptic Orthodox
population in just a few decades. The relatively large Ukrainian population of
Manitoba and Saskatchewan has produced many followers of the Ukrainian Catholic
and Ukrainian Orthodox Churches, while southern Manitoba has been settled
largely by Mennonites. The concentration of these smaller groups often varies
greatly across the country. Baptists are especially numerous in the Maritimes.
The Maritimes, prairie provinces, and southwestern Ontario have significant
numbers of Lutherans. Southwest Ontario has seen large numbers of German and
Russian immigrants, including many Mennonites and Hutterites, as well as a
significant contingent of Dutch Reformed. Alberta has seen considerable
immigration from the American plains, creating a significant Mormon minority in
that province. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints claims 178,102
members (74,377 of that is in Alberta) as of year-end 2007. And according to
the Jehovah's Witnesses year report there are 111,963 active members (members
who actively preach) in Canada. Canada as a nation is becoming increasingly
religiously diverse, especially in large urban centres such as Toronto,
Vancouver, and Montreal, where minority groups and new immigrants who make up
the growth in most religious groups congregate. Two significant trends become
clear when we examine the current religious landscape closely. One is the loss
of ‘secularized’ Canadians as active and regular participants in the
churches and denominations they grew up in, which were overwhelmingly
Christian, while these churches remain a part of Canadians cultural identity.
The other is the increasing presence of ethnically diverse immigration within
the religious makeup of the country. As Mainline Protestants and Roman
Catholics have experienced drastic losses over the past 30 years, others have
been expanding rapidly: overall by 144% in ‘Eastern’ religions during the
1981-1991 decade. Considering Canada’s increasing reliance on immigration to
bolster a low birth rate, the situation is only likely to continue to
diversify. This increased influx of ethnic immigrants not only affects the
types of religions represented in the Canadian context but also the
increasingly multicultural and multilingual makeup of individual Christian
denominations. From Chinese Anglican or Korean United Church communities, to
the Lutheran focus on providing much needed services to immigrants new to the
Canadian context and English language, immigration is making changes. For some
Protestant denominations, adapting to a new secular context has meant adjusting
to their non-institutional roles in society by increasingly focusing on social
justice. However the pull between conservative religious members and the more
radical among the church members is complicated by the numbers of immigrant
communities who may desire a church that fulfills a more ‘institutionally
complete’ role as a buffer in this new country over the current tension
filled debates over same-sex marriage, ordination of women and homosexuals, or
the role of women in the church. This of course will depend on the background
of the immigrant population, as in the Hong Kong context where ordination of
Florence Li Tim Oi happened long before women’s ordination was ever raised on
the Canadian Anglican church level. As well a multicultural focus on the
churches part may include non-Christian elements (such as the inclusion of a
Buddhist priest in one incident) which are unwelcome to the transplanted
religious community. Serving the needs and desires of different aspects of the
Canadian and newly Canadian populations makes a difficult balancing act for the
various mainline churches which are starved for money and active parishioners
in a time where 16% of Canadians identify as non-religious and up to two-thirds
of those who do identify with a denomination use the church only for it’s
life-cycle rituals governing birth, marriage, and death. The church retains
that hold in their parishioner’s lives but not the commitment of time and
energy necessary to support an aging institution. A loud portion of the
evangelical and sectarian Protestant groups proclaim their growth as well but
as Roger O’Tool notes they make up 7% of the Canadian population and seem to
gain most of their growth from a higher birthrate. What is significant is the
higher participation of their members in contrast to Mainline Protestants and
Roman Catholics. This high commitment would seem to translate into the kind of
political power evangelicals in the United States enjoy but despite Canada's
historically Christian background as Lori Beaman notes neatly “... the
backdrop for social process” explicit religiosity appears to have not
effectively moved the government towards legal discrimination against gay
marriage. Much as many Roman Catholics in Quebec ignore the Church’s stance
on birth control, abortion, or premarital sex, the churches do not dictate much
of the daily lives of regular Canadians. Christianity remains a social justice
and community force within Canada but its cultural loss of active and engaged
participants has not been supplanted by the gains in immigrant numbers, thus
Canada’s religious landscape has become increasingly diverse. Islam. Four
years after Canada's founding in 1867, the 1871 Canadian Census found 13
Muslims among the population. The first Canadian mosque was constructed in
Edmonton in 1938, when there were approximately 700 Muslims in the country.
This building is now part of the museum at Fort Edmonton Park. The years after
World War II saw a small increase in the Muslim population. However, Muslims
were still a distinct minority. It was only with the removal of European
immigration preferences in the late 1960s that Muslims began to arrive in
significant numbers. According to Canada's 2001 census, there were 579,740
Muslims in Canada, just under 2% of the population. In 2006, the Muslim
population was estimated to be 0.8 million or about 2.6%. In 2010, the Pew
Research Centre estimates there were about 0.9 million Muslims in Canada. About
65% were Sunni, while 15% were Shia. Some Muslims are non-practicing. In 2007,
the CBC introduced a popular television sitcom called "Little Mosque on the
Prairie", a contemporary reflection and critical commentary on attitudes
towards Islam in Canada. In 2008, the Prime Minister of Canada, Stephen Harper,
visited the Baitun Nur Mosque, the largest mosque in Canada for its inaugural
session with the Head of the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community. Judaism. The Jewish
community in Canada is almost as old as the nation itself. The earliest
documentation of Jews in Canada are British Army records from the French and
Indian War from 1754. In 1760, General Jeffrey Amherst, 1st Baron Amherst
attacked and won Montreal for the British. In his regiment there were several
Jews, including four among his officer corps, most notably Lieutenant Aaron
Hart who is considered the father of Canadian Jewry. In 1807, Ezekiel Hart was
elected to the legislature of Lower Canada, becoming the first Jew in the
British Empire to hold an official position. Hart was sworn in on a Hebrew
Bible as opposed to a Christian Bible. The next day an objection was raised
that Hart had not taken the oath in the manner required for sitting in the
assembly — an oath of abjuration, which would have required Hart to swear "on
the true faith of a Christian". Hart was expelled from the assembly, only to be
re-elected two more times. In 1768, the first synagogue in Canada was built in
Montreal, the Spanish and Portuguese Synagogue of Montreal. In 1832, partly
because of the work of Ezekiel Hart, a law was passed that guaranteed Jews the
same political rights and freedoms as Christians. The Jewish population saw a
growth during the 1880s due to the pogroms of Russia and growing anti-Semitism.
Between the years of 1880 and 1930 the Jewish population grew to 155,000. In
1872, Henry Nathan, Jr. became the first Jewish Member of Parliament,
representing the Victoria, BC area in the newly created House of Commons. The
First World War halted the flow of immigrants into Canada, and after the War
there was a change in Canada's immigration policy to limit the immigration of
people from "non-preferred nations", i.e., those not from the United Kingdom or
otherwise White Anglo-Saxon Protestant nations. In June 1939 Canada and the
United States were the last hope for 907 Jewish refugees aboard the steamship
SS St. Louis which had been denied to land in Havana although the passengers
had entry visas. The Canadian government ignored the protests of Canadian
Jewish organizations. King said the crisis was not a "Canadian problem" and
Blair added in a letter to O.D. Skelton, Undersecretary of State for External
Affairs, dated June 16, 1939, "No country could open its doors wide enough to
take in the hundreds of thousands of Jewish people who want to leave Europe:
the line must be drawn somewhere." The ship finally had to return to Germany.
During the Second World War almost twenty thousand Canadian Jews volunteered to
fight overseas. Nearly 40,000 Holocaust survivors moved to Canada in the late
1940s to rebuild their lives. Today the Canadian Jewish community is the sixth
largest in the world and practices in both of the official languages of Canada.
There is an increase in the number of people that use Hebrew, other than
religious ceremonies, while there is a decline in the Yiddish language. Most of
Canada's Jews live in Ontario and Quebec, with Toronto having the largest
Jewish population centre. Recently, anti-Semitism has been a growing concern in
Canada. In 2009, anti-Semitic incidents jumped a fivefold, with over 113
incidents, and some reports listing 479 in Toronto alone. Dhamic religions.
Hinduism. Hindus in Canada generally come from one of three groups. The first
is primarily made up of Indian immigrants who began arriving in British
Columbia about 100 years ago and continue to immigrate today (Hindus from all
over India immigrate to Canada today, but the largest Indian subgroups are the
Gujaratis and Punjabis). The second major group of Hindus immigrated from Sri
Lanka, going back to the 1940s, when a few hundred Sri Lankan Tamils migrated
to Canada. The 1983 communal riots in Sri Lanka precipitated the mass exodus of
Tamils. A third group is made up of Canadian converts to the various sects of
Hinduism through the efforts of the Hare Krishna movement, the Gurus during the
last 50 years, and other organizations. According to the 2001 Census of Canada,
there were 297,200 practitioners of Hinduism. However, the non-profit
organization "Association for Canadian Studies" estimates the Hindu population
grew to 372,500 by 2006, or just under 1.2% of the population of Canada. The
vast majority of Hindus reside in Ontario (primarily in Toronto, Scarborough,
Brampton, Hamilton, Windsor & Ottawa), Quebec (primarily around the Montreal
area) & British Columbia, (primarily around the Vancouver area). Have
significant populations. The Hindu Population in Canada according to the 2001
Census. Buddhism. There is a small, rapidly growing Buddhist community in
Canada. As of the 2001 count, 300,346 Canadians identified their religion as
Buddhist (about 1% of the population). Buddhism has been practiced in Canada
for more than a century and in recent years has grown dramatically. Buddhism
arrived in Canada with the arrival of Chinese laborers in the territories
during the 19th century. Modern Buddhism in Canada traces to Japanese
immigration during the late 19th century. The first Japanese Buddhist temple in
Canada was built at the Ishikawa Hotel in Vancouver in 1905. Over time, the
Japanese Jōdo Shinshū branch of Buddhism became the prevalent form of
Buddhism in Canada and established the largest Buddhist organization in Canada.
Jainism. The first official Jain temple was established in Toronto in 1988.
This temple served both the Digambar and Svetambara communities. Sikhism.
Canadian Sikhs are the largest religious group among Indo-Canadians. According
to the 2001 census there are 278,410 Sikhs in Canada. Sikhs have been in Canada
since at least 1887. One of the first Sikh soldiers arrived in Canada following
Queen Victoria's Diamond Jubilee. Other religions. Wicca. Odyssean Wicca is a
Wiccan tradition created in Toronto, Ontario, Canada in the late 1970s. Its
principal founders were Tamarra and Richard James. Most of its practitioners
today live in Ontario, but it also has members in the United States. The
tradition differs from other initiatory Wiccan traditions in its emphasis on
preparation of its members for public priesthood. Druidry. In Neo-Druid history
a notable community was the Reformed Druids of North America, one of whose four
Founders was a Canadian, which was served the US Druid community as well as the
Canadian Druid community. Neo-Druidism largely spread in Canada through the
Ancient Order of the Druids during the 19th century. Unitarian Universalism.
Unitarian Universalism is a religion characterized by support for a "free and
responsible search for truth and meaning". Unitarian Universalists do not share
a creed; rather, they are unified by their shared search for spiritual growth
and by the understanding that an individual's theology is a result of that
search and not obedience to an authoritarian requirement. Unaffiliated
(Irreligion). Irreligious Canadians include atheists, agnostics, and humanists.
The surveys may also include those who are spiritual, deists, and pantheists.
In 1991, they made up 12.3 percent which, according to the 2001 census,
increased to 16.2 percent. Some non-religious Canadians have formed
associations, such as the Humanist Association of Canada, Toronto Secular
Alliance or the Centre for Inquiry Canada, as well as a number of University
Campus Groups. Agnostics and atheists. In 2011, a survey conducted by Ipsos-
Reid shows that 47% believed religion does more harm in the world than good,
while 64% believed that religion provides more questions than answers. A 2008
Canadian Press Harris-Decima telephone survey of just over 1,000 Canadians
found 23% were willing to state they do not believe in any god. The Canadian
Ipsos Reid poll released September 12, 2011 entitled "Canadians Split On
Whether Religion Does More Harm in the World than Good," sampled 1,129 Canadian
adults and came up 30% who do not believe in a god. Interestingly, the same
poll found that 33% of respondents who identified themselves as Catholics and
28% Protestants said they didn't believe in a god. A 2010 80-question mail-in
survey of 420 Canadians by Carleton University Survey Centre and the Montreal-
based Association for Canadian Studies found 30% agreed with the statement "I
know God really exists and I have no doubts", 20% acknowledged they "have
doubts" but "feel that I do believe in God", 10% answered they believe in God
"sometimes", 20% said they don't believe in a "personal God" but "do believe in
a higher power", 12% adopted the classic agnostic position and said they "don't
know whether there is a God and don't believe there is a way to find out", and
7% said no god exists. Slightly more than half believed in heaven, while less
than a third believed in hell, with 53.5% saying they believed in life after
death. About 27% said they believe in reincarnation, and 50% expressed belief
in religious miracles. Age and religion. According to the 2001 census, the
major religions in Canada have the following median age. Canada has a median
age of 37.3. Government and religion. Canada today has no official church, and
the government is officially committed to religious pluralism. While the
Canadian government's official ties to religion, specifically Christianity are
few, it more overtly recognizes the existence of God and even the supremacy of
God. Both the preamble to the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms and the
national anthem in both languages refer to God. Nevertheless the rise of
irreligion within the country and influx of non-Christan peoples has led to a
greater separation of government and religion. Demonstrated in forms like
"Christmas holidays" being called "winter festivals" in public schools. Some
religious schools are government-funded as per Section Twenty-nine of the
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. Canada is a Commonwealth realm in
which the head of state is shared with 15 other countries, including the United
Kingdom. The UK's succession laws bar Roman Catholics or those who marry
Catholics from inheriting the throne, and the reigning monarch is also "ex
officio" Supreme Governor of the Church of England. Within Canada, the Queen's
title includes the phrases "By the Grace of God" and "Defender of the Faith."
Christmas and Easter are nationwide holidays, and while Jews, Muslims, and
other groups are allowed to take their holy days off work they do not share the
same official recognition. In 1957, Parliament declared Thanksgiving "a day of
general thanksgiving to almighty God for the bountiful harvest with which
Canada has been blessed." In some parts of the country Sunday shopping is still
banned, but this is steadily becoming less common. There was an ongoing battle
in the late 20th century to have religious garb accepted throughout Canadian
society, mostly focused on Sikh turbans. Eventually the Royal Canadian Mounted
Police, the Royal Canadian Legion, and other groups accepted members wearing
turbans.
