Religion in ancient Greece Greek religion encompasses the collection of beliefs
and rituals practiced in ancient Greece in the form of both popular public
religion and cult practices. These different groups varied enough for it to be
possible to speak of "Greek religions" or "cults" in the plural, though most of
them shared similarities. Also, the Greek religion extended out of Greece and
out to other islands. Many Greek people recognized the major gods and
goddesses: Zeus, Poseidon, Hades, Apollo, Artemis, Aphrodite, Ares, Dionysus,
Hephaestus, Athena, Hermes, Demeter, Hestia and Hera though philosophies such
as Stoicism and some forms of Platonism used language that seems to posit a
transcendent single deity. Different cities often worshipped the same deities,
sometimes with epithets that distinguished them and specified their local
nature. The religious practices of the Greeks extended beyond mainland Greece,
to the islands and coasts of Ionia in Asia Minor, to Magna Graecia (Sicily and
southern Italy), and to scattered Greek colonies in the Western Mediterranean,
such as Massalia (Marseille). Greek religion was tempered by Etruscan cult and
belief to form much of the later Ancient Roman religion. Beliefs. While there
were few concepts universal to all the Greek peoples, there were common beliefs
shared by many. Theology. Ancient Greek theology was based on polytheism; that
is, the assumption that there were many gods and goddesses. There was a
hierarchy of deities, with Zeus, the king of the gods, having a level of
control over all the others, although he was not omnipotent. Some deities had
dominion over certain aspects of nature. For instance, Zeus was the sky-god,
sending thunder and lightning, Poseidon ruled over the sea and earthquakes,
Hades projected his remarkable power throughout the realms of death and the
Underworld, and Helios controlled the sun. Other deities ruled over an abstract
concept; for instance Aphrodite controlled love. While being immortal, the gods
were not all powerful. They had to obey fate, which overrode all. For instance,
in mythology, it was Odysseus' fate to return home to Ithaca after the Trojan
War, and the gods could only lengthen his journey and make it harder for him,
but they could not stop him. The gods acted like humans, and had human vices.
They would interact with humans, sometimes even spawning children with them. At
times certain gods would be opposed to others, and they would try to outdo each
other. In the Iliad Zeus, Aphrodite, Ares and Apollo support the Trojan side in
the Trojan War, while Hera, Athena and Poseidon support the Greeks (see
theomachy). Some gods were specifically associated with a certain city. Athena
was associated with the city of Athens, Apollo with Delphi and Delos, Zeus with
Olympia and Aphrodite with Corinth. Other deities were associated with nations
outside of Greece; Poseidon was associated with Ethiopia and Troy, and Ares
with Thrace. Identity of names was not a guarantee of a similar cultus; the
Greeks themselves were well aware that the Artemis worshipped at Sparta, the
virgin huntress, was a very different deity from the Artemis who was a many-
breasted fertility goddess at Ephesus. When literary works such as the "Iliad"
related conflicts among the gods these conflicts were because their followers
were at war on earth and were a celestial reflection of the earthly pattern of
local deities. Though the worship of the major deities spread from one locality
to another, and though most larger cities boasted temples to several major
gods, the identification of different gods with different places remained
strong to the end. Afterlife. The Greeks believed in an underworld where the
spirits of the dead went after death. It was commonly supposed that unless the
proper funeral rituals were performed, the deceased person's spirit would never
reach the underworld and so would haunt the upper world as a ghost forever.
There were various views of the underworld, and the idea changed over time. One
of the most widespread areas of the underworld was known as Hades. This was
ruled over by a god, a brother of Zeus, who was called Hades (his realm was
originally called 'the place of Hades'). Another realm, called Tartarus, was
the place where the damned were thought to go, a place of torment. A third
realm, Elysium, was a pleasant place where the virtuous dead and initiates in
the mystery cults were said to dwell. In the early Mycenean religion all the
dead went to Hades, just as in early Judaism all the dead went to Sheol. When
Odysseus visits Hades in "Odyssey" 11, Achilles tells him he would rather be a
farmer's servant on the face of the earth than king of Hades. The rise of
mystery cults in the Archaic age led to the development of places such as
Tartarus and Elysium. A few, like Achilles, Alcmene, Amphiaraus Ganymede, Ino,
Melicertes, Menelaus, Peleus, and a great number of those who fought in the
Trojan and Theban wars, were considered to have been physically immortalized
and brought to live forever in either Elysium, the Islands of the Blessed,
heaven, the ocean, or literally right under the ground. Such beliefs are found
in the most ancient Greek sources, such as Homer and Hesiod. This belief held
strong even into the Christian era. For most people at the moment of death
there was, however, no hope of anything but continued existence as a
disembodied soul. Some Greeks, such as the philosophers Pythagoras and Plato,
also espoused the idea of reincarnation, though this was only accepted by a
few. Epicurus taught that the soul was simply atoms which dissolved at death,
so there was no existence after death. Mythology. Greek religion had an
extensive mythology. It consisted largely of stories of the gods and of how
they affected humans on Earth. Myths often revolved around heroes and their
actions, such as Heracles and his twelve labors, Odysseus and his voyage home,
Jason and the quest for the Golden Fleece and Theseus and the Minotaur. Many
different species existed in Greek mythology. Chief among these were the gods
and humans, though the Titans also frequently appeared in Greek myths. They
predated the Olympian gods, and were hated by them. Lesser species included the
half-man, half-horse centaurs, the nature based nymphs (tree nymphs were
dryads, sea nymphs were Nereids) and the half man, half goat satyrs. Some
creatures in Greek mythology were monstrous, such as the one-eyed giant
Cyclopes, the sea beast Scylla, whirlpool Charybdis, Gorgons, and the half-man,
half-bull Minotaur. Many of the myths revolved around the Trojan war between
Greece and Troy. For instance, the epic poem, "The Iliad", by Homer, is based
on the war. Many other tales are based on the aftermath of the war, such as the
murder of King Agamemnon of Argos, and the adventures of Odysseus on his return
to Ithaca. There was no one set Greek cosmogony, or creation myth. Different
religious groups believed that the world had been created in different ways.
One Greek creation myth was told in Hesiod's "Theogony". It stated that at
first there was only a primordial deity called Chaos, who gave birth to various
other primordial gods, such as Gaia, Tartarus and Eros, who then gave birth to
more gods, the Titans, who then gave birth to the first Olympians. The
mythology largely survived and was added to in order to form the later Roman
mythology. The Greeks and Romans had been literate societies, and much
mythology was written down in the forms of epic poetry (such as "The Iliad",
"The Odyssey" and the "Argonautica") and plays (such as Euripides' "The
Bacchae" and Aristophones' "The Frogs"). The mythology became popular in
Christian post-Renaissance Europe, where it was often used as a basis for the
works of artists like Botticelli, Michelangelo and Rubens. Festivals. Various
religious festivals were held in ancient Greece. Many were specific only to a
particular deity or city-state. For example, the festival of Lycaea was
celebrated in Arcadia in Greece, which was dedicated to the pastoral god Pan.
There were also the Games held each year in different locations, culminating in
the Olympic Games, which were held every 4 years. These celebrated Zeus.
Morality. One of the most important moral concepts to the Greeks was a fear of
committing hubris, which constituted many things, from rape to desecration of a
corpse. It was a crime in the city-state of Athens. Although pride and vanity
were not considered sins themselves, the Greeks emphasized moderation. Pride
only became hubris when it went to extremes, like any other vice. The same was
thought of eating and drinking. Anything done to excess was not considered
proper. Ancient Greeks placed, for example, importance on athletics and
intellect equally. In fact many of their competitions included both. Pride was
not evil until it became all-consuming or hurtful to others. Sacred Texts.
Hesiod's Theogony and Works and Days, Homer's Iliad and Odyssey and Pindar's
Odes are included as sacred texts as are other works of classical antiquity.
These are the core texts that were considered inspired and usually include an
invocation to the Muses for inspiration at the beginning of the work. Such
texts, however, were not considered inspired in the sense that they had to be
believed by everyone. Plato even wanted to exclude the myths from his ideal
state described in the "Republic" because of their low moral tone. Practices.
Ceremonies. Greek ceremonies and rituals were mainly performed at altars. These
typically were devoted to one, or a few, gods, and contained a statue of the
particular deity upon it. Votive deposits would be left at the altar, such as
food, drinks, as well as precious objects. Sometimes animal sacrifices would be
performed here, with most of the flesh eaten, and the offal burnt as an
offering to the gods. Libations, often of wine, would be offered to the gods as
well, not only at shrines, but also in everyday life, such as during a
symposium. One ceremony was pharmakos, a ritual involving expelling a symbolic
scapegoat such as a slave or an animal, from a city or village in a time of
hardship. It was hoped that by casting out the ritual scapegoat, the hardship
would go with it. Sacrifice. Worship in Greece typically consisted of
sacrificing domestic animals at the altar with hymn and prayer. Parts of the
animal were then burned for the gods; the worshippers would eat the rest. The
evidence of the existence of such practices is clear in some ancient Greek
literature, especially in Homer’s epics. Throughout the poems, the use of the
ritual is apparent at banquets where meat is served, in times of danger or
before some important endeavor to gain the favor of the gods. For example, in
Homer’s The Odyssey (circa 725 B.C.) Eumaeus sacrifices a pig with prayer for
his unrecognizable master Odysseus. In Homer’s The Iliad (circa 750 B.C.),
which may describe Greek civilization centuries earlier, every banquet of the
princes begins with a sacrifice and prayer. These sacrificial practices,
described in these pre-Homeric eras, share commonalities to the 8th century
forms of sacrificial rituals. Furthermore, throughout the poem, special
banquets are held whenever gods indicated their presence by some sign or
success in war. Before setting out for Troy, this type of animal sacrifice is
offered. Odysseus offers Zeus a sacrificial ram in vain. The occasions of
sacrifice in Homer’s epic poems may shed some light onto the view of the gods
as members of society, rather than as external entities, indicating social
ties. Sacrificial rituals played a major role in forming the relationship
between humans and the divine. Rites of passage. One rite of passage was the
amphidromia, celebrated on the fifth or seventh day after the birth of a child.
Childbirth was extremely significant to Athenians, especially if the baby was a
boy. Mystery religions. Those who were not satisfied by the public cult of the
gods could turn to various mystery religions which operated as cults into which
members had to be initiated in order to learn their secrets. Here, they could
find religious consolations that traditional religion could not provide: a
chance at mystical awakening, a systematic religious doctrine, a map to the
afterlife, a communal worship, and a band of spiritual fellowship. Some of
these mysteries, like the mysteries of Eleusis and Samothrace, were ancient and
local. Others were spread from place to place, like the mysteries of Dionysus.
During the Hellenistic period and the Roman Empire, exotic mystery religions
became widespread, not only in Greece, but all across the empire. Some of these
were new creations, such as Mithras, while others had been practiced for
hundreds of years before, like the Egyptian mysteries of Osiris. History.
Origins. Mainstream Greek religion appears to have evolved from the earlier
Mycenaean religion from the Mycenaean civilization of Bronze Age Greece. The
Mycenaeans, according to archaeological discoveries, seemed to treat Poseidon
as the chief deity. It may also have absorbed the beliefs and practices of
earlier, nearby cultures, such as Minoan religion. Herodotus traced many Greek
religious practices to Egypt. Classical antiquity. The mainstream religion of
the Greeks did not go unchallenged from persons within Greece. Several notable
philosophers criticised a belief in the gods. The earliest of these was
Xenophanes, who chastised the human vices of the gods as well as their
anthropomorphic depiction. Plato did not believe in many polythiestic deities,
but instead believed that there was one supreme god, whom he called the Form of
the good, and which he believed was the emanation of perfection in the
universe. Plato's disciple, Aristotle, also disagreed that polythiestic deities
existed, because he could not find enough empirical evidence for it. He
believed in a Prime Mover, which had set creation going, but was not connected
to or interested in the universe. Roman Empire. When the Roman Republic
conquered Greece in 146 BC, it took much of Greek religion (along with many
other aspects of Greek culture such as literary and architectural styles) and
incorporated it into its own. The Greek gods were equated with the ancient
Roman deities; Zeus with Jupiter, Hera with Juno, Poseidon with Neptune,
Aphrodite with Venus, Ares with Mars, Artemis with Diana, Athena with Minerva,
Hermes with Mercury, Hephaestus with Vulcan, Hestia with Vesta, Demeter with
Ceres, Hades with Pluto, Tyche with Fortuna, and Pan with Faunus. Some of the
gods, such as Apollo and Bacchus, had earlier been adopted by the Romans. There
were also many deities that existed in the Roman religion before its
interaction with Greece that weren't associated with a Greek deity, including
Janus and Quirinus. Greek Polytheism revivals. Greek religion has experienced a
number of revivals, in the arts, humanities and spirituality of the Renaissance
as well as with the contemporary Hellenic Reconstructionism, or "Hellenismos"
as it is sometimes called (a term first used by the last pagan Roman emperor
Julian the Apostate). Many neo-pagan religious paths, such as Wicca, use
aspects of ancient Greek religions in their practice; Hellenic
Reconstructionism focuses exclusively thereon, as far as the nature of the
surviving source material allows. It reflects neo-Platonic/Platonic speculation
(which is represented in Porphyry, Libanius, Proclus, and Julian), as well as
Classical cult practice. The overwhelming majority of modern Greeks are
followers of Greek Orthodox Christianity. According to estimates reported by
the U.S. State Department, there are perhaps as many as 2,000 followers of the
ancient Greek religion out of a total Greek population of 11 million, however
"Hellenismos" leaders place that figure at 100,000 followers.
