Religious studies Religious studies is the academic field of multi-
disciplinary, secular study of religious beliefs, behaviors, and institutions.
It describes, compares, interprets, and explains religion, emphasizing
systematic, historically based, and cross-cultural perspectives. While theology
attempts to understand the nature of transcendent or supernatural forces (such
as deities), religious studies tries to study religious behavior and belief
from outside any particular religious viewpoint. Religious studies draws upon
multiple disciplines and their methodologies including anthropology, sociology,
psychology, philosophy, and history of religion. Religious studies originated
in the nineteenth century, when scholarly and historical analysis of the Bible
had flourished, and Hindu and Buddhist texts were first being translated into
European languages. Early influential scholars included Friedrich Max Müller,
in England, and Cornelius P. Tiele, in the Netherlands. Today religious studies
is practiced by scholars worldwide. In its early years, it was known as
Comparative Religion or the Science of Religion and, in the USA, there are
those who today also know the field as the History of religion (associated with
methodological traditions traced to the University of Chicago in general, and
in particular Mircea Eliade, from the late 1950s through to the late 1980s).
The field is known as "Religionswissenschaft" in Germany and "Sciences de la
religion" in the French-speaking world. The term "religion" originated from the
Latin noun "religio", that was nominalized from one of three verbs: "relegere"
(to turn to constantly/observe conscientiously); "religare" (to bind oneself );
and "reeligare" (to choose again). Because of these three different meanings,
an etymological analysis alone does not resolve the ambiguity of defining
religion, since each verb points to a different understanding of what religion
is. During the Medieval Period, the term "religious" was used as a noun to
describe someone who had joined a monastic order (a "religious"). Despite this
change in meaning, it is important to note the term "religion" is primarily a
Christian term. Judaism and Hinduism, for example, do not include this term in
their vocabulary. Religious studies vs. theology. Western philosophy of
religion, as the basic ancestor of modern religious studies, is differentiated
from theology and the many Eastern philosophical traditions by generally being
written from a third party perspective. The scholar need not be a believer.
Theology stands in contrast to the philosophy of religion and religious studies
in that, generally, the scholar is first and foremost a believer employing both
logic "and" scripture as evidence. Theology according to this understanding
fits with the definition which Anselm of Canterbury gave to it in the 11th
century, credo ut intelligam, or faith seeking understanding (literally, "I
believe so that I may understand"). The theologian then has the task of making
intelligible, or clarifying, the religious commitments to which he or she
ascribes. The scholar of religious studies has no such allegiances.
Intellectual foundation and background. Before religious studies became a field
in its own right, flourishing in the United States in the late 1960s, several
key intellectual figures explored religion from a variety of perspectives. One
of these figures was the famous pragmatist William James. His 1902 Gifford
lectures and book "The Varieties of Religious Experience" examined religion
from a psychological-philosophical perspective and is still influential today.
His essay "The Will to Believe" defends the rationality of faith. Max Weber
studied religion from an economic perspective in "The Protestant Ethic and the
Spirit of Capitalism" (1904-5), his most famous work. As a major figure in
sociology, he has no doubt influenced later sociologists of religion. Émile
Durkheim also holds continuing influence as one of the fathers of sociology. He
explored Protestant and Catholic attitudes and doctrines regarding suicide in
his work "Suicide". In 1912 he published his most memorable work on religion,
"Elementary Forms of the Religious Life". History. in the general study of
religion dates back to at least Hecataeus of Miletus (ca. 550 BCE – ca. 476
BCE) and Herodotus (ca. 484 BCE – 425 BCE). Later, during the Middle Ages,
Islamic scholars studied Persian, Jewish, Christian, and Indian religions. The
first history of religion was the "Treatise on the Religious and Philosophical
Sects" (1127 CE), written by the Muslim scholar Muhammad al-Shahrastani. Peter
the Venerable, also working in the twelfth century, studied Islam and made
possible a Latin translation of the Qur'an. Notwithstanding the long interest
in the study of religion, the academic discipline Religious Studies is
relatively new. Dr. Chris Partridge notes that the "first professorships were
established as recently as the final quarter of the nineteenth century."[http:/
/www.uccf.org.uk/yourcourse/rtsf/docs/academicstudyofreligion.pdf] In the
nineteenth century, the study of religion was done through the eyes of science.
Max Müller was the first Professor of Comparative Religion at Oxford
University, a chair created especially for him. In his "Introduction to the
Science of Religion" (1873) he wrote that it is "the duty of those who have
devoted their life to the study of the principal religions of the world in
their original documents, and who value and reverence it in whatever form it
may present itself, to take possession of this new territory in the name of
true science." Partridge writes that "by the second half of the twentieth
century the study of religion had emerged as a prominent and important field of
academic enquiry." He cites the growing distrust of the empiricism of the
nineteenth century and the growing interest in non-Christian religions and
spirituality coupled with convergence of the work of social scientists and that
of scholars of religion as factors involved in the rise of Religious Studies.
In the 1960s and 1970s, the term "religious studies" became common and interest
in the field increased. New departments were founded and influential journals
of religious studies were initiated (for example, "Religious Studies and
Religion"). In the forward to "Approaches to the Study of Religion", Ninian
Smart wrote that "in the English-speaking world studies basically dates from
the 1960s, although before then there were such fields as 'the comparative
study of religion', the 'history of religion', the 'sociology of religion' and
so on..." In the 1980s, in both Britain and America, "the decrease in student
applications and diminishing resources in the 1980s led to cut backs affecting
religious studies departments." (Partridge) Later in the decade, religious
studies began to pick up as a result of integrating religious studies with
other disciplines and forming programs of study that mixed the discipline with
more utilitarian study. Philosophy of religion uses philosophical tools to
evaluate religious claims and doctrines. Western philosophy has traditionally
been employed by English speaking scholars. (Some other cultures have their own
philosophical traditions including Indian, Muslim, and Jewish.) Common issues
considered by the (Western) philosophy of religion are the existence of God,
belief and rationality, cosmology, and logical inferences of logical
consistency from sacred texts. Although philosophy has long been used in
evaluation of religious claims ("e.g." Augustine and Pelagius's debate
concerning original sin), the rise of scholasticism in the 11th century, which
represented "the search for order in intellectual life" (Russell, 170), more
fully integrated the Western philosophical tradition (with the introduction of
translations of Aristotle) in religious study. There is some amount of overlap
between subcategories of religious studies and the discipline itself. Religious
studies seeks to study religious phenomena as a whole, rather than be limited
to the approaches of its subcategories. Anthropology of religion. The
anthropology of religion is principally concerned with the common basic needs
of man that religion fulfills. Cultural anthropology of religion. The cultural
anthropology of religion is principally concerned with the cultural aspects of
religion. Of primary concern to the cultural anthropologist of religions are
rituals, beliefs, religious art, and practices of piety. Economics of religion.
Gallup surveys have found that the world's poorest countries may be the most
religious. Of those countries with average per-capita incomes under $2000, 95%
reported that religion played an important role in their daily lives. This is
contrasted by the average of 47% from the richest countries, with incomes over
$25000 (with the United States breaking the trend by reporting at 65%). Social
scientists have suggested that religion plays a functional role (helping people
cope) in poorer nations. The New York Times offers a graphic illustrating the
correlation (not necessarily causation) between religion and poverty. Geography
of religion. The geography of religion is principally concerned with the
spatial elements of religious practice and embodiment. In the 1960s and 1970s,
geographers of religion such as Wilbur Zelinsky and David Sopher were mostly
associated with the "Berkeley school" of cultural geography and focused mostly
on the cultural imprints of religion on the landscape. Since the turn in the
new cultural geography of religion through the work of James Duncan on the City
as Text, geographers of religion have focused on what Lily Kong has called the
"politics and poetics" of religion, especially in relation to the political
geographies of secular nation-states. Recent interest in the geography of
religion has focused on how religious practitioners enact sacred space through
their embodied sacred practices as well as the relationship between religion
and geopolitics. History of religion. The history of religions is not concerned
with theological claims apart from their historical significance. Some topics
of this discipline are the historicity of religious figures, events, and the
evolution of doctrinal matters. Literary approaches. There are many approaches
to the study of sacred texts. One of these approaches is to interpret the text
as a literary object. Metaphor, thematic elements, and the nature and
motivations of the characters are of interest in this approach. An example of
this approach is "", by Jack Miles. Neurological approaches. Recently there has
been an interesting meeting between neurology and religion, especially
Buddhism. Also of interest has been the temporal lobe, the "God center" of the
brain. (Ramachandran, ch. 9) Although not a widely accepted discipline within
religious studies, neurological findings in regard to religious experience may
very well become of more widespread interest to scholars of religion.
Scientific investigators have used a SPECTscanner to analyze the brain activity
of both Christian contemplatives and Buddhist meditators, finding them to be
quite similar. Origin of religion. The "origin of religion" refers to the
emergence of religious behavior in prehistory, before written records.
Psychology of religion. The psychology of religion is concerned with what
psychological principles are operative in religious communities and
practitioners. William James was one of the first academics to bridge the gap
between the emerging science of psychology and the study of religion. A few
issues of concern to the psychologist of religions are the psychological nature
of religious conversion, the making of religious decisions, religion and
happiness, and the psychological factors in evaluating religious claims.
Sigmund Freud was another influential figure in the field of psychology and
religion. He used his psychoanalytic theory to explain religious beliefs,
practices, and rituals in order to justify the role of religion in the
development of human culture. Sociology of religion. The sociology of religion
concerns the dialectical relationship between religion and society; the
practices, historical backgrounds, developments, universal themes and roles of
religion in society. There is particular emphasis on the recurring role of
religion in all societies and throughout recorded history. The sociology of
religion is distinguished from the philosophy of religion in that it does not
set out to assess the validity of religious beliefs, though the process of
comparing multiple conflicting dogmas may require what Peter L. Berger has
described as inherent "methodological atheism". Whereas the sociology of
religion broadly differs from theology in assuming the invalidity of the
supernatural, theorists tend to acknowledge socio-cultural reification of
religious practise. It may be said that the modern formal discipline of
sociology "began" with the analysis of religion in Durkheim's 1897 study of
suicide rates amongst Catholic and Protestant populations. The works of Max
Weber emphasised the relationship between religious belief and the economic
foundations of society. Contemporary debates have centred on issues such as
secularization, civil religion, and the cohesiveness of religion in the context
of globalization and multiculturalism. The sociology of religion also deals
with how religion impacts society regarding the positive and negatives of what
happens when religion is mixed with society. Theorist such as Marx states that
“religion is the opium of the people” - the idea that religion has become a
way for people to deal with their problems. At least one comprehensive study
refutes this idea. Research has found that secular democracies like France or
Scandinavia outperform more theistic democracies on various measures of
societal health. The authors explains, "Pressing questions include the reasons,
whether theistic or non-theistic, that the exceptionally wealthy U.S. is so
inefficient that it is experiencing a much higher degree of societal distress
than are less religious, less wealthy prosperous democracies. Conversely, how
do the latter achieve superior societal health while having little in the way
of the religious values or institutions?" Methodologies. A number of
methodologies are used in Religious Studies. Methodologies are hermeneutics, or
interpretive models, that provide a structure for the analysis of religious
phenomena. Phenomenology. Phenomenology is "arguably the most influential
approach to the study of religion in the twentieth century." (Partridge) The
term is first found in the title of the work of the influential philosopher of
German Idealism, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel, entitled The Phenomenology of
Spirit. Phenomenology had been practiced long before its being made explicit as
a philosophical method by Edmund Husserl, who is considered to be its founder.
In the context of Phenomenology of religion however, the term was first used by
Pierre Daniel Chantepie de la Saussaye in his work "Lehrbuch der
Religiongeschichte" (1887). Chantepie's phenomenology catalogued observable
characteristics of religion much like a zoologist would categorize animals or
an entomologist would categorize insects. In part due to Husserl's influence,
"phenomenology" came to "refer to a method which is more complex and claims
rather more for itself than did Chantepie’s mere cataloguing of facts."
(Partridge) Husserl argued that the foundation of knowledge is consciousness.
He recognized "how easy it is for prior beliefs and interpretations to
unconsciously influence one’s thinking, Husserl’s phenomenological method
sought to shelve all these presuppositions and interpretations." (Partridge)
Husserl introduced the term "eidetic vision" to describe the ability to observe
without "prior beliefs and interpretations" influencing understanding and
perception. Most phenomenologists are aware of the fact that understanding is
asymptotic and there will never be complete and absolute understanding. By
setting aside metaphysical issues (such as a Christian phenomenologist would do
with monotheism/polytheism while studying Hinduism), phenomenologists keep
religious studies separate from theology and (hopefully) decrease their bias
and come away with a more accurate picture. source Functionalism.
Functionalism, in regard to religious studies, is the analysis of religions and
their various communities of adherents using the functions of particular
religious phenomena to interpret the structure of religious communities and
their beliefs. A major criticism of functionalism is that it lends itself to
teleological explanations. An example of a functionalist approach is
understanding the dietary restrictions contained in the Pentateuch as having
the function of promoting health or providing social identity ("i.e." a sense
of belonging though common practice). Criticism of religious studies. A group
of scholars have criticized religious studies beginning in the 1990s as a
theological project which actually imposes views onto the people it aims to
survey. Prominent voices in this critical view include Robert A. Orsi, Timothy
Fitzgerald, Talal Asad, Tomoko Masuzawa, G.A. Oddie, Richard King, Russell T.
McCutcheon, and Daniel Dubuisson. Their areas of research overlap heavily with
postcolonial studies.
