Religious conversion Religious conversion is the experience of one or more of
the following phenomena. At the fundamental level conversion is the awakening
of religious knowledge or understanding within a human being who had previously
no belief in or concern with religious or spiritual matters. This awakening to
moral and spiritual realities thus precedes a transformation of lifestyle and
thought patterns often taking place over a long period of time and requiring a
significant level of effort and commitment as described in the spiritual
teachings of the world's great religions. This transformation is the first and
basic meaning of religious conversion. In popular usage, religious conversion
refers to the adoption, wholesale, of a set of beliefs identified with one
particular religious denomination to the exclusion of others. Thus 'religious
conversion' would describe the abandoning of adherence to one denomination and
affiliating with another. This might be from one to another denomination within
the same religion, for example, Christian Baptist to Methodist or Catholic,
Muslim Shi'a to Sunni. People convert to a different religion for various
reasons, including: active conversion by free choice due to a change in
beliefs, secondary conversion, deathbed conversion, conversion for convenience
and marital conversion, and forced conversion. Conversion or reaffiliation for
convenience is an insincere act, sometimes for relatively trivial reasons such
as a parent converting to enable a child to be admitted to a good school
associated with a religion, or a person adopting a religion more in keeping
with the social class he or she aspires to. When people marry one spouse may
convert to the religion of the other. Forced conversion is adoption under
duress of a different religion. The convert may secretly retain the previous
beliefs and continue, covertly, with the practices of the original religion,
while outwardly maintaining the forms of the new religion. Over generations a
family forced against their will to convert may wholeheartedly adopt the new
religion. "Proselytism" is the act of attempting to convert by persuasion
another individual from a different religion or belief system. (See proselyte).
Apostate is a term used by members of a religion or denomination to refer to
someone who has left that religion or denomination. Abrahamic religions.
Judaism. Procedure. Jewish law has a number of requirements of potential
converts. They should desire conversion to Judaism for its own sake, and for no
other motives. A male convert needs to undergo a ritual circumcision conducted
according to Jewish law (if already circumcised, a needle is used to draw a
symbolic drop of blood while the appropriate blessings are said), and there has
to be a commitment to observe Jewish law. A convert must join the Jewish
community, and reject the previous theology he or she had prior to the
conversion. Ritual immersion in a small pool of water known as a "mikvah" is
required. History. In Hellenistic and Roman times, some Pharisees were eager
proselytizers, and had at least some success throughout the empire. Some Jews
are also descended from converts to Judaism outside the Mediterranean world. It
is known that some Khazars, Edomites, and Ethiopians, as well as many Arabs,
particularly in Yemen before, converted to Judaism in the past; today people
all over the world convert to Judaism. The word "proselyte" originally meant a
Greek who had converted to Judaism. As late as the 6th century the Eastern
Roman empire (i.e., the Byzantine empire) was issuing decrees against
conversion to Judaism, implying that this was still occurring. In recent times,
members of the Reform Judaism movement began a program to convert to Judaism
the non-Jewish spouses of its intermarried members and non-Jews who have an
interest in Judaism. Their rationale is that so many Jews were lost during the
Holocaust that newcomers must be sought out and welcomed. This approach has
been repudiated by Orthodox and Conservative Jews as unrealistic and posing a
danger. They say that these efforts make Judaism seem an easy religion to join
and observe when in reality being Jewish entails many difficulties and
sacrifices. Christianity. Conversion to Christianity is the religious
conversion of a previously non-Christian person to some form of Christianity.
The exact requirements vary between different churches and denominations. The
process of converting to Catholicism involves religious education followed by
initial participation in the sacraments. In general, conversion to Christian
Faith primarily involves repentance for sin and a decision to live a life that
is holy and acceptable to God through faith in (the atoning death and
resurrection of ) Jesus Christ. All of this is essentially done through a
voluntary exercise of the will of the individual concerned. True conversion to
Christianity is thus a personal, internal matter and can never be forced.
Converts are almost always expected to be baptized. Christians consider that
conversion requires internalization of the new belief system. It implies a new
reference point for the convert's self-identity, and is a matter of belief and
social structure—of both faith and affiliation. This typically entails the
sincere avowal of a new belief system, but may also present itself in other
ways, such as adoption into an identity group or spiritual lineage. History.
The ancient roman saturnalia were integrated in Christianity in the 4th century
CE, as a means to mass convert the pagan roman citizens. During the saturnalia,
human-shaped biscuits were consumed and dance-like singing was performed in the
streets, a "precursor of modern gingerbread man" and caroling. Baptism.
Catholics, Orthodox and many Protestant denominations encourage infant baptism
before children are aware of their status. In Roman Catholicism and certain
high church forms of Protestantism, baptized children are expected to
participate in confirmation classes as pre-teens. In Eastern Orthodoxy, the
equivalent of confirmation, chrismation, is administered to all converts, adult
and infant alike, immediately after baptism. Methods of baptism include
immersion, sprinkling (aspersion) and pouring (affusion). Baptism received by
adults or younger people who have reached the age of accountability where they
can make a personal religious decision is referred to as believer's baptism
among conservative or evangelical Protestant groups. It is intended as a public
statement of a person's prior decision to become a Christian. Some Christian
groups such as Catholics, Churches of Christ, and Christadelphians believe
baptism is essential to salvation. Accepting Christ and renouncing sin.
Conversion is expected to be more than a simple change in religious identity,
but a change in nature (regeneration), evidenced by a change in values. The
Latin word "conversio," translating the Greek "metanoia", literally means
"going the other way" or "changing one's mind". According to Christianity a
convert is one who renounces sin as worthless and treasures instead the supreme
worth of Jesus Christ; the convert sees the worth of Christ in Jesus'
sacrificial death and resurrection and renounces sin. The Christian convert is
expected to believe that his separation from God cannot be overcome by good
deeds done out of a desire to achieve individual moral self-satisfaction;
rather, he seeks the forgiveness of his sins in the blood of Christ and wishes
to be clothed in the righteousness of Christ. Because conversion is a change in
values that embraces God and rejects sin, it includes a personal commitment to
a life of holiness as described by Paul of Tarsus and exemplified by Jesus. In
some Protestant traditions, this is called "accepting Christ as one's Savior
and following him as Lord." In another variation, the 1910 Catholic Dictionary
defines "conversion" as "One who turns or changes from a state of sin to
repentance, from a lax to a more earnest and serious way of life, from unbelief
to faith, from heresy to the true faith." The Eastern Orthodox understanding of
conversion is illustrated in the rite of baptism, in which the convert faces
west while publicly renouncing and symbolically spitting upon Satan, and then
turns to the east to worship Christ "as king and God". Responsibilities. Many
Christian denominations believe that proselytism, understood to be sharing the
Gospel, in word or in deed, of Jesus Christ, is a responsibility of all
Christians. In the New Testament, Jesus commanded his disciples to "go and make
disciples of all nations", generally known as the Great Commission.
Accordingly, evangelism—"spreading the good news"—has been practiced by
many Christians. Some evangelical Protestants consider that, in order to
fulfill the Great Commission, every Christian must be prepared to try to
convert nearly everyone they encounter. Other forms of Christianity such as
Roman Catholicism and Eastern Orthodoxy consider that the Gospel cannot
accurately and faithfully be explained, instead favouring evangelism by
example. Reaffiliation. Transferring from one Christian denomination to another
may consist of a relatively simple transfer of membership, especially if moving
from one Trinitarian denomination to another, and if the person has received
water baptism in the name of the Trinity. If not, then the person may be
required to be baptized or rebaptized before acceptance by the new church. Some
denominations, such as those in the Anabaptist tradition, require previously
baptized Christians to be re-baptized. The Eastern Orthodox Church treats a
transfer from another denomination of Christianity to Orthodoxy (conceived of
as the one true Church) as a category of conversion and repentance, though re-
baptism is not always required. The process of conversion to Christianity
varies somewhat among Christian denominations. Most Protestants believe in
conversion by "faith" to attain salvation. According to this understanding, a
person professes faith in Jesus Christ as God, their Lord and savior.
Repentance for sin and a holy living are expected of those professing faith in
Jesus Christ. While an individual may make such a decision privately, usually
it entails being baptized and becoming a member of a denomination or church. In
these traditions, a person is considered to become a Christian by publicly
acknowledging the fundamental Christian doctrines that Jesus Christ died, was
buried, and was resurrected for the remission of sins. Comparison between
Protestants. This table summarizes the classical views of three different
Protestant beliefs. Mormonism. Much of the theology of Mormon baptism was
established during the early Latter Day Saint movement founded by Joseph Smith,
Jr. According to this theology, baptism must be by submersion for the remission
of sins (meaning that through baptism, past sins are forgiven), and occurs
after one has shown faith and repentance. Mormon baptism does not purport to
remit any sins other than personal ones, as adherents do not believe in
original sin. Mormon baptisms also occur only after an "age of accountability"
which is defined as the age of eight years. The theology thus rejects infant
baptism. In addition, Mormon theology requires that baptism may only be
performed with one who has been called and ordained by God with priesthood
authority. Because the churches of the Latter Day Saint movement operate under
a lay priesthood, children raised in a Mormon family are usually baptized by a
father or close male friend or family member who has achieved the office of
priest, which in Mormonism is conferred upon worthy male members at least 16
years old. Baptism is seen as symbolic both of Jesus' death, burial and
resurrection and is also symbolic of the baptized individual putting off of the
natural or sinful man and becoming spiritually reborn as a disciple of Jesus.
Membership into a Latter Day Saint church is granted only by baptism whether or
not a person has been raised in the church. Most Latter Day Saint churches do
not recognize baptisms of other faiths as valid because they believe baptisms
must be performed under the church's unique authority. Thus, all who come into
one of the Latter Day Saint faiths as converts are baptized, even if they have
previously received baptism in another faith. When performing a Baptism, Latter
Day Saints say the following prayer before performing the ordinance: Baptisms
inside and outside the temples are usually done in a baptismal font, although
they can be performed in any body of water in which the person may be
completely immersed. The person administering the baptism must recite the
prayer exactly, and immerse every part, limb, hair and clothing of the person
being baptized. If there are any mistakes, or if any part of the person being
baptized is not fully immersed, the baptism must be redone. In addition to the
baptizer, two priesthood holders witness the baptism to ensure that it is
performed properly. Following baptism, Latter Day Saints receive the Gift of
the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands of a Melchizedek Priesthood holder.
Islam. A newly converted Muslim is called a "Muallaf". There are five pillars,
or foundations, of Islam but the primary, and most important is to believe that
there is only one God and creator, referred to as Allah (the word for the name
of God in Arabic) and that the Islamic prophet, Muhammad, is His last and final
messenger. A person is considered to have converted to Islam from the moment he
or she sincerely makes this "declaration of faith", called the shahadah. Islam
teaches that everyone is Muslim at birth because every child that is born has a
natural inclination to goodness and to worship the one true God alone, but his
or her parents or society can cause him or her to deviate from the straight
path. When someone accepts Islam he/she is considered to revert to his/her
original condition. While conversion "to" Islam is among its most supported
tenets, conversion "from" Islam to another religion is considered to be the sin
of apostasy, and in Arab countries it is subject to the penalty of death. In
the Koran however, there is no death penalty for apostasy. In Islam,
circumcision is a "Sunnah" custom not mentioned in the Qur'an. The primary
opinion is that it is not obligatory and is not a condition for entering into
Islam. The Shafi`i and Hanbali schools regard it as obligatory, while the
Maliki and Hanafi schools regard it as only recommended. However, it is not a
precondition for the acceptance of a person's Islamic practices, nor does one
sin if choosing to forgo circumcision. It is not one of the Five Pillars of
Islam or the Six Fundamentals of Belief. Bahá'í Faith. In sharing their faith
with others, Bahá'ís are cautioned to "obtain a hearing" – meaning to make
sure the person they are proposing to teach is open to hearing what they have
to say. "Bahá'í pioneers", rather than attempting to supplant the cultural
underpinnings of the people in their adopted communities, are encouraged to
integrate into the society and apply Bahá'í principles in living and working
with their neighbors. Bahá'ís recognize the divine origins of all revealed
religion, and believe that these religions occurred sequentially as part of a
Divine plan (see Progressive revelation), with each new revelation superseding
and fulfilling that of its predecessors. Bahá'ís regard their own faith as
the most recent (but not the last), and believe its teachings – which are
centered around the principle of the oneness of humanity – are most suited to
meeting the needs of a global community. In most countries conversion is a
simple matter of filling out a card stating a declaration of belief. This
includes acknowledgement of Bahá'u'llah – the Founder of the Faith – as
the Messenger of God for this age, awareness and acceptance of His teachings,
and intention to be obedient to the institutions and laws He established.
Conversion to the Bahá'í Faith carries with it an explicit belief in the
common foundation of all revealed religion, a commitment to the unity of
mankind, and active service to the community at large, especially in areas that
will foster unity and concord. Since the Bahá'í Faith has no clergy, converts
to this Faith are encouraged to be active in all aspects of community life.
Even a recent convert may be elected to serve on a Local Spiritual Assembly –
the guiding Bahá'í institution at the community level. Indian religions.
Hinduism. Clear concepts of conversion, evangelization, and proselytization are
absent from Hindu texts, playing a marginal role in practice. Early in their
history, in the absence of other competing religions, Hindus considered
everyone they came across as Hindus and expected everyone they met to be
Hindus. Hindus today continue to be influenced by historical ideas of
acceptability of conversion. Hence, many Hindus continue to believe that
Hinduism is an identity that can only be had from birth, while many others
continue to believe that anyone who follows Hindu beliefs and practices is a
Hindu, and many believe in some form of both theories. However, as a reaction
to perceived and actual threat of evangelization, prozelyzation, and conversion
activities of other major religions many modern Hindus are opposed to the idea
of conversion from (any) one religion to (any) other per se. In Southeast Asia
the merchant, sailor, and priestly class accounted for much of the spread of
the religion. Many foreign groups including Gujjars, Ahoms, and Hunas converted
to Hinduism after generations of Sanskritization. In India and Indonesia today
many groups still convert to Hinduism. With the rise of Hindu revivalist
movements, conversions to Hinduism have risen. Reconversion of former adherents
of Hinduism are well accepted since conversion out of Hinduism is not
recognized. There is no formal process for converting to Hinduism, although in
many traditions a ritual called "dīkshā" ("initiation") marks the beginning
of spiritual life. A ritual called "shuddhi" ("purification") sometimes marks
the return to spiritual life after reconversion. Most Hindu sects do not
actively seek converts, as they believe that the goals of spiritual life can be
attained through any religion, as long as it is practiced sincerely. However,
some Hindu sects and affiliates such as Arya Samaj, Saiva Siddhanta Church,
BAPS, and the International Society for Krishna Consciousness accept those who
have a desire to follow Hinduism. Sikhism. Sikhism is not known to openly
proselytize, but accepts converts. Jainism. Jainism accepts anyone who wants to
embrace the religion. There is no specific ritual for becoming a Jain. You do
not need to ask any authorities for admission in Jain faith, you can become a
Jain on your own by adopting the five vows. Following the five vows is the
basic thing in following Jainism. All other thing like visiting temples, monks
etc. are secondary thing. Buddhism. Persons newly adhering to Buddhism
traditionally "take Refuge" (express faith in the Three Jewels — Buddha,
Dharma, Sangha) before a monk, nun, or similar representative. Buddhists often
hold multiple religious identities, combining the religion with Shinto (in
Japan) or Taoism and Confucianism (in China; cf. Chinese traditional religion).
Throughout the timeline of Buddhism, conversions of entire countries and
regions to Buddhism were frequent, as Buddhism spread throughout Asia. For
example, in the 11th century in Burma, king Anoratha converted his entire
country to Theravada Buddhism. At the end of the 12th century, Jayavarman VII
set the stage for conversion of the Khmer people to Theravada Buddhism. In the
17th century, during the Edo period in Japan, Christianity - brought to Japan
by the Portuguese explorers - was outlawed, and all subjects had to register at
Buddhist or Shinto temples. Mass conversions of areas and communities to
Buddhism occur up to the present day, for example, in the Dalit Buddhist
movement in India there have been organized mass conversions. Exceptions to
encouraging conversion may occur in some Buddhist movements. In Tibetan
Buddhism, for example, the current Dalai Lama discourages active attempts to
win converts. Other religions and sects. Conversion to new religious movements
(NRMs) is riddled with controversies. The anti-cult movement sometimes uses the
term thought reform or even brainwashing. Often they will call certain NRMs
cults. There are many different definitions for the word cult. NRMs are very
diverse and it is not clear whether conversion to NRMs differs from conversion
to mainstream religions. However, it is clear that for the first decade or so
of any NRM's existence, the overwhelming majority of its members must be
converts (because the NRM will not have been in existence long enough for a
significant number of its members to have been brought up in it). It is also
clear that every mainstream religion must have gone through this stage when it
first emerged. See also Brainwashing controversy in new religious movements.
Research both in the USA and the Netherlands has shown there is a positive
correlation between lack of involvement in mainstream churches in certain areas
and provinces and the percentage of people who are a member of a new religious
movement. This applies also for the presence of New Age centres. The Dutch
research included Jehovah's Witnesses (though most JW's were previously
religious including a number of former ministers, deacons, priests and nuns)
and the Latter Day Saint movement/Mormonism in the NRMs (which was more
indicative of the research). In the 1960s sociologist John Lofland lived with
Unification Church missionary Young Oon Kim and a small group of American
church members in California and studied their activities in trying to promote
their beliefs and win new members for their church. Lofland noted that most of
their efforts were ineffective and that most of the people who joined did so
because of personal relationships with other members, often family
relationships. Lofland published his findings in 1964 as a doctorial thesis
entitled: "The World Savers: A Field Study of Cult Processes," and in 1966 in
book form by Prentice-Hall as "". It is considered to be one of the most
important and widely cited studies of the process of religious conversion, and
one of the first modern sociological studies of a new religious movement. In
1965, William M. Branham started teaching separation from mainstream religion.
In several of his sermons he claimed denominational religion was "The Mark of
the Beast" from the Book of Revelation. The Church of Scientology attempts to
gain converts by offering "free stress tests" (see picture at auditing). Unlike
other religions, Scientology requires converts to sign contracts before
attending church. On the other end of the scale are religions that do not
accept any converts, or do so only very rarely. Often these are relatively
small, close-knit minority religions that are ethnically-based such as the
Yazidis, Druze, and Mandaeans. Zoroastrianism classically does not accept
converts, but this issue has become controversial in the 20th century due to
the rapid decline in membership. Chinese traditional religion lacks clear
criteria for membership, and hence for conversion. The Shakers and some Indian
eunuch brotherhoods do not allow procreation, so that every member is a
convert. International law. The United Nations Universal Declaration of Human
Rights defines religious conversion as a human right: "Everyone has the right
to freedom of thought, conscience and religion; this right includes freedom to
change his religion or belief..." (Article 18). In spite of this some groups
forbid or restrict religious conversion (see below). Based on the declaration
the United Nations Commission on Human Rights (UNCHR) drafted the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, a legally binding treaty. It states
that "Everyone shall have the right to freedom of thought, conscience and
religion. This right shall include freedom to have or to adopt a religion or
belief of his choice..." (Article 18.1). "No one shall be subject to coercion
which would impair his freedom to have or to adopt a religion or belief of his
choice" (Article 18.2). The UNCHR issued a General Comment on this Article in
1993: "The Committee observes that the freedom to 'have or to adopt' a religion
or belief necessarily entails the freedom to choose a religion or belief,
"including the right to replace one's current religion or belief with another"
or to adopt atheistic views [...] Article 18.2 bars coercion that would impair
the right to have or adopt a religion or belief, including the use of threat of
physical force or penal sanctions to compel believers or non-believers to
adhere to their religious beliefs and congregations, to recant their religion
or belief "or to convert"." (CCPR/C/21/Rev.1/Add.4, General Comment No. 22.;
emphasis added) Some countries distinguish voluntary, motivated conversion from
organized proselytism, attempting to restrict the latter. The boundary between
them is not easily defined: what one person considers legitimate evangelizing,
or witness-bearing, another may consider intrusive and improper. Illustrating
the problems that can arise from such subjective viewpoints is this extract
from an article by Dr. C. Davis, published in Cleveland State University's
'Journal of Law and Health': "According to the Union of American Hebrew
Congregations, Jews for Jesus and Hebrew Christians constitute two of the most
dangerous cults, and its members are appropriate candidates for deprogramming.
Anti-cult evangelicals ... protest that 'aggressiveness and proselytizing ...
are basic to authentic Christianity,' and that Jews for Jesus and Campus
Crusade for Christ are not to be labeled as cults. Furthermore, certain
Hassidic groups who physically attacked a meeting of the Hebrew Christian
'cult' have themselves been labeled a 'cult' and equated with the followers of
Reverend Moon, by none other than the President of the Central Conference of
American Rabbis." Since the collapse of the former Soviet Union the Russian
Orthodox Church has enjoyed a revival. However, it takes exception to what it
considers illegitimate proselytizing by the Roman Catholic Church, the
Salvation Army, Jehovah's Witnesses and other religious movements in what it
refers to as its "canonical territory". Greece has a long history of conflict,
mostly with Jehovah's Witnesses but also with some Pentecostals over its laws
on proselytism. This situation stems from a law passed in the 1930s by the
dictator Ioannis Metaxas. A Jehovah's Witness, Minos Kokkinakis, won the
equivalent of US $14,400 in damages from the Greek state after being arrested
for trying to preach his faith from door to door. In another case, Larissis vs.
Greece, a member of the Pentecostal church also won a case in the European
Court of Human Rights. Some Islamic countries with Islamic law outlaw and carry
strict sentences for proselytizing. Several Islamic countries under Islamic
law, Saudi Arabia, Yemen, Afghanistan, Pakistan, Egypt, Iran, and Maldives,
outlaw apostasy and carry imprisonment or the death penalty for those leaving
Islam and those enticing Muslims to leave Islam. Also, induced religious
conversions in Indian States of Orissa has resulted in communal-riots.
Psychological approaches to religious conversion. Edwin Starbuck. It can,
therefore, be argued that sociological factors can have a strong influence on
religious conversion. It has been noted that, for every year a non-Christian
grows older than 25, the likelihood of them converting decreases exponentially.
James H Leuba. James H Leuba was an American psychologist who studied religious
conversion. In 1916, he started a study, intending to test the hypothesis that,
the more people were educated, the less they believed in God. His studies
compares undergraduates, professors and more distinguished professors; he found
that, as one rises on the scale of age and culture, the proportion of
unbelievers rises. In 1997, Edward Larson and Harry Witham attempted to
replicate Leuba's study. They studied a similar number of scientists, divided
between physicists, biologists and mathematicians. Their results were very
similar to Leuba's, in that scientists still seemed to be less likely to
believe in religion than the average person. Whereas, in Leuba's study, the
highest proportion of atheists were biologists, the later study revealed that
physicists were now the most atheist group.
