Repentance Repentance is the activity of reviewing one's actions and feeling
contrition or regret for past wrongs. It generally involves a commitment to
personal change and resolving to live a more responsible and humane life. In
religious contexts it usually refers to confession to God, ceasing sin against
God in order to gain forgiveness or absolution. It typically includes an
admission of guilt, a promise or resolve not to repeat the offense; an attempt
to make restitution for the wrong, or in some way to reverse the harmful
effects of the wrong where possible. In Biblical Hebrew, the idea of repentance
is represented by two verbs: ◊©◊ï◊ë "shuv" (to return) and ◊ ◊ó◊ù "nicham" (to
feel sorrow). In the New Testament, the word translated as 'repentance' is the
Greek word ŒºŒµœÑŒ¨ŒΩŒøŒπŒ± ("metanoia"), "after/behind one's mind", which is a
compound word of the preposition 'meta' (after, with), and the verb 'noeo' (to
perceive, to think, the result of perceiving or observing). In this compound
word the preposition combines the two meanings of time and change, which may be
denoted by 'after' and 'different'; so that the whole compound means: 'to think
differently after'. Metanoia is therefore primarily an after-thought, different
from the former thought; a change of mind accompanied by regret and change of
conduct, "change of mind and heart", or, "change of consciousness". A
description of repentance in the "New Testament" can be found in the parable of
the prodigal son found in the Gospel of Luke (15 beginning at verse 11). In
Judaism. Rabbinic Jewish literature contains extensive discussions on the
subject of repentance. Many rabbinic sources state that repentance is of
paramount importance to the existence of this world, so that it was one of the
seven provisions which God made before the Creation (Talmud Bavli, tractates
Pesahim 54a; Nedarim 39b; Midrash Genesis Rabbah 1). "The Holy One, blessed be
His name, said to Elijah, 'Behold, the precious gift which I have bestowed on
my world: though a man sins again and again, but returns in penitence, I will
receive him'" (Jerusalem Talmud Sanhedrin 28b). "Great is repentance: it brings
healing into the world"; "it reaches to the throne of the lord" (Hosea 14:2,
5); "it brings redemption" (Isaiah 59:20); "it prolongs man's life" (Ezekiel
18:21; Talmud Yoma 86a). "Repentance and works of charity are man's
intercessors before God's throne" (Talmud Shabbath 32a). Sincere repentance is
equivalent to the rebuilding of the Temple, the restoration of the altar, and
the offering of all the sacrifices. Sincere repentance is manifested when the
same temptation to sin, under the same conditions, is ever after resolutely
resisted. "He that confesses his sin and still clings to it is likened to a man
that holds in his hand a defiling object; though he batheth in all the waters
of the world he is not cleansed; but the moment he casteth the defiling object
from him a single bath will cleanse him, as it is said 'Whosoever confesses and
forsakes them sins shall have mercy'". According to Jewish doctrine, repentance
is the prerequisite of atonement. Yom Kippur, the day of atonement, derives its
significance only from the fact that it is the culmination of the ten
penitential days with which the Jewish religious year begins; and therefore it
is of no avail without repentance; (Midrash Sifra, Emor, 14.). Though man ought
to be penitent every day (Mishna Avoth Chap 2, 10; Talmud Shabbath 153a), the
first ten days of every year are the acceptable time announced by the prophet
(Isaiah 55:6): "Seek the Lord while he may be found, call upon him while he is
near" (Talmud Rosh Hashan 18a; Mishneh Torah "Teshuva" 2:6). Repentance and the
Day of Atonement only absolve one from sins committed against God; from sins
against another person they absolve only when restitution has been made and the
pardon of the offended party has been obtained (Talmud Yoma 87a; Mishneh Torah
"Teshuva"2:9). No one need despair on account of his or her sins, for every
penitent sinner is graciously received by God. (Jeremiah 31:9). Jewish doctrine
holds that it is never too late, even on the day of death, to return to God
with sincere repentance for "as the sea is always open for every one who wishes
to cleanse himself, so are the gates of repentance always open to the sinner".
Jewish doctrine states that the hand of God is continually stretched out to
receive a sinner. One view in the Talmud holds that a repentant sinner attains
a more exalted spiritual eminence than one who has never sinned (Talmud
Berakhoth 34b.) It is a sin to taunt a repentant sinner by recalling their
former sinful ways. Repentance occupies a prominent position in all the ethical
writings of the Middle Ages. Bahya ibn Paquda devotes a special section to it
in his 'Hovot ha-Levavot", "Gate of Repentance." Maimonides devotes the last
section of "Sefer ha-Madda'" in his Mishneh Torah to the subject. One of the
most significant medieval works on Repentance is "Shaarei Teshuva," the "Gates
of Repentance" by Rabbeinu Yona of Gerona. In the Hebrew Bible, repentance
generally leads to salvation. In some cases, individuals or nations repent of
their sins and are spared God's judgment. Sometimes the punishment avoided is
destruction in this life, sometimes it is damnation. In the book of Jonah, the
prophet initially chose to disobey God's command, and then he repented and
became obedient. However, Jonah returned to disobedience when he hoped for the
destruction of the city of Nineveh. In the Book of Job, Job never repented of
any particular sin or activity when he went through his major dilemma. The
Hebrew term "teshuvah" (lit. "return") is used to refer to "repentance". This
implies that transgression and sin are the natural and inevitable consequence
of man's straying from God and His laws, and that it is man's destiny and duty
to be with God. The Bible states that God's loving-kindness is extended to the
returning sinner. The Torah (five books of Moses) distinguishes between
offenses against God and offenses against man. In the first case the
manifestation of repentance consists in: (1) Confession of one's sin before God
(Lev. 5:5; Num. 5:7), the essential part being a solemn promise and firm
resolve not to commit the same sin again. (2) Making certain prescribed
offerings (Lev. 5:1-20). Offenses against man require, in addition to
confession and sacrifice, restitution in full of whatever has been wrongfully
obtained or withheld from one's fellow man, with one-fifth of its value added
thereto (Lev. 5:20-26). If the wronged man has died, restitution must be made
to his heir; if he has no heir, it must be given to the priest who officiates
at the sacrifice made for the remission of the sin (Num. 5:7-9). There are
other manifestations of repentance mentioned in the Bible. These include
pouring out water, which symbolizes the pouring out of one's heart before God;
prayer self-affliction, as fasting; wearing sackcloth; sitting and sleeping on
the ground However, the Prophets disparaged all such outer manifestations of
repentance, insisting rather on a complete change of the sinner's mental and
spiritual attitude. In Isaiah 55:7, the Bible states that repentance brings
pardon and forgiveness of sin. Apart from repentance, no other activities, such
as sacrifices or religious ceremonies can secure pardon and forgiveness of sin.
In Christianity. The doctrine of Repentance in the Scriptures appears to be
very prominent. See the description of repentance in the Hebrew Bible above for
repentance in the Old Testament. In the New Testament, John the Baptist began
his public ministry, as did Jesus, with a call to repentance (‚Äì; ). In the
Acts 2 sermon on Pentecost, Peter commands repentance. In the Acts 3 sermon at
the Beautiful gate of the Temple, Peter interchanges the phrase "turn again" at
a similar place in his presentation. When Jesus sent forth messengers to
proclaim his gospel, he commanded them to preach repentance (Luke 24:47; Mark
6:12). Teachings on repentance are found in the New Testament in Peter, (Acts
2:38); Paul, (Acts 20:21). God wants everyone to repent (2 Pet. 3:9; Acts 17:
30). Indeed, failure on the part of man to heed God's call to repentance means
that he shall utterly perish (Luke 13:3). The constant references to repentance
in Peter's preaching to his fellow countrymen in the early part of the book of
Acts may indicate an exceptional need for repentance amongst those who had
recently been party to the crucifixion of Christ, see Responsibility for the
death of Jesus. Paul is emphatic that change take place amongst those whom he
taught (see the Bible references to "turning to a true and living God"). This
aversion to the Greek or idolatrous lifestyle may have come from the intense
patriotism to Jewish ideals held by the well educated former Pharisee. Saint
Isaac of Syria said, "This life has been given to you for repentance. Do not
waste it on vain pursuits." Protestant conceptions. There is a three-fold idea
involved in true repentance in the Protestant conception. The Protestant
reformer John Calvin said that repentance "may be justly defined to be ‚Äúa
true conversion of our life to God, proceeding from a serious fear of God, and
consisting in the mortification of the flesh and of the old man, and in the
vivification of the Spirit.‚Äù He further said that "it will be useful to
amplify and explain the definition we have given; in which there are three
points to be particularly considered." "In the first place, when we call
repentance ‚Äúa conversion of the life to God, we require a transformation, not
only in the external actions, but in the soul itself; which, after having put
off the old nature, should produce the fruits of actions corresponding to its
renovation. . . .In the second place, we represented repentance as proceeding
from a serious fear of God. For before the mind of a sinner can be inclined to
repentance, it must be excited by the knowledge of the Divine judgment. "It
remains for us, in the third place, to explain our position, that repentance
consists of two parts‚Äîthe mortification of the flesh and the vivification of
the spirit. . . . Both these branches of repentance effects our participation
of Christ. For if we truly partake of his death, our old man is crucified by
its power, and the body of sin expires, so that the corruption of our former
nature loses all its vigor. . . .If we are partakers of his resurrection, we
are raised by it to a newness of life, which corresponds with the righteousness
of God." from "A Compend of the Institutes of the Christian Religion" by John
Calvin edited by Hugh T. Kerr, The Westminster Press-Philadelphia 1939. The
issue of repentance is also discussed in connection with the will and
disposition. One of the Hebrew words for repent means "to turn." The Prodigal
Son said, ""I will arise... and he arose"" (Luke 15:18, 20). The part of the
will and disposition in repentance is shown in the Confession of sin to God:
Psa. 38:18 -- ""For I will declare mine iniquity: I will be sorry for my sin.""
The publican beat upon his breast, and said, ""God be merciful to me a sinner""
(Luke 18:13). The prodigal said, ""I have sinned against heaven"" (Luke 15:21).
There must be confession to man also in so far as man has been wronged in and
by our sin (); James 5:16). Isa. 55:7 Prov. 28:13 ("He that covereth his sins
shall not prosper: but whoso confesseth and forsaketh them shall have mercy.");
("Bring forth therefore fruits meet for repentance:... And now also the axe is
laid unto the root of the trees: therefore every tree which bringeth not forth
good fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fire."). It is not enough to turn
away from sin; we must turn unto God. 1 Thessalonians 1:9; Acts 26:18.
According to Christians, acts of repentance do not earn God's forgiveness from
one's sin; rather, forgiveness is given as a gift from God to those whom he
saves. Acts 11:18--""Then hath God also to the Gentiles granted repentance unto
life."" 2 Tim. 2:25 -- ""If God peradventure will give them repentance to the
acknowledging of the truth."" Acts 5:30, 31. In this view, people are called
upon to repent in order that we may feel our own inability to do so, and
consequently be thrown upon God and petition Him to perform this work of grace
in our hearts. Many church fathers have made reference to it as the "gift of
repentance" or as the "gift of tears". God calls all to repent through the
hearing of the Gospel. God grants total repentance as each individual responds
to repentance through faith in the expiating sacrifice of Jesus for all sin.
"So then faith cometh by hearing, and hearing by the word of God." (Romans 10:
17). Repentance is given before anything else by definition. One cannot show
true change in his life before he himself has changed to bring about
manifestations of that change/repentance. Acts 2:37, 38, 41. The very Gospel
which calls for repentance produces it. When the people of Nineveh (Jonah 3:5-
10) heard the preaching of the word of God by Jonah they believed the message
and turned unto God. Not any message, but the Gospel is the instrument that God
uses to bring about this desired end. Furthermore, this message must be
preached in the power of the Holy Spirit (1 Thess. 1:5-10). Rev. 3:19; Heb. 12:
6, 10-11. The chastisements of God are sometimes for the purpose of bringing
His wandering children back to repentance. 2 Tim. 2:24-25. God often uses the
loving, Christian reproof of a fellow believer to be the means of bringing
Christians back to God. Mormonism. Faith in Jesus Christ naturally leads to
repentance. LDS Church adherents do not subscribe to the notion of "Original
Sin," Instead, they different degrees of severity in sin, some being outright
cruelty and viciousness and some being against written commandments. All people
sin, sometimes in ignorance, or weakness, or willful disobedience. Latter-day
Saints do not believe that God has given any commandment that a person cannot
fully live up to and that repentance is a real and practical means to live up
to those commandments. There is personal responsibility in salvation and it is
a duty to repent of sin, "Wherefore teach it unto your children, that all men,
everywhere, must repent, or they can in nowise inherit the kingdom of God, for
no unclean thing can dwell there, or dwell in his presence (Moses 6:57.)"
Repentance wasn't meant to be vague, but the Lord has made it plain and
practical, so people can understand what is required of them. This is how men
are able to literally "work out your own salvation with fear and trembling.
(Phil. 2:12)" In Islam. The word "tawbah" (repentance) in Arabic literally
means 'to return', and is mentioned in the Qur'an. In an Islamic context, it
refers to the act of leaving what Allah Has prohibited and returning to what He
Has Commanded. The act of repentance can redeem the sins and give the
opportunity to go to Heaven. These awards are noted in Quran verse as follows.
Although repentance is considered as one act that can be used for cleansing the
sins, the Quran noted that not all of the sins are forgiven. There is one sin
that cannot be forgiven after believing period. The sin is well known as Shirk.
The shirk itself is considered as an act of worshipping another god beside the
Truly God. Two verses are giving comments regarding Shirk, ["An-Nisaa" 4:48]
and ["An-Nisaa" 4:116]. Islam does not accept the concept of original sin,
instead it teaches that a person is born in a state of innonence and pure
belief. The person remains in that state of sinlessness as along as they have
not reached the age of puberty. After which they are accountable for their
sins. In Buddhism. The Buddha considered shame over doing wrong (Pali: "hiri")
and fear of the consequences of wrongdoing (Pali:"otappa") as essential
safeguards against falling into evil ways and further as extremely useful in
the path of purification. Also recommended was the regular practice of self-
assessment or wise reflection (Pali: "yoniso manasikara") on one's own actions
in relation to others and the bigger picture. In Hawaiian Tradition.
Hooponopono (ho-o-pono-pono) is an ancient Hawaiian practice of reconciliation
and forgiveness, combined with (repentance) prayers. Similar forgiveness
practices were performed on islands throughout the South Pacific, including
Samoa, Tahiti and New Zealand. Traditionally hooponopono is practiced by
healing priests or "kahuna lapaau" among family members of a person who is
physically ill. Modern versions are performed within the family by a family
elder, or by the individual alone.
