Responsa Responsa (Latin: plural of "responsum", "answers") comprise a body of
written decisions and rulings given by legal scholars in response to questions
addressed to them. In the Roman Empire. Roman law recognised "responsa
prudentium", i.e. the responses and thoughts of jurists, as one of the sources
of "Ius scriptum" (written law), along with laws originating from magistrates,
from the Senate or from the emperor. A particularly well-known and highly
influential example of such responsa was the Digesta (or Digests), in 90 books,
principal work of the prominent Second Century jurist Salvius Julianus. This
was a systematic treatise on civil and praetorian law, cited by many later
Roman legal writers, which has been described as “"A comprehensive collection
of responsa on real and hypothetical cases; in general, it followed the edictal
system... With Iulianus, the Roman jurisprudence reached its apogee."” In the
Roman Catholic Church. In the Roman Catholic Church, a responsum is an answer
given by the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith on certain matters
pertaining to faith and morals. The Holy Office is the sole and exclusive
doctrinal organization which has the right to give responsa. Recent doctrinal
documents which contain relevant responsa are Commentary on Responsa ad
quaestiones, Responsum ad Dubium Concerning the Teaching Contained in Ordinatio
Sacerdotalis and Responses to Certain Questions of the United States Conference
of Catholic Bishops Concerning Artificial Nutrition and Hydration In Judaism.
In rabbinic literature, the Responsa are known as "She'elot ve-Teshuvot"
(Hebrew: שאלות ותשובות "questions and answers") and comprise the
body of written decisions and rulings given by poskim ("deciders of Jewish
law"). Judaism's responsa constitute a special class of rabbinic literature, to
be distinguished from the commentaries ("meforshim")—devoted to the exegesis
of the Hebrew Bible, the Mishnah, the Talmud—and from the codes of law which
delineate the rules for ordinary incidents of life. The responsa literature
covers a period of 1,700 years—the mode, style and subject matter have
changed as a function of the travels of the Jewish people and of the
development of other halakhic literature, particularly the codes. See History
of Responsa. Responsa play a particularly important role in Jewish law. The
questions forwarded are usually practical, and often concerned with new
contingencies for which no provision has been made in the codes of law, and the
responsa thus supplement the codes. They therefore function as a source of law,
almost as legal precedent, in that they are consulted by later decisors in
their rulings; they are also, in turn, incorporated into subsequent codes. See
Posek; The sources and process of Halakha. In addition to requests for Halakhic
rulings, many of the questions addressed were theoretical in character,
particularly amongst the earlier responsa. The responsa accordingly contain
rulings on ethics, business ethics, the philosophy of religion, astronomy,
mathematics, history, geography, as well as interpretations of passages in the
Bible, the Mishnah, the Talmud and the Midrash. Thus, while early Jewish
literature has few historical works, many notes on the history of Judaism have
been introduced into the responsa. Responsa thus contain valuable information
about the culture of the Jews and the people among whom they lived. Information
may also be gleaned about the moral and social relations of the times,
occupations, the household, customs, expressions of joy and of sorrow, and
recreations and even games. Older responsa are also important for readings and
emendations of the Mishnah and the Talmud. In Islam. A similar use of responsa
(here called fatwā) is found in Islam. The mufti is a member of the Islamic
scholarly class (ulamā) who form the Muslim religious establishment. In Islam,
the term muftī is largely restricted to Sunnism, and has both a formal and
informal use, the former for state-appointed officials who gave rulings on
matters concerning the state or the public, the latter for individuals who
respond to their followers or to others. Nowadays, questions can be asked via
the Internet, where sites have sprung up offering legal advice. In Shiaism,
fatwa is also used. There personal devotion to specific clergy is mandatory for
believers. High-ranking members of the ulama class achieve the status of marja'
al-taqlīd (pl. marāji'), that is, "the point to which imitation returns": in
other words, they pronounce on religious matters, especially legal ones, and
the rest of mankind are muqallid or imitators, who do nothing without the
mandate of their specific marja'. There are very few marāji' at any time,
though on a number of occasions since the 19th century, the title has come to
rest on a single individual for the entire Shia world. There are larger numbers
of Shia clergy with the rank of mujtahid, who are empowered to give independent
opinions on religious matters. Traditionally, as in Judaism, the answers of
marāji' and mujtahids are collected in a compilation called Risāla-yi su'āl
va javāb (Farsi) or "Epistle of Questions and Answers". There is generally
greater latitude for Shia ulamā, insofar as the principle of independent
reasoning (ijtihād, from the same root as mujtahid) in matters of religious
law remains valid in Shi'i jurisprudence, whereas it is deemed to have ended in
Sunnism as far back as the 10th century (though it is now reckoned that this
perception of the desuetude or "closing of the door" of ijtihad did not always
apply).
