Restoration (Latter Day Saints) In the Latter Day Saint movement, the
Restoration refers to the return of the Priesthood and the Church of Christ to
the earth that started the Church. While in some ways the term may refer to the
early history of the religion, in other contexts the term will be used in a way
to include down to and past the present. Especially in The Church of Jesus
Christ of Latter-day Saints The Restoration is often used as a term to
encompass the religious messages of the Church down to the present. The
restoration is associated with a number of events occurred that were understood
to be necessary to re-establish the early Christian church found in the New
Testament, and to prepare the earth for the Second Coming of Jesus Christ. In
particular, Latter Day Saints believe that angels appeared to Joseph Smith, Jr.
and others and bestowed various Priesthood authority to them. Apostasy.
According to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church), the
Great Apostasy in Christianity began not long after the ascension of Jesus
Christ. It was marked with the corruption of Christian doctrine by Greek and
other philosophies, with followers dividing into different ideological groups,
and the martyrdom of the Apostles which lead to a loss of Priesthood authority
to administer the church and its ordinances. With all Priesthood authorities
either martyred, taken from the earth, or teaching impure doctrines, there was
a break in Apostolic Succession, and what remained was a mere fragment of the
Church established by Jesus Christ. The Christian believers who survived the
persecutions took it upon themselves to speak for God, interpret, amend or add
to his doctrines and ordinances, and carry out his work without proper
authority and divine direction from God. During this time, important doctrines
and rites were lost or corrupted. Latter-day Saints specifically reject the
early ecumenical councils for what they see as misguided human attempts to
decide matters of doctrine without divine assistance, substituting debate and
politics for divine revelation. Latter-day Saints claim that various Old
Testament and New Testament scriptures, including teachings of Christ himself,
prophesy of this "falling away" or "apostasy." Thus, Latter-day Saints refer to
the "restitution of all things" mentioned in and claim that a restoration of
all the original and primary doctrines and rites of Christianity was necessary.
They believe that important historical events such as the Protestant
Reformation and the establishment of the United States Constitution, which
explicitly allows for freedom of religion in its First Amendment, were
necessary antecedents to the Restoration. Restoration. No restoration would
have been necessary if a legitimately established church had existed. Joseph
Smith, Jr., founder of the Latter Day Saint movement, originally prayed about
which church to join. In a vision in 1820 near Palmyra, New York, two
personages (generally believed to be God the Father and Jesus Christ)
instructed him not to join any churches, for "all their creeds were an
abomination." Smith described another vision in 1823 as being visited in his
bedroom by an "angel Moroni" who told him of a record of an ancient people
written in an ancient language on golden plates. After repeated visits by this
angel in successive years, Smith described receiving and translating this
ancient record and publishing the translation as the Book of Mormon. (Joseph
Smith History 1) The Book of Mormon provided many teachings about the atonement
of Christ that were not as clear in the Bible, as also teachings about the
House of Israel and the baptismal covenant. When Joseph prayed in May 1829
about the need for baptism, he and Oliver Cowdery were visited angelically by
John the Baptist so that they could receive proper authority to baptize.
Coinciding with the restoration of the Priesthood, Mormons believe that Smith
received many revelations, visions and visitations of heavenly messengers to
instruct him in order to enable him to fulfill his responsibilities in
propounding doctrine and re-establishing ordinances and temple covenants, often
in response to specific questions he asked in prayer. The majority of this
history is recorded in one of the Mormon's scriptural canons, the "Doctrine and
Covenants". Additional details and background of the Church in Smith's era is
presented in the Church's seven volume set "History of the Church".
Significance and impact. According to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
Saints (LDS Church), the largest Mormon group, all Priesthood keys necessary to
administer Jesus Christ's church were given to Joseph Smith, Jr. who then
organized that church to continue in perpetuity. Hence, members refer to their
church as "The Church of Jesus Christ." The term "latter day saints" refers to
the fact that members of Early Christianity were originally called "saints",
and the church reestablished by Smith is believed to be Christ's church in the
last days prior to the second coming of Jesus. Members of the LDS Church
believe that their church is the "only true and living church upon the face of
the earth" because of the divine authority restored through Smith. They claim
that the LDS Church is the restoration of Jesus' original church, has the
authentic Priesthood authority, and all doctrines and ordinances of the Gospel,
fulfilling many of the prophecies of Daniel, Isaiah and Malachi in the Old
Testament and also the prophesies of Peter and Jesus in the New Testament.
Latter-day Saints maintain that other religions have a "portion" of the truth,
mingled with inaccuracies. They also maintain that many other religions advance
many good causes and do much good among the people insofar as they are led by
the light of Christ, "which lighteth every man that cometh into the world."
(John 1:9)
