Restorationism Christian primitivism, the primitive Christian movement, or
restorationism is the belief that Christianity should be restored along the
lines of what is known about the apostolic early church, which restorationists
see as the search for a more pure and more ancient form of the religion.
Fundamentally, "this vision seeks to correct faults or deficiencies the church
by appealing to the primitive church as a normative model." The term
"restorationism" is sometimes used more specifically as a synonym for the
American Restoration Movement. The term is also used by more recent groups,
describing their goal to re-establish Christianity in its original form, such
as some anti-denominational Charismatic Restorationists, which arose in the
1970s in the United Kingdom and elsewhere. In comparable terms, earlier
"primitivist" movements, including the Hussites, Anabaptists, Landmarkists and
the Puritans, have been described as examples of "restorationism", as have many
seventh-day Sabbatarians. Efforts to restore an earlier, purer form of
Christianity are often a response to denominationalism. As Rubel Shelly put it,
"he motive behind all restoration movements is to tear down the walls of
separation by a return to the practice of the original, essential and universal
features of the Christian religion." Different groups have tried to implement
the restorationist vision in different ways; for instance, some have focused on
the structure and practice of the church, others on the ethical life of the
church, and others on the direct experience of the Holy Spirit in the life of
the believer. The relative importance given to the restoration ideal, and the
extent to which the full restoration of the early church is believed to have
been achieved, also varies between groups. Uses of the term. The terms
"restorationism", "restorationist" and "restoration" are used in several senses
within Christianity. The term "primitive", in contrast with other uses, refers
to a basis in scholarship and research into the actual writings of the church
fathers and other historical documents. Since written documents for the
underground first-century church are sparse, the primitive church passed down
its knowledge verbally. Elements of the primitive Christianity movement reject
the patristic tradition of the prolific extrabiblical 2nd- and 3rd-century
redaction of this knowledge (the Ante-Nicene Fathers), and instead attempt to
reconstruct primitive church practices as they might have existed in the
Apostolic Age. To do this, they revive practices found in the Old Testament.
The term "apostolic" refers to a nonmainstream, often literal, apostolic
succession or historical lineage tracing back to the Apostles and the Great
Commission. These restorationist threads are sometimes regarded critically as
being Judaizers in the Ebionite tradition. Historical models. Ecclesiastical
primitivism focuses on restoring the ecclesiastical practices of the early
church. Huldrych Zwingli, John Calvin and the Puritans all advocated
ecclesiastical primitivism. The strongest advocate of ecclesiastical
primitivism in the US was Alexander Campbell. Ethical primitivism focuses on
restoring the ethical norms and commitment to discipleship of the early church.
The Anabaptists, Barton W. Stone and the Holiness Movement are examples of this
form of restorationism. The movement often requires observance of universal
commandments, such as Biblical Sabbath as given to Adam and Eve in the Garden
of Eden, and the Hebrew calendar to define years, seasons, weeks, and days.
Circumcision, animal sacrifices, and ceremonial requirements, as practiced in
Judaism, are distinguished from the Ten Commandments, Noahide laws and High
Sabbaths as given to, and in effect for, all humanity. The Sermon on the Mount
and particularly the Expounding of the Law warn against antinomianism, the
rejection of Biblical teachings concerning observance of the Law. Experiential
primitivism focuses on restoring the direct communication with God and the
experience of the Holy Spirit seen in the early church. Examples include the
Latter Day Saint movement of Joseph Smith, Jr. and Pentecostalism. Gospel
primitivism may be best seen in the theology of Martin Luther. Luther was not,
in the strictest sense, a restorationist because he saw human effort to restore
the church as works righteousness and was sharply critical of other Reformation
leaders who were attempting to do so. On the other hand, he was convinced that
the gospel message had been obscured by the Roman Catholic Church of the time.
He also rejected church traditions and insisted on scripture as the sole
authority for the church. These models are not mutually exclusive, but overlap;
for example, the Pentecostal movement sees a clear link between ethical
primitivism and experiential primitivism. Middle Ages. According to Barbara
Tuchman, beginning in about 1470 a succession of Popes focused on the
acquisition of money, their role in Italian politics as rulers of the papal
states and power politics within the college of cardinals. The restorationist
movement at the time was centered on movements that wanted to renew the church,
such as the Lollards, Hussites, and Brethren of the Common Life. While these
pre-reformation movements did presage and sometimes discussed a break with Rome
and papal authority, they also provoked restorationist movements within the
church, such as the councils of Constance and Basle, which were held in the
first half of the 15th century. Preachers at the time regularly harangued
delegates to these conferences regarding simony, venality, lack of chastity and
celibacy, and the holding of multiple benefices. The lack of success of the
restorationist movements led, arguably, to the Protestant Reformation.
Protestant Reformation. The Protestant Reformation came about through an
impulse to repair the Church and return it to what the reformers saw as its
original biblical structure, belief, and practice, and was motivated by a sense
that "the medieval church had allowed its traditions to clutter the way to God
with fees and human regulations and thus to subvert the gospel of Christ." At
the heart of the Reformation was an emphasis on the principle of "scripture
alone" (sola scriptura). As a result the authority of church tradition, which
had taken practical precedence over scripture, was rejected. The Reformation
was not a monolithic movement, but consisted of at least three identifiable
sub-currents. One was centered in Germany, one was centered in Switzerland, and
the third was centered in England. While these movements shared some common
concerns, each had its own particular emphasis. The Lutheran approach can be
described as one of "reformation," seeking "to reform and purify the historic,
institutional church while at the same time preserving as much of the tradition
as possible." In contrast, the Reformed approach can be described as one of
"restoration," seeking "to restore the essence and form of the primitive church
based on biblical precedent and example; tradition received scant respect."
While Luther focused on the question "How can we find forgiveness of sins?",
the early Reformed theologians turned to the Bible for patterns that could be
used to replace traditional forms and practices. Heinrich Bullinger and Martin
Bucer in particular emphasized the restoration of Biblical patterns. John
Calvin reflected an intermediate position between that of Luther and Reformed
theologians such as Zwingli, stressing Biblical precedents for church
governance, but as a tool to more effectively proclaim the gospel rather than
as ends in themselves. Luther opposed efforts to restore "biblical forms and
structures," because he saw human efforts to restore the church as works
righteousness. He did seek the "marks of the true church," but was concerned
that by focusing on forms and patterns could lead to the belief that by
"restoring outward forms alone one has restored the essence." Thus, Luther
believed that restoring the gospel was the first step in renewing the church,
rather than restoring biblical forms and patterns. In this sense, Luther can be
described as a gospel restorationist, even though his approach was very
different from that of other restorationists. Protestant groups have generally
accepted history as having some "jurisdiction" in Christian faith and life; the
question has been the extent of that jurisdiction. A commitment to history and
primitivism are not mutually exclusive; while some groups attempt to give full
jurisdiction to the primitive church, for others the apostolic "first times"
are given only partial jurisdiction. First Great Awakening. During the First
Great Awakening, a movement developed among the Baptists known as Separate
Baptists. Two themes of this movement were the rejection of creeds and "freedom
in the Spirit." The Separate Baptists saw scripture as the "perfect rule" for
the church. However, while they turned to the Bible for a structural pattern
for the church, they did not insist on complete agreement on the details of
that pattern. This group originated in New England, but was especially strong
in the South where the emphasis on a biblical pattern for the church grew
stronger. In the last half of the 18th century it spread to the western
frontier of Kentucky and Tennessee, where the Stone and Campbell movements
would later take root. The development of the Separate Baptists in the southern
frontier helped prepare the ground for the Restoration Movement, as the
membership of both the Stone and Campbell groups drew heavily from among the
ranks of the Separate Baptists. Separate Baptist restorationism also
contributed to the development of the Landmark Baptists in the same area at
about the same time as the Stone-Campbell Restoration Movement. Under the
leadership of James Robinson Graves, this group looked for a precise blueprint
for the primitive church, believing that any deviation from that blueprint
would keep one from being part of the true church. Groups arising during the
Second Great Awakening. The ideal of restoring a "primitive" form of
Christianity grew in popularity in the U.S. after the American Revolution. This
desire to restore a purer form of Christianity played a role in the development
of many groups during this period, known as the Second Great Awakening,
including the Mormons, Baptists and Shakers. Several factors made the
restoration sentiment particularly appealing during this time period. Camp
meetings fueled the Second Great Awakening, which served as an "organizing
process" that created "a religious and educational infrastructure" across the
trans-Appalachian frontier that encompassed social networks, a religious
journalism that provided mass communication, and church related colleges.
American Stone-Campbell Restoration Movement. The American Restoration Movement
aimed to restore the church and sought "the unification of all Christians in a
single body patterned after the church of the New Testament." While the
Restoration Movement developed from several independent efforts to go back to
apostolic Christianity, two groups that independently developed similar
approaches to the Christian faith were particularly important to its
development. The first, led by Barton W. Stone began at Cane Ridge, Bourbon
County, Kentucky and called themselves simply "Christians". The second began in
western Pennsylvania and Virginia (now West Virginia) and was led by Thomas
Campbell and his son, Alexander Campbell; they used the name "Disciples of
Christ". The Campbell movement was characterized by a "systematic and rational
reconstruction" of the early church, in contrast to the Stone movement which
was characterized by radical freedom and lack of dogma. Despite their
differences, the two movements agreed on several critical issues. Both saw
restoring apostolic Christianity as a means of hastening the millennium. Both
also saw restoring the early church as a route to Christian freedom. And, both
believed that unity among Christians could be achieved by using apostolic
Christianity as a model. They were united, among other things, in the belief
that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; that Christians should celebrate the
Lord's Supper on the first day of each week; and that baptism of adult
believers by immersion in water is a necessary condition for salvation. Because
the founders wanted to abandon all denominational labels, they used the
biblical names for the followers of Jesus that they found in the Bible. The
commitment of both movements to restoring the early church and to uniting
Christians was enough to motivate a union between many in the two movements.
With the merger, there was the challenge of what to call the new movement.
Clearly, finding a Biblical, non-sectarian name was important. Stone wanted to
continue to use the name "Christians." Alexander Campbell insisted upon
"Disciples of Christ". As a result, both names were used. The Restoration
Movement began during, and was greatly influenced by, the Second Great
Awakening. While the Campbells resisted what they saw as the spiritual
manipulation of the camp meetings, the Southern phase of the Awakening "was an
important matrix of Barton Stone's reform movement" and shaped the evangelistic
techniques used by both Stone and the Campbells. The Restoration Movement has
seen several divisions, resulting in multiple separate groups. Three modern
groups originating in the U.S. claim the Stone-Campbell movement as their
roots: Churches of Christ, Christian churches and churches of Christ, and the
Christian Church (Disciples of Christ). Some see divisions in the movement as
the result of the tension between the goals of restoration and ecumenism, with
the churches of Christ and the Christian churches and churches of Christ
resolving the tension by stressing restoration while the Christian Church
(Disciples of Christ) resolved the tension by stressing ecumenism. Non-U.S.
churches associated with this movement include the Churches of Christ in
Australia and the Evangelical Christian Church in Canada. Christadelphians. Dr.
John Thomas (April 12, 1805 - March 5, 1871), was a devout convert to the
Restoration Movement after a shipwreck at sea on his emigration to America
brought to focus his inadequate understanding of the Bible, and what would
happen to him at death. This awareness caused him to devote his life to the
study of the Bible and he promoted interpretations of it which were at variance
with the mainstream Christian views the Restoration Movement held. In
particular he questioned the nature of man. He held a number of debates with
one of the leaders of the movement Alexander Campbell on these topics and
eventually agreed to stop because there was no practical merits to his personal
beliefs and it had the potential to create division. He later determined that
salvation was dependant upon having the theology he had developed for baptism
to be effective for salvation and published an "Confession and Abjuration" of
his previous position on March 3rd 1847. He was also rebaptised. Following his
abjuration and rebaptism he went to England on a preaching tour in June 1848
including Reformation Movement churches, Although his abjuration and his
disfellowship in America were reported in the British churches magazines
certain churches in the movement still allowed him to present his views. Thomas
also gained a hearing in Unitarian and Adventist churches through his promotion
of the concept of "independence of thought" with regards to interpreting the
Bible. Through a process of creed setting and division the Christadelphian
movement emerged with a distinctive set of doctrines incorporating Adventism,
anti-trinitarianism, the belief that God is a "substantial and corporeal"
being, objection to military service, a lay-membership with full participation
by all members, and other doctrines consistent with the spirit of the
Restorationist movement. One consequence of objection to military service was
the adoption of the name Christadelphians to distinguish this small community
of believers and to be granted exemption from military service in the American
Civil War. Latter Day Saints. Adherents of The Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints (LDS), commonly called Mormons, believe that founder Joseph
Smith, Jr., was a prophet of God, chosen to restore the primitive, apostolic
church established by Jesus, now "in its fullness", rather than to reform the
church or priesthood, which had ceased to exist in any substantial or
authoritative sense shortly after the end of the apostolic age and before the
First Council of Nicaea in 325. This belief is not shared by the second largest
denomination in the Latter Day Saint Movement, the Community of Christ
(formerly known as The Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day
Saints). As Allen and Hughes put it, "group used the language of 'restoration'
more consistently and more effectively than did the [Latter Day Saints ...
early Mormons seemed obsessed with restoring the ancient church of God."
According to Smith, God the Father, Jesus, and the Holy Spirit appeared to him
and instructed him that the creeds of the churches of the day "were an
abomination in his sight", and that, through him, God would establish the true
church, which had fallen into complete apostasy. Smith taught that this Great
Apostasy was complete and required a full restoration, or, more accurately, re-
establishment, of the original church. This included what he called the Aaronic
priesthood and Melchizedek priesthood, and what he saw as the full primitive
church structure consisting of prophets, apostles, evangelists and teachers.
Latter-day Saints believe that, in addition to Joseph Smith being the first
prophet appointed by Jesus in the "latter days", every subsequent President of
the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints also serves in the capacity of
prophet, seer and revelator. In 1830, Smith published "The Book of Mormon",
which LDS members believe he translated through divine means from the Golden
Plates that he obtained from the angel Moroni. According to its text, the Book
of Mormon contains the writings of ancient prophets who lived on the American
continent from approximately 2200 BC to AD 421, describes the visit of Jesus
after his resurrection and his establishing his church among the indigenous
people, and includes important gospel truths lost during the Great Apostasy. In
addition, Smith claimed that he received the true authority of priesthood,
which he divided in to two orders, Aaronic (lesser) and Melchizedek (greater),
directly from those who held it anciently: namely, John the Baptist for the
Aaronic, who returned as an angel and gave him and Oliver Cowdery the authority
to baptize, and Peter, James, and John, the Apostles, who returned as heavenly
messengers and gave Smith and Cowdery the authority to lead the church just as
the Apostles had done anciently, this being the Melchizedek authority. The
church was organized on April 6, 1830, in New York. Originally the church was
unofficially called the "Church of Christ". Four years later, in April 1834, it
was also referred to as the "Church of Latter Day Saints" to differentiate the
church of this era from that of the New Testament. Then, in April 1838, the
full name was stated as the "Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints". Some
among the Churches of Christ have attributed the restorationist character of
the Latter Day Saints movement to the influence of a preacher, Sidney Rigdon,
who was associated with the Campbell movement in Ohio but left it and became a
close friend of Joseph Smith. Neither the Mormons nor the early Restoration
Movement leaders invented the idea of "restoration"; it was a popular theme of
the time that had developed independently of both, and Mormonism and the
Restoration Movement represent different expressions of that common theme. The
two groups had very different approaches to the restoration ideal. The Campbell
movement combined it with Enlightenment rationalism, "precluding emotionalism,
spiritualism, or any other phenomena that could not be sustained by rational
appeals to the biblical text." The Latter Day Saints combined it with "the
spirit of nineteenth-century Romanticism" and, as a result, "never sought to
recover the forms and structures of the ancient church as ends in themselves"
but "sought to restore the golden age, recorded in both Old Testament and New
Testament, when God broke into human history and communed directly with
humankind." Mormons gave priority to current revelation. Primitive observances
of "appointed times" like Sabbath were secondary to progressive revelation,
similarly as in mainstream Christianity. Adventism. Adventism is a Christian
eschatological belief that looks for the imminent Second Coming of Jesus to
inaugurate the Kingdom of God. This view involves the belief that Jesus will
return to receive those who have died in Christ and those who are awaiting his
return, and that they must be ready when he returns. Adventists are considered
to be both restorationists and conservative Protestants. Millerites and
Sabbatarianism. The Millerites were the most well-known family of the Adventist
movements. They emphasized apocalyptic teachings anticipating the end of the
world, and did not look for the unity of Christendom but busied themselves in
preparation for Christ's return. Millerites sought to restore a prophetic
immediacy and uncompromising biblicism that they believed had once existed but
had long been rejected by mainstream Protestant and Catholic churches. From the
Millerites descended the Seventh-day Adventists and the Advent Christian
Church. Seventh-day Adventists. The Seventh-day Adventist Church grew out of
the Adventist movement, in particular the Millerites. The Seventh-day Adventist
Church is the largest of several Adventist groups which arose from the
Millerite movement of the 1840s in upstate New York, a phase of the Second
Great Awakening. Important to the Seventh-day Adventist movement is a belief in
progressive revelation, teaching that the Christian life and testimony is
intended to be typified by the Spirit of Prophecy, as explained in the writings
of Ellen G. White. Much of the theology of the Seventh-day Adventist Church
corresponds to Protestant Christian teachings such as the Trinity and the
infallibility of Scripture. Distinctive teachings include the unconscious state
of the dead and the doctrine of an investigative judgment. The church is also
known for its emphasis on diet and health, its holistic understanding of the
person, its promotion of religious liberty, and its conservative principles and
lifestyle. Worldwide Church of God. The Worldwide Church of God arose from the
Seventh Day churches. The personal ministry of Herbert W. Armstrong became the
Radio Church of God, which became the Worldwide Church of God. It later
splintered into many other churches and groups when the Worldwide Church of God
disassociated itself with the Restoration movements and made major attempts to
join the Protestant branch of Christianity. Advent Christian Church. The Advent
Christian Church is unaffiliated with Seventh-day Adventism, but considers
itself the second "of six Christian denominations that grew out of the ministry
of William Miller". As a "first-day" body of Adventist Christians established
by "The Advent Christian General Conference" in 1860, the church's beliefs
include "conditional immortality" and a form of "soul sleep". Advent Christians
such as George Storrs and Jonas Wendell influenced the Bible Student movement.
Other groups originating in the 19th century. Bible Students (Jehovah's
Witnesses). In the 1870s, a Bible study group led by Charles Taze Russell
formed into what was eventually called the Bible Student movement. Russell's
congregations did not consider him to be the founder of a new religion, but
that he helped in restoring true Christianity from the apostasy that Jesus and
the Apostle Paul foretold. They believed that other Churches departed in a
Great Apostasy from the original faith on major points, and that the original
faith could be restored through a generally literal interpretation of the Bible
and a sincere commitment to follow its teachings. They focused on several key
doctrinal points that they considered a return to "primitive Christianity",
derived from their interpretation of the Bible, including a rejection of
trinitarianism, the immortality of the soul, and the definition of Hell as a
place of eternal torment; active proselytization; strict neutrality in
political affairs; abstinence from warfare; and a belief in the imminent
manifestation of the Kingdom of God (or World to Come) on Earth. Jehovah's
Witnesses emerged as a distinct religious organization, maintaining control of
Russell's Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society and other corporations. They
continued to develop doctrines that they considered to be an improved
restoration of first century Christianity, including increased emphasis on the
use of "Jehovah" as God's personal name. Plymouth Brethren. The Plymouth
Brethren is a conservative, Evangelical, restorationist movement whose history
can be traced to Dublin, Ireland, in the late 1820s. The title, "The Brethren",
is one that many of their number are comfortable with, in that the Bible
designates all believers as "brethren". Christians meeting in "Brethren
assemblies" are commonly perceived as being divided into at least two branches,
the "Open Brethren" and the "Exclusive Brethren". The Plymouth Brethren
movement began in Dublin in around 1827 and soon spread from Ireland to
Britain. The first English assembly was in Plymouth where the movement became
well known. Brethren assemblies diffused throughout Europe and beyond. Leonard
Strong led the formation about 1836 of assemblies in British Guiana among the
slaves. In Dublin, more than one group of believers met separately around 1827,
and for some time were unknown to each other. These believers included John
Nelson Darby and Anthony Norris Groves. They were dubbed "brethren" because of
their practice of calling each other "brother" instead of the titles favored by
mainstream denominations. The first meeting in England was held in December
1831 in Plymouth. It was organised primarily by George Wigram, Benjamin Wills
Newton and John Nelson Darby. The movement soon spread throughout the UK. By
1845, the assembly in Plymouth had over 1,000 souls in fellowship. They became
known as "the brethren from Plymouth", and were soon simply called "Plymouth
Brethren." The term "Darbyites" was also used, although it was uncommon and
referred mainly to the "Exclusive" branch. Many within the movement refuse to
accept any name other than "Christian." By 1848, divergence of practice and
belief led to the development of two separate branches. The rift was caused
primarily by a difference of opinions between John Nelson Darby and Benjamin
Wills Newton in regards to eschatology. Despite more divisions, assemblies are
still often generalized into two main categories: "Open Brethren" and
"Exclusive Brethren". 20th century groups. Charismatic Movement. British New
Church Movement. During the Charismatic Movement of the 1960s and 1970s, which
focused on the transformation of the individual, some leaders formed what has
become known as the Charismatic Restorationist Movement. These leaders, of whom
Arthur Wallis, David Lillie and Cecil Cousen were at the forefront, focused on
the nature of the church and shared a distinctive view that authentic church
order was being restored to the whole church. This authentic church order
centred on what is referred to as the "fivefold ministries", as listed in
Ephesians 4:11: Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Teachers and Pastors. Although
the Charismatic Movement brought the Pentecostal gifts to the denominational
churches, these restorationists considered denominationalism unbiblical, and
shared a conviction that God would cause the church to be directly organized
and empowered by the holy spirit. The movement has thousands of adherents
worldwide, and notable church networks include Newfrontiers led by Terry Virgo,
Salt and Light Ministries International led by Barney Coombs and (arguably)
Ichthus Christian Fellowship led by Faith and Roger Forster. Shepherding
Movement. The British leaders of charismatic restorationism mutually recognised
a parallel movement in the United States, centered on the Fort Lauderdale Five;
Derek Prince, Don Basham, Bob Mumford, Charles Simpson and Ern Baxter. This
movement became known as the Shepherding Movement and was the subject of
significant controversy in the mid-1970s. The movement left a significant
legacy through its influence on contemporary ministries International Churches
of Christ, Maranatha Campus Ministries and Great Commission International.
Apostolic-Prophetic Movement. More recently another form of charismatic
restorationism with a similar recognition of the apostolic office has emerged
in the form of the Apostolic-Prophetic Movement, centered on the Kansas City
Prophets. Leading proponents of the movement include C. Peter Wagner, Rick
Joyner, Mike Bickle and Lou Engle. Church of God. Most Churches of God are
Sabbatarian observers of primitive, apostolic Christianity, as are some Noahide
Churches of the Nazarene. The "Church of God (Restoration)" is a Christian
denomination that was founded in the 1980s by Daniel (Danny) Layne. In a
booklet written by Mr. Layne in the early 1980s, he claimed to be an ex-heroin
addict who spent years dealing drugs and living a life of crime and sin on the
streets of San Francisco. Layne was originally raised in the Church of God
(Anderson), where his father was a minister. Layne began preaching in the
Church of God (Guthrie, OK) after his conversion. One tenet of this group is
that they are ordained by both prophecy and divine command to restore the
church of God as it was in the Book of Acts. Most of Daniel Layne's beliefs
concerning the book of Revelation originated from some ministers who had left
the Church of God (Anderson) reformation movement thirty or so years earlier.
This teaching is upheld by the official eschatology, which is a form of church
historicism. This Church of God (Restoration) teaches that the 7th Trumpet in
the book of the Revelation began to sound around the year 1980 when Daniel
Layne was saved, alleging that there was a general discontent among many of its
current adherents that were in various Churches of God at that time. A
variation of this "7th Seal message" had been taught in other Churches of God
for approximately 50 years prior to this point. Iglesia ni Cristo. "Iglesia ni
Cristo" began in the Philippines and was incorporated by Felix Y. Manalo on
July 27, 1914. The church professes to be the reestablishment of the original
church founded by Jesus Christ and teaches that the original church was
apostatized. It does not teach the doctrine of the Trinity or the divinity of
Jesus. "Iglesia ni Cristo" does not subscribe to the term "Restoration" or
claim to be a part of the "Restoration Movement". Members Church of God
International. The Members of the Church of God International began in the
Philippines and was incorporated by Bro. Eli Soriano on March 30, 1977. The
church professes to be the continuation of the church founded by Jesus Christ
in Jerusalem. They reject the doctrine of the Trinity and various "added"
doctrines. Local churches. The local churches are a Christian movement
influenced by the teachings of Watchman Nee and Witness Lee and associated with
the Living Stream Ministry publishing house. Its members see themselves as
separate from other Christian groups, denominations, and movements, part of
what they sometimes call "the Lord's recovery". One of the defining features of
the local churches is their adherence to the principle that all Christians in a
city or locality are automatically members of the one church in that locality.
Another defining feature is the lack of an official organization or official
name for the movement. The local churches believe that to take a name would be
disrespectful and insulting to the name of Jesus. To distinguish themselves,
each local church refers to itself only as "the church in ". Jesuism. Jesuism
is the personal philosophy encompassing the teachings of Jesus of Nazareth and
commitment or adherence to those teachings. Jesuism is distinct from and
sometimes opposed to mainstream Christianity, the organized religion based on
the Christian Bible. In particular, Jesusism is distinguished from the writings
attributed to Paul of Tarsus and from modern Church doctrine. Jesusism is not
necessarily critical of the Christian Bible or Church doctrine, but rather it
does not affirm their authority over the teachings of Jesus. As a philosophy,
Jesusism is characterized as naturalistic and rationalist, rejecting the
conflict between faith and science.
