Resurrection Resurrection (anglicized from Latin "resurrectio") is the concept
of a living being coming back to life after death. It is largely a religious
concept, where it is used in two distinct respects —a belief in the
resurrection of individual souls that is current and ongoing (Christian
idealism, realized eschatology), or else a belief in a singular "Resurrection
of the Dead" event at the end of the world. Most eschatologies believe in a
universal resurrection, wherein all people from all history are resurrected.
The Resurrection of the Dead is a standard eschatological belief in the
Abrahamic religions. In a number of ancient religions, a life-death-rebirth
deity is a deity which dies and resurrects. The death and resurrection of Jesus
is a central focus of Christianity. The soul is believed by some to be the
divine and immortal part of the human being, and some believe it is the actual
vehicle by which people are resurrected. However, theological debate ensues
with regard to what kind of resurrection is factual —either a "spiritual"
resurrection with a spirit body (i.e. Heaven), or a material resurrection with
a restored human body. While most Christians believe Jesus' resurrection was in
a material body, a very small minority believe it was spiritual. There are
documented rare cases of the return to life of the clinically dead which are
classified scientifically as examples of the Lazarus syndrome, a term
originating from the Biblical story of the Resurrection of Lazarus. Ancient
religions in the Near East. The concept of resurrection is found in the
writings of some ancient non-Abrahamic religions in the Middle East. A few
extant Egyptian and Canaanite writings allude to dying and rising gods such as
Osiris and Baal. Sir James Frazer in his book "The Golden Bough" relates to
these dying and rising gods, but many of his examples, according to various
scholars, distort the sources. Taking a more positive position, Mettinger
argues in his recent book that the category of rise and return to life is
significant for the following deities: Ugaritic Baal, Melqart, Adonis, Eshmun,
Osiris and Dumuzi. Ancient Greek religion. In ancient Greek religion, a number
of men and women were made physically immortal as they were resurrected from
the dead. Asclepius was killed by Zeus, only to be resurrected and transformed
into a major deity. Achilles, after being killed, was snatched from his funeral
pyre by his divine mother Thetis and resurrected, brought to an immortal
existence in either Leuce, Elysian plains or the Islands of the Blessed.
Memnon, who was killed by Achilles, seems to have a received a similar fate.
Alcmene, Castor, Heracles, and Melicertes, were also among the figures
sometimes considered to have been resurrected to physical immortality.
According to Herodotus's Histories, the seventh century BC sage Aristeas of
Proconnesus was first found dead, after which his body disappeared from a
locked room. Later he found not only to have been resurrected but to have
gained immortality. Many other figures, like a great part of those who fought
in the Trojan and Theban wars, Menelaus, and the historical pugilist Cleomedes
of Astupalaea, were also believed to have been made physically immortal, but
without having died in the first place. Indeed, in Greek religion, immortality
originally always included an eternal union of body and soul. The philosophical
idea of an immortal soul was a later invention, which, although influential,
never had a breakthrough in the Greek world. As may be witnessed even into the
Christian era, not least by the complaints of various philosophers over popular
beliefs, traditional Greek believers maintained the conviction that certain
individuals were resurrected from the dead and made physically immortal and
that for the rest of us, we could only look forward to an existence as
disembodied and dead souls. This traditional religious belief in physical
immortality was generally denied by the Greek philosophers. Writing his "Lives
of Illustrious Men" (Parallel Lives) in the first century CE, the Middle
Platonic philosopher Plutarch's chapter on Romulus gave an account of his
mysterious disappearance and subsequent deification, comparing it to
traditional Greek beliefs such as the resurrection and physical immortalization
of Alcmene and Aristeas the Proconnesian, "for they say Aristeas died in a
fuller's work-shop, and his friends coming to look for him, found his body
vanished; and that some presently after, coming from abroad, said they met him
traveling towards Croton." Plutarch openly scorned such beliefs held in
traditional ancient Greek religion, writing, "many such improbabilities do your
fabulous writers relate, deifying creatures naturally mortal." Judaism.
According to Herbert C. Brichtothe, writing in Reform Judaism's Hebrew Union
College Annual, the family tomb is the central concept in understanding
biblical views of the afterlife. Brichtothe states that it is "not mere
sentimental respect for the physical remains that is...the motivation for the
practice, but rather an assumed connection between proper sepulture and the
condition of happiness of the deceased in the afterlife" According to
Brichtothe, the early Israelites apparently believed that the graves of family,
or tribe, united into one, and that this unified collectivity is to what the
Biblical Hebrew term Sheol refers. Although not well defined in the Tanakh,
Sheol in this view was a subterranean underworld where the souls of the dead
went after the body died. The Babylonians had a similar underworld called
Aralu, and the Greeks had one known as Hades. For biblical references to Sheol
see Genesis 42:38, Isaiah 14:11, Psalm 141:7, Daniel 12:2, Proverbs 7:27 and
Job 10:21,22, and 17:16, among others. According to Brichtothe, other Biblical
names for Sheol were: Abaddon (ruin), found in Psalm 88:11, Job 28:22 and
Proverbs 15:11; Bor (the pit), found in Isaiah 14:15, 24:22, Ezekiel 26:20; and
Shakhat (corruption), found in Isaiah 38:17, Ezekiel 28:8. Christianity. In
Christianity, resurrection most critically concerns the Resurrection of Jesus
Christ, but also includes the resurrection of Judgment Day known as the
Resurrection of the Dead by those Christians who subscribe to the Nicene Creed
(which is the majority or Mainstream Christianity), as well as the resurrection
miracles done by Jesus and the prophets of the Old Testament. Resurrection of
Jesus. Nearly all Christians - Catholic, Orthodox and Protestant and adherents
of the Assyrian Church of the East - accept the resurrection of Jesus as a real
historical event, and condemn the denial of the physical reality of the
resurrection as a heresy. Docetism, the heresy that denied the death and
subsequent resurrection of Jesus by emphasizing that Jesus was only God and not
man, was condemned by Proto-orthodox Christianity in the late 1st to early 2nd
century. Resurrection miracles. During the Ministry of Jesus on earth, before
his crucifixion, he commissioned his Twelve Apostles to, among other things,
raise the dead. In the New Testament, Jesus is said to have raised several
persons from death. These resurrections included the daughter of Jairus shortly
after death, a young man in the midst of his own funeral procession, and
Lazarus, who had been buried for four days. According to the Gospel of Matthew,
after Jesus's resurrection, many of the dead saints came out of their tombs and
entered Jerusalem, where they appeared to many. Similar resurrections are
credited to Christian apostles and saints. Peter allegedly raised a woman named
Dorcas (called Tabitha), and Paul revived a man named Eutychus who had fallen
asleep and fell from a window to his death, according to the book of Acts.
Proceeding the apostolic era, many saints were said to resurrect the dead, as
recorded in Orthodox Christian hagiographies. Resurrection of the Dead.
Christianity started as a religious movement within 1st-century Judaism (late
Second Temple Judaism), and it retains the Pharisaic belief in the afterlife
and Resurrection of the Dead. Whereas this belief was only one of many beliefs
held about the World to Come in Second Temple Judaism, and was notably rejected
by the Sadducees, this belief became dominant within Early Christianity and
soon included an insistence on the resurrection of the flesh, against gnostic
teachings that flesh was evil. Most modern Christian churches continue to
uphold the belief that there will be a final Resurrection of the Dead and World
to Come, perhaps as prophesied by the Apostle Paul when he said: "...he hath
appointed a day, in the which he will judge the world..." (Acts 17:31 KJV) and
"...there shall be a resurrection of the dead, both of the just and unjust."
(Acts 24:15 KJV). Most also teach that it is only as a result of the atoning
work of Christ, by grace through faith, that people are spared eternal
punishment as divine judgment for their sins. Belief in the Resurrection of the
Dead, and Jesus Christ's role as judge, is codified in the Apostles' Creed,
which is the fundamental creed of Christian baptismal faith. The Book of
Revelation also makes many references about the Day of Judgment when the dead
will be raised up. Platonic philosophy. In Platonic philosophy and other Greek
philosophical thought, at death the soul was said to leave the inferior body
behind. The idea that Jesus was resurrected spiritually rather than physically
even gained popularity among some Christian teachers, whom the author of 1 John
declared to be antichrists. Similar beliefs appeared in the early church as
Gnosticism. However, in Luke 24:39, the resurrected Jesus expressly states
"behold my hands and my feet, that it is I myself. Handle me and see, for a
spirit does not have flesh and bones as you see I have." Islam. Belief in the
"Day of Resurrection", "Yawm al-Qiyāmah" () is also crucial for Muslims. They
believe the time of "Qiyāmah" is preordained by God but unknown to man. The
trials and tribulations preceding and during the "Qiyāmah" are described in
the Qur'an and the hadith, and also in the commentaries of scholars. The Qur'an
emphasizes bodily resurrection, a break from the pre-Islamic Arabian
understanding of death. Zen Buddhism. There are stories in Buddhism where the
power of resurrection was allegedly demonstrated in Chan or Zen tradition. One
is the legend of Bodhidharma, the Indian master who brought the Ekayana school
of India to China that subsequently became Chan Buddhism. The other is the
passing of Chinese Chan master Puhua (J., Fuke) and is recounted in the Record
of Linji (J., Rinzai). Puhua was known for his unusual behavior and teaching
style so it is no wonder that he is associated with an event that breaks the
usual prohibition on displaying such powers. Here is the account from Irmgard
Schloegl's "The Zen Teaching of Rinzai". Disappearances (as distinct from
resurrection). As knowledge of different religions has grown, so have claims of
bodily disappearance of some religious and mythological figures. In ancient
Greek religion, this was a way the gods made some physically immortal,
including such figures as Cleitus, Ganymede, Menelaus, and Tithonus. In his
chapter on Romulus from Parallel Lives, Plutarch criticises the continuous
belief in such disappearances, referring to the allegedly miraculous
disappearance of the historical figures Romulus, Cleomedes of Astypalaea, and
Croesus. In ancient times pagan similarities were explained by the early
Christian writers, such as Justin Martyr, as the work of demons and Satan, with
the intention of leading Christians astray. In somewhat recent years it has
been learned that Gesar, the Savior of Tibet, at the end, chants on a mountain
top and his clothes fall empty to the ground. The body of the first Guru of the
Sikhs, Guru Nanak Dev, is said to have disappeared and flowers were left in
place of his dead body. There is a traditional spot in Jerusalem where the
Prophet Muhammad mounted the steed Al-Buraq and ascended to Heaven in the
night. Lord Raglan's Hero Pattern lists many religious figures whose bodies
disappear, or have more than one sepulchre. B. Traven, author of "The Treasure
of the Sierra Madre", wrote that the Inca Virococha, walked away on the top of
the sea and vanished. It has been thought that teachings regarding the purity
and incorruptibility of the hero's human body are linked to this phenomenon.
Perhaps, this is also to deter the practice of disturbing and collecting the
hero's remains. They are safely protected if they have disappeared. The first
such case mentioned in the Bible is that of Enoch (son of Jared, great-
grandfather of Noah, and father of Methuselah). Enoch is said to have lived a
life where he "walked with God", after which "he was not, for God took him".
(Genesis 5:1-18) In Deuteronomy (34:6) Moses is secretly buried. Elijah
vanishes in a whirlwind 2 Kings (2:11). After hundreds of years these two
earlier Biblical heroes suddenly reappear, and are seen walking with Jesus,
then again vanish. Mark (9:2-8), Matthew (17:1-8) and Luke (9:28-33). The last
time he is seen, Luke (24:51) alone tells of Jesus leaving his disciples by
ascending into the sky. Zombies. A zombie (Haitian Creole: "zonbi"; North
Mbundu: "nzumbe") can be either a fictional undead monster or a person in an
entranced state believed to be controlled by a "bokor" or wizard. These latter
are the original zombies, occurring in the West African Vodun religion and its
American offshoots Haitian Vodou and New Orleans Voodoo. Zombies became a
popular device in modern horror fiction, largely because of the success of
George A. Romero's 1968 film "Night of the Living Dead" and they have appeared
as plot devices in various books, films and in television shows. Zombie fiction
is now a sizeable sub-genre of horror, usually describing a breakdown of
civilization occurring when most of the population become flesh-eating zombies
– a zombie apocalypse. The monsters are usually hungry for human flesh, often
specifically brains. Sometimes they are victims of a fictional pandemic illness
causing the dead to reanimate or the living to behave this way, but often no
cause is given in the story.
