Resurrection of Jesus The resurrection of Jesus is the Christian belief that
Jesus Christ returned to life on the Sunday following the Friday on which he
was executed by crucifixion. It is a central tenet of Christian faith and
theology and part of the Nicene Creed: "On the third day he rose again in
accordance with the Scriptures". In the New Testament, after the Romans crucify
Jesus, he is anointed and buried in a new tomb by Joseph of Arimathea but God
raises him from the dead and he appears to many people over a span of forty
days before his ascension to Heaven, to sit at the Right Hand of God.
Christians celebrate the resurrection of Jesus on Easter Sunday, the third day
after Good Friday, the day of his crucifixion. Easter's date corresponds
roughly with Passover, the Jewish observance associated with the Exodus, that
is fixed for the night of the Full moon near the time of the equinox.
Christians view the resurrection of Jesus as part of the plan of salvation and
redemption by atonement for man's sin. There are other accounts of the death of
Jesus, notably in the Jewish and Islamic traditions. Not all of these accounts
include the resurrection. Skeptical scholars have questioned the historicity of
the resurrection story for centuries; for example, "nineteenth- and early-
twentieth-century biblical scholarship dismissed resurrection narratives as
late, legendary accounts." A number of contemporary scholars express doubts
about the historicity of the resurrection accounts and have debated their
origin, and some other scholars consider the biblical accounts of Jesus'
resurrection as derived from the experiences of Jesus' followers and of Apostle
Paul. New Testament Events. In the New Testament there are three groups of
events that surround the death and resurrection of Jesus: "Crucifixion and
burial": wherein Jesus is placed in a new tomb following his death, "discovery
of the empty tomb" and the "resurrection appearances". The New Testament does
not include an account of the "moment of resurrection" and in the Eastern
Church icons do not depict that moment, but show the Myrrhbearers, and depict
scenes of salvation. Burial. All four Gospels state that, on the evening of the
crucifixion, Joseph of Arimathea asked Pilate for the body of Jesus, and that,
after Pilate granted his request, he wrapped Jesus' body in a linen cloth and
laid it in a tomb. This was in accordance with Mosaic Law, which stated that a
person hanged on a tree must not be allowed to remain there at night, but
should be buried before sundown. In Matthew, Joseph was identified as "also a
disciple of Jesus;" in Mark he was identified as "a respected member of the
council (Sanhedrin) who was also himself looking for the Kingdom of God;" in
Luke he was identified as "a member of the council, good and righteous, who did
not consent to their purpose or deed, and who was looking for the Kingdom of
God'" and in John he was identified as "a disciple of Jesus." The Gospel of
Mark states that when Joseph asked for Jesus' body, Pilate was shocked that
Jesus was already dead, and he summoned a centurion to confirm this before
dispatching the body to Joseph. John recorded that Joseph was assisted in the
burial process by Nicodemus, who brought a mixture of myrrh and aloes and
included these spices in the burial cloth as per Jewish customs. Death state of
Christ during the 3 days. The apostle Peter delivers a sermon fifty days after
the resurrection in which he states: "Brothers, I can tell you confidently that
the patriarch David died and was buried, and his tomb is here to this day. But
he was a prophet and knew that God had promised him on oath that he would place
one of his descendants on his throne. Seeing what was ahead, "he spoke of the
resurrection of the Christ, that he was not abandoned to the grave, nor did his
body see decay. God has raised this Jesus to life, and we are all witnesses of
the fact."" As written in the Book of Revelation: "When I saw him, I fell at
his feet as though dead. Then he placed his right hand on me and said: 'Do not
be afraid. I am the First and the Last. I am the Living One; I was dead (Greek
"egonomen nekros"), and behold I am alive for ever and ever! And I hold the
keys of death and Hades." 1 Peter also states: "It is better, if it is God's
will, to suffer for doing good than for doing evil. "For Christ died for sins
once for all", the righteous for the unrighteous, to bring you to God. "He was
put to death in the body but made alive by the Spirit", through whom also he
went and preached to the spirits in prison." (i.e., He descended into Hades
after his death), which describes Jesus as preaching to the "spirits in prison
who disobeyed long ago". This passage, along with the phrase in 1 Peter that
God did "not leave his soul in Hades," is the theological basis behind the
statement "He descended into Hades" in the Apostles' Creed. The death state of
Christ was considered by theologians such as Thomas Aquinas and related in
traditions such as the Harrowing of Hell. Tomb discovery. Variants have to do
with the precise time the women visited the tomb, the number and identity of
the women; the purpose of their visit; the appearance of the messenger
(s)—angelic or human; their message to the women; and the response of the
women. All four Gospels report that women were the ones to find the tomb of
Jesus empty, although the number varies from one (Mary Magdalene) to an
unspecified number. According to Mark and Luke, the "announcement" of Jesus'
resurrection was first made to women. According to Matthew and John, Jesus
actually "appeared" first to women (in Mark 16:9 and John 20:14 to Mary
Magdalene alone). "Whereas others found woman not qualified or authorized to
teach, the four Gospels have it that the risen Christ commissioned women to
proclaim to men, including Peter and the other apostles, the resurrection,
foundation of Christianity." In the Gospels, especially the synoptics, women
play a central role as eyewitness at Jesus' death, entombment, and in the
discovery of the empty tomb. All three synoptics repeatedly make women the
subject of verbs of seeing, clearly presenting them as eyewitnesses.
Resurrection appearances of Jesus. After the discovery of the empty tomb, the
Gospels indicate that Jesus made a series of appearances to the disciples.
These include the appearance to the disciples in the upper room, where Thomas
did not believe until he was invited to put his finger into the holes in Jesus'
hands and side; the "Road to Emmaus appearance"; and beside the Sea of Galilee
to encourage Peter to serve his followers. His final appearance is reported as
being forty days after the resurrection when he ascended into heaven where he
remains with God the Father and God the Holy Spirit until the Second Coming of
Christ. Soon after, on the road to Damascus, Paul of Tarsus converted to
Christianity based on a vision of Jesus and later, became one of Christianity's
foremost missionaries and theologians. Christian tradition. The resurrection of
Jesus has long been central to Christian faith and appears within diverse
elements of the Christian tradition, from feasts to artistic depictions to
religious relics. In Christian teachings, the sacraments derive their saving
power from the passion and resurrection of Christ, upon which the salvation of
the world entirely depends. An example of the interweaving of the teachings on
the resurrection with Christian relics is the application of the concept of
"miraculous image formation" at the moment of resurrection to the Shroud of
Turin. Christian authors have stated the belief that the body around whom the
shroud was wrapped was not merely human, but divine, and that the image on the
shroud was miraculously produced at the moment of resurrection. Quoting Pope
Paul VI's statement that the shroud is "the wonderful document of His Passion,
Death and Resurrection, written for us in letters of blood" author Antonio
Cassanelli argues that the shroud is a deliberate divine record of the five
stages of the Passion of Christ, created at the moment of resurrection. Easter.
Easter, the preeminent feast that celebrates the resurrection of Jesus, is
clearly the earliest Christian festival. Since the earliest Christian times, it
has focused on the redemptive act of God in the death and resurrection of
Christ. Easter is linked to the Passover and Exodus from Egypt recorded in the
Old Testament through the Last Supper and crucifixion that preceded the
resurrection. According to the New Testament, Jesus gave the Passover meal a
new meaning, as he prepared himself and his disciples for his death in the
upper room during the Last Supper. He identified the loaf of bread and cup of
wine as symbolizing his body soon to be sacrificed and his blood soon to be
shed. states, "Get rid of the old yeast that you may be a new batch without
yeast—as you really are. For Christ, our Passover lamb, has been sacrificed";
this refers to the Passover requirement to have no yeast in the house and to
the allegory of Jesus as the Paschal lamb. Resurrection and Redemption. In the
teachings of the apostolic Church, the resurrection was seen as heralding a new
era. Forming a theology of the resurrection fell to Apostle Paul. It was not
enough for Paul to simply repeat elementary teachings, but as states, "go
beyond the initial teachings about Christ and advance to maturity". Fundamental
to Pauline theology is the connection between Christ's Resurrection and
redemption. Paul explained the importance of the resurrection of Jesus as the
cause and basis of the hope of Christians to share a similar experience in .
But Christ really has been raised from the dead. He is the first of all those
who will rise. Death came because of what a man did. Rising from the dead also
comes because of what a man did. Because of Adam, all people die. So because of
Christ, all will be made alive. The Apostolic Fathers, discussed the death and
resurrection of Jesus, including Ignatius (50−115), Polycarp (69−155), and
Justin Martyr (100−165). Following the conversion of Constantine and the
liberating Edict of Milan in 313, the ecumenical councils of the 4th, 5th and
6th centuries, that focused on Christology helped shape the Christian
understanding of the redemptive nature of Resurrection, and influenced both the
development of its iconography, and its use within Liturgy. Belief in bodily
resurrection was a constant note of the Christian church in antiquity. And
nowhere was it argued for more strongly than in North Africa. Saint Augustine
accepted it at the time of his conversion in 386. Augustine defended
Resurrection, and argued that given that Christ has risen, there is
Resurrection of the Dead. Moreover, he argued that the death and resurrection
of Jesus was for the salvation of man, stating: "to achieve each resurrection
of ours, the savior paid with his single life, and he pre-enacted and presented
his one and only one by way of sacrament and by way of model. The 5th century
theology of Theodore of Mopsuestia provides an insight into the development of
the Christian understanding of the redemptive nature of Resurrection. The
crucial role of the sacraments in the mediation of salvation was well accepted
at the time. In Theodore's representation of the Eucharist, the sacrificial and
salvific elements are combined in the "One who saved us and delivered us by the
sacrifice of Himself". Theodore's interpretation of the Eucharistic rite is
directed towards the triumph over the power of death brought about by the
Resurrection. The emphasis on the salvific nature of the Resurrection continued
in Christian theology in the next centuries, e.g., in the 8th century Saint
John of Damascus wrote that: "...When he had freed those who were bound from
the beginning of time, Christ returned again from among the dead, having opened
for us the way to resurrection" and Christian iconography of the ensuing years
represented that concept. Depictions of the Resurrection. In the Catacombs of
Rome, artists just hinted at the Resurrection by using images from the Old
Testament such as the fiery furnace and Daniel in the Lion's den. Depictions
prior to the 7th century generally used secondary events such as the
Myrrhbearers at the tomb of Jesus to convey the concept of the Resurrection. An
early symbol of the resurrection was the wreathed Chi Rho, whose origin traces
to the victory of emperor Constantine I at the Battle of the Milvian Bridge in
312, which he attributed to the use of a cross on the shields of his soldiers.
Constantine used the Chi Rho on his standard and his coins showed a labarum
with the Chi Rho killing a serpent. The use of a wreath around the Chi Rho
symbolizes the victory of the Resurrection over death, and is an early visual
representations of the connection between the Crucifixion of Jesus and his
triumphal resurrection, as seen in the 4th century sarcophagus of Domitilla in
Rome. Here, in the wreathed Chi Rho the death and resurrection of Christ are
shown as inseparable, and the Resurrection is not merely a happy ending tucked
at the end of the life of Christ on earth. Given the use of similar symbols on
the Roman standard, this depiction also conveyed another victory, namely that
of the Christian faith: the Roman soldiers who had once arrested Jesus and
marched him to Calvary now walked under the banner of a resurrected Christ. The
cosmic significance of the Resurrection in Western theology goes back to Saint
Ambrose who in the 4th century said that "In Christ the world has risen, heaven
has risen, the earth has risen". However, this theme was only developed later
in Western theology and art. It was, a different matter in the East where the
Resurrection was linked to redemption, and the renewal and rebirth of the whole
world from a much earlier period. In art this was symbolized by combining the
depictions of the Resurrection with the Harrowing of Hell in icons and
paintings. A good example is from the Chora Church in Istanbul, where John the
Baptist, Solomon and other figures are also present, depicting that Christ was
not alone in the resurrection. The depiction sequence at the 10th century
Hosios Loukas shows Christ as he pulls Adam, followed by Eve from his tomb,
signifying the salvation of humanity after the resurrection. Historicity and
origin of the narrative. The earliest Christians proclaimed Jesus as the risen
Christ. The first Christians may be defined as those followers of Jesus who,
after his crucifixion, proclaimed him as the risen lord. The earliest Christian
scriptures place Jesus' resurrection at the center of religious faith. The
preaching and letters of Apostle Peter in the Acts of the Apostles and the
letters of Paul declared that Jesus died, was raised by God and the apostles
are witnesses to this resurrection. Géza Vermes who considers the Resurrection
one of the fundamental and intriguing concepts of the Christian faith has
presented eight possible theories to explain the Resurrection of Jesus. These
theories fall between two extremes, ranging from a total denial of the
Resurrection to absolute belief in it. The six variants include the theft of
the body, recovery from a coma and a spiritual non-bodily resurrection. Vermes
dismisses the "two extremes", stating that they "are not susceptible to
rational judgment". Various arguments against the historicity of the
Resurrection have been presented, e.g. the number of other historical figures
and gods with similar death and resurrection accounts. According to Peter
Kirby, "many scholars doubt the historicity of the empty tomb." However
according to a survey done by Gary Habermas; 75% of both conservative and non-
conservative New Testament scholars accept arguments in favor of the empty
tomb. Robert M. Price claims that if the resurrection could, in fact, be proven
through science or historical evidence, the event would lose its miraculous
qualities. Helmut Koester writes that the stories of the resurrection were
originally epiphanies and that the more detailed accounts of the resurrection
are secondary and not based on historical records. According to R. A. Burridge,
the majority consensus among biblical scholars is that the genre of the Gospels
is a kind of ancient biography and not myth. E.P. Sanders argues that a plot to
foster belief in the Resurrection would probably have resulted in a more
consistent story, and that some of those who were involved in the events gave
their lives for their belief. James D.G. Dunn has stated that, while the
apostle Paul's resurrection experience was "visionary in character" and "non-
physical, non-material", the accounts in the Gospels are very different.
Biblical accounts. Background. In 1st century BC, debates existed among Jewish
religious groups. The Pharisees believed in Resurrection of the Dead, and the
Sadducees did not. The Sadducees did not believe in an afterlife, but the
Pharisees believed in a literal resurrection of the body. The Sadducees,
politically powerful religious leaders, rejected the afterlife, angels, and
demons as well as the Pharisees oral law. The Pharisees, whose views became
Rabbinic Judaism, eventually won (or at least survived) this debate. The
promise of a future resurrection appears in the Torah as well as in certain
Jewish works, such as the Life of Adam and Eve, "c" 100 BC, and the Pharisaic
book 2 Maccabees, "c" 124 BC. In the Torah, the Jewish scriptures and the Old
Testament of the Bible, it was the promise of God to provide an eternal
liberating king in the line of King David of Bethlehem. Apostle Peter used this
reasoning to argue for the significance of the resurrection. The Apostle Paul
also connects Jesus' death and resurrection with a fulfilment of scripture.
Paul's epistles. The earliest written records of the death and resurrection of
Jesus are the letters of Paul, which were written around two decades after the
death of Jesus, and show that within this time frame Christians believed that
it had happened. Some scholars suppose that these contain early Christian
creeds and creedal hymns, which were included in several of the New Testament
texts and that some of these creeds date to within a few years of Jesus' death
and were developed within the Christian community in Jerusalem. Though embedded
within the texts of the New Testament, these creeds are a distinct source for
early Christianity. These appearances include those to prominent members of
Jesus' ministry and the later Jerusalem church, including James the brother of
Jesus and the apostles, naming the Apostle Peter (Cephas). The creed also makes
reference to appearances to unidentified individuals. According to the Acts of
the Apostles and Paul's Letter to the Galatians, he had contact with at least
two of the named witnesses of the creed, James and Peter. Hans Von Campenhausen
and A. M. Hunter have separately stated that the creed text passes high
standards of historicity and reliability of origin. Gospel narratives. Mark.
Just after sunrise on the day after the Sabbath three women, Mary Magdalene,
Mary the mother of James, and Salome, come to anoint Jesus' body, wondering how
they can roll the rock away from the tomb; but they find the rock already
rolled aside and a young man in white inside; he tells them that Jesus is
risen, and that they should tell Peter and the disciples that he will meet them
in Galilee, "just as he told you." The women run away and tell no-one. Matthew.
Just after sunrise on the day after the Sabbath two women, Mary Magdalene and
"the other Mary," came to look at the tomb. Accompanied by an earthquake, an
angel comes down from Heaven and rolls the rock aside from the tomb. The angel
tells them not to be afraid, but to tell the disciples that Jesus is risen and
will meet them in Galilee. The women are joyful and set out to tell the
disciples the good news, but Jesus appears and tells them not to be afraid, and
tells them that he is risen and that they should tell the disciples that they
will see him in Galilee. The disciples go to Galilee, where they see Jesus. The
soldiers guarding the tomb are terrified by the angel, and inform the chief
priests; the priests and elders bribe them to spread a lie that the disciples
have stolen the body, "this story has been widely circulated among the Jews to
this very day." Luke. Just after sunrise on the day after the Sabbath a number
of women (Mary Magdalene, Joanna, and Mary the mother of James) come to anoint
Jesus' body. They find the stone rolled away and the tomb empty. Suddenly two
men stand beside them. The men tell them Jesus is risen. The women tell the
disciples, but the disciples do not believe them, except for Peter who runs to
the tomb. Peter finds the grave-clothes in the empty tomb and goes away,
wondering. The same day Jesus appears to two of his followers on the road to
Emmaus. They fail to recognise him until he breaks bread and gives thanks, and
he then vanishes. The two go at once to Jerusalem where they find the disciples
exclaiming over Jesus' appearance to Peter. As they tell their story Jesus
appears to them all. They are afraid, but he invites them to touch his body,
eats with them, and explains the prophecies which are fulfilled in him. Acts.
Jesus appeared to the Apostles for forty days, giving many proofs that he was
alive, and instructing them not to leave Jerusalem until they were baptised
with the Holy Spirit. John. Early on the day after the Sabbath, before sunrise,
Mary Magdalene visits the tomb and finds the stone rolled away. She tells Peter
and "the beloved disciple," who run to the tomb and find the grave-clothes,
then go home. Mary sees two angels and then Jesus, whom she does not recognise.
Jesus tells her to tell the disciples that he is ascending to the Father, and
Mary tells the disciples she has seen the Lord. That evening Jesus appears
among them, despite locked doors, and gives them power over sin and forgiveness
of sin. A week later he appears to doubting Thomas, who has not believed, but
when Thomas is instructed to touch the wounds of Jesus he says, "My Lord and my
God!" Jesus replies: "Because you have seen me, you have believed; blessed are
those who have not seen and yet have believed." Theological significance. In
Christian theology, the resurrection of Jesus is a foundation of the Christian
faith. Christians, through faith in the working of God are spiritually
resurrected with Jesus, and are redeemed so that they may walk in a new way of
life. As Paul the Apostle stated: "If Christ was not raised, then all our
preaching is useless, and your trust in God is useless." The death and
resurrection of Jesus are the most important events in Christian Theology. They
form the point in scripture where Jesus gives his ultimate demonstration that
he has power over life and death, thus he has the ability to give people
eternal life. Terry Miethe, a Christian philosopher at Oxford University,
stated, " 'Did Jesus rise from the dead?' is the most important question
regarding the claims of the Christian faith.' " According to the Bible, "God
raised him from the dead," he ascended to heaven, to the "right hand of God",
and will return again to fulfill the rest of Messianic prophecy such as the
Resurrection of the dead, the Last Judgment and establishment of the Kingdom of
God; see also Messianism and Messianic Age. Some modern scholars use the belief
of Jesus' followers in the resurrection as a point of departure for
establishing the continuity of the historical Jesus and the proclamation of the
early church. Carl Jung suggests that the crucifixion-resurrection account was
the forceful spiritual symbol of, literally, God-as-Yahweh becoming God-as-Job.
Apostle Paul wrote that: "If there is no resurrection of the dead, then Christ
has not been raised; if Christ has not been raised, then our preaching is in
vain and your faith is in vain...If Christ has not been raised, your faith is
futile". (I Cor 15:13–14, 17). Many scholars have contended that in
discussion on the resurrection, Apostle Paul refers to a rabbinic style
transmission of an early authoritative tradition that he received and has
passed on to the church at Corinth. For this and other reasons, it is widely
believed that this creed is of pre-Pauline origin. Geza Vermes writes that the
creed is "a tradition he has inherited from his seniors in the faith concerning
the death, burial and resurrection of Jesus". The creed's ultimate origins are
within the Jerusalem apostolic community having been formalised and passed on
within a few years of the resurrection. Paul Barnett writes that this creedal
formula, and others, were variants of the "one basic early tradition that Paul
"received" in Damascus from Ananias in about 34 [CE" after his conversion. (as
in ) Paul's views went against the thoughts of the Greek philosophers to whom a
bodily resurrection meant a new imprisonment in a corporeal body, which was
what they wanted to avoid; given that for them the corporeal and the material
fettered the spirit. At the same time, Paul believed that the newly resurrected
body would be a heavenly body; immortal, glorified, powerful and pneumatic in
contrast to an earthly body, which is mortal, dishonored, weak and psychic.
According to theologian Peter Carnley, the resurrection of Jesus was different
from the Resurrection of Lazarus as: "In the case of Lazarus, the stone was
rolled away so that he could walk out... the raised Christ didn't have to have
the stone rolled away, because he is transformed and can appear anywhere, at
any time." According to international scholar Thorwald Lorenzen, the first
Easter led to a shift in emphasis from faith "in God" to faith "in Christ."
Today, Lorenzen finds "a strange silence about the resurrection in many
pulpits." He writes that among some Christians, ministers and professors, it
seems to have to have become "a cause for embarrassment or the topic of
apologetics." It has been argued that many Christians neglect the resurrection
because of their understandable pre-occupation with the Cross. However, the
belief in Jesus' physical resurrection remains the single doctrine most
accepted by Christians of all denominational backgrounds. Groups such as Jews,
Muslims, Bahá'ís, and other non-Christians, as well as some liberal
Christians, dispute whether Jesus actually rose from the dead. Arguments over
death and resurrection claims occur at many religious debates and interfaith
dialogues. Gnostics. Gnostics did not believe in a literal physical
resurrection. "For the gnostic any resurrection of the dead was excluded from
the outset; the flesh or substance is destined to perish. 'There is no
resurrection of the flesh, but only of the soul', say the so-called Archontics,
a late gnostic group in Palestine." Non-Christian views. Some other religions
include their own descriptions of Jesus which may not include his resurrection.
Judaism. Jesus was Jewish, but Christianity split with Judaism in the 1st
century, and the two faiths have differed in their theology since. According to
the "Toledot Yeshu", the body of Jesus was removed in the same night by a
gardener named Juda, after hearing the disciples planned to steal the body of
Jesus. However, "Toledot Yeshu" is not considered either canonical or normative
within rabbinic literature. Van Voorst states that "Toledot Yeshu" is a
medieval document set without a fixed form which is "most unlikely" to have
reliable information about Jesus. The Blackwell Companion to Jesus states that
the Toledot Yeshu has no historical facts as such, and was perhaps created as a
tool for warding off conversions to Christianity. Islam. Muslims believe that
Jesus son of Mary was a holy prophet with a divine message. The Islamic
perspective is that Jesus was not crucified and will be resurrected to the
world at the end of times. "But Allâh raised him up to Himself. And Allâh is
Ever All-Powerful, All-Wise". The Quran says in Surah An-Nisa [Ch004:Verse157]
"And because of their saying, "We killed Messiah 'Îsâ (Jesus), son of Maryam
(Mary), the Messenger of Allâh," – but they killed him not, nor crucified
him, but it appeared so to them, and those who differ therein are full of
doubts". Further reading. Historical. Pro-Resurrection. "Articles:" "Books:
" Skeptical. "Articles:" "Books:"
