Rhema Rhema (ῥῆμα in Greek) literally means an "utterance" or "thing
said" in Greek. In philosophy, it was used by both Plato and Aristotle to refer
to propositions or sentences. In Christianity, it is used in reference to the
concept of "Rhematos Christou"; Jesus Christ's sayings. Etymology. The Greek
noun "saying, utterance, verb, word" is analyzed as consisting of the root
ἐρ-/ῥε- (er-/rhe-) "say" (cf. "I say"; ἐρῶ "I will say") and the
suffix -μα (-ma), a suffix used to form nouns from verbs. In the New
Testament, this noun is used in such instances as 1 Peter : “τὸ δὲ
ῥῆμα Κυρίου μένει εἰς τὸν αἰῶνα” i.e. “the
Lord's utterance/saying remains forever”, or more commonly, "the word of the
Lord endureth for ever". Greek philosophers. Both Plato (c. 428–347 BC) and
Aristotle (384–322 BC) used the terms "logos", "rhema" and "onoma". In
Plato's usage, a logos (often translatable as a "sentence") is a sequence in
which verbs are mingled with nouns and every logos must have an onoma and
rhema. For Plato, every logos was either true or false and in a logos, names
included rhema "which denotes actions" and onoma a "mark set on those who do
the actions". Rhema and Logos in Christianity. In Christianity, "rhema" is used
in Bible study to signify Jesus Christ's utterance. The Greek word "rhema" is
useful to distinguish between two meanings of "word". While both "rhema" and
"logos" are translated into the English "word", in the original Greek there was
a substantial distinction. "Rhema" is Christ's utterance, while "Logos" refers
to Christ himself. Septuagint usage. The Septuagint translation of the Hebrew
Bible into Greek uses the terms Rhema and Logos as equivalents and uses both
for the Hebrew word Dabar, as the Word of God. Modern usage. Some modern usage
distinguishes Rhema from Logos in Christian Theology, with Rhema at times
called "a word from the Word," referring to the revelation received by the
reader from the Holy Spirit when the Word (Logos) is read. In this usage,
"Logos" refers to Christ. In this modern usage, Logos is the "Word of God"
Jesus Christ, the subject from Genesis to Revelation. Rhema is the revealed
word of God, as an utterance from God to the heart of the reader via the Holy
Spirit, as in John "... the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my name,
will teach you all things and will remind you of everything I have said to
you." "Consequently, faith comes from hearing the message, and the message is
heard through the word of Christ. (rhematos Christou)" and in the Matthew :
"Man does not live on bread alone, but on every word (rhema) that comes from
the mouth of God".
