Righteousness Righteousness (also called rectitude) is an important theological
concept in Christianity, Judaism, Islam, Hinduism (dharma), and Zoroastrianism.
It is an attribute that implies that a person's actions are justified, and can
have the connotation that the person has been "judged" or "reckoned" as leading
a life that is pleasing to God. William Tyndale remodelled the word after an
earlier word "rihtwis", which would have yielded modern English *"rightwise" or
*"rightways". He used it to translate the Hebrew root צדקים ("TzDYQ"),
"tzedek", which appears more than five hundred times in the Hebrew Bible, and
the Greek word ("dikaios"), which appears more than two hundred times in the
New Testament. Hebrew Bible. Righteousness is one of the chief attributes of
God as portrayed in the Hebrew Bible. Its chief meaning concerns ethical
conduct. (For example, Leviticus 19:36; Deuteronomy 25:1; Psalm 1:6; Proverbs
8:20). It is used in a legal sense; while the guilty are judged, the guiltless
are deemed righteous. God's faithfulness to His covenant is also a large part
of His righteousness. (Nehemiah 9:7-8) Righteousness also relates to God's role
as ; God is a "righteous saviour"; (Isaiah 61) and a deliverer. (Isaiah 46:12-
13) The righteous are those who trust that they will be vindicated by the Lord
God. (Psalm 37:12-13). Hebrew definition. The Hebrew word for righteousness is
"tseh'-dek", tzedek, Gesenius's Strong's Concordance:6664—righteous,
integrity, equity, justice, straightness. The root of "tseh'-dek" is "tsaw-dak,
Gesenius's Strong:6663—upright, just, straight, innocent, true, sincere. It
is best understood as the product of upright, moral action in accordance with
some form of divine plan. In the Book of Job the title character is introduced
to us as a person who is "perfect" in righteousness. New Testament. The New
Testament continues the Hebrew Bible's tradition of the ethical () and legal ()
aspects of righteousness. Jesus asserts the importance of righteousness by
saying in Matthew 5:20 "For I tell you that unless your righteousness surpasses
that of the Pharisees and the teachers of the law, you will certainly not enter
the kingdom of heaven." Jesus also re-affirms the Laws of Moses by saying in
Matthew 5:19 "Anyone who breaks one of the least of these commandments and
teaches others to do the same will be called least in the kingdom of heaven,
but whoever practices and teaches these commands will be called great in the
kingdom of heaven." However, Paul of Tarsus speaks of two ways, at least in
theory, to achieve righteousness: through the Torah, the law of Moses; and
through faith in the atonement made possible through the death and resurrection
of Jesus Christ, (). He repeatedly emphasizes that faith is the only effective
way. For example, just a few verses earlier, he says the Jews did not attain
the law of righteousness, because they sought it not by faith, but by works ().
The New Testament speaks of a salvation founded on God's righteousness, as
exemplified throughout the history of salvation narrated in the Old Testament,
(). Paul writes to the Romans that righteousness comes by faith: "...a
righteousness that is by faith from first to last, just as it is written: 'The
righteous will live by faith.'" ()Thus making the new testament church a
"Church Of Righteousness". The apostle James speaks of the relationship between
works of righteousness and faith (), saying that "faith without works is dead."
Righteous acts according to James include works of charity () as well as
avoiding sins against the law of Moses (). Saint Peter describes Lot as a
righteous man in . Islam. Righteousness is mentioned several times in the
Qur'an. The Qur'an says that a life of righteousness is the only way to make it
to Heaven. Type of saint. In the Eastern Orthodox Church, "Righteous" is a type
of saint who is regarded as a holy person under the Old Covenant (Old Testament
Israel) but also sometimes used for married saints of the New Covenant (the
Church). According to Orthodox theology, the Righteous saints of the Old
Covenant were not able to enter into heaven until after the death of Jesus on
the cross (), but had to await salvation in the Bosom of Abraham.
