Robert Bellarmine Saint Robert Bellarmine, S.J. (; 4 October 1542 – 17
September 1621) was an Italian Jesuit and a Cardinal of the Catholic Church. He
was one of the most important figures in the Counter-Reformation. He was
canonized in 1930 and named a Doctor of the Church. Biography. Early years.
Bellarmine was born at Montepulciano, the son of noble, albeit impoverished,
parents, Vincenzo Bellarmino and his wife Cinzia Cervini, who was the sister of
Pope Marcellus II. As a boy he knew Virgil by heart and composed a number of
poems in Italian and Latin. One of his hymns, on Mary Magdalene, is included in
the Breviary. He entered the Roman novitiate in 1560, remaining in Rome three
years. He then went to a Jesuit house at Mondovì, in Piedmont, where he
learned Greek. While at Mondovì, he came to the attention of Francesco Adorno,
the local Jesuit Provincial Superior, who sent him to the University of Padua.
Bellarmine's systematic study of theology began at Padua in 1567 and 1568,
where his teachers were adherents of Thomism. In 1569 he was sent to finish it
at the University of Leuven in Flanders. There he was ordained, and obtained a
reputation both as a professor and a preacher. He was the first Jesuit to teach
at the university, where the subject of his course was the "Summa Theologica"
of Thomas Aquinas. His residence in Leuven lasted seven years. In poor health,
in 1576 he made a journey to Italy. Here he remained, commissioned by Pope
Gregory XIII to lecture on polemical theology in the new Roman College. New
duties after 1589. Until 1589, Bellarmine was occupied as professor of
theology. After the murder in that year of Henry III of France, Pope Sixtus V
sent Enrico Caetani as legate to Paris to negotiate with the Catholic League of
France, and chose Bellarmine to accompany him as theologian. He was in the city
during its siege by Henry of Navarre. The next pope, Clement VIII, set great
store by him. He was made rector of the Roman College in 1592, examiner of
bishops in 1598, and cardinal in 1599. Immediately after his appointment as
Cardinal, Pope Clement made him a Cardinal Inquisitor, in which capacity he
served as one of the judges at the trial of Giordano Bruno, and concurred in
the decision which condemned Bruno to be burned at the stake as a heretic. In
1602 he was made archbishop of Capua. He had written against pluralism and non-
residence of bishops within their dioceses. As bishop he put into effect the
reforming decrees of the Council of Trent. He received some votes in the 1605
conclaves which elected Pope Leo XI, Pope Paul V, and in 1621 when Pope Gregory
XV was elected, but only in the second conclave of 1605 was he "papabile". The
Galileo case. In 1616, on the orders of Paul V, Bellarmine summoned Galileo,
notified him of a forthcoming decree of the Congregation of the Index
condemning the Copernican doctrine of the mobility of the Earth and the
immobility of the Sun, and ordered him to abandon it. Galileo agreed. When
Galileo later complained of rumors to the effect that he had been forced to
abjure and do penance, Bellarmine wrote out a certificate denying the rumors,
stating that Galileo had merely been notified of the decree and informed that,
as a consequence of it, the Copernican doctrine could not be "defended or
held". Cardinal Bellarmine was himself ambiguous about heliocentrism,
personally noting that further research had to be done to confirm or condemn
it. (In 1633, Galileo would again be called before the Inquisition in this
matter.) Last years. In his old age he was bishop of Montepulciano for four
years, after which he retired to the Jesuit college of St. Andrew in Rome,
where he died on 17 September 1621, aged 78. Works. Bellarmine's books bear the
stamp of their period; the effort for literary elegance (so-called
""maraviglia"") had given place to a desire to pile up as much material as
possible, to embrace the whole field of human knowledge, and incorporate it
into theology. His controversial works provoked many replies, and were studied
for some decades after his death. At Leuven he made extensive studies in the
Church Fathers and scholastic theologians, which gave him the material for his
book "De scriptoribus ecclesiasticis" (Rome, 1613). It was later revised and
enlarged by Sirmond, Labbeus, and Casimir Oudin. Bellarmine wrote the preface
to the new Sixto-Clementine Vulgate. Dogmatics. From his research grew his
"Disputationes de controversiis christianae fidei" (also called
"Disputationes"), first published at Ingolstadt in 1581–1593. This major work
was the earliest attempt to systematize the various religious controversies of
the time. Bellarmine devoted eleven years to it while at the Roman College. The
first volume of the "Disputationes" treats of the Word of God, of Christ, and
of the Pope; the second of the authority of ecumenical councils, and of the
Church, whether militant, expectant, or triumphant; the third of the
sacraments; and the fourth of Divine grace, free will, justification, and good
works. Venetian Interdict. Under Pope Paul V (reigned 1605–1621), a major
conflict arose between Venice and the Papacy. Paolo Sarpi, as spokesman for the
Republic of Venice, protested against the papal interdict, and reasserted the
principles of the Council of Constance and of the Council of Basel, denying the
pope's authority in secular matters. Bellarmine wrote three rejoinders to the
Venetian theologians, and may have warned Sarpi of an impending murderous
attack. Allegiance oath controversy and papal authority. Bellarmine also became
involved in controversy with King James I of England. From a point of principle
for English Catholics, this debate drew in figures from much of Western Europe.
It raised the profile of both protagonists, King James as a champion of his own
restricted Calvinist Protestantism, and Bellarmine for Tridentine Catholicism.
Devotional works. During his retirement, he wrote several short books intended
to help ordinary people in their spiritual life: "De ascensione mentis in Deum
per scalas rerum creatorum opusculum" ("The Mind's Ascent to God") (1614) which
was translated into English as "Jacob's Ladder" (1638) without acknowledgement
by Henry Isaacson, "The Art of Dying Well" (1619) (in Latin, English
translation under this title by Edward Coffin), and "The Seven Words on the
Cross". Canonization and final resting place. Bellarmine was canonized by Pope
Pius XI in 1930; the following year he was declared a Doctor of the Church. His
remains, in a cardinal's red robes, are displayed behind glass under a side
altar in the Church of Saint Ignatius, the chapel of the Roman College, next to
the body of his student, St. Aloysius Gonzaga, as he himself had wished. In the
Roman Catholic calendar of saints Saint Robert Bellarmine's feast day is on 17
September, the day of his death; but some continue to use pre-1969 calendars,
in which for 37 years his feast day was on 13 May. The rank attributed to his
feast has been "double" (1932–1959) and its equivalent "third-class feast"
(1960–1968); in 1969 it was downgraded to an "optional memorial". Legacy.
Bellarmine University in Louisville, Kentucky is named after him, as are
Bellarmine College Preparatory in San Jose, California and Bellarmine
Preparatory School in Tacoma, Washington.
