Roger Williams (theologian) Roger Williams (c. 1603 – between January and
March 1683) was an English Protestant theologian who was an early proponent of
religious freedom and the separation of church and state. In 1636, he began the
colony of Providence Plantation, which provided a refuge for religious
minorities. Williams started the first Baptist church in America, the First
Baptist Church of Providence. He was a student of Native American languages and
an advocate for fair dealings with Native Americans. Williams was arguably the
very first abolitionist in North America, having organized the first attempt to
prohibit slavery in any of the original thirteen colonies. Biography. Early
life. Roger Williams was born in London on December 21, 1603. The record of his
birth was destroyed in the Great Fire of London of 1666 when St. Sepulchre's
Church was burned. At the age of 11, he had a spiritual-conversion experience
of which his father disapproved. His father, James Williams (1562–1620), was
a merchant tailor in Smithfield, England. His mother was Alice Pemberton
(1564–1634). As a teenager Williams was apprenticed with Sir Edward Coke
(1552–1634), the famous jurist, and under Coke's patronage, Williams was
educated at Charterhouse and also at Pembroke College, Cambridge (B.A., 1627).
He seemed to have a gift for languages, and early acquired familiarity with
Latin, Hebrew, Greek, Dutch, and French. Years later he gave John Milton
lessons in Dutch in exchange for refresher lessons in Hebrew. Although he took
holy orders in the Church of England, he had become a Puritan at Cambridge,
forfeiting any chance of a place of preferment in the Anglican church. After
graduating from Cambridge, Williams became the chaplain to a Puritan lord, Sir
William Macham. He married Mary Barnard (1609–76) on December 15, 1629, at
the Church of High Laver, Essex, England. They had six children, all born in
America: Mary, Freeborn, Providence, Mercy, Daniel and Joseph. Williams was
privy to the plans of the Puritan leaders to migrate to the New World, and
while he did not join the first wave in the summer of 1630, before the end of
the year, he decided he could not remain in England under Archbishop William
Laud's rigorous (and High church) administration. He regarded the Church of
England to be corrupt and false, and by the time he and his wife boarded the
"Lyon" in early December, he had arrived at the Separatist position. Life in
America. When Roger and Mary Williams arrived at Boston on February 5, 1631, he
was welcomed and almost immediately invited to become the Teacher (assistant
minister) in the Boston church to officiate while Rev. John Wilson returned to
England to fetch his wife. He shocked them by declining the position, saying
that he found that it was "an unseparated church". In addition he asserted that
the civil magistrates may not punish any sort of "breach of the first table the
Ten Commandments", such as idolatry, Sabbath-breaking, false worship, and
blasphemy, and that every individual should be free to follow his own
convictions in religious matters. Right from the beginning, he sounded three
principles which were central to his subsequent career: Separatism, freedom of
religion, and separation of church and state. As a Separatist he had concluded
that the Church of England was irredeemably corrupt and that one must
completely separate from it to establish a new church for the true and pure
worship of God. His search for the true church eventually carried him out of
Congregationalism, the Baptists, and any visible church. From 1639 forward, he
waited for Christ to send a new apostle to reestablish the church, and he saw
himself as a "witness" to Christianity until that time came. He believed that
soul liberty freedom of conscience, was a gift from God, and that everyone had
the natural right to freedom of religion. Religious freedom demanded that
church and state be separated. Williams was the first to use the phrase "wall
of separation" to describe the relationship of the church and state. He called
for a high wall of separation between the "Garden of Christ" and the
"Wilderness of the World". This idea might have been one of the foundations of
the religion clauses in the United States Constitution, and the First Amendment
to the U.S. Constitution, although the language used by the founders is quite
different. Years later, in 1802 Thomas Jefferson, writing of the "wall of
separation" echoed Roger Williams in a letter to the Danbury Baptist
Association. The Salem church was much more inclined to Separatism, so they
invited Williams to become their Teacher. When the leaders in Boston learned of
this, they vigorously protested, and the offer was withdrawn. By the end of the
summer of 1631, Williams had moved to Plymouth colony where he was welcomed,
and informally assisted the minister there. He regularly preached and according
to Governor Bradford, "his teachings were well approved." Life at Salem, Exile.
After a time, Williams felt disappointed that the Plymouth church was not
sufficiently separated from the Church of England, and his study of the Native
Americans had caused him to doubt the validity of the colonial charters.
Governor Bradford later wrote that Williams fell "into some strange opinions
which caused some controversy between the church and him". In December 1632 he
wrote a lengthy tract which openly condemned the King's charters and questioned
the right of Plymouth (or Massachusetts) to the land without first buying it
from the Indians. He charged that King James had uttered a "solemn lie" when he
asserted that he was the first Christian monarch to have discovered the land.
Subsequently, he moved back to Salem by the fall of 1633 and was welcomed by
Rev. Samuel Skelton as an unofficial assistant in the church. The Massachusetts
authorities were not pleased to see Williams return, and when they learned of
his tract attacking the King and the charters, he was summoned in December 1633
to appear before the General Court in Boston. The issue was smoothed out, and
the tract disappeared forever, probably burned. In August, 1634 (Rev. Skelton
having died), Williams became acting pastor of the Salem church and continued
to be embroiled in controversies. He had promised earlier not to raise the
issue of the charter again, but he did. Again, in March 1635 was ordered to
appear before the General Court to explain himself. In April he so vigorously
opposed the new oath of allegiance to the colonial government that it became
impossible to enforce it. He was summoned again before the Court in July to
answer for "erroneous" and "dangerous opinions", and the Court declared that he
should be removed from his church position. This latest controversy welled up
at just the moment that the Town of Salem had petitioned the General Court to
annex some land on Marblehead Neck. The Court would not consider the request
until the Salem church removed Williams. The Salem church felt that this order
violated the independence of the church, and a letter of protest was sent to
the other churches. However, the letter was not read, and the General Court
refused to seat the delegates from Salem at the next session. Support for
Williams began to wane under this pressure, and when Williams demanded that the
Salem church separate itself from other churches, his support crumbled
entirely. He withdrew and met in his home with a few of his most devoted
followers. Finally, in October 1635 he was tried by the General Court and
convicted of sedition and heresy. The Court declared that he was spreading
"diverse, new, and dangerous opinions". He was then ordered to be banished. The
execution of the order was delayed because Williams was ill and winter was
approaching, and he was allowed to stay temporarily provided he ceased his
agitation. He did not cease, so in January 1636 the sheriff came to pick him up
only to discover that Williams had slipped away three days before during a
blizzard. He walked through the deep snow of a hard winter the 105 miles from
Salem to the head of Narragansett Bay where the local Wampanoags offered him
shelter and took him to the winter camp of their chief sachem, Massasoit, where
he resided for 3 and a half months. Settlement at Providence the spring of 1636
Williams and a number of his followers from Salem began a settlement on land
that Williams had bought from Massasoit, only to be told by Plymouth that he
was still within their land grant. They warned that they might be forced to
extradite him to Massachusetts and invited him to cross the Seekonk River to
territory beyond any charter. The outcasts rowed over to Narragansett
territory, and having secured land from Canonicus and Miantonomi, chief sachems
of the Narragansetts, Williams established a settlement with twelve "loving
friends". He called it "Providence" because he felt that God's Providence had
brought him there. (He would later name his third child, the first born in his
new settlement, "Providence" as well.) He said that his settlement was to be a
haven for those "distressed of conscience", and it soon attracted quite a
collection of dissenters and otherwise-minded individuals. From the beginning,
the settlement was governed by a majority vote of the heads of households, but
"only in civil things", and newcomers could be admitted to full citizenship by
a majority vote. In August 1637 they drew up a town agreement, which again
restricted the government to "civil things". In 1640, another agreement was
signed by thirty-nine "freemen", (men who had full citizenship and voting
rights) which declared their determination "still to hold forth liberty of
conscience". Thus, Williams had founded the first place in modern history where
citizenship and religion were separated, a place where there was religious
liberty and separation of church and state. In November 1637, the General Court
of Massachusetts disarmed, disenfranchised, and forced into exile the
Antinomians, the followers of Anne Hutchinson. One of them, John Clarke,
learned from Williams that Aquidneck Island might be purchased from the
Narragansetts. Williams facilitated the purchase by William Coddington and
others, and in the spring of 1638 the Antinomians began settling at a place
called Pocasset, which is now the town of Portsmouth, Rhode Island. Some of the
Antinomians, especially those described by Governor John Winthrop as
"Anabaptists", settled in Providence. In the meantime, the Pequot War had
broken out, and it was a great irony that Massachusetts Bay was forced to ask
for Roger Williams' help. He not only became the Bay colony's eyes and ears, he
used his relationship with the Narragansetts to dissuade them from joining with
the Pequots. Instead, the Narragansetts allied themselves with the English and
helped to crush the Pequots in 1637-1638. When the war was over, the
Narragansetts were clearly the most powerful Indian nation in southern New
England, and quite soon the other New England colonies began to fear and
mistrust the Narragansetts. They came to regard Roger Williams' colony and the
Narragansetts as a common enemy. In the next three decades Massachusetts,
Connecticut, and Plymouth exerted pressure to destroy both Rhode Island and the
Narragansetts. In 1643, the neighboring colonies formed a military alliance
called the United Colonies and pointedly excluded the towns around Narragansett
Bay. The object was to extend their power over the heretic settlements and put
an end to the infection. In response Williams was sent to England by his fellow
citizens to secure a charter for the colony. The English Civil War was in full
swing in England when Williams arrived. The Puritans were then in power in
London, and through the offices of Sir Henry Vane a charter was obtained
despite strenuous opposition from agents from Massachusetts. Historians agree
that the key that unlocked the door for Williams was his first published book,
"A Key Into the Language of America" (1643). Printed by John Milton's publisher
the book was an instant "best-seller", and gave Williams a large and favorable
reputation. This little book was the first dictionary of any Indian tongue in
the English language and fed the great hunger of the English about the Native
Americans. Having secured his precious charter for "Providence Plantations"
from Parliament, in July 1644 Williams then published his most famous book,
"The Bloody Tenent of Persecution for Cause of Conscience". This produced a
great uproar, and Parliament responded in August by ordering the book to be
burned by the public hangman. By then, Williams was already on his way home to
Providence Plantations. Also, by then, the settlers on Aquidneck Island had
renamed their island "Rhode Island". Because of opposition from William
Coddington on "Rhode Island", it took Williams until 1647 to get the four towns
around Narragansett Bay to unite under a single government, and liberty of
conscience was again proclaimed. The colony became a safe haven for people who
were persecuted for their beliefs including Baptists, Quakers, and Jews. Still,
the divisions between the towns and powerful personalities did not bode well
for the colony. Coddington, who never liked Williams nor liked being
subordinated to the new charter government, sailed to England and returned in
1651 with his own patent making him "Governor for Life" over "Rhode Island" and
Conanicut. As a result, Providence and Warwick dispatched Roger Williams and
Coddington's opponents on "Rhode Island" sent John Clarke to England to get
Coddington's commission canceled. To pay for the trip, Williams sold his
trading post at Cocumscussec, near present-day Wickford, Rhode Island. This
trading post was his main source of income. Williams and Clarke were successful
in getting Coddington's patent rescinded, but Clarke remained in England until
1664 to secure a new charter for the colony. Williams returned to America in
1654 and was immediately elected the President of the colony. He would
subsequently serve in many offices in the town and colonial governments, and in
his 70s he was elected captain of the militia in Providence during King
Philip's War in 1676. One notable effort by "Providence Plantations"
(Providence and Warwick) during the time when Coddington had separated "Rhode
Island" (Newport and Portsmouth) from the mainland came on May 18, 1652, when
they passed a law which attempted to prevent slavery from taking root in the
colony. In 1641 Massachusetts Bay had passed the first laws to make slavery
legal in the English colonies, and these laws spread to Plymouth and
Connecticut with the creation of the United Colonies in 1643. Roger Williams
and Samuel Gorton both opposed slavery, and the law passed in 1652 was the
attempt to stop slavery from coming to Rhode Island. Unfortunately, when the
parts of the colony were reunited, the Aquidneck towns refused to accept the
law and it became a dead letter. The economic and political center of Rhode
Island and Providence Plantations was Newport for the next 100 years, and they
disregarded the anti-slavery law. Indeed, Newport entered the African slave
trade in 1700 and became the leading American slave traders from then until the
American Revolution. Relations with the Baptists. By 1638, Williams' ideas had
ripened to the point that he accepted the idea of believer's baptism, or
credobaptism. Williams had been holding services in his home for some time for
his neighbors, many of whom had followed him from Salem. To that point they had
been like the Separatists of Plymouth, still believing in infant baptism.
Williams came to accept the ideas of English antipedobaptists. John Smyth,
Thomas Helwys, and John Murton were co-founders of the Baptist movement in
England, and produced a rich literature advocating liberty of conscience.
Williams certainly had read some of their writings because he commented on them
in his "Bloudy Tenent". While Smyth, Helwys and Murton were General Baptists, a
Calvinistic Baptist variety grew out of some Separatists around 1630. Williams
became a Calvinist or Particular Baptist (Reformed Baptist). However, Williams
had not adopted antipedobaptist views before his banishment from Massachusetts,
for antipedobaptism was not a charge leveled at him by his opponents. Winthrop
attributed Williams's "Anabaptist" views to the influence of Katherine Scott, a
sister of Anne Hutchinson, who may have impressed upon Williams the importance
of believers' baptism. Historians tend to think that Williams arrived there
from his own study. Williams had himself baptized by Ezekiel Holliman in late
1638. Thus was constituted a church which still survives as the First Baptist
Church in America. A few years later, John Clarke, Williams’ compatriot in
the cause of religious freedom in the New World, established the First Baptist
Church in Newport, Rhode Island. In 1847 the Newport church suddenly maintained
that it was the first Baptist church in America, but virtually all historians
have dismissed this claim. If nothing else, Roger Williams had gathered and
resigned from the Providence church before the town of Newport was even
founded. Still, both Roger Williams and John Clarke are variously credited as
being the founder of the Baptist faith in America. It should be noted that
Roger Williams was a Baptist only briefly. He remained with the little church
in Providence only a few months. He became convinced that the ordinances,
having been lost in the Apostasy Christianity became the official religion of
the Roman Empire, could not be validly restored without a special divine
commission. He declared: "There is no regularly constituted church of Christ on
earth, nor any person qualified to administer any church ordinances; nor can
there be until new apostles are sent by the Great Head of the Church for whose
coming I am seeking." He never again affiliated himself with any church, but
remained deeply religious and active in preaching and praying. He looked
forward to the time when Christ would send a new apostle to restore the church,
but in the meantime, he would be a "witness" to Christianity. He always
remained interested in the Baptists, being in agreement with them in their
rejection of infant baptism as in most other matters. He has been mistakenly
called a "Seeker", both in his own time by his enemies and by his admirers in
the last century. Some of his enemies in England called him a “Seeker” in
an attempt to smear him by associating him with a heretical movement that
accepted Socinianism and universal salvation. Both of these ideas were anathema
to Williams. Church and state. Williams had read their writings, and his own
experience of persecution by Archbishop Laud and the Anglican establishment and
the bloody wars of religion that raged in Europe at that very time convinced
him that a state church had no basis in Scripture. Clearly he had arrived at
this conclusion before he landed in Boston in 1631 because he criticized the
Massachusetts Bay system immediately for mixing church and state. He declared
that the state could legitimately concern itself only with matters of civil
order, but not religious belief. The state had no business in trying to enforce
the “first Table” of the Ten Commandments, those first commandments that
dealt with the relationship between God and persons. The state must confine
itself to the commandments that dealt with the relations between people:
murder, theft, adultery, lying, honoring parents, and so forth. He regarded any
effort by the state to dictate religion or promote any particular religious
idea or practice to be “forced worship”. And he colorfully declared that
“forced worship stinks in the nostrils of God”. He would write that he saw
no warrant in the New Testament to use the sword to promote religious belief.
Indeed, he said that Constantine had been a worse enemy to true Christianity
than Nero because Constantine’s support had corrupted Christianity and led to
the death of the Christian church. In the strongest language he described the
attempt to compel belief to be rape of the soul, and he spoke of the “oceans
of blood” shed as a result of trying to command conformity. He believed that
the moral principles found in the Scriptures ought to inform the civil
magistrates, but he observed that well ordered, just, and civil governments
existed where Christianity was not present. All governments were required to
maintain civil order and justice, but none had a warrant to promote any
religion. Most of Williams’s contemporaries and critics regarded his ideas as
a prescription for chaos and anarchy. The vast majority believed that each
nation must have its national church and that dissenters had to be compelled to
conform. The establishment of Rhode Island was so threatening to its neighbors
that they tried for the next hundred years to extinguish the “lively
experiment” in religious freedom that had begun in 1636. Death. Williams died
between January and March 1683 and was buried on his own property. Fifty years
later, his house had collapsed into the cellar and the location of his grave
had been forgotten. In 1860, Zachariah Allen sought to locate his remains, but
found nothing. In the grave that Allen thought was that of Williams, he found
the apple tree root, but little else. Some dirt from the hole was placed in the
Randall family mausoleum in the North Burial Ground. In anticipation of the
300th anniversary of the founding of Providence, the dirt was retrieved from
the mausoleum and placed in an urn and kept at the Rhode Island Historical
Society until a proper monument was erected at Prospect Terrace Park in
Providence. The actual deposit of the “dust from the grave of Roger
Williams” did not occur until 1939 when the WPA finished the monument. The
apple tree root is now regarded as a curio and kept by the Rhode Island
Historical Society at the John Brown House Museum. Writings. Williams's career
as an author began with "A Key into the Language of America" (London, 1643),
written during his first voyage to England. His next publication was "Mr.
Cotton's Letter lately Printed, Examined and Answered" (London, 1644;
reprinted, with Cotton's letter, which it answered, in "Publications of the
Narragansett Club", vol. ii.). "The Bloody Tenent of Persecution, for Cause of
Conscience" soon followed (London, 1644). This is his most famous work, and was
the ablest statement and defense of the principle of absolute liberty of
conscience that had appeared in any language. It is in the form of a dialogue
between Truth and Peace, and well illustrates the vigor of his style. During
the same year an anonymous pamphlet appeared in London which now is ascribed to
Williams, entitled: "Queries of Highest Consideration Proposed to Mr. Tho.
Goodwin, Mr. Phillip Nye, Mr. Wil. Bridges, Mr. Jer. Burroughs, Mr. Sidr.
Simpson, all Independents, etc." These Independents were members of the
Westminster Assembly and their "Apologetical Narration", sought to find a way
between extreme Separatism and Presbyterianism, and their prescription was the
acceptance of the state church model of Massachusetts Bay. Williams attacked
their arguments for the very same reasons that he found that Massachusetts Bay
violated liberty of conscience. In 1652, during his second visit to England,
Williams published "The Bloody Tenent yet more Bloody: by Mr. Cotton's Endeavor
to wash it white in the Blood of the Lamb; of whose precious Blood, spilt in
the Bloud of his Servants; and of the Blood of Millions spilt in former and
later Wars for Conscience sake, that most Bloody Tenent of Persecution for
cause of Conscience, upon, a second Tryal is found more apparently and more
notoriously guilty, etc." (London, 1652). This work reiterated and amplified
the arguments in "Bloody Tenent"; but it has the advantage of being written in
answer to Cotton's elaborate defense of New England persecution, "A Reply to
Mr. Williams his Examination" ("Publications of the Narragansett Club", vol.
ii.). A volume of his letters is included in the Narragansett Club edition of
Williams's "Works " (7 vols., Providence, 1866–74), and a volume was edited
by J. R. Bartlett (1882). Brown University's John Carter Brown Library has long
housed a 234-page volume referred to as the "Roger Williams Mystery Book". The
margins of this book are filled with notations in handwritten code, believed to
be the work of Roger Williams. In 2012, Brown University undergraduate Lucas
Mason-Brown cracked this code and uncovered conclusive historical evidence
attributing its authorship to Roger Williams. Translations are revealing
transcriptions of a geographical text, a medical text, and some twenty pages of
original notes addressing the issue of infant baptism. Mason-Brown has since
discovered more writings by Williams employing a separate code in the margins
of a rare edition of the "Eliot Indian Bible". Indian language and culture.
Williams intended to become a missionary to the Native Americans and set out to
learn their language. He studied their language, customs, religion, family life
and other aspects of their world. As a result he came to see their point of
view about colonization and developed a deep appreciation of them as people. He
wrote his "A Key into the Language of America" (1643) as a kind of phrase book
coupled with observations about life and culture as an aid in communication
with the Indians. In it he talked about everything from salutations in the
first chapter to death and burial in chapter 32. The book also sought to
instruct the English, who thought of themselves as vastly superior to the
Native Americans, that they were mistaken. He repeatedly made the point that
the Indians were just as good as the English, even superior in some respects.
"Boast not proud English, of thy birth & blood; Thy brother Indian is by birth
as Good. Of one blood God made Him, and Thee and All, As wise, as fair, as
strong, as personal." Having learned their language and customs, Williams gave
up the idea of being a missionary and never baptized a single Indian. He was
severely criticized by the Puritans for failing to Christianize them, but
Williams had arrived at the place in his own thinking that no valid church
existed. He said he could have baptized the whole country, but it would have
been hypocritical and false. He formed from friendships and developed deep
trust among the Native Americans, especially the Narragansetts. He was able to
keep the peace between the Indians and English in Rhode Island for nearly forty
years because of his constant mediation and negotiation. He twice surrendered
himself as a hostage to the Indians to guarantee the safe return of a great
sachem from a summons to a court: Pessicus in 1645 and Metacomet (King Philip)
in 1671. He more than any other Englishman was trusted by the Native Americans
and proved to be trustworthy. In the end King Philip’s War (1675–1676) was
one of the bitterest events in his life as his efforts ended with the burning
of Providence in March 1676, including his own house. Tributes and memorials.
(1963) traces the 'negative' approach of the orthodox Puritan writers
(Bradford, Winthrop, Morton, Cotton Mather, Hutchinson, Winsor, and Dexter),
the 'romantic' approach (George Bancroft, Vernon Parrington, Ernst, and
Brockunier) and the 'realistic' approach (Backus, H. Richard Niebuhr, Roland
Bainton, and Hudson), and regards the work of Mauro Calamandrei, who was
followed by Perry Miller and Ola Winslow, as crucial. The realistic writers
created a synthesis of the earlier interpretations. Williams has been
considered an American hero ever since the Puritans of his own day stopped
dominating historical interpretations. His defense of Native Americans,
accusations that Puritans had reproduced the "evils" of the Anglican Church,
and denial that the king had authority to grant charters for colonies put him
at the center of nearly every political debate during his life. By the time of
American independence, however, he was considered a defender of religious
freedom and has continued to be praised by generations of historians who have
often altered their interpretation of his period as a whole. Historians have
been able to appropriate Williams because he was unusual, prolific, and vague.
