Women in Judaism The role of women in Judaism is determined by the Hebrew
Bible, the Oral Law (the corpus of rabbinic literature), by custom, and by non-
religious cultural factors. Although the Hebrew Bible and rabbinic literature
mention various female role models, religious law treats women differently in
various circumstances. Biblical times. Relatively few women are mentioned in
the Bible by name and role, suggesting that they were rarely in the forefront
of public life. There are a number of exceptions to this rule, including the
Matriarchs Sarah, Rebecca, Rachel, and Leah, Miriam the prophetess, Deborah the
Judge, Huldah the prophetess, Abigail who married David, Rahab and Esther. In
the Biblical account these women did not meet with opposition for the
relatively public presence they had. According to Jewish tradition, a covenant
was formed between the Israelites and the God of Abraham at Mount Sinai. The
Torah relates that both Israelite men and Israelite women were present at
Sinai, however, the covenant was worded in such a way that it bound men to act
upon its requirements and to ensure that the members of their household (wives,
children, and slaves) met these requirements as well. In this sense, the
covenant bound women as well, though indirectly. Marriage and family law in
biblical times favored men over women. For example, a husband could divorce a
wife if he chose to, but a wife could not divorce a husband without his
consent. The practice of levirate marriage applied to widows of childless
deceased husbands, but not to widowers of childless deceased wives. Laws
concerning the loss of female virginity have no male equivalent. These and
other gender inequalities found in the Torah suggest that women were
subordinate to men during biblical times, however, they also suggest that
biblical society viewed continuity, property, and family unity as paramount.
However, men had specific obligations they were required to perform for their
wives. These included the provision of clothing, food, and sexual relations to
their wives. Women also had a role in ritual life. Women (as well as men) were
required to make a pilgrimage to the Temple in Jerusalem once a year and offer
the Passover sacrifice. They would also do so on special occasions in their
lives such as giving a "todah" ("thanksgiving") offering after childbirth.
Hence, they participated in many of the major public religious roles that non-
levitical men could, albeit less often and on a somewhat smaller and generally
more discreet scale. Women depended on men economically. Women generally did
not own property except in the rare case of inheriting land from a father who
didn't bear sons. Even "in such cases, women would be required to remarry
within the tribe so as not to reduce its land holdings." Talmudic times. While
few women are mentioned by name in rabbinic literature, and none are known to
have authored a rabbinic work, those who are mentioned are portrayed as having
a strong influence on their husbands, and occasionally having a public persona.
Examples are Bruriah, the wife of the Tanna Rabbi Meir; Rachel, the wife of
Rabbi Akiva; and Yalta, the wife of Rabbi Nachman. Rabbi Eliezer's wife (of
Mishnaic times) counselled her husband in assuming leadership over the
Sanhedrin. Middle Ages. Like most women in Europe, Jewish women in the Middle
Ages had exclusively household roles and arranged marriages; child brides were
common. Jewish women were generally prohibited from holding formal leadership
roles with authority over men. Regarding European Jewry, Avraham Grossman
wrote, "Throughout the Middle Ages, which continued for about a thousand years,
we do not find so much as a single women of importance among the sages of
Israel... Moreover, over a period of a thousand years, not a single Jewish
woman wrote a halakhic, literary, theoretical, mystical, or poetic work, with
the exception of a handful of poems written by Jewish women in Spain." Middle
Eastern Jewry, on the other hand, had an abundance of female literates. The
Cairo Geniza is filled with correspondences written (sometimes dictated)
between family members and spouses. Many of these letters are pious and poetic
and express a desire to be in closer or more frequent contact with a loved one
that is far enough away to only be reached by written correspondence. There are
also records of wills and other personal legal documents as well as written
petitions to officials in cases of spouse abuse or other conflicts between
family members written or dictated by women. After the expulsion of the Jews
from Spain in 1492, women became virtually the only source of Jewish ritual and
tradition in the Catholic world in a phenomenon known as crypto-Judaism.
Crypto-Jewish women would slaughter their own animals and made sure to keep as
many of the Jewish dietary laws and life cycle rituals as possible without
raising suspicion. Occasionally, these women were prosecuted by Inquisition
officials for suspicious behavior such as lighting candles to honor the Sabbath
or refusing to eat pork when it was offered to them. The Inquisition targeted
crypto-Jewish women at least as much as it targeted crypto-Jewish men because
women were accused of perpetuating Jewish tradition while men were merely
permitting their wives and daughters to organize the household in this manner.
Domestic law. Rabbeinu Gershom instituted a rabbinic decree ("takhanah")
prohibiting polygamy among Ashkenazic Jews. The rabbis instituted legal methods
to enable women to petition a rabbinical court to compel a divorce. Maimonides
ruled that a woman who found her husband "repugnant" could compel a divorce,
"because she is not like a captive, to be subjected to intercourse with one who
is hateful to her." The rabbis also instituted and tightened prohibitions on
domestic violence. Rabbi Peretz ben Elijah ruled, "The cry of the daughters of
our people has been heard concerning the sons of Israel who raise their hands
to strike their wives. Yet who has given a husband the authority to beat his
wife?" Rabbi Rothberg ruled that "For it is the way of the Gentiles to behave
thus, but Heaven forbid that any Jew should do so. And one who beats his wife
is to be excommunicated and banned and beaten." Rabbi Rothenberg also ruled
that a battered wife could petition a rabbinical court to compel a husband to
grant a divorce, with a monetary fine owed her on top of the regular "ketubah"
money. These rulings occurred in the midst of societies where wife-beating was
legally sanctioned and routine. Religious developments. Religious developments
included relaxation on prohibitions against teaching women Torah, and the rise
of women's prayer groups in France and Germany. These changes were accompanied
by increased pietistic strictures, including greater requirements for modest
dress, and greater strictures during the period of menstruation. At the same
time, there was a rise in philosophical and midrashic interpretations depicting
women in a negative light, emphasizing a duality between matter and spirit in
which femininity was associated, negatively, with earth and matter. The rise
and increasing popularity of Kabbalah, which emphasized the "shechinah" and
female aspects of the divine presence and human-divine relationship, and which
saw marriage as a holy covenant between partners rather than a civil contract,
had great influence. Kabbalists explained the phenomenon of menstruation as
expressions of the demonic or sinful character of the menstruant. Mystical
understandings of what occurs to men's souls in the afterlife and on Shabbat
differed significantly from what was understood about what occurs to women's
souls. Present day. Orthodox Judaism. Orthodox Judaism sometimes prescribes
different roles and religious obligations for men and women. There are
different opinions among Orthodox Jews concerning these differences. Most claim
that men and women have complementary, yet different roles in religious life,
resulting in different religious obligations. A minority within the Orthodox
tradition believe that some of these differences are not a reflection of
religious law, but rather of cultural, social, and historical causes. In the
area of education, women were historically exempted from any study beyond an
understanding of the practical aspects of Torah, and the rules necessary in
running a Jewish householdboth of which they have an obligation to learn. Until
the twentieth century, women were often discouraged from learning Talmud and
other advanced Jewish texts. In the past 100 years, Orthodox Jewish education
for women has advanced tremendously. Some Orthodox rabbis view contemporary
efforts at change as motivated by sociological reasons and not by true
religious motivation. They also view these suggested changes as a break with
the accepted norms of observance, and do not allow women to engage in
activities traditionally reserved for men. For example, Orthodox, Haredi, and
Hasidic rabbis discourage women from wearing a yarmulke, tallit or tefillin. In
most Orthodox synagogues, women do no to give a "d'var Torah" (brief discourse,
generally on the weekly Torah portion) after or between services. Furthermore,
a few Modern Orthodox synagogues have mechitzot dividing the left and right
sides of the synagogue (rather than the usual division between the front and
back of the synagogue, with women sitting in the back), with the women's
section on one side and the men's section on the other. This is often seen as
more equal since the women are not farther away from the service than the men.
Rules of modesty. The importance of modesty in dress and conduct is
particularly stressed among girls and women in Orthodox society. Many Orthodox
women only wear skirts and avoid wearing trousers, and some married Orthodox
women cover their hair with a wig, hat, or scarf. Judaism prescribes modesty
for both men and women. Rules of family purity. In accordance with Jewish Law,
Orthodox Jewish women refrain from contact with their husbands while they are
menstruating, and for a period of 7 clean days after menstruating, and after
the birth of a child. The Israeli Rabbinate has recently approved women acting
as "yoatzot", halakhic advisers on sensitive personal matters such as family
purity. Modern Orthodox Judaism. Rabbi Joseph B. Soloveitchik, a leader of
profound influence in modern Orthodoxy in the United States, forbade women from
serving as presidents of synagogues or any other official positions of
leadership, and from performing other mitzvot (commandments) traditionally
performed by males exclusively, such as wearing a tallit or tefillin.
Soloveitchik wrote that while women do not lack the capability to perform such
acts, there is no "mesorah" (Jewish tradition) that permits it. In making his
decision, he relied upon Jewish oral law, including a mishnah in Chulin 2a and
a Beit Yoseph in the Tur Yoreh Deah stating that a woman can perform a specific
official communal service for her own needs but not those of others. Women's
issues garnered more interest with the advent of feminism. Many Modern Orthodox
Jewish women and Modern Orthodox rabbis sought to provide greater and more
advanced Jewish education for women. Since most Modern Orthodox women attend
college, and many receive advanced degrees in a variety of fields, Modern
Orthodoxy generally believes that their Jewish education should equal their
secular education. An entire genre of Orthodox feminist literature now exists,
and has caused changes within some Orthodox synagogues and communities ("The
Status of Women in Halakhic Judaism," Berman, Tradition, 14:2, 1973.). Orthodox
girls' and women's Jewish education has expanded tremendously in the past 30
years. Of some controversy are the questions of whether girls and women should
or may learn the Talmud. While most segments of Modern Orthodoxy ostensibly
support women's education, the permissibility of Talmud study for women is
still not accepted among most of Modern Orthodoxy. Women's prayer groups. In
Germany, in the 12th and 13th centuries, women's prayer groups were led by
female cantors. Rabbi Eliezar of Worms, in his elegy for his wife Dulca,
praised her for teaching the other women how to pray and embellishing the
prayer with music. The gravestone of Urania of Worms, who died in 1275,
contains the inscription "who sang "piyyutim" for the women with musical
voice." In the Nurnberg Memorial Book, one Richenza was inscribed with the
title "prayer leader of the women." Women as witnesses. Traditionally, women
are not generally permitted to serve as witnesses in an Orthodox Beit Din
(rabbinical court), although they have recently been permitted to serve as
"toanot" (advocates) in those courts. This limitation has exceptions which have
required exploration under rabbinic law as the role of women in society and the
obligations of religious groups under external civil law have been subject to
increasing recent scrutiny. The Rabbinical Council of America, while initially
relying on its own investigation, chose to rely on the Halakhic ruling of the
Haredi Rabbinical body as authoritative in the situation. Orthodox approaches
to change. Leaders of the Haredi community have been steadfast in their
opposition to a change in the role of women, arguing that the religious and
social constraints on women, as dictated by traditional Jewish texts, are
timeless and are not affected by contemporary social change. Many also argue
that giving traditionally male roles to women will only detract from both
women's and men's ability to lead truly fulfilling lives. Haredim have also
sometimes perceived arguments for liberalization as in reality stemming from
antagonism to Jewish law and beliefs generally, arguing that preserving faith
requires resisting secular and "un-Jewish" ideas. Modern Orthodox Judaism,
particularly in its more liberal variants, has tended to look at proposed
changes in the role of women on a specific, case-by-case basis, focusing on
arguments regarding the religious and legal role of specific prayers, rituals
and activities individually. Such arguments have tended to focus on cases where
the Talmud and other traditional sources express multiple or more liberal
viewpoints, particularly where the role of women in the past was arguably
broader than in more recent times. Feminist advocates within Orthodoxy have
tended to stay within the traditional legal process of argumentation, seeking a
gradualist approach, and avoiding wholesale arguments against the religious
tradition as such. Conservative Judaism. A Conservative Jewish "ketuba"
includes a clause that puts a husband and wife on more equal footing when it
comes to marriage and divorce law within "halacha". The CJLS recently
reaffirmed the obligation of Conservative women to observe "niddah" (sexual
abstinence during and after menstruation) and "mikvah" (ritual immersion)
following menstruation, although somewhat liberalizing certain details. Such
practices, while requirements of Conservative Judaism, are not to be widely
observed among Conservative laity. Changes in the Conservative position. Prior
to 1973, Conservative Judaism had more limited roles for women and was more
similar to current Modern Orthodoxy, with changes on issues including mixed
seating, synagogue corporate leadership, and permitting women to be called to
the Torah. In 1973, the CJLS of the Rabbinical Assembly voted, without issuing
an opinion, that women could count in a "minyan". In 1983, the Jewish
Theological Seminary of America (JTSA) faculty voted, also without accompanying
opinion, to ordain women as rabbis and as cantors. In 2002, the CJLS adapted a
responsum by Rabbi David Fine, "Women and the Minyan", which provides an
official religious-law foundation for these actions and explains the current
Conservative approach to the role of women in prayer. In 2006, the CJLS adopted
three responsa on the subject of niddah, which reaffirmed an obligation of
Conservative women to abstain from sexual relations during and following
menstruation and to immerse in a mikvah prior to resumption, while liberalizing
observance requirements including shortening the length of the niddah period,
lifting restrictions on non-sexual contact during niddah, and reducing the
circumstances under which spotting and similar conditions would mandate
abstinence. In all cases continuing the Orthodox approach was also upheld as an
option. Individual Conservative rabbis and synagogues are not required to adopt
any of these changes, and a small number have adopted none of them.
Conservative approaches to change. Prior to 1973, Conservative approaches to
change were generally on an individual, case-by-case basis. Between 1973 and
2002, the Conservative movement adapted changes through its official
organizations, but without issuing explanatory opinions. Since 2002, the
Conservative movement has coalesced around a single across-the board approach
to the role of women in Jewish law. In 1973, 1983, and 1993, individual rabbis
and professors issued six major opinions which influenced change in the
Conservative approach, the first and second Sigal, Blumenthal, Rabinowitz, and
Roth responsa, and the Hauptman article. These opinions sought to provide for a
wholesale shift in women's public roles through a single, comprehensive legal
justification. Most such opinions based their positions on an argument that
Jewish women always were, or have become, legally obligated to perform the same
"mitzvot" as men and to do so in the same manner. The first Sigal and the
Blumenthal responsa were considered by the CJLS as part of its decision on
prayer roles in 1973. They argued that women have always had the same
obligations as men. The first Sigal responsum used the Talmud's general prayer
obligation and examples of cases in which women were traditionally obligated to
say specific prayers and inferred from them a public prayer obligation
identical to that of men. The Blumenthal responsum extrapolated from a minority
authority that a "minyan" could be formed with nine men and one woman in an
emergency. The Committee on Jewish Law and Standards (CJLS) declined to adopt
either responsum. Rabbi Siegel reported to the Rabbinical Assembly membership
that many on the CJLS, while agreeing with the result, found the arguments
unconvincing. The Rabinowitz, Roth, and second Sigal responsa were considered
by the JTSA faculty as part of its decision to ordain women as rabbis in 1983.
The Rabbinowitz responsum sidestepped the issue of obligation, arguing that
there is no longer a religious need for a community representative in prayer
and hence there is no need to decide whether a woman can "halakhically" serve
as one. The CJLS felt that an argument potentially undermining the value of
community and clergy was unconvincing: "We should not be afraid to recognize
that the function of clergy is to help our people connect with the holy." The
Roth and second Sigal responsa accepted that time-bound "mitzvot" were
traditionally optional for women, but argued that women in modern times could
change their traditional roles. The Roth responsum argued that women could
individually voluntarily assume the same obligations as men, and that women who
do so (e.g. pray three times a day regularly) could count in a "minyan" and
serve as agents. The JTSA accordingly required female rabbinical students
wishing to train as rabbis to personally obligate themselves, but synagogue
rabbis, unwilling to inquire into individual religiosity, found it impractical.
The second Sigal responsum called for a "takkanah", or rabbinical edict, "that
would serve as a "halakhic" ERA," overruling all non-egalitarian provisions in
law or, in the alternative, a new approach to "halakhic" interpretation
independent of legal precedents. The CJLS, unwilling to use either an intrusive
approach or a repudiation of the traditional legal process as bases for action,
did not adopt either and let the JTS faculty vote stand unexplained. In 1993,
Professor Judith Hauptman of JTS issued an influential paper [http://
www.findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_m0411/is_n1_v42/ai_13796427] arguing that
women had historically always been obligated in prayer, using more detailed
arguments than the Blumenthal and first Sigal responsa. The paper suggested
that women who followed traditional practices were failing to meet their
obligations. Rabbi Roth argued that Conservative Judaism should think twice
before adopting a viewpoint labeling its most traditional and often most
committed members as sinners. The issue was again dropped. In 2002, the CJLS
returned to the issue of justifying its actions regarding women's status, and
adopted a single authoritative approach, the Fine responsum, as the definitive
Conservative halakha on role-of-women issues. This responsum holds that
although Jewish women do not traditionally have the same obligations as men,
Conservative women have, as a collective whole, voluntarily undertaken them.
Because of this collective undertaking, the Fine responsum holds that
Conservative women are eligible to serve as agents and decision-makers for
others. The Responsum also held that traditionally-minded communities and
individual women could opt out without being regarded by the Conservative
movement as sinning. By adopting this Responsum, the CJLS found itself in a
position to provide a considered Jewish-law justification for its egalitarian
practices, without having to rely on potentially unconvincing arguments,
undermine the religious importance of community and clergy, ask individual
women intrusive questions, repudiate the "halakhic" tradition, or label women
following traditional practices as sinners. Reform Judaism. Concerns about
intermarriage have also influenced the Reform Jewish position on gender. In
1983, the Central Conference of American Rabbis passed a resolution waiving the
need for formal conversion for anyone with at least one Jewish parent who has
made affirmative acts of Jewish identity. This departed from the traditional
position requiring formal conversion to Judaism for children without a Jewish
mother. The 1983 resolution of the American Reform movement has had a mixed
reception in Reform Jewish communities outside of the United States. Most
notably, the Israel Movement for Progressive Judaism has rejected patrilineal
descent and requires formal conversion for anyone without a Jewish mother.
Reform approaches to change. Reform Judaism generally holds that the various
differences between the roles of men and women in traditional Jewish law are
not relevant to modern conditions and not applicable today. Accordingly, there
has been no need to develop legal arguments analogous to those made within the
Orthodox and Conservative movements. Reconstructionist Judaism. The equality of
women and men is a central tenet and hallmark of Reconstructionist Judaism.
From the beginning, Reconstructionist Jewish ritual allowed men and women to
pray together — a decision based on egalitarian philosophy. It was on this
basis that Rabbi Mordecai Kaplan called for the full equality of women and men,
despite the obvious difficulties reconciling this stance with norms of
traditional Jewish practice. The Reconstructionist Movement ordained women
Rabbi from the start. In 1968, women were accepted into the Reconstructionist
Rabbinical College, under the leadership of Ira Eisenstein. The first ordained
female Reconstructionist rabbi, Sandy Eisenberg Sasso, served as rabbi of the
Manhattan Reconstructionist Congregation in 1976 and gained a pulpit in 1977 at
Beth El Zedeck congregation in Indianapolis. Sandy Eisenberg Sasso was accepted
without debate or subsequent controversy. In 2005, 24 out of the movement's 106
synagogues in the US had women as senior or assistant rabbis. The
Reconstructionist Community began including women in the minyan and allowing
them to come up to the Torah for aliyot. They also continued the practice of
bat mitzvah. Reconstructionist Judaism also allowed women to perform other
traditional male tasks, such as serving as witnesses, leading services, public
Torah reading, and wearing ritual prayer garments like kippot and tallitot.
Female Reconstructionist rabbis have been instrumental in the creation of
rituals, stories, and music that have begun to give women's experience a voice
in Judaism. Most of the focus has been on rituals for life-cycle events. New
ceremonies have been created for births, weddings, divorces, conversions,
weaning, and the onset of menarche and menopause. The Recontructionist movement
as a whole has been committed to creating liturgy that is in consonance with
gender equality and the celebration of women's lives. Another major step: The
Federation of Reconstructionist Congregations has also developed educational
programs that teach the full acceptance of lesbians, as well as rituals that
affirm lesbian relationships. In Canada, the reconstructionist Rabbis does
officiate at same-sex wedding. Reconstructionist Judaism allows gay men and
women to be ordained as rabbis and cantors. Several prominent members of the
Reconstructionist community have focused on issues like domestic violence.
Others have devoted energy to helping women gain the right of divorce in
traditional Jewish communities. Many have spoken out for the right of Jewish
women to pray aloud and read from the Torah at the Western Wall in Jerusalem,
the Women of the Wall group. When the roles of women in religion change, there
may also be changed roles for men. With their advocacy of patrilineal descent
in the 1970s, the Reconstructionist Rabbinical Association supported the
principle that a man who takes responsibility for raising a Jewish child can
pass Judaism on to the next generation as well as a woman. All children who
receive a Jewish education are considered Jewish in Reconstructionist Judaism
regardless of whatever is the sex of their Jewish parent. External links.
General Publications Particular issues
