Romanian Orthodox Church The Romanian Orthodox Church ("Biserica Ortodoxă
Română" in Romanian) is an autocephalous Eastern Orthodox church. It is in
full communion with other Eastern Orthodox churches, and is ranked seventh in
order of precedence. The Primate of the church has the title of Patriarch. Its
jurisdiction covers the territory of Romania, with dioceses for Romanians
living in nearby Moldova, Serbia and Hungary, as well as diaspora communities
in Central and Western Europe, North America and Oceania. It is the only
Eastern Orthodox church using a Romance language. The majority of people in
Romania (16,367,267, or 85.9% of the population, according to the 2011 census
data) belong to it, as well as some 720,000 Moldovans. The Romanian Orthodox
Church is the second-largest in size behind the Russian Orthodox Church.
Adherents of the Romanian Orthodox Church sometimes refer to it as "Dreapta
credinţă" ("right/correct belief" or "true faith"; compare to Greek
ὀρθὴ δόξα, "straight/correct belief"). History. The Church in the
Kingdom of Romania. In 1859, the Romanian principalities of Moldavia and
Wallachia formed the modern state of Romania. The hierarchy of the Orthodox
churches tends to follow the structure of the state. Therefore, shortly
afterwards, in 1872, the Orthodox churches of the former principalities, the
Metropolis of Ungro-Wallachia and the Metropolis of Moldavia, decided to unite
to form the Romanian Orthodox Church. The 1866 Constitution of Romania declared
the Orthodox Church to be "independent of any foreign hierarchy", but it was a
law passed in 1872 that declared the church to be "autocephalous". After a long
period of negotiations with the Patriarchate of Constantinople, the latter
finally recognized in 1885 the Metropolis of Romania, which was raised to the
rank of Patriarchy in 1925. Communist period. Assessing the attitude of the
Romanian Orthodox Church towards the Communist regime is difficult due to
restricted access to ecclesiastical and relevant state archives. Nevertheless,
as an institution it was more or less tolerated by the Marxist–Leninist
atheist regime, though controlled through "special delegates" and excluded from
the public space; the regime generally focused on individuals. Its members'
actions, both laity and clergy, range broadly from opposition to the regime and
martyrdom, to survival, silent consent or collaboration. Not only the limited
access to the Securitate and Party archives or the events' recentness, but the
particularities of each individual and situation, the understanding each had
about how their own relation with the regime could influence others and how it
actually did, make such a task cumbersome. The Romanian Communist Party, which
gained power at the end of 1947, initiated mass purges that decimated the
Orthodox hierarchy. Three archbishops died suddenly after expressing opposition
to government policies, and thirteen more "uncooperative" bishops and
archbishops were arrested. A May 1947 decree imposed a mandatory retirement age
for clergy, allowing authorities to pension off old-guard holdouts. The 4
August 1948 Law on Cults institutionalised state control of episcopal elections
and packed the Holy Synod with Communist supporters. In exchange for
subservience and enthusiastic support for state policies, as well as 2,500
church buildings and other assets from the now-outlawed Romanian Greek-Catholic
Church, the government provided salaries for bishops and priests, and financial
subsidies for the publication of church books, calendars and theological
journals. By weeding out the anti-communists and setting up a pro-regime and
secret police-infiltrated Union of Democratic Priests (1945), the party
endeavoured to secure the hierarchy's cooperation. By January 1953 some 300-500
Orthodox priests were being held in concentration camps, and after Patriarch
Nicodim's death in May 1948, the party succeeded in having the ostensibly
docile Justinian Marina elected to succeed him. As a result of measures passed
in 1947-48, the 2,300 elementary schools operated by the church were closed, as
were its 24 high schools, its academy of sacred music, three divinity schools,
and 13 of its 15 theological seminaries. A new campaign struck the church in
1958-62 when more than half its remaining monasteries were closed, more than
2,000 monks forced to take secular jobs, and about 1,500 clergy and lay
activists arrested (out of a total of up to 6,000 in the 1946-64 period).
Throughout this period Patriarch Justinian was careful to say the right things
and avoid giving offence to the government; indeed the hierarchy claimed the
arrests were not due religious persecution. The church's situation began to
improve in 1962, when relations with the state suddenly thawed, an event that
coincided with Romania's pursuit of an independent foreign policy course that
saw the élite use nationalism to secure its position against Soviet pressure.
The Romanian Orthodox Church, as an intensely national body which had made
significant contributions to Romanian culture from the 14th century, was a
natural partner. As a result of this second co-optation, now as an ally, the
church was able to recover dramatically. Its diocesan clergy numbered about
12,000 in 1975, and by then it was already publishing eight high-quality
theological reviews, including "Ortodoxia" and "Studii Teologice". Orthodox
clergymen consistently supported the Ceauşescu régime's foreign policy,
refrained from criticism of domestic policy, and upheld the Romanian line
against the Soviets (over Bessarabia) and the Hungarians (over Transylvania).
As of 1989, two metropolitan bishops even sat in the Great National Assembly.
The church maintained its silence when some two dozen historic Bucharest
churches were demolished in the 1980s, and when plans for systematization
(including the destruction of village churches) were announced. A notable
dissenter was Gheorghe Calciu-Dumitreasa, imprisoned for a number of years and
expelled from Romania in June 1985 after signing an open letter criticizing and
demanding an end to the regime's violations of human rights. In order to fit
its new circumstances, the Orthodox Church constructed a new ecclesiology to
justify its subservience to the state in supposed theological terms. The
"Social Apostolate" doctrine, developed by Patriarch Justinian, declared that
the church owed its allegiance to the secular government and should be of
service to that government. This notion inflamed conservatives, who were purged
by Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej, Ceauşescu's predecessor and a friend of
Justinian's. The Social Apostolate called on clerics to become active in the
People's Republic, laying the foundation for the church's submission to and
collaboration with the state. Fr. Vasilescu, an Orthodox priest, tried to
ground the Social Apostolate in the Christian tradition, citing Augustine of
Hippo, John Chrysostom, Maximus the Confessor, Origen and Tertullian. Based on
this alleged tradition, Vasilescu concluded that Christians owed submission to
their rulers because it was God's will. With recalcitrants removed from office,
remaining bishops adopted a servile attitude, endorsing Ceauşescu's concept of
nation, supporting his policies, and applauding his ideas about peace.
Collaboration with the Securitate. After the 1989 Romanian Revolution, the
Church never admitted of willingly collaborating with the régime, but several
Romanian Orthodox priests have admitted publicly after 1989 that they have
collaborated with and/or were informers for the Securitate, the Romanian
Communist secret police. A prime example was Bishop Nicolae Corneanu, the
Metropolitan of Banat, who admitted his efforts on the behalf of the Communist
Party, and denounced clergy activity with the Communists, including his own, as
"the Church's prostitution with the Communist régime". After 1989. As Romania
made the transition to a democracy, the Church was freed from state control,
though the State Secretariat for Religious Denominations maintains control over
a number of aspects of the church property, finances and administration. The
state funds the church in proportion of religious adherents based on census
returns and "the religion's needs" which is considered to be an "ambiguous
provision". Currently, the state pays for the salaries of priests, deacons and
prelates and the pensions of those who have retired, as well as expenses
related to non-religious personal. This applies to all state-recognised
religions. The state also provides support for church construction and
dilapidations with a preference towards the Orthodox parishes. The state funds
all the expenses of the Orthodox seminaries and colleges including teachers and
professor salaries with compensation as civil servants. Since the fall of
Communism, Greek-Catholic Church leaders have claimed that the Eastern Catholic
community is facing with a cultural and religious wipe-out: the Greek-Catholic
churches are allegedly destroyed by the Orthodox Church representatives, whose
actions are supported and accepted by the Romanian authorities. The Church in
Moldova. The Romanian Orthodox Church also has jurisdiction over a minority of
believers in Moldova, who belong to the Metropolis of Bessarabia, as opposed to
the majority, who belong to the Moldovan Orthodox Church, under the Moscow
Patriarchate. In 2001 it won a landmark legal victory against the Government of
Moldova at the Strasbourg-based European Court of Human Rights. This means that
despite current political issues, the Metropolis of Bessarabia is now
recognized as "the rightful successor" to the Metropolitan Church of Bessarabia
and Hotin, which existed from 1927 to 1944, when it was dissolved, its
canonical territory being put under the jurisdiction of the Russian Orthodox
Church's Moscow Patriarchate in 1947. Organization. The Romanian Orthodox
Church is organized as the Romanian Patriarchate. The highest hierarchical,
canonical and dogmatical authority of the Romanian Orthodox Church is the Holy
Synod. There are six Metropolitanates and ten archbishoprics in Romania, and
more than twelve thousand priests and deacons, servant fathers of ancient
altars from parishes, monasteries and social centres. Almost 400 monasteries
exist inside the country for some 3,500 monks and 5,000 nuns. Three "Diasporan
Metropolitanates" and two "Diasporan Bishoprics" function outside Romania
proper. As of 2004, there are, inside Romania, fifteen theological universities
where more than ten thousand students (some of them from Bessarabia, Bukovina
and Serbia benefiting from a few Romanian fellowships) currently study for a
doctoral degree. More than 14,500 churches (traditionally named "lăcaşe de
cult", or worshiping places) exist in Romania for the Romanian Orthodox
believers. As of 2002, almost 1,000 of these were either in the process of
being built or rebuilt. Relations with other Orthodox jurisdictions. Most
Eastern Orthodox autocephalous churches, including the Romanian, maintain a
respectful spiritual link to the Ecumenical Patriarch, currently Bartholomew I.
In December 2007 Russian Duma United Russia’s MP Konstantin Zatulin accused
the Romanian Orthodox Church of “proselytism” against the Russian Orthodox
Church in Moldova (and Transnistria) with the aim of annexing these territories
into Romania. Famous theologians. Dumitru Stăniloae (1903–1993) is
considered one of the greatest Orthodox theologians of the 20th century, having
written extensively in all major fields of Eastern Christian systematic
theology. One of his other major achievements in theology is the 45-year-long
comprehensive series on Orthodox spirituality known as the Romanian Philokalia,
a collection of texts written by classical Byzantine writers, that he edited
and translated from Greek. Archimandrite Ilie Cleopa (1912–1998), elder of
the Sihastria Monastery, is considered one of the most representative spiritual
fathers of contemporary Romanian Orthodox monastic spirituality. Current
leaders of the Church. The chair is currently held by Daniel I, Archbishop of
Bucharest, Metropolitan of Ungro-Vlachia (Muntenia or Wallachia and Dobrogea or
Dobruja) and Patriarch of All of the Romanian Orthodox Church, "Locum Tenens"
of Caesarea in Cappadocia.
