Rosh Hashanah Rosh Hashanah (, literally "head of the year"), is the Jewish New
Year. It is the first of the High Holy Days or "Yamim Nora'im" ("Days of Awe")
which usually occur in the early autumn of the Northern Hemisphere. Rosh
Hashanah is a two day celebration which begins on the first day of Tishrei, the
first month of the Jewish calendar. The day is believed to be the anniversary
of the creation of Adam and Eve, the first man and woman, and their first
actions toward the realization of mankind’s role in God’s world. Rosh
Hashanah customs include sounding the shofar and eating symbolic foods such as
apples dipped in honey. The common greeting on Rosh Hashanah is "Shanah Tovah."
Etymology. The term "Rosh Hashanah" does not appear in the Torah. refers to the
festival of the first day of the seventh month as ""Zikhron Teru'ah"" ("a
memorial with the blowing of horns"); it is also referred to in the same part
of Leviticus as 'שַׁבַּת שַׁבָּתוֹן' or penultimate Sabbath or
meditative rest day, and a "holy day to God". These same words are commonly
used in the Psalms to refer to the anointed days. calls the festival "Yom
Teru'ah", ("Day blowing [the horn"), and symbolizes a number of subjects, such
as the Binding of Isaac and the animal sacrifices that were to be performed.
(The term Rosh Hashanah appears once in the Bible in where it means generally
the time of the "beginning of the year" or is possibly a reference to Yom
Kipur, but the phrase may also refer to the month of Nissan in the spring,
especially in light of where the month of Nissan is stated as being "the first
month of the year" and where "the first month" unambiguously refers to Nissan,
the month of Passover, as made plain by .) In the Siddur and Machzor Rosh
Hashanah is also called "Yom Hazikaron" (a day of remembrance), not to be
confused with the modern Israeli holiday of the same name which falls in
spring. The Hebrew Rosh HaShanah is etymologically related to the Arabic Ras
as-Sanah, the name chosen by Muslim lawmakers for the Islamic New Year,
reflecting the Islamic imitation of older Jewish traditions. Other pre-Islamic
mid-eastern cultures, such as Egypt, Persia and Babylon, did not use this
unique name. Rosh Hashanah marks the start of a new year in the Hebrew calendar
(one of four "new year" observances that define various legal "years" for
different purposes as explained in the Mishnah and Talmud). It is the new year
for people, animals, and legal contracts. The Mishnah also sets this day aside
as the new year for calculating calendar years, shmita and yovel years. Jews
are confident that Rosh Hashanah represents either figuratively or literally
God's creation ex nihilo. However, according to Rabbi Eleazar ben Shammua, Rosh
Hashanah commemorates the creation of man. Religious significance. The Mishnah
contains the second known reference to Rosh Hashanah as the "day of judgment".
In the Talmud tractate on Rosh Hashanah, it states that three books of account
are opened on Rosh Hashanah, wherein the fate of the wicked, the righteous, and
those of an intermediate class are recorded. The names of the righteous are
immediately inscribed in the book of life, and they are sealed "to live." The
intermediate class are allowed a respite of ten days, until Yom Kippur, to
reflect, repent and become righteous; the wicked are "blotted out of the book
of the living forever." "The Holy One said, 'on Rosh Hashanah recite before Me
of Sovereignty, Remembrance, and Shofar blasts ("malchuyot, zichronot,
shofrot"): Sovereignty so that you should make Me your King; Remembrance so
that your remembrance should rise up before Me. And through what? Through the
Shofar.' (Rosh Hashanah 16a, 34b)" This is reflected in the prayers composed by
the classical rabbinic sages for Rosh Hashanah found in all machzorim where the
theme of the prayers is the strongest theme is the "coronation" of God as King
of the universe in preparation for the acceptance of judgments that will follow
on that day, symbolized as "written" into a Divine book of judgments, that then
hang in the balance for ten days waiting for all to repent, then they will be
"sealed" on Yom Kippur. The assumption is that everyone was sealed for life and
therefore the next festival is Sukkot (Tabernacles) that is referred to as "the
time of our joy" ("z'man simchateinu"). Shofar blowing. Laws on the form and
use of the shofar and laws related to the religious services during the
festival of Rosh Hashanah are described in Rabbinic literature such as the
Mishnah that formed the basis of the tractate "Rosh HaShanah" in both the
Babylonian Talmud and the Jerusalem Talmud. This also contains the most
important rules concerning the calendar year. The shofar is blown in long,
short and staccato blasts that follow a set sequence: The total number of
blasts on Rosh Hashana is 100. Duration and timing. Rosh Hashanah occurs 163
days after the first day of Passover ("Pesach"). In terms of the Gregorian
calendar, the earliest date on which Rosh Hashanah can fall is September 5, as
happened in 1899 and will happen again in 2013. The latest date that Rosh
Hashanah can occur relative to the Gregorian dates is October 5, as happened in
1967 and will happen again in 2043. After 2089, the differences between the
Hebrew calendar and the Gregorian calendar will result in Rosh Hashanah falling
no earlier than September 6. Although the Jewish calendar is based on the lunar
cycle, so that the first day of each month originally began with the first
sighting of a new moon, since the fourth century it has been arranged so that
Rosh Hashanah never falls on a Wednesday, Friday, or Sunday. The Torah defines
Rosh Hashanah as a one-day celebration, and since days in the Hebrew calendar
begin at sundown, the beginning of Rosh Hashanah is at sundown at the end of 29
Elul. The rules of the Hebrew calendar are designed such that the first day of
Rosh Hashanah will never occur on the first, fourth, or sixth day of the Jewish
week (i.e., Sunday, Wednesday, or Friday). Since the time of the destruction of
the Second Temple of Jerusalem in 70 CE and the time of Rabban Yohanan ben
Zakkai, normative Jewish law appears to be that Rosh Hashanah is to be
celebrated for two days, due to the difficulty of determining the date of the
new moon. Nonetheless, there is some evidence that Rosh Hashanah was celebrated
on a single day in Israel as late as the thirteenth century CE. Orthodox and
Conservative Judaism now generally observe Rosh Hashanah for the first two days
of Tishrei, even in Israel where all other Jewish holidays dated from the new
moon last only one day. The two days of Rosh Hashanah are said to constitute
""Yoma Arichtah"" (Aramaic: ""one" long day"). In Reform Judaism, some
communities observe only the first day of Rosh Hashanah, while others observe
two days. Karaite Jews, who do not recognize Rabbinic Jewish oral law and rely
on their own understanding of the Torah, observe only one day on the first of
Tishrei, since the second day is not mentioned in the Written Torah. Pre-Rosh
Hashanah customs. The "Yamim Nora'im" are preceded by the month of Elul, during
which Jews are supposed to begin a self-examination and repentance, a process
that culminates in the ten days of the "Yamim Nora'im" known as beginning with
Rosh Hashanah and ending with the holiday of Yom Kippur. The "shofar" is
traditionally blown each morning for the entire month of Elul, the month
preceding Rosh Hashanah. The sound of the "shofar" is intended to awaken the
listeners from their "slumbers" and alert them to the coming judgment. The
shofar is not blown on Shabbat. In the period leading up to the "Yamim Nora'im"
(Hebrew, "days of awe"), penitential prayers, called "selichot", are recited.
Rosh Hashanah eve. The evening before Rosh Hashanah day is known as "Erev Rosh
Hashanah" ("Rosh Hashanah eve"). As with Rosh Hashanah day, it falls on the 1st
day of the Hebrew month of Tishrei, since days of the Hebrew calendar begin at
sundown. Some communities perform Hatar'at nedarim (a nullification of vows)
after the morning prayer services during the morning on the 29th of the Hebrew
month of Elul, which ends at sundown, when Erev Rosh Hashanah commences. The
mood becomes festive but serious in anticipation of the new year and the
synagogue services. Many Orthodox men immerse in a mikveh in honor of the
coming day. Rosh Hashanah prayer service. On Rosh Hashanah day, religious
poems, called "piyyuttim", are added to the regular services. A special prayer
book, the mahzor, is used on Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur (plural "mahzorim").
A number of additions are made to the regular service, most notably an extended
repetition of the Amidah prayer for both Shacharit and Mussaf. The Shofar is
blown during Mussaf at several intervals. (In many synagogues, even little
children come and hear the Shofar being blown.) Biblical verses are recited at
each point. According to the Mishnah, 10 verses (each) are said regarding
kinship, remembrance, and the shofar itself, each accompanied by the blowing of
the shofar. A variety of "piyyutim", medieval penitential prayers, are recited
regarding themes of repentance. The "Alenu" prayer is recited during the
repetition of the Mussaf Amidah. Symbolic foods. Rosh Hashanah meals usually
include apples and honey, to symbolize a sweet new year. Other foods with a
symbolic meaning may be served, depending on local "minhag" ("custom"), such as
the head of a fish (to symbolize the "head" of the year). The Sephardi and
Mizrahi communities hold a "Rosh Hashanah seder" during which blessings are
recited over a variety of symbolic dishes. The blessings start with the phrase
"Yehi ratzon," meaning "May it be thy will." In many cases, the name of the
food in Hebrew or Aramaic represents a play on words or pun. The Yehi Ratson
platter may include apples (dipped in honey, baked or cooked as a compote
called "mansanada"); dates; pomegranates; black-eyed peas; pumpkin-filled
pastries called "rodanchas"; leek fritters called "keftedes de prasa"; beets;
and a whole fish with the head intact. It is also common to eat stuffed
vegetables called "legumbres yaprakes". Some of the symbolic foods eaten are
dates, black-eyed peas, leek, spinach and gourd, all of which are mentioned in
the Talmud. Pomegranates are used in many traditions, to symbolize being
fruitful like the pomegranate with its many seeds. The use of apples and honey,
symbolizing a sweet year, is a late medieval Ashkenazi addition, though it is
now almost universally accepted. Typically, round challah bread is served, to
symbolize the cycle of the year. Gefilte fish and Lekach are commonly served by
Ashkenazic Jews on this holiday. On the second night, new fruits are served to
warrant inclusion of the shehecheyanu blessing. Tashlikh. The ritual of
tashlikh is performed on the afternoon of the first day of Rosh Hashanah.
Prayers are recited near natural flowing water, and one's sins are symbolically
cast into the water. Many also have the custom to throw bread or pebbles into
the water, to symbolize the "casting off" of sins. In some communities, if the
first day of Rosh Hashanah occurs on Shabbat, "tashlikh" is postponed until the
second day. The traditional service for "tashlikh" is recited individually and
includes the prayer "Who is like unto you, O God...And You will cast all their
sins into the depths of the sea", and Biblical passages including ("They will
not injure nor destroy in all My holy mountain, for the earth shall be as full
of the knowledge of the Lord as the waters cover the sea") and , 121 and 130,
as well as personal prayers. Though once considered a solemn individual
tradition, it has become an increasingly social ceremony practiced in groups.
