Sabbath in Christianity "For other uses, see Biblical Sabbath, Sabbath in
seventh-day churches, Shabbat, High Sabbath, and Sabbath year. In Christianity,
Sabbath is a weekly day of rest or religious observance, derived from Biblical
Sabbath (, "shabb√¢th", , meaning intensive "repose"). By the 2nd century AD,
the observance of a corporate day of worship on the first day (Sunday, or
Saturday night) had become commonplace, as attested in the patristic writings.
For such worshipers the term "Lord's Day" came to mean the first day or Sunday.
From the 4th century onwards, Sunday worship has also taken on the observance
of Sunday rest in some Christian traditions, such as the Puritans of the 16th
and 17th centuries. Among these "first-day Sabbatarians", Sunday worship and/or
rest eventually became synonymous with a first-day "Christian Sabbath".
Seventh-day Sabbath observance, i.e., resting from hard labor from sunset to
sunset on the seventh day (from Friday to Saturday), similarly to "Shabbat" in
Judaism, is practiced by Seventh-day Sabbatarians, Non-Sabbatarianism, the
principle of Christian liberty from being bound to physical Sabbath observance,
has significant historical support. Non-Sabbatarians focus on Sabbath's
typological meaning, i.e., its representation of present or future spiritual
rest in Christ. Biblical tradition. As "shabath" (rest), Sabbath was first
described in the Biblical account of the seventh day of Creation ().
Observation and remembrance of Sabbath is one of the Ten Commandments (the
fourth in the Eastern Orthodox and most Protestant traditions, the third in
Roman Catholic and Lutheran traditions). Most people who observe first-day or
seventh-day Sabbath regard it as having been instituted as a "perpetual
covenant the people of Israel" and proselytes (, , ), a sign in respect for the
day during which God rested after having completed Creation in six days (, ).
In the New Testament, Jesus debates the Jews about the topic of Sabbath
observance and declares that the Son of Man is Lord of Sabbath (e.g., ). Early
Jewish Christians such as Paul the Apostle visit the synagogue on Sabbath ().
The New Testament epistles contain Sabbath teachings interpreted variously by
Christians as affirming seventh-day rest, first-day worship, and/or freedom
from legalistic requirements to observe days. The following textual evidence
for first-day assembly is usually combined with the notion that the rest day
should follow the assembly day to support first-day Sabbatarianism. On the
first day of the week (usually considered the day of Firstfruits), after Jesus
has been raised from the dead (), he appears to Mary Magdalene, Peter, Cleopas,
and others. "On the evening of that first day of the week" (Roman time), or the
evening beginning the second day (Hebrew time), the resurrected Jesus appears
at a meeting of ten apostles and other disciples (). The same time of the week
"a week later" (NIV) or, more literally, "after eight days again" inclusive
(KJV), Jesus appears to the eleven apostles and others (). After Jesus ascends
(), on the feast of Pentecost or Shavuot (the 50th day from Firstfruits and
thus usually calculated as the first day of the week), the Spirit of God is
given to the disciples, who baptize 3,000 people into the apostolic fellowship.
Later, on one occasion in Troas, the early Christians meet on the first day
(Hebrew) to break bread and to listen to Christian preaching (). Paul also
states that the churches of Corinth and Galatia should set aside donations on
the first day for collection (). Didache 14:1 (AD 70-120?) contains an
ambiguous text, translated by Roberts as, "But every Lord's day gather
yourselves together, and break bread, and give thanksgiving"; the first clause
in Greek, " ", literally means "On the Lord's of the Lord", and translators
supply the elided noun (e.g., "day", "commandment" (from 13:7), or "doctrine").
Gleason Archer regards this as clearly referring to Sunday. Breaking bread may
refer to Christian fellowship, agape feasts, or Eucharist (cf. , ). Other
interpreters believe these references do not support the concept of transfer of
the seventh-day rest, and some add that they do not sufficiently prove that
Sunday observance was an established practice in the primitive New Testament
church. Origin of Sunday rest. Though the majority observance of Christian
Sabbath is as Sunday rest, this development was gradual. In the 2nd century,
the observance of a corporate day of worship on the first day (Sunday, or
Saturday night) had become commonplace as attested in the patristic writings.
For such worshipers the term "Lord's Day" came to mean the first day or Sunday.
From the 4th century onwards, Sunday worship has also taken on the observance
of Sunday rest in some Christian traditions, such as the Puritans of the 16th
and 17th centuries. Among these "first-day Sabbatarians", Sunday worship and/or
rest eventually became synonymous with a first-day Christian Sabbath. Seventh-
day rest. In the first centuries, the first day, being made a festival in honor
of Christ's resurrection, received attention as a day of religious services and
recreation, but seventh-day Sabbath rest was still observed by "almost all
churches". According to classical sources, widespread seventh-day Sabbath rest
by Gentile Christians was also the prevailing mode in the 3rd and 4th
centuries. Nonobservance. Early Christian observance of both spiritual seventh-
day Sabbath and Lord's Day assembly is evidenced in Ignatius's letter to the
Magnesians ca. 110. Ambiguity arises due to textual variants. The only extant
Greek parent manuscript of the letter, the "Codex Mediceus Laurentius", says,
"Those who had walked in ancient practices attained unto newness of hope, no
longer observing Sabbath, but living according to the Lord's life ..." ("kata
kyriaken zoen zontes"). The expanded Pseudo-Ignatian version of Magnesians,
possibly from the middle of the 3rd century, rewrites this passage to make
"Lord's" refer to the first day (the variant textual reading of "kata kyriaken
zontes", "living according to the Lord's", is supported by the medieval Latin
manuscript "Codex Caiensis 395", ""secundum Dominicam viventes""). Pseudo-
Ignatius amplified this point by combining weekly observance of spiritual
seventh-day Sabbath with the Lord's assembly: "Let us therefore no longer keep
the Sabbath after the Jewish manner, and rejoice in days of idleness ... But
let every one of you keep the Sabbath after a spiritual manner, rejoicing in
meditation on the law, not in relaxation of the body, admiring the workmanship
of God, and not eating things prepared the day before, nor using lukewarm
drinks, and walking within a prescribed space, nor finding delight in dancing
and plaudits which have no sense in them. And after the observance of the
Sabbath, let every friend of Christ keep the Lord's "Dominicam" as a festival,
the resurrection-day, the queen and chief of all the days." If Pseudo-Ignatius
dates as early as 140, its admonition must be considered important evidence on
2nd-century Sabbath and Lord's Day observance. The 1st- or 2nd-century Epistle
of Barnabas or Pseudo-Barnabas on regards "Sabbaths of the present age" as
unacceptable in favor of one spiritual seventh-day Sabbath that ushers in "the
eighth day" and commencement of a new world. By the mid-2nd century, Justin
Martyr, who attended worship on the first day, wrote about the cessation of
Sabbath observance and stated that Sabbath was enjoined as a temporary sign to
Israel because of Israel's sinfulness, no longer needed after Christ came
without sin. Tertullian (early 3rd century) also said "to Sabbaths are strange"
and unobserved. Sunday rest. The origin of Sunday worship in the 1st or 2nd
century remains a debated point. Often first-day worship (Sunday morning or
Saturday night) was practiced alongside observance of seventh-day Sabbath rest
and was a widespread Christian tradition by the 2nd century; over time, Sunday
thus came to be known as Lord's Day and, later, a rest day. On March 7, 321,
the Roman Emperor Constantine issued a decree making Sunday a day of rest from
labor, stating: Some church authorities opposed widespread seventh-day Sabbath
observance as a Judaizing tendency. For example, the Council of Laodicea (canon
29) required Christians to separate from Jewish laws and traditions, stating
that Christians must not Judaize by resting on Sabbath, but must work that day
and then, if possible, rest on the Lord's Day, and that any found to be
Judaizers were declared anathema from Christ. This was consistent with
Constantine's personal position towards Jewry, which has been described by the
primitive Christianity movement as being anti-Semitic, antinomian, and
persecution of seventh-day observers. Simultaneously Rabbinical Judaism was
distinguishing itself from primitive Christianity. Middle ages. Augustine of
Hippo followed the early patristic writers in spiritualizing the meaning of the
Sabbath commandment, referring it to eschatological rest rather than observance
of a literal day. However, the practice of Sunday rest increased in prominence
throughout the early Middle Ages. Thomas Aquinas taught that the Decalogue is
an expression of natural law which binds all men, and therefore the Sabbath
commandment is a moral requirement along with the other nine. Thus Sunday rest
and Sabbath became increasingly associated. Protestantism. According to
Bauckham, the reformers Martin Luther and John Calvin repudiated the idea that
Christians are bound to obey the Mosaic law, including the fourth commandment
of the Decalogue concerning Sabbath, although they followed Aquinas's concept
of natural law. They viewed Sunday rest as a civic institution established by
human authority, which provided an occasion for bodily rest and public worship.
In his work against the Antinomians, Luther rejected the idea that he had
taught the abolition of the Ten Commandments. Another Protestant Reformer, John
Wesley, stated "This 'handwriting of ordinances' our Lord did blot out, take
away, and nail to His cross. (Colossians 2:14.) But the moral law contained in
the Ten Commandments, and enforced by the prophets, He did not take away ...
The moral law stands on an entirely different foundation from the ceremonial or
ritual law ... Every part of this law must remain in force upon all mankind and
in all ages." Sunday Sabbatarianism became prevalent amongst both the
continental and English Protestants over the following century. A new rigorism
was brought into the observance of the Christian Lord's Day among the 17th-
century Puritans of England and Scotland, in reaction to the laxity with which
Sunday observance was customarily kept. Sabbath ordinances were appealed to,
with the idea that only the word of God can bind men's consciences in whether
or how they will take a break from work, or to impose an obligation to meet at
a particular time. Their influential reasoning spread to other denominations
also, and it is primarily through their influence that "Sabbath" has become the
colloquial equivalent of "Lord's Day" or "Sunday". Sunday Sabbatarianism is
enshrined in its most mature expression, the Westminster Confession of Faith
(1646), in the Calvinist theological tradition. Chapter 21, "Of Religious
Worship, and the Sabbath Day", sections 7-8 read: The confession holds that not
only is work forbidden in Sunday, but also "works, words, and thoughts" about
"worldly employments and recreations." Instead, the whole day should be taken
up with "public and private exercises of [one's] worship, and in the duties of
necessity and mercy." Strict Sunday Sabbatarianism is sometimes called "Puritan
Sabbath", often contrasted with "Continental Sabbath". The latter follows the
continental reformed confessions, such as the Heidelberg Catechism, which
emphasize rest and worship on the Lord's Day, but do not forbid recreational
activities. Though first-day Sabbatarian practice declined in the 18th century,
the evangelical awakening in the 19th century led to a greater concern for
strict Sunday observance. The founding of the Lord's Day Observance Society in
1831 was influenced by the teaching of Daniel Wilson. Modern first-day
churches. Roman Catholicism. In 1998 Pope John Paul II wrote an apostolic
letter "Dies Domini", "on keeping the Lord's day holy". He encourages Catholics
to remember the importance of keeping Sunday holy, urging that it not lose its
meaning by being blended with a frivolous "weekend" mentality. In the Western
Catholic Church, "Sabbath" is a synonym of "Lord's Day" (Sunday), which is kept
in commemoration of the resurrection of Christ, and celebrated with the
Eucharist (Catholic Catechism 2177). It is also the day of rest. Lord's Day is
considered both the first day and "the eighth day" of the seven-day week,
symbolizing both first creation and new creation (2174). Roman Catholics view
the first day as a day for assembly for worship (2178, ), but consider a day of
rigorous rest not obligatory on Christians (, ). Catholics count the
prohibition of servile work as transferred from seventh-day Sabbath to Sunday
(2175-6), but do not hinder participation in "ordinary and innocent
occupations". Cardinal Gibbons affirmed Sunday Sabbath as a sign of the Roman
Catholic Church's sufficiency as guide: Lutheranism. Lutheran founder Martin
Luther stated "I wonder exceedingly how it came to be imputed to me that I
should reject the law of Ten Commandments...Whosoever abrogates the law must of
necessity abrogate sin also." The Lutheran Augsburg Confession, speaking of
changes made by Roman Catholic Pontiffs, states: "They refer to the Sabbath-day
as having been changed into the Lord's Day, contrary to the Decalog, as it
seems. Neither is there any example whereof they make more than concerning the
changing of the Sabbath-day. Great, say they, is the power of the Church, since
it has dispensed with one of the Ten Commandments!" Lutheran church historian
Augustus Neander states "The festival of Sunday, like all other festivals, was
always only a human ordinance". Lutheran writer Marva Dawn keeps a whole day as
Sabbath, advocating for rest during any weekly complete 24-hour period and
favoring rest from Saturday sunset to Sunday sunset, but regarding corporate
worship as "an essential part of God's Sabbath reclamation." Baptists. The
Baptist Church Manual states "We believe that the law of God is the eternal and
unchangeable rule of His moral government." Other Protestants. The founder of
the Moody Bible Institute states, "Sabbath was binding in Eden, and it has been
in force ever since. This fourth commandment begins with the word 'remember,'
showing that the Sabbath already existed when God wrote the law on the tables
of stone at Sinai. How can men claim that this one commandment has been done
away with when they will admit that the other nine are still binding?"
Organizations that promote Sunday Sabbatarianism include Day One Christian
Ministries. Latter Day Saints. In 1831, Joseph Smith published a revelation
commanding his related movement, the formative Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints, to go to the house of prayer, offer up their sacraments,
rest from their labors, and pay their devotions on the Lord's day (D&C 59:
9‚Äì12). Latter-day Saints believe this means performing no labor that would
keep them from giving their full attention to spiritual matters (Ex. 20:10).
LDS prophets have described this as meaning they should not shop, hunt, fish,
attend sports events, or participate in similar activities on that day. Elder
Spencer W. Kimball taught that mere idle lounging on Sabbath does not keep the
day holy, and that Sabbath calls for constructive thoughts and acts (Miracle of
Forgiveness, pp.¬ 96‚Äì97). Latter-day Saints are encouraged to prepare only
simple foods on Sabbath (D&C 59:13, Is. 58:13) and believe the day is only for
righteous activities. In most areas of the world, Latter-day Saints worship on
Sunday, but in parts of the world where traditional Sabbath is on another day,
such as in Israel or in Saudi Arabia, Latter-day Saints observe local Sabbath.
Seventh-day Sabbath. Apostolic history. The Bible records that the followers of
Christ kept the seventh-day Sabbath that immediately followed the crucifixion
of Jesus (). In the 5th century, Sozomen ("Ecclesiastical History, Book VII"),
referencing Socrates Scholasticus, added to this description: Pre-Reformation.
Seventh-day Sabbath was observed at least sporadically by a minority of groups
during the Middle Ages. An Eastern body of Christian Sabbath-keepers mentioned
from the 8th century to the 12th is called Athenians ("touch-not") because they
abstained from uncleanness and intoxicating drinks, called Athinginians in
Neander: "This sect, which had its principal seat in the city of Armorion, in
upper Phrygia, where many Jews resided, sprung out of a mixture of Judaism and
Christianity. They united baptism with the observance of all the rites of
Judaism, circumcision excepted. We may perhaps recognize a branch of the older
Judaizing sects. Cardinal Hergenrother says that they stood in intimate
relation with Emperor Michael II (AD 821-829), and testifies that they observed
Sabbath. As late as the 11th century Cardinal Humbert still referred to the
Nazarenes as a Sabbath-keeping Christian body existing at that time. But in the
10th and 11th centuries, there was a great extension of sects from the East to
the West. Neander states that the corruption of the clergy furnished a most
important vantage-ground on which to attack the dominant church. The abstemious
life of these Christians, the simplicity and earnestness of their preaching and
teaching, had their effect. ‚ÄúThus we find them emerging at once in the
eleventh century, in countries the most diverse, and the most remote from each
other, in Italy, France, and even in the Harz districts in Germany.‚Äù
Likewise, also, ‚Äútraces of Sabbath-keepers are found in the times of Gregory
I, Gregory VII, and in the twelfth century in Lombardy.‚Äù Post-Reformation.
Seventh-day Sabbatarianism was advocated in England by John Traske
(1586‚Äì1636) and Thomas Brabourne, whose ideas gave rise to the Seventh-day
Baptists. Seventh-day churches. The Seventh-day Adventist Church arose in the
mid-19th century in America, having inherited seventh-day Sabbatarianism from
the Seventh-day Baptists. Fundamental Belief # 20 of the Seventh-day Adventist
Church states: The Worldwide Church of God (Armstrongism) taught seventh-day
Sabbath observance. The United Church of God teaches seventh-day Sabbath
observance. Seventh-day Protestants regard Sabbath as a day of rest for all
mankind and not Israel alone, based on Jesus's statement, "the Sabbath was made
for man" (i.e., purposed for humankind at the time of its creation, , cf. ),
and on early-church Sabbath meetings. Seventh-day Sabbatarianism has also been
criticized as an effort to combine Old Testament laws, practiced in Judaism,
with Christianity, or to revive the Judaizers of the Epistles or the Ebionites.
Eastern Christianity. The Eastern Orthodox church distinguishes between
"Sabbath" (Saturday) and "Lord's Day" (Sunday), and both continue to play a
special role for the faithful. Many parishes and monasteries will serve the
Divine Liturgy on both Saturday morning and Sunday morning. The church never
allows strict fasting on any Saturday (except Holy Saturday) or Sunday, and the
fasting rules on those Saturdays and Sundays which fall during one of the
fasting seasons (such as Great Lent, Apostles' Fast, etc.) are always relaxed
to some degree. During Great Lent, when the celebration of the Liturgy is
forbidden on weekdays, there is always Liturgy on Saturday as well as Sunday.
The church also has a special cycle of Bible readings (Epistle and Gospel) for
Saturdays and Sundays which is different from the cycle of readings allotted to
weekdays. However, the Lord's Day, being a celebration of the Resurrection, is
clearly given more emphasis. For instance, in the Russian Orthodox Church
Sunday is always observed with an All-Night Vigil on Saturday night, and in all
of the Orthodox Churches it is amplified with special hymns which are chanted
only on Sunday. If a feast day falls on a Sunday it is always combined with the
hymns for Sunday (unless it is a Great Feast of the Lord). Saturday is
celebrated as a sort of leave-taking for the previous Sunday, on which several
of the hymns from the previous Sunday are repeated. In part, Orthodox
Christians continue to celebrate Saturday as Sabbath because of its role in the
history of salvation: it was on a Saturday that Jesus "rested" in the tomb
after his work on the cross. For this reason also, Saturday is a day for
general commemoration of the departed, and special requiem hymns are often
chanted on this day. The Ethiopian Orthodox church (part of the Oriental
Orthodox communion, having about 40 million members) observes both Saturday and
Sunday as holy, but places extra emphasis on Sunday. Non-Sabbatarianism. Justin
Martyr, writing in the 2nd century, rejected the need to keep literal seventh-
day Sabbath, arguing instead that "the new law requires you to keep the sabbath
constantly." Similarly, Irenaeus wrote that the Christian "will not be
commanded to leave idle one day of rest, who is constantly keeping sabbath",
and Tertullian argued "that we still more ought to observe a sabbath from all
servile work always, and not only every seventh-day, but through all time".
This early metaphorical interpretation of Sabbath applied it to the entire
Christian life. Augustine, Luther and Calvin taught that the Sabbath
commandment of the Decalogue is not binding on Christians as a legal
requirement. Other historical non-Sabbatarians from more recent times include
the Anglicans Peter Heylin, William Paley and John Milton; the nonconformist
Philip Doddridge; the Quaker Robert Barclay; and Congregationalist James
Baldwin Brown. Other definitions. By synecdoche the term "Sabbath" in the New
Testament may also mean simply a "se'nnight" or seven-day week, namely, the
interval between two Sabbaths. Jesus's parable of the Pharisee and the Publican
describes the Pharisee as fasting "twice a week" (Greek "dis tou sabbatou",
literally, "twice of the Sabbath"). Seven annual Biblical festivals, called by
the name "miqra" ("called assembly") in Hebrew and "High Sabbath" in English,
serve as supplemental testimonies to Sabbath. These are recorded in the books
of Exodus and Deuteronomy and do not necessarily occur on Sabbath. They are
observed by Jews and a minority of Christians. Three of them occur in spring:
the first and seventh days of Passover, and Pentecost. Four occur in fall, in
the seventh month, and are also called "Shabbaton": Trumpets; Atonement,
"Sabbath of Sabbaths"; and the first and eighth days of Tabernacles. The year
of "Shmita" (Hebrew ◊©◊û◊ô◊ò◊î, literally, "release"), also called Sabbatical
Year, is the seventh year of the seven-year agricultural cycle mandated by the
Torah for the Land of Israel. During "Shmita", the land is to be left to lie
fallow. A second aspect of "Shmita" concerns debts and loans: when the year
ends, personal debts are considered nullified and forgiven. Jewish "Shabbat" is
a weekly day of rest cognate to Christian Sabbath, observed from sundown on
Friday until the appearance of three stars in the sky on Saturday night; it is
also observed by a minority of Christians. Customarily, "Shabbat" is ushered in
by lighting candles shortly before sunset, at halakhically calculated times
that change from week to week and from place to place. The new moon, occurring
every 29 or 30 days, is an important separately sanctioned occasion in Judaism
and some other faiths. It is not widely regarded as Sabbath, but some Messianic
and Pentecostal churches, such as the native New Israelites of Peru and the
Creation Seventh Day Adventist Church, do keep the day of the new moon as
Sabbath or rest day, from evening to evening. New-moon services can last all
day. In South Africa, Christian Boers have celebrated December 16, now called
the Day of Reconciliation, as annual Sabbath (holy day of thanksgiving) since
1838, commemorating a famous Boer victory over the Zulu. Many early Christian
writers from the 2nd century, such as pseudo-Barnabas, Irenaeus, Justin Martyr
and Hippolytus of Rome followed rabbinic Judaism (the "Mishna") in interpreting
Sabbath not as a literal day of rest, but as a thousand-year reign of Jesus
Christ, which would follow six millennia of world history. Secular use of
"Sabbath" for "rest day", while it usually refers to Sunday, is often stated in
North America to refer to different purposes for the rest day than those of
Christendom. In "McGowan v. Maryland" (1961), the Supreme Court of the United
States held that contemporary Maryland blue laws (typically, Sunday rest laws)
were intended to promote the secular values of "health, safety, recreation, and
general well-being" through a common day of rest, and that this day coinciding
with majority Christian Sabbath neither reduces its effectiveness for secular
purposes nor prevents adherents of other religions from observing their own
holy days.
