Sabbath School Sabbath School is a function of the Seventh-day Adventist
Church, Seventh Day Baptist and some other sabbatarian denominations, usually
comprising a song service and lesson. Activities. Sabbath School usually begins
at 9:30am or 10:00am on Saturday mornings before the worship service starts.
The Sabbath school service for adults typically has two portions. The first
portion begins with a song service, followed by a mission emphasis and a short
talk. The second, and larger portion, is the lesson study. Different churches
conduct Sabbath School in many ways, mostly teaching on the same topic or
reading in a given week, as each quarter of the year has a different theme that
reflects Bible, doctrinal, or church lifestyle teachings. The lesson booklet is
called "quarterly." Sabbath School may be conducted in one large class, or the
congregation may separate into smaller groups for discussion in the sanctuary
or in different rooms. Participation is not restricted to Church members. Young
people often meet separately. After Sabbath School the church service begins,
usually at 11:00am. On the last Sabbath of the quarter, or the 13th Sabbath, a
special collection is taken for a missionary project. During the "13th Sabbath
Program," youngsters may present a music or acting special based on the subject
learned that quarter or explain the traditions and dress in the attire of the
countries or world regions which offerings collected will benefit. Communion
Service preceded by footwashing may take place on or right after the 13th
Sabbath. A 2002 worldwide survey of local church leaders estimated that 67% of
Adventists, including 63% of under-18s, "attend Sabbath school nearly every
week". Teachers. Sabbath school teachers are usually lay people selected by a
designated coordinator, board, or committee. Normally, the selection is based
on a perception of character and ability to teach the Bible rather than formal
training in education, although some Sabbath school teachers have a background
in education as a result of their occupation. Some churches offer courses in
teaching, or hold teachers' classes to go over the lesson for that Sabbath;
other churches allow volunteers who make a profession of faith to teach without
training. Study guides (Seventh-day Adventist). Adult lesson. Adult church
members are provided with the "Adult Bible Study Guide" (formerly known as
"Sabbath School Quarterly") issued four times a year. It is also known as the
"Quarterly" and the "Lesson". It is published by Pacific Press Publishing
Association. Sabbath School quarterlies are Bible study guides that cover a
specific topic or book of the Bible every quarter. The quarterly is designed to
be read during the week, so that during Sabbath School, the class members are
ready to discuss questions and topics raised in that lesson in small groups.
The Adult Sabbath School always has a heavy focus on the Bible. All Seventh-day
Adventists around the world use the same Sabbath school quarterly, translated
into the necessary languages (with few exceptions such as Germany, where
members cover the same topic with different material). {{As of|2012]] the
editor of the Adult Sabbath School lessons was Clifford Goldstein. Other
lessons. At the same time as the adult study, children attend classes for their
age group. Typical age group divisions are Beginner (infants), Kindergarten
(K), Primary (Grades 1-3), Junior (Grades 4-6), Earliteen (Grades 7-8), and
Youth (High School and University). Each age division has its own specific
quarterly, which is titled by the class name up to Primary. Juniors and
Earliteens often share the same quarterly entitled "PowerPoints". Some
Earliteen groups use a separate publication entitled "Real Time Faith". Youth
use either "Cornerstone Connections" or "Collegiate Quarterly (CQ)". Some
churches give the children a weekly magazine at the close of Sabbath school.
Kindergarten receives "Our Little Friend", Primary receives "Primary Treasure",
Juniors and Earliteens receive "Guide", and the Youth receive "Insight".
