Sabbath mode Sabbath mode, also known as Shabbos mode (Ashkenazi pronunciation)
or Shabbat mode, is a feature in many modern home appliances, including ovens
and refrigerators, which is intended to allow the appliances to be used
(subject to various constraints) by Shabbat-observant Jews on the Shabbat and
Jewish holidays. Jews are forbidden from doing creative work on the Shabbat.
Observant Jews interpret this to include doing things such as making a fire,
preparing food or even closing a switch or pressing an electronic button.
Appliances. Oven. While raw food may not be cooked on the Shabbat, food that
was already cooked beforehand may be kept warm until mealtime. On some
holidays, food may be cooked fresh, but turning the heat on is prohibited. In
the past, the problem could be solved simply by lighting a stove or oven before
the day began, and using its heat over the course of the day. In recent
decades, however, appliance manufacturers have instituted a safety feature that
automatically shuts off the heat after a number of hours. This renders the
appliance useless for those who observe these religious laws. When an oven is
in Shabbat mode, the standard six- or twelve-hour automatic shutoff is
overridden, and all lights and displays (for example, a light that might go on
when the door is opened) are disabled. In more recently designed ovens, Shabbat
mode will often feature the ability to adjust the temperature of the oven
without any feedback to the operator of the oven. This is not relevant to the
Shabbat, but is useful on some holidays, when adjusting the heat is allowed,
but changing a digital readout on the control panel is not, according to the
prevailing Orthodox opinion and the minority Conservative view. With some
Shabbat mode ovens that are controlled using a keypad to set the temperature,
there is a random delay triggered after a button is pressed before the
temperature change takes place. In June 2008, a number of prominent poskim
signed a public pronouncement (Kol Koreh) stating that it was unequivocally
forbidden to raise or lower the temperature by reprogramming on Yom Tov using
the Star-K approved Shabbat Mode feature. The pronouncement referred to the
long-held lenient opinion of Rabbi Moshe Heinemann as a minority opinion that
should not be relied upon (Daas Yachid). However, it has been pointed out that
Rabbi Heinemann's opinion is fully consistent with the rulings of Rabbi Shlomo
Zalman Auerbach. Refrigerator. A Shabbat mode refrigerator includes, at a
minimum, the ability to disable all lights or other electrical activity from
occurring when the refrigerator door is opened. Some Shabbat mode refrigerators
include a timer for the compressor so that opening the door, which will
normally indirectly cause the compressor to turn on as the temperature rises,
will have no effect on the electrical operation of the appliance. Lamp. A
Shabbat lamp is a special lamp that has movable parts to expose or block out
its light so it can be turned "on" or "off" while its power physically remains
on.
