Sabellianism In Christianity, Sabellianism, (also known as modalism, modalistic
monarchianism, or modal monarchism) is the nontrinitarian belief that the
Heavenly Father, Resurrected Son and Holy Spirit are different "modes" or
"aspects" of one God, as perceived by "the believer", rather than three
distinct persons in " God Himself". The term Sabellianism comes from Sabellius,
a theologian and priest from the 3rd century. Modalism differs from
Unitarianism by accepting the Christian doctrine that Jesus is fully God.
Meaning and origins. God was said to have three "faces" or "masks" (Greek
πρόσωπα "prosopa"; Latin "personae"). The number three is never
mentioned in relation to God in scripture, which of course is the number that
is central to the word "Trinity". The only possible exceptions to this are the
Great Commission Matthew 28:16-20, 2 Corinthians 13:14, and the Comma
Johanneum, which many regard as a spurious text passage in First John (1 John
5:7) known primarily from the King James Version and some versions of the
Textus Receptus but not included in modern critical texts. It is also suspected
that Matthew 28:19 is not part of the original text, because Eusebius of
Caesarea quoted it by saying "In my name", and there is no mention of baptism
in the verse. Eusebius only quoted the trinitarian formula after the Council of
Nicea,(Conybeare(Hibbert Journal, i(1902-3) Page 102). The Shem-Tob's Hebrew
Gospel of Matthew,(George Howard), also has no reference of baptism or a
trinitarian formula in Matthew 28:19. Trinitarians believe that all three
members of the Trinity were present as seemingly distinct beings at Jesus'
baptism, and believe there is other scriptural evidence for Trinitarianism (see
main page for details). Modalism has been mainly associated with Sabellius, who
taught a form of it in Rome in the 3rd century. This had come to him via the
teachings of Noetus and Praxeas. Hippolytus of Rome knew Sabellius personally
and mentioned him in the "Philosophumena". He knew Sabellius disliked
Trinitarian theology, yet he called Modal Monarchism the heresy of Noetus, not
that of Sabellius. Sabellianism was embraced by Christians in Cyrenaica, to
whom Demetrius, Patriarch of Alexandria, wrote letters arguing against this
belief. Colossians 1:15-20 (ESV) Jesus answered: "Don't you know me, Philip,
even after I have been among you such a long time? Anyone who has seen me has
seen the Father. How can you say, 'Show us the Father'? A notable modern
adherent of Modalism is T.D. Jakes Catholic criticism. Catholics charge that
modalistic monarchianism has its origin by means of influence in Greek pagan
philosophy, including pagan philosophers like Euclid and Aristotle, who based
their logic on Monism and Aristotle's arguments around his concept energeia
(i.e. energy) called metaphysics. Aristotelian logic is the way ontologically
or via metaphysics that Hellenic pagan philosopher Aristotle reasoned (Aquinas
analytically, Zeno, Plato and Socrates dialectically, Aristotle
syllogistically) to deconstructed human consciousness and existence and being.
In order to represent their view of the monad or single-ness (unity of all
things). As unity or oneness in the "idea" of God and God's ousia as the
essence or universal category above finite being. Ancient opposition. The chief
critic of Sabellianism was Tertullian, who labeled the movement
"Patripassianism", from the Latin words "pater" for "father", and "passus" from
the verb "to suffer" because it implied that the Father suffered on the Cross.
It was coined by Tertullian in his work "Adversus Praxeas", Chapter I, "By this
Praxeas did a twofold service for the devil at Rome: he drove away prophecy,
and he brought in heresy; he put to flight the Paraclete, and he crucified the
Father." It is important to note that our only sources extant for our
understanding of Sabellianism are from their detractors. Scholars today are not
in agreement as to what exactly Sabellius or Praxeas taught. It is easy to
suppose Tertullian and Hippolytus misrepresented the opinions of their
opponents. Tertullian seems to suggest that the majority of believers at that
time favoured the Sabellian view of the oneness of God. Epiphanius (Haeres 62)
about 375 notes that the adherents of Sabellius were still to be found in great
numbers, both in Mesopotamia and at Rome. The first general council at
Constantinople in 381 in canon VII and the third general council at
Constantinople in 680 in canon XCV declared the baptism of Sabellius to be
invalid, which indicates that Sabellianism was still extant. Historic
Sabellianism taught that God the Father was the only true existence of the
Godhead, a belief known as Monarchianism. One author has described Sabellius'
teaching thus: "The true question, therefore, turns on this, viz., what is it
which constitutes what we name ‘person’ in the Godhead? Is it original,
substantial, essential to divinity itself? Or does it belong to and arise from
the exhibitions and developments which the divine Being has made of himself to
his creatures? The former Sabellius denied; the latter he fully admitted." It
has been noted that the Greek term "homoousian" or "con-substantial", which
Athanasius of Alexandria favoured, was actually a term reported to be put forth
by Sabellius, and was a term that many followers of Athanasius were uneasy
about. Their objection to the term "homoousian" was that it was considered to
be un-Scriptural, suspicious, and "of a Sabellian tendency." This was because
Sabellius also considered the Father and the Son to be "one substance." Meaning
that, to Sabellius, the Father and Son were one essential person. Sabellianism
has been rejected by the majority of Christian churches in favour of
Trinitarianism, which was eventually defined as three distinct, co-equal, co-
eternal persons by the Athanasian Creed late in the 4th century. Eastern
Orthodox view. The Orthodox teach that God is not of a substance that is
comprehensible since God the Father has no origin and is eternal and infinite.
That it is improper to speak of things as physical and metaphysical but rather
it is Christian to speak of things as created and uncreated. God the Father is
the origin, source of the Trinity not God in substance or essence. Therefore
the consciousness of God is not obtainable to created beings either in this
life or the next (see apophatism), though through co-operation with God (called
theosis) Mankind can become good (God-like) and from such a perspective
reconcile himself to the Knowledge of Good and the Knowledge of Evil he
consumed in the Garden of Eden (see the Fall of Man). Thus returning himself to
the proper relationship with his creator and source of being. Later teachings.
Oneness Pentecostalism teaches that the Father (a spirit) is united with Jesus
(a man) as the Son of God. However, Oneness Pentecostalism differs
significantly by rejecting sequential modalism and by the full acceptance of
the begotten humanity of the Son, not eternally begotten, who was the man Jesus
and was born, crucified, and risen, and not the deity. This directly opposes
Patripassianism and the pre-existence of the Son, which Sabellianism does not.
Oneness Pentecostals believe that Jesus was "Son" only when he became flesh on
earth, but was the Father prior to his being made human. They refer to the
Father as the "Spirit" and the Son as the "Flesh". But they believe that Jesus
and the Father are one essential Person. Though operating as different
"manifestations". Oneness Pentecostals reject the Trinity doctrine as pagan and
un-Scriptural, and hold to the Jesus' Name doctrine with respect to baptisms.
They are often referred to as "Modalists" or "Sabellians" or "Jesus Only".
Oneness Pentecostalism can be compared to Sabellianism, or can be described as
holding to a form of Sabellianism, as both are Nontrinitarian, and as both
believe that Jesus was "Almighty God in the Flesh", but they do not totally
identify each other.
