Sabians The Sabians () of Middle Eastern tradition were a monotheistic
Abrahamic religious group mentioned three times in the Quran with the people of
the Book, "the Jews, the Sabians, and the Christians." In the "hadith", they
are described merely as converts to Islam, but interest in the identity and
history of the group increased over time, and discussions and investigations
about the Sabians begin to appear in later Islamic literature. In later Islamic
sources. According to Muslim authors, Sabians followed the fourth book of
Abrahamic tradition, the "Zabur," which was given to the prophet King David of
Ancient Israel according to the Qur'an. The "Zabur" is identified by many
modern scholars as the biblical Book of Psalms. Most of what is known of them
comes from Ibn Wahshiyya's "The Nabatean Agriculture", and the translation of
this by Maimonides. Other classical Arabic sources include the "Fihrist" of Ibn
al-Nadim, (c. 987), who mentions the "Mogtasilah" ("Mughtasila," or "self-
ablutionists"), a sect of Sabians in southern Mesopotamia who counted El-Hasaih
as their founder and academics agree that they are probably the enigmatic
"Sobiai" to whom Elchasai preached in Parthia. According to Daniel Chwolsohn
(1856) they appear to have gravitated around the original pro-Jewish Hanputa of
Elchasai out of which the miso-Judaic prophet Mani seceded and are identified
therefore as the pro-Torah "Sampsaeans" but also less accurately with the anti-
Torah Mandaeans. They were said by Khalil Ibn Ahmad (d.786) to believe that
they "belonged" to the prophet Noah. Some supposed that they influenced the
practices of the Hellenic Godfearers ("theosebeis" ) while their angelology
(based around the movements of the Sun, Moon, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus and
Saturn) found its greatest development in the community which was based in the
Harran region of south-eastern Anatolia and northern Syria. Ibn al-Qayyim
distinguished them as the Sabians of Harran from the south Mesopotamian
"Sābi'ūna Hunafā". Etymology. There has been much speculation as to the
origins of the religious endonym from this practice. Segal (1963) argued that
the term Sābi'ūn derives from the Syriac root "S-b-' ", referring to
conversion through submersion. The Syriac (and Hebrew) nouns derived from this
root refer to proselytes, both "Judaisers" — non-converts who followed
certain basic rules of Judaism — and early Christian converts of non-Jewish
origin and practice. These latter were called "Theosebeians" "God-fearers",
"Sebomenoi" "Believers", or "Phobeomenoi" () "pious ones" in Greek sources. The
Greek etymology of "sebomai" (), applied to the proselytes, is in the word
"eusebian" (), meaning a kind of godliness and reverence or worshipfulness.
According to Islamic scholars, the word Sābi'ūna (Sabian) is derived from the
verb "saba’a", which refers to the action of leaving one religion and
entering another. Sabians practiced initiation through submersion in water,
intended to harken to the inundation of the world during the deluge of the time
of Noah which cleansed man's sinful nature from the face of the earth.
Overview. In the later ninth century CE, Arab authors focused upon the origins
of the "Abrahamic" Sabians from the "Hellenistic" Sabians and went into much
detail on the Harranian period before the time of Abraham. Most of this
knowledge was translated in 904 CE from Syriac sources into the book called
"The Nabatean Agriculture" by Ibn Wahshiyya; Maimonides considered it an
accurate record of the beliefs of the Sabians, whose role as a pre-Judaic
monotheistic movement he commented on at length. Despite substantial and clear
documentation about both kinds of Sabians spanning many centuries from sources
as diverse as Greek Christian, Arabic Muslim, Arabic and Persian Bahá'í, as
well as Jewish sources and documents, the actual nature of the Sabians has
remained a matter of some heated debate among Orientalists. Therefore, "Sabian"
has been used mistakenly in many literary references for decades and though,
the spelling "Sabian" usually refers to one of the People of the Book mentioned
in the Qur'an, it is also used by the Mandaeans under the variation of
"Sabaean" detailed below. The variation "Sabean" has been employed in English
to distinguish the ancient Harranian group, but the usage is not universal. The
confusion of Sabaeans and Sabians began with Marmaduke Pickthall's spelling
mistake in his translation of the Qur'an. The word "Sabaeans" comes from a
completely different root spelling, beginning with the Arabic letter "Sin"
instead of the Arabic letter "Sad". The Sabaeans were in fact the people of
ancient Saba in Yemen who scholars have shown to have no connection to the
Sabians of the Qur'an, except for their Ansar tribe, which practiced Qur'anic
Sabianism. Al-Biruni (writing at the beginning of the eleventh century CE) said
that the '"real Sabians'" were "the remnants of the Jewish tribes who remained
in Babylonia when the other tribes left it for Jerusalem in the days of Cyrus
and Artaxerxes. According to Ethel Drower (1937) these remaining tribes ...
adopted a system mixed up of Magism and Judaism.' Islamic reference. The recent
debate on who the Sabians were is directly connected to how to best translate
the following verses from the Qur'an out of the original Arabic. The Sabians
existed before Muhammad, and are said to have read from a book called the
"Zabur" ("Psalms"). They came under Islamic rule about 639 CE. At that time in
history they were described as Greek immigrants but were grouped together with
the Nabataeans. Many Islamic writers from the period of about 650 CE onward
gave further descriptions of the Sabians. They wrote that the Sabians lived in
Iraq around Sawad, Kutha and Mosul and they "wash themselves with water", had
"long hair", and "white gowns". They had a monotheistic faith with religious
literature (the Zabur) and acknowledged the prophets. Their theology resembled
that of Judaism and Christianity yet were neither, nor were they Magians. With
regard to their beliefs, Ibn al-Qayyim said: "The people differed greatly
concerning them, and the imams were unsure about them because they did not have
enough knowledge of their beliefs and religion." Al-Shaafa’i said: "Their
case is to be examined further; if they resemble the Christians in basic
matters but they differ from them in some minor issues, then the "jizya" is to
be taken from them. But if they differ from them in basic issues of religion
then their religion cannot be approved of by taking the "jizya" from them." And
he elaborated elsewhere: "They are a kind of Christian," a view consistent with
a comment about some of them mentioned in Bahá'i writings. Ibn al-Qayyim said:
"The Sabians are a large nation among whom are both blessed and doomed. They
are one of the nations who are divided into believers and disbelievers, for the
nations before the coming of the Prophet (Peace and Blessings of Allāh be Upon
Him) were of two types, "kāfir" nations all of whose people were doomed and
among whom were none who were blessed, such as the idol-worshippers and the
Magians; and others who were divided into those who were blessed and those who
were doomed, namely the Jews, Christians and Sabians." According to Islamic
scholars, they did not reject the Prophets of Islam but neither did they regard
it as obligatory to follow them. In their view Whoever followed (the Prophets)
may be blessed and saved, but whoever follows a path similar to that of the
Prophets "by virtue of one's own reasoning" is also blessed and saved, even if
one did not follow the Prophets in specific terms. In their view the call of
the Prophets was true but there was "no one specific route" to salvation. They
believed that the universe had a Creator and Sustainer, Who is Wise and above
any resemblance to created beings, but many of them, or most of them, (i.e. the
Sabians of Harran) said: we are unable to reach Him without intermediaries, so
we have to approach Him through the mediation of spiritual and holy Bud Asaf
who are pure and free of any physical elements and who are above place and
time, rather they are created pure and holy. Abd al-Rahman Ibn Zayd (d. 798 CE)
wrote: "The Sābi'ūn say that their religion is a religion to itself and they
live near Mosul (jazirat al-mawsil) and believe in only one God." He also wrote
that they have: "no cult though their main belief is 'La ilaha il Allāh'." He
also remarked that: "the Sābi'ūn did not believe in the Prophet Muhammad (in
the same way as his followers did), yet the polytheists were known to say of
the Prophet and his companions 'these are the Sabians' comparing them to them."
following the Din of Noah as a sect who read the Zabur akin to Christianity.
They appear to be between Judaism and Magianism but are in fact closer to
Judaism. Sābi'ūn recognise the practice of Muhammad in going to the caves
prior to his inspiration, as in accordance with the Sabi quest for Tawheed
Hunafa' and, in general, many similarities with the Sabians meant Muhammad and
his companions were often considered to have been Sabians. Most specifically
this was because of the Sabian shahada “La ilaha ila Allāh”. The root-
meaning of the word "Sabian" (from which they derive Seboghatullah) means
proselyte, and is identical in usage with the Greek words for Godfearers
"sebomenoi", "theosebes", "phobeomenoi". Characteristics of the Sabi religion.
Sābi'ūn knew God as the "Rabb al-'alihah" (lord of gods) and "'ilah al-
'alihah (god of gods)" and speak to angels in their meditations, each of whom
they believe dwell in different stars, which has led to the erroneous beliefs
among some that Sābi'ūn worship angels while others derogatorily call them
star-worshipers (and so it is said in Arabic "saba'at al-nujūm", meaning "the
stars appeared"). Sābi'ūn read from the "Zaboor" (as with the Slavonic
Subbotniki or Psaltirschiki) and use the sun for a qiblah, facing the equator
at mid day. Their fundamental teaching is "La ilahah il Allah" (there is no god
but Allah), but besides this ardent unitarianism, Sābi'ūn are quite akin to
Christians. Hanif Sabians are more universal, looking to Noah as their prophet
of the Dīn.Sābi'ūn have five daily prayers (though Zohar can join Asr while
Maghrib can join Isha giving the appearance of three). They believe in all
prophets, reiterating the Din of Noah and, not in the same way as the Muslims,
believe in the Seal of the prophets. They also fast for 30 days. Non Islamic
sources. Maimonides. Although too late to be of relevance in identifying the
sect mentioned in the Qur'an, Maimonides wrote about the Sabians, . Based upon
a book called "The Nabataean Agriculture" which Maimonides translated,
Maimonides' "Guide for the Perplexed" describes the Sabians in quite some
detail. They were questioned by Caliph al-Ma'mun of Baghdad in 830 CE,
according to Abu Yusuf Absha al-Qadi, about what protected religion they
belonged to. Not being Muslim, Christian, Jewish or Magian, the caliph told
them they were nonbelievers and would have to become Muslims or adherents of
one of the other religions recognized by the Qur'an by the time he returned
from his campaign against the Byzantines or he would kill them. The Harranians
consulted with a lawyer who suggested that they find their answer in the Qur'an
II.59 which made it clear that Sabians were tolerated. It was unknown what was
intended by Sabian and so they took the name. These newly-dubbed Harranian
Sabians acknowledged Hermes Trismegistus as their prophet and the "Corpus
Hermeticum" as their sacred text, being a group of Hermeticists. Validation of
Hermes as a prophet comes from his identification as Idris (i.e. Enoch) in the
Qur'an (19.57 and 21.85). The Harranian Sabians played a vital role in Baghdad
and the rest of the Arab world from 856 until about 1050; playing the role of
the main source of Greek philosophy and science as well as shaping the
intellectual life. The most prominent of the Harranian Sabians was Thabit ibn
Qurra. A Yezidi writer. The Yezidi, and later French citizen and Vice-Consul at
Mosul, Nicolas Siouffi in his "Études sur la religion des Soubbas ou Sabéens,
leurs dogmes, leurs moeurs" (Paris: Imprimerie Nationale, 1880) claimed to have
identified 4,000 Sabians in the Soubbhas. This was well received by the
Theosophist G. R. S. Mead, but received critical reviews from scholars. In the
Bahá'í writings. The Sabians are also mentioned in the literature of the
Bahá'í Faith. These references are brief for the most part, once describing a
group who believe in Jesus). `Abdu'l-Bahá has one brief reference where he
describes Seth as one of the "sons of Adam". Bahá'u'lláh in a Tablet
identifies Idris with Hermes. He does not, however, specifically name Idris as
the prophet of the Sabians. Modern critical scholarship. Possible
identifications for the Sabians include Mandaeans and Harranians. Jaakko
Hämeen-Anttila (2002, 2006) notes that in the marsh areas of Southern Iraq
there was a continuous tradition of Mandaean religion, but also another pagan,
or "Sabian," centre in the tenth-century Islamic world centred on Harran. These
pagan "Sabians" are mentioned in the Nabataean corpus of Ibn Wahshiyya. "The
Sabians, who were pagans in the Middle East, were identified with two groups,
the Mandaeans and the Harranians. The Mandaeans lived in Iraq during the 2nd
century A.D. As they continue to do today, they worshipped multiple gods, or
"light personalities." Their gods were classified under four categories: "first
life," "second life," "third life" and "fourth life." Old gods belong to the
"first life" category. They summoned deities who, in turn, created "second
life" deities, and so forth. References. Churton, Tobias. "The Golden Builders:
Alchemists, Rosicrucians, and the First Freemasons". New York: Barnes and
Noble, 2002.
