Sacred language A sacred language, "holy language" (in religious context), or
liturgical language, is a language that is cultivated for religious reasons by
people who speak another language in their daily life. Concept. Once a language
becomes associated with religious worship, its believers often ascribe virtues
to the language of worship that they would not give to their native tongues. In
the case of sacred texts, there is a justified fear of losing authenticity and
accuracy by a translation or re-translation, and difficulties in getting
general acceptance for a new version of a text. The sacred language is
typically vested with a solemnity and dignity that the vernacular lacks.
Consequently, the training of clergy in the use of the sacred language becomes
an important cultural investment, and their use of the tongue is perceived to
give them access to a body of knowledge that untrained lay people cannot (or
should not) access. In medieval Europe, the (real or putative) ability to read
(see also benefit of clergy) scripture—which was in Latin—was considered a
prerogative of the priesthood, and a benchmark of literacy; until near the end
of the period almost all who could read and write could do so in Latin. Because
sacred languages are ascribed with virtues that the vernacular is not perceived
to have, the sacred languages typically preserve characteristics that would
have been lost in the course of language development. In some cases, the sacred
language is a dead language. In other cases, it may simply reflect archaic
forms of a living language. For instance, some 17th century elements of the
English language remain current in Protestant Christian worship through the use
of the "King James Bible" or older versions of the Anglican "Book of Common
Prayer". In more extreme cases, the language has changed so much from the
language of the sacred texts that the liturgy is no longer comprehensible
without special training. In some instances, the sacred language may not even
be (or have been) native to a local population, that is, missionaries or
pilgrims may carry the sacred language to peoples who never spoke it, and to
whom it is an altogether alien language. The concept of sacred languages is
distinct from that of divine languages, which are languages ascribed to the
divine (i.e. God or gods) and may not necessarily be natural languages. The
concepts may however overlap, as expressed for example in "Devanāgarī", the
name of a script that means "urban(e) of the deities." Buddhism. Theravada
Buddhism uses Pali as its main liturgical language, and prefers its scriptures
to be studied in the original Pali. Mahayana Buddhism makes little use of its
original language, Sanskrit. An unusual form of liturgical language is found in
some Japanese rituals where Chinese texts are read out or recited with the
Japanese pronunciations of their constituent characters, resulting in something
unintelligible in both languages. In Thailand, Pali is written using the Thai
alphabet, resulting in a Thai monotone-like pronunciation of the Pali language.
In Tibetan Buddhism, Tibetan language is used, but mantras are in Sanskrit.
Christianity. Christian rites, rituals, and ceremonies are not celebrated in
one single sacred language. The Churches which trace their origin to the
Apostles have continued to use the standard languages of the first few
centuries AD. The extensive use of the Greek in the Roman Liturgy has continued
up to the present, in theory; it was used extensively on a regular basis during
the Papal Mass, which has not been celebrated for some time. The continuous use
of Greek in the Roman Liturgy came to be replaced in part by Latin by the reign
of Pope Saint Damasus I. Gradually, the Roman Liturgy took on more and more
Latin until, generally, only a few words of Hebrew and Greek remained. The
adoption of Latin was further fostered when the Vetus Latina version of the
Bible was edited and parts retranslated from the original Hebrew and Greek by
Saint Jerome in his Vulgate. Latin continued as the Western Church's language
of liturgy and communication. One simply practical reason for this may be that
there were no standardized vernaculars throughout the Middle Ages. Church
Slavonic was used for the celebration of the Roman Liturgy in the 9th century
(twice, 867-873 and 880-885). In the mid-sixteenth century the Council of Trent
rejected a proposal to introduce national languages as this was seen, among
other reasons, as potentially divisive to Catholic unity. The vernacular was
used in the rite of the Roman Liturgy only among certain Roman Rite Slavs of
Croatia and Dalmatia, for example in the so-called Missale Romanum Glagolitice
[http://www.newadvent.org/cathen/06575b.htm]. The particular vernacular was
also used in the inquiry of bride and bridegroom as to whether they accepted
their marriage-vows itself. Jesuit missionaries to China had sought, and for a
short time, received permission to translate the Roman Missal into scholarly
Classical Chinese. (See Chinese Rites controversy). However, ultimately
permission was revoked. Among the Algonquin and Iroquois, the received
permission to translate the propers of the Mass into the vernacular. In the
20th c., Pope Pius XII granted permission for a few vernaculars to be used in a
few rites, rituals, and ceremonies. This did not include the Roman Liturgy of
the Mass. The Catholic Church, long before the Second Œcumenical Council of
the Vatican ('Vatican II') accepted and promoted the use of the non-vernacular
liturgical languages listed above; vernacular (i.e. modern or native) languages
were never used liturgically until 1964, when the first permissions were given
for certain parts of the Roman Liturgy to be celebrated in certain approved
vernacular translations. The use of vernacular language in liturgical practice
created controversy for a majority of Catholics, and opposition to liturgical
vernacular is a major tenet of the Catholic Traditionalist movement. In the
twentieth century, Vatican II set out to protect the use of Latin as a
liturgical language. To a large degree, its prescription was initially
disregarded and the vernacular became not only standard, but generally used
exclusively in the liturgy. Latin, which remains the chief language of the
Roman Rite, is the main language of the Roman Missal (the official book of
liturgy for the Latin Rite) and of the Code of Canon Law, and use of liturgical
Latin is still encouraged. Large-scale papal ceremonies often make use of it.
Meanwhile, the numerous Eastern Catholic Churches in union with Rome each have
their own respective 'parent-language'. As a subsidiary issue, unrelated to
liturgy, the Eastern Code of Canon Law, for the sake of convenience, has been
promulgated in Latin. Eastern Orthodox Churches are varied in use of liturgical
languages within their Church services. Koine Greek and Church Slavonic are the
main sacred languages used in the Churches of the Eastern Orthodox communion.
However, The Eastern Orthodox Church permits other languages to be used for
liturgical worship, and each country often will have the liturgical services in
their own language. This has led to a wide variety of languages used for
liturgical worship, but there is still uniformity in the liturgical worship
itself. So one can attend an Orthodox service in another location and the
service will be (relatively) the same. Liturgical languages used in the Eastern
Orthodox Church include (but are not limited to): Koine Greek, Church Slavonic,
Romanian, Georgian, Arabic, Ukrainian, Bulgarian, Moldovan, Serbian, English,
Spanish, French, Polish, Portuguese, Albanian, Finnish, Swedish, Chinese,
Estonian, Korean, Japanese, many African dialects, and many other world
languages. Oriental Orthodox Churches regularly pray in the vernacular of the
community within which a Church outside of its ancestral land is located.
However some clergymen and communities prefer to retain their traditional
language or use a combination of languages. Many Anabaptist groups, such as the
Amish, continue to use High German in their worship despite not speaking it
amongst themselves. Hinduism. Hinduism is traditionally considered to have one
liturgical language, Sanskrit. It is the language of the Vedas, Bhagavadgita
and the Upanishads, and various other liturgical texts such as the Sahasranama,
Chamakam and Rudram. It is also the tongue of most Hindu rituals. The people
following Kaumaram, Vainavam, Shaivam sects of Tamil Nadu use Tamil as
liturgical language along with Sanskrit. Divya Prabandha is chanted in most of
the South Indian Vishnu temples. Tamils consider their language to be sacred
and divine with equal status to Sanskrit within temple rituals. The divya
prabhandams and Devarams are referred to as Dravaida Vedam (Tamil Veda). A long
standing myth states that Sanskrit and Tamil emerged from either side of Lord
Shiva's divine drum of creation as he danced the dance of creation as Nataraja
or sound of cosmic force. Islam. Classical Arabic is the sacred language of
Islam. It is the language of the Qur'an, and the native language of Muhammad.
Like Latin in medieval Europe, Arabic shares both the role of intellectual
language as well as the role of liturgical language in much of the Islamic
world. Muslim history, particularly the Nizari-Ismailis of Khurasan and
Badakhshan, witnessed and experienced Persian as a liturgical language during
the Alamut period(1094 to 1256 CE) and post-Alamut period (1256 to present).
Judaism. The core of the Tanakh (the Hebrew Bible) is written in Classical
Hebrew, referred to by some Jews as "" (), "The Holy Language." Hebrew remains
the traditional language of Jewish religious services, though its usage today
varies by denomination: Orthodox services are, generally, entirely in Hebrew,
Reform services make more use of the national language, and Conservative
services usually fall somewhere in-between. Aramaic too serves in traditional
liturgy albeit in a very limited capacity. Lingayatism. Kannada is the language
of Lingayatism, founded by Shri Basaveshwara and other sharanas. Most of the
literature of this religion is in Kannada. Some literature of this religion is
also found in Telugu and Sanskrit.
