Sacrament A sacrament is a sacred rite recognized as of particular importance
and significance. There are various views on the existence and meaning of such
rites. General definitions and terms. Hexam's "Concise Dictionary of Religion"
calls a sacrament "a Rite in which GOD (or Gods) is (are) uniquely active". But
within Christianity the word is used in a more restricted sense. The Catechism
of the Catholic Church defines the sacraments as "efficacious signs of grace,
instituted by Christ and entrusted to the Church, by which divine life is
dispensed to us. The visible rites by which the sacraments are celebrated
signify and make present the graces proper to each sacrament. They bear fruit
in those who receive them with the required dispositions." The catechism
included in the Anglican Book of Common Prayer defines a sacrament as "an
outward and visible sign of an inward and spiritual grace given unto us,
ordained by Christ himself, as a means whereby we receive the same, and a
pledge to assure us thereof." Some Protestant traditions avoid the word
"sacrament". Reaction against the 19th-century Oxford Movement led Baptists to
prefer instead the word "ordinance", practices ordained by Christ to be
permanently observed by the church. "Sacrament" stresses mainly, but not
solely, what God does, "ordinance" what the Christians do. The Catholic Church
and Oriental Orthodoxy teach that the sacraments are seven. The Eastern
Orthodox Church also believes that there are seven major sacraments, but
applies the corresponding Greek word, μυστήριον ("mysterion") also to
rites that in the Western tradition are called sacramentals and to other
realities, such as the Church itself. Similarly, the Catholic Church
understands the word "sacrament" as referring not only to the seven sacraments
considered here, but also to Christ and the Church. Anglican teaching is that
"there are two Sacraments ordained of Christ our Lord in the Gospel, that is to
say, Baptism and the Supper of the Lord", and that "those five commonly called
Sacraments, that is to say, Confirmation, Penance, Orders, Matrimony, and
Extreme Unction, are not to be counted for Sacraments of the Gospel". Roman
Catholic teaching. In the teaching of the Roman Catholic Church, "the
sacraments are efficacious signs of grace, instituted by Christ and entrusted
to the Church, by which divine life is dispensed to us. The visible rites by
which the sacraments are celebrated signify and make present the graces proper
to each sacrament. They bear fruit in those who receive them with the required
dispositions." The Church teaches that the effect of the sacraments comes "ex
opere operato", by the very fact of being administered, regardless of the
personal holiness of the minister administering it. However, as indicated in
this definition of the sacraments given by the "Catechism of the Catholic
Church", a recipient's own lack of proper disposition to receive the grace
conveyed can block a sacrament's effectiveness in that person. The sacraments
presuppose faith and through their words and ritual elements, nourish,
strengthen and give expression to faith. Though not every individual has to
receive every sacrament, the Church affirms that, for believers as a whole, the
sacraments are necessary for salvation, as the modes of grace divinely
instituted by Christ himself. Through each of them, Christ bestows that
sacrament's particular grace, such as incorporation into Christ and the Church,
forgiveness of sins, or consecration for a particular service. Eastern and
Oriental Orthodox teaching. The "seven" sacraments are also accepted by Eastern
Orthodoxy and Oriental Orthodoxy, but the Eastern Orthodox tradition does not
limit the number of sacraments to seven, holding that anything the Church does
as Church is in some sense sacramental. However it recognizes these seven as
"the major sacraments", which are completed by many other blessings and special
services. Some lists of the sacraments taken from the Church Fathers include
the Consecration of a Church, Monastic Tonsure, and the Burial of the Dead.
More specifically, for the Eastern Orthodox and Oriental Orthodox Christian the
term "sacrament" is a term which seeks to classify something that may,
according to Orthodox thought, be impossible to classify. The Orthodox
communion's preferred term is "Sacred Mystery". While the Catholic Church has
attempted to dogmatically define the sacraments, and discover the precise
moment when the act results in the manifestation of the grace of God, the
Orthodox communion has refrained from attempting to determine absolutely the
exact form, number and effect of the sacraments, accepting simply that these
elements are unknowable to all except God. According to Orthodox thinking God
touches mankind through material means such as water, wine, bread, oil,
incense, candles, altars, icons, etc. How God does this is a mystery. On a
broad level, the mysteries are an affirmation of the goodness of created
matter, and are an emphatic declaration of what that matter was originally
created to be. Despite this broad view, Orthodox divines do write about there
being seven "principal" mysteries. On a specific level, while not
systematically limiting the mysteries to seven, the most profound Mystery is
the Eucharist or Synaxis, in which the partakers, by participation in the
liturgy and receiving the consecrated bread and wine (understood to have become
the body and blood of Christ) directly communicate with God. This differs from
the Catholic view of transubstantiation in that the Orthodox don't claim to
understand how exactly this happens, but merely state "This appears to in the
form of bread and wine, but God has told me it is His Body and Blood. I will
take what He says as a 'mystery' and not attempt to rationalize it to my
limited mind". The emphasis on mystery is characteristic of Orthodox theology,
and is often called apophatic, meaning that any and all positive statements
about God and other theological matters must be balanced by negative
statements. For example, while it is correct and appropriate to say that "God
exists", or even that "God is the only Being which truly exists", such
statements must be understood to also convey the idea that God transcends what
is usually meant by the term "to exist". Anglican teaching. Anglican
sacramental theology reflects its dual roots in the Catholic tradition and the
Reformation. The Catholic heritage is perhaps most strongly asserted in the
importance Anglicanism places on the sacraments as a means of grace and
sanctification while the Protestant tradition has contributed a marked
insistent on "lively faith" and "worthy reception". Anglican and Roman Catholic
theologians participating in an Anglican/Roman Catholic Joint Preparatory
Commission declared that they had "reached substantial agreement on the
doctrine of the Eucharist". Article XXV recognises only two sacraments (Baptism
and the Supper of the Lord) since these are the only ones ordained by Christ in
the Gospel. The article continues stating that "Those five commonly called
Sacraments ... are not to be counted for Sacraments of the Gospel ...but have
not the like nature of Sacraments with Baptism and the Lord's Supper, for they
have not any visible sign or ceremony ordained by God." These phrases have led
to a debate as to whether the five are to be called sacraments or not. A recent
author writes that the Anglican Church gives "sacramental value to the other
five recognised by the Roman Catholic and Orthodox Churches ... " but these "do
not reveal those essential aspects of redemption to which Baptism and Communion
point." Some Anglicans maintain that the use of "commonly" implies that the
others can legitimately be called sacraments (perhaps more exactly "Sacraments
of the Church" as opposed to "Sacraments of the Gospel"); others object that at
the time the Articles were written "commonly" meant "inaccurately" and point
out that the Prayer Book refers to the creeds "commonly called the Apostles'
Creed" and the "Athanasian" where both attributions are historically incorrect.
Anglicans are also divided as to the effects of the sacraments. Some hold views
similar to the Roman Catholic "ex opere operato" theory, that is that when the
outward ceremony is duly performed the inward grace is necessarily given unless
the recipient puts some obstacle in the way ("non ponere obicem"). Article XXVI
(entitled "Of the unworthiness of ministers which hinders not the effect of the
Sacrament") states that the "ministration of the Word and Sacraments" is not
done in the name of the minister, "neither is the effect of Christ's ordinance
taken away by their wickedness," since the sacraments have their effect
"because of Christ's intention and promise, although they be ministered by evil
men." As in Roman Catholic theology, the worthiness or unworthiness of the
recipient is of great importance. Article XXV states: "And in such only as
worthily receive the they have a wholesome effect and operation: but they that
receive them unworthily purchase to themselves damnation..." and Article XXVIII
on the Lord's Supper affirms "to such as rightly, worthily, and with faith,
receive the same, the Bread which we break is a partaking of the Body of
Christ;..." In the Exhortations of the Prayer Book rite, the worthy communicant
is bidden to "prepare himself by examination of conscience, repentance and
amendment of life and above all to ensure that he is in love and charity with
his neighbours" and those who are not "are warned to withdraw". This particular
question was fiercely debated in the 19th century arguments over Baptismal
Regeneration Lutheran teaching. Lutherans hold that sacraments are sacred acts
of divine institution. Whenever they are properly administered by the use of
the physical component commanded by God along with the divine words of
institution, God is, in a way specific to each sacrament, present with the Word
and physical component. He earnestly offers to all who receive the sacrament
forgiveness of sins and eternal salvation. He also works in the recipients to
get them to accept these blessings and to increase the assurance of their
possession. This strict definition narrowed the number of sacraments down to
two or three: Holy Baptism, the Eucharist, and for some, Holy Absolution, with
the other four rites eliminated for not having a visible element or the ability
to forgive sin. Lutherans do not dogmatically define the exact number of
sacraments. In line with Luther's initial statement in his Large Catechism some
Lutherans speak of only two sacraments, Baptism and the Eucharist, although
later in the same work he calls Confession and Absolution "the third
sacrament". The definition of sacrament in the Apology of the Augsburg
Confession lists Absolution as one of them. It is important to note that
although Lutherans do not consider the other four rites as sacraments, they are
still retained and used in the Lutheran church. Within Lutheranism, the
sacraments are a Means of Grace, and, together with the Word of God, empower
the Church for mission. Teachings of other Christian traditions. The
enumeration, naming, understanding, and the adoption of the sacraments formally
vary according to denomination, although the finer theological distinctions are
not always understood and may not even be known to many of the faithful. Many
Protestants and other post-Reformation traditions affirm Luther's definition
and have only Baptism and Eucharist (or Communion or the Lord's Supper) as
sacraments, while others see the ritual as merely symbolic, and still others do
not have a sacramental dimension at all. In addition to the traditional seven
sacraments, other rituals have been considered sacraments by some Christian
traditions. In particular, foot washing as seen in Anabaptist, Schwarzenau
Brethren, German Baptist groups or True Jesus Church, and the hearing of the
Gospel, as understood by a few Christian groups (such as the Polish National
Catholic Church of America), have been considered sacraments by some churches.
Since some post-Reformation denominations do not regard clergy as having a
classically sacerdotal or priestly function, they avoid the term "sacrament",
preferring the terms "sacerdotal function", "ordinance", or "tradition". This
belief invests the efficacy of the "ordinance" in the obedience and
participation of the believer and the witness of the presiding minister and the
congregation. This view stems from a highly developed concept of the priesthood
of all believers. In this sense, the believer himself or herself performs the
sacerdotal role . Baptists and Pentecostals, among other Christian
denominations, use the word "ordinance", rather than "sacrament" because of
certain sacerdotal ideas connected, in their view, with the word "sacrament.".
These churches argue that the word "ordinance" points to the ordaining
authority of Christ which lies behind the practice. Latter Day Saints. The
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Mormons). Members of The Church of
Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints use the word "Sacrament" solely for the
Lord's Supper, in which participants eat bread and drink wine (or water, since
the late 1800s). It is similar to the Eucharist or Holy Communion in other
Christian denominations. In LDS congregations, the Sacrament is normally
provided every Sunday as part of the Sacrament meeting. In LDS teachings
however, the word "ordinance" is used approximately as the word "sacrament" is
used in Christianity in general.. In terms of Ordinances which roughly equate
to Christian sacraments in terms of conferring an invisible form of grace the
LDS have several which are of a saving nature and are required for
"exaltation". These are: baptism, confirmation, Ordination to the Aaronic and
Melchizedek Priesthoods (in the case of men), the temple Endowment, and
Celestial Marriage. There are other ordinances which are performed, but which
are not required for salvation; these are "Sacrament" or the Lord's Supper,
ministering to the sick, the naming and blessing of a child, dedication of a
grave, patriarchal blessings, and various other blessings of comfort and
counsel. Community of Christ (formerly the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ
of Latter Day Saints). Baptism, Confirmation, The Blessing of Children, The
Lord's Supper, Marriage, Administration to the sick, Ordination, and The
Evangelist's blessing. Non-sacramental churches. Some denominations do not have
a sacramental dimension (or equivalent) at all. The Salvation Army does not
practice formal sacraments for a variety of reasons, including a belief that it
is better to concentrate on the reality behind the symbols; however, it does
not forbid its members from receiving sacraments in other denominations The
Quakers (Religious Society of Friends) also do not practice formal sacraments,
believing that all activities should be considered holy. Rather, they are
focused on an inward transformation of one's whole life. Some Quakers use the
words "Baptism" and "Communion" to describe the experience of Christ's presence
and his ministry in worship.
