Sacred tradition Sacred tradition or holy tradition is a theological term used
in some Christian traditions, primarily in the Roman Catholic, Anglican,
Eastern Orthodox and Oriental Orthodox traditions, to refer to the fundamental
basis of church authority. The word "tradition" is taken from the Latin "trado,
tradere" meaning to hand over, to deliver, or to bequeath. The teachings of
Scripture are written down in the Bible, and are handed on, not only in
writing, but also in the lives of those who live according to its teachings.
The teachings of Tradition are not necessarily written down, but are lived and
are handed on by the lives of those who lived according to its teachings,
according to the example of Christ and the Apostles (1 Corinthians 11:2, 2
Thessalonians 2:15). This perpetual handing on of the teachings of Tradition is
called a living Tradition; it is the transmission of the teachings of Tradition
from one generation to the next. The term "deposit of faith" refers to the
entirety of Jesus Christ's revelation, and is passed to successive generations
in two different forms, sacred scripture (the Bible) and sacred tradition
(apostolic succession). In the theology of these churches, sacred scripture is
the written part of this larger tradition, recording (albeit sometimes through
the work of individual authors) the community's experience of God or more
specifically of Jesus Christ. Hence the Bible must be interpreted within the
context of sacred tradition and within the community of the church. Sacred
tradition, and thus sacred scripture as well, are "inspired," another technical
theological term indicating that they contain and communicate the truths of
faith and morals God intended to make known for mankind's salvation. This is in
contrast to many Protestant traditions, which believe that the Bible alone is a
sufficient basis for all Christian teaching (a position known as Sola
Scriptura). Usage of term. In the English language, "sacred tradition" is more
likely to be used in reference to Roman Catholicism and "holy tradition" in
reference to Eastern Orthodoxy, although the two terms are interchangeable in
meaning. History. Among the earliest examples of the theological appeal to
tradition is the response of early 'orthodox' Christianity to Gnosticism, a
movement that used some Christian Scripture as the basis for its teachings.
Irenaeus of Lyons held that 'rule of faith' ("regula fidei") is preserved by a
church through its historical continuity (of interpretation and teaching) with
the Apostles. Tertullian argued that although interpretations founded on a
reading of all Holy Scripture are not prone to error, tradition is the proper
guide. Athanasius held that Arianism fell into its central error by not
adhering to tradition. The magisterium has a role in deciding authoritatively
which truths are a part of sacred tradition. Holy tradition in the Catholic and
Orthodox Churches. Holy tradition, for the Eastern Orthodox, is the deposit of
faith given by Jesus Christ to the Apostles and passed on in the Church from
one generation to the next without addition, alteration or subtraction.
Vladimir Lossky famously described the Tradition as "the life of the Holy
Spirit in the Church." It is dynamic in application, yet unchanging in dogma.
It is growing in expression, yet ever the same in essence. The Eastern Orthodox
churches do not regard holy tradition as something which grows and expands over
time, forming a collection of practices and doctrines which accrue, gradually
becoming something more developed. Rather, Eastern Orthodox believers view holy
tradition as being the faith which Jesus Christ taught to the Apostles and
which they gave to their disciples, without any development or deepening of
understanding in the faith. The Catholic Church, too, views holy tradition in
much the same terms, as a passing down of that same Apostolic Faith, but, in a
critical difference from the Eastern Orthodox position, holds that the Faith
continues to deepen and develop over time, and in our understanding of it, all
the while staying the same; thus the doctrine of the Trinity, the two natures
of Christ, the divine motherhood, the Immaculate Conception and Assumption of
Mary, along with other central Catholic Christian doctrines were not fully
defined until many years after Christ had ascended and the Apostles had died,
and that our understanding of them may continue to deepen, not only through
mystical experience, but through the sciences of philosophy and theology,
exemplified by the Scholastics, such as Saint Thomas Aquinas, Duns Scotus, and
William of Ockham of the High Middle Ages. A common metaphor used to explain
this phenomenon is to think of a seed: over time, it grows into a tall oak, but
its identity and essence is still the same. Protestant position. Most
Protestant denominations believe that the Bible alone is the source for
Christian doctrine. This position does not deny that Jesus or the apostles
preached in person, that their stories and teachings were transmitted orally
during the early Christian era, or that truth exists outside of the Bible. For
"sola scriptura" Christians today, however, these teachings are preserved in
the Bible as the only inspired medium. Since in the opinion of "sola scriptura"
Christians, other forms of tradition do not exist in a fixed form that remains
constant in its transmission from one generation to the next and cannot be
referenced or cited in its pure form, there is no way to verify which parts of
the "tradition" are authentic and which are not, aside from the judgment of the
magisterium.
