Sacred king In many historical societies, the position of kingship carries a
sacral meaning, that is, it is identical with that of a high priest and of
judge. The concept of theocracy is related, although a sacred king need not
necessarily rule through his religious authority; rather, the temporal position
itself has a religious significance. History. The notion has prehistoric roots
and is found worldwide, on Java as in sub-Saharan Africa, with shaman-kings
credited with rain-making and assuring fertility and good fortune. On the other
hand, the king might also be designated to suffer and atone for his people,
meaning that the sacral king could be the pre-ordained victim of a human
sacrifice, either regularly killed at the end of his term in the position, or
sacrificed in times of crisis (e.g. Domalde). Among the Ashanti, a new king was
flogged before being enthroned. From the Bronze Age Near East, enthronement and
anointment of a monarch is a central religious ritual, reflected in the titles
Messiah or Christ which became separated from worldly kingship. Thus, Sargon of
Akkad described himself as "deputy of Ishtar", just as the Pope is considered
the "Vicar of Christ". The king is styled as a shepherd from earliest times,
e.g., the term was applied to Sumerian princes such as Lugalbanda in the 3rd
millennium BC. The image of the shepherd combines the themes of leadership and
the responsibility to supply food and protection as well as superiority. As the
mediator between the people and the divine, the sacral king was credited with
special wisdom (e.g. Solomon) or vision (oneiromancy). Examples. Sacral
kingship was carried into the Middle Ages by considering kings installed "by
the grace of god" Study. Study of the concept was introduced by Sir James
George Frazer in his influential book "The Golden Bough" (1890–1915); sacral
kingship plays a role in Romanticism and Esotericism (e.g. Julius Evola) and
some currents of Neopaganism (Theodism). The school of Pan-Babylonianism
derived much of the religion described in the Hebrew Bible from cults of sacral
kingship in ancient Babylonia. The so-called British and Scandinavian cult-
historical schools maintained that the king personified a god and stood at the
center of the national or tribal religion. The English "myth and ritual school"
concentrated on anthropology and folklore, while the Scandinavian "Uppsala
school" emphasized Semitological study. Frazer's interpretation. A sacred king,
according to the systematic interpretation of mythology developed by Frazer in
"The Golden Bough" (published 1890), was a king who represented a solar deity
in a periodically re-enacted fertility rite. Frazer seized upon the notion of a
substitute king and made him the keystone of his theory of a universal, pan-
European, and indeed worldwide fertility myth, in which a consort for the
Goddess was annually replaced. According to Frazer, the sacred king represented
the spirit of vegetation, a divine John Barleycorn. He came into being in the
spring, reigned during the summer, and ritually died at harvest time, only to
be reborn at the winter solstice to wax and rule again. The spirit of
vegetation was therefore a "dying and reviving god". Osiris, Adonis, Dionysus,
Attis and many other familiar figures from Greek mythology and classical
antiquity were re-interpreted in this mold. The sacred king, the human
embodiment of the dying and reviving vegetation god, was supposed to have
originally been an individual chosen to rule for a time, but whose fate was to
suffer as a sacrifice, to be offered back to the earth so that a new king could
rule for a time in his stead. Especially in Europe during Frazer's early
twentieth century heyday, it launched a cottage industry of amateurs looking
for "pagan survivals" in such things as traditional fairs, maypoles, and folk
arts like morris dancing. It was widely influential in literature, being
alluded to by D. H. Lawrence, James Joyce, Ezra Pound, and in T. S. Eliot's
"The Waste Land", among other works. Robert Graves used Frazer's work in "The
Greek Myths" and made it one of the foundations of his own personal mythology
in "The White Goddess". Most curiously of all, Margaret Murray, the principal
theorist of witchcraft as a "pagan survival," used Frazer's work to propose the
thesis that many Kings of England who died as kings, most notably William
Rufus, were secret pagans and witches, and whose deaths were the re-enactment
of the human sacrifice that stood at the centre of Frazer's myth, a speculation
taken up by Katherine Kurtz' in her novel "Lammas Night". In fiction. Many of
Rosemary Sutcliff's novels are recognized as being directly influenced by
Frazer, depicting individuals accepting the burden of leadership and the
ultimate responsibility of personal sacrifice, including Sword at Sunset, The
Mark of the Horse Lord, and Sun Horse, Moon Horse.
