Sacraments of the Catholic Church The Sacraments of the Catholic Church are,
the Roman Catholic Church teaches, "efficacious signs of grace, instituted by
Christ and entrusted to the Church, by which divine life is dispensed to us.
The visible rites by which the sacraments are celebrated signify and make
present the graces proper to each sacrament. They bear fruit in those who
receive them with the required dispositions." Every individual is not able to
receive every sacrament. The Roman Catholic Church affirms that Jesus Christ
established "His life-giving Spirit upon His disciples and through Him has
established His "Body" which is the Church as the universal sacrament of
salvation". The Church has given us seven sacraments and teaches that Christ
bestows on these sacraments particular graces, such as incorporation into
Christ and the Church, forgiveness of sins, or consecration for a particular
service. While the Church itself is the universal sacrament of salvation, the
sacraments "of" the Catholic Church in the strict sense are seven sacraments
that "touch all the stages and all the important moments of Christian life:
they give birth and increase, healing and mission to the Christian's life of
faith". "The Church affirms that for believers the sacraments of the New
Covenant are necessary for salvation", although not all are necessary for every
individual, and has placed under anathema those who deny it: "If any one saith,
that the sacraments of the New Law are not necessary unto salvation, but
superfluous; and that, without them, or without the desire thereof, men obtain
of God, through faith alone, the grace of justification;-though all (the
sacraments) are not ineed necessary for every individual; let him be anathema."
The Church further teaches that the effect of a sacrament comes "ex opere
operato", by the very fact of being administered, regardless of the personal
holiness of the minister administering it. However, a recipient's own lack of
proper disposition to receive the grace conveyed can block the effectiveness of
the sacrament in that person. The sacraments presuppose faith and through their
words and ritual elements, nourish, strengthen and give expression to faith.
The Catechism of the Catholic Church lists the sacraments as follows: "The
whole liturgical life of the Church revolves around the Eucharistic sacrifice
and the sacraments. There are seven sacraments in the Church: Baptism,
Confirmation or Chrismation, Eucharist, Penance, Anointing of the Sick, Holy
Orders, and Matrimony." Sacraments of initiation. The Compendium of the
Catechism of the Catholic Church states: "Christian initiation is accomplished
by means of the sacraments which establish the foundations of Christian life.
The faithful born anew by Baptism are strengthened by Confirmation and are then
nourished by the Eucharist." Baptism. The Catholic Church sees baptism as the
first and basic sacrament of Christian initiation. In the Western or Latin Rite
of the Church, baptism is usually conferred today by pouring water three times
on the recipient's head, while reciting the baptismal formula: "I baptize you
in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit" (cf. ). In the
Eastern Catholic Churches of Byzantine Rite immersion or submersion is used,
and the formula is: "The servant of God, N., is baptized in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit." Though sprinkling is not
normally used, its validity is accepted, provided that the water flows over the
skin, since otherwise it is not a washing. Confirmation. Confirmation or
Chrismation is the second sacrament of Christian initiation. "It is called
Chrismation (in the Eastern Churches: anointing with holy myron or chrism)
because the essential rite of the sacrament is anointing with chrism. It is
called Confirmation because it confirms and strengthens baptismal grace." It is
conferred by "the anointing with Sacred Chrism (oil mixed with balsam and
consecrated by the bishop), which is done by the laying on of the hand of the
minister who pronounces the sacramental words proper to the rite." These words,
in both their Western and Eastern variants, refer to a gift of the Holy Spirit
that marks the recipient as with a seal. Through the sacrament the grace given
in baptism is "strengthened and deepened." Like baptism, confirmation may be
received only once, and the recipient must be in a state of grace (meaning free
from any known unconfessed mortal sin) in order to receive its effects. The
"originating" minister of the sacrament is a validly consecrated bishop; if a
priest (a "presbyter") confers the sacrament — as is done ordinarily in the
Eastern Churches and in special cases (such as the baptism of an adult or in
danger of the death of a young child) in the Latin Church (CCC 1312–1313) —
the link with the higher order is indicated by the use of oil (known as
"chrism" or "myron") blessed by the bishop on Holy Thursday itself or on a day
close to it. In the East, which retains the ancient practice, the sacrament is
administered by the parish priest immediately after baptism. In the West, where
administration is normally reserved for those who can understand its
significance, it came to be postponed until the recipient's early adulthood;
but in view of the earlier age at which children are now admitted to reception
of the Eucharist, it is more and more restored to the traditional order and
administered before giving the third sacrament of Christian initiation. See
also "Catechism of the Catholic Church", 1285–1321 Eucharist. The Eucharist,
also called the Most Blessed Sacrament, is the sacrament (the third of
Christian initiation, the one that the "Catechism of the Catholic Church" says
"completes Christian initiation") by which Catholics partake of the Body and
Blood of Jesus Christ and participate in his one sacrifice. The first of these
two aspects of the sacrament is also called Holy Communion. The bread (which
must be wheaten, and which is unleavened in the Latin, Armenian and Ethiopic
Rites, but is leavened in most Eastern Rites) and wine (which must be from
grapes) used in the Eucharistic rite are, in Catholic faith, transformed in its
inner reality, though not in appearance, into the Body and Blood of Christ, a
change that is called transubstantiation. "The minister who is able to confect
the sacrament of the Eucharist in the person of Christ is a validly ordained
priest alone." The word "priest" here (in Latin "sacerdos") includes both
bishops and those priests who are also called presbyters. Deacons as well as
priests ("sacerdotes") are ordinary ministers of Holy Communion, and lay people
may be authorized in limited circumstances to act as extraordinary ministers of
Holy Communion. The Eucharist is seen as "the source and summit" of Christian
living, the high point of God's sanctifying action on the faithful and of their
worship of God, the point of contact between them and the liturgy of heaven. So
important is it that participation in the Eucharistic celebration (see Mass) is
seen as obligatory on every Sunday and holy day of obligation and is
recommended on other days. Also recommended for those who participate in the
Mass is reception, with the proper dispositions, of Holy Communion. This is
seen as obligatory at least once a year, during Eastertide. See also "Catechism
of the Catholic Church", 1322–1419 Sacraments of healing. Penance or
Reconciliation. The Sacrament of Penance is the first of two sacraments of
healing. The Catechism of the Catholic Church mentions in the following orders
different names of the sacrament, calling it the sacrament of conversion,
Penance, confession, forgiveness and Reconciliation. It is the sacrament of
spiritual healing for a baptized person from the distancing from God resulting
from sins committed. If a man sins after baptism, he cannot have baptism as a
remedy; Baptism, which is a spiritual regeneration, cannot be given a second
time. Reconciliation involves four elements: (1) Contrition (the Penitent's
sincere remorse for wrongdoing or sin, repentance, without which the rite has
no effect); (2) Confession to a Priest with the faculty to hear confessions
(Canon 966.1) – while it may be spiritually helpful to confess to another,
only a Priest has the power to administer the sacrament; (3) Absolution by the
Priest; and, (4) Satisfaction or Penance. "Many sins wrong our neighbour. One
must do what is possible in order to repair the harm (e.g., return stolen
goods, restore the reputation of someone slandered, pay compensation for
injuries). Simple justice requires as much. But sin also injures and weakens
the sinner himself, as well as his relationships with God and neighbour.
Absolution takes away sin, but it does not remedy all the disorders sin has
caused. Raised up from sin, the sinner must still recover his full spiritual
health by doing something more to make amends for the sin: he must 'make
satisfaction for' or 'expiate' his sins. This satisfaction is also called
'penance'" (CCC 1459). In early Christian centuries, this element of
satisfaction was quite onerous and generally preceded absolution, but now it
usually involves a simple task for the penitent to perform, to make some
reparation and as a medicinal means of strengthening against further
temptation. The priest is bound by the "seal of confession", which is
inviolable. "Accordingly, it is absolutely wrong for a confessor in any way to
betray the penitent, for any reason whatsoever, whether by word or in any other
fashion." A confessor who directly violates the sacramental seal incurs an
automatic excommunication whose lifting is reserved to the Holy See. In some
dioceses, certain sins are "reserved" which means only certain confessors can
absolve them. Some sins, such as violation of the sacramental seal,
consecration of bishops without authorization by the Holy See, direct physical
attacks on the Pope, and intentional desecration of the Eucharist are reserved
to the Holy See. A special case-by-case faculty from the Sacred Penitentiary is
normally required to absolve these sins. See also "Catechism of the Catholic
Church", 1422–1498 Anointing of the Sick. Anointing of the Sick is the second
sacrament of healing. In this sacrament a priest anoints the sick with oil
blessed specifically for that purpose. "The anointing of the sick can be
administered to any member of the faithful who, having reached the use of
reason, begins to be in danger by reason of illness or old age" (canon 1004;
cf. CCC 1514). A new illness or a worsening of health enables a person to
receive the sacrament a further time. When, in the Western Church, the
sacrament was conferred only on those in "immediate" danger of death, it came
to be known as "Extreme Unction", i.e. "Final Anointing", administered as one
of the Last Rites. The other Last Rites are Confession (if the dying person is
physically unable to confess, at least absolution, conditional on the existence
of contrition, is given), and the Eucharist, which when administered to the
dying is known as "Viaticum", a word whose original meaning in Latin was
"provision for a journey". Sacraments at the service of communion. Holy Orders.
Holy Orders is the sacrament by which a man is made a bishop, a priest, or a
deacon, and thus dedicated to be an image of Christ. A bishop is the minister
of this sacrament. Ordination as a bishop confers the fullness of the
sacrament, making the bishop a member of the body of successors of the
Apostles, and giving him the mission to teach, sanctify, and govern, along with
the care of all the Churches. Ordination as a priest configures the priest to
Christ the Head of the Church and the one essential High Priest, and conferring
on him the power, as the bishops' assistant, to celebrate the sacraments and
other liturgical acts, especially the Eucharist. Ordination as a deacon
configures the deacon to Christ the Servant of All, placing him at the service
of the bishop, especially in the Church's exercising of Christian charity
towards the poor and preaching of the word of God. Aspirants to the priesthood
are required by canon law (canon 1032 of the Code of Canon Law) to go through a
seminary program that includes, as well as graduate level philosophical and
theological studies, a formation program that includes spiritual direction,
retreats, apostolate experience, etc. The course of studies in preparation for
ordination as a permanent deacon is decided by the episcopal conference
concerned. See also "Catechism of the Catholic Church", 1536–1600 Matrimony.
Matrimony, or Marriage, like Holy Orders, is a sacrament that consecrates for a
particular mission in building up the Church, and that provides grace for
accomplishing that mission. This sacrament, seen as a sign of the love uniting
Christ and the Church, establishes between the spouses a permanent and
exclusive bond, sealed by God. Accordingly, a marriage between baptized people,
validly entered into and consummated, cannot be dissolved. The sacrament
confers on them the grace they need for attaining holiness in their married
life and for responsible acceptance and upbringing of their children. As a
condition for validity, the sacrament is celebrated in the presence of the
local Ordinary or Parish Priest or of a cleric delegated by them (or in certain
limited circumstances a lay person delegated by the diocesan Bishop with the
approval of the Episcopal Conference and the permission of the Holy See) and at
least two other witnesses, though in the theological tradition of the Latin
Church the ministers of the sacrament are the couple themselves. For a valid
marriage, a man and a woman must express their conscious and free consent to a
definitive self-giving to the other, excluding none of the essential properties
and aims of marriage. If one of the two is a non-Catholic Christian, their
marriage is licit only if the permission of the competent authority of the
Catholic Church is obtained. If one of the two is not a Christian (i.e. has not
been baptized), the competent authority's dispensation is necessary for
validity. Validity and liceity of administration of the sacraments. As stated
above, the effect of the sacraments comes "ex opere operato" (by the very fact
of being administered). Since it is Christ who operates through them, their
effectiveness does not depend on the worthiness of the minister. The belief
that the validity of the sacrament is dependent upon the holiness of the
administrator was rejected in the Donatist crisis. However, an apparent
administration of a sacrament is invalid, if the person acting as minister does
not have the necessary power (as if a deacon were to celebrate Mass). They are
also invalid if the required "matter" or "form" is lacking. The matter is the
perceptible material object, such as water in baptism or wheaten bread and
grape wine for the Eucharist, or the visible action. The form is the verbal
statement that specifies the signification of the matter, such as, (in the
Western Church), "N., I baptize you in the name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Spirit". Furthermore, if the minister positively excludes some
essential aspect of the sacrament, the sacrament is invalid. This last
condition lies behind the 1896 judgement of the Holy See denying the validity
of Anglican Orders. A sacrament may be administered validly, but illicitly, if
a condition imposed by canon law is not observed. Obvious cases are
administration of a sacrament by a priest under a penalty of excommunication or
suspension, and an episcopal ordination without a mandate from the Pope. Canon
law specifies impediments to reception of the sacraments of orders and
marriage. Those concerning the first of these two sacraments only concern
liceity, but "a diriment impediment renders a person incapable of validly
contracting a marriage" (canon 1073). In the Latin Church, only the Holy See
can authentically declare when divine law prohibits or invalidates a marriage,
and only the Holy See has the right to establish for those who are baptised
other impediments to marriage (canon 1075). But individual Eastern Catholic
Churches, after having fulfilled certain requirements that include consulting
(but not necessarily obtaining approval from) the Holy See, may establish
impediments (Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches, canon 792). If an
impediment is imposed by merely ecclesiastical law, rather than being a matter
of divine law, the Church may grant a dispensation from the impediment.
Conditions for validity of marriage such as sufficient use of reason (canon
1095) and freedom from coercion (canon 1103), and the requirement that,
normally, a marriage be contracted in the presence of the local Ordinary or
parish priest or of the priest or deacon delegated by either of them, and in
the presence of two witnesses (canon 1108), are not classified in the Code of
Canon Law as impediments, but have much the same effect. Three of the
sacraments may not be repeated: Baptism, Confirmation and Holy Orders: their
effect is permanent. This teaching has been expressed by the images of, in the
West, an indelible character or mark and of, in the East, a seal (CCC 698).
However, if there is doubt about the validity of the administration of one or
more of these sacraments, a conditional form of conferral may be used, such as:
"If you are not already baptized, I baptize you …" In the still recent past,
it was common practice in the Catholic Church to baptize conditionally almost
every convert from Protestantism because of a perceived difficulty in judging
about the validity in any concrete instance. In the case of the major
Protestant denominations, agreements involving assurances about the manner in
which they administer baptism has ended this practice, which sometimes
continues for other groups of Protestant tradition. The Catholic Church has
always recognized the validity of baptism in the Churches of Eastern
Christianity, but it has explicitly denied the validity of the baptism
conferred in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. It does not
recognize a baptismal ceremony in which the names of the three Persons of the
Trinity, Father, Son and Holy Spirit, are replaced by descriptions such as
Creator, Redeemer and Sanctifier, and requires that the conditional form should
not be used when baptizing people who have received this kind of baptism.
