Sacred Holiness, or sanctity, is in general the state of being holy (perceived
by religious individuals as associated with the divine)[http://
books.google.com/
books?id=CDIGVRkxfDEC&pg=PT32&lpg=PT32&dq=perceived+by+religious+individuals+as+associated+with+the+divine&source=bl&ots=qGoeSVtEy7&sig=qRI9W7dHb0i9Ydwu4qG88is7kmo&hl=en&sa=X&ei=PTA6UMCYM4ik8ATPk4DoAQ&ved=0CC0Q6AEwAA#v=onepage&q=perceived%20by%20religious%20individuals%20as%20associated%20with%20the%20divine&f=false]
e-Study Guide for: Religion and Globalization by John L. Esposito, ISBN
9780195176957 Etymology. The word "sacred" descends from the Latin "sacrum",
which referred to the gods or anything in their power, and to "sacerdos",
priest; "sanctum", set apart. It was generally conceived spatially, as
referring to the area around a temple. The English word "holy" dates back to at
least the 11th Century with the Old English word "hālig", an adjective derived
from "hāl" meaning "whole" and used to mean "uninjured, sound, healthy,
entire, complete". The Scottish "hale" ("health, happiness and wholeness") is
the most complete modern form of this Old English root. The modern word
"health" is also derived from the Old English "hal". As "wholeness", holiness
may be taken to indicate a state of religious completeness or perfection. The
word "holy" in its modern form appears in Wyclif's Bible of 1382. In non-
specialist contexts, the term "holy" is used in a more general way, to refer to
someone or something that is associated with a divine power, such as water used
for baptism. Hierology. Hierology (Greek ιερος, hieros, "sacred" or
"holy", + λογος, logos, "word", "account", or "reason") refers to the
study of the sacred and sacredness. It is generally pursued by those who find
real truth in many faiths and especially refers to philosophical speculations
about religion that involve the traditions of multiple cultures or belief
systems. It differs from theology in that a god or gods are not necessarily a
focus and in that it may include sources with no origin in Western philosophy
or religion. Buddhism. In Theravada Buddhism one finds the designation of
'noble person' or "ariyapuggala" (Pali). The Buddha described four grades of
such person depending on their level of purity. This purity is measured by
which of the ten fetters (samyojana) and klesha have been purified and
integrated from the mindstream. These persons are called (in order of
increasing sanctity) Sotapanna, Sakadagami, Anagami and Arahant. The latter
term designates an enlightened human being and is sometimes rendered into
English as the Holy One. Christianity. Catholicism. Catholicism has inherited
much of the Jewish vision of the world in terms of holiness, with certain
behaviour appropriate to certain places and times. The calendar gives shape to
Catholic practice, which tends to focus on the Eucharist, in which the Real
Presence of Christ is manifested. Holy days, celebrating events of the life of
Christ and the lives of Catholic saints officially recognized as holy, are
celebrated throughout the year. Many features of the Jewish temple (although
now seen as having Christian significance) are imitated in churches, such as
the altar, bread, lamp, incense, font, etc., to emphasise the extreme holiness
of the Eucharistic elements, which are reserved in a tabernacle. In extension
of this focus on the Sacrament as holy, many objects in Catholicism are also
considered holy. They are called sacramentals and are usually blessed by a
priest. Such items include rosaries, crucifixes, medals, and statues and icons
of Jesus, angels and saints (Virgin Mary). While Catholics believe that holy
places and objects (i.e., objects dedicated to God for sacred use) should be
respected and not put to profane use, the Catholic Church condemns worshiping
the object itself, as any worship given to something other than God is
considered idolatry. People in a state of sanctifying grace are also considered
holy in Catholicism. A central notion of Catholicism as articulated in
contemporary theology is the " call to holiness," considered as a vocation
shared by every Christian believer. Profound personal holiness has
traditionally also been seen as a focus for the kind of contagious holiness
primarily associated with the Sacrament. So the communion of saints in
Catholicism is not only the acclamation of their piety or morality, but also
reverence for the tangible holiness that flows from their proximity to the
divine. Hence the places where saints lived, died, performed miracles, or
received visions frequently become sites of pilgrimage, and notable objects
surviving a saint (including the body or parts of it) are considered relics.
The holiness of such places or objects, resulting from contact with a deeply
holy person, is often connected with the miraculous long after the death of the
saint. Sanctus (Latin for "holy") is the name of an important hymn of Christian
liturgy. The Trisagion ('Thrice Holy') is a standard hymn of the Divine Liturgy
of the Eastern Churches. Protestantism. The Protestant Reformation stood in
opposition to the beliefs of tangible holiness in the Catholic Church and
rejected most of its teachings regarding devotional practice, language and
imagery. The early Protestant Reformers, who were often scholars of Ancient
Greek and also borrowed from Jewish scholarship, recognized that holiness is an
attribute of God, and holiness is always part of the presence of God. Yet they
also recognized that "practical holiness" was the evidence of the presence of
God in the converted believer. Martin Luther viewed God's grace (and therefore
God's holiness), as an invasion of the life. Actions that demonstrated holiness
would spring up, not premeditated, as the believer focused more and more on his
or her relationship with Christ. This was the life of faith, according to
Luther; a life in which one recognizes that the sin inherent in human nature
never departs, yet Grace invades each human spirit and draws each person after
Christ. Calvin, on the other hand, formulated a practical system of holiness
that even tied in with culture and social justice. All unholy actions, Calvin
reasoned, resulted in suffering. Thus he proved out to the city fathers of
Geneva that dancing and other social vices always ended with the wealthy
oppressing the poor. A holy life, in his outlook, was pietistic and simple, a
life that shunned extravagance, excess, and vanity. On a personal level, Calvin
believed that suffering would be a manifestation of taking on the Cross of
Christ, but suffering was also part of the process of holiness. He expected
that all Christians would suffer in this life, not as punishment, but rather as
participation in union with Christ, who suffered for them. And yet, socially,
Calvin argued that a holy society would end up as a gentle, kindly society
(except to criminals) where the poor would be protected from the abuses of the
wealthy, the lawyers, and others who normally preyed upon them. In
Protestantism, especially in American branches of Protestantism of the more
Pentecostal variety, holiness has acquired the secondary meaning of the
reshaping of a person through spiritual rebirth. The term owes its origin to
John Wesley's concept of "scriptural holiness" or Christian perfection. The
Holiness movement began within Methodism in the United States, among those who
thought the church had lost the zeal and emphasis on personal holiness of
Wesley's day. In the latter part of the 19th century revival meetings were
held, attended by thousands. In Vineland, N.J in 1867 a camp meeting was begun
and the "National Holiness Camp Meeting Association, which went on to establish
many holiness camp meetings across the nation. Some adherents to the movement
remained within their denominations; others founded new denominations, such as
the Free Methodist Church, the Church of the Nazarene, and the Church of God
(Anderson). Within a generation another movement, the Pentecostal movement was
born, drawing heavily from the Holiness Movement. Around the middle of the 20th
century, the Conservative Holiness Movement was born – a conservative
offshoot of the Holiness movement. The Higher Life movement appeared in the
British Isles during the mid-19th century. In the contemporary Holiness
movement, the idea that holiness is relational is growing. In this thought, the
core notion of holiness is love. Other notions of holiness, such as purity,
being set apart, perfection, keeping rules, and total commitment, are seen as
contributory notions of holiness. These contributory notions find their
ultimate legitimacy when love is at their core (Thomas Jay Oord and Michael
Lodahl). Commonly recognized outward expressions or "standards" of holiness
among more fundamental adherents frequently include applications relative to
dress, hair, and appearance: e.g., short hair on men, uncut hair on women, and
prohibitions against shorts, pants on women, make-up and jewelry. Other common
injunctions are against places of worldly amusement, mixed swimming, smoking,
minced oaths, as well as the eschewing of television and radio. More
traditional or mainline Protestant denominations, such as the Anglican,
Lutheran, and some Methodist denominations, believe in Holy Sacraments that the
clergy perform, such as Holy Communion and Holy Baptism. As well as strong
belief in the Holy Catholic Church, Holy Scripture, Holy Trinity, and the Holy
Covenant. They also believe that angels and saints are called to holiness.
Islam. Among the names of God in Quran is القدوس (Al-Quddus) : and , the
closest English translation for which is 'sacred'. As God alone is considered
to be the ultimate source of all true purification and guidance in Islam, all
holiness is his alone too. Judaism. Some consider that the Hebrew noun for
"holiness," "kedushah" (), from the adjective "kodesh", "holy," has the
connotation of "separateness", although Hebrew has other verbs and adjectives
to indicate separate, such as "badal" (בָּדַל). That which is holy in
Judaism is set apart, and the separation is maintained by both legal and
spiritual measures. Certain places and times are intrinsically sacred, and
strictures are placed on one's actions in those situations. However, holiness
is not a single state, but contains a broad spectrum. The Mishnah lists
concentric circles of holiness surrounding the Temple in Jerusalem: Holy of
Holies; Temple Sanctuary; Temple Vestibule; Court of Priests; Court of
Israelites; Court of Women; Temple Mount; the walled city of Jerusalem; all the
walled cities of Israel; and the borders of the Land of Israel. Distinctions
are made as to who and what are permitted in each area. Likewise, the holidays,
including and especially the Sabbath, are considered to be holy in time; the
Torah calls them "holy of gathering. Work is not allowed on those days, and
rabbinic tradition lists 39 categories of activity that are specifically
prohibited. The Torah describes the Aaronite priests and the Levites as being
selected by God to perform the Temple services; they, as well, are called
"holy." A righteous person ("tzadik") is also considered to be holy. Beyond the
intrinsically holy, objects can become sacred through consecration. Any
personal possession may be dedicated to the Temple of God, after which its
misappropriation is considered among the gravest of sins. The various
sacrifices are holy; those that may be eaten have very specific rules
concerning who may eat which of their parts, and time limits on when the
consumption must be completed. Most sacrifices contain a part to be consumed by
the priests – a portion of the holy to be consumed by God's holy devotees.
The encounter with the holy is seen as eminently desirable, and at the same
time fearful and awesome. For the strongest penalties are applied to one who
transgresses in this area – one could in theory receive either the death
penalty or the heavenly punishment of "karet", spiritual excision, for mis-
stepping in his close approach to God's domain. Sacred ground. Usually, social
or religious groups considers an area sacred or holy, where there is a human
presence, e.g. a cemetery or a building or site for worship. However, there are
natural areas on each continent—canyons, mountains, rivers, forests, deserts,
seashores, etc. that are considered sacred, where the site's value as a sacred
area trumps its use for economic purposes, and is usually preserved for
perpetuity.
