Sacred Heart The Sacred Heart (also known as Most Sacred Heart of Jesus) is one
of the most widely practiced and well-known devotions, taking Jesus' physical
heart as the representation of his divine love for humanity. This devotion is
predominantly used in the Catholic Church and among some high-church Anglicans
and Lutherans. The devotion especially emphasizes the unmitigated love,
compassion, and long-suffering of the heart of Christ towards humanity. The
origin of this devotion in its modern form is derived from a French Roman
Catholic nun, Marguerite Marie Alacoque, who said she learned the devotion from
Jesus during a mystical experience. Predecessors to the modern devotion arose
unmistakably in the Middle Ages in various facets of Catholic mysticism. In the
Roman Catholic tradition, the Sacred Heart has been closely associated with
Acts of Reparation to Jesus Christ. In his encyclical "Miserentissimus
Redemptor", Pope Pius XI stated: ""the spirit of expiation or reparation has
always had the first and foremost place in the worship given to the Most Sacred
Heart of Jesus"". The "Golden Arrow Prayer" directly refers to the Sacred
Heart. Devotion to the Sacred Heart is sometimes seen in the Eastern Catholic
Churches, where it remains a point of controversy and is seen as an example of
Liturgical Latinisation. The Sacred Heart is often depicted in Christian art as
a flaming heart shining with divine light, pierced by the lance-wound,
encircled by the crown of thorns, surmounted by a cross and bleeding. Sometimes
the image shown shining within the bosom of Christ with his wounded hands
pointing at the heart. The wounds and crown of thorns allude to the manner of
Jesus' death, while the fire represents the transformative power of divine
love. The Feast of the Sacred Heart has been in the Roman Catholic liturgical
calendar since 1856, and is celebrated 19 days after Pentecost. As Pentecost is
always celebrated on Sunday, the Feast of the Sacred Heart always falls on a
Friday. History of Devotion. Early devotion. From the time of John the
Evangelist and Paul of Tarsus there has always been in the Church something
like devotion to the love of God, but there is nothing to indicate that, during
the first ten centuries of Christianity, any worship was rendered to the
wounded Heart of Jesus. It is in the eleventh and twelfth centuries that the
first indications of devotion to the Sacred Heart are found. It was in the
fervent atmosphere of the Benedictine or Cistercian monasteries, in the world
of Anselmian or Bernardine thought, that the devotion arose, although it is
impossible to say positively what were its first texts or who were its first
devotees. It was already well known to St. Gertrude, St. Mechtilde, and the
author of the "Vitis mystica" (previously ascribed to St. Bernard, now
attributed to St. Bonaventure). From the thirteenth to the sixteenth centuries,
the devotion was propagated but it did not seem to have developed in itself. It
was everywhere practised by individuals and by different religious
congregations, such as the Franciscans, Dominicans, Carthusians, etc. It was,
nevertheless, a private, individual devotion of the mystical order. Nothing of
a general movement had been inaugurated, except for similarities found in the
devotion to the Five Wounds by the Franciscans, in which the wound in Jesus's
heart figured most prominently. In the sixteenth century, the devotion passed
from the domain of mysticism into that of Christian asceticism. It was
established as a devotion with prayers already formulated and special
exercises, found in the writings of Lanspergius (d. 1539) of the Carthusians of
Cologne, the Louis of Blois (Blosius; 1566), a Benedictine and Abbot of
Liessies in Hainaut, John of Avila (d. 1569) and St. Francis de Sales, the
latter belonging to the seventeenth century. The historical record from that
time shows an early bringing to light of the devotion. Ascetic writers spoke of
it, especially those of the Society of Jesus. The image of the Sacred Heart of
Jesus was everywhere in evidence, largely due to the Franciscan devotion to the
Five Wounds and to the habit formed by the Jesuits of placing the image on
their title-page of their books and the walls of their churches. Nevertheless,
the devotion remained an individual, or at least a private, devotion. Jean
Eudes (1602–1680) made it public, gave it an Office, and established a feast
for it. Père Eudes was the apostle of the Heart of Mary; but in his devotion
to the Immaculate Heart there was a share for the Heart of Jesus. Little by
little, the devotion to the Sacred Heart became a separate one, and on August
31, 1670, the first feast of the Sacred Heart was celebrated in the Grand
Seminary of Rennes. Coutances followed suit on October 20, a day with which the
Eudist feast was from then on to be connected. The feast soon spread to other
dioceses, and the devotion was likewise adopted in various religious
communities. It gradually came into contact with the devotion begun at Paray,
and resulting in a fusion of the two. Visions of Saint Margaret Mary Alacoque.
A few days after the "great apparition", Margaret Mary reported everything she
saw to Father de la Colombière, and he, acknowledging the vision as an action
of the Spirit of God, consecrated himself to the Sacred Heart and directed her
to write an account of the apparition. He also made use of every available
opportunity to circulate this account, discreetly, through France and England.
Upon his death on February 15, 1682, there was found in his journal of
spiritual retreats a copy in his own handwriting of the account that he had
requested of Margaret Mary, together with a few reflections on the usefulness
of the devotion. This journal, including the account and an "offering" to the
Sacred Heart, in which the devotion was well explained, was published at Lyons
in 1684. The little book was widely read, especially at Paray. Margaret Mary
reported feeling "dreadful confusion" over the book's contents, but resolved to
make the best of it, approving of the book for the spreading of her cherished
devotion. Outside of the Visitandines, priests, religious, and laymen espoused
the devotion, particularly the Capuchins, Margaret Mary's two brothers, and
some Jesuits. The Jesuit Father Croiset wrote a book called , a book which
Jesus is said to have told Margaret to tell Fr. Croiset to write, and Fr.
Joseph de Gallifet, also a Jesuit, promoted the devotion. Papal Approvals. The
death of Margaret Mary Alacoque on October 17, 1690, did not dampen the zeal of
those interested; on the contrary, a short account of her life published by
Father Croiset in 1691, as an appendix to his book "De la Dévotion au Sacré
Cœur", served only to increase it. In spite of all sorts of obstacles, and of
the slowness of the Holy See, which in 1693 imparted indulgences to the
Confraternities of the Sacred Heart and, in 1697, granted the feast to the
Visitandines with the Mass of the Five Wounds, but refused a feast common to
all, with special Mass and Office. The devotion spread, particularly in
religious communities. The Marseilles plague, 1720, furnished perhaps the first
occasion for a solemn consecration and public worship outside of religious
communities. Other cities of the South followed the example of Marseilles, and
thus the devotion became a popular one. In 1726 it was deemed advisable once
more to importune Rome for a feast with a Mass and Office of its own, but, in
1729, Rome again refused. However, in 1765, it finally yielded and that same
year, at the request of the queen, the feast was received quasi-officially by
the episcopate of France. On all sides it was asked for and obtained, and
finally, in 1856, at the urgent entreaties of the French bishops, Pope Pius IX
extended the feast to the Roman Catholic Church under the rite of double major.
In 1889 it was raised by the Roman Catholic Church to the double rite of first
class. After the letters of Mother Mary of the Divine Heart (1863–1899)
requesting, in the name of Christ Himself, to Pope Leo XIII consecrate the
entire World to the Sacred Heart of Jesus, the Holy Father commissions a group
of theologians to examine the petition on the basis of revelation and sacred
tradition. This investigation was positive. And so in the encyclical letter
"Annum Sacrum" (on May 25, 1899) this same pope decreed that the consecration
of the entire human race to the Sacred Heart of Jesus should take place on June
11, 1899. In this encyclical letter the Pope attached Later Pope Leo XIII
encouraged the entire Roman Catholic episcopate to promote the devotion of the
Nine First Fridays and he established June as the Month of the Sacred Heart.
Leo XIII also composed the Prayer of Consecration to the Sacred Heart and
included it in Annum Sacrum. Pope Pius X decreed that the consecration of the
human race, performed by Pope Leo XIII be renewed each year. Pope Pius XI in
his encyclical letter "Miserentissimus Redemptor" (on May 8, 1928) affirmed the
Church's position with respect to Saint Margaret Mary's visions of Jesus Christ
by stating that Jesus had ""manifested Himself"" to Saint Margaret and had
""promised her that all those who rendered this honor to His Heart would be
endowed with an abundance of heavenly graces"." The encyclical refers to the
conversation between Jesus and Saint Margaret several times and reaffirmed the
importance of consecration and reparation to the Sacred Heart of Jesus.
Finally, Venerable Pope Pius XII, on the occasion of the 100th anniversary of
Pope Pius IX's institution of the Feast, instructed the entire Roman Catholic
Church at length on the devotion to the Sacred Heart in his encyclical letter
"Haurietis aquas" (on May 15, 1956). On May 15, 2006, also Pope Benedict XVI
sent a letter to Father Peter Hans Kolvenbach, the Superior General of the
Society of Jesus, on the 50th Anniversary of the encyclical "Haurietis Aquas",
about the Sacred Heart, by Pope Pius XII. In his letter to Father Kolvenbach,
Pope Benedict XVI reaffirmed the importance of the devotion to the Sacred Heart
of Jesus. Worship and devotion. The Roman Catholic acts of consecration,
reparation and devotion were introduced when the feast of the Sacred Heart was
declared. In his Papal Bull "Auctorem Fidei", Pope Pius VI praised devotion to
the Sacred Heart. Finally, by order of Leo XIII, in his encyclical "Annum
Sacrum" (May 25, 1899), as well as on June 11, he consecrated every human to
the Sacred Heart. The idea of this act, which Leo XIII called "the great act"
of his pontificate, had been proposed to him by a religious woman of the Good
Shepherd from Oporto (Portugal) who said that she had supernaturally received
it from Jesus. Since "c." 1850, groups, congregations, and States have
consecrated themselves to the Sacred Heart. In 1873, by petition of president
Gabriel García Moreno, Ecuador was the first country in the world to be
consecrated to the Sacred Heart, fulfilling God's petition to Saint Margaret
Mary over two hundred years later. Peter Coudrin of France founded the
Congregation of the Sacred Hearts of Jesus and Mary on December 24, 1800. A
religious order of the Roman Catholic Church, the order is best known for its
missionary work in Hawaii. Mother Clelia Merloni from Forlì (Italy) founded
the Congregation of the Apostles of the Sacred Heart of Jesus in Viareggio,
Italy, May 30, 1894. Worship of the Sacred Heart mainly consists of several
hymns, the Salutation of the Sacred Heart, and the Litany of the Sacred Heart.
It is common in Roman Catholic services and occasionally is to be found in
Anglican services. The Feast of the Sacred Heart is a solemnity in the Roman
Catholic liturgical calendar, and is celebrated 19 days after Pentecost. As
Pentecost is always celebrated on Sunday, the Feast of the Sacred Heart always
falls on a Friday. The Enthronement of the Sacred Heart is a Roman Catholic
ceremony in which a priest or head of a household consecrates the members of
the household to the Sacred Heart. A blessed image of the Sacred Heart, either
a statue or a picture, is then "enthroned" in the home to serve as a constant
reminder to those who dwell in the house of their consecration to the Sacred
Heart. The practice of the Enthronement is based upon Pope Pius XII's
declaration that devotion to the Sacred of Jesus is "the foundation on which to
build the kingdom of God in the hearts of individuals, families, and
nations..." Alliance with the Immaculate Heart. The Alliance of the Hearts of
Jesus and Mary is based on the historical, theological and spiritual links in
Catholic devotions to the Sacred Heart of Jesus and the Immaculate Heart of
Mary. The joint devotion to the hearts was first formalized in the 17th century
by Saint Jean Eudes who organized the scriptural, theological and liturgical
sources relating to the devotions and obtained the approbation of the Church,
prior to the visions of Saint Marguerite Marie Alacoque. In the 18th and 19th
centuries the devotions grew, both jointly and individually through the efforts
of figures such as Saint Louis de Montfort who promoted Catholic Mariology and
Saint Catherine Labouré's Miraculous Medal depicting the Heart of Jesus thorn-
crowned and the Heart of Mary pierced with a sword. The devotions, and the
associated prayers, continued into the 20th century, e.g. in the Immaculata
prayer of Saint Maximillian Kolbe and in the reported messages of Our Lady of
Fatima which stated that the Heart of Jesus wishes to be honored together with
the Heart of Mary. Popes supported the individual and joint devotions to the
hearts through the centuries. In the 1956 encyclical Haurietis Aquas, Pope Pius
XII encouraged the joint devotion to the hearts. In the 1979 encyclical
Redemptor Hominis Pope John Paul II explained the theme of unity of Mary's
Immaculate Heart with the Sacred Heart. In his Angelus address on September 15,
1985 Pope John Paul II coined the term "The Alliance of the Hearts of Jesus and
Mary", and in 1986 addressed the international conference on that topic held at
Fátima, Portugal. Institution Names. "Sacred Heart" is a widely used name for
many Roman Catholic institutions, including schools, colleges, and hospitals in
many countries around the world. It is also the name of many Roman Catholic
parishes, religious orders, and stores selling Roman Catholic goods. Sacred
Heart imagery. The Sacred Heart has also been involved in (and been depicted)
in saintly apparitions such as those to Saint Catherine Labouré in 1830 and
appears on the Miraculous Medal. On the Miraculous Medal, the Sacred Heart is
crowned with thorns. The Immaculate Heart of Mary also appears on the medal,
next to the Sacred Heart, but is pierced by a sword, rather than being crowned
with thorns. The M on the medal signifies the Blessed Virgin at the foot of the
Cross when Jesus was being crucified. Religious imagery depicting the Sacred
Heart is frequently featured in Roman Catholic, and sometimes Anglican and
Lutheran homes. Sometimes images display beneath them a list of family members,
indicating that the entire family is entrusted to the protection of Jesus in
the Sacred Heart, from whom blessings on the home and the family members are
sought. The prayer ""O Sacred Heart of Jesus, I place all my trust in Thee"" is
often used. One particular image has been used as part of a set, along with an
image of the Blessed Virgin Mary. In that image, Mary too was shown pointing to
her "Immaculate Heart", expressing her love for the human race and for her Son,
Jesus Christ. The mirror images reflect an eternal binding of the two hearts.
The Scapular of the Sacred Heart and the Scapular of the Sacred Hearts of Jesus
and Mary are worn by Roman Catholics. In Eastern Catholicism. Devotion to the
Sacred Heart may be found in some Eastern Catholic Churches, but is a
contentious issue. Those who favour purity of rite are opposed to the devotion,
while those who are in favour of the devotion cite it as a point of commonality
with their Latin Catholic brethren. Promises of the Sacred Heart. Jesus Christ,
in his appearances to Saint Margaret Mary Alacoque, promised these blessings to
those who practice devotion to his Sacred Heart. This tabular form of promises
was not made by Saint Margaret Mary or her contemporaries. It first appeared at
1863. In 1882, an American businessman spread the tabular form of the promises
profusely throughout the world, the twelve promises appearing in 238 languages.
In 1890, Cardinal Adolph Perraud deplored this circulation of the promises in
the tabular form which were different from the words and even from the meaning
of the expressions used by St. Margaret Mary, and wanted the promises to be
published in the full, authentic texts as found in the writings of St. Margaret
Mary. The last promise has given rise to the pious Roman Catholic practice of
making an effort to attend Mass and receive Communion on the first Friday of
each month. Great efficacy of converting people has been attached to the use of
the image of the Sacred Heart. http://books.google.com/
books?id=9dwEAAAAYAAJ&pg=PA49&dq&ei=8lnxR_K1C83KiwGEt6jhBw#PPA157,M1 Scapular
of the Sacred Heart. The devotions to the Sacred Heart of Jesus also involve
the Scapular of the Sacred Heart. It is a Roman Catholic devotional scapular
that can be traced back to Saint Margaret Marie Alacoque who herself made and
distributed "badges" similar to it. In 1872 Pope Pius IX granted an indulgence
for the badge and the actual scapular was approved by the Congregation of Rites
in 1900. It bears the representation of the Sacred Heart of Jesus on one side,
and that of the Blessed Virgin Mary under the title of Mother of Mercy on the
other side. Litany of the Sacred Heart of Jesus. V. Lord, have mercy on us. "R.
Christ, have mercy on us." V. Lord, have mercy on us. Christ, hear us. "R.
Christ, graciously hear us." V. God the Father of Heaven, "have mercy on us."
God the Son, Redeemer of the world, "have mercy on us." God the Holy Ghost,
"have mercy on us." Holy Trinity, one God, "have mercy on us." Heart of Jesus,
Son of the Eternal Father, "have mercy on us." Heart of Jesus, formed in the
womb of the Virgin Mother by the Holy Ghost, "have mercy on us." Heart of
Jesus, united substantially to the Word of God. Heart of Jesus, of infinite
majesty. Heart of Jesus, holy temple of God. Heart of Jesus, tabernacle of the
Most High. Heart of Jesus, house of God and gate of heaven. Heart of Jesus,
glowing furnace of charity. Heart of Jesus, vessel of justice and love. Heart
of Jesus, full of goodness and love. Heart of Jesus, abyss of all virtues.
Heart of Jesus, most worthy of all praise. Heart of Jesus, King and center of
all hearts. Heart of Jesus, in whom art all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge. Heart of Jesus, in whom dwelleth all the fullness of the Godhead.
Heart of Jesus, in whom the Father was well pleased. Heart of Jesus, of whose
fullness we have all received. Heart of Jesus, desire of the everlasting hills.
Heart of Jesus, patient and rich in mercy. Heart of Jesus, rich to all who call
upon Thee. Heart of Jesus, fount of life and holiness. Heart of Jesus,
propitiation for our offenses. Heart of Jesus, overwhelmed with reproaches.
Heart of Jesus, bruised for our iniquities. Heart of Jesus, obedient even unto
death. Heart of Jesus, pierced with a lance. Heart of Jesus, source of all
consolation. Heart of Jesus, our life and resurrection. Heart of Jesus, our
peace and reconciliation. Heart of Jesus, victim for our sins. Heart of Jesus,
salvation of those who hope in Thee. Heart of Jesus, hope of those who die in
Thee. Heart of Jesus, delight of all saints. V. Lamb of God, who takest away
the sins of the world, "R. spare us, O Lord." V. Lamb of God, who takest away
the sins of the world, "R. graciously hear us, O Lord." V. Lamb of God, who
takest away the sins of the world, "R. have mercy on us." V. Jesus, meek and
humble of Heart, "R. Make our hearts like unto Thine." Let us pray. Almighty
and everlasting God, look upon the Heart of Thy well-beloved Son and upon the
acts of praise and satisfaction which He renders unto Thee in the name of
sinners; and do Thou, in Thy great goodness, grant pardon to them who seek Thy
mercy, in the name of the same Thy Son, Jesus Christ, who liveth and reigneth
with Thee, world without end.
