Religious text Religious texts, also known as scripture, scriptures, holy writ,
or holy books, are the texts which various religious traditions consider to be
sacred, or of central importance to their religious tradition. Many religions
and spiritual movements believe that their sacred texts are divinely or
supernaturally revealed or inspired. History of religious texts. The oldest
known religious texts are Pyramid texts of Ancient Egypt that date to 2400-2300
BCE. The earliest form of the Phoenician alphabet found to date is the
inscription on the sarcophagus of King Ahiram of Byblos. ( The Sumerian Temple
Hymns ). The Epic of Gilgamesh from Sumeria is also one of the earliest
literary works dating to 2150-2000 BCE, that includes various mythological
figures. The Rigveda of Hinduism is proposed to have been composed between
1700–1100 BCE making it possibly the world's oldest religious text still in
use. The oldest portions of the Zoroastrian Avesta are believed to have been
transmitted orally for centuries before they found written form, and although
widely differing dates for "Gathic" Avestan (the language of the oldest texts)
have been proposed, scholarly consensus floats at around 1000 BCE. The majority
of scholars agree that the Torah's composition took place over centuries. From
the late 19th century there was a general consensus around the documentary
hypothesis, which suggests that the five books were created c.450 BCE by
combining four originally independent sources, known as the Jahwist, or J
(about 900 BCE), the Elohist, or E (about 800 BCE), the Deuteronomist, or D,
(about 600 BCE), and the Priestly source, or P (about 500 BC). The first
scripture printed for wide distribution to the masses was The Diamond Sutra, a
Buddhist scripture, and is the earliest recorded example of a dated printed
text, bearing the Chinese calendar date for 11 May 868 CE. Views. Attitudes to
sacred texts differ. Some religions make written texts widely and freely
available, while others hold that sacred secrets must remain hidden from all
but the loyal and the initiate. Most religions promulgate policies defining the
limits of the sacred texts and controlling or forbidding changes and additions.
Some religions view their sacred texts as the "Word of God", often contending
that the texts are inspired by God and as such not open to alteration.
Translations of texts may receive official blessing, but an original sacred
language often has "de facto", absolute or exclusive paramountcy. Some
religions make texts available free or in subsidized form; others require
payment and the strict observance of copyright. References to scriptures profit
from standardisation: the Guru Granth Sahib (of Sikhism) always appears with
standardised page numbering while many other religions (including the Abrahamic
religions and their offshoots) favour chapter and verse pointers. Other terms.
Terms like "Holy Writ", "Holy Scripture" or "Sacred Scripture" are often used
by adherents to describe the canonical works of their religion to denote the
text's importance, its status as divine revelation, or, as in the case of many
Christian groups, its complete inerrancy. Christianity is not alone in using
this terminology to revere its sacred book; Islam holds the Qur'an in similar
esteem, as does Hinduism the Vedas and Bhagavad Gita and Buddhism the sutras.
Hierographology. Hierographology (Ancient Greek: ἱερός, hieros, "sacred"
or "holy", + γραφή, graphe, "writing", + λόγος, logos, "word" or
"reason") (archaically also 'hierology') is the study of sacred texts.
Increasingly, sacred texts of many cultures are studied within academic
contexts, primarily to increase understanding of other cultures, whether
ancient or contemporary. Sometimes this involves the extension of the
principles of higher criticism to the texts of many faiths. It may also involve
a comparative study of religious texts. The hierographology of the Qur'an can
be particularly controversial, especially when questioning the accuracy of
Islamic traditions about the text. List of sacred texts of various religions.
Bahá'í Faith. Books by Bahá'u'lláh
