Sadducees The Sadducees (Hebrew: "Ṣĕdûqîm") were a sect or group of Jews
that were active in Judea during the Second Temple period, starting from the
second century BCE through the destruction of the Temple in 70 CE. The sect was
identified by Josephus with the upper social and economic echelon of Judean
society. As a whole, the sect fulfilled various political, social, and
religious roles, including maintaining the Temple. The Sadducees are often
compared to other contemporaneous sects, including the Pharisees and the
Essenes. Their sect is believed to have become extinct sometime after the
destruction of Herod's Temple in Jerusalem in 70 CE, but it has been speculated
that the later Karaites may have had some roots or connections with old
Sadducee views. Etymology. According to Abraham Geiger, the Sadducee sect of
Judaism drew their name from Tzadok, the first Kohen Gadol to serve in The
First Temple with the leaders of the sect proposed as the Kohanim (priestly)
sons of Tzadok. However, based on Chazalic sources, some researchers have
argued that the Sadducee group originated "in tandem" with the Boethusian group
during the Second Temple period, with their founders, Tzadok and Boethus, both
being individual students of Antigonus of Sokho, who preceded the Zugot era,
with no direct connection between the founder of the Tzadoki sect and Tzadok
the Kohen Gadol, other than the same name. In any event, the name Tzadok, being
related to the root "ṣādaq" (to be right, just) could be indicative of their
aristocratic status in society in the initial period of their existence.
History. The Second Temple Period. The Second Temple Period is the period in
Ancient Israel between the construction of the Second Temple in Jerusalem in
516 BCE and its destruction by the Romans in 70 CE. Throughout the Second
Temple Period, Jerusalem saw several shifts in rule. Alexander’s conquest of
the Mediterranean world brought an end to Persian control of Jerusalem (539
BCE- 334/333 BCE) and ushered in the Hellenistic period. The Hellenistic
period, which extended from 334/333 BCE to 63 BCE, is known today for the
spread of Hellenistic influence. This included an expansion of culture,
including an appreciation of theater, and admiration of the human body. After
the death of Alexander in 323 BCE, his generals divided the empire among
themselves and for the next 30 years, they fought for control of the empire.
The Ptolemies emerged with control of Judea in 301 BCE (r. 301-200 BCE), but
only held it until the Seleucids (r. 200-167) took control in 200 BCE. King
Antiochus Epiphanes of Syria, a Seleucid, disrupted whatever peace there had
been in Judea when he desecrated the temple in Jerusalem and forced Jews to
violate their laws. Most prominent of the rebel groups were the Maccabees, led
by Mattathias the Hasmonean and his son Judah the Maccabee. Though the
Maccabees rebelled against the Seleucids in 164 BCE, Seleucid rule did not end
for another 20 years. The Maccabean (a.k.a. Hasmonean) rule lasted until 63
BCE, when the Romans, having grown uncomfortable with the dynasty’s growing
power, conquered Jerusalem. Thus began the Roman period, which extended into
the 4th century CE, well beyond the end of the Second Temple Period.
Cooperation between the Romans and the Jews was strongest during the reigns of
Herod and Herod Agrippa I (his grandson). However, the Romans gradually moved
power out of the hands of vassal kings and into the hands of Roman
administrators (e.g. Pontius Pilate). It was during this stage of control that
war broke out (66 CE). After a few years of conflict, the Romans retook
Jerusalem and destroyed the temple, bringing an end to the Second Temple Period
(70 CE). Role of the Temple. During the Persian period, the Temple became more
than the center of worship in Judea after its reconstruction in 516 BCE; it
served as the center of society. It makes sense, then, that priests held
important positions as official leaders outside of the Temple. The
democratizing forces of the Hellenistic period lessened and shifted the focus
of Judaism away from the Temple and in the 3rd century BCE, a scribal class
began to emerge. New organizations and “social elites,” according to Shaye
Cohen, appeared. It was also during this time that the high priesthood - the
members of which often identified as Sadducees - was developing a reputation
for corruption. Questions about the legitimacy of the Second Temple and its
Sadduceean leadership freely circulated Judean society. Sects began to form
during the Maccabean reign (see Jewish Sectarianism below). The Temple in
Jerusalem was the formal center of political and governmental leadership in
ancient Israel, although its power was often contested and disputed by fringe
groups. After the Temple destruction. After the destruction of the Temple of
Jerusalem in 70 CE, the Sadducees appear only in a few references to the
Talmud. In the beginnings of Karaism the followers of Anan ben David were
called "Sadducees" and setting a claim for the former being a historical
continuity from the latter. The discovery in 1910 of Sefer Zadok mentions by
the Karaite sage Ya'akov al-Qirqisani, led to a renewal for the hypothesis of
the Sadducee influences on the Karaites. The Sadducee idea of soul mortality
reflected on Uriel Acosta who mentions them in his writings, and the thinker
was referred to as a Sadducee in Karl Gutzkow's play "The Sadducees in
Amsterdam" (1834). Role of the Sadducees. Religious. The religious
responsibilities of the Sadducees included the maintenance of the Temple in
Jerusalem. Their high social status was reinforced by their priestly
responsibilities, as mandated in the Torah. The Priests were responsible for
performing sacrifices at the Temple, the primary method of worship in Ancient
Israel. This also included presiding over sacrifices on the three festivals of
pilgrimage to Jerusalem. Their religious beliefs and social status were
mutually reinforcing, as the Priesthood often represented the highest class in
Judean society. It is important to note that the Sadducees and the priests were
not completely synonymous. Cohen points out that “not all priests, high
priests, and aristocrats were Sadducees; many were Pharisees, and many were not
members of any group at all.” As mentioned above, it is widely believed that
the Sadducees were descended from the House of Zadok and sought to preserve
this priestly line and the authority of the Temple. Beliefs. General. The
Sadducees rejected the belief in resurrection of the dead, which was a central
tenet believed by Pharisees and by Early Christians. This often provoked
hostilities. Furthermore, the Sadducees rejected the Oral Law as proposed by
the Pharisees. Rather, they saw the Torah as the sole source of divine
authority. The written law, in its depiction of the priesthood, corroborated
the power and enforced the hegemony of the Sadducees in Judean society. Jewish
sectarianism. The Jewish community of the Second Temple period is often defined
by its sectarian and fragmented attributes. Josephus, in Antiquities,
contextualizes the Sadducees as opposed to the Pharisees and the Essenes. The
Sadducees are also notably distinguishable from the growing Jesus movement,
which later evolved into Christianity. These groups differed in their beliefs,
social statuses, and sacred texts. Though the Sadducees produced no primary
works themselves, their attributes can be derived from other contemporaneous
texts, namely, the New Testament, the Dead Sea Scrolls, and later, the Mishnah
and Talmud. Overall, within the hierarchy, the Sadducees represented an
aristocratic, wealthy, and traditional elite. As opposed to the Essenes. The
Dead Sea Scrolls, which are often attributed to the Essenes, suggest clashing
ideologies and social positions between the Essenes and the Sadducees. In fact,
some scholars suggest that the Essenes began as a group of renegade Zadokites,
which would suggest that the group itself had priestly, and thus Sadducean
origins. Within the Dead Sea Scrolls, the Sadducees are often referred to as
Manasseh. The Scrolls suggest that the Sadducees (Manasseh) and the Pharisees
(Ephraim) became religious communities that were distinct from the Essenes, the
true Judah. Clashes between the Essenes and the Sadducees are depicted in the
Pesher on Nahum, which states “They are the wicked ones...whose reign over
Israel will be brought down...his wives, his children, and his infant will go
into captivity. His warriors and his honored ones [will perish by the sword.”
The reference to the Sadducees as those who reign over Israel corroborates
their aristocratic status as opposed to the more fringe group of Essenes.
Furthermore, it suggests that the Essenes challenged the authenticity of the
rule of the Sadducees, blaming the downfall of ancient Israel and the siege of
Jerusalem on their impiety. The Dead Sea Scrolls brand the Sadduceean elite as
those who broke the covenant with God in their rule of the Judean state, and
thus became targets of divine revenge. As opposed to the Early Christian
Church. The New Testament, specifically the books of Mark and Matthew, describe
anecdotes that hint at hostility between the growing Jesus movement and the
Sadduceean establishment. These disputes manifest themselves on both
theological and social levels. Primarily, Mark describes how the Sadducees
challenged the Jesus’ groups belief in divine resurrection. Jesus
subsequently defends his belief in resurrection against Sadduceean resistance,
stating “and as for the dead being raised, have you not read in the book of
Moses, in the story about the bush, how God said to him ‘I "am" the God of
Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob?’ He is God not of the dead,
but of the living; you are quite wrong.” The tone and content of the passage
are indicative of theological and sociopolitical dispute. Jesus challenges the
reliability of the Sadducees’ interpretation of Biblical doctrine, the
authority of which enforces the power of the Sadduceean priesthood. In
addition, the Sadducees address the issue of resurrection through the lens of
marriage, which “hinted at their real agenda: the protection of property
rights through patriarchal marriage that perpetuated the male lineage."
Furthermore, Matthew depicts the Sadducees as “brood of Vipers,” and a
perversion of the true Israel. The New Testament thus constructs the identity
of the Jesus movement in opposition to the Sadducees. As opposed to the
Pharisees. The Pharisees and the Sadducees are historically seen as antitheses
of one another. Josephus, the author of the most extensive historical account
of the Second Temple Period, gives an extensive account of Jewish sectarianism
in both Jewish War and Antiquities. In Antiquities, he describes “the
Pharisees have delivered to the people a great many observances by succession
from their father. which are not written in the law of Moses, and for that
reason it is that the Sadducees reject them and say that we are to esteem those
observance to be obligatory which are in the written word, but are not to
observe what are derived from the tradition of our forefathers.” The
Sadducees rejected the Pharisaic use of the Oral law to enforce their claims to
power, citing the Written Torah as the sole manifestation of divinity. The
Rabbis, who are traditionally seen as the descendants of the Pharisees,
describe the similarities and differences between the two sects in Mishnah
Yadaim. The Mishnah explains that the Sadducees state, “So too, regarding the
Holy Scriptures, their impurity is according to (our) love for them. But the
books of Homer, which are not beloved, do not defile the hands.” The
Sadducees thus accuse the Pharisees as the opponents of traditional Judaism
because of their susceptibility and assimilation into the Hellenistic world.
When synthesized, one can discern that the Pharisees represented mainstream
Judaism in the Hellenistic world, while the Sadducees represented a more
aristocratic elite. Despite this, a passage from the book of Acts suggests that
both Pharisees and Sadducees collaborated in the Sanhedrin, the high Jewish
court.
