Saint A saint is one who has been recognized for having an exceptional degree
of holiness, sanctity, and virtue. While the English term "saint" originated in
Christianity, the term is now used by historians of religion "in a more general
way to refer to the state of special holiness that many religions attribute to
certain people," with the Jewish Tzadik, the Islamic wali, the Hindu rishi or
guru, and the Buddhist arahat or boddhisatva also referred to as saints.
Depending on the religion, saints are recognized either through official church
recognition or by popular acclaim (see Folk saints). In Christianity, "saint"
has a wide variety of meanings, depending on its usage and the denomination. In
some denominations, "saint" refers to any believer who is "in Christ", and in
whom Christ dwells, whether in heaven or in earth. In Orthodox and Catholic
teachings, all Christians in heaven are considered to be saints, but some are
considered to be worthy of higher honor, emulation, or veneration, with
official church recognition given to some saints through canonization or
glorification. General characteristics. The term in English was originally used
in Christianity, though historians now use the term for those who are
considered worthy of veneration for their holiness or sanctity in all major
religions. While there are parallels between these (and other) concepts and
that of sainthood, each of these concepts has specific meanings within a given
religion. Also, new religious movements have sometimes taken to using the word
in cases where the people so named would not be regarded as saints within
mainstream Christianity. Some of the Cao Dai saints and saints of Ecclesia
Gnostica Catholica are examples of such. The anthropologist Lawrence Babb in an
article about Sathya Sai Baba asks the question "Who is a saint?", and responds
by saying that in the symbolic infrastructure of some religions, there is the
image of a certain extraordinary spiritual king's "miraculous powers", to whom
frequently a certain moral presence is attributed. These saintly figures, he
asserts, are "the focal points of spiritual force-fields", exerting "powerful
attractive influence on followers but touch the inner lives of others in
transforming ways as well." Christianity. Anglicanism. In the Anglican
Communion and the Continuing Anglican movement, the title of Saint refers to a
person who has been elevated by popular opinion as a pious and holy person. The
saints are seen as models of holiness to be imitated, and as a 'cloud of
witnesses' that strengthen and encourage the believer during his or her
spiritual journey (). The saints are seen as elder brothers and sisters in
Christ. Official Anglican creeds recognise the existence of the saints in
heaven. So far as invocation of the saints is concerned, one of the Church of
England's Articles of Religion "Of Purgatory" condemns "the Romish Doctrine
concerning...(the) Invocation of Saints" as "a fond thing vainly invented, and
grounded upon no warranty of Scripture, but rather repugnant to the Word of
God". However, each of the 44 member churches in the Anglican Communion are
free to adopt and authorise their own official documents, and the Articles are
not officially normative in all of them (e.g., The Episcopal Church USA, which
relegates them to "Historical Documents"). Anglo-Catholics in Anglican
provinces using the Articles often make a distinction between a "Romish" and a
"Patristic" doctrine concerning the invocation of saints, permitting the
latter. In high-church contexts, such as Anglo-Catholicism, a saint is
generally one to whom has been attributed (and who has generally demonstrated)
a high level of holiness and sanctity. In this use, a saint is therefore not a
believer, but one who has been transformed by virtue. In Roman Catholicism, a
saint is a special sign of God's activity. The veneration of saints is
sometimes misunderstood to be worship, in which case it is derisively termed
"hagiolatry". Some Anglicans and Anglican churches, particularly Anglo-
Catholics, personally ask prayers of the saints. However, such a practice is
seldom found in any official Anglican liturgy. Unusual examples of it are found
in The Korean Liturgy 1938, the liturgy of the Diocese of Guiana 1959 and The
Melanesian English Prayer Book. Anglicans believe that the only effective
Mediator between the believer and God the Father, in terms of redemption and
salvation, is God the Son, Jesus Christ. Historical Anglicanism has drawn a
distinction between the intercession of the saints and the invocation of the
saints. The former was generally accepted in Anglican doctrine, while the
latter was generally rejected. There are some, however, in Anglicanism, who do
beseech the saints' intercession. Those who beseech the saints to intercede on
their behalf make a distinction between "mediator" and "intercessor", and claim
that asking for the prayers of the saints is no different in kind than asking
for the prayers of living Christians. Anglican Catholics understand sainthood
in a more Catholic or Orthodox way, often praying for intercessions from the
saints and celebrating their feast days. According to the Church of England, a
saint is one who is sanctified, as it translates in the Authorised King James
Version (1611) 2 Chronicles 6:41 Now therefore arise, O God, into thy resting
place, thou, and the ark of thy strength: let thy priests, O God, be clothed
with salvation, and let thy saints rejoice in goodness. In the Bible, only one
person is expressly called a saint: "They envied Moses also in the camp, and
Aaron the saint of the ." () The apostle Paul declared himself to be "less than
the least of all saints" in . Eastern Orthodoxy. In the Eastern Orthodox Church
a saint is defined as anyone who is in Heaven, whether recognized here on
earth, or not. By this definition, Adam and Eve, Moses, the various prophets,
except for the angels and archangels are all given the title of "Saint".
Sainthood in the Orthodox Church does not necessarily reflect a moral model,
but the communion with God: there are countless examples of people who lived in
great sin and became saints by humility and repentance, such as Mary of Egypt,
Moses the Ethiopian, and of course Dysmas, the repentant thief who was
crucified. Therefore, a more complete definition of what a saint is, has to do
with the way that saints, through their humility and their love of humankind,
saved inside them the entire Church, and loved all people. Orthodox belief
considers that God reveals his saints through answered prayers and other
miracles. Saints are usually recognized by a local community, often by people
who directly knew them. As their popularity grows they are often then
recognized by the entire church. The formal process of recognition involves
deliberation by a synod of bishops. If successful, this is followed by a
service of Glorification in which the Saint is given a day on the church
calendar to be celebrated by the entire church. This does not, however, make
the person a saint; the person already was a saint and the Church ultimately
recognized it. It is believed that one of the ways the holiness (sanctity) of a
person is revealed, is through the condition of their relics (remains). In some
Orthodox countries (such as Greece, but not in Russia) graves are often reused
after 3 to 5 years because of limited space. Bones are washed and placed in an
ossuary, often with the person's name written on the skull. Occasionally when a
body is exhumed something miraculous is reported as having occurred; exhumed
bones are claimed to have given off a fragrance, like flowers, or a body is
reported as having remained free of decay, despite not having been embalmed
(traditionally the Orthodox do not embalm the dead) and having been buried for
some years in the earth. The reason relics are considered sacred is because,
for the Orthodox, the separation of body and soul is unnatural. Body and soul
both comprise the person, and in the end, body and soul will be reunited;
therefore, the body of a saint shares in the "Holiness" of the soul of the
saint. As a general rule only clergy will touch relics in order to move them or
carry them in procession, however, in veneration the faithful will kiss the
relic to show love and respect toward the saint. Every altar in every Orthodox
church contains relics, usually of martyrs. Church interiors are covered with
the Icons of saints. Because the Church shows no true distinction between the
living and the dead (the saints are considered to be alive in Heaven), saints
are referred to as if they were still alive. Saints are venerated but not
worshipped. They are believed to be able to intercede for salvation and help
mankind either through direct communion with God, or by personal intervention.
In the Eastern Orthodox Church, the title , "Hosios" (f. Ὁσία "Hosia") is
also used. This is a title attributed to saints who had lived a monastic or
eremitic life, and it is equal to the more usual title of "Saint". Mormons
(Latter-day Saints). The beliefs within The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-
day Saints (LDS Church) with regard to saints are similar but not quite the
same as to the Protestant tradition described below. In the New Testament the
saints are all those who have entered into the Christian covenant of baptism.
The qualification "latter-day" refers to the doctrine that members are living
in the "latter days", before the Second Coming of Christ, and is used to
distinguish the members of the LDS Church, which considers itself the
restoration of the ancient Christian church. Therefore members are often
referred to as "Latter-day Saints" or "LDS", and among themselves as "Saints".
Oriental Orthodox. The Syriac Orthodox, Coptic Orthodox, Ethiopian Orthodox,
Eritrean Orthodox, Malankara Orthodox Syrian Church and Armenian Apostolic
churches do accept the existence of saints, but officially recognize them via
their own individual processes. For example, the Pope of the Coptic Orthodox
Church of Alexandria canonizes saints, through the approval of that church's
Holy Synod. A requirement of the Coptic Orthodox faith is that at least 50
years must pass from a saint's death to his canonization, and the Coptic
Orthodox Pope must follow that rule. Protestantism. In many Protestant
churches, the word "saint" is used more generally to refer to anyone who is a
Christian. This is similar in usage to Paul's numerous references in the New
Testament of the Bible. In this sense, anyone who is within the Body of Christ
(i.e., a professing Christian) is a 'saint' because of their relationship with
Christ Jesus. Many Protestants consider prayers to the saints to be idolatry as
an application of divine worship that should be given only to God himself is
being given to other believers, dead or alive. Many Protestants sects also
consider the practice to be similar to necromancy as the dead are believed to
be awaiting resurrection, unable to do anything for the living saint. Within
some Protestant traditions, "saint" is also used to refer to any born-again
Christian. Many emphasise the traditional New Testament meaning of the word,
preferring to write "saint" to refer to any believer, in continuity with the
doctrine of the priesthood of all believers. Lutheranism. In the Lutheran
Church, all Christians, whether in heaven or on earth, are regarded as saints.
However, the church still recognizes and honors specific saints, including some
of those recognized by the Catholic Church, but in a qualified way: according
to the Augsburg Confession, the term "saint" is used in the manner of the Roman
Catholic Church only insofar as to denote a person who received exceptional
grace, was sustained by faith and whose good works are to be an example to any
Christian. Traditional Lutheran belief accounts that prayers "to" the saints
are prohibited, as they are not mediators of redemption. But, Lutherans do
believe that saints pray for the Christian Church in general. Philip
Melancthon, the author of the Apology of the Augsburg Confession, approved
honoring the saints by saying they are honored in three ways: 1. By thanking
God for examples of His mercy; 2. By using the saints as examples for
strengthening our faith; 3. By imitating their faith and other virtues. The
Lutheran Churches also have liturgical calendars in which they honor
individuals as saints. Methodism. While Methodists as a whole do not practice
the patronage or veneration of saints, they do honor and admire them.
Methodists believe that all Christians are "saints", but mainly use the term to
refer to bibilical people, Christian leaders, and martyrs of the faith. Many
Methodist churches are named after saints, such as the Twelve Apostles, John
Wesley, etc. Although, most are named after geographical locations associated
with an early circuit or prominent location. Some Methodist congregations
observe All Saints Day if they follow the liturgical calendar. Many encourage
the study of saints, that is, the biography of holy people. The 14th Article of
Religion in the United Methodist Discipline states, "The Romish doctrine
concerning purgatory, pardon, worshiping, and adoration, as well of images as
of relics, and also invocation of saints, is a fond thing, vainly invented, and
grounded upon no warrant of Scripture, but repugnant to the Word of God." John
Wesley, the theological father of world Methodism, did not practice or permit
Roman Catholic practices associated with the veneration of the Virgin Mary or
prayers to saints. Roman Catholicism. One Roman Catholic website states that
"There are over 10,000 named saints and beatified people from history, the
Roman Martyrology and Orthodox sources, but no definitive head count". Rev.
Alban Butler published "Lives of the Saints" in 1756, containing 1,486 saints.
The latest edition of this work, edited by Father Herbert Thurston, S.J., and
British author Donald Attwater, contains the lives of 2,565 saints. Monsignor
Robert Sarno, an official of Vatican's Congregation for the Causes of Saints,
expressed that it is impossible to say the exact number of saints. The Catholic
Church teaches that it does not, in fact, make or create saints. Rather, it
recognizes them. In the Church, the title of Saint refers to a person who has
been formally canonized (officially recognized) by the Catholic Church, and is
therefore believed to be in Heaven. By this definition there are many people
believed to be in Heaven who have not been formally declared as saints (most
typically due to their obscurity and the involved process of formal
canonization) but who may nevertheless generically be referred to as saints.
All in Heaven are, in the technical sense, saints, since they are believed to
be completely perfect in holiness. Unofficial devotions to uncanonized
individuals take place in certain regions. Sometimes the word "saint" is used
to refer to Christians still sojourning here on earth. In his book, "Saint of
the Day", editor Leonard Foley, OFM, says this of saints: "[Saints'] surrender
to God's love was so generous an approach to the total surrender of Jesus that
the Church recognizes them as heroes and heroines worthy to be held up for our
inspiration. They remind us that the Church is holy, can never stop being holy
and is called to show the holiness of God by living the life of Christ." In his
book, on "Making Saints", author Kenneth L. Woodward notes the following:  The
veneration of saints, in Latin, "cultus", or the "cult of the saints",
describes a particular popular devotion or abandonment to a particular saint or
saints. Although the term "worship" is sometimes used, it is intended in the
old-sense meaning to honor or give respect ("dulia"). According to the Catholic
Church, Divine Worship is properly reserved only for God ("latria") and never
to the saints. They can be asked to intercede or pray for those still on earth,
just as one can ask someone on earth to pray for them. A saint may be
designated as a patron saint of a particular cause or profession, or invoked
against specific illnesses or disasters, sometimes by popular custom and
sometimes by official statements of the Magisterium. Saints are not thought to
have power of their own, but only that granted by God. Relics of saints are
respected in a similar manner to holy images and icons. The practices of past
centuries in venerating relics of saints for healing is taken from the early
Church. For example, an American deacon claimed in 2000 that Blessed John Henry
Newman interceded with God to cure him. The American, Jack Sullivan, asserted
that after addressing Newman he was cured of spinal stenosis in a matter of
hours. In 2009, a panel of theologians concluded that Sullivan's recovery was
the result of his prayer to Newman. According to the Catholic Church, to be
deemed a miracle, "a medical recovery must be instantaneous, not attributable
to treatment, disappear for good." Once a person has been declared a saint, the
body of the saint is considered holy. The remains of saints are called holy
relics and are usually used in churches. Saints' personal belongings may also
be used as relics. Some of the saints have a symbol that represents their life.
In Church tradition, a person who is seen as exceptionally holy can be declared
a saint by a formal process, called canonization. Formal canonization is a
lengthy process often taking many years, even centuries. The first step in this
process is an investigation of the candidate's life, undertaken by an expert.
After this, the report on the candidate is given to the bishop of the area and
more studying is done. It is then sent to the Congregation for the Causes of
Saints in Rome. If the application is approved, the person may be granted the
title of "Venerable". Further investigations may lead to the candidate's
beatification and given title of "Blessed." At a minimum, two important
miracles are required to be formally declared a saint. These miracles must be
posthumous. Finally, when all of this is done the Pope canonizes the saint.
Other religions. The use of the term "saint" is not exclusive to Christianity.
In many religions, there are people who have been recognized within their
tradition as having fulfilled the highest aspirations of religious teaching. In
English, the term saint is often used to translate this idea from many world
religions. African Diaspora. Cuban Santería, Haitian Vodou, Brazilian Umbanda
and Candomblé, and other similar syncretist religions adopted the Catholic
saints, or at least the images of the saints, and applied their own spirits/
deities to them. They are worshiped in churches (where they appear as saints)
and in religious festivals, where they appear as the deities. The name
"santería" was originally a pejorative term for those whose worship of saints
deviated from Catholic norms. Buddhism. Buddhists hold the Arhats and Arahants
in special esteem, as well as Bodhisattvas and Buddhas. Discordianism. In
Discordianism, anyone, living or dead, or even anything can be named a saint.
Anyone may canonize anything or anyone else as everyone, whether they are aware
of it or not, is a pope in the POEE. This is because "moral perfection isn't
necessary for Discordian Sainthood. You just have to suffer a lot." Hinduism.
There are individuals who have been described as being Hindu saints, most of
whom have also been more specifically identified by the terms Sant, Mahatma,
Paramahamsa, or Swami, or with the titles "Sri" or "Srila". Islam. "We do not
prefer any of the saintly men among the Ummah over any of the Prophets but
rather we say that any one of the Prophets is better than all the awliya' put
together. We believe in what we know of Karamat, the marvels of the awliya' and
in authentic stories about them from trustworthy sources. Unlike Prophets and
Messengers, the "awliya" can be either male and female. One of the best known
female saints is Rabi`a al-Adawiyya. It is widely regarded in Islam that the
saint of saints is Ali Ibn Abi Talib, the cousin of Prophet Muhammad. Most Sufi
orders, Tarikahs, originate through his teachings. In Sufism, the major "wali"
are considered masters in the art of spiritual purification. Many Muslims hold
the Hadrat (literally Presence, a title of saints) in esteem. Scholars have
also noted the parallels between the regard for some Sufi figures in popular
Muslim observance and Christian ideas of sainthood. In some Muslim countries
there are shrines at the tombs of Sufi saints, with the observation of festival
days on the anniversary of death, and a tradition of miracle-working. Judaism.
The term "Tzadik" "righteous", and its associated meanings, developed in
Rabbinic thought from its Talmudic contrast with "Hasid" ("Pious" honorific),
to its exploration in Ethical literature, and its esoteric spiritualisation in
Kabbalah. In Hasidic Judaism, the institution of the Tzadik assumed central
importance, combining former elite mysticism with social movement for the first
time. Sikhism. The concept of sant or bhagat is found in North Indian religious
thought including Sikhism. Figures such as Kabir, Ravidas, Nanak, and others
are widely regarded as belonging to the Sant tradition. Some of their mystical
compositions are incorporated in the Guru Granth Sahib. The term "Sant" is
still sometimes loosely applied to living individuals in the Sikh and related
communities.
