Salvation Salvation, in religion, is the saving of the soul from sin and its
consequences. It may also be called "deliverance" or "redemption" from sin and
its effects. Depending on the religious tradition, salvation is considered to
be caused either by the free will and grace of a deity (in theistic religions)
or by personal responsibility and self-effort (e.g. in the sramanic and yogic
traditions of India). Religions often emphasize the necessity of both personal
effort— for example, repentance and asceticism —and divine action (e.g.
grace). Within soteriology, salvation has two related meanings. On the one hand
it refers to the phenomenon of being saved by divine agency —such as is the
case in Christianity, Judaism and Islam. On the other it refers to the
phenomenon of the soul being saved (as in 'safe') from some unfortunate
destiny. In the former, divine agency gives rise to the situation of the
latter. However, devotion, petition, supplication and liturgical participation
though considered integral to Roman Catholic and Eastern Orthodox Christianity
are not considered enough alone to bring about salvation. Asceticism and
repentance are advocated as essential from both a practical and sacramental
point of view. Protestant Christianity (particularly evangelical Christianity)
with its emphasis on "sola fide" asserts that salvation comes by way of grace
through Jesus (Ephesians 2:8-9) and is effected by faith alone. The academic
study of salvation is called soteriology. It concerns itself with the
comparative study of how different religious traditions conceive salvation and
how they believe it is effected or achieved. In Indian religions, for example,
the concept of salvation (which is called "moksha") involves being free from an
endless process of transmigration of the soul, a belief that is absent from
Abrahamic soteriology. In Jainism and Buddhism divine agency does not have any
role in salvation since both religions regard the matter from a purely causal
point of view. In both Eastern and Western religions salvation is also the
phenomenon of being saved from death but here is not meant biological death but
the suffering and degradation within life resulting from the consequences of
sin. In Christianity one who has attained salvation is said to experience and
inherit eternal life in God or what in Buddhism is called "nirvana" (whose
synonym "amaravati" means "deathlessness"). Christianity. According to
Christian belief, salvation is made possible by the life, death, and
resurrection of Jesus, which in the context of salvation is referred to as the
"atonement". For this reason, the New Testament portrays Jesus as the only
redeemer or saviour of mankind, and the Early Church regarded his salvation as
a message for everyone, gentiles as well as Jews. However, it has been pointed
out that in the words of Jesus in "If there is one theological issue that both
Jews and Christians should be able to agree on, it is that ""salvation is from
the Jews""." It had been expressed in Judaism from the days of Abraham onward
that the salvation of all mankind is to come from Israel, i.e. the Jews through
their relationship with God. This is the primary sense in which the Jews are
"the Chosen People". Christians who believe in the accuracy of the New
Testament, would accept that "salvation is from the Jews", since "those are the
very words that Jesus spoke to the Samaritan woman at the well". Salvation is
believed to be a process that begins when a person first becomes a Christian,
continues through that person's life, and is completed when they stand before
Christ in judgment. Therefore, according to Catholic apologist James Akin, the
faithful Christian can say in faith and hope, "I "have been" saved; I "am
being" saved; and I "will be" saved." Christian salvation concepts are varied
and complicated by certain theological concepts, traditional beliefs, and
dogmas. Scripture is subject to individual and ecclesiastical interpretations.
Therefore, Christian soteriology ranges from exclusive salvation to universal
reconciliation concepts. While some of the differences are as widespread as
Christianity itself, the overwhelming majority agrees that salvation is made
possible by the work of Jesus Christ, the Son of God, dying on the cross. The
purpose of salvation is debated, but in general most Christian theologians
agree that God devised and implemented His plan of salvation because he loves
them and regards human beings as his children. Since human existence on Earth
is said to be "," salvation also has connotations that deal with the liberation
of human beings from sin, and the suffering associated with the punishment of
sin—i.e., "the wages of sin is death." Paradigms of salvation. Moral
transformation. The moral transformation view was the predominant understanding
of salvation among Christians during the first three centuries AD, and
continues to be held by some denominations such as the Eastern Orthodox today.
In this view, Jesus saved people from sinfulness through his life and teachings
(see the moral influence theory of atonement), thus transforming their
character to become righteous. This salvation is seen as undeserved, since God
graciously sent Jesus to save people when they were unrighteous and did not in
any way deserve such a favour. In the moral transformation paradigm, a person
is saved from sinfulness by faithfully following the teachings of Jesus, and
the example he set of how to live. Consequently, a person becomes righteous in
God's sight, and can expect a positive final judgment by God. Perfection is not
required, and mistakes are forgiven after repentance. In this view, Jesus'
crucifixion is understood primarily as a martyrdom. The moral transformation
view has been criticised and rejected by many Protestant Christians, for a
variety of reasons. Critics believe that the moral transformation view
conflicts with various biblical passages (particularly ones by Paul regarding
'faith' and 'works'), underestimates the seriousness of sin and denies the
atoning value of Jesus' death. Christus Victor. In the Christus Victor view,
people needed salvation from the powers of evil. Jesus achieved salvation for
people by defeating the powers of evil, particularly Satan. This view has been
dated in writings of the Church Fathers to the 4th centuries AD, although it
remained popular for several centuries. Several perspectives on this idea
existed, which can be roughly divided into "conquest of Satan" and "rescue from
Satan's power". In the conquest of Satan version, writers such as Eusebius of
Caesarea depicted Jesus defeating Satan in a great spiritual battle that
occurred between his death and resurrection. By winning this battle, Jesus
overthrew Satan and saved people from his dominion. The Christus Victor view is
not widely held in the West. Ransom from Satan. The ransom from Satan view
entails the idea that Satan had power over people's souls in the afterlife, but
that Christ rescued people from his power. Often, the death of Christ plays an
important role in this rescue. The view appears to have arisen during the 3rd
century, in the writings of Origen and other theologians. In one version of the
idea, Satan attempted to take Jesus' soul after he had died, but in doing so
over-extended his authority, since Jesus had not sinned. As a consequence,
Satan lost his authority completely, and all humanity gained freedom. In
another version, God entered into a deal with Satan, offering to trade Jesus'
soul in exchange for the souls of all people, but after the trade, God raised
Jesus from the dead and left Satan with nothing. Other versions held that
Jesus' divinity was masked by his human form, so Satan tried to take Jesus’
soul without realizing that his divinity would destroy Satan's power. Another
idea is that Jesus came to teach how not to sin and Satan, in anger with this
tried to take his soul. The Ransom from Satan view is also not widely held in
the West. Satisfaction. In the 11th century, Anselm of Canterbury rejected the
ransom view, and proposed instead the satisfaction view. He depicted God as a
feudal lord, whose honour had been offended by the sins of humankind. In this
view, people needed salvation from the divine punishment that these offences
would bring, since nothing they could do could repay the honour debt. Anselm
held that Christ had infinitely honoured God through his life and death that
Christ could repay what humanity owed God, thus resolving the offence to God's
honour ("satisfying" it) and doing away with the need for punishment. When
Anselm proposed the satisfaction view, it was immediately criticised by Peter
Abelard. Penal substitution and faith. In the 16th century, the Protestant
Reformers reinterpreted Anselm's satisfaction theory of salvation within a
legal paradigm. In the legal system, offences required punishment, and no
satisfaction could be given to avert this need. They proposed a theory known as
penal substitution, in which Christ takes the penalty of people's sin as their
substitute, thus saving people from God's wrath against sin. Penal substitution
thus presents Jesus saving people from the divine punishment of their past
wrongdoings. However, this salvation is not presented as automatic. Rather, a
person must have faith in order to receive this free gift of salvation. In the
penal substitution view, salvation is not dependent upon human effort or deeds.
The penal substitution paradigm of salvation is widely held among Protestant
Christians, who often consider it central to Christianity. However, it has also
be widely critiqued. Advocates of the New Perspective on Paul also argue that
many New Testament books by Paul the Apostle used to support the theory of
penal substitution should be interpreted differently. Catholicism. A crucial
difference between the Catholic and Protestant understanding of salvation is
that, unlike Protestantism, Catholicism believes that, after the Fall humanity
did not become totally corrupt but was “wounded by sin” (rather than
destroyed) and “stands in need of salvation from God. Divine help comes in
Christ through the law that guides and the grace that sustains” That divine
help, that grace, is a favour, a free and undeserved gift from God which helps
us to respond to His invitation to enter relationship. Catholics profess belief
that Christ alone is the Saviour of the human race. Christ is God incarnate,
bringing about redemption from sin, for “…all salvation comes through
Christ.” IndeedNostra aetate para 2 In the Catholic Church justification is
granted by God from baptism firstly, instead of plainly by faith, and from the
sacrament of reconciliation after if a mortal sin is committed. A mortal sin
makes justification lost even if faith is still present. The Catholic Church
infallibly declared in the Ecumentical Council of Trent that, "If anyone says
that the sinner is justified by faith alone, meaning that nothing else is
required to cooperate in order to obtain the grace of justification, and that
it is not in any way necessary that he be prepared and disposed by the action
of his own will, let him be anathema." in canon 9 of session VI. It also said
in the VII session in canon IV, "If any one saith, that the sacraments of the
New Law are not necessary unto salvation, but superfluous; and that, without
them, or without the desire thereof, men obtain of God, through faith alone,
the grace of justification;-though all (the sacraments) are not indeed
necessary for every individual; let him be anathema (excommunicated)."
Salvation of non-Catholics. For Catholicism, Christ provides the Church with
"'the fullness of the means of salvation' which he has willed: correct and
complete confession of faith, full sacramental life, and ordained ministry in
apostolic succession." To Catholic thinking, this does not mean that only
Christians can enter heaven, for "Jesus, the Son of God, freely suffered death
for us in complete and free submission to the will of God, his Father. By his
death he has conquered death, and so opened the possibility of salvation to all
men." As Pope John Paul II stated in his encyclical "Redemptoris Missio", Thus,
the Catholic Church teaches that, although Christ is the Saviour of humanity,
it is not necessary to know of Him, or have a relationship with Him, to be
saved. This is because The Church teaches that the salvation of humanity takes
place because of Christ's death and resurrection, and that this salvation
applies to all people whether or not they are aware of this act. This does not
mean that The Church teaches that all religions are equal, but rather that
everyone does not have the same access to Christ and His teachings, or may have
had the Gospel presented in such a manner as to have turned them away (e.g. by
missionaries who were poor examples of the Christian life). Anselm. Shortly
after 1100, Anselm, appointed as archbishop of Canterbury, wrote a classic
treatise about atonement. In it he puts forward the "satisfaction theory" of
the Atonement in salvation. Man's offense of rebellion against God is one that
demands a payment or satisfaction. Fallen man is incapable of making adequate
satisfaction. Nevertheless, such is God's love that God will not simply abandon
us (at least not all of us) to the consequences of our sins. Anselm wrote,
"This debt was so great that, while none but man must solve the debt, none but
God was able to do it; so that he who does it must be both God and man." The
suffering of Christ, the God-man who is God's only son, pays off what human
beings owe to God's honor, and we are thereby reconciled to God. So God took
human nature upon Himself so that a perfect man might make perfect satisfaction
and so restore the human race. Anselm is called the founder of scholasticism,
and he is noted as the originator of the ontological argument for the existence
of God. His foundational work is seen later in Calvinism and Arminianism.
Eastern Christianity. Eastern Christianity was much less influenced by
Augustine. It asks different questions, and it generally views salvation less
in legalistic terms (e.g. grace and punishment), more in medical terms
(sickness, healing etc.). It views salvation more along the lines of theosis, a
seeking to become holy or draw closer to God, a traditional concept of Eastern
Orthodox, Oriental Orthodox, and Eastern Catholic Christians. It also stresses
teaching about forgiveness. "The Longer Catechism of the Orthodox, Catholic,
Eastern Church", known also as "The Catechism of St. Philaret" includes the
questions and answers: "155. To save men from what did (the Son of God) come
upon earth? From sin, the curse, and death." "208. How does the death of Jesus
Christ upon the cross deliver us from sin, the curse, and death? That we may
the more readily believe this mystery, the Word of God teaches us of it, so
much as we may be able to receive, by the comparison of Jesus Christ with Adam.
Adam is by nature the head of all humanity, which is one with him by natural
descent from him. Jesus Christ, in whom the Godhead is united with manhood,
graciously made himself the new almighty Head of men, whom he unites to himself
through faith. Therefore as in Adam we had fallen under sin, the curse, and
death, so we are delivered from sin, the curse, and death in Jesus Christ. His
voluntary suffering and death on the cross for us, being of infinite value and
merit, as the death of one sinless, God and man in one person, is both a
perfect satisfaction to the justice of God, which had condemned us for sin to
death, and a fund of infinite merit, which has obtained him the right, without
prejudice to justice, to give us sinners pardon of our sins, and grace to have
victory over sin and death. Orthodox theology teaches prevenient grace, meaning
that God makes the first movement toward man, and that salvation is impossible
from our own will alone. However, man is endowed with free will, and an
individual can either accept or reject the grace of God. Thus an individual
must cooperate with God's grace to be saved, though he can claim no credit of
his own, as any progress he makes is possible only by the grace of God.
Besides, the Orthodox Church supposes that the person has salvation not only by
his good deeds, but also by his patient suffering of various griefs, illnesses,
misfortunes, failures (-31, -38, -11, -3, ). Protestantism. The Protestant
Christian perspective on salvation is that no one can merit the grace of God by
performing rituals, good works, asceticism or meditation, because grace is the
result of one's initiative without any regard whatsoever to any merit in the
one towards whom the good is being initiated. To be forgiven and brought back
into a personal relationship with God, it is not enough that the grace of God
exists as potential solution. It must be claimed personally by the sinful
person by their own initiative. The recognition of one’s sinful state,
followed by a complete turning away from that sinful lifestyle and attitude, is
called "repentance." Repentance in the New Testament has a wider meaning than
simply regretting the mistakes of the past. "When the Holy Spirit descended at
Pentecost, repentance meant to be sorry for rejecting Jesus Christ as Savior,
accompanied by a subsequent change of mentality. The same change in attitude
toward Jesus is required today. This repentance followed by a complete turning
toward and believing in the atoning death and sacrifice of Jesus on the cross
for one's sins is what results in salvation. Christianity teaches that Jesus is
not a mere man, a prophet, a guru or something similar, but the savior of the
world, the only "name under heaven given to men by which we must be saved."
Only then can the atoning death of Christ become an actual solution for one’s
sins. According to Christian theologian Frank Stagg, salvation is rooted in the
"grace of God." "For bankrupt sinners with no ground of their own upon which to
stand, with nothing of their own upon which to stand, with nothing of their own
to hold up to God for [one's] reward, it is their only hope, but it is their
sufficient hope." According to the New Testament, this salvation is a gift from
God that anyone may receive by exercising faith in Christ and repenting for
their sin. Some of the benefits of this salvation are that people become "new
creations in Christ," their sins are forgiven, they receive eternal life and
become children of God. They also receive the Holy Spirit, who enables them to
live a new life based on God's requirements and to spread the gospel to others.
In Christianity, the human problem is sin that causes suffering in this life
but may lead to eternal suffering in the next life. According to Christian
teachings, God is good, perfect, and just, and so sin by its nature prevents a
right relationship with God and provokes God to anger at all humanity who
consistently rebel against His law and commandments. Therefore, people who have
not accepted salvation cannot enjoy the full benefits of knowing God in this
life, such as peace and comfort in times of trouble. They also cannot spend
eternity in God's presence, and will consequently suffer the eternal wrath of
God's righteous punishment and judgement in a place called Hell. Christianity
claims to offer "good news," and this good news is that it is possible to be
saved (attain salvation) from sin and the wrath of God's holy and righteous
judgement. The solution, then, is salvation from sin, temporal suffering, and
suffering under the eternal wrath of God. According to Christianity, eternal
life is not the annihilation of soul and personhood, but an embodied existence
of perfect and eternal communion with God. In the Protestant view, Jesus took
God's justice and wrath upon himself and was crushed in order to conquer death
and bring into right standing with God, those who believe and repent. Broadly
speaking, Protestants hold to the five "sola"s of the Reformation which declare
that salvation is by "faith" alone in "Christ" alone through "grace" alone to
the "Glory of God" alone as told in "Scripture" alone. Universalism.
Universalists agree with both Calvinists and Arminians that everyone is born in
sin and in need of salvation. They also believe that one is saved by Jesus
Christ. However, they emphasize that judgment in hell upon sinners is of
limited duration, and that God uses judgment to bring sinners to repentance.
Churches of Christ. Western Churches of Christ are strongly anti-Calvinist in
their understanding of salvation, and generally present conversion as
"obedience to the proclaimed facts of the gospel rather than as the result of
an emotional, Spirit-initiated conversion." Churches of Christ hold the view
that humans of accountable age are lost because of their sins. These lost souls
can be redeemed because Jesus Christ, the Son of God, offered Himself as the
atoning sacrifice. Children too young to understand right from wrong, and make
a conscious choice between the two, are believed to be innocent of sin. The age
when this occurs is generally believed to be around 13. Beginning in the 1960s,
many preachers began placing more emphasis on the role of grace in salvation,
instead of focusing exclusively implementing all of the New Testament commands
and examples. This was not an entirely new approach, as others had actively
"affirmed a theology of free and unmerited grace," but it did represent a
change of emphasis with grace becoming "a theme that would increasingly define
this tradition." Because of the belief that baptism is a necessary part of
salvation, some Baptists hold that the Churches of Christ endorse the doctrine
of baptismal regeneration. However, members of the Churches of Christ reject
this, arguing that since faith and repentance are necessary, and that the
cleansing of sins is by the blood of Christ through the grace of God, baptism
is not an inherently redeeming ritual. One author describes the relationship
between faith and baptism this way, ""Faith" is the "reason why" a person is a
child of God; "baptism" is the "time at which" one is incorporated into Christ
and so becomes a child of God" (italics are in the source). Baptism is
understood as a confessional expression of faith and repentance, rather than a
"work" that earns salvation. Baptist. Baptist denominations believe water
baptism must include full immersion of the person being baptized. The
requirement for baptism is affirmation of faith in Jesus Christ. The Church of
Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
Saints (also known as Mormons) defines the term salvation based on the
teachings of their modern-day prophet Joseph Smith, Jr., as recorded in the
Doctrine and Covenants and summarized in the Articles of Faith (Latter Day
Saints) number four.  The general Christian belief that salvation means
returning to the presence of God and Jesus Christ is similar to the way the
word is used in the Book of Mormon, wherein the prophet Amulek teaches that
through the "great and last sacrifice" of the Son of God, "he shall bring
salvation to all those who shall believe on his name; ... to bring about the
bowels of mercy, which overpowereth justice, and bringeth about means unto men
that they may have faith unto repentance. And thus mercy can satisfy the
demands of justice, and encircles them in the arms of safety, while he that
exercises no faith unto repentance is exposed to the whole law of the demands
of justice;" (Alma 34:14-16) There are two kinds of salvation, conditional and
unconditional. Unconditional salvation is similar to what is believed by other
Christians in that the Atonement of Jesus Christ redeems all mankind from the
chains of death and are resurrected to their perfect frames. They will also be
redeemed from the powers of Satan, except those sons of perdition of vile
wickedness and those who have been enemies to God, in which they will be
returned to their master. All others will receive a degree of glory set apart
for their just metes. Conditional salvation of the righteous comes by grace
coupled with strict obedience to Gospel principles in which those who have
upheld the highest standards and committed to the laws and ordinances of God
will inherit the highest heaven. Full salvation is attained by virtue of
knowledge, truth, righteousness, and following true principles. Indian
religions. In the Indian religions, salvation is called "mukti" or "moksha"
which may be translated respectively as "release" or "liberation". This is
obtained through either of four paths or methods ("yoga"): "karma yoga" (acting
rightly through selfless service), "bhakti yoga" (devoting one's self and love
to a deity), "raja yoga" (cultivating the mind through meditation) and "jnana
yoga" (obtaining knowledge of the absolute). That which one is released or
liberated from is suffering, sensory desires and a process of eternal
transmigration through a round of successive lives. At liberation the illusions
and delusions (based on a false identification with matter) which have driven
the process of successive reincarnations are seen for what they are, as "maya".
Beings which are subject to eternal transmutation (the endless process of
birth, aging and death) cannot be said to truly exist - their apparent reality
is only an illusion based on a relative (Pali: "sammuti sacca") understanding
of the bigger picture. Only that which is not subject to eternal transmutation
can be said to have true identity (Skt: "sat"). Since only God (as the
unmanifested originator of phenomena) possesses this quality it is necessary
for a human being to disentangle themself from identification with matter to
restore their primordial identity with their creator. Indian religion asserts
that mind and consciousness are higher order realities to which matter is
subject (in contrast to modern western science which asserts that mind and
consciousness are by-products of physical processes, "see epiphenomenalism")
Therefore, mind and consciousness are the engine of continued physical
manifestation. The contents of the mind and consciousness which are causing
future manifestation and obscuring clear vision are called "samskaras"
(Sanskrit) or "sankharas" (Pali). The saint (a person who has attained
liberation) has completely purified the mind of its conditioning and
experiences pure consciousness (Skt: "cit" or "turiya"). This ultimate release
from matter gives rise to a feeling of infinite freedom and bliss (Skt:
"ananda"). Immutable existence (sat), pure consciousness (cit) and bliss
(ananda) are considered characteristics of ultimate reality (Brahman) as
experienced by the saint. Buddhism and Jainism place no emphasis on a creator-
God but share the general philosophy of purification as a necessary
prerequisite for liberation and the identification of the samskaras as the
cause of incarnation. Jainism and Buddhism are emphatic that liberation can
only be achieved by personal efforts and invariably involves a significant
degree of self-discipline and asceticism. The Buddha taught that in this quest
one can rely on no one and on nothing but oneself: neither gods nor priests,
neither church nor sacraments, nor faith nor works are of any avail. Other
disciplines are not so desolate, and "each Buddha and Bodhisattwa is a
redeemer", assisting the Buddhist in seeking to achieve the redemptive state.
The assistance rendered is a form of self-sacrifice on the part of the
teachers, who would presumably be able to achieve total detachment from worldly
concerns, but have instead chosen to remain engaged in the material world to
the degree that this is necessary to assist others in achieving such
detachment. Islam. Salvation. "Salvation" in Islam refers to the eventual
entrance to heaven. The word does not cover the possible entry to hellfire, or
the different levels of hellfire and heaven. Islam teaches that people who die
disbelieving in the God do not receive salvation. It also teaches that non-
Muslims who die believing in the God but disbelieving in his message (Islam),
are left to His will. Those who die believing in the “One God” and his
message “Islam” receive salvation. Narrated Anas that Muhammad said, Islam
teaches that all righteous Christians, Jews, Sabaeans before the coming of
Muhammad will enter Heaven but those who appeared after Muhammad must accept
Islam. Belief in the "One God". Some Muslim scholars break the Tawhid into
further parts by breaking Tawheedo Al Ruboobeeya into multiple parts putting
emphases on some of the attributes of God that they see being vastly ignored,
or forgotten, in their respective times. Many scholars, for example, state a
third principle, Tawheedo Al Asma'a (تَوْحيدُ الأَسْماءْ)
which explicitly states the belief in the names of God. Other scholars state
another principal, Tawheedo Al Hukmee (تَوْحيدُ الحُكْم), which
explicitly states the belief in the Governance Attribute of God, emphasizing
this attribute which is a part of Tawheed seen to be vastly broken by modern
governments of Muslim nations which do not follow the Islamic law. The Test.
Islam describes a true believer to have Love of God and Fear of God. Islam also
teaches that every person is responsible for their own sins. The Quran states;
Al-Agharr al-Muzani, a companion of Mohammad, reported that Ibn 'Umar stated to
him that Mohammad said, Sin in Islam is not a state, but an action (a bad
deed); Islam teaches that a child is born sinless, regardless of the belief of
his parents, dies a Muslim; he enters heaven, and does not enter hell.
Mandatory acts of worship. There are acts of worship that Islam teaches to be
mandatory. Islam is built on five principles. Narrated Ibn 'Umar that Muhammad
said, Not performing the mandatory acts of worship may deprive Muslims of the
chance of salvation. See also Shirk. Islam also states that it is the final
message of God to mankind. The Quran states. Redemption. Redemption is a
religious concept referring to forgiveness or absolution for past sins or
errors and protection from damnation and disgrace, eternal or temporary,
generally through sacrifice. Redemption is common in many world religions,
including Indic religions and all Abrahamic Religions, especially in
Christianity and Islam (المغفرة). In Judaism, (Hebrew "ge'ulah"),
redemption refers to God redeeming the people of Israel from their various
exiles. This includes the final redemption from the present exile. In
Christianity, redemption is synonymous with salvation. The Christian religion,
though not the exclusive possessor of the idea of redemption, has given to it a
special definiteness and a dominant position. Taken in its widest sense, as
deliverance from dangers and ills in general, most religions teach some form of
it. It assumes an important position, however, only when the ills in question
form part of a great system against which human power is helpless.
