Sanctification Sanctification is the act or process of acquiring sanctity, of
being made or becoming holy. "Sanctity" is an ancient concept widespread among
religions, a property of a thing or person sacred or set apart within the
religion, from temple vessels to days of the week, to a human believer who
achieves this state. To sanctify is literally "to set apart for special use or
purpose," figuratively "to make holy or sacred," and etymologically from the
Latin verb ' which in turn is from "sanctus" "holy" and ' "to make."
Christianity. In the various branches of Christianity sanctification usually
refers to a "person" becoming more holy in some sense, with the details
differing in different branches. Trinitarian. Anglicanism. Anglicans teach that
sanctification is a process of changing to become holy. Richard Hooker, one of
the founders of Anglican thought, argued that sanctification is based on works
while justification is only by faith. Calvinism. Calvinist and Evangelical
theologians interpret sanctification as the process of being made holy only
through the merits and justification of Jesus Christ through the work of the
Holy Spirit. Sanctification cannot be attained by any works based process, but
only through the works and power of the divine. Sanctification is seen as a
process in Calvinism and not instantaneous. As the process of sanctification
flows, the person becomes, in their essence, a different person/man. When a man
is unregenerate, it is their essence that sins and does evil. But when a man is
justified through Christ, it is no longer the man (in his essence) that sins,
but the man is acting outside of his character. In other words, the man is not
being himself, he is not being true to who he is. Eastern Orthodoxy. Orthodox
Christianity teaches the doctrine of theosis, whereby humans take on divine
properties. A key scripture supporting this is . In the 4th century, Athanasius
taught that God became Man that Man might become God. Essentially, Man does not
become divine, but in Christ can partake of divine nature. This Church's
version of salvation restores God's image in man. One such theme is release
from mortality caused by desires of the world. Lutheranism. Martin Luther, the
founder of Lutheranism, taught in his Large Catechism that Sanctification is
only caused by the Holy Spirit through the powerful Word of God. The Holy
Spirit uses churches to gather Christians together for the teaching and
preaching of the Word of God. Methodism. John Wesley, the founder of Methodism,
taught what is known as entire sanctification in the holiness movement
churches, such as the Church of the Nazarene, the Salvation Army, or Christian
perfection in "mainstream" Methodist denominations, such as the United
Methodist Church, the Methodist Church of Great Britain. This is the doctrine
that by the power of God's sanctifying grace and attention upon the means of
grace may cleanse a Christian of the corrupting influence of original sin in
this life. It is explained in depth in the essay, "Entire Sanctification" by
Adam Clarke as well as, later, in Articles of Religion in the "Book of
Discipline of the Methodist Church". "Initial salvation" is sometimes seen as
an initial step of acknowledging God's holiness, with sanctification as,
through the grace and power of God, entering into it. A key scripture is
Hebrews 12:14: "Follow after...holiness, without which no one shall see the
Lord." United Methodists believe that sanctifying grace draws one toward the
gift of Christian perfection, which Wesley described as a heart "habitually
filled with the love of God and neighbor" and as "having the mind of Christ and
walking as he walked." Roman Catholicism. According to the Catholic
encyclopedia "sanctity" differs for God, individual, and corporate body. For
God, it is God's unique absolute moral perfection. For the individual, it is a
close union with God and the resulting moral perfection. It is essentially of
God, by a divine gift. For a society, it is the ability to produce and secure
holiness in its members, who display a real, not merely nominal, holiness. The
Church's holiness is beyond human power, beyond natural power. Sanctity is
regulated by standards. Other Christian denominations and movements. Beliefs
about sanctification vary amongst the Christian denominations and movement,
influenced by various Christian movements. These beliefs differ from each other
on: whether sanctification is a definitive experience or process, when the
process/experience takes place, and if entire sanctification is possible in
this life. Influenced by the Holiness movement some Pentecostal churches, such
as the Church of God in Christ and the Apostolic Faith Church, believe that
sanctification is a definitive act of God’s grace and spiritual experience
whereby we are made holy subsequent to salvation and prior to the baptism of
the Holy Spirit. Reformed Churches are amongst denominations that teach about
definitive sanctification at the time of conversion, and believers are required
to "do good works" which are "… all sanctified by (God’s) grace."
Similarly, non-Wesleysan Pentecostals such as Assemblies of God teach about
definitive sanctification at the time of conversion and progressive
sanctification after conversion. Converted believers are expected to "make
every effort to live a holy life… Even though Christians may not attain
absolute perfection in this life". The event of entire sanctification occurs
when Christ comes back and gives us glorified bodies. Higher Life movement and
Brunstad Christian Church believe that sinless perfection is attainable in
Christian life. Even though believers still have an inclination to sin after
conversion, they must constantly rely on the Holy Spirit to struggle against
this tendency, and therefore can attain sinless perfection in this life. Higher
life movement teaches "the secret of complete victory is faith: simply
believing that Jesus has done and is doing all". Brunstad Christian Church
focuses on the belief that Jesus was a man during His days on earth. They teach
that believers ought to follow him by destroying the sinful nature and thereby
increase in divine nature, through the process of "becoming holy as He is
holy". Non-Trinitarian. Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. In the
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints sanctification is a process that
makes its members holier. In the scriptural cannon of The Church of Jesus
Christ of Latter-day Saints sanctification is mentioned in the following
scriptures: Docterine & Covenants 20:31 "we know also, that sanctification
through the grace of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ is just and true, to all
those who love and serve God with all their mights, minds, and strength," and
Helaman 3:35 "Nevertheless they did fast and pray oft, and did wax stronger and
stronger in their humility, and firmer and firmer in the faith of Christ, unto
the filling their souls with joy and consolation, yea, even to the purifying
and the sanctification of their hearts, which sanctification cometh because of
their yielding their hearts unto God." Dallin H. Oaks, an LDS General authority
and member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles taught that trials and
adversities can change who a member is into what God wants them "to become" if
they approach them with the right attitude.
