Sanskrit Sanskrit ( ' , originally ', "refined speech"), is a historical Indo-
Aryan language, the primary liturgical language of Hinduism and a literary and
scholarly language in Buddhism and Jainism. Today, it is listed as one of the
22 scheduled languages of India and is an official language of the state of
Uttarakhand. Sanskrit holds a prominent position in Indo-European studies.
Classical Sanskrit is the standard register as laid out in the grammar of ,
around the 4th century BCE. Its position in the cultures of Greater India is
akin to that of Latin and Greek in Europe and it has significantly influenced
most modern languages of the Indian subcontinent, particularly in India,
Pakistan, Sri Lanka and Nepal. The pre-Classical form of Sanskrit is known as
Vedic Sanskrit, with the language of the Rigveda being the oldest and most
archaic stage preserved, its oldest core dating back to as early as 1500 BCE.
This qualifies Rigvedic Sanskrit as one of the oldest attestations of any Indo-
Iranian language, and one of the earliest attested members of the Indo-European
language family, the family which includes English and most European languages.
The corpus of Sanskrit literature encompasses a rich tradition of poetry and
drama as well as scientific, technical, philosophical and dharma texts.
Sanskrit continues to be widely used as a ceremonial language in Hindu
religious rituals and Buddhist practice in the forms of hymns and mantras.
Spoken Sanskrit is still in use in a few traditional institutions in India and
there are many attempts at revival. Name. The Sanskrit verbal adjective ' may
be translated as "put together, constructed, well or completely formed;
refined, adorned, highly elaborated". It is derived from the root ' "to put
together, compose, arrange, prepare", where ' "together" (as English "same")
and ' "do, make". The term in the generic meaning of "made ready, prepared,
completed, finished" is found in the Rigveda. Also in Vedic Sanskrit, as
nominalized neuter "", it means "preparation, prepared place" and thus "ritual
enclosure, place for a sacrifice". As a term for "refined or elaborated speech"
the adjective appears only in Epic and Classical Sanskrit, in the Manusmriti
and in the Mahabharata. The language referred to as ' "the cultured language"
has by definition always been a "sacred" and "sophisticated" language, used for
religious and learned discourse in ancient India, and contrasted with the
languages spoken by the people, ' "natural, artless, normal, ordinary".
History. Sanskrit is a member of the Indo-Iranian sub-family of the Indo-
European family of languages. Its closest ancient relatives are the Iranian
languages Old Persian and Avestan. In order to explain the common features
shared by Sanskrit and other Indo-European languages, many scholars have
proposed migration hypotheses asserting that the original speakers of what
became Sanskrit arrived in what is now India and Pakistan from the north-west
some time during the early second millennium BCE. Evidence for such a theory
includes the close relationship of the Indo-Iranian tongues with the Baltic and
Slavic languages, vocabulary exchange with the non-Indo-European Uralic
languages, and the nature of the attested Indo-European words for flora and
fauna. The earliest attested Sanskrit texts are Brahmanical texts of the
Rigveda, which date to the mid-to-late second millennium BCE. No written
records from such an early period survive, if ever existed. However, scholars
are confident that the oral transmission of the texts is reliable: they were
ceremonial literature whose correct pronunciation was considered crucial to its
religious efficacy. From the Rigveda until the time of PƒÅ·πáini (fl. 4th
century BCE) the development of the early Vedic language may be observed in
other Vedic texts: the Samaveda, Yajurveda, Atharvaveda, Brahmanas, and
Upanishads. During this time, the prestige of the language, its use for sacred
purposes, and the importance attached to its correct enunciation all served as
powerful conservative forces resisting the normal processes of linguistic
change. However, there is a clear, five-level linguistic development of Vedic
from the Rigveda to the language of the Upanishads and the earliest Sutras
(such as Baudhayana). The oldest surviving Sanskrit grammar is PƒÅ·πáini's ""
("Eight-Chapter Grammar"). It is essentially a prescriptive grammar, i.e., an
authority that defines correct Sanskrit, although it contains descriptive
parts, mostly to account for some Vedic forms that had become rare in 's time.
The term "Sanskrit" was not thought of as a specific language set apart from
other languages, but rather as a particularly refined or perfected manner of
speaking. Knowledge of Sanskrit was a marker of social class and educational
attainment in ancient India and the language was taught mainly to members of
the higher castes, through close analysis of Sanskrit grammarians such as .
Sanskrit, as the learned language of Ancient India, thus existed alongside the
Prakrits (vernaculars), also called Middle Indic dialects, and eventually into
the contemporary modern Indo-Aryan languages. Vedic Sanskrit. Sanskrit, as
defined by , had evolved out of the earlier "Vedic" form. The beginning of
Vedic Sanskrit can be traced as early as 1500‚Äì1200 BCE (for Rig-vedic and
Indo-Aryan superstrate in Mitanni). Scholars often distinguish Vedic Sanskrit
and Classical or "PƒÅ·πáinian" Sanskrit as separate 'dialects'. Though they are
quite similar, they differ in a number of essential points of phonology,
vocabulary, grammar and syntax. Vedic Sanskrit is the language of the Vedas, a
large collection of hymns, incantations (Samhitas), theological and religio-
philosophical discussions in the Brahmanas and Upanishads. Modern linguists
consider the metrical hymns of the Rigveda Samhita to be the earliest, composed
by many authors over several centuries of oral tradition. The end of the Vedic
period is marked by the composition of the Upanishads, which form the
concluding part of the Vedic corpus in the traditional view; however the early
Sutras are Vedic, too, both in language and content. Around the mid-1st
millennium BCE, Vedic Sanskrit began the transition from a first language to a
second language of religion and learning. Classical Sanskrit. For nearly 2,000
years, a cultural order existed that exerted influence across South Asia, Inner
Asia, Southeast Asia, and to a certain extent, East Asia. A significant form of
post-Vedic Sanskrit is found in the Sanskrit of the Hindu Epics‚Äîthe Ramayana
and Mahabharata. The deviations from in the epics are generally considered to
be on account of interference from Prakrits, or "innovations" and not because
they are pre-Paninean. Traditional Sanskrit scholars call such deviations
"ƒÅr·π£a" (‡§Ü‡§∞‡•ç‡§∑), meaning 'of the ·πõ·π£is', the traditional title for
the ancient authors. In some contexts, there are also more "prakritisms"
(borrowings from common speech) than in Classical Sanskrit proper. Buddhist
Hybrid Sanskrit is a literary language heavily influenced by Middle Indic,
based on early Buddhist prakrit texts which subsequently assimilated to the
Classical Sanskrit standard in varying degrees. According to , there were four
principal dialects of classical Sanskrit: ' (Northwestern, also called Northern
or Western), ' (lit., middle country), ' (Eastern) and ' (Southern, arose in
the Classical period). The predecessors of the first three dialects are even
attested in Vedic "", of which the first one was regarded as the purest (").
Decline. Both died slowly, and earliest as a vehicle of literary expression,
while much longer retaining significance for learned discourse with its
universalist claims. Both were subject to periodic renewals or forced rebirths,
sometimes in connection with a politics of translocal aspiration‚Ä¶ At the same
time‚Ä¶ both came to be ever more exclusively associated with narrow forms of
religion and priestcraft, despite centuries of a secular aesthetic. The decline
of Sanskrit use in literary and political circles was likely due to a weakening
of the political institutions that supported it, and to heightened competition
with vernacular languages seeking literary-cultural dignity. There was regional
variation in the forcefulness of these vernacular movements and Sanskrit
declined in different ways across the Indian subcontinent. For example, in
Kashmir, Kashmiri was used alongside Sanskrit as the language of literature
after the 13th century. Sanskrit works from the Vijayanagara Empire failed to
circulate outside their place and time of composition. By contrast, works in
Kannada and Telugu flourished. Despite this presumed "death" of Sanskrit and
the literary use of vernacular languages, Sanskrit continued to be used in
literary cultures in India, and those who could read vernacular languages could
also read Sanskrit. It did mean that Sanskrit was not used to express changing
forms of subjectivity and sociality embodied and conceptualized in the modern
age. Instead, it was reduced to "reinscription and restatements" of ideas
already explored, and any creativity in Sanskrit was restricted to hymns and
verses. When the British imposed a Western-style education system in India in
the nineteenth century, knowledge of Sanskrit and ancient literature continued
to flourish as the study of Sanskrit changed from a more traditional style into
a form of analytical and comparative scholarship mirroring that of Europe.
European scholarship. European scholarship in Sanskrit, begun by Heinrich Roth
(1620‚Äì1668) and Johann Ernst Hanxleden (1681‚Äì1731), is regarded as
responsible for the discovery of the Indo-European language family by Sir
William Jones. This scholarship played an important role in the development of
Western philology, or historical linguistics. The Sanskrit language, whatever
be its antiquity, is of a wonderful structure; more perfect than the Greek,
more copious than the Latin, and more exquisitely refined than either, yet
bearing to both of them a stronger affinity, both in the roots of verbs and in
the forms of grammar, than could possibly have been produced by accident; so
strong, indeed, that no philologer could examine them all three, without
believing them to have sprung from some common source, which, perhaps, no
longer exists. British attitudes towards Sanskrit. According to Thomas R.
Trautmann, after the 18th-century wave of "Indomania", i.e. enthusiasm for
Indian culture and for Sanskrit, as exemplified in the positions of Orientalist
scholars such as Sir William Jones, a certain hostility to Sanskrit and to
Indian culture in general began to assert itself in Britain in the early 19th
century. The hostility was manifest by a neglect of Sanskrit in British
academia, as compared to other European countries, and was part of a general
push in favor of the idea that India should be culturally, religiously and
linguistically assimilated to Britain as far as possible. Traufmann considers
that this British hostility to Sanskrit had two separate and logically opposite
sources: one was "British Indophobia", which he calls essentially a
developmentalist, progressivist, liberal, and non-racial-essentialist critique
of Hindu civilization as an aid for the improvement of India along European
lines. The other was race science, which was a theorisation of the English
""common-sense view"" that Indians constituted a "separate, inferior and
unimprovable race". Phonology. Classical Sanskrit distinguishes about 36
phonemes. There is, however, some allophony and the writing systems used for
Sanskrit generally indicate this, thus distinguishing 48 sounds. An alternate
traditional ordering is that of the Shiva Sutra of . Vowels. The long vowels
are pronounced twice as long as their short counterparts. Also, there exists a
third, extra-long length for most vowels, called pluti, which is used in
various cases, but particularly in the vocative. The "pluti" is not accepted by
all grammarians. The vowels and continue as allophonic variants of Proto-Indo-
Iranian , and are categorized as diphthongs by Sanskrit grammarians even though
they are realized phonetically as simple long vowels. (See above). Consonants.
IAST and Devanagari notations are given, with approximate IPA values in square
brackets. The table below shows the traditional listing of the Sanskrit
consonants with the (nearest) equivalents in English (as pronounced in General
American and Received Pronunciation) and Spanish. Each consonant shown below is
deemed to be followed by the neutral vowel schwa (), and is named in the table
as such. Accent. Vedic Sanskrit had pitch accent: Some syllables had a high
tone, and the following syllable a falling tone, though through ellipsis a
falling tone may occur elsewhere. Classical Sanskrit ... Phonology and sandhi.
The Sanskrit vowels are as discussed in the section above. The long syllabic l
() is not attested, and is only discussed by grammarians for systematic
reasons. Its short counterpart occurs in a single root only, "to order, array".
Long syllabic r () is also quite marginal, occurring in the genitive plural of
r-stems (e.g. ' "mother" and ' "father" have gen.pl. ' and '). are vocalic
allophones of consonantal . There are thus only 5 invariably vocalic phonemes,
or a total of 36 unique Sanskrit phonemes altogether. The phonological rules
which are applied when combining morphemes to a word, and when combining words
to a sentence, are collectively called "sandhi" "composition". Texts are
written phonetically, with sandhi applied (except for the so-called "").
Writing system. Sanskrit was spoken in an oral society, and the oral tradition
was maintained through the development of early classical Sanskrit literature.
Writing was not introduced to India until after Sanskrit had evolved into the
Prakrits; when it was written, the choice of writing system was influenced by
the regional scripts of the scribes. Therefore, Sanskrit has no native script
of its own. As such, virtually all of the major writing systems of South Asia
have been used for the production of Sanskrit manuscripts. Since the late 19th
century, "devanƒÅgari" has become the "de facto" standard writing system for
Sanskrit publication, quite possibly because of the European practice of
printing Sanskritic texts in this script. DevanƒÅgari is written from left to
right, lacks distinct letter cases, and is recognizable by a distinctive
horizontal line running along the tops of the letters that links them together.
The earliest known inscriptions in Sanskrit date to the 1st century BCE. They
are in the Brahmi script, which was originally used for Prakrit, not Sanskrit.
It has been described as a "paradox" that the first evidence of written
Sanskrit occurs centuries later than that of the Prakrit languages which are
its linguistic descendants. When Sanskrit was written down, it was first used
for texts of an administrative, literary or scientific nature. The sacred texts
were preserved orally, and were set down in writing, "reluctantly" (according
to one commentator), and at a comparatively late date. Brahmi evolved into a
multiplicity of scripts of the Brahmic family, many of which were used to write
Sanskrit. Roughly contemporary with the Brahmi, the Kharosthi script was used
in the northwest of the subcontinent. Later (around the 4th to 8th centuries
CE) the Gupta script, derived from Brahmi, became prevalent. From ca. the 8th
century, the Sharada script evolved out of the Gupta script. The latter was
displaced in its turn by Devanagari from ca. the 11/12th century, with
intermediary stages such as the Siddham script. In Eastern India, the Bengali
script and, later, the Oriya script, were used. In the south where Dravidian
languages predominate, scripts used for Sanskrit include Kannada, Telugu,
Tamil, Malayalam and Grantha. Romanization. Since the late 18th century,
Sanskrit has been transliterated using the Latin alphabet. The system most
commonly used today is the IAST (International Alphabet of Sanskrit
Transliteration), which has been the academic standard since 1888/1912. ASCII-
based transliteration schemes have evolved due to difficulties representing
Sanskrit characters in computer systems. These include Harvard-Kyoto and
ITRANS, a transliteration scheme that is used widely on the Internet,
especially in Usenet and in email, for considerations of speed of entry as well
as rendering issues. With the wide availability of Unicode-aware web browsers,
IAST has become common online. It is also possible to type using an
alphanumeric keyboard and transliterate to devanagari using software like Mac
OS X's international support. European scholars in the 19th century generally
preferred Devanagari for the transcription and reproduction of whole texts and
lengthy excerpts. However, references to individual words and names in texts
composed in European languages were usually represented with Roman
transliteration. From the 20th century onwards, due to production costs,
textual editions edited by Western scholars have mostly been in Romanized
transliteration. Grammar. Grammatical tradition. Sanskrit grammatical tradition
(', one of the six Vedanga disciplines) began in late Vedic India and
culminated in the ' of , which consists of 3990 sutras (ca. 5th century BCE).
About a century after (around 400 BCE) KƒÅtyƒÅyana composed VƒÅrtikas on
PƒÅ·πáinian s≈©tras. Pata√±jali, who lived three centuries after PƒÅ·πáini,
wrote the ', the "Great Commentary" on the and VƒÅrtikas. Because of these
three ancient Sanskrit grammarians this grammar is called Trimuni VyƒÅkarana'".
To understand the meaning of sutras Jayaditya and VƒÅmana wrote the commentary
named KƒÅsikƒÅ 600 CE. PƒÅ·πáinian grammar is based on 14 Shiva sutras
(aphorisms). Here whole MƒÅtrika (alphabet) is abbreviated. This abbreviation
is called PratyƒÅhara. Verbs. Sanskrit has ten classes of verbs divided into in
two broad groups: athematic and thematic. The thematic verbs are so called
because an "a", called the theme vowel, is inserted between the stem and the
ending. This serves to make the thematic verbs generally more regular.
Exponents used in verb conjugation include prefixes, suffixes, infixes, and
reduplication. Every root has (not necessarily all distinct) zero, guna, and
vrddhi grades. If V is the vowel of the zero grade, the -grade vowel is
traditionally thought of as a + V, and the -grade vowel as ƒÅ + V. Nouns.
Sanskrit is a highly inflected language with three grammatical genders
(masculine, feminine, neuter) and three numbers (singular, plural, dual). It
has eight cases: nominative, vocative, accusative, instrumental, dative,
ablative, genitive, and locative. Personal pronouns and determiners. Sanskrit
pronouns are declined for case, number, and gender. The pronominal declension
applies to a few adjectives as well. Many pronouns have alternative enclitic
forms. The first and second person pronouns are declined for the most part
alike, having by analogy assimilated themselves with one another. Where two
forms are given, the second is enclitic and an alternative form. Ablatives in
singular and plural may be extended by the syllable -"tas"; thus "mat" or
"mattas", "asmat" or "asmattas". Sanskrit does not have true third person
pronouns, but its demonstratives fulfill this function instead by standing
independently without a modified substantive. There are four different
demonstratives in Sanskrit: "tat", "etat", "idam", and "adas". "etat" indicates
greater proximity than "tat". While "idam" is similar to "etat", "adas" refers
to objects that are more remote than "tat". "eta", is declined almost
identically to "ta". Its paradigm is obtained by prefixing "e-" to all the
forms of "ta". As a result of "sandhi", the masculine and feminine singular
forms transform into ' and '. The enclitic pronoun "ena" is found only in a few
oblique cases and numbers. Interrogative pronouns all begin with "k-", and
decline just as "tat" does, with the initial "t-" being replaced by "k-". The
only exception to this are the singular neuter nominative and accusative forms,
which are both "kim" and not the expected "*kat". For example, the singular
feminine genitive interrogative pronoun, "of whom?", is "". Indefinite pronouns
are formed by adding the participles "api", "cid", or "cana" after the
appropriate interrogative pronouns. All relative pronouns begin with "y-", and
decline just as "tat" does. The correlative pronouns are identical to the "tat"
series. In addition to the pronouns described above, some adjectives follow the
pronominal declension. Unless otherwise noted, their declension is identical to
"tat". Syntax. Because of Sanskrit's complex declension system the word order
is free. In usage, there is a strong tendency toward subject‚Äìobject‚Äìverb
(SOV), which was the original system in place in Vedic prose. However, there
are exceptions when word pairs cannot be transposed. Influence. Modern-day
India. Influence on vernaculars. Sanskrit's greatest influence, presumably, is
that which it exerted on languages of India that grew from its vocabulary and
grammatical base; for instance, Hindi is a "Sanskritized register" of the
Khariboli dialect. However, all modern Indo-Aryan languages, as well as Munda
and Dravidian languages, have borrowed many words either directly from Sanskrit
("tatsama" words), or indirectly via middle Indo-Aryan languages ("tadbhava"
words). Words originating in Sanskrit are estimated to constitute roughly fifty
percent of the vocabulary of modern Indo-Aryan languages, and the literary
forms of (Dravidian) Malayalam and Kannada. Literary texts in Telugu are
lexically Sanskrit or Sanskritized to an enormous extent, perhaps seventy
percent or more. Sanskrit is prized as a storehouse of scripture and as the
language of prayers in Hinduism. Like Latin's influence on European languages
and Classical Chinese's influence on East Asian languages, Sanskrit has
influenced most Indian languages. While vernacular prayer is common, Sanskrit
mantras are recited by millions of Hindus, and most temple functions are
conducted entirely in Sanskrit, often Vedic in form. Of modern day Indian
languages, Nepali, Bengali, Assamese, Konkani and Marathi still retain a
largely Sanskrit and Prakrit vocabulary base, while Hindi and Urdu tend to be
more heavily weighted with Arabic and Persian influence. The Indian national
anthem, Jana Gana Mana, is written in a literary form of Bengali (known as
"sadhu bhasha"); it is Sanskritized to be recognizable but is still archaic to
the modern ear. The national song of India, Vande Mataram, which was originally
a poem composed by Bankim Chandra Chattopadhyay and taken from his book called
'Anandamath', is in a similarly highly Sanskritized Bengali. Malayalam, Telugu
and Kannada also combine a great deal of Sanskrit vocabulary. Sanskrit also has
influence on Chinese through Buddhist Sutras. Chinese words like ÂâéÈÇ£
"ch√ n√ " (DevanƒÅgarƒ´: ‡§ï‡•ç‡§∑‡§£ "" 'instantaneous period of time') were
borrowed from Sanskrit. Revival attempts. The 1991 and 2001, census of India
recorded 49,736 and 14,135 persons, respectively, with Sanskrit as their native
language. Since the 1990s, efforts to revive spoken Sanskrit have been
increasing. Many organizations like the "Samskrta Bharati" are conducting Speak
Sanskrit workshops to popularize the language. The state of Uttarakhand in
India has ruled Sanskrit as its second official language. The "CBSE" (Central
Board of Secondary Education) of India has made Sanskrit a third language
(though it is an option for the school to adopt it or not, the other choice
being the state's own official language) in the schools it governs. In such
schools, learning Sanskrit is an option for grades 5 to 8 (Classes V to VIII).
This is true of most schools affiliated to the ICSE board too, especially in
those states where the official language is Hindi. Sudharma, the only daily
newspaper in Sanskrit has been published out of Mysore in India since the year
1970. Since 1974, there has been a short daily news broadcast on state-run All
India Radio. In October 2012 noted social activist Hemant Goswami filed a writ
petition in the Punjab and Haryana High Court for declaring Sanskrit as a
'Minority' language, so that it could enjoy special protection as available to
minorities under the Constitution of India. Symbolic usage. In the Republic of
India, in Nepal and Indonesia, Sanskrit phrases are widely used as mottoes for
various educational and social organizations (much as Latin is used by some
institutions in the West). The motto of the Republic is also in Sanskrit. Other
countries. Many of the post‚ÄìIndependence educational institutions of national
importance in India and Sri Lanka have Sanskrit mottoes. For a fuller list of
such educational institutions, see List of educational institutions which have
Sanskrit phrases as their mottoes. Interaction with other languages. Sanskrit
and related languages have also influenced their Sino-Tibetan-speaking
neighbors to the north through the spread of Buddhist texts in translation.
Buddhism was spread to China by Mahayanist missionaries sent by Emperor Ashoka
mostly through translations of Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit and Classical Sanskrit
texts, and many terms were transliterated directly and added to the Chinese
vocabulary. (Although Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit is not Sanskrit, properly
speaking, its grammar and vocabulary are substantially the same, both because
of genetic relationship, and because of conscious implementation of PƒÅ·πáinian
standardizations on the part of composers. Buddhist texts composed in Sanskrit
proper were primarily found in philosophical schools like the Madhyamaka.) The
situation in Tibet is similar; many Sanskrit texts survive only in Tibetan
translation (in the Tanjur). In Southeast Asia, languages such as Thai and Lao
contain many loan words from Sanskrit, as do Khmer, Vietnamese to a lesser
extent, through Sinified hybrid Sanskrit. For example, in Thai, the
RƒÅvana‚Äîthe emperor of Sri Lanka is called 'Thosakanth' which is a derivation
of his Sanskrit name 'Dashakanth' ("of ten necks"). Many Sanskrit loanwords are
also found in Austronesian languages, such as Javanese particularly the old
form from which nearly half the vocabulary is derived from the language. Other
Austronesian languages, such as traditional Malay, modern Indonesian, also
derive much of their vocabulary from Sanskrit, albeit to a lesser extent, with
a large proportion of words being derived from Arabic. Similarly, Philippine
languages such as Tagalog have many Sanskrit loanwords, although more are
derived from Spanish. A Sanskrit loanword encountered in many Southeast Asian
languages is the word "bhƒÅ·π£ƒÅ", or spoken language, which is used to mean
language in general, for example "bahasa" in Malay, Indonesian and Tausug,
"basa" in Javanese, Sundanese, and Balinese", "phasa" in Thai and Lao, "bhasa"
in Burmese, and 'phiesa" in Khmer. Usage in modern times. Many of India's and
Nepal's scientific and administrative terms are named in Sanskrit, as a
counterpart of the western practice of naming scientific developments in Latin
or Greek. The Indian guided missile program that was commenced in 1983 by DRDO
has named the five missiles (ballistic and others) that it has developed as
Prithvi, Agni, Akash, Nag and Trishul. India's first modern fighter aircraft is
named HAL Tejas. Recital of Sanskrit shlokas as background chorus in films,
television advertisements and as slogans for corporate organizations has become
a trend. The opera "Satyagraha" by Philip Glass uses texts from the "Bhagavad
Gita", sung in the original Sanskrit. Recently, Sanskrit also made an
appearance in Western pop music in two recordings by Madonna. One, "Shanti/
Ashtangi", from the 1998 album "Ray of Light", is the traditional Ashtanga
Vinyasa Yoga chant referenced above set to music. The second, "Cyber-raga",
released in 2000 as a B-side to Madonna's album "Music", is a Sanskrit-language
ode of devotion to a higher power and a wish for peace on earth. The climactic
battle theme of "The Matrix Revolutions" features a choir singing a Sanskrit
prayer from the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad in the closing titles of the movie.
Composer John Williams featured choirs singing in Sanskrit for "Indiana Jones
and the Temple of Doom" and in "". The Sky1 version of the title sequence in
season one of "Battlestar Galactica 2004" features the Gayatri Mantra, taken
from the Rig Veda (3.62.10). The composition was written by miniseries composer
Richard Gibbs. Sanskrit has also seen a significant revival in China. Musicians
such as Sa Dingding have written pop songs in Sanskrit. Scientific facts on
Sanskrit. Most European languages have their roots in Sanskrit. Many English
words have Sanskrit origins. It is regarded to be one of the most scientific
langauages. Computational linguistics. There have been suggestions to use
Sanskrit as a metalanguage for knowledge representation in e.g. machine
translation, and other areas of natural language processing because of its
relatively high regular structure. This is due to Classical Sanskrit being a
regularized, prescriptivist form abstracted from the much more complex and
richer Vedic Sanskrit. This leveling of the grammar of Classical Sanskrit began
during the Brahmana phase, and had not yet completed by the time of PƒÅ·πáini,
when the language had fallen out of popular use.
