Sarah Sarah or Sara (; ISO 259-3 "Śarra"; ; Arabic: "Sārah"; Persian:
"Sārā") was the wife of Abraham and the mother of Isaac as described in the
Hebrew Bible and the Quran. Her name was originally Sarai. According to
"Genesis" 17:15 God changed her name to Sarah as part of a covenant after Hagar
bore Abraham his first son, Ishmael. The Hebrew name "Sarah" indicates a woman
of high rank and is translated as "princess." In the Hebrew Bible. Sarah was
the wife of Abraham, as well as being his half-sister, the daughter of his
father Terah (Genesis 20:12). The Talmud identifies Sarai with Iscah, daughter
of Abraham's deceased brother Haran (Genesis 11:29), so that Sarah turns out to
be the niece of Abraham and the sister of Lot and Milcah. She was also the
mother-in-law of Rebecca, her successor. She was considered beautiful to the
point that Abraham feared that when they were near more powerful rulers she
would be taken away and given to another man. Twice he purposefully identified
her as being only his sister so that he would be "treated well" for her sake.
It is apparent that she remained attractive into her later years. Despite her
great beauty, she was barren for an unknown reason. She was originally called
"Sarai" which is translated "my princess." Later she was called "Sarah" i.e.,
princess." In Biblical times, the changing of one's name was significant and
used to symbolize the binding of a covenant. In this case, God promised to put
an end to her barrenness and give her a child (Isaac). Departure from Ur.
Terah, with Abram, Sarai and Lot, departed for Canaan, but settled in a place
named Haran, where Terah died at the age of 205. () God then told Abram to
leave his country and his father's house for a land that He would show him,
promising to make of him a great nation, bless him, make his name great, bless
those who blessed him, and curse those who cursed him. () Following God's
command Abram took his wife Sarai, his nephew Lot, and the wealth and persons
that they had acquired, and traveled to Shechem in Canaan. Abram was 75 and
Sarai was 65 at this time. Pharaoh's harem. There was a severe famine in the
land of Canaan, so that Abram and Lot and their households, travelled south to
Egypt. On the journey to Egypt, Abraham instructed Sarai to identify herself
only as his sister, fearing that Pharaoh would kill him in order to take his
wife, saying, "I know what a beautiful woman you are. When the Egyptians see
you, they will say, 'this is his wife.' Then they will kill me but will let you
live. Say you are my sister, so that I will be treated well for your sake and
my life will be spared because of you." When brought before Pharaoh, Sarai said
that Abraham was her brother, and the king thereupon took her into his palace
and bestowed upon the latter many presents and marks of distinction. It is
likely that Sarai acquired her Egyptian maidservant Hagar during this stay.
However, God afflicted Pharaoh's household with great plagues.() He then
realized that Sarai was also Abram's wife and demanded that they leave Egypt
immediately.() Hagar and Ishmael. having lived in Canaan for ten years and
still childless, Sarai suggested that Abram have a child with her servant
Hagar, to which Abram agreed. This resulted in tension between Sarai and Hagar,
and Sarai complained to Abram that the latter no longer respected her. () At
one point, Hagar fled toward Shur but returned after being instructed to by an
angel. She gave birth to Abram's son Ishmael when Abram was eighty-six years
old. () Isaac. Not long afterwards, Abraham and Sarah were visited by three
men. One of the visitors told Abraham that upon his return next year, Sarah
would have a son. While at the tent entrance, Sarah overheard what was said and
she laughed to herself about the prospect of having a child at their ages. The
visitor inquired to Abraham why Sarah laughed at bearing a child for her age as
nothing is too hard for God. Frightened, Sarah denied laughing. As had been
prophesied in the previous year (Genesis 18:14), Sarah became pregnant and bore
a son to Abraham, at the very time which had been spoken. The patriarch, now a
hundred years old, named the child "Isaac" (Hewbrew yitschaq, laughter) and
circumcised him when he was eight days old. (Genesis 21:4) For Sarah, the
thought of giving birth and nursing a child, at such an old age, also brought
her much laughter, as she declared, "God hath made me to laugh. Every one that
heareth will laugh with me." (Genesis 21:6-7) Abraham held a great feast on the
day when Isaac was to be weaned. It was during this banquet that Sarah happened
upon the then teenaged Ishmael mocking and was so disturbed that she requested
that both he and Hagar be removed from their company. Abraham was initially
distressed by this but relented when told by God to do as his wife had asked.
() Abimelech. After being visited by the three men, Abraham and Sarah settled
between Kadesh and Shur in the land of the Philistines. While he was living in
Gerar, Abraham again claimed that Sarah was his sister. King Abimelech
subsequently had her brought to him. Later, God came to Abimelech in a dream
and declared that taking her would result in death because she was a married
woman. Abimelech, who had not laid hands on her, inquired if he would also slay
a righteous nation, especially since Abraham had claimed that he and Sarah were
siblings. In response, God told Abimelech that he did indeed have a blameless
heart and that was why he continued to exist. However, if he did not return
Sarah to Abraham, God would surely destroy Abimelech and his entire household.
Abimelech was informed that Abraham was a prophet who would pray for him.()
Early next morning, Abimelech informed his servants of his dream and approached
Abraham inquiring as to why he had brought such great guilt upon his kingdom.
Abraham replied that he thought there was no fear of God in that place, and
that they might kill him for his wife. Then Abraham defended what he had said
as not being a lie at all: "And yet indeed "she is" my sister; she "is" the
daughter of my father, but not the daughter of my mother; and she became my
wife." () Abimelech returned Sarah to Abraham, and gave him gifts of sheep,
oxen, and servants; and invited him to settle wherever he pleased in
Abimelech's lands. Further, Abimelech gave Abraham a thousand pieces of silver
to serve as Sarah's vindication before all. Abraham then prayed for Abimelech
and his household, since the had stricken the women with infertility because of
the taking of Sarah. () Death. Sarah, who died at the age of 127, is the only
woman in Hebrew scriptures whose age is given. Abraham buried her in the Cave
of the Patriarchs (also called the Cave of Machpelah), near Hebron which he had
purchased, along with the adjoining field, from Ephron the Hittite and laid her
to rest in the cave. () In rabbinic literature. Pharaoh's harem. When brought
before Pharaoh, Sarah said that Abraham was her brother, and the king thereupon
bestowed upon the latter many presents and marks of distinction. As a token of
his love for Sarai the king deeded his entire property to her, and gave her the
land of Goshen as her hereditary possession: for this reason the Israelites
subsequently lived in that land. Sarai prayed to God to deliver her from the
king, and He thereupon sent an angel, who struck Pharaoh whenever he attempted
to touch her. Pharaoh was so astonished at these blows that he spoke kindly to
Sarai, who confessed that she was Abraham's wife. The king then ceased to annoy
her. According to another version, Pharaoh persisted in annoying her after she
had told him that she was a married woman; thereupon the angel struck him so
violently that he became ill, and was thereby prevented from continuing to
trouble her. According to one tradition it was when Pharaoh saw these miracles
wrought in Sarai's behalf that he gave her his daughter Hagar as slave, saying:
"It is better that my daughter should be a slave in the house of such a woman
than mistress in another house." Abimelech acted likewise. Relations with
Hagar. Sarai treated Hagar well, and induced women who came to visit her to
visit Hagar also. Hagar, when pregnant by Abraham, began to act superciliously
toward Sarai, provoking the latter to treat her harshly, to impose heavy work
upon her, and even to strike her Some believe Sarai was originally destined to
reach the age of 175 years, but forty-eight years of this span of life were
taken away from her because she complained of Abraham, blaming him as though
the cause that Hagar no longer respected her. Sarah was sterile; but a miracle
was granted to her after her name was changed from "Sarai" to "Sarah".
According to one myth, when her fertility had been restored and she had given
birth to Isaac, the people would not believe in the miracle, saying that the
patriarch and his wife had adopted a foundling and pretended that it was their
own son. Abraham thereupon invited all the notabilities to a banquet on the day
when Isaac was to be weaned. Sarah invited the women, also, who brought their
infants with them; and on this occasion she gave milk from her breasts to all
the strange children, thus convincing the guests of the miracle. Death. Legends
connect Sarah's death with the attempted sacrifice of Isaac, there being two
versions of the story. According to one, Samael came to her and said: "Your old
husband seized the boy and sacrificed him. The boy wailed and wept; but he
could not escape from his father." Sarah began to cry bitterly, and ultimately
died of her grief. According to the other legend, Satan came to Sarah disguised
as an old man, and told her that Isaac had been sacrificed. Believing it to be
true, she cried bitterly, but soon comforted herself with the thought that the
sacrifice had been offered at the command of God. She started from Beer-sheba
to Hebron, asking everyone she met if he knew in which direction Abraham had
gone. Then Satan came again in human shape and told her that it was not true
that Isaac had been sacrificed, but that he was living and would soon return
with his father. Sarah, on hearing this, died of joy at Hebron. Abraham and
Isaac returned to their home at Beer-sheba, and, not finding Sarah there, went
to Hebron, where they discovered her dead. According to the Genesis Rabbah,
during Sarah's lifetime her house was always hospitably open, the dough was
miraculously increased, a light burned from Saturday evening to Saturday
evening, and a pillar of cloud rested upon the entrance to her tent. New
Testament references. ""For it is written that Abraham had two sons, one by the
slave woman and the other by the free woman. His son by the slave woman was
born in the ordinary way; but his son by the free woman was born as the result
of a promise. These things may be taken figuratively, for the women represent
two covenants. One covenant is from Mount Sinai and bears children who are to
be slaves: This is Hagar. Now Hagar stands for Mount Sinai and corresponds to
the present city of Jerusalem, because she is in slavery with her children. But
the Jerusalem that is above is free, and she is our mother...Now you, brothers,
like Isaac, are children of promise...Therefore, brothers, we are not children
of the slave woman, but of the free woman."" Islam. Sarah (Arabic: سارة,
"Sara"), the wife of the patriarch and Islamic prophet Abraham and the mother
of the prophet Isaac, is an honoured woman in the Islamic faith. According to
Muslim belief, she was Abraham's first wife. Although not mentioned by name in
the Qur'an, she is referenced and alluded to via the story of her husband. She
lived with Abraham throughout her life and, although she was barren, God
promised her the birth of a prophetic son, Isaac. Muslim tradition holds that
Sarah and Abraham had no children. Abraham, however, prayed constantly to God
for a son. Sarah, being barren, subsequently gave him her Egyptian handmaiden,
Hājar (Hagar), to wed as his second wife. Hagar bore Ismā'īl (Ishmael), when
Abraham was 86, who too would become a prophet of God like his father. Thirteen
years later, God announced to Abraham, now a hundred, that barren Sarah would
give birth to a second son, Isaac, who would also be a prophet of the Lord.
Although the Qur'an does not mention Sarah by name, it mentions the
annunciation of the birth of Isaac. The Qur'an mentions that Sarah laughed when
the angels gave her the glad tidings of Isaac, which is perhaps why the name
Isaac has the root meaning of 'laughter'. There is a necessary clarification
that Sarah was not annoyed with Hagar but it was only the order from Allah that
Abraham bring them in the Arab Desert. According to Islamic teachings, it was
Ishmael, not Isaac, whom God ordered Abraham to sacrifice to test him. Tomb of
Sarah. Sarah is believed to be buried in the Cave of the Patriarchs (known by
Muslims as the "Sanctuary of Abraham"). The compound, located in the ancient
city of Hebron, is the second holiest site for Jews (after the Temple Mount in
Jerusalem), and is also venerated by Christians and Muslims, both of whom have
traditions which maintain that the site is the burial place of three Biblical
couples: Abraham and Sarah, Isaac and Rebecca, and Jacob and Leah. According to
the book of Genesis, Abraham purchased the plot of land for her tomb from a man
named Ephron the Hittite. Although some Jews alternatively also believe this to
be the burial place for Adam and Eve, this is a view not usually adopted by
Christians or Muslims. Contemporary works and analysis. Sarah has been featured
in several novels, and she is the central character in "Sarah" by Orson Scott
Card in the Women of Genesis series, "Sarai: A Novel" by Jill Eileen Smith, and
"Sarah: A Novel" by Marek Halter. In the Christian fiction novel "Redeeming
Love" by Francine Rivers, the protagonist, called "Angel" throughout the
duration of the story, is barren. At the end of the book, she reveals that her
birth name is "Sarah" to her husband, who takes the revelation as a promise
from God that they will one day be able to have children. In the 1994 movie
Abraham, Sarah is portrayed by Barbara Hershey. Sarah is also a subject
discussed in nonfiction books. In "Twelve Extraordinary Women" by Pastor John
F. MacArthur, her life and story is analyzed along with that of Eve, Rahab,
Ruth, Hannah, Mary the mother of Jesus, Anna, the Samaritan woman, Mary of
Bethany, Martha of Bethany, Mary Magdalene, and Lydia. Sarah appears in
"Slightly Bad Girls of the Bible: Flawed Women Loved by a Flawless God" by Liz
Curtis Higgs alongside several other Biblical women. Some classical and modern
scholars have analyzed Abraham's reasoning for hiding Sarah's position as his
wife. Rashi argued that when a stranger comes to town, the proper thing to do
would be to inquire if he needs food and drink, not whether his female
companion is a married woman, and hence as Abimelech did the latter, it tipped
off Abraham to the fact that "there is no fear of God in this place", and so he
lied about his relationship with Sarah in order to avoid being killed.
Christian interpretation of the incidents has varied considerably. Some
commentators have seen them as regrettable exceptions in the lives of those who
otherwise lived upright lives, comparable tp Noah's and Lot's drunkenness and
David's adultery. On the other hand, commentators such as Allan Turner, in his
essay "Lying: Is It Ever Right?", takes the standpoint that the patriarchal
individuals did not actually lie, but merely concealed part of the truth.
Others have questioned Sarah's status as Abraham's sister, notably biblical
archaeologists. According to Emanuel Feldman (1965), basing his argument on
Albright's interpretation of the archaeology of Nuzu, a wife could legally be
awarded the title "sister", and that this was the most sacred form of marriage,
and hence Abraham and Isaac referred to their wives as "sisters" for this
reason. Most archaeologists however dispute that view, instead arguing the
opposite - that sisters in the region were often awarded the title "wife" in
order to give them much greater status in society. Savina Teubal's book "Sarah
the Priestess" explains that while Sarah was indeed both Abram's wife and
sister, there was no incest taboo because she was a half-sister by a different
mother.
