Saturnalia Saturnalia was an ancient Roman festival in honor of the deity
Saturn originally held December 17 and later expanded with unofficial
festivities through December 23. The holiday was celebrated with a sacrifice at
the Temple of Saturn in the Roman Forum and a public banquet, followed by
private gift-giving, continual partying, and a carnival atmosphere that
overturned Roman social norms: gambling was permitted, and masters provided
table service for their slaves. The poet Catullus called it "the best of days."
In Roman mythology, Saturn was an agricultural deity who reigned over the world
in the Golden Age, when humans enjoyed the spontaneous bounty of the earth
without labor in a state of social egalitarianism. The revelries of Saturnalia
were supposed to reflect the conditions of the lost mythical age, not all of
them desirable. The Greek equivalent was the Kronia. Although probably the
best-known Roman holiday, Saturnalia as a whole is not described from beginning
to end in any single ancient source. Modern understanding of the festival is
pieced together from several accounts dealing with various aspects. The
Saturnalia was the dramatic setting of the multivolume work of that name by
Macrobius, a Latin writer from late antiquity who is the major source for the
holiday. In one of the interpretations in Macrobius's work, Saturnalia is a
festival of light leading to the winter solstice, with the abundant presence of
candles symbolizing the quest for knowledge and truth. The renewal of light and
the coming of the new year was celebrated in the later Roman Empire at the
"Dies Natalis" of Sol Invictus, the "Birthday of the Unconquerable Sun," on
December 25. The popularity of Saturnalia continued into the 3rd and 4th
centuries CE, and as the Roman Empire came under Christian rule, some of its
customs may have influenced the seasonal celebrations surrounding Christmas and
the New Year. Public religious observance. The main cult statue of Saturn
normally had its feet bound in wool, which was removed for the holiday as an
act of liberation. The official rituals were carried out according to "Greek
rite" "(ritus graecus)". The sacrifice was officiated by a priest whose head
was uncovered; in Roman rite, priests sacrificed "capite velato", with head
covered by a special fold of the toga. This procedure is usually explained by
the Hellenization of Saturn's cult through assimilation with his Greek
counterpart Cronus, but it may also be one of the Saturnalian reversals, the
opposite of what was normal. Following the sacrifice the Roman Senate arranged
a "lectisternium", a ritual of Greek origin that typically involved placing the
deity's image on a sumptuous couch, as if he were present and actively
participating in the festivities. A public banquet followed "(convivium
publicum)". The day was supposed to be a holiday from all forms of work.
Schools were closed, and exercise regimens were suspended. The courts were
closed, so no justice was administered, and no declaration of war could be
made. After the public rituals, observances continued at home. On December 18
and 19, which were also holidays from public business, families conducted
domestic rituals. They bathed early, and those with means sacrificed a suckling
pig, a traditional offering to an earth deity. "Io Saturnalia". The phrase "io
Saturnalia" was the characteristic shout or salutation of the festival,
originally commencing after the public banquet on the single day of December
17. The interjection "io" (Greek "ἰώ", "ǐō") is pronounced either with two
syllables (a short "i" and a long "o") or as a single syllable (with the "i"
becoming the Latin consonantal "j" and pronounced "yō"). It was a strongly
emotive ritual exclamation or invocation, used for instance in announcing
triumph or celebrating Bacchus, but also to punctuate a joke. Private
festivities. Saturnalia is the best-known of several festivals in the Greco-
Roman world characterized by role reversals and behavioral license. Slaves were
treated to a banquet of the kind usually enjoyed by their masters. Ancient
sources differ on the circumstances: some suggest that master and slave dined
together, while others indicate that the slaves feasted first, or that the
masters actually served the food. The practice may have varied over time, and
in any case slaves would still have prepared the meal. Saturnalian license also
permitted slaves to enjoy a pretense of disrespect for their masters, and
exempted them from punishment. It was a time for free speech: the Augustan poet
Horace calls it "December liberty." In two satires set during the Saturnalia,
Horace has a slave offer sharp criticism to his master. But everyone knew that
the leveling of the social hierarchy was temporary and had limits; no social
norms were ultimately threatened, because the holiday would end. The toga, the
characteristic garment of the male Roman citizen, was set aside in favor of the
Greek "synthesis", colourful "dinner clothes" otherwise considered in poor
taste for daytime wear. Romans of citizen status normally went about bare-
headed, but for the Saturnalia donned the "pilleus", the conical felt cap that
was the usual mark of a freedman. Slaves, who ordinarily were not entitled to
wear the "pilleus", wore it as well, so that everyone was "pilleated" without
distinction. The participation of freeborn Roman women is implied by sources
that name gifts for women, but their presence at banquets may have depended on
the custom of their time; from the late Republic onward, women mingled socially
with men more freely than they had in earlier times. Female entertainers were
certainly present at some otherwise all-male gatherings. Role-playing was
implicit in the Saturnalia's status reversals, and there are hints of mask-
wearing or "guising". No theatrical events are mentioned in connection with the
festivities, but the classicist Erich Segal saw Roman comedy, with its cast of
impudent, free-wheeling slaves and libertine seniors, as imbued with the
Saturnalian spirit. Gambling and dice-playing, normally prohibited or at least
frowned upon, were permitted for all, even slaves. Coins and nuts were the
stakes. On the Calendar of Philocalus, the Saturnalia is represented by a man
wearing a fur-trimmed coat next to a table with dice, and a caption reading
"Now you have license, slave, to game with your master." Rampant overeating and
drunkenness became the rule, and a sober person the exception. Seneca the
Younger, "Epistulae" 18.1–2. Some Romans found it all a bit much. Pliny
describes a secluded suite of rooms in his Laurentine villa which he used as a
retreat "especially during the Saturnalia when the rest of the house is noisy
with the licence of the holiday and festive cries. This way I don't hamper the
games of my people and they don't hinder my work or studies." Gift-giving. The
day of gift-giving was the Sigillaria on December 23. Because gifts of value
would mark social status contrary to the spirit of the season, these were often
the pottery or wax figurines called "sigillaria" made specially for the day,
candles, or "gag gifts", of which Augustus was particularly fond. In his many
poems about the Saturnalia, Martial names both expensive and quite cheap gifts,
including writing tablets, dice, knucklebones, moneyboxes, combs, toothpicks, a
hat, a hunting knife, an axe, various lamps, balls, perfumes, pipes, a pig, a
sausage, a parrot, tables, cups, spoons, items of clothing, statues, masks,
books, and pets. Gifts might be as costly as a slave or exotic animal, but
Martial suggests that token gifts of low intrinsic value inversely measure the
high quality of a friendship. Patrons or "bosses" might pass along a gratuity "
(sigillaricium)" to their poorer clients or dependents to help them buy gifts.
Some emperors were noted for their devoted observance of the Sigillaria. In a
practice that might be compared to modern greeting cards, verses sometimes
accompanied the gifts. Martial has a collection of poems written as if to be
attached to gifts. Catullus received a book of bad poems by "the worst poet of
all time" as a joke from a friend. Gift-giving was not confined to the day of
the Sigillaria. In some households, guests and family members received gifts
after the feast in which slaves had shared. On the calendar. Saturnalia was
supposed to have been held on December 17 from the time of the oldest Roman
religious calendar, which the Romans believed to have been established by the
legendary founder Romulus and his successor Numa. It was a "dies festus," a
legal holiday when no public business could be conducted. The day marked the
dedication of the Temple to Saturn in the Roman Forum in 497 BCE. By the late
Republic, the celebration of Saturnalia had expanded to a full seven days, but
during the Imperial period contracted variously to three to five days. Under
Augustus, there was a three-day official holiday. Caligula extended it to five.
December 17 was the first day of the astrological sign Capricorn, the house of
Saturn, the planet named for the god. Its proximity to the winter solstice
(December 25 on the Julian calendar) was endowed with various meanings by both
ancient and modern scholars; for instance, the widespread use of wax candles "
(cerei," singular "cereus)" may refer to "the returning power of the sun's
light after the solstice." Historical context. Saturnalia underwent a major
reform in 217 BCE, after the Battle of Lake Trasimene, when the Romans suffered
one of their most crushing defeats by Carthage during the Second Punic War.
Until that time, they had celebrated the holiday according to Roman custom "
(more Romano)". It was after a consultation of the Sibylline books that they
adopted "Greek rite", introducing sacrifices carried out in the Greek manner,
the public banquet, and the continual shouts of "io Saturnalia" that became
characteristic of the celebration. Cato the Elder (234–149 BCE) was aware of
a time before the so-called "Greek" elements had been added to the Roman
Saturnalia. It was not unusual for the Romans to offer cult to the gods of
other nations in the hope of redirecting their favor (see "evocatio"), and the
Second Punic War in particular created pressures on Roman society that led to a
number of religious innovations and reforms. Robert E.A. Palmer has argued that
the introduction of new rites at this time was in part an effort to appease
Ba'al Hammon, the Carthaginian god who was regarded as the counterpart of the
Roman Saturn and Greek Cronus. The table service that masters offered their
slaves thus would have extended to Carthaginian or African war captives. King
of the Saturnalia. Imperial sources refer to a "Saturnalicius princeps" who
ruled as master of ceremonies for the proceedings. He was appointed by lot, and
has been compared to the medieval Lord of Misrule at the Feast of Fools. His
capricious commands, such as "Sing naked" or "Throw him into cold water," had
to be obeyed by the other guests at the "convivium:" he creates and (mis)rules
a chaotic and absurd world. The future emperor Nero is recorded as playing the
role in his youth. Since this figure does not appear in accounts from the
Republican period, the "princeps" of the Saturnalia may have developed as a
satiric response to Rome's transition from a participatory republic to imperial
monarchy under a "princeps", the title assumed by the first emperor Augustus to
avoid the hated connotations of the word "king" "(rex)". Art and literature
under Augustus celebrated his reign as a new Golden Age, but the Saturnalia
makes a mockery of a world in which law is determined by one man and the
traditional social and political networks are reduced to the power of the
emperor over his subjects. In a poem about a lavish Saturnalia under Domitian,
Statius makes it clear that the emperor, like Jupiter, still reigns during the
temporary return of Saturn. Theology and philosophical views. The Saturnalia
reflects the contradictory nature of the deity Saturn himself: "there are
joyful and utopian aspects of careless well-being side by side with disquieting
elements of threat and danger". As a god of agricultural bounty, Saturn
embodied prosperity and wealth in general. The name of his consort Ops, whose
festival Opalia was celebrated December 19, meant "Wealth, Resources." The
Temple of Saturn, the ruins of which still stand, housed the state treasury "
(aerarium Saturni)", and was the administrative headquarters of the quaestors,
the public officials whose duties included oversight of the mint. It was among
the oldest cult sites in Rome, and had been the location of "a very ancient"
altar "(ara)" even before the building of the first temple in 497 BCE. The
Romans regarded Saturn as the original and autochthonous ruler of the
Capitolium, and the first king of Latium or even the whole of Italy. At the
same time, there was a tradition that Saturn had been an immigrant god,
received by Janus after he was usurped by his son Jupiter (Zeus) and expelled
from Greece. His contradictions—a foreigner with one of Rome's oldest
sanctuaries, and a god of liberation who is kept in fetters most of the
year—indicate Saturn's capacity for obliterating social distinctions. Roman
mythology of the Golden Age of Saturn's reign differed from the Greek
tradition. He arrived in Italy "dethroned and fugitive," but brought
agriculture and civilization and became a king. As the Augustan poet Vergil
described it, "He gathered together the unruly race" of fauns and nymphs
"scattered over mountain heights, and gave them laws … . Under his reign were
the golden ages men tell of: in such perfect peace he ruled the nations." But
Saturn also had a less benevolent aspect. Another of his consorts was Lua,
sometimes called "Lua Saturni" ("Saturn's Lua") and identified with Lua Mater,
"Mother Destruction," a goddess in whose honor the weapons of enemies killed in
war were burned, perhaps as expiation. Saturn's chthonic nature connected him
to the underworld and its ruler Dis Pater, the Roman equivalent of Greek
Plouton (Pluto in Latin) who was also a god of hidden wealth. In 3rd-century CE
sources and later, Saturn is recorded as receiving dead gladiators as offerings
"(munera)" during or near the Saturnalia. These gladiatorial events, ten days
in all throughout December, were presented by the quaestors and sponsored with
funds from the treasury of Saturn. The practice of gladiatorial "munera" was
criticized by Christian apologists as a form of human sacrifice. Although there
is no evidence of this practice during the Republic, the offering of gladiators
led to later theorizing that the primeval Saturn had demanded human victims.
Macrobius says that Dis Pater was placated with human heads and Saturn with
sacrificial victims consisting of men "(virorum victimis)". The figurines that
were exchanged as gifts "(sigillaria)" may have represented token substitutes.
The Neoplatonic philosopher Porphyry, however, took an allegorical view of the
Saturnalia. He saw the festival's theme of liberation and dissolution as
representing the "freeing of souls into immortality"—an interpretation that
Mithraists also may have followed, since they included a significant number of
slaves and freedmen. According to Porphyry, the Saturnalia occurred near the
winter solstice because the sun enters Capricorn, the astrological house of
Saturn, at that time. In the "Saturnalia" of Macrobius, the proximity of the
Saturnalia to the winter solstice leads to an exposition of solar monotheism,
the belief that the Sun (see Sol Invictus) ultimately encompasses all
divinities as one. Perceived relations among the Mithraic mysteries, the "Dies
Natalis" of Sol Invictus (the "Birthday of the Unconquered Sun") on December
25, and the Christian Nativity as celebrated in December are a matter of
longstanding and complex scholarly debate. The Mishna and Talmud (Avodah Zara
8a) describe a pagan festival called Saturna which occurs 8 days before the
winter solstice. It is followed 8 days after the solstice with a festival
called Kalenda. The Talmud ascribes the origins of this festival to Adam, who
saw that the days were getting shorter and thought it was punishment for his
sin. He was afraid that the world was returning to the chaos and emptiness that
existed before creation. He sat and fasted for 8 days. Once he saw that the
days were getting longer again he realized that this was the natural cycle of
the world, so made 8 days of celebration. The Talmud states that this festival
was later turned into a pagan festival. Influence on Christmas. Unlike several
Roman religious festivals which were particular to cult sites in the city, the
prolonged seasonal celebration of Saturnalia at home could be held anywhere in
the Empire. Saturnalia continued as a secular celebration long after it was
removed from the official calendar. As William Warde Fowler noted, Saturnalia
"has left its traces and found its parallels in great numbers of mediaeval and
modern customs, occurring about the time of the winter solstice." A number of
scholars view aspects of the Saturnalia festival as the origin of some later
Christmas customs, particularly caroling and the practice of gift giving, which
was suppressed by the Catholic Church during the Middle Ages due to perceived
"pagan origins". The "Catholic Encyclopedia" states the Church's view on the
latter claim by saying that while midwinter pagan feasts such as Saturnalia may
have helped influence the eventual choice to fix the date of Christmas, this
does not mean that Christian Christmas traditions find their origin or
inspiration there: "though the abundance of analogous midwinter festivals may
indefinitely have helped the choice of the December date, the same instinct
which set "Natalis Invicti" at the winter solstice will have sufficed, apart
from deliberate adaptation or curious calculation, to set the Christian feast
there too." During the ancient roman saturnalia, human-shaped biscuits were
consumed and dance-like singing was performed in the streets, which makes it a
"precursor of modern gingerbread man" and caroling. The ancient roman
saturnalia were integrated in Christianity in the 4th century CE, as a means to
mass convert the pagan roman citizens.Because its pagan origin was known, the
Christmas festival was banned in Massachusetts between 1659 and 1681 by the
Puritans as an illegal observance.
