Scapegoat In modern usage a scapegoat is an individual, group, or country
singled out for unmerited negative treatment or blame. A whipping boy or "fall
guy" is a form of scapegoat. Scapegoat derives from the common English
translation of the Hebrew term "azazel" (Hebrew: עזאזל) which occurs in
Leviticus 16:8 after the prefix "la-" (Hebrew לַ "for"). In ancient Greece a
cripple or beggar or criminal (the "pharmakos") was cast out of the community,
either in response to a natural disaster (such as a plague, famine or an
invasion) or in response to a calendrical crisis (such as the end of the year).
In the Bible, the scapegoat was a goat that was designated (Hebrew
לַעֲזָאזֵֽל ) "la-aza'zeyl" to be outcast in the desert as part of
the ceremonies of the Day of Atonement, that began during the Exodus with the
original Tabernacle and continued through the times of the temples in
Jerusalem. In psychology and sociology, the practice of selecting someone as a
scapegoat has led to the concept of scapegoating. Etymology. The verb "to
scapegoat" (noun form "scapegoating") is a modern intransitive or transitive
coinage from the older transitive verb-noun construction "to make (someone) a
scapegoat." Scapegoat derives from the common English translation of the Hebrew
term "azazel" (Hebrew: עזאזל) which occurs in Leviticus 16:8 after the
prefix "la-" (Hebrew לַ "for"). The lexicographer Gesenius and
Brown–Driver–Briggs Hebrew Lexicon give "la-azazel" (Hebrew: עזאזל) as
a reduplicative intensive of the stem "azel" "remove", hence "la-azazel," "for
entire removal". This reading is supported by the Jewish Greek Bible
translation as "the sender away (of sins)." Later Jewish sources in the Talmud
(Yoma 6:4,67b)give the etymology of "azazel" as a compound of "az", strong or
rough, and "el", mighty, that the goat was sent from the most rugged or
strongest of mountains. Alternatively, broadly contemporary with the
Septuagint, the pseudepigrapical Book of Enoch may preserve Azazel as the name
of a fallen angel and from the Targums onwards the term "azazel" was also seen
by some rabbinical commentators as the name of a Hebrew demon, fallen angel, or
pagan deity. The two readings are still disputed today. English Bible versions
traditionally follow the translation of the Septuagint and Latin Vulgate which
interpret "azazel" as "the goat that departs" (Greek "tragos apopompaios",
"goat sent out", Latin "caper emissarius", "emissary goat"). William Tyndale
rendered the Latin as "(e)scape goat" in his 1530 Bible. This translation was
followed by following versions up to the King James Version of the Bible in
1611: "And Aaron shall cast lots upon the two goats; one lot for the Lord, and
the other lot for the scapegoat." Several modern versions however either follow
the reading as a demon, Azazel, or footnote "for Azazel." as an alternative
reading. History. Ancient Syria. A concept superficially similar to the
biblical scapegoat is attested in two ritual texts in archives at Ebla of the
24th century BC. They were connected with ritual purification on the occasion
of the king's wedding. In them, a she-goat with a silver bracelet hung from her
neck was driven forth into the wasteland of "Alini"; "we" in the report of the
ritual involves the whole community. Such "elimination rites", in which an
animal, without confession of sins, is the vehicle of evils (not sins) that are
chased from the community are widely attested in the Ancient Near East. Ancient
Greece. The Ancient Greeks practiced a scapegoating rite in which a cripple or
beggar or criminal (the "pharmakos") was cast out of the community, either in
response to a natural disaster (such as a plague, famine or an invasion) or in
response to a calendrical crisis (such as the end of the year). The scholia
refer to the "pharmakos" being killed, but many scholars reject this, and argue
that the earliest evidence (the fragments of the iambic satirist Hipponax) only
show the "pharmakos" being stoned, beaten and driven from the community. The
Bible. The scapegoat was a goat that was designated (Hebrew
לַעֲזָאזֵֽל ) "la-aza'zeyl"; either "for absolute removal" (Brown-
Driver-Briggs Lexicon) or possibly "for Azazel" (some modern versions taking
the term as a name) and outcast in the desert as part of the ceremonies of the
Day of Atonement, that began during the Exodus with the original Tabernacle and
continued through the times of the temples in Jerusalem. Throughout the year,
the sins of the ancient Israelites were daily transferred to the regular sin
offerings as outlined in the Torah in Leviticus Ch 16. Once a year, on the
tenth day of the seventh month in the Jewish calendar, the Day of Atonement,
the High Priest of Israel sacrificed a bull for a sin offering for his own
sins. Subsequently he took two goats and presented them at the door of the
tabernacle with a view to dealing with the corporate sins of God's people —
the nation of Israel. Two goats were chosen by lot: one to be "The Lord's
Goat", which was offered as a blood sacrifice, and the other to be the "Azazel"
scapegoat to be sent away into the wilderness. The blood of the slain goat was
taken into the Holy of Holies behind the sacred veil and sprinkled on the mercy
seat, the lid of the ark of the covenant. Later in the ceremonies of the day,
the High Priest confessed the sins of the Israelites to Jehovah placing them
figuratively on the head of the other goat, the Azazel scapegoat, who "took
them away" never to be seen again. The sin of the nation was thus "atoned for"
(paid for) by the "The Lord's Goat" and "The Azazel Goat". In Christian thought
this process prefigures the sacrifice of Christ on the cross through which God
has been propitiated and sins can be expiated. Jesus Christ is seen to have
fulfilled both of the Biblical "types" - the Lord's goat that deals with the
pollution of sin and the scapegoat that removes the "burden of sin". Christians
believe that sinners who own their guilt and confess their sins, exercising
faith and trust in the person and sacrifice of Jesus, are forgiven of their
sins. Since the second goat was sent away to perish, the word "scapegoat" has
developed to indicate a person who is blamed and punished for the sins of
others.
