Scientology in Australia Scientology has existed in Australia since the mid
1950s. Their numbers vary depending upon the source: according to the 2011
census it has a declining population, 2163 members, down from 2507 in 2006,
while Scientology itself has claimed 150,000 members in Australia. It has
headquarters in Sydney, Melbourne, Perth, Adelaide and Canberra and has a
mission in Tasmania. The Church of Scientology Australia is the regional
headquarters for the entire Asian and Pacific area. In 1959 L. Ron Hubbard
travelled to Australia and delivered lectures on 7 to 8 November at the
Melbourne Congress and the First Melbourne Advanced Clinical Course from 9 to
30 November. Interaction with education. Scientology has arranged at least one
anti-psychiatry exhibition in Australia, and is active in the media about what
it claims are the dangers of psychiatric drugs and the treatment of ADHD.
Scientology, through its group Narconon has run an anti-drug campaign in dozens
of schools in Melbourne, giving presentations and handing out brochures.
Scientology members have also attended events like the Big Day Out to give out
anti-drug information. One school in Australia, the Athena School in Newtown,
Sydney uses Scientology study technology. The Athena School has 90 pupils
ranging from pre-school to year 10. It has eight teachers, who have completed
six months' training in L. Ron Hubbard teaching techniques but do not hold
formal qualifications. Some children at the school are involved in Scientology
community out reach programs operating under different names, including Drug
Free Ambassadors. Banning of '"Tom Cruise: An Unauthorized Biography" by
Australian book retailers. A book released detailing Tom Cruise's activities
within Scientology was banned by the major Australian booksellers in Australia,
including Dymocks and Angus and Robertson, after threats of legal action by the
Church of Scientology. The book, "" by British writer Andrew Morton, had been
pulled from sale in the UK, and made a number of claims against Tom Cruise and
claims about Scientology trying to influence Nicole Kidman. The Australian arm
of publisher Pan Macmillan had planned to print a local Australian edition, but
decided not to, after legal advice that the Church would act against them. This
resulted in the book not being stocked by the Borders chain in Australia.
Though certain bookstores in Australia refused to sell the book due to legal
concerns, it was the number one bestseller in Australia for publisher AbeBooks
in 2008, and the number one most-borrowed non-fiction book at libraries in
Brisbane in September 2008. Teresa Budasi of the "Chicago Sun-Times" described
the book as "fascinating", although Budasi also brought up a "question as to
what’s true and what isn’t." Budasi summed up her impression of the work,
writing "Morton’s book is as much an indictment on Cruise’s chosen faith as
it is the life story of one of the world’s biggest movie stars. And by the
end you realize that 'Scientologist' is what will end up being the role of his
lifetime." In a review in "The Buffalo News", Jeff Simon wrote of the author:
"To give Morton the credit he’s clearly due: he is one of the best around at
constructing a 250-page gossip column." Upon its publication, Cruise's lawyer
and the Church of Scientology released statements which question the
truthfulness of assertions made by Morton in the book. In a 15-page statement
released to the press, the Church of Scientology called the book "a bigoted,
defamatory assault replete with lies." The book was not published in the UK,
Australia, or New Zealand due to strict libel laws in those countries. Banning
and legal status. Government criticism of the Church of Scientology was begun
by a Victorian public servant, Dr Eric Cunningham Dax. Based on the findings of
the 1965 Anderson Inquiry, to which Dax contributed, the Church of Scientology
was restricted from forming under that name in Australia. The ban in Victoria
lasted from 1965 until 1973, in South Australia from 1968 to 1973 and in
Western Australia from 1968 until 1972. As a response to the banning of
Scientology in WA and SA, Scientology changed its name to the Church of the New
Faith, a body incorporated in Adelaide in 1969, and continued to operate in
those two states. However, it closed its Spring St office in Melbourne,
Victoria. The magistrates in the 1983 Victorian Court actions (see below)
referenced the Anderson Inquiry, particularly that it was "Uncompromising in
its denunciation of Scientology as a profoundly evil movement from which
gullible - and the not so gullible - members of the community required
protection", that it had "gained publicity in countries and states where the
organization was entrenched"; that the leaders of the Scientology movement
succumbed to the temptation to avoid "destruction" of the movement by
simulating, so as to become accepted as, a religion; that "the ecclesiastical
appearance now assumed by the organization is no more than colourable in order
to serve an ulterior purpose"; and, ultimately, that Scientology (1983) 1 VR,
at pp 108-109 . (at p170) "Report..." p. 161 In Victoria this enquiry led to a
ban and was legislated in the "Psychological Practices Act, 1965", which
prohibited using an E-meter or teaching Scientology for fee or reward. In the
understanding that Scientology was a form of psychology, this law required
anyone practising psychology to register with the newly established Victorian
Psychological Council. However, it exempted any religious denomination
recognised by the Australian government under the federal Marriage Act since it
used a definition of psychology broad enough to include the counselling
traditionally done by priests and ministers of religion. Although similar laws
were later passed in Western Australia in 1968 (the "Scientology Act") and
South Australia (the "Scientology (Prohibition) Act, 1968" replaced by the
"Psychological Practices Act, 1973"), the Church remained active in these two
States. In January 1973, the newly elected federal Labor government recognised
the Church of Scientology as a religious denomination under the Marriage Act,
making it effectively exempt from the provisions of the Victorian
"Psychological Practices Act". Western Australia had already repealed its
"Scientology Act" in the previous year. On 25 February 1981, officials of
Scientology urged repeal of the Victorian "Psychological Practices Act", which
was subsequently amended by the "Psychologists Registration (Scientology) Act,
1982" to remove all references to Scientology. This Act was repealed by the
"Psychologists Registration Act, 1987". The South Australian "Psychological
Practices Act" has remained in force and has a necessary role in regulating the
activities of psychologists and hypnotists in that State. However, neither this
Act itself now contain any reference to Scientology. The Western Australian
"Scientology Act, 1968" was repealed in 1972, and replaced by a "Psychologists
Registration Act, 1976". with similar provisions to regulate psychologists. In
1983, the matter went to the Courts in the State of Victoria and subsequently
to the national High Court. Scientologists argued a $70 payroll tax should not
be paid due to its status as a religious organisation. The Commissioner of Pay-
Roll Tax in Victoria had ruled that Scientology was not a religion. This
decision was upheld in the Supreme Court of Victoria (Judge: Crockett,J) and
then on appeal in the Full Court. The judgement concluding Scientology was not
a religion relied on the premise that Scientology was a philosophy rather than
a religion and that the trappings of religion had only been acquired after its
establishment in order to give the organisation the semblance of a religion.
Some support of this position was found in Scientologist writings:
Scientology's predecessor in Australia was the Hubbard Association of
Scientologist International ("H.A.S.I."), This association had published, at
some time not earlier than 1961, a magazine which unequivocally asserted
"H.A.S.I. is non-religious -it does not demand any belief or faith nor is it in
conflict with faith. People of all faiths use Scientology." The full bench of
the Victorian Supreme Court affirmed that the Victorian Court Judgement, quoted
in subsequent High Court judgement Thus the Victorian court found that a
considerable transformation had ostensibly occurred. The court found that "the
ecclesiastical appearance now assumed by the organization is no more than
colourable in order to serve an ulterior purpose", namely, the purpose of
acquiring the legal status of a religion so that the organization might have
the fiscal and other benefits of that status in Australia and elsewhere and the
purpose of avoiding the legal disabilities to which the organization was
subject by reason of the Psychological Practices Act 1965 (Vict.). He expressed
his clear conviction that the purported transformation of Scientology to a
religion was "No more than a sham, the proclaimed belief in the efficacy of
prayer is bogus, and the adoption of the paraphernalia and ceremonies of
conventional religion is a mockery. The very adroitness - and alacrity - with
which the tenets or structure were from time (to time) so cynically adapted to
meet a deficiency thought to operate in detraction of the claim to
classification as a religion serve to rob the movement of that sincerity and
integrity that must be cardinal features of any religious faith." Though the
court found that at least some parts of Mr. Hubbard's writing contained merely
pretended doctrines and practices of Scientology, he also found that members of
the Scientology movement are "expected to and, apostates excepted, accord blind
reverence to the written works of Mr. Hubbard. Although the sincerity and
integrity of the ordinary members of the Scientology movement are not in doubt,
Scientology is no less a sham because there are others prepared to accept and
act upon such aims and beliefs as though they were credible when they can not
see them for what they are. Gullibility cannot convert something from what it
is to something which it is not". and The High Court of Australia restored
Scientology's tax exempt status in 1983. The High Court's decision, dismissing
the earlier judgements, now serves as the current precedent for defining
religious groups. Controversies. Revesby murder. Linda Walicki, who was
diagnosed with a psychiatric illness, was not administered psychiatric drugs
prescribed by the hospital because of the beliefs of her Scientologist parents.
Instead her parents administered vitamins imported from the United States. Her
condition worsened, and her parents became alarmed, finally relenting and
administering the prescribed medicine. However, three weeks later, she
assaulted them, killing her father Michael and sister Kathryn, and wounding her
mother Sue. The mother has since recovered. After the incident, Australian
Church of Scientology vice-president Cyrus Brooks in Sydney continued to
criticise Psychiatry and Psychiatric drugs, while the Australian Medical
Association President Dr Rosanna Capolingua, speaking on ABC Radio, said if
"the girl had had access to appropriate medical treatment it could have changed
the course of her life." Linda has since been found not guilty by reason of
insanity and has been taken to a hospital for further treatment. Speech by
Senator Xenophon. In November 2009 Independent Senator Nick Xenophon spoke in
the parliament about the organisation, describing it as a "criminal
organisation" and saying that he had letters from former followers which
included "claims of abuse, false imprisonment and forced abortion." His staff
interviewed a number of people who made the claims. Xenophon called for a
parliamentary enquiry to investigate the Church's activities and its tax-exempt
status. In March 2010, Xenophon's call for an inquiry was "overwhelmingly
rejected" by the Australian Senate, the senators voting 33 to 6 against, with
37 abstentions; Xenophon said he would "continue to push for an inquiry when
parliament reconvenes in May." Scientology targets school children in NSW
schools. After Scientology related material was sent to NSW schools, the NSW
Government warned principals about a Church of Scientology attempt to
infiltrate primary schools with propaganda videos and booklets aimed at Year 6
students. Education Minister Verity Firth has warned all NSW primary schools
after a DVD was distributed about a Scientology organisation called "Youth for
Human Rights".The DVD was sent to various schools for the students, and didn't
reveal it was connected to the Church of Scientology. "It's not appropriate for
the Church of Scientology to distribute materials," Ms Firth said. Notable
members. Noted Australian members of the church are singer Kate Ceberano. Media
tycoon James Packer has been involved with the church but left in 2008. Aaron
Saxton, a former member of the Sea Org, rose to prominence as a whistleblower
in 2009, when allegations he had made in his correspondence with Senator
Xenophon were discussed in the Australian Senate. Litigation. The Church of
Scientology has been involved in a number of lawsuits and threatened legal
action during its five decade history in Australia. Billboard promotion.
Scientology used a notable promotion in Sydney for many years, an "electronic
talking billboard" a 33 metre high Volcano billboard situated in the main
cinema district on George Street. The Volcano billboard was "33 metres wide, 10
metres high and projects three-and-a-half-metres from the Metro's facade. It is
internally illuminated by 150 special display lamps synchronised to create a
stylised simulation of lava flowing down the sides of the volcano. Each
eruption heralds the screening of ads on the TV screen. Non-toxic smoke will
spew from the crater at regular intervals." The billboard was used to promote
Dianetics books.
