Scofield Reference Bible The Scofield Reference Bible is a widely circulated
study Bible edited and annotated by the American Bible student Cyrus I.
Scofield, that popularized dispensationalism at the beginning of the 20th
century. Published by Oxford University Press and containing the traditional
Protestant King James Version of the Bible, it first appeared in 1909 and was
revised by the author in 1917. The Scofield Bible had several innovative
features. Most important, it printed what amounted to a commentary on the
biblical text alongside the Bible instead of in a separate volume. It also
contained a cross-referencing system that tied together related verses of
Scripture and allowed a reader to follow biblical themes from one chapter and
book to another. Finally, the 1917 edition also attempted to date events of the
Bible. It was in the pages of the Scofield Reference Bible that many Christians
first encountered Archbishop James Ussher's calculation of the date of Creation
as 4004 BC; and through discussion of Scofield's notes, which advocated the
"gap theory," fundamentalists began a serious internal debate about the nature
and chronology of creation. The Scofield Bible was published only a few years
before World War I destroyed the cultural optimism that had viewed the world as
entering a new era of peace and prosperity; and the post-World War II era saw
the creation in Israel of a homeland for the Jews. Thus, Scofield's
premilliennialism seemed almost prophetic. "At the popular level, especially,
many people came to regard the dispensationalist scheme as completely
vindicated." Sales of the Reference Bible exceeded two million copies by the
end of World War II. The Scofield Reference Bible promoted dispensationalism,
the belief that between creation and the final judgment there were seven
distinct eras of God's dealing with man and that these eras were a framework
for synthesizing the message of the Bible. It was largely through the influence
of Scofield's notes that dispensationalism grew in influence among
fundamentalist Christians in the United States. Scofield's notes on the Book of
Revelation are a major source for the various timetables, judgments, and
plagues elaborated by popular religious writers such as Hal Lindsey, Edgar C.
Whisenant, and Tim LaHaye; and in part because of the success of the Scofield
Reference Bible, twentieth-century American fundamentalists placed greater
stress on eschatological speculation. Opponents of biblical fundamentalism have
criticized the Scofield Bible for its air of total authority in biblical
interpretation, for what they consider its glossing over of biblical
contradictions, and for its focus on eschatology. The 1917 Scofield Reference
Bible is now in the public domain, continues to be published, and is
"consistently the best selling edition" in the United Kingdom and Ireland. In
1967, Oxford University Press published a revision of the Scofield Bible with a
slightly modernized KJV text and a muting of some of the tenets of Scofield's
theology. The Press continues to issue editions under the title "Oxford
Scofield Study Bible", and there are translations into French, German, Spanish,
and Portuguese. For instance, the French edition published by the Geneva Bible
Society is printed with a revised version of the Louis Segond translation that
includes additional notes by a Francophone committee.
