Scottish Episcopal Church The Scottish Episcopal Church () is a Christian
church in Scotland, consisting of seven dioceses. Since the 17th century, it
has held an identity distinct from the (presbyterian) Church of Scotland. A
continuation of Scotland's Jacobite-era Church of Scotland, the Episcopal
Church of Scotland is now a member of the Anglican Communion, and recognises
the position of the Archbishop of Canterbury as president of the Anglican
Instruments of Communion, but without jurisdiction in Scotland. The current
Primus of the Scottish Episcopal Church is the Most Reverend David
Chillingworth. Official name. The Scottish Episcopal Church was previously
called the Episcopal Church in Scotland, reflecting its role as the Scottish
province of the Anglican Communion. Although not incorporated until 1712, the
Scottish Episcopal Church traces its origins beyond the Reformation and sees
itself in continuity with the church established by St. Ninian, St. Columba,
St. Kentigern and other Celtic saints. The established Church of Scotland
claims the same continuity. The church is sometimes pejoratively referred to in
Scotland as the "English Kirk", but this is misleading and can cause offence.
It is, nonetheless, a union of the non-juring Episcopalians with the "qualified
congregations" who worshipped according to the liturgy of the Church of
England. History. Origins of Christianity in Scotland. Saint Ninian conducted
the first Christian mission to what is now southern Scotland. In 563 St Columba
travelled to Scotland with twelve companions, where according to legend he
first landed at the southern tip of the Kintyre peninsula, near Southend.
However, being still in sight of his native land he moved further north along
the west coast of Scotland. He was granted land on the island of Iona off the
Isle of Mull which became the centre of his evangelising mission to the Picts.
However, there is a sense in which he did not leave his native people, as the
Irish Gaels had been colonising the west coast of Scotland for some time. Aside
from the services he provided guiding the only centre of literacy in the
region, his reputation as a holy man led to his role as a diplomat among the
tribes; there are also many stories of miracles which he performed during his
work to convert the Picts. He visited the pagan king Bridei, king of Fortriu,
at his base in Inverness, winning the king's respect and Columba subsequently
played a major role in the politics of that country. He was also very energetic
in his evangelical work; in addition to founding several churches in the
Hebrides, he worked to turn his monastery at Iona into a school for
missionaries. He was a renowned man of letters, having written several hymns
and being credited with having transcribed 300 books personally. He died on
Iona and was buried in the abbey he established. The Scottish church would
continue to grow in the centuries that followed, and in the 11th century, Saint
Margaret of Scotland (Queen Consort of Malcolm III of Scotland) strengthened
the church's ties with the Holy See as did successive monarchs such as
Margaret's son, David, who invited several religious orders to establish
monasteries. Reformation. The Scottish Reformation was formalised in 1560, when
the church in Scotland broke with the Holy See, during a process of Protestant
reform led, among others, by John Knox. It reformed its doctrines and
government, drawing on the principles of John Calvin which Knox had been
exposed to while living in Switzerland. In 1560, the Scottish Parliament
abolished papal jurisdiction and approved Calvin's Confession of Faith, but did
not accept many of the principles laid out in Knox's "First Book of
Discipline", which argued, amongst other things, that all of the assets of the
old church should pass to the new. The 1560 Reformation Settlement was not
ratified by the crown for some years, and the question of church government
also remained largely unresolved. In 1572 the acts of 1560 were finally
approved by the young James VI, but under pressure from many of the nobles the
Concordat of Leith also allowed the crown to appoint bishops with the church's
approval. John Knox himself had no clear views on the office of bishop,
preferring to see them renamed as 'superintendents'; but in response to the new
Concordat a Presbyterian party emerged headed by Andrew Melville, the author of
the "Second Book of Discipline". The Scottish Episcopal Church began as a
distinct church in 1582, when the Church of Scotland rejected episcopal
government (by bishops) and adopted a presbyterian government by elders as well
as reformed theology. Scottish monarchs made repeated efforts to introduce
bishops and two ecclesiastical traditions competed. Episcopal government
maintained. In 1584 James VI of Scotland had the Parliament of Scotland pass
the "Black Acts", appointing two bishops and bringing the Church of Scotland
under royal control. This met vigorous opposition and he was forced to concede
that the General Assembly should continue to run the church. Calvinists who
disliked the more ceremonious style of liturgy were opposed by an Episcopalian
faction. After ascending to the English throne in 1603 James stopped the
General Assembly from meeting, increased the number of Scottish bishops and in
1618 held a General Assembly in Perth; this gathering adopted "Five Articles"
of Episcopalian practices. Many Scottish church leaders, and their
congregations, responded to the Five Articles with boycotts and disdain. James'
son Charles I was crowned in Holyrood Abbey, Edinburgh, in 1633 with full
Anglican rites. Subsequently, in 1637, Charles attempted to introduce a version
of the Book of Common Prayer, written by a group of Scottish prelates, most
notably the Archbishop of St Andrews, John Spottiswood, and the Bishop of Ross,
John Maxwell, and edited for printing by the Archbishop of Canterbury, William
Laud; it was a combination of Knox's Book of Common Order, which was in use
before 1637, and English liturgy in hopes of further unifying the (Anglican)
Church of England and the (Presbyterian) Church of Scotland. When the revised
Book of Common Prayer was used for the first time during worship on 23 July
1637 in St Giles' Edinburgh, it sparked a riot which became so uncontainable
that it led to the Wars of the Three Kingdoms, beginning with the Bishops Wars
and developing into the English Civil War. With the 1689 refusal of the
Scottish bishops to swear allegiance to William of Orange while King James VII
(James II of England) lived and had not abdicated, the Presbyterian polity was
finally re-established in the Church of Scotland. However, the Comprehension
Act of 1690 allowed Episcopalian incumbents, on taking the Oath of Allegiance,
to retain their benefices, though excluding them from any share in the
government of the Church of Scotland without a further declaration of
presbyterian principles. Many 'non-jurors' also succeeded for a time in
retaining the use of the parish churches. The excluded Scottish bishops were
slow to organise the Episcopalian remnant under a jurisdiction independent of
the state, regarding the then arrangements as provisional, and looking forward
to a reconstituted national Episcopal Church under a sovereign they regarded as
legitimate (see Jacobitism). A few prelates, known as college bishops, were
consecrated without sees, to preserve the succession rather than to exercise a
defined authority. At length the hopelessness of the Stuart cause and the
growth of congregations outside the establishment forced the bishops to
dissociate canonical jurisdiction from royal prerogative and to reconstitute
for themselves a territorial episcopate. The Scottish "Book of Common Prayer"
came into general use at start of the reign of William and Mary. The Scottish
Communion Office, compiled by the non-jurors in accordance with primitive
models, has had a varying co-ordinate authority, and the modifications of the
English liturgy that would be adopted by the American Church were mainly
determined by its influence. Among the clergy of post-Revolution days the most
eminent are Bishop John Sage, a well-known patristic scholar; Bishop Rattray,
liturgiologist; John Skinner, of Longside, author of "Tullochgorum"; Bishop
Gleig, editor of the 3rd edition of the "Encyclopædia Britannica"; Dean
Ramsay, author of "Reminiscences of Scottish Life and Character"; Bishop AP
Forbes; GH Forbes, liturgiologist; and Bishop Charles Wordsworth. From the
birth of the United Kingdom. The Scottish Episcopalians Act of 1711 protected
the Episcopal Church, which marked its virtual incorporation as a distinct
society. However, matters were still complicated by a considerable, though
declining, number of Episcopalian incumbents holding parish churches. Moreover,
the Jacobitism of the non-jurors provoked a state policy of repression in 1715
and 1745, and fostered the growth of new Hanoverian congregations, using the
English Prayer Book (served by clergy who had been ordained by a bishop but
amenable to none), who qualified themselves under the act of 1712. This act was
further modified in 1746 and 1748 to exclude clergy ordained in Scotland. These
causes reduced the Episcopalians who, in 1689, had been a large section of the
population, to a minority save in a few corners of the west and north-east of
Scotland. Their official recognition of George III, on the death of Charles
Edward Stuart in 1788, removed the chief bar to progress. In 1792 the penal
laws were repealed, but clerical disabilities were only finally removed in
1864. The qualified congregations were gradually absorbed in the early 19th
century. After the independence of the 13 colonies, the Scottish Episcopal
Church also took the step of consecrating Samuel Seabury at Aberdeen in 1784.
He became the first bishop of the American Episcopal Church after being refused
consecration by Church of England clergy. In this way, it can be said that the
Episcopal Church in the United States owes as much of its origins to the
Scottish Episcopal Church as to the Church of England. The Theological College
was founded in 1810, incorporated with Trinity College, Glenalmond, in 1848,
and re-established at Edinburgh in 1876. Theological training is now provided
by the various dioceses and is supervised by the Theological Institute of the
Scottish Episcopal Church (TISEC). In 1900 the church had 356 congregations,
with a total membership of 124,335 and 324 working clergy. Membership did not
grow in the following decades as it was believed it would. In 1989 there were
approximately 200 stipendiary and 80 non-stipendiary clergy. Membership was
65,000, with 31,000 communicants. In the past 30 years the Scottish Episcopal
Church has taken a stand on various issues including economic justice, the
ordination of women and inclusion. Membership. In terms of official membership
Episcopalians comprise a little over 1% of the population of Scotland, making
them about 12% of the size of the Church of Scotland. The Church has 310
parishes with a total membership of 44,280 (about 54,000 including children).
In 1995, the Scottish Episcopal Church began working through a process known as
"Mission 21". Canon Alice Mann of the Alban Institute was invited to begin
developing a missionary emphasis within the congregations of the church
throughout Scotland. This led to the development of the "Making Your Church
More Inviting" programme which has now been completed by many congregations. In
addition to working on making churches more inviting, "Mission 21" emphasises
reaching out to new populations which have previously not been contacted by the
church. As "Mission 21" has developed, changing patterns of ministry have
become part of its remit. As for other churches in Scotland attendance has
declined over recent years: the overall figures reflect rises in some dioceses
and decline in others. Structure. Bishops and Primus. As an episcopal
denomination, the church is governed by bishops, differentiating it from the
national Church of Scotland which is presbyterian and governed by elders.
However, unlike the Church of England, the bishops of the Scottish Episcopal
Church are elected in a procedure involving clergy and laity of the vacant
diocese voting at an electoral synod. All sees except Edinburgh (founded by
Charles I) stem from sees of the Catholic Church in Scotland. The bishops of
the Episcopal Church are direct successors of the prelates consecrated to
Scottish sees at the Restoration. The bishops are addressed "Right Reverend".
The College of Bishops constitutes the episcopal synod, the supreme court of
appeal. This synod elects from among its own members a presiding Bishop who has
the title of Primus (the title originates from the Latin phrase "Primus inter
pares" — 'First among equals'). The current incumbent is David Chillingworth,
who took this office on 13 June 2009. The Primus does not have any metropolitan
jurisdiction - the last to hold such jurisdiction was Archbishop Arthur Rose
(of St Andrews) up to his death in 1704. The Primus is addressed "Most
Reverend". Representative bodies. The church is governed by the General Synod.
This consists of the House of Bishops, the House of Clergy and the House of
Laity. The General Synod makes canon law, administers finance and monitors the
work of the boards and committees of the Church. Most decisions are arrived at
by a simple majority of members of the General Synod voting together. More
complex legislation, such as changes to the Code of Canons requires each of the
Houses to agree and to vote in favour by a two-thirds majority. Each diocese
has its synod of the clergy and laity. Its dean (similar to an archdeacon in
the Church of England) is appointed by the bishop, and, on the voidance of the
see, summons the diocesan synod, at the instance of the primus, to choose a
bishop. Each diocese has one or more (in the case of some united dioceses)
cathedrals. The senior priest of a Scottish Episcopal cathedral is styled as
provost (as the title of 'dean' is given to the senior priest of the diocese as
a whole, see above). The only exception in Scotland is the Cathedral of the
Isles on the island of Great Cumbrae which has been led by a member of the
clergy styled as Precentor. Diocesan deans and cathedral provosts are both
addressed as "Very Reverend". Worship and liturgy. The Scottish Episcopal
Church embraces three orders of ministry: deacon, priest (referred to in the
1929 Scottish Prayer Book as presbyter) and bishop. Increasingly, an emphasis
is being placed on these orders to work collaboratively within the wider
ministry of the whole people of God. Liturgies. In addition to the , the church
has a number of other liturgies available to it. In recent years, revised
Funeral Rites have appeared, along with liturgies for Christian Initiation
(e.g. Baptism and Affirmation) and Marriage. The modern Eucharistic rite
(Scottish Liturgy 1982) includes Eucharistic prayers for the various seasons in
the Liturgical Year and is commonly known as "The Blue Book" - a reference to
the colour of its covers. A further Eucharistic prayer is provided in the
Marriage liturgy. Doctrine and practice. The threefold sources of authority in
Anglicanism are scripture, tradition, and reason. These three sources uphold
and critique each other in a dynamic way. This balance of scripture, tradition
and reason is traced to the work of Richard Hooker, a sixteenth century
apologist. In Hooker's model, scripture is the primary means of arriving at
doctrine and things stated plainly in scripture are accepted as true. Issues
that are ambiguous are determined by tradition, which is checked by reason.
Social issues. The Scottish Episcopal Church has been involved in Scottish
politics. The Church is an opponent of nuclear weaponry. Supporting devolution,
it was one of the parties involved in the Scottish Constitutional Convention,
which resulted in the setting up of the Scottish Parliament in 1999. The church
actively supports the work of the Scottish Churches Parliamentary Office in
Edinburgh and the Society, Religion and Technology Project. In some areas, such
as human sexuality, the church has faced a struggle. All orders of ministry are
open to both male and female candidates. As yet, no women have been elected to
the episcopate and thus there are no bishops who are women. Debate continues in
the church as to the propriety of fully affirming the presence of lesbian and
gay church members. Ecumenical relations. Like many other Anglican churches,
the Scottish Episcopal Church has entered into full communion with the Old
Catholics. The Scottish Episcopal Church is also a member of the Porvoo
Communion and is a member of several ecumenical bodies, including Action of
Churches Together in Scotland and the World Council of Churches. In December
2009, there were reports that certain High Church traditionalists within the
Scottish Episcopal Church were in favour of joining the Roman Catholic Church.
