Second Coming In Christianity and Islam, the Second Coming of Christ, the
second advent, sometimes called the parousia, is the anticipated return of
Jesus Christ to Earth. The Second Coming belief is based on prophecies found in
the canonical gospels and in most Christian and Islamic eschatologies.
Christians generally believe the anticipated event is predicted in biblical
messianic prophecies. Views about the nature of Jesus' Second Coming vary among
Christian denominations and sometimes among individual Christians. Most English
versions of the Nicene Creed in current use include the following beliefs about
Jesus: "...he ascended into heaven and is seated at the right hand of the
Father. He will come again in glory to judge the living and the dead, and his
kingdom will have no end. ... We look for the resurrection of the dead, and the
life of the world to come. Amen." Terminology. Several different terms are used
to refer to the second coming of Christ. Epiphany. In the New Testament the
Greek word ἐπιφάνεια ("epiphaneia", appearing) is used five times to
refer to the return of Christ. Parousia. The Greek New Testament uses the Greek
term "parousia" (παρουσία, meaning "arrival", "coming", or "presence")
twenty-four times, seventeen of them concerning Christ. The word is also used
six times referring to individuals: Stephanas, Fortunatus and Achaicus , Titus
and of Paul himself and one time referring to the "coming of the lawless one".
The etymology of Greek word "parousia" is related to "para" "beside" "ousia"
"presence". In English "parousia" always has a special, Christian, meaning.
Definitions. Adolf Deissmann (1908) showed that the Greek word "parousia" was
used as early as the 3rd century BC to describe the visit of a king or
dignitary to a city arranged in order the show his magnificence to the people.
The Roman Advent Coins struck by the cities of Corinth and Patras for Nero's
visit reveals the correspondence between the Greek "parousia" and the Latin
"Adventus" and their relationship to the Greek word "epiphany" that means
"appearing". Christian views. 1st century. According to historian Charles
Freeman, early Christians expected Jesus to return within a generation of his
death. The non-occurrence of the second coming surprised the early Christian
communities, but they quickly began to understand Christ's warning not to
speculate "the day or the hour." Catholic and Orthodox. Most English versions
of the Nicene Creed in current use include the following beliefs about Jesus:
"...he ascended into heaven and is seated at the right hand of the Father. He
will come again in glory to judge the living and the dead, and his kingdom will
have no end. ... We look for the resurrection of the dead, and the life of the
world to come. Amen." It is the traditional view of Catholics and Orthodox
Christians, preserved from the early Church, that the second coming will be a
sudden and unmistakable incident, like "a flash of lightning". They hold the
general view that Jesus will not spend any time on the earth in ministry or
preaching. They also agree that the ministry of the Antichrist will take place
right before the Second Coming. Respected Orthodox layman Alexander Kalomiros
explains the original Church's position regarding the Second Coming in River of
Fire and Against False Union, stating that those who contend that Christ will
reign on earth for a thousand years "do not wait for Christ, but for the
Antichrist." The idea of Jesus returning to this earth as a kingly is a
heretical concept to the Church, equated to "the expectations of the Jews who
wanted the Messiah to be an earthly King." The Church instead teaches that
which it has taught since the beginning—Christ will not return to earth,
rather the Kingdom of Heaven, the New Jerusalem, will be established through
the General Resurrection. Preterism. The position associating the Second Coming
with 1st century events such as the destruction of Jerusalem and of the Jewish
Temple in AD 70 is known as Preterism. Some preterists see this "coming of the
Son of Man in glory" primarily fulfilled in Jesus' death on the cross. They
believe the apocalyptic signs are already fulfilled including "the sun will be
dark", the "powers ... will be shaken," and "then they will see". Yet some
critics note many are missing such as "But the day of the Lord will come as a
thief in the night, in which the heavens will pass away with a great noise, and
the elements will melt with fervent heat; both the earth and the works that are
in it will be burned up." (2 Peter 3:10) And "Then the sign of the Son of Man
will appear in heaven, and then all the tribes of the earth will mourn, and
they will see the Son of Man coming on the clouds of heaven with power and
great glory." (Matthew 24:30) Some, such as Jerome, interpret the phrase "this
generation" to mean lifetime of the Jewish race; however, if Jesus meant "race"
he would have used "genos" (race) not "genea" (generation). However, most
scholars don't think Jesus spoke Greek, but instead that he spoke Aramaic.
Mainline Protestant. The many denominations of Protestantism have differing
views on the exact details of Christ's second coming. Only a handful of
Christian organizations claim complete and authoritative interpretation of the
typically symbolic and prophetic biblical sources. A common thread is the
belief that Jesus will return to judge the world and to establish the kingdom
of God (fulfilling the rest of Messianic prophecy). A short reference to the
second coming is contained in the Nicene Creed, a prominent Christian statement
of faith: "He shall come again in glory to judge the living and the dead; and
His kingdom shall have no end." An analogous statement is also in the biblical
Pauline Creed, in . Some Lutheran, Anglican and United Methodist liturgies
proclaim the Mystery of Faith to be: "Christ has died, Christ is risen, Christ
will come again." Adam Clarke writing in 1825, gave a time line ending in 2015.
Generally, mainline Protestant Christianity does not offer predictions on the
date of the second coming, though some may form their own ideas of how and
where it will happen. Seventh-day Adventists. Fundamental Belief # 25 of the
Seventh-day Adventist Church states Jehovah's Witnesses. Jehovah's Witnesses
rarely use the term "second coming", preferring the term "presence" as a
translation of "parousia". They believe that Jesus' comparison of ""the
presence of the Son of man"" with ""the days of Noah"" at Matthew 24:37-39 and
Luke 17:26-30 suggests a duration rather than a moment of arrival. Jehovah's
Witnesses believe that biblical chronology points to 1914 as the start of
Christ's "presence", which continues until Armageddon. Other biblical
expressions they correlate with this period include "the time of the end" (Dan
12:4), "the conclusion of the system of things" (Matt 13:40,49; 24:3) and "the
last days" (2 Tim 3:1; 2 Peter 3:3). Witnesses believe Christ's millennial
reign begins after Armageddon. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints.
Latter-day Saints believe that Christ shall return as its written in the Bible.
Jeffrey R. Holland, one of the Twelve Apostles wrote "I testify that Jesus
Christ is the literal, living Son of our literal, living God. This Jesus is our
Savior and Redeemer who, under the guidance of the Father, was the Creator of
heaven and earth and all things that in them are. I bear witness that He was
born of a virgin mother, that in His lifetime He performed mighty miracles
observed by legions of His disciples and by His enemies as well. I testify that
He had power over death because He was divine but that He willingly subjected
Himself to death for our sake because for a period of time He was also mortal.
I declare that in His willing submission to death He took upon Himself the sins
of the world, paying an infinite price for every sorrow and sickness, every
heartache and unhappiness from Adam to the end of the world. In doing so He
conquered both the grave physically and hell spiritually and set the human
family free. I bear witness that He was literally resurrected from the tomb
and, after ascending to His Father, to complete the process of that
Resurrection, He appeared, repeatedly, to hundreds of disciples in the Old
World and in the New. I know He is the Holy One of Israel, the Messiah who will
one day come again in final glory, to reign on earth as Lord of lords and King
of kings." Full text Notably Latter-day Saints have particularly distinct and
specific interpretations as to various signs presented in the Book of
Revelation. Esoteric Christian teachings. In Rosicrucian esoteric Christian
teaching, there is a clear distinction between the cosmic Christ, or Christ
without, and the Christ within. According to this tradition, the Christ within
is regarded as the true Saviour who needs to be born within each individual in
order to evolve toward the future Sixth Epoch in the Earth's etheric plane,
that is, toward the ""new heavens and a new earth"": the "New Galilee." The
Second Coming or Advent of the Christ is not in a physical body, but in the new
"soul body" of each individual in the etheric region of the planet where man
"shall be caught up in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air." The "day and
hour" when this event shall be, as described in the Bible, is not in the human
knowledge domain. The esoteric Christian tradition teaches that first there
will be a preparatory period as the Sun enters Aquarius by precession: the
coming age of Aquarius. Last Day counterfeits. Many Christians believe there
will be a great deception before the coming of Christ. In Matthew 24 Jesus
states Specific date predictions and claims. A number of specific dates have
been suggested for the Second Coming of Christ. Some of these predictions have
passed many decades ago and some are decades away. Victor J. Stenger notes that
Jesus is recorded as saying, " ...there are some standing here, which shall not
taste death, till they see the Son of Man coming in his kingdom ", . He makes
similar predictions in four other places in the Gospels; , , , . When the
coming did not happen within the life-times of his disciples, as Jesus
prophesied, Christianity changed its emphasis to the Resurrection and promise
of eternal life. Non-Christian viewpoints. Judaism. Simmons, Rabbi Shraga, "Why
Jews Don't Believe in Jesus", Aish.Com. Accessed December 22, 2011. Regarding
the Christian idea that these prophecies will be fulfilled during a "second
coming," "Ohr Samayach" states "we find this to be a contrived answer, since
there is no mention of a second coming in the Jewish Bible. Second, why
couldn't G-d accomplish His goals the first time round?" Rabbi David Wolpe
believes that the Second Coming was "grown out of genuine disappointment" and
invented by Christians to theologically compensate for Jesus' death. Islam.
According to Islamic tradition, Isa's descent will be in the midst of wars
fought by the "Mahdi" ("lit". "the rightly guided one"), known in Islamic
eschatology as the redeemer of Islam, against the "al-Masīh ad-Dajjāl"
("false messiah") and his followers. Isa will descend at the point of a white
arcade, east of Damascus, dressed in yellow robes—his head anointed. He will
then join the "Mahdi" in his war against the "Dajjal". Isa, considered in Islam
as a Muslim (one who submits to God) and one of God's messengers, will abide by
the Islamic teachings. Eventually, Isa will slay the "Dajjal", and then
everyone from the People of the Book ("ahl al-kitāb", referring to Jews and
Christians) will believe in him. Thus, there will be one community, that of
Islam. After the death of the "Mahdi", Isa will assume leadership. This is a
time associated in Islamic narrative with universal peace and justice. Islamic
texts also allude to the appearance of Ya'juj and Ma'juj (known also as Gog and
Magog), ancient tribes which will disperse and cause disturbance on earth. God,
in response to Isa's prayers, will kill them by sending a type of worm in the
napes of their necks. Isa's rule is said to be around forty years, after which
he will die. Muslims will then perform the "Salat al-Janazah" (funeral prayer)
for him and bury him in the city of Medina in a grave left vacant beside
Muhammad. Ahmadiyya. The Ahmadis believe that the promised Mahdi and Messiah
(being one and the same person) has already arrived in the person of Mirza
Ghulam Ahmad (1835–1908). The "hadith" (sayings of the Islamic Prophet
Muhammad) and the Bible indicated that Isa would return during the latter days.
Islamic tradition commonly depicts that Isa, upon his second coming, would be
an "Ummati" (Muslim) and a follower of Muhammad and that he would revive the
truth of Islam rather than fostering a new religion. The Ahmadiyya movement
interpret the Second Coming of Isa prophesied as being that of a person
"similar to Isa" ("mathīl-i ʿIsā") and not his physical return, in the same
way as John the Baptist resembled the character of the biblical prophet Elijah
in Christianity. Ahmadis believe that Ghulam Ahmad demonstrated that the
prophecy in Muslim and Christian religious texts were traditionally
misunderstood to suggest that Jesus of Nazareth himself would return, and hold
that Jesus had survived the crucifixion and had died a natural death. Ahmadi's
consider the founder of the movement, in both his character and teachings to be
representative of Jesus, and subsequently he attained the same spiritual rank
of Prophethood as Jesus. Thus, Ahmadis believe this prediction was fulfilled
and continued by his movement. Baha'i Faith. Bahá'u'lláh claimed to be the
Return of Christ. Followers of the Bahá'í Faith believe that the fulfillment
of the prophecies of the second coming of Jesus, as well as the prophecies of
the Maitreya and many other religious prophecies, were begun by the Báb in
1844 and then by Bahá'u'lláh. They commonly compare the fulfillment of
Christian prophecies to Jesus' fulfillment of Jewish prophecies, where in both
cases people were expecting the literal fulfillment of apocalyptic statements.
Hinduism. In modern times some traditional Indian religious leaders have since
moved to embrace Jesus as an Avatar, or incarnation, of God. In light of this,
the Indian guru Paramahansa Yogananda, author of "Autobiography of a Yogi",
scribed an extensive commentary on the Gospels published in the two-volume set
"The Second Coming of Christ: The Resurrection of the Christ Within You". In
the tradition of the Gnostic Gospels, the book offers a mystical interpretation
of the Second Coming in which it is understood to be an inner experience,
something that takes place within the individual heart. Stating that
"Paramahansa Yogananda was sent to the West by Jesus Christ himself" with the
said intent to "restore the original Christian teachings among his followers",
in "Revelations of Christ" Swami Kriyananda, Yogananda's disciple and Ex-
minister of the Self-Realization Fellowship, provides a distilled commentary on
the life and teachings of Christ, all of which is meant to serve as an
anticipatory primer to Yogananda's more philosophically nuanced treatment in
"The Second Coming of Christ". Turning directly to The Bible, Kriyananda argues
for a more scripturally mature Christianity in which The Second Coming is
treated not in terms of a profane materialism - one which favors a literal,
physical and subsequently anti-spiritual resurrection - but rather unfolds in
accordance with the more spiritual aspirations of The Book of Luke; for
"Neither shall they say, Lo here! or, lo there! for, behold, the kingdom of God
is within you." (Luke 17:21) Thus Hinduism's consideration of itself as an
Eastern extension of the Christian Gospel, however, is neither unique to
Yogananda or his disciple, Swami Kriyananda. Similarly, Srila Prabhupada,
author Bhagavad Gita As It Is and founder of the Hare Krishna Movement, has
propounded the same pluralistic, nonsecular view: that "'Christ' is another way
of saying Krsta and Krsta is another way of pronouncing Krishna, the name of
God." Stating that "A son may call his father 'Father', but the father also has
a specific name. Similarly, God is the general name of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, whose specific name is Krishna", "Therefore", he writes, "whether
you call God 'Christ', 'Krsta', or 'Krishna', ultimately you are addressing the
same Supreme Personality of Godhead. " Theosophy. In January 1946, Theosophist
Alice A. Bailey prophesied that Christ (who is regarded by Theosophists as
being identical with the being known by Theosophists as the "Maitreya") would
return "sometime after AD 2025".
