Second Great Awakening The Second Great Awakening was a Protestant revival
movement during the early 19th century in the United States. The movement began
around 1790, gained momentum by 1800, and, after 1820 membership rose rapidly
among Baptist and Methodist congregations, whose preachers led the movement. It
was past its peak by the 1840s. The Second Great Awakening expressed Arminian
theology, by which every person could be saved through revivals. It enrolled
millions of new members in existing evangelical denominations and led to the
formation of new denominations. Many converts believed that the Awakening
heralded a new millennial age. The Second Great Awakening stimulated the
establishment of many reform movements designed to remedy the evils of society
before the Second Coming of Jesus Christ. People at the time talked about the
Awakening; historians named the Second Great Awakening in the context of the
First Great Awakening of the 1730s and '40s and of the Third Great Awakening of
the late 1850s to early 1900s. Spread of revivals. Burned-over district. In the
early nineteenth century, upstate New York was called the "burned-over
district" because of the numerous revivals that crisscrossed the region.
Frontier and Tidewater South. On the American Frontier, evangelical
denominations sent missionary preachers and exhorters out to the people in the
backcountry, which supported the growth of membership among Methodists and
Baptists. Revivalists' techniques were based on the camp meeting, with its
Scottish Presbyterian roots. Most of the Scots-Irish immigrants before the
American Revolutionary War settled in the backcountry of Pennsylvania and down
the spine of the Appalachian Mountains. These denominations were based on an
interpretation of man's spiritual equality before God, which led them to
recruit members and preachers from a wide range of classes and all races.
Baptists and Methodist revivals were successful in some parts of the Tidewater
in the South, where an increasing number of common planters, plain folk, and
slaves were converted. Adventism. The Advent Movement emerged in the 1830s and
1840s in North America, and was preached by ministers such as William Miller,
whose followers became known as Millerites. The name refers to belief in the
soon Second Advent of Jesus (popularly known as the Second coming) and resulted
in several major religious denominations, including Seventh-day Adventists and
Advent Christians. Church membership soars. The Methodist circuit riders and
local Baptist preachers made enormous gains; to a lesser extent the
Presbyterians gained members, particularly with the Cumberland Presbyterian
Church in frontier areas. Among the new denominations that grew from the
religious ferment of the Second Great Awakening are the Churches of Christ,
Christian Church (Disciples of Christ), The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-
day Saints (nicknamed the Mormons), the Seventh-day Adventist Church, and the
Evangelical Christian Church in Canada. Frontier. In the newly settled frontier
regions, the revival was implemented through camp meetings. These often
provided the first encounter for some settlers with organized religion, and
they were important as social venues. The camp meeting was a religious service
of several days' length with multiple preachers. Settlers in thinly populated
areas gathered at the camp meeting for fellowship as well as worship. The sheer
exhilaration of participating in a religious revival with crowds of hundreds
and perhaps thousands of people inspired the dancing, shouting, and singing
associated with these events. The revivals followed an arc of great emotional
power, with an emphasis of the individual's sins and need to turn to Christ,
restored by a sense of personal salvation. Upon their return home, most
converts joined or created small local churches, which grew rapidly. One of the
early camp meetings took place in July 1800 at Gasper River Church in
southwestern Kentucky. A much larger gathering was held at Cane Ridge, Kentucky
in 1801, attracting perhaps as many as 20,000 people. Numerous Presbyterian,
Baptist and Methodist ministers participated in the services. Thanks to such
leaders as Barton W. Stone (1772–1844) and Alexander Campbell (1788–1866),
the camp meeting revival became a major mode of church expansion for the
Methodists and Baptists. The Cumberland Presbyterian Church emerged in
Kentucky. Cane Ridge was also instrumental in fostering what became known as
the Restoration Movement. This was made up of non-denominational churches
committed to what they saw as the original, fundamental Christianity of the New
Testament. They were committed to individuals' achieving a personal
relationship with Christ. Churches with roots in this movement include the
Churches of Christ, Christian Church (Disciples of Christ), Evangelical
Christian Church in Canada and the Christian churches and churches of Christ.
Restoration Movement. The Restoration Movement began during, and was greatly
influenced by, the Second Great Awakening. While the leaders of one of the two
primary groups making up this movement, Thomas Campbell and Alexander Campbell,
resisted what they saw as the spiritual manipulation of the camp meetings, the
revivals contributed to the development of the other major branch, led by
Barton W. Stone. The Southern phase of the Awakening "was an important matrix
of Barton Stone's reform movement" and shaped the evangelistic techniques used
by both Stone and the Campbells. Culture and society. Congregationalists set up
missionary societies to evangelize the western territory of the northern tier.
Members of these groups acted as apostles for the faith, and also as educators
and exponents of northeastern urban culture. Publication and education
societies promoted Christian education; most notable among them was the
American Bible Society, founded in 1816. Social activism influenced abolition
groups and supporters of the temperance movement. They began efforts to reform
prisons and care for the handicapped and mentally ill. They believed in the
perfectibility of people and were highly moralistic in their endeavors. The
Second Great Awakening served as an "organizing process" that created "a
religious and educational infrastructure" across the western frontier that
encompassed social networks, a religious journalism that provided mass
communication, and church-related colleges. Ritual and theology. Long (2002)
notes that since the 1980s, scholars have connected American religious camp
meetings to Scottish holy fairs of the 17th–18th centuries. Formerly they
were thought to have originated in the unique conditions of the American
frontier experience. The great wave of Scots-Irish immigrants to the colonies
before the American Revolution brought such traditions with them. Long examines
the sacramental theology in communion sermons given by James McGready in
Kentucky during the first decade of the 19th century. McGready's sermons
demonstrated adherence to reformed theology, a Calvinist understanding of
salvation, and a sacramental emphasis. A central theme of McGready's sermons
was that of believers' meeting Christ at the communion table. Slaves and free
blacks. Baptists and Methodists in the South preached to slaveholders and
slaves alike. Conversions and congregations started with the First Great
Awakening, resulting in Baptist and Methodist preachers being authorized among
slaves and free blacks more than a decade before 1800. Free blacks in
Philadelphia left a Methodist church because of its discrimination. By the late
eighteenth century, they founded the first African Episcopal Church and first
African Methodist Episcopal (AME) churches in Philadelphia. In 1816, several
AME congregations joined in association to establish the AME denomination, the
first independent black denomination in the United States. Soon after that, the
African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church (AME Zion) was founded as another
denomination in New York City. Early Baptist congregations were formed by
slaves and free blacks in South Carolina and Virginia. Especially in the
Baptist Church, blacks were welcomed as members and as preachers. By the early
19th century, independent black congregations numbered in the several hundred
in some cities of the South, such as Charleston, South Carolina, and Richmond
and Petersburg, Virginia. With the growth in congregations and churches,
Baptist associations formed in Virginia, for instance, as well as Kentucky and
other states. The revival also inspired slaves to demand freedom. In 1800, out
of black revival meetings in Virginia, a plan for slave rebellion was devised
by Gabriel Prosser, although the rebellion was discovered and crushed before it
started. Despite white attempts to control independent black congregations,
especially after the Nat Turner Uprising of 1831, a number of black
congregations managed to maintain their separation as independent congregations
in Baptist associations. State legislatures passed laws requiring them always
to have a white man present at their worship meetings. Prominent figures. The
great revival quickly spread throughout Kentucky, Tennessee and southern Ohio.
Each denomination had assets that allowed it to thrive on the frontier. The
Methodists had an efficient organization that depended on itinerant ministers,
known as circuit riders, who sought out people in remote frontier locations.
The circuit riders came from among the common people, which helped them
establish rapport with the frontier families they hoped to convert. The Second
Great Awakening exercised a profound impact on American religious history. The
numerical strength of the Baptists and Methodists rose relative to that of the
denominations dominant in the colonial period—the Anglicans, Presbyterians,
Congregationalists, and Reformed. Efforts to apply Christian teaching to the
resolution of social problems presaged the Social Gospel of the late 19th
century. The United States was becoming a more culturally diverse nation in the
early-to-mid-19th century, and the growing differences within American
Protestantism reflected and contributed to this diversity. The Awakening
influenced numerous reform movements, especially abolitionists. Political
implications. In the midst of shifts in theology and church polity, American
Christians began progressive movements to reform society during this period.
Known commonly as antebellum reform, this phenomenon included reforms in
temperance, women's rights, abolitionism, and a multitude of other questions
faced by society. The religious enthusiasm of the Second Great Awakening was
echoed by the new political enthusiasm of the Second Party System. Historians
stress the understanding common among participants of reform as being a part of
God's plan. As a result, local churches saw their roles in society in purifying
the world through the individuals to whom they could bring salvation, and
through changes in the law and the creation of institutions. Interest in
transforming the world was applied to mainstream political action, as
temperance activists, antislavery advocates, and proponents of other variations
of reform sought to implement their beliefs into national politics. While
religion had previously played an important role on the American political
scene, the Second Great Awakening highlighted the important role which
individual beliefs would play.
