Second Vatican Council The Second Vatican Council (Latin: Concilium Oecumenicum
Vaticanum Secundum or informally known as Vatican II) addressed relations
between the Roman Catholic Church and the modern world. It was the twenty-first
Ecumenical Council of the Catholic Church and the second to be held at Saint
Peter's Basilica in the Vatican. The council, through the Holy See, formally
opened under the pontificate of Pope John XXIII on 11 October 1962 and closed
under Pope Paul VI on 8 December 1965. Of those who took part in the council's
opening session, four have become pontiffs to date: Cardinal Giovanni Battista
Montini, who on succeeding Pope John XXIII took the name of Paul VI; Bishop
Albino Luciani, the future Pope John Paul I; Bishop Karol Wojtyła, who became
Pope John Paul II; and Father Joseph Ratzinger, present as a theological
consultant, who became Pope Benedict XVI. Background. Throughout the 1950s,
theological and biblical studies of the Catholic Church had begun to sway away
from the neo-scholasticism and biblical literalism that the reaction to
Catholic modernism had enforced since the First Vatican Council. This shift
could be seen in theologians such as Karl Rahner, S.J., Michael Herbert, and
John Courtney Murray, SJ who looked to integrate modern human experience with
church principles based on Jesus Christ, as well as others such as Yves Congar,
Joseph Ratzinger and Henri de Lubac who looked to an accurate understanding of
scripture and the early Church Fathers as a source of renewal (or
"ressourcement"). At the same time the world's bishops faced tremendous
challenges driven by political, social, economic, and technological change.
Some of these bishops sought new ways of addressing those challenges. The First
Vatican Council had been held nearly a century before but had been cut short
when the Italian Army entered the city of Rome at the end of Italian
unification. As a result, only deliberations on the role of the Papacy and the
congruent relationship of faith and reason were completed, with examination of
pastoral issues concerning the direction of the Church left unaddressed. Pope
John XXIII, however, gave notice of his intention to convene the Council on 25
January 1959, less than three months after his election in October 1958. This
sudden announcement, which caught the Curia by surprise, caused little initial
official comment from Church insiders. Reaction to the announcement was
widespread and largely positive from both religious and secular leaders outside
the Catholic Church, and the council was formally summoned by the apostolic
constitution "Humanae Salutis" on 25 December 1961. In various discussions
before the Council actually convened, Pope John often said that it was time to
open the windows of the Church to let in some fresh air. He invited other
Christians outside of the Catholic Church to send observers to the Council.
Acceptances came from both the Protestant denominations and Eastern Orthodox
churches. Chronology. Preparation. Preparations for the Council took more than
two years, and included work from 10 specialised commissions, people for mass
media and Christian Unity, and a Central Commission for overall coordination.
These groups, composed mostly of members of the Roman Curia, produced 987
proposed constituting sessions, making it the largest gathering in any council
in church history. (This compares to Vatican I, where 737 attended, mostly from
Europe.) Attendance varied in later sessions from 2,100 to over 2,300. In
addition, a varying number of "periti" () were available for theological
consultation—a group that turned out to have a major influence as the council
went forward. Seventeen Orthodox Churches and Protestant denominations sent
observers. More than three dozen representatives of other Christian communities
were present at the opening session, and the number grew to nearly 100 by the
end of the 4th Council Sessions. First period: 1962. Opening. Pope John XXIII
opened the Council on 11 October 1962 in a public session and read the
declaration Gaudet Mater Ecclesia before the Council Fathers. 13 October 1962
marked the initial working session of the Council. That day's agenda included
the election for members of the ten conciliar commissions. Each would have
sixteen elected and eight appointed members, and were expected to do most of
the work of the Council. It had been expected that the members of the
preparatory commissions, where the Curia was heavily represented, would be
confirmed as the majorities on the conciliar commissions. Senior French
Cardinal Achille Liénart addressed the Council, saying that the bishops could
not intelligently vote for strangers. He asked that the vote be postponed to
give all the bishops a chance to draw up their own lists. German Cardinal Josef
Frings seconded that proposal, and the vote was postponed. The very first
meeting of the Council adjourned after only fifteen minutes. Commissions. The
bishops met to discuss the membership of the commissions, along with other
issues, both in national and regional groups, as well as in gatherings that
were more informal. The "schemata" from the preparatory sessions were thrown
out, and new ones were created. When the council met on 16 October 1962, a new
slate of commission members was presented and approved by the Council. One
important change was a significant increase in membership from Central and
Northern Europe, instead of countries such as Spain or Italy. More than 100
bishops from Africa, Asia, and Latin America were Dutch or Belgian and tended
to associate with the bishops from those countries. These groups were led by
Cardinals Bernardus Johannes Alfrink of the Netherlands and Leo Suenens of
Belgium. Issues. After adjournment on 8 December, work began on preparations
for the sessions scheduled for 1963. These preparations, however, were halted
upon the death of Pope John XXIII on 3 June 1963, since an ecumenical council
is automatically interrupted and suspended upon the death of the Pope who
convened it, until the next Pope orders the council to be continued or
dissolved. Pope Paul VI was elected on 21 June 1963 and immediately announced
that the Council would continue. Second period: 1963. In the months prior to
the second period, Pope Paul VI worked to correct some of the problems of
organization and procedure that had been discovered during the first period.
This included inviting additional lay Catholic and non-Catholic observers,
reducing the number of proposed schemata to seventeen (which were made more
general, in keeping with the pastoral nature of the council) and later
eliminating the requirement of secrecy surrounding general sessions. During
this period, the bishops approved the constitution on the liturgy
("Sacrosanctum Concilium") and the decree on the media of social communication
("Inter Mirifica"). Work went forward with the schemata on the Church, bishops
and dioceses, and ecumenism. On 8 November 1963, Josef Frings criticized the
Holy Office, and drew an articulate and impassioned defense by its Secretary,
Alfredo Ottaviani. This exchange is often considered the most dramatic of the
council. (Cardinal Frings's theological advisor was the young Joseph Ratzinger,
now Pope Benedict XVI, who would later, as Cardinal, head the same department
of the Holy See.) The second period ended on December 4. Third period: 1964. In
the time between the second and third periods, the proposed schemata were
further revised on the basis of comments from the council fathers. A number of
topics were reduced to statements of fundamental propositions that could gain
approval during the third period, with postconciliar commissions handling
implementation of these measures. Eight religious and seven lay women observers
were invited to the sessions of the third period, along with additional male
lay observers. During this period, which began on 14 September 1964, the
Council Fathers worked through a large volume of proposals. Schemata on
ecumenism ("Unitatis Redintegratio"), the official view on Protestant and
Eastern Orthodox "separated brethren", the Eastern Rite churches ("Orientalium
Ecclesiarum"), and the Dogmatic Constitution of the Church ("Lumen Gentium")
were approved and promulgated by the Pope. Schemata on the life and ministry of
priests and the missionary activity of the Church were rejected and sent back
to commissions for complete rewriting. Work continued on the remaining
schemata, in particular those on the Church in the modern world and religious
freedom. There was controversy over revisions of the decree on religious
freedom and the failure to vote on it during the third period, but Pope Paul
promised that this schema would be the first to be reviewed in the next period.
Pope Paul closed the third period on November 21 by announcing a change in the
Eucharistic fast and formally reaffirming Mary as "Mother of the Church".
Fourth period: 1965. Eleven schemata remained unfinished at the end of the
third period, and commissions worked to give them their final form. Schema 13,
on the Church in the modern world, was revised by a commission that worked with
the assistance of laymen. Pope Paul VI opened the last period of the Council on
14 September 1965 with the establishment of the Synod of Bishops. This more
permanent structure was intended to preserve close cooperation of the bishops
with the Pope after the council. The first business of the fourth period was
the consideration of the decree on religious freedom, "Dignitatis Humanae", one
of the more controversial of the conciliar documents. The vote was 1,997 for to
224 against, a margin that widened even farther by the time the bishop's final
signing of the decree. The principal work of the rest of the period was work on
three documents, all of which were approved by the council fathers. The
lengthened and revised pastoral constitution on the Church in the modern world,
"Gaudium et Spes", was followed by decrees on missionary activity, "Ad Gentes"
and the ministry and life of priests, "Presbyterorum Ordinis". The council also
gave final approval to other documents that had been considered in earlier
sessions. This included decrees on the pastoral office of bishops ("Christus
Dominus"), the life of persons in religious orders (expanded and modified from
earlier sessions, finally titled "Perfectæ Caritatis"), education for the
priesthood ("Optatam Totius"), Christian education ("Gravissimum Educationis"),
and the role of the laity ("Apostolicam Actuositatem"). One of the more
controversial documents was "Nostra Aetate", which stated that the Jews of the
time of Christ, taken indiscriminately, and all Jews today are no more
responsible for the death of Christ than Christians. A major event of the final
days of the council was the act of Pope Paul and Orthodox Patriarch Athenagoras
of a joint expression of regret for many of the past actions that had led up to
the Great Schism between the western and eastern churches. Issues.
Ecclesiology. Perhaps the most famous and most influential product of the
council is the Dogmatic Constitution on the Church, "Lumen Gentium". In its
first chapter, titled ""The Mystery of the Church,"" is the famous statement
that "the sole Church of Christ which in the Creed we profess to be one, holy,
catholic and apostolic, which our Saviour, after His Resurrection, commissioned
Peter to shepherd, and him and the other apostles to extend and direct with
authority, which He erected for all ages as 'the pillar and mainstay of the
truth.' This Church, constituted and organized as a society in the present
world, subsists in the Catholic Church, which is governed by the successor of
Peter and by the bishops in communion with him" (Lumen Gentium, 8). The
document immediately adds: "Nevertheless, many elements of sanctification and
of truth are found outside its visible confines." Liturgy. One of the first
issues considered by the council, and the matter that had the most immediate
effect on the lives of individual Catholics, was the revision of the liturgy.
The central idea was that there ought to be greater lay participation in the
liturgy. In the mid-1960s, permissions were granted to celebrate most of the
Mass in vernacular languages, including the Canon from 1967 onwards. Neither
the Second Vatican Council nor the subsequent revision of the Roman Missal
abolished Latin as the liturgical language of the Roman Rite: the official text
of the Roman Missal, on which translations into vernacular languages are to be
based, continues to be in Latin, and Latin can still be used in the
celebration. Scripture and divine revelation. The council sought to revive the
central role of Scripture in the theological and devotional life of the Church,
building upon the work of earlier popes inSaints, Doctordmportance of Sacred
Scripture as attested by Providentissimus Deus by Pope Leo XIII and the
writings of the ds, and Popes throughout Church history but also approved
historically conditioned interpretation of Scripture as presented in Pi by the
bishops. The Church was to continue to provide versions of the Bible in the
"mother tongues" of the faithful, and both clergy and laity were to continue to
make Bible study a central part of their lives. This affirme crafting a modern
approach to Scriptural analysis and interpretation. A new approach to
interpretation was approve the ius XII's 1943 encyclical Divino Afflante
Spiritu. Bishops. The role of the bishops of the Church was brought into
renewed prominence, especially when seen collectively, as a college that has
succeeded to that of the Apostles in teaching and governing the Church. This
college was headed by the successor of St. Peter. Legacy. "By the spirit of
Vatican II" is meant to promote the teachings and intentions attributed to the
Second Vatican Council in ways not limited to literal readings of its
documents, but not in contradiction to the "letter" of the Council (cf. Saint
Paul's phrase, "the letter kills, but the Spirit gives life"). The spirit of
Vatican II is invoked for a great variety of ideas and attitudes. Bishop John
Tong Hon of Hong Kong used it with regard merely to an openness to dialogue
with others, saying: "We are guided by the spirit of Vatican II: only dialogue
and negotiation can solve conflicts." In contrast, Michael Novak described it
as a spirit that "sometimes soared far beyond the actual, hard-won documents
and decisions of Vatican II. ... It was as though the world (or at least the
history of the Church) were now to be divided into only two periods, pre-
Vatican II and post-Vatican II. Everything 'pre' was then pretty much
dismissed, so far as its "authority" mattered. For the most extreme, to be a
Catholic now meant to believe more or less anything one wished to believe, or
at least in the sense in which one personally interpreted it. One could be a
Catholic 'in spirit'. One could take "Catholic" to mean the 'culture' in which
one was born, rather than to mean a creed making objective and rigorous
demands. One could imagine Rome as a distant and irrelevant anachronism,
embarrassment, even adversary. Rome as 'them'." Such views of the Second
Vatican Council were condemned by the Church's hierarchy, and the works of
theologians who were active in the Council or who closely adhered to the
Council's aspect of reform (such as Hans Küng) have often been criticized by
the Church for espousing a belief system that the hierarchy considers radical
and misguided. As Dei Verbum reads, “Therefore, following in the footsteps of
the Council of Trent and of the First Vatican Council, this present council
wishes to set forth authentic doctrine on divine revelation and how it is
handed on…”, Vatican II did not deny previous councils correctness. To mark
the fiftieth anniversary of the beginning of Vatican II, in October 2011, the
Vatican's website and many other Catholic news organizations announced that the
Pope Benedict XVI, had made the period from October 2012 to the end of November
2013 (the Solemnity of Christ the King) a "Year Of Faith" in a solemn
declaration, and ordered all parishes and religious institutions to find some
manner during that Year of celebrating and reaffirming the Creed (there are now
two main Creeds- the shorter Apostle's Creed and the lengthier Niceno-
Constantopolitan, or Nicene Creed. The Nicene creed is recited at each Mass,
and both are listed and examined in the landmark 1994 Catechism of the Catholic
Church; they serve as fundamental declarations that a catechumen or a baptized
Catholic identifies with the Church).
