Sect A sect is a group with distinctive religious, political or philosophical
beliefs. Although in past it was mostly used to refer to religious groups, it
has since expanded and in modern culture can refer to any organization that
breaks away from a larger one to follow a different set of rules and
principles. The term is occasionally used in a malicious way to suggest the
broken-off group follows a more negative path than the original. The historical
usage of the term "sect" in Christendom has had pejorative connotations,
referring to a group or movement with heretical beliefs or practices that
deviate from those of groups considered orthodox. A sect as used in an Indian
context refers to an organized tradition. Etymology. The word "sect" comes from
the Latin noun "secta" (a feminine form of a variant past participle of the
verb "sequi", to follow), meaning "(beaten) path", and figuratively a
(prescribed) way, mode, or manner, and hence metonymously, a discipline or
school of thought as defined by a set of methods and doctrines. The present
gamut of meanings of "sect" has been influenced by confusion with the
homonymous (but etymologically unrelated) Latin word "secta" (the feminine form
of the past participle of the verb "", to cut), as sects were scissions cut
away from the mainstream religion. Sociological definitions and descriptions.
There are several different sociological definitions and descriptions for the
term. Among the first to define them were Max Weber and Ernst Troeltsch (1912).
In the church-sect typology they are described as newly formed religious groups
that form to protest elements of their parent religion (generally a
denomination). Their motivation tends to be situated in accusations of apostasy
or heresy in the parent denomination; they are often decrying liberal trends in
denominational development and advocating a return to true religion. The
American sociologists Rodney Stark and William Sims Bainbridge assert that
"sects claim to be authentic purged, refurbished version of the faith from
which they split". They further assert that sects have, in contrast to
churches, a high degree of tension with the surrounding society. Other
sociologists of religion such as Fred Kniss have asserted that sectarianism is
best described with regard to what a sect is in tension with. Some religious
groups exist in tension only with co-religious groups of different ethnicities,
or exist in tension with the whole of society rather than the church which the
sect originated from. Sectarianism is sometimes defined in the sociology of
religion as a worldview that emphasizes the unique legitimacy of believers'
creed and practices and that heightens tension with the larger society by
engaging in boundary-maintaining practices. The English sociologist Roy Wallis
argues that a sect is characterized by “epistemological authoritarianism”:
sects possess some authoritative locus for the legitimate attribution of
heresy. According to Wallis, “sects lay a claim to possess unique and
privileged access to the truth or salvation and “their committed adherents
typically regard all those outside the confines of the collectivity as 'in
error'”. He contrasts this with a cult that he described as characterized by
“epistemological individualism” by which he means that “the cult has no
clear locus of final authority beyond the individual member.” Corresponding
words in other European languages. In European languages other than English the
corresponding words for "sect", such as "secte" (French), "secta" (Spanish),
"seita" (Portuguese), "sekta" (Polish, Czech, Slovak, Croatian, Serbian),
"sekt" (Danish, Estonian, Norwegian, Swedish), "sekte" (Dutch), "Sekte"
(German) or "szekta" (Hungarian), are used sometimes to refer to a harmful
religious or political sect, similar to how English-speakers popularly use the
word "cult". In France, since the 1970s, "secte" has a specific meaning which
is very different from the English word. In Christianity. The historical usage
of the term sect in Christendom has had pejorative connotations, referring to a
group or movement with heretical beliefs or practices that deviate from those
of groups considered orthodox. Roman Catholic sects. There are many groups
outside the Roman Catholic Church which regard themselves as Catholic, such as
the Community of the Lady of All Nations, the Palmarian Catholic Church, the
Philippine Independent Church, the Brazilian Catholic Apostolic Church, the
Free Catholic Church, the Society of St. Pius X, the Movement for the
Restoration of the Ten Commandments of God, and others. The "Sodalitium
Christianae Vitae" started in Lima, Peru, has multiple cases of psychological
abuses experienced by youth that were attracted to the movement. In Hinduism.
The Indologist Axel Michaels writes in his book about Hinduism that in an
Indian context the word according to Michaels,
