Sede vacante Sede vacante is an expression, used in the Canon Law of the
Catholic Church, that refers to the vacancy of the episcopal see of a
particular church. It is Latin for "the seat being vacant" (the ablative
absolute to "sedes vacans" "vacant seat"), the seat in question being the
"cathedra" of the particular church. Vacancy of the Holy See. After the death
or resignation of a pope the Holy See becomes sede vacante. In this case the
particular church is the Diocese of Rome and the "vacant seat" is the
"cathedra" of Saint John Lateran, the cathedral church of the bishop of Rome.
During this period, the Holy See is administered by a regency of the College of
Cardinals. According to "Universi Dominici Gregis", the government of the Holy
See "sede vacante" (and therefore of the Catholic Church) falls to the College
of Cardinals, but in a very limited capacity. At the same time, all of the
heads of the Roman Curia resign their offices. The exceptions are the Cardinal
Camerlengo, who is charged with managing the property of the Holy See, and the
Major Penitentiary, who continues to exercise his normal role. If either has to
do something which normally requires the assent of the Pope, he has to submit
it to the College of Cardinals. Papal legates continue to exercise their
diplomatic roles overseas, and the Vicar General of Rome continues to exercise
his pastoral role over the diocese of Rome during this period. The postal
administration of the Vatican City State prepares and issues special postage
stamps for use during this particular period, known as ""sede vacante" stamps".
The coat of arms of the Holy See also changes during this period. Instead of
the papal tiara over the keys, the tiara is replaced with the "umbraculum" or
"ombrellino" in Italian. This symbolizes both the lack of a Pope and also the
governance of the Camerlengo over the temporalities of the Holy See. As further
indication, the Camerlengo ornaments his arms with this symbol during this
period, which he subsequently removes once a pope is elected. The arms of the
Camerlengo appear on commemorative euro coins minted during this period, which
are legal tender in all Eurozone member states. The interregnum is usually
highlighted by the funeral Mass of the deceased pope, the general congregations
of the college of cardinals for determining the particulars of the election,
and finally culminated in the conclave to elect a successor. Once a new pope
has been elected (and ordained bishop if necessary) the "sedes" is no longer
vacant, so this period then officially ends. Afterward occurs the Papal
Installation or Papal Coronation, depending on the form of inauguration and
investiture a new pope chooses, and the formal possession of the "cathedra" of
the Basilica di San Giovanni in Laterano. Cardinals present in Rome are
required to wait at least fifteen days after the start of the vacancy for the
rest of the college before they can hold the conclave to elect the new Pope.
However, after twenty days have elapsed, they must hold the conclave even if
cardinals are missing. Historically, "sede vacante" periods have often been
quite lengthy, lasting many months due to lengthy deadlocked conclaves. For
many years through 1922 the period from the death of the Pope to the start of
the conclave was shorter, but after William Henry Cardinal O'Connell had
arrived just too late for two conclaves in a row, Pope Pius XI extended the
time limit. With the very next conclave in 1939, cardinals began to travel by
air. The most recent period of "sede vacante" of the Holy See began at 19:37
UTC, April 2, 2005, due to the death of Pope John Paul II, and concluded with
the election of Pope Benedict XVI at 16:05 UTC, April 19, 2005. For dioceses
other than the Diocese of Rome. This means that for a diocese the diocesan
bishop has either died, resigned, transferred to a different diocese, or lost
his office and a replacement has not yet been named. If there is a coadjutor
bishop for the diocese, then this period does not take place, as the coadjutor
bishop (or coadjutor archbishop, in the case of an archdiocese) immediately
succeeds to the episcopal see. Within eight days after the see is known to be
vacant, the college of consultors (or the cathedral chapter in some countries)
is obliged to elect a diocesan administrator. The administrator they choose
must be a priest or bishop who is at least 35 years old. If the college of
consultors fails to elect a qualifying person within the time allotted, the
choice of diocesan administrator passes to the metropolitan archbishop or, if
the metropolitan see is vacant, to the senior-most by appointment of the
suffragan bishops. Before the election of the diocesan administrator of a
vacant see, the governance of the see is entrusted, with the powers of a vicar
general, to the auxiliary bishop, if there is one, or to the senior among them,
if there are several, otherwise to the college of consultors as a whole. The
diocesan administrator has greater powers, essentially those of a bishop except
for matters excepted by the nature of the matter or expressly by law. Canon law
subjects his activity to various legal restrictions and to special supervision
by the college of consultors (as for example canons 272 and 485). Vicars
general and episcopal vicars lose their powers "sede vacante" if they are not
bishops; the vicars that are themselves bishops retain the powers they had
before the see fell vacant, which they are to exercise under the authority of
the administrator. Other Uses. The term has been adopted in Sedevacantism, an
extreme strand of the Catholic traditionalist movement. Sedevacantists believe
that all popes since the Second Vatican Council have been heretics, and that
therefore the see of Rome is vacant.
