Sedevacantism Sedevacantism (derived from the Latin words "sedes" or "seat",
and "vacans" or "vacant")) is the position, held by a minority of
Traditionalist Catholics, that the present occupant of the papal see is not
truly Pope and that, for lack of a valid Pope, the see has been vacant since
the death of Pope Pius XII in 1958. A tiny number of these claim the vacancy
actually goes back to the death of Pope Pius X in 1914. Sedevacantists believe
that Paul VI (1963–1978), John Paul I (1978), John Paul II (1978–2005) and
Benedict XVI (since 2005) have been neither true Catholics nor true Popes, by
virtue of allegedly having espoused the heresy of Modernism, or of having
otherwise denied or contradicted solemnly defined Catholic dogmas. Some of them
classify John XXIII (1958–1963) also as a Modernist antipope. The term
"sedevacantism" is derived from the Latin phrase "sede vacante", which
literally means "the seat being vacant", specifically in the context of the
vacancy of the Holy See. This phrase is normally used between the death or
resignation of a pope and the election of his successor. "Sedevacantism" as a
term in English appears to date from the 1980s, though the movement itself is
older. Among those who maintain that the see of Rome, occupied by what they
declare to be an illegitimate pope, was really vacant, some have chosen an
alternative pope of their own, and thus in their view ended the vacancy of the
see, and are known sometimes as "conclavists". Early history. One of the
earliest proponents of sedevacantism was the American Francis Schuckardt.
Although still working within the "official" Church in 1967, he publicly took
the position in 1968 that the Holy See was vacant and that the Church that had
emerged from the Second Vatican Council was no longer Catholic. An associate of
his, Daniel Q. Brown, arrived at the same conclusion. In 1969, Brown received
episcopal orders from an Old Catholic bishop, and in 1971 he in turn
consecrated Schuckardt. Schuckardt founded a congregation called the Tridentine
Latin Rite Catholic Church. In 1970, a Japanese layman, Yukio Nemoto
(1925–1988), created a sedevacantist group called Seibo No Mikuni. Another
founding sedevacantist was Father Joaquín Sáenz y Arriaga, a Jesuit
theologian from Mexico. He put forward sedevacantist ideas in his books "The
New Montinian Church" (August 1971) and "Sede Vacante" (1973). His writings
gave rise to the sedevacantist movement in Mexico, led by Sáenz, Father
Moisés Carmona and Father Adolfo Zamora, and also inspired Father Francis E.
Fenton in the U.S. In the years following the Second Vatican Council other
priests took up similar positions, including: Positions. Sedevacantism owes its
origins to the rejection of the theological and disciplinary changes
implemented following the Second Vatican Council (1962–1965). Sedevacantists
reject this Council, on the basis of its documents on ecumenism and religious
liberty, which they see as contradicting the traditional teachings of the
Catholic Church and as denying the unique mission of Catholicism as the one
true religion, outside of which there is no salvation. They also say that new
disciplinary norms, such as the Mass of Paul VI, promulgated on April 3, 1969,
undermine or conflict with the historical Catholic faith and are deemed
heresies. Other traditionalist Catholics recognize as legitimate the line of
Popes leading to Pope Benedict XVI. Some of them hold that one or more of the
most recent popes have held and taught unorthodox beliefs, but do not go so far
as to say that they have been formal heretics or have been widely and publicly
judged to be heretics. Sedevacantists, on the other hand, claim that the
infallible Magisterium of the Catholic Church could not have decreed the
changes made in the name of the Second Vatican Council, and conclude that those
who issued these changes could not have been acting with the authority of the
Catholic Church. Accordingly, they hold that Pope Paul VI and his successors
left the true Catholic Church and thus lost legitimate authority in the Church.
A formal heretic, they say, cannot be the Catholic Pope. A number of writers
have engaged sedevacantists in debate on some of these points. Brian Harrison
of Puerto Rico, for example, has argued that Pope Pius XII's conclave
legislation permitted excommunicated cardinals to attend, from which he argues
that they could also be legitimately elected. Opponents of Harrison have argued
that a phrase in Pope Pius XII's legislation "Cardinals who have been deposed
or who have resigned, however, are barred and may not be reinstated even for
the purpose of voting", though it speaks of someone deposed or resigned from
the cardinalate, not of someone who may have incurred automatic excommunication
but has not been officially declared excommunicated, means that, even if
someone is permitted to attend, that does not automatically translate into
electability. There are estimated to be between several tens of thousands and
more than two hundred thousands of sedevacantists worldwide, mostly
concentrated in the United States, Canada, France, the UK, Italy, and
Australia, but the actual size of the sedevacantist movement has never been
accurately assessed. (See further the section on statistics in the article
"Traditionalist Catholic".) Catholic doctrine teaches the four marks of the
true Church are that it is One, Holy, Catholic, and Apostolic. Sedevacantists
base their claim to be the remnant Roman Catholic Church on what they see as
the presence in them of these four "marks", absent, they say, in the Church
since the Second Vatican Council. Their critics counter that sedevacantists are
not one, forming numerous splinter groups, each of them in disagreement with
the rest. Most sedevacantists hold the Holy Orders conferred with the present
revised rites of the Catholic Church to be invalid due to defect both of
intention and form. They conclude that the great majority of the bishops listed
in the Holy See's "Annuario Pontificio", including Benedict XVI himself, are in
reality merely priests or even laymen. Bishops and holy orders. Catholic
doctrine holds that any bishop can validly ordain any baptised man to the
priesthood or to the episcopacy, provided that he has the correct intention and
uses a doctrinally acceptable rite of ordination, whether or not he has
official permission of any sort to perform the ordination, and indeed whether
or not he and the ordinand are Catholics. Absent specified conditions, canon
law forbids ordination to the episcopate without a mandate from the Pope, and
both those who confer such ordination without the papal mandate and those who
receive it are subject to excommunication. In a specific pronouncement in 1976,
the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith declared devoid of canonical
effect the consecration ceremony conducted for the Palmarian Catholic Church by
Archbishop Pierre Martin Ngô Đình Thục on December 31, 1975, though it
refrained from pronouncing on its validity. This declaration also applied pre-
emptively to any later ordinations by those who received ordination in the
ceremony. Of those then ordained, seven who are known to have returned to full
communion with Rome did so as laymen. When Archbishop Emmanuel Milingo
conferred episcopal ordination on four men in Washington on September 24, 2006,
the Holy See's Press Office declared that "the Church does not recognize and
does not intend in the future to recognize these ordinations or any ordinations
derived from them, and she holds that the canonical state of the four alleged
bishops is the same as it was prior to the ordination." This denial of
canonical status means Milingo had no authority to exercise any ministry.
However, the Rev. Ciro Benedettini of the Holy See Press Office, who was
responsible for publicly issuing, during the press conference, the communique
on Milingo, stated to reporters that any ordinations the excommunicated Milingo
had performed prior to his laicization were "illicit but valid", while any
subsequent ordinations would be invalid. On June 11, 2011, the Pontifical
Council for Legislative Texts issued a statement regarding episcopal
consecrations in China, saying that the penalty of excommunication imposed by
law on those who consecrate or are consecrated without a papal mandate "must be
tempered or a penance employed in its place" when those involved in the
intrinsically evil act are "coerced by grave fear, even if only relatively
grave, or due to necessity or grave inconvenience". It recalled that absolution
from the excommunication in question is reserved to the Holy See. Bishop Juan
Ignacio Arrieta, Secretary of the Pontifical Council, explained that the
statement applied to the bishops ordained by Milingo and Thuc as well as to the
Chinese cases.
