Sephardic law and customs Sephardic law and customs means the practice of
Judaism as observed by the Sephardi and Mizrahi Jews, so far as it is peculiar
to themselves and not shared with other Jewish groups such as the Ashkenazim.
Sephardim do not constitute a separate denomination within Judaism, but rather
a distinct cultural tradition. Sephardim are, primarily, the descendants of
Jews from the Iberian peninsula. They may be divided into the families that
left in the Expulsion of 1492 and those that remained as crypto-Jews and left
in the following few centuries. In religious parlance, and by many in modern
Israel, the term is used in a broader sense to include all Jews of Ottoman or
other Asian or African backgrounds, whether or not they have any historic link
to Spain, though some prefer to distinguish between Sephardim proper and
Mizraḥi Jews. Law. Jewish law is based on the Torah, as interpreted and
supplemented by the Talmud: for a fuller account see Halakha. The Talmud in its
final form dates from the Sassanian period and was the product of a number of
colleges in Babylonia. The Geonic period. The two principal colleges, Sura and
Pumbedita, survived well into the Islamic period. Their presidents, known as
Geonim, together with the Exilarch, were recognised by the Abbasid Caliphs as
the supreme authority over the Jews of the Arab world. The Geonim provided
written answers to questions on Jewish law from round the world, which were
published in collections of Responsa and enjoyed high authority. The Geonim
also produced handbooks such as the "Halachot Pesuqot" by Yehudai Gaon and the
"Halachot Gedolot" by Simeon Kayyara. Spain. The learning of the Geonim was
transmitted through the scholars of Kairouan, notably Chananel Ben Chushiel and
Nissim Gaon, to Spain, where it was used by Isaac Alfasi in his "Sefer ha-
Halachot" (code of Jewish law), which took the form of an edited and abridged
Talmud. This in turn formed the basis for the Mishneh Torah of Maimonides. A
feature of these early Tunisian and Spanish schools was a willingness to make
use of the Jerusalem Talmud as well as the Babylonian. Developments in France
and Germany were somewhat different. They too respected the rulings of the
Geonim, but also had strong local customs of their own. The Tosafists did their
best to explain the Talmud in a way consistent with these customs. A theory
grew up that custom trumps law (see Minhag): this had some Talmudic support,
but was not nearly so prominent in Arabic countries as it was in Europe.
Special books on Ashkenazic custom were written, for example by Yaakov Moelin.
Further instances of Ashkenazic custom were contributed by the penitential
manual of Elazar Rokeach and some additional stringencies on sheḥitah (the
slaughter of animals) formulated in Jacob Weil's "Sefer Sheḥitot u-Bediqot".
The learning of the Tosafists, but not the literature on Ashkenazic customs as
such, was imported into Spain by Asher ben Yeḥiel, a German-born scholar who
became chief rabbi of Toledo and the author of the "Hilchot ha-Rosh" - an
elaborate Talmudic commentary, which became the third of the great Spanish
authorities after Alfasi and Maimonides. A more popular résumé, known as the
Arba'ah Turim, was written by his son, Jacob ben Asher, though he did not agree
with his father on all points. The Tosafot were also used by the scholars of
the Catalonian school, such as Nahmanides and Solomon ben Adret, who were also
noted for their interest in Kabbalah. For a while, Spain was divided between
the schools: in Catalonia the rulings of Nahmanides and ben Adret were
accepted, in Castile those of the Asher family and in Valencia those of
Maimonides. (Maimonides' rulings were also accepted in most of the Arab world,
especially Yemen, Egypt and the Land of Israel.) After the expulsion. Following
the expulsion of the Jews from Spain, Jewish law was codified by Joseph Caro in
his "Bet Yosef", which took the form of a commentary on the Arba'ah Turim, and
Shulḥan Aruch, which presented the same results in the form of a practical
abridgement. He consulted most of the authorities available to him, but
generally arrived at a practical decision by following the majority among the
three great Spanish authorities, Alfasi, Maimonides and Asher ben Yeḥiel,
unless most of the other authorities were against them. He did not consciously
intend to exclude non-Sephardi authorities, but considered that the Ashkenazi
school, so far as it had anything to contribute on general Jewish law as
opposed to purely Ashkenazi custom, was adequately represented by Asher.
However, since Alfasi and Maimonides generally agree, the overall result was
overwhelmingly Sephardi in flavour, though in a number of cases Caro set the
result of this consensus aside and ruled in favour of the Catalonian school
(Nahmanides and Solomon ben Adret), some of whose opinions had Ashkenazi
origins. The "Bet Yosef" is today accepted by Sephardim as the leading
authority in Jewish law, subject to minor variants drawn from the rulings of
later rabbis accepted in particular communities. The Polish rabbi Moses
Isserles, while acknowledging the merits of the Shulḥan Aruch, felt that it
did not do justice to Ashkenazi scholarship and practice. He accordingly
composed a series of glosses setting out all respects in which Ashkenazi
practice differs, and the composite work is today accepted as the leading work
on Ashkenazi halachah. Isserles felt free to differ from Caro on particular
points of law, but in principle he accepted Caro's view that the Sephardic
practice set out in the Shulḥan Aruch represents standard Jewish law while
the Ashkenazi practice is essentially a local custom. So far, then, it is
meaningless to speak of "Sephardic custom": all that is meant is Jewish law
without the particular customs of the Ashkenazim. For this reason, the law
accepted by other non-Ashkenazi communities, such as the Italian and Yemenite
Jews, is basically similar to that of the Sephardim. There are of course
customs peculiar to particular countries or communities within the Sephardic
world, such as Syria and Morocco. An important body of customs grew up in the
Kabbalistic circle of Isaac Luria and his followers in Safed, and many of these
have spread to communities throughout the Sephardi world: this is discussed
further in the Liturgy section below. In some cases they are accepted by Greek
and Turkish Sephardim and Mizrahi Jews but not by Western communities such as
the Spanish and Portuguese Jews. These are customs in the true sense: in the
list of usages below they are distinguished by an L sign. Liturgy. Origins. For
the outline and early history of the Jewish liturgy, see the articles on Siddur
and Jewish services. At an early stage, a distinction was established between
the Babylonian ritual and that used in Palestine, as these were the two main
centres of religious authority: there is no complete text of the Palestinian
rite, though some fragments have been found in the Cairo Genizah. Some scholars
maintain that Ashkenazi Jews are inheritors of the religious traditions of the
great Babylonian Jewish academies, and that Sephardi Jews are descendants of
those who originally followed the Judaean or Galilaean Jewish religious
traditions. Others, such as Zunz, maintain precisely the opposite. To put the
matter into perspective it must be emphasized that all Jewish liturgies in use
in the world today are in substance Babylonian, with a small number of
Palestinian usages surviving the process of standardization: in a list of
differences preserved from the time of the Geonim, most of the usages recorded
as Palestinian are now obsolete. (In the list of usages below, Sephardic usages
inherited from Palestine are marked P, and instances where the Sephardic usage
conforms to the Babylonian while the Ashkenazic usage is Palestinian are marked
B.) By the 12th century, as a result of the efforts of Babylonian leaders such
as Yehudai Gaon and Pirqoi ben Baboi, the communities of Palestine, and
Diaspora communities such as Kairouan which had historically followed
Palestinian usages, had adopted Babylonian rulings in most respects, and
Babylonian authority was accepted by Jews throughout the Arabic-speaking world.
Early attempts at standardizing the liturgy which have been preserved include,
in chronological order, those of Amram Gaon, Saadia Gaon, Shelomoh ben Natan of
Sijilmasa (in Morocco) and Maimonides. All of these were based on the legal
rulings of the Geonim but show a recognisable evolution towards the current
Sephardi text. The liturgy in use in Visigothic Spain is likely to have
belonged to a Palestinian-influenced European family, together with the Italian
and Provençal, and more remotely the Old French and Ashkenazi rites, but as no
liturgical materials from the Visigothic era survive we cannot know for
certain. From references in later treatises such as the "Sefer ha-Manhig" by
Rabbi Abraham ben Nathan ha-Yarḥi (c. 1204), it appears that even at that
later time the Spanish rite preserved certain European peculiarities that have
since been eliminated in order to conform to the rulings of the Geonim and the
official texts based on them. (Conversely the surviving versions of those
texts, in particular that of Amram Gaon, appear to have been edited to reflect
some Spanish and other local usages.) The present Sephardic liturgy should
therefore be regarded as the product of gradual convergence between the
original local rite and the North African branch of the Babylonian-Arabic
family, as prevailing in Geonic times in Egypt and Morocco. Following the
Reconquista, the specifically Spanish liturgy was commented on by David
Abudirham (c. 1340), who was concerned to ensure conformity with the rulings of
halachah. Despite this convergence, there were distinctions between the
liturgies of different parts of the Iberian peninsula: for example the Lisbon
and Catalonian rites were somewhat different from the Castilian rite, which
formed the basis of the later Sephardic tradition. The Catalonian rite was
intermediate in character between the Castilian rite and that of Provence:
Haham Gaster classified the rites of Oran and Tunis in this group. Post-
expulsion. After the expulsion from Spain, the Sephardim took their liturgy
with them to countries throughout the Arab and Ottoman world, where they soon
assumed positions of rabbinic and communal leadership. They formed their own
communities, often maintaining differences based on their places of origin in
the Iberian peninsula. In Salonica, for instance, there were more than twenty
synagogues, each using the rite of a different locality in Spain or Portugal
(as well as one Romaniot and one Ashkenazi synagogue). Lurianic Kabbalah. The
most important theological, as opposed to practical, motive for harmonization
was the Kabbalistic teachings of Isaac Luria and Ḥayim Vital. Luria himself
always maintained that it was the duty of every Jew to abide by his ancestral
tradition, so that his prayers should reach the gate in Heaven appropriate to
his tribal identity. However he devised a system of usages for his own
followers, which were recorded by Vital in his "Sha'ar ha-Kavvanot" in the form
of comments on the Venice edition of the Spanish and Portuguese prayer book.
The theory then grew up that this composite Sephardic rite was of special
spiritual potency and reached a "thirteenth gate" in Heaven for those who did
not know their tribe: prayer in this form could therefore be offered in
complete confidence by everyone. Further Kabbalistic embellishments were
recorded in later rabbinic works such as the 18th century "Ḥemdat Yamim"
(anonymous, but sometimes attributed to Nathan of Gaza). The most elaborate
version of these is contained in the Siddur published by the 18th century
Yemenite Kabbalist Shalom Sharabi for the use of the Bet El yeshivah in
Jerusalem: this contains only a few lines of text on each page, the rest being
filled with intricate meditations on the letter combinations in the prayers.
Other scholars commented on the liturgy from both a halachic and a kabbalistic
perspective, including Ḥayim Azulai and Ḥayim Palaggi. There were also
Kabbalistic groups in the Ashkenazic world, which adopted the Lurianic-
Sephardic ritual, on the theory of the thirteenth gate mentioned above. This
accounts for the "Nusach Sefard" and "Nusach Ari" in use among the Hasidim,
which is based on the Lurianic-Sephardic text with some Ashkenazi variations.
19th century. From the 1840s on a series of prayer-books was published in
Livorno, including "Tefillat ha-Ḥodesh", "Bet Obed" and "Zechor le-Abraham".
These included notes on practice and the Kabbalistic additions to the prayers,
but not the meditations of Shalom Sharabi, as the books were designed for
public congregational use. They quickly became standard in almost all Sephardic
and Oriental communities, with any local variations being preserved only by
oral tradition. In the late nineteenth and early 20th centuries, many more
Sephardic prayer books were published in Vienna. These were primarily aimed at
the Judaeo-Spanish communities of the Balkans, Greece and Turkey, and therefore
had rubrics in Ladino, but also had a wider distribution. An important
influence on Sephardic prayer and custom was the late 19th century Baghdadi
rabbi known as the Ben Ish Ḥai, whose work of that name contained both
halachic rulings and observations on Kabbalistic custom based on his
correspondence with Eliyahu Mani of the Bet El yeshivah. These rulings and
observations form the basis of the Baghdadi rite: both the text of the prayers
and the accompanying usages differ in some respects from those of the Livorno
editions. The rulings of the Ben Ish Ḥai have been accepted in several other
Sephardic and Oriental communities, such as that of Jerba. Present day. In the
Sephardic world today, in particular in Israel, there are many popular prayer-
books containing this Baghdadi rite, and this is what is currently known as
"Minhag Edot ha-Mizraḥ" (the custom of the Oriental congregations). Other
authorities, especially older rabbis from North Africa, reject these in favour
of a more conservative Oriental-Sephardic text as found in the 19th century
Livorno editions; and the "Shami" Yemenite and Syrian rites belong to this
group. Others again, following R. Ovadia Yosef, prefer a form shorn of some of
the Kabbalistic additions and nearer to what would have been known to R. Joseph
Caro, and seek to establish this as the standard "Israeli Sephardi" rite for
use by all communities. The liturgy of the Spanish and Portuguese Jews differs
from all these (more than the Eastern groups differ from each other), as it
represents an older form of the text, has far fewer Kabbalistic additions and
reflects some Italian influence. The differences between all these groups,
however, exist at the level of detailed wording, for example the insertion or
omission of a few extra passages: structurally, all Sephardic rites are very
similar.
