Seraph A seraph (pl. seraphim (); Hebrew: שְׂרָפִים "śərāfîm",
singular שָׂרָף "śārāf"; Latin: "seraphisingular "seraph[us"; Greek:
σεραφείμ) is a type of celestial or heavenly being in the Abrahamic
religions. Literally "burning ones", the word "seraph" is normally a synonym
for serpents when used in the Hebrew Bible. A seminal passage in the Book of
Isaiah (6.1-8) used the term to describe fiery six-winged beings that fly
around God's throne singing "holy, holy, holy". This throne scene, with its
triple invocation of holiness (a formula that came to be known as the
"trisagion"), profoundly influenced subsequent theology, literature and art.
Its influence is frequently seen in works depicting angels, heaven and
apotheosis. Seraphs are mentioned as celestial beings in an influential
Hellenistic work, the Book of Enoch, and the Book of Revelation. Tradition
places seraphs in the fifth rank of ten in the Jewish angelic hierarchy and the
highest rank in the Christian angelic hierarchy. Origins and development. The
word "seraphim", literally "burning ones", transliterates a Hebrew plural noun;
translation yields "seraphs". The singular, "seraph", is more properly rendered
"sarap". The word "sarap/seraphim" appears three times in the Torah (Numbers
21:6-8, Deuteronomy 8:15) and four times in the Book of Isaiah (6:2-6, 14:29,
30:6). In Numbers and Deuteronomy the "seraphim" are serpents – the
association of serpents as "burning ones" is possibly due to the burning
sensation of the poison. Isaiah also uses the word in close association with
words to describe snakes ("nahash," the generic word for snakes, in 14:29, and
"efeh," viper, in 30:6). The Isaiah vision of seraphs in an idealised Jerusalem
First Temple represents the sole instance in the Hebrew Bible of this word
being used to describe celestial beings. "... I saw the Lord sitting upon a
throne, high and lifted up; and His train filled the Hekhal (sanctuary). Above
him stood the Seraphim; each had six wings; with two he covered his face, and
with two he covered his feet, and with two he flew." (Isaiah 6:1–3) The
seraphim cry continually to each other, "Holy, holy, holy, is YHWH of hosts:
the whole earth is full of His glory." (verses 2-3) One seraph then carries out
an act of purification for the prophet by touching his lips with a live coal
from the altar (verses 6-7). The text uses the word "seraphim" but adds no
adjectives or modifiers emphasising snakes ("nahash," etc.). At the same time
the description gives the creatures both human and avian attributes. A strong
association with fire, though, is maintained. Seraphs appear in the 2nd century
B.C. Book of Enoch where they are designated as "drakones" (δράκονες
"serpents"), and are mentioned, in conjunction with cherubs as the heavenly
creatures standing nearest to the throne of God. In the late 1st century A.D.
Book of Revelation (iv. 4-8) they are described as being forever in God's
presence and praising him: "Day and night with out ceasing they sing: 'Holy,
holy, holy is the Lord God Almighty, who was and is and is to come.'" They
appear also in the Christian Gnostic text "On the Origin of the World",
described as "dragon-shaped angels". In Judaism. The 12th century scholar
Maimonides placed the seraphs in the fifth of ten ranks of angels in his
exposition of the Jewish angelic hierarchy. They are part of the angelarchy of
modern Orthodox Judaism. Isaiah's vision is repeated several times in daily
Jewish services, including at Kedushah prayer as part of the repetition of the
Amidah, and in several other prayers as well. Conservative Judaism retains the
traditional doctrines regarding angels and includes references to them in the
liturgy, although a literal belief in angels is by no means universal among
adherents. Adherents of Reform Judaism and Reconstructionist Judaism generally
take images of angels as symbolic. Some adherents view them as part of the
Merkabah. In Christianity. The seraphim took on a mystic role in Pico della
Mirandola's "Oration on the Dignity of Man" (1487), the epitome of Renaissance
humanism. Pico took the fiery Seraphim—"they burn with the fire of
charity"—as the highest models of human aspiration: "impatient of any second
place, let us emulate dignity and glory. And, if we will it, we shall be
inferior to them in nothing", the young Pico announced, in the first flush of
optimistic confidence in the human capacity that is the coinage of the
Renaissance. "In the light of intelligence, meditating upon the Creator in His
work, and the work in its Creator, we shall be resplendent with the light of
the Cherubim. If we burn with love for the Creator only, his consuming fire
will quickly transform us into the flaming likeness of the Seraphim." St.
Bonaventure, a Franciscan theologian who was a contemporary of Aquinas, uses
the six wings of the seraph as an important analogical construct in his
mystical work "The Journey of the Mind to God". Christian theology developed an
idea of seraphs as beings of pure light who enjoy direct communication with
God.
