Sermon A sermon is an oration by a prophet or member of the clergy. Sermons
address a Biblical, theological, religious, or moral topic, usually expounding
on a type of belief, law or behavior within both past and present contexts.
Elements of preaching include exposition, exhortation and practical
application. In Christianity, a sermon (also known as a homily within some
churches) is often delivered in a place of worship, most of which have a pulpit
or ambo, an elevated architectural feature. The word "sermon" comes from a
Middle English word which was derived from an Old French term, which in turn
came from the Latin word "sermō"; ("discourse"), although links have been made
between the Latin word serere, which means 'to join together', so this leaves
the modern Latin definition open to interpretation. The word can mean
"conversation", which could mean that early sermons were delivered in the form
of question and answer, and that only later did it come to mean a monologue. In
contrast to this are examples from the Bible, where sermons are speeches
without interlocution: Moses' sermon in Deuteronomy 1-33 Jesus' sermon on the
mount in Matthew 5-7 [http://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=matt%205-
7;&version=9;; Peter's sermon after Pentecost in Acts 2:14-40 [http://
www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=acts%202:14-40;&version=9;]. In modern
language, the word "sermon" can also be used pejoratively in secular terms to
describe a lengthy or tedious speech delivered with great passion, by any
person, to an uninterested audience. A sermonette is a short sermon (usually
associated with television broadcasting, as stations would present a sermonette
before signing off for the night). Christian tradition. In Christianity, the
most famous sermon is the Sermon on the Mount by Jesus of Nazareth. This sermon
was probably preached around 30 A.D. and is recounted in the Gospel of Matthew
(5:1–7:29, including introductory and concluding material) as being delivered
on a mount on the north end of the Sea of Galilee, near Capernaum. The Sermon
on the Mount lays out many of the core principles of Christianity. Another
rendition of much of the same material may be found in the "Sermon on the
Plain" in the Gospel of Luke (6:17–49, including introductory material).
During the later history of Christianity, several figures became known for
their sermons or a particularly significant sermon. Preachers of the early
church include Peter (see especially Acts 2:14b–36), Stephen (see Acts 7:
1b–53), Tertullian, John Chrysostom, Gregory Nazianzus. Sermons in this era
were used to spread Christianity across Europe and Asia Minor. During the
Middle Ages, sermons inspired the beginnings of new religious institutes
("e.g.", Saint Dominic and Francis of Assisi). Pope Urban II began the First
Crusade in November 1095 at the Council of Clermont, France, when he exhorted
French knights to retake the Holy Land in Palestine. In the Roman Catholic
tradition, the art of preaching has developed through the theological field of
homiletics. Many sermons have been written down, collected and published. Such
sermons include John Wesley's "53 Standard Sermons", John Chrysostom's "Homily
on the Resurrection" (preached every Easter in Orthodox churches) and Gregory
Nazianzus' homily "On the Theophany, or Birthday of Christ" (preached every
Christmas in Orthodox churches). Martin Luther began a tradition of publishing
sermons (Hauspostille) on the Sunday lessons for the edification of readers.
This tradition was continued by Chemnitz and Arndt and others into the
following centuries — for example CH Spurgeon's stenographed sermons, The
Metropolitan Tabernacle Pulpit. Protestantism. The Reformation led to
Protestant sermons, many of which defended the schism with the Roman Catholic
Church and explained beliefs about scripture, theology and devotion. The
distinctive doctrines of Protestantism held that salvation was by faith alone,
and convincing people to believe the Gospel and place trust in God for their
salvation through Jesus Christ was the decisive step in salvation. In many
Protestant churches, the sermon came to replace the Eucharist as the central
act of Christian worship (although some Protestants such as Lutherans give
equal time to a sermon and the Eucharist in their Divine Service). The goal of
many Protestant's worship, as conditioned by these beliefs, was to rouse the
congregation to a deeper faith, rather than have them just partake in rituals.
In the 18th and 19th centuries during the Great Awakening, major sermons were
made at revivals, which were especially popular in the United States. These
sermons were noted for their "fire-and-brimstone" message, typified by Jonathan
Edwards's famous "Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God" speech. In these
sermons the wrath of God was clearly one to be afraid of, although fear was not
the message Edwards was trying to convey in his sermons, he was simply trying
to tell the people that they could be forgiven for their sins. Jewish
Tradition. Rabbinic ordination often includes the phrase, "Rabbi, Teacher, and
Preacher in Israel", and there is a long history of using sermons in Judaism as
part of education, ethics, a call to repentance, or as a message of hope, often
during difficult times. Perhaps in our generation the counsel of our Talmudic
sages may seem superfluous, for today the story of our enslavement in Egypt is
kept alive not only by ritualistic symbolism, but even more so by tragic
realism. We are the contemporaries and witnesses of its daily re-enactment. Are
not our hapless brethren in the German Reich eating "the bread of affliction"?
Are not their lives embittered by complete disenfranchisement and forced labor?
Are they not lashed mercilessly by brutal taskmasters behind the walls of
concentration camps? Are not many of their men-folk being murdered in cold
blood? Is not the ruthlessness of the Egyptian Pharaoh surpassed by the sadism
of the Nazi dictators?And yet, even in this hour of disaster and degradation,
it is still helpful to "visualize oneself among those who had gone forth out of
Egypt." It gives stability and equilibrium to the spirit. Only our estranged
kinsmen, the assimilated, and the de-Judaized, go to pieces under the impact of
the blow...But those who visualize themselves among the groups who have gone
forth from the successive Egypts in our history never lose their sense of
perspective, nor are they overwhelmed by confusion and despair... It is this
faith, born of racial experience and wisdom, which gives the oppressed the
strength to outlive the oppressors and to endure until the day of ultimate
triumph when we shall "be brought forth from bondage unto freedom, from sorrow
unto joy, from mourning unto festivity, from darkness unto great light, and
from servitude unto redemption. In the same way, he preached a message of hope
in 1938 when he said that, "Undaunted, we confidently expect that some day,
somehow, the present low ebb of liberty and democracy will be followed by a
rising tide whose onrush will irresistibly wash away the ramparts of tyranny."
His sermons and articles targeted the Jewish community, the United States, the
"family of nations," the "Jewish homeland in Palestine," and frequently
described the importance of the "Jewish State"—a nation yet not created, but
which he supported with both his words and his actions. He shared his vision of
that State by proclaiming that, "Whether the Jewish State be large or small,
its importance in the family of nations will be determined, not by its limited
area, but by its creative genius and cultural contributions to mankind. Like
Judaea and Athens of old, it may be only a small vessel, but exceedingly rich
in precious content." Types. Sermons can be both written and spoken out loud.
Delivery methods. Sermons also differ on the amount of time and effort used to
prepare them. With the advent of reception theory, researchers also became
aware that how sermons are listened to affects their meaning as much as how
they are delivered. The expectations of the congregation, their prior
experience of listening to oral texts, their level of scriptural education, and
the relative social positions — often reflected in the physical arrangement
— of sermon-goers vis-a-vis the preacher are part of the meaning of the
sermon.
