Shabbos goy A Shabbos goy, Shabbat goy or Shabbes goy (Yiddish: שבת גוי,
"shabbos goy" Modern Hebrew: גוי של שבת "goy shel shabat") is a non-Jew
who performs certain types of work (melakha) for a Jew on the Biblical Sabbath,
work which Jewish Law (Halachah) enjoins the Jew from doing on the Sabbath. The
phrase is a combination of the word "Shabbos" (שבת) meaning the Sabbath, and
"Goy", which literally means "a nation" but colloquially and practically means
a "non-Jew" (in Biblical Hebrew "goy" means simply "a nation", but in Mishnaic
Hebrew it is used in the sense of "a non-national", i.e., "a non-Jew"). Judaism
prohibits Jews from doing certain types of work, known as "melakha" on the
Sabbath. Within certain guidelines (as dictated by the Shulkhan Arukh, the
authoritative Jewish code of law), a non-Jew may perform certain acts which are
beneficial to Jews but which may not be performed by Jews on the Sabbath.
Generally speaking, a Jew should respect a non-Jew's right to rest on the
Sabbath, and therefore may not explicitly ask a non-Jew to perform a service
prohibited by the Jewish law on the Sabbath, nor may the Jew obtain benefit
("hana'a") from such a service. Nevertheless, a non-Jew is not expected to keep
the Sabbath like a Jew. Hence a Jew may benefit from work performed by a non-
Jew if the non-Jew performs this work for his own good and of his own free
will. A borderline case is when a Jew hints to a non-Jew that he wants him to
perform a certain service without explicitly asking him. Such cases are
considered legitimate in most Jewish communities. Furthermore, in many Jewish
communities it is considered legitimate to hire a non-Jewish worker to perform
certain services on the Sabbath, providing that the non-Jew is paid in advance,
so that the payment seems like a kind of gift rather than a salary. In this
way, the principle of the non-Jew performing the service of his own free will
is still adhered to, at least formally. It is more appropriate if the non-Jew
enjoys his own service in a way. For example, if his job is to take care of the
heating system, it is more appropriate if this system also heats his own room
or apartment, so that he enjoys it as well and not just the members of the
Jewish community. A "shabbat goy" is not needed where life is at stake (pikuach
nefesh). Jewish physicians must work on the Sabbath if their work is needed to
save lives. They should avoid any unnecessary work forbidden on the Sabbath.
However, if there is any question as to the exigency of the situation, they
must err on the side of leniency, and do the work. In certain households and
synagogues a particular non-Jew (invariably not a member of the home/synagogue)
may be designated as the Shabbos goy for that place. This individual is usually
one who would be present regardless of this role, such as a babysitter, a
security guard or a synagogue maintenance crew member, and is typically paid
for the work. Before the 20th century Shabbos goys most commonly lit (or re-
lit) stoves in Jewish homes in the winter. In the 20th century, Colin Powell,
Mario Cuomo, Martin Scorsese, Floyd B. Olson, and the adolescent Elvis Presley
assisted their Jewish neighbors in this way.
