Shabbat Shabbat (, Ashkenazi pronunciation: Shabbos, , "rest" or "cessation")
is the seventh day of the Jewish week and the Jewish day of rest. On Shabbat,
Jews recall the Genesis creation narrative in which God creates the Heavens and
the Earth in six days and rests on the seventh. Shabbat observance also entails
refraining from a range of activities prohibited on Shabbat, such as lighting a
fire and cooking. According to halakha, Shabbat is observed from a few minutes
before sunset on Friday evening until the appearance of three stars in the sky
on Saturday night. Shabbat is ushered in by lighting candles and reciting a
blessing. Traditionally, three festive meals are eaten; on Friday night,
Saturday morning, and late Saturday afternoon. Friday night dinner begins with
kiddush and a blessing recited over two loaves of challah. Shabbat is a festive
day when Jews are freed from the regular labors of everyday life. It offers an
opportunity to contemplate the spiritual aspects of life and spend time with
family. Etymology. The word Shabbat derives from the Hebrew verb "shavat".
Although frequently translated as "rest" (noun or verb), another accurate
translation of these words is "ceasing work", as resting is not necessarily
denoted. The related modern Hebrew word "shevita", (labor strike), has the same
implication of active rather than passive abstinence from work. The notion of
active cessation from labor is also regarded as more consistent with an
omnipotent God's activity on the seventh day of Creation according to Genesis.
Biblical sources. Shabbat is given special status as a holy day at the very
beginning of the Torah in . It is first commanded after the Exodus from Egypt,
in (relating to the cessation of manna) and in (as the fourth of the Ten
Commandments). Shabbat is commanded and commended many more times in the Torah
and Tanakh; special sacrifices are to be offered on the day. Shabbat is also
described by the prophets Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Hosea, Amos, and Nehemiah.
History. The traditional Jewish position is that unbroken seventh-day "Shabbat"
originated among the Jewish people, as their first and most sacred
institution.. The Mosaic tradition usually quotes an origin in Biblical
creation, though some suggest some obscure, later, naturalistic origin.
Seventh-day "Shabbat" did not originate with the Egyptians, to whom it was
unknown; and other origin theories based on the day of Saturn, or on the
planets generally, have also been abandoned. The first non-Biblical reference
to the Sabbath is in an ostracon found in excavations at Mesad Hashavyahu,
which is dated 630 BCE. Some point to Jewish contact with Babylonians who
celebrated every seventh day as a "holy-day", also called an "evil day"
(meaning "unsuitable" for prohibited activities). On these days officials were
prohibited from various activities and common men were forbidden to "make a
wish", and at least the 28th was known as a "rest-day". The "Universal Jewish
Encyclopedia" advanced a theory of Assyriologists like Friedrich Delitzsch (and
of Marcello Craveri), that "shabbat" originally arose from the lunar cycle in
the Babylonian calendar containing four weeks ending in Sabbath, plus one or
two additional unreckoned days per month. The difficulties of this theory
include reconciling the differences between an unbroken week and a lunar week,
and explaining the absence of texts naming the lunar week as "Shabbat" in any
language. Friday night rituals. According to Jewish law, Shabbat starts a few
minutes before sunset. Candles are lit at this time. It is customary in many
communities to light the candles 18 minutes before sundown and most printed
Jewish Calendars adhere to this custom. The Kabbalat Shabbat service is a
prayer service welcoming the arrival of Shabbat. Before Friday night dinner, it
is customary to sing two songs, one "greeting" the Shabbat angels into the
house and the other consisting of Proverbs 31:10-31, praising the woman of the
house for all the work she has done over the past week. After blessings over
the wine and challah, a festive meal is served. Singing is traditional at
Sabbath meals. Shabbat rituals. Shabbat is a day of celebration as well as
prayer. It is customary to eat three festive meals: Dinner on Shabbat eve
(Friday night), lunch on Shabbat day (Saturday), and a third meal, known as
"Seudah Shlishit", in the late afternoon (Saturday). Many Jews attend synagogue
services on Shabbat even if they do not do so during the week. Services are
held on Shabbat eve (Friday night), Shabbat morning (Saturday morning), and
late Shabbat afternoon (Saturday afternoon). With the exception of Yom Kippur,
which is referred to in the Torah as the "Shabbat of Shabbats", days of public
fasting are postponed or advanced if they coincide with Shabbat. Mourners
sitting "shivah" (week of mourning subsequent to the death of a spouse or
first-degree relative) outwardly conduct themselves normally for the duration
of the day and are forbidden to display public signs of mourning. According to
Rabbinic literature, God via the Torah commands Jews to "observe" (refrain from
forbidden activity) and "remember" (with words, thoughts, and actions) the
Shabbat, and these two actions are symbolized by the two Shabbat candles which
are lit 18 to 40 minutes ("Tosefet Shabbat") before the onset of Shabbat by
Jewish women, usually the mother/wife, though men who live alone are required
to do so themselves. It is customary to light two candles, although some
families light more, sometimes in accordance with the number of children.
Prohibited activities. 39 Melakhot. Jewish law (halakha) prohibits doing any
form of "melakhah" (מְלָאכָה, plural "melakhot") on Shabbat, with some
exceptions. Though "melakhah" is commonly translated as "work" in English, a
better definition is "deliberate activity" or "skill and craftmanship". There
are 39 categories of prohibited activities ("melakhot") listed in Mishnah
Tractate Shabbat Chapter 7, Mishna 2). Different streams of Judaism view the
prohibition on work in different ways. Observant Orthodox and Conservative Jews
refrain from performing the prohibited activities. These prohibited activities
are exegetically derived – based on juxtaposition of corresponding Biblical
passages – from the kinds of work that were necessary for the construction of
the Tabernacle. They are not directly listed in the Torah; elsewhere, the
Mishnah observes that "the laws of Shabbat [...] are like mountains hanging by
a hair, for they are little Scripture but many laws". Many religious scholars
have pointed out that these labors have in common activity that is "creative,"
or that exercises control or dominion over one's environment. The 39 categories
of "melakhah" are: ploughing earth, sowing, reaping, binding sheaves,
threshing, winnowing, selecting, grinding, sifting, kneading, baking, shearing
wool, washing wool, beating wool, dyeing wool, spinning, weaving, making two
loops, weaving two threads, separating two threads, tying, untying, sewing
stitches, tearing, trapping, slaughtering, flaying, tanning, scraping hide,
marking hides, cutting hide to shape, writing two or more letters, erasing two
or more letters, building, demolishing, extinguishing a fire, kindling a fire,
putting the finishing touch on an object and transporting an object between the
private domain and the public domain, or for a distance of 4 cubits within the
public domain. Each "melakhah" has derived prohibitions of various kinds. There
are, therefore, many more forbidden activities on the Shabbat; all are traced
back to one of the 39 above principal "melakhot". Given the above, the 39
"melakhot" are not so much activities as "categories of activity." For example,
while "winnowing" usually refers exclusively to the separation of chaff from
grain, and "selecting" refers exclusively to the separation of debris from
grain, they refer in the Talmudic sense to any separation of intermixed
materials which renders edible that which was inedible. Thus, filtering
undrinkable water to make it drinkable falls under this category, as does
picking small bones from fish. ("Gefilte fish" is one solution to this
problem.) Use of electricity. Orthodox and some Conservative authorities rule
that it is prohibited to turn electric devices on or off as falling under one
of the 39 categories of work ("melakhot"). However, the authorities are not in
agreement about exactly which category (or categories) this would fall under.
One view is that tiny sparks are created in a switch when the circuit is
closed, and this would constitute "lighting a fire" (category 37). If the
appliance is one whose purpose is for light or heat (such as an incandescent
lightbulb or electric oven) then the lighting or heating elements may be
considered as a type of fire; if so, then turning them on constitutes both
"lighting a fire" (category 37) and "cooking" (a form of baking, category 11),
and turning them off would be "extinguishing a fire" (category 36). Another
view is that a device which is plugged into an electrical outlet of a wall
becomes part of the building, but is nonfunctional while the switch is off;
turning it on would then constitute "building" and turning it off would be
"demolishing" (categories 35 and 34). Some schools of thought consider the use
of electricity to be forbidden only by rabbinic injunction, rather than because
it violates one of the original categories. A common solution to the problem of
electricity involves pre-set timers (Shabbat clocks) for electric appliances,
to turn them on and off automatically, with no human intervention on Shabbat
itself. Some Conservative authorities reject altogether the arguments for
prohibiting the use of electricity. Some Orthodox also hire a "shabbas goy", a
gentile to turn light switches on and off on Shabbat. Automobiles. Orthodox and
many Conservative authorities completely prohibit the use of automobiles on
Shabbat as a violation of multiple categories include "igniting a fire"
(category 37), "extinguishing a fire" (category 36) and "transferring between
domains" (category 39). However, the Conservative movement's Committee on
Jewish Law and Standards permits driving to a synagogue on Shabbat, as an
emergency measure, on the grounds that if Jews lost contact with synagogue life
they would become lost to the Jewish people. A halachically authorized Shabbat
module added to an Amigo power operated vehicle may be used on the observance
of Shabbat for those with walking limitations. Often referred to as a Shabbat
scooter or Amigo Shabbat, it is manufactured by Zomet Institute in Israel, each
Shabbat module application is individually inspected and certified by a Zomet
representative. It is intended only for individuals whose limited mobility is
dependent on a POV/scooter or automobile consistently throughout the week.
Shomer Shabbat. The term "shomer Shabbat" is used for a person (or
organization) who adheres to Shabbat laws consistently. The "shomer Shabbat" is
an archetype mentioned in Jewish songs (e.g., "Baruch El Elyon") and the
intended audience for various treatises on Jewish law and practice for
"Shabbat" (e.g., "Shemirat Shabbat ke-Hilkhata"). Technology in the service of
Shabbat. When there is an urgent human or medical need which is life-
threatening violating the rules is ok. It is also possible to perform seemingly
"forbidden" acts by modifying the relevant technology to such an extent that no
law is actually violated. An example is the "Sabbath elevator". In this mode,
an elevator will stop automatically at every floor, allowing people to step on
and off without anyone having to press any buttons, which would normally be
needed to work. (Dynamic braking is also disabled if it is normally used,
shunting energy collected from downward travel, and thus the gravitational
potential energy of passengers, into a resistor network.) This prevents
"violation" of the Shabbat prohibition against doing "useful work." Many
rabbinical authorities consider the use of such elevators by those who are
otherwise capable as a "violation" of the Shabbat, with such workarounds being
for the benefit of the frail and handicapped and not being in the spirit of the
day. Many observant Jews avoid the prohibition of "carrying" in the absence of
an eruv by making their keys into a tie bar, or part of a belt buckle or
brooch. The key thereby becomes a legitimate article of clothing or jewelry,
which may be worn, rather than carried. Some also use an elastic band which has
clips on both ends, and keys are placed between them as an integral link in the
band, which may then be considered a belt. In recent years, the Shabbat lamp
has been developed to allow a light in a room to be turned on/off at will while
the electricity remains on. A special mechanism blocks out the light when the
off position is desired without violating Shabbat. Permitted desecration. In
the event that a human life is in danger ("pikuach nefesh"), a Jew is not only
allowed, but required, to violate any Shabbat law that stands in the way of
saving that person, excluding murder, idolatry, and forbidden sexual acts. The
concept of life being in danger is interpreted broadly: for example, it is
mandated that one violate the Shabbat to bring a woman in active labor to a
hospital. Lesser, rabbinic restrictions are often violated under much less
urgent circumstances (a patient who is ill but not critically so). Various
other legal principles closely delineate which activities constitute
desecration of the Shabbat. Examples of these include the principle of "shinui"
("change" or "deviation"): A severe violation becomes a non-severe one if the
prohibited act was performed in a way that would be considered abnormal on a
weekday. Examples include writing with one's non-dominant hand (according to
many rabbinic authorities). This legal principle operates "bedi'avad" ("ex post
facto") and does not cause a forbidden activity to be permitted barring
extenuating circumstances. Liberal views. Generally, adherents of Reform and
Reconstructionist Judaism believe that the individual Jew determines whether to
follow Shabbat prohibitions or not. For example, some Jews might find
activities, such as writing or cooking for leisure, to be enjoyable
enhancements to Shabbat and its holiness, and therefore may encourage such
practices. Many Reform Jews believe that what constitutes "work" is different
for each person, and that only what the person considers "work" is forbidden.
Radical Hungarian-born Reform rabbi Ignaz Einhorn even shifted his
congregation's Shabbat worship to Sundays. More rabbinically traditional Reform
and Reconstruction Jews believe that these "halakhot" in general may be valid,
but that it is up to each individual to decide how and when to apply them. A
small fraction of Jews, in the Progressive Jewish community, accept these laws
much the same way as Orthodox Jews. Special Shabbats. The Special Shabbats are
the Shabbats that precede important Jewish holidays: e.g. "Shabbat ha-Gadol" is
the Shabbat preceding Passover, "Shabbat Zachor" is the Shabbat preceding
Purim, and "Shabbat Teshuva" is the Shabbat preceding Yom Kippur. Sabbath
adaptation. Most Christians do not observe a Saturday Shabbat, but instead
observe a weekly day of worship on Sunday, which is often called the "Lord's
Day". Several Christian denominations, such as the Seventh-day Adventist
Church, the Seventh Day Baptists, and the True Jesus Church, observe seventh-
day Sabbath. This observance is celebrated from Friday sunset to Saturday
sunset. Some of Messianic Judaism considers its Sabbath to be kept according to
Jewish doctrinal tradition, while most of Rabbinic Judaism disagrees. The
principle of weekly Sabbath also exists in other beliefs: compare the
Babylonian calendar, the Buddhist "uposatha", the Islamic "jumu'ah", the
Neopagan sabbat, the Unification Church Ahn Shi Il, and the parody-religion
Pastafarian weekend.
