Shamanism Shamanism ( or ) is a practice that involves a practitioner reaching
altered states of consciousness in order to encounter and interact with the
spirit world. A shaman is a person regarded as having access to, and influence
in the world of benevolent and malevolent spirits, who typically enters into a
trance state during a ritual, and practices divination and healing. The term
"shamanism" was first applied to the ancient religion of the Turks and Mongols,
as well as those of the neighboring Tungusic and Samoyedic-speaking peoples.
The word "shaman" originates from the Evenk language (Tungusic) of North Asia
and was introduced to the west after the Russian forces conquered shaman
Khanate of Kazan in 1552. Upon learning more about religious traditions across
the world, western scholars also described similar magico-religious practices
found within the indigenous religions of other parts of Asia, Africa,
Australasia and the Americas as shamanism. Various historians have argued that
shamanism also played a role in many of the pre-Christian religions of Europe,
and that shamanic elements may have survived in popular culture right through
to the Early Modern period. Various archaeologists and historians of religion
have also suggested that shamanism may have been a dominant pre-religious
practice for humanity during the Palaeolithic. Mircea Eliade writes, "A first
definition of this complex phenomenon, and perhaps the least hazardous, will
be: shamanism = 'technique of religious ecstasy'." Shamanism encompasses the
premise that shamans are intermediaries or messengers between the human world
and the spirit worlds. Shamans are said to treat ailments/illness by mending
the soul. Alleviating traumas affecting the soul/spirit restores the physical
body of the individual to balance and wholeness. The shaman also enters
supernatural realms or dimensions to obtain solutions to problems afflicting
the community. Shamans may visit other worlds/dimensions to bring guidance to
misguided souls and to ameliorate illnesses of the human soul caused by foreign
elements. The shaman operates primarily within the spiritual world, which in
turn affects the human world. The restoration of balance results in the
elimination of the ailment. Shamanic beliefs and practices have attracted the
interest of scholars from a wide variety of disciplines, including
anthropologists, archaeologists, historians, religious studies scholars and
psychologists. Hundreds of books and academic papers on the subject have been
produced, with a peer-reviewed academic journal being devoted to the study of
shamanisms. In the 20th century, many westerners involved in the counter-
cultural movement adopted magico-religious practices influenced by indigenous
shamanisms from across the world, creating the Neoshamanic movement.
Terminology. Etymology. The word "shaman" is based upon the Evenk language word
""šamán"". The Tungusic term was subsequently adopted by Russians interacting
with the indigenous peoples in Siberia. It is found in the memoirs of the
exiled Russian churchman Avvakum. The word was brought to Western Europe in
1692 by the Dutch traveler Nicolaes Witsen who reported his stay and journeys
among the Tungusic- and Samoyedic-speaking indigenous peoples of Siberia in his
book "Noord en Oost Tataryen". Adam Brand, a merchant from Lübeck, published
in 1698 his account of a Russian ambassy to China and a translation of his
book, published the same year, introduced the word to English speakers.
Definitions. There is no single agreed upon definition for the word "shamanism"
among anthropologists. The English historian Ronald Hutton noted that by the
dawn of the 21st century, there were four separate definitions of the term
which appeared to be in use. The first of these uses the term to refer to
"anybody who contacts a spirit world while in an altered state of
consciousness." The second definition limits the term to refer to those who
contact a spirit world while in an altered state of consciousness at the behest
of others. The third definition attempts to distinguish shamans from other
magico-religious specialists who are believed to contact spirits, such as
"mediums", "witch doctors", "spiritual healers" or "prophets", by claiming that
they undertake a particular technique not used by the others. Problematically,
scholars advocating this position have failed to agree on what this defining
technique should be. The fourth definition identified by Hutton uses
"shamanism" to refer to the indigenous religions of Siberia and neighbouring
parts of Asia. Initiation and learning. Shamans are normally "called" by dreams
or signs which require lengthy training. However, shamanic powers may be
inherited. Turner and colleagues mention a phenomenon called shamanistic
initiatory crisis. A rite of passage for shamans-to-be, commonly involving
physical illness and/or psychological crisis. The significant role of
initiatory illnesses in the calling of a shaman can be found in the detailed
case history of Chuonnasuan, the last master shaman among the Tungus peoples in
Northeast China. Roles. The shaman's social role is usually defined by the
obligations, actions and responsibilities expected of them within their
individual cultures. Shamans gain knowledge and the power to heal by entering
into the spiritual world or dimension. Most shamans have dreams or visions that
tell them certain things. The shaman may have or acquire many spirit guides,
who often guide and direct the shaman in his/her travels in the spirit world.
These spirit guides are always present within the shaman though others only
encounter them when the shaman is in a trance. The spirit guide energizes the
shaman, enabling him/her to enter the spiritual dimension. The shaman heals
within the spiritual dimension by returning 'lost' parts of the human soul from
wherever they have gone. The shaman also cleanses excess negative energies
which confuse or pollute the soul. Shamans act as mediators in their culture.
The shaman communicates with the spirits on behalf of the community, including
the spirits of the deceased. The shaman communicates with both living and dead
to alleviate unrest, unsettled issues, and to deliver gifts to the spirits.
Shamans assist in soul retrieval. In shamanism it is believed that part of the
human soul is free to leave the body. The soul is the "axis mundi", the center
of the shamanic healing arts. Shamans change their state of consciousness
allowing their free soul to travel and retrieve ancient wisdom and lost power.
Because a portion of the soul is free to leave the body it will do so when
dreaming, or it will leave the body to protect itself from potentially damaging
situations, be they emotional or physical. In situations of trauma the soul
piece may not return to the body on its own, and a shaman must intervene and
return the soul essence. Among the Selkups, the sea duck is a spirit animal
because ducks fly in the air and dive in the water. Thus ducks belong to both
the upper world and the world below. Among other Siberian peoples these
characteristics are attributed to water fowl in general. Among many Native
Americans, the jaguar is a spirit animal because jaguars walk on earth, swim in
water, and climb in trees. Thus jaguars belong to all three worlds, Sky, Earth,
and Underworld. Shamans perform a variety of functions depending upon their
respective cultures; healing, leading a sacrifice, preserving the tradition by
storytelling and songs, fortune-telling, and acting as a psychopomp (literal
meaning, "guide of souls"). A single shaman may fulfill several of these
functions. The functions of a shaman may include either guiding to their proper
abode the souls of the dead (which may be guided either one-at-a-time or in a
cumulative group, depending on culture), and/or curing (healing) of ailments.
The ailments may be either purely physical afflictions—such as disease, which
may be cured by gifting, flattering, threatening, or wrestling the disease-
spirit (sometimes trying all these, sequentially), and which may be completed
by displaying a supposedly extracted token of the disease-spirit (displaying
this, even if "fraudulent", is supposed to impress the disease-spirit that it
has been, or is in the process of being, defeated, so that it will retreat and
stay out of the patient's body) --, or else mental (including psychosomatic)
afflictions—such as persistent terror (on account of a frightening
experience), which may be likewise cured by similar methods. Usually in most
languages a different term other than the one translated "shaman" is applied to
a religious official leading sacrificial rites ("priest"), or to a raconteur
("sage") of traditional lore; there may be more of an overlap in functions
(with that of a shaman), however, in the case of an interpreter of omens or of
dreams. There are distinct types of shaman who perform more specialized
functions. For example, among the Nani people, a distinct kind of shaman acts
as a psychopomp. Other specialized shamans may be distinguished according to
the type of spirits, or realms of the spirit world, with which the shaman most
commonly interacts. These roles vary among the Nenets, Enets, and Selkup shaman
(paper; online). Among the Huichol, there are two categories of shaman. This
demonstrates the differences among shamans within a single tribe. Among the
Hmong people, the shaman or the "Ntxiv Neej" (Tee-Neng), acts as healer. The
Ntxiv Neej also performs rituals/ceremonies designed to call the soul back from
its many travels to the physical human body. A Ntxiv Neej may use several
shamanistic tools such as swords, divinity horns, a gong (drum), or finger
bells/jingles. All tools serve to protect the spirits from the eyes of the
unknown, thus enabling the Ntxiv Neej to deliver souls back to their proper
owner. The Ntxiv Neej may wear a white, red, or black veil to disguise the soul
from its attackers in the spiritual dimension. Boundaries between the shaman
and laity are not always clearly defined. Among the Barasana of Brazil, there
is no absolute difference between those men recognized as shamans and those who
are not. At the lowest level, most adult men have abilities as shamans and will
carry out the same functions as those men who have a widespread reputation for
their powers and knowledge. The Barasana shaman knows more myths and
understands their meaning better, nonetheless the majority of adult men also
know many myths. Among Inuit peoples the laity have experiences which are
commonly attributed to the shamans of those Inuit groups. Daydream, reverie,
and trance are not restricted to shamans. Control over helping spirits is the
primary characteristic attributed to shamans. The laity usually employ amulets,
spells, formulas, songs. Among the Greenland Inuit, the laity have greater
capacity to relate with spiritual beings. These people are often apprentice
shamans who failed to complete their initiations. The assistant of an Oroqen
shaman (called "jardalanin", or "second spirit") knows many things about the
associated beliefs. He or she accompanies the rituals and interprets the
behavior of the shaman. Despite these functions, the jardalanin is "not" a
shaman. For this interpretative assistant, it would be unwelcome to fall into
trance. Gender. Recent archaeological evidence suggests that the earliest known
shamans—dating back to the Upper Paleolithic era in what is now the Czech
Republic—were women. Ecological aspect. Resources for human consumption are
easily depletable in tropical rainforests. Among the Tucano people, a
sophisticated system exists for environmental resources management and for
avoiding resource depletion through overhunting. This system is conceptualized
mythologically and symbolically by the belief that breaking hunting
restrictions may cause illness. As the primary teacher of tribal symbolism, the
shaman may have a leading role in this ecological management, actively
restricting hunting and fishing. The shaman is able to "release" game animals,
or their souls, from their hidden abodes. The Piaroa people have ecological
concerns related to shamanism. Among the Inuit, shamans fetch the souls of game
from remote places, or soul travel to ask for game from mythological beings
like the Sea Woman. Economics. The way shamans get sustenance and take part in
everyday life varies among cultures. In many Inuit groups, they provide
services for the community and get a "due payment" (cultures believe the
payment is given to the helping spirits), but these goods are only "welcome
addenda." They are not enough to enable shamanizing as a full-time activity.
Shamans live like any other member of the group, as hunter or housewife.
Beliefs. Shamanism is based on the premise that the visible world is pervaded
by invisible forces or spirits which affect the lives of the living. Although
the causes of disease lie in the spiritual realm, inspired by malicious
spirits, both spiritual and physical methods are used to heal. Commonly, a
shaman "enters the body" of the patient to confront the spiritual infirmity and
heals by banishing the infectious spirit. Many shamans have expert knowledge of
medicinal plants native to their area, and an herbal treatment is often
prescribed. In many places shamans learn directly from the plants, harnessing
their effects and healing properties, after obtaining permission from the
indwelling or patron spirits. In the Peruvian Amazon Basin, shamans and
"curanderos" use medicine songs called "icaros" to evoke spirits. Before a
spirit can be summoned it must teach the shaman its song. The use of totemic
items such as rocks with special powers and an animating spirit is common. Such
practices are presumably very ancient. Plato wrote in his "Phaedrus" that the
"first prophecies were the words of an oak", and that those who lived at that
time found it rewarding enough to "listen to an oak or a stone, so long as it
was telling the truth". Belief in witchcraft and sorcery, known as "brujería"
in Latin America, exists in many societies. Other societies assert all shamans
have the power to both cure and kill. Shamanic knowledge usually enjoys great
power and prestige in the community, but it may also be regarded suspiciously
or fearfully as potentially harmful to others. By engaging in their work, a
shaman is exposed to significant personal risk, from the spirit world, from
enemy shamans, or from the means employed to alter the shaman's state of
consciousness. Shamanic plant materials can be toxic or fatal if misused.
Failure to return from an out-of-body journey can lead to death. Spells are
commonly used to protect against these dangers, and the use of more dangerous
plants is often very highly ritualized. Soul and spirit concepts. The variety
of functions described above may seem like distinct tasks, but they may be
united by underlying soul and spirit concepts. Practice. Shamans will often
observe dietary or customary restrictions particular to their tradition. These
restrictions are more than just cultural. For example, the diet followed by
shamans and apprentices prior to participating in an ayahuasca ceremony
includes foods rich in tryptophan (a biosynthetic precursor to serotonin) as
well as avoiding foods rich in tyramine, which could induce hypertensive crisis
if ingested with MAOIs such as are found in ayahuasca brews as well as
abstinence from alcohol or sex. Music, songs. Just like shamanism itself, music
and songs related to it in various cultures are diverse, far from being alike.
In several instances, songs related to shamanism are intended to imitate
natural sounds, via onomatopoeia. Sound mimesis in various cultures may serve
other functions not necessarily related to shamanism: practical goals as luring
game in the hunt; or entertainment (Inuit throat singing). Paraphernalia.
Shamans may have various kinds of paraphernalia in different cultures. Academic
study. Cognitive, semiotic, hermeneutic approaches. As mentioned, a (debated)
approach explains the etymology of word "shaman" as meaning "one who knows".
Really, the shaman is a person who is an expert in keeping together the
multiple codes of the society. Accordingly, the society's codes are the
manifestation of the society's underlying complex belief system. Thus to be
effective, shamans maintain a comprehensive view in their mind which gives them
certainty of knowledge. The shaman uses (and the audience understands) multiple
codes. Shamans express meanings in many ways: verbally, musically,
artistically, and in dance. Meanings may be manifested in objects such as
amulets. The shaman knows the culture of his or her community well, and acts
accordingly. Thus, their audience knows the used symbols and meanings—that is
why shamanism can be efficient: people in the audience trust it. For example,
the shaman's drumming can appear to its members as certainty of
"knowledge"—this explains the above described etymology for the word "shaman"
as meaning "one who knows." There are semiotic theoretical approaches to
shamanism, ("ethnosemiotics"). The symbols on the shaman's costume and drum can
refer to Power animals, or to the rank of the shaman. Armin Geertz coined and
introduced the hermeneutics, "ethnohermeneutics", approaches to the practice of
interpretation. Hoppál extended the term to include not only the
interpretation of oral and written texts, but that of "visual texts as well
(including motions, gestures and more complex ritual, and ceremonies performed
for instance by shamans)". It not only reveals the animistic views hiding
behind shamanism, but also conveys their relevance for the contemporary world,
where ecological problems have validated paradigms about balance and
protection. Ecological approaches, systems theory. Other fieldworks use systems
theory concepts and ecological considerations to understand the shaman's lore.
Desana and Tucano Indians have developed a sophisticated symbolism and concepts
of "energy" flowing between people and animals in cyclic paths. Gerardo
Reichel-Dolmatoff relates these concepts to developments in the ways that
modern science (systems theory, ecology, new approaches in anthropology and
archeology) treats causality in a less linear fashion. He also suggests a
cooperation of modern science and indigenous lore (online). Hypotheses on
origins. Shamanic practices may originate as early as the Paleolithic,
predating all organized religions, and certainly as early as the Neolithic
period. Early anthropologist studies theorise that shamanism developped as a
magic practice to ensure a successful hunt or gathering of food. Evidence in
caves and drawings on walls support indications that shamanism started during
the Paleolithic era. One such picture featured a half-animal, with the face and
legs of a man, with antlers and a tail of a stag. Archaeological evidence
exists for Mesolithic shamanism. In November 2008, researchers announced the
discovery of a 12,000-year-old site in Israel that is perceived as one of the
earliest known shaman burials. The elderly woman had been arranged on her side,
with her legs apart and folded inward at the knee. Ten large stones were placed
on the head, pelvis and arms. Among her unusual grave goods were 50 complete
tortoise shells, a human foot, and certain body parts from animals such as a
cow tail and eagle wings. Other animal remains came from a boar, leopard, and
two martens. "It seems that the woman … was perceived as being in a close
relationship with these animal spirits", researchers noted. The grave was one
of at least 28 at the site, located in a cave in lower Galilee and belonging to
the Natufian culture, but is said to be unlike any other among the Natufians or
in the Paleolithic period. Clinical trial. The Kaiser Permanente Center For
Health Research in Portland, Oregon conducted a phase I study into the
effectiveness of shamanic healing as a treatment for chronic face and jaw pain.
Twenty-three women who were diagnosed with Temporomandibular Joint Disorders
(TMDs) participated in the study. At the end of treatment only four were
clinically diagnosed with the TMDs present at the beginning of the study.
Historical-Anthropological School of Folkloristics. Folklorists have evaluated
the presence of remnants of shamanism and shamanic practice in folktales from
around the world. Michael Berman identified the genre of the shamanic story,
examples of which are only produced by folk groups with shamanic cosmology or a
shamanic world view. Kultkrantz points out that, “in areas where shamanism
has long been a thing of the past, many tales contain only vague, piecemeal or
inaccurate recollections of shamans and their like.” The presence of
distinctive characteristics and features of shamanic stories help folklorists
and anthropologists reconstruct a culture’s practice of shamanism. Decline
and revitalization / tradition-preserving movements. Shamanism is believed to
be declining around the world. Possibly due to other organised religious
influences, like Christianity, that want people who practice shamanism to
convert to their own system and doctrine. Another reason is western views of
shamanism as 'primitive', 'superstitious', backwarded and outdated. Whalers who
frequently interact with Inuit tribes are one source of this decline in that
region. In many areas, former shamans ceased to fulfill the functions in the
community they used to, as they felt mocked by their own community, or regarded
their own past as a deprecated thing, and unwilling to talk about it to an
ethnographer. Moreover, besides personal communications of former shamans,
folklore texts may narrate directly about a deterioration process. For example,
a Buryat epic text details the wonderful deeds of the ancient "first shaman"
Kara-Gürgän: he could even compete with God, create life, steal back the soul
of the sick from God without his consent. A subsequent text laments that
shamans of older times were stronger, possessing capabilities like omnividence,
fortune-telling even for decades in the future, moving as fast as a bullet; the
texts contrast them to the recent heartless, unknowing, greedy shamans. In most
affected areas, shamanic practices ceased to exist, with authentic shamans
dying and their personal experiences dying with them. The loss of memories is
not always lessened by the fact the shaman is not always the only person in a
community who knows the beliefs and motives related to the local shaman-hood
(laics know myths as well, among Barasana, even though less; there are former
shaman apprentices unable to complete the learning among Greenlandic Inuit
peoples, moreover, even laics can have trance-like experiences among the Inuit;
the assistant of a shaman can be extremely knowledgeable among Dagara).
Although the shaman is often believed and trusted precisely because s/he
"accommodates" to the "grammar" of the beliefs of the community, several parts
of the knowledge related to the local shamanhood consist of personal
experiences of the shaman (illness), or root in his/her family life (the
interpretation of the symbolics of his/her drum), thus, those are lost with
his/her death. Besides that, in many cultures, the entire traditional belief
system has become endangered (often together with a partial or total language
shift), the other people of the community remembering the associated beliefs
and practices (or the language at all) grew old or died, many folklore memories
(songs, texts) were forgotten - which may threaten even such peoples who could
preserve their isolation until the middle of the 20th century, like the
Nganasan. Some areas could enjoy a prolonged resistance due to their
remoteness. After exemplifying the general decline even in the most remote
areas, let us mention that there are revitalization or tradition-preserving
efforts as a response. Besides collecting the memories, there are also
tradition-preserving and even revitalization efforts, led by authentic former
shamans (for example among Sakha people and Tuvans). However, according to
Richard L. Allen, Research & Policy Analyst for the Cherokee Nation, they are
overwhelmed with fraudulent Shaman. "One may assume that anyone claiming to be
a Cherokee 'shaman, spiritual healer, or pipe-carrier', is equivalent to a
modern day medicine show and snake-oil vendor." In fact, there is no Cherokee
word for Shaman or Medicine Man. The Cherokee word for "medicine" is Nvowti
which means "power". Besides tradition-preserving efforts, there are also
neoshamanistic movements, these may differ from many tradtitional shamanistic
practice and beliefs in several points. Admittedly, several traditional beliefs
systems indeed have ecological considerations (for example, many Eskimo
peoples), and among Tukano people, the shaman indeed has direct resource-
protecting roles, see details in section Ecological aspect. Today, shamanism
survives primarily among indigenous peoples. Shamanic practices continue today
in the tundras, jungles, deserts, and other rural areas, and even in cities,
towns, suburbs, and shantytowns all over the world. This is especially true for
Africa and South America, where "mestizo shamanism" is widespread. Regional
variations. Asia. Mongolia. Mongolian shamanism has the longest recorded
history in the world. The word "Böö" "shaman; spirit medium; healer" first
appeared on oracle bones from the late Shang Dynasty (ca. 1600–1046 BCE).
Mongolian classics from the Hunnu Dynasty (1045-256 BCE) provide details about
male and female shamans serving as exorcists, healers, rainmakers,
oneiromancers, soothsayers, and officials. Shamanic practices continue in
present day Mongolia culture. The spiritual hierarchy in clan-based Mongolian
society was complex. The highest group consisted of 99 "tngri" (55 of them
benevolent or "white" and 44 terrifying or "black"), 77 "natigai" or "earth-
mothers", besides others. The "tngri" were called upon only by leaders and
great shamans and were common to all the clans. After these, three groups of
ancestral spirits dominated. The "Lord-Spirits" were the souls of clan leaders
to whom any member of a clan could appeal for physical or spiritual help. The
"Protector-Spirits" included the souls of great shamans ("ĵigari") and
shamanesses ("abĵiya"). The "Guardian-Spirits" were made up of the souls of
smaller shamans ("böge") and shamanesses ("idugan") and were associated with a
specific locality (including mountains, rivers, etc.) in the clan's territory.
In the 1990s, a form of Mongolian neo-shamanism was created which has given a
more modern approach to shamanism. Mongolian shamans are now making a business
out of their profession and even have offices in the larger towns. At these
businesses, a shaman generally heads the organization and performs services
such as healing, fortunetelling, and solving all kinds of problems. Hmong
shamanism. The Hmong people, as an ancient people of China with a 5,000 year
history, continue to maintain and practice its form of shamanism known as "Ua
Neeb" in mainland Asia. At the end of the Vietnam War, some 300,000 Hmong have
been settled across the globe. They have continued to practice Ua Neeb in
various countries in the North and South America, Europe and Australia. In the
USA, the Hmong shaman practitioner is known as "Txiv Neeb" has been license by
many hospitals in California as being part of the medical health team to treat
patients in hospital. This revival of Ua Neeb in the West has been brought
great success and has been hailed in the media as "Doctor for the disease,
shaman for the soul". Being a Hmong shaman represents a true vocation, chosen
by the shaman God "Sivyis". A shaman main job is to bring harmony to the
individual, his family and his community within his environment by performing
various rituals (trance). Animal sacrifice has been part of the Hmong shamanic
practice for the past 5,000 years. Contrary to the belief of many Westerners,
the Hmong practice of using animal in shamanic practice has been done with
great respect. After the Vietnam War, over 200,000 Hmong were resettled in the
USA and shamanism is still part of the Hmong culture. But due the colluding of
culture and the law, as Professor Alison Dundes Renteln, a political science
professor at the University of Southern California and author of The Cultural
Defense, a book that examines the influence of such cases on U.S. courts, once
said, "We say that as a society we welcome diversity, and in fact that we
embrace it...In practice, it's not that easy.". The Hmong believe that all
things on Earth has a soul(s) and those souls are treated as equal and can be
considered interchangeable. When a person is sick due to his soul being loss or
captured by wild spirit, it is necessary to ask and get permission of that
animal, whether it is a chicken, pig, dog, goat or any other animals is
required, to use its soul for an exchange with that person's soul for period of
12 months. At the end of that 12 months period, during the Hmong New Year, the
shaman performed a special ritual to release the soul of that animal and send
it off to the world beyond. As part of his service to mankind, the animal soul
is sent off to be re-incarnated into a higher form of animal or even to become
a member of a god's family (ua Fuab Tais Ntuj tus tub, tus ntxhais) to live a
life of luxury, free of the suffering as an animal. Hence, being asked to
perform this duty (what Westerner called "animal sacrifice) is one of the a
greatest honor for that animal to be able to serve mankind. The Hmong of
Southeast Guizhou will cover the cock with a piece of red cloth and then hold
it up to worship and sacrifice to the Heaven and the Earth before the
cockfight. In a 2010 trial of a Sheboygan Wisconsin Hmong that was charged with
staging a cockfight, it was stated that the roosters were “kept for both food
and religious purposes” followed by an acquittal. In addition to the
spiritual dimension, Hmong shaman can treat many physical illness by using text
of sacred words (khawv koob). Korea. Shamanism is still practiced in South
Korea, where the role of a shaman is most frequently taken by women known as
"mudangs", while male shamans (rare) are called baksoo mudangs. Korean shamans
are considered to be from a low class. A person can become a shaman through
hereditary title or through natural ability. Shamans are consulted in
contemporary society for financial and marital decisions. Japan. Shamanism is
part of the native Japanese religion of Shinto.The distinction is that Shinto
is Shamanism for agricultural society. Today Shinto has morphed with Buddhism
and other Japanese folk culture. The book ""Occult Japan: Shinto, Shamanism and
the Way of the Gods"" by Percival Lowell delves further into researching
Japanese Shamanism or Shintoism. It is generally accepted that the vast
majority of Japanese people take part in Shinto rituals. The book "Japan
Through the Looking Glass: Shaman to Shinto" uncovers the extraordinary aspects
of Japanese beliefs. Siberia. Among the Siberian Chukchis peoples, a shaman is
interpreted as someone who is possessed by a spirit who demands that someone
assume the shamanic role for their people. Among the Buryat, there is a ritual
known as "shanar" whereby a candidate is consecrated as shaman by another,
already-established shaman. Siberia is regarded as the "locus classicus" of
shamanism. It is inhabited by many different ethnic groups. Many of its peoples
observe shamanistic practices even in modern times. Many classical ethnographic
sources of "shamanism" were recorded among Siberian peoples. Among several
Samoyedic peoples shamanism was a living tradition also in modern times,
especially at groups living in isolation until recent times (Nganasans). The
last notable Nganasan shaman's seances could be recorded on film in the 1970s.
When the People's Republic of China was formed in 1949 and the border with
Russian Siberia was formally sealed, many nomadic Tungus groups that practiced
shamanism were confined in Manchuria and Inner Mongolia. These include the
Evenki. The last shaman of the Oroqen, Chuonnasuan (Meng Jin Fu), died in
October 2000. In many other cases, shamanism was in decline even at the
beginning of 20th century (Gypsies). Central Asia. Geographic influences on
Central Asian shamanism. Geographical factors heavily influence the character
and development of the religion, myths, rituals and epics of Central Asia.
While in other parts of the world, religious rituals are primarily used to
promote agricultural prosperity, here they were used to ensure success in
hunting and breeding livestock. Animals are one of the most important elements
of indigenous religion in Central Asia because of the role they play in the
survival of the nomadic civilizations of the steppes as well as sedentary
populations living on land not conducive to agriculture. Shamans wore animal
skins and feathers and underwent transformations into animals during spiritual
journeys. In addition, animals served as humans' guides, rescuers, ancestors,
totems and sacrificial victims. As a religion of nature, shamanism throughout
Central Asia held particular reverence for the relations between sky, earth and
water and believed in the mystical importance of trees and mountains. Shamanism
in Central Asia also places a strong emphasis on the opposition between summer
and winter, corresponding to the huge differences in temperature common in the
region. The harsh conditions and poverty caused by the extreme temperatures
drove Central Asian nomads throughout history to pursue militaristic goals
against their sedentary neighbors. This military background can be seen in the
reverence for horses and warriors within many indigenous religions. Common
shamanic practices and beliefs shared among Central Asians. Central Asian
shamans served as sacred intermediaries between the human and spirit world. In
this role they took on tasks such as healing, divination, appealing to
ancestors, manipulating the elements, leading lost souls and officiating public
religious rituals. The shamanic séance served as a public display of the
shaman's journey to the spirit world and usually involved intense trances,
drumming, dancing, chanting, elaborate costumes, miraculous displays of
physical strength, and audience involvement. The goal of these séances ranged
from recovering the lost soul of a sick patient and divining the future to
controlling the weather and finding a lost person or thing. The use of sleight-
of-hand tricks, ventriloquism, and hypnosis were common in these rituals but
did not explain the more impressive feats and actual cures accomplished by
shamans. Shamans perform in a "state of ecstasy" deliberately induced by an
effort of will. Reaching this altered state of consciousness required great
mental exertion, concentration and strict self-discipline. Mental and physical
preparation included long periods of silent meditation, fasting, and smoking.
In this state, skilled shamans employ capabilities that the human organism
cannot accomplish in the ordinary state. Shamans in ecstasy displayed unusual
physical strength, the ability to withstand extreme temperatures, the bearing
of stabbing and cutting without pain, and the heightened receptivity of the
sense organs. Shamans made use of intoxicating substances and hallucinogens,
especially mukhomor mushrooms and alcohol, as a means of hastening the
attainment of ecstasy. The use of purification by fire is an important element
of the shamanic tradition dating back as early as the 6th century. People and
things connected with the dead had to be purified by passing between fires.
These purifications were complex exorcisms while others simply involved the act
of literally walking between two fires while being blessed by the Shaman.
Shamans in literature and practice were also responsible for using special
stones to manipulate weather. Rituals are performed with these stones to
attract rain or repel snow, cold or wind. This "rain-stone" was used for many
occasions including bringing an end to drought as well as producing hailstorms
as a means of warfare. Despite distinctions between various types of shamans
and specific traditions, there is a uniformity throughout the region manifested
in the personal beliefs, objectives, rituals, symbols and the appearance of
shamans. Shamanic rituals as artistic performance. The shamanic ceremony is
both a religious ceremony and an artistic performance. The fundamental purpose
of the dramatic displays seen during shamanic ceremonies is not to draw
attention or to create a spectacle for the audience as many Westerners have
come to believe, but to lead the tribe in a solemn ritualistic process. In
general, all performances consist of four elements: dance, music, poetry and
dramatic or mimetic action. The use of these elements serves the purpose of
outwardly expressing his mystical communion with nature and the spirits for the
rest of the tribe. The true shaman can make the journey to the spirit world at
any time and any place, but shamanic ceremonies provide a way for the rest of
the tribe to share in this religious experience. The shaman changes his voice
mimetically to represent different persons, gods, and animals while his music
and dance change to show his progress in the spirit world and his different
spiritual interactions. Many shamans practice ventriloquism and make use of
their ability to accurately imitate the sounds of animals, nature, humans and
other noises in order to provide the audience with the ambiance of the journey.
Elaborate dances and recitations of songs and poetry are used to make the
shamans spiritual adventures into a matter of living reality to his audience.
Costume and accessories. The shaman's attire varies throughout the region but
his chief accessories are his coat, cap, and tambourine or drum. The
transformation into an animal is an important aspect of the journey into the
spirit world undertaken during shamanic rituals so the coat is often decorated
with birds feathers and representations of animals, coloured handkerchiefs,
bells and metal ornaments. The cap is usually made from the skin of a bird with
the feathers and sometimes head, still attached. The drum or tambourine is the
essential means of communicating with spirits and enabling the shaman to reach
altred states of consciousness on his journey. The drum, representing the
universe in epitome, is often divided into equal halves to represent the earth
and lower realms. Symbols and natural objects are added to the drum
representing natural forces and heavenly bodies. Shamanism in Tsarist and
Soviet Russia. In Soviet Central Asia, the Soviet government persecuted and
denounced shamans as practitioners of fraudulent medicine and perpetuators of
outdated religious beliefs in the new age of science and logic. The radical
transformations occurring after the October Socialist Revolution led to a sharp
decrease in the activity of shamans. Shamans represented an important component
in the traditional culture of Central Asians and because of their important
role in society, Soviet organizations and campaigns targeted shamans in their
attempt to eradicate traditional influences in the lives of the indigenous
peoples. Along with persecution under the tsarist and Soviet regimes, the
spread of Christianity and Islam had a role in the disintegration of native
faith throughout central Asia. Poverty, political instability and foreign
influence are also detrimental to a religion that requires publicity and
patronage to flourish. By the 1980s most shamans were discredited in the eyes
of their people by Soviet officials and physicians. Other Asian traditions.
There is a strong shamanistic influence in the Bön religion in Central Asian,
and in Tibetan Buddhism. Buddhism became popular with shamanic peoples such as
the Tibetans, Mongols, and Manchu beginning in the eighth century. Forms of
shamanistic ritual combined with Tibetan Buddhism became institutionalized as a
major religion under the Mongolian Yuan dynasty and the Manchurian Qing
dynasty. However, in the shamanic cultures still practiced by various ethnic
groups in areas such as Nepal and northern India, shamans are not necessarily
considered enlightened, and often are even feared for their ability to use
their power to carry out malicious intent. In Tibet, the Nyingma schools in
particular, had a Tantric tradition that had married "priests" known as Ngakpas
or Ngakmas/mos (fem.). The Ngakpas were often employed or commissioned to rid
the villages of demons or disease, creations of protective amulets, the
carrying out of religious rites etc. The Ngakpas should however, have been
grounded in Buddhist philosophy and not simply another form of shaman, but
sadly, this was most often not the case. There have always been, however,
highly realised and accomplished ngakpas. They were in their own right great
lamas who were of equal status as lamas with monastic backgrounds. The
monasteries, as in many conventional religious institutions, wished to preserve
their own traditions. The monasteries depended upon the excesses of patrons for
support. This situation often led to a clash between the more grassroots and
shamanic character of the travelling "Chödpa" and "Ngakpa" culture and the
more conservative religious monastic system. "Jhakri" is the common name used
for shamans in Sikkim, India. They exist in the Limbu, Sunuwar, Rai, Sherpa,
Kami, Tamang, Gurung and Lepcha communities. They are inflluenced by Hinduism,
Tibetan Buddhism, Mun and Bön rites. Shamanism is still widely practiced in
the Ryukyu Islands (Okinawa, Japan), where shamans are known as 'Noro' (all
women) and 'Yuta'. 'Noro' generally administer public or communal ceremonies
while 'Yuta' focus on civil and private matters. Shamanism is also practiced in
a few rural areas in Japan proper. It is commonly believed that the Shinto
religion is the result of the transformation of a shamanistic tradition into a
religion. Forms of practice vary somewhat in the several Ryukyu islands, so
that there is, e.g., a distinct Miyako shamanism. Shamanism practices seem to
have been preserved in the Catholic religious traditions of aborigines in
Taiwan. In Vietnam, shamans conduct rituals in many of the religious traditions
that co-mingle in the majority and minority populations. In their rituals,
music, dance, special garments and offerings are part of the performance that
surround the spirit journey. Europe. While shamanism had a strong tradition in
Europe before the rise of monotheism, shamanism remains a traditional,
organized religion in northern Eurasia, including Mari-El and Udmurtia, two
semi-autonomous provinces of Russia with large minority populations. Shamanism
in Scandinavia may be represented in rock art dating to the Neolithic era and
was practiced throughout the Iron Age by the various Teutonic tribes and the
Baltic-Finnic peoples. People which used to live in Siberia, have wandered to
their present locations since then. For example, many Uralic peoples live now
outside Siberia, however the original location of the Proto-Uralic peoples (and
its extent) is debated. Combined phytogeographical and linguistic
considerations (distribution of various tree species and the presence of their
names in various Uralic languages) suggest that this area was north of Central
Ural Mountains and on lower and middle parts of Ob River. The ancestors of
Hungarian people or Magyars have wandered from their ancestral proto-Uralic
area to the Pannonian Basin. Shamanism played an important role in Turko-Mongol
mythology. Tengriism, the major belief among Xiongnu or Mongol and Turkic
peoples, Magyars and Bulgars in ancient times incorporates elements of
shamanism. Shamanism is no more a living practice among Hungarians, but
remnants have been reserved as fragments of folklore, in folktales, customs.
Various scholars have also argued that shamanism was once widespread across
Europe prior to Christianisation. Some historians of the Late Middle Ages and
Early Modern period have argued that traces of shamanistic traditions can be
seen in the popular folk belief of this period. Most prominent among these was
the Italian Carlo Ginzburg, who claimed shamanistic elements in the
"benandanti" custom of 16th century Italy, the Hungarian Éva Pócs, who
identified them in the "táltos" tradition of Hungary, and the Frenchman Claude
Lecouteux, who has argued that Medieval traditions regarding the soul are based
on earlier shamanic ideas. Ginzburg in particular has argued that some of these
shamanistic traditions influenced the conception of witchcraft in Christendom,
in particular ideas regarding the witches' sabbath, leading to the events of
the witch trials in the Early Modern period. The cunning folk is an English
language term referring to professional or semi-professional Anglo-Celtic
practitioners of magic active from at least the 15th up until the early 20th
century particularly throughout rural United Kingdom (and possibly into the
21st century among the diaspora). They practiced folk magic – also known as
"low magic" – although often combined this with elements of "high" or
ceremonial magic. Such people were also frequently known across England as
"wizards", "wise men" or "wise women", or in southern England and Wales as
"conjurers" or as "dyn(es) hysbys" in the Welsh language. In Cornwall they were
sometimes referred to as pellars, which some etymologists suggest originated
from the term expellers, referring to the practice of expelling evil spirits.
Many have argued that this is evidence that community shamanism was practiced
in the UK up until to the modern era. Christian sanctioned Laws were enacted
across England, Scotland and Wales that often condemned cunning folk and their
magical practices. In Scandinavia the klok gumma ("wise woman") or klok gubbe
("wise man"), and collectively De kloka ("The Wise ones"), as they were known
in Swedish, were usually elder members of the community who acted as
naturopathic doctors and midwives as well as using folk magic such as magic
rhymes. In Denmark they were called klog mand ("wise man") and klog kone ("wise
woman") and collectively as kloge folk ("wise folk"). The names used for
cunning-folk in Italy vary from region to region, although such names include
praticos (wise people), guaritori (healers), fattucchiere (fixers), donne che
aiutano (women who help) and mago, maga or maghiardzha (sorcerers). At times,
they were sometimes called streghe (witches), although usually only "behind
their backs or by those who either are sceptical of their powers or believe
they deal in black magic." The cunning profession akin to Shamanism survived
the 20th century and into the early 21st, allowing Italian-American sociologist
Sabina Magliocco to make a brief study of them (2009). Circumpolar shamanism.
Inuit and Yupik cultures. Eskimo groups inhabit a huge area stretching from
Eastern Siberia through Alaska and Northern Canada (including Labrador
Peninsula) to Greenland. Shamanistic practice and beliefs have been recorded at
several parts of this vast area crosscutting continental borders. When speaking
of "shamanism" in various Eskimo groups, we must remember that (as mentioned
above) the term "shamanism" can cover certain characteristics of "various"
different cultures. Mediation is regarded often as an important aspect of
shamanism in general. Also in most Eskimo groups, the role of mediator is known
well: the person filling it in is actually believed to be able to contact the
beings who populate the belief system. Term "shaman" is used in several
English-language publications also in relation to Eskimos. Also the
"alignalghi" () of the Asian Eskimos is translated as "shaman" in the Russian
and English literature. The belief system assumes specific links between the
living people, the souls of hunted animals, and those of dead people. The soul
concepts of several groups are specific examples of soul dualism (showing
variability in details in the various cultures). Unlike the majority of
shamanisms the careers of most Eskimo shamans lack the motivation of "force":
becoming a shaman is usually a result of deliberate consideration, not a
necessity forced by the spirits. Diversity, with similarities. Another possible
concern: do the belief systems of various Eskimo groups have such common
features at all, that would justify any mentioning them together? There was no
political structure above the groups, their languages were relative, but
differed more or less, often forming language continuums (online). There are
similarities in the cultures of the Eskimo groups together with diversity, far
from homogeneity. The Russian linguist Menovshikov (Меновщиков), an
expert of Siberian Yupik and Sireniki Eskimo languages (while admitting that he
is not a specialist in ethnology although a large distance separates Siberia
and Greenland. There may be certain similarities also in Asiatic groups with
North American ones. Also the usage of a specific shaman's language is
documented among several Eskimo groups, used mostly for talking to spirits.
Also the Ungazighmiit (belonging to Siberian Yupiks) had a special allegoric
usage of some expressions. The local cultures showed great diversity. The myths
concerning the role of shaman had several variants, and also the name of their
protagonists varied from culture to culture. For example, a mythological
figure, usually referred to in the literature by the collective term Sea Woman,
has factually many local names: Nerrivik "meat dish" among Polar Inuit,
Nuliayuk "lubricous" among Netsilingmiut, Sedna "the nether one" among Baffin
Land Inuit. Also the soul conceptions, e.g. the details of the soul dualism
showed great variability, ranging from guardianship to a kind of reincarnation.
Conceptions of spirits or other beings had also many variants (see e.g. the
tupilaq concept). Africa. In central Mali, Dogon sorcerers (both male and
female) claim to have communication with a head deity named Amma, who advises
them on healing and divination practices. In the early 19th century traditional
healers in parts of Africa were often referred to in a derogatory manner as
"witch doctors" practicing Juju by early European settlers and explorers.
Contemporary ethnology records that the Bushmen, or their ancestors distributed
throughout Southern Africa before the 20th century, practiced shamanism. In the
semi-desert Northern Cape region, the shamans of the |Xam people were known by
the compound word '!gi:ten', where '!gi' is 'power' and 'ten' indicated
possession. The word is phonetically identical to the Xhosa word for 'doctor'.
In areas in Eastern Free State and Lesotho, where they co-existed with the
early Sotho tribes, local folklore describes them to have lived in caves where
they drew pictures on cave walls during a trance and were also reputed to be
good rainmakers. The classical meaning of shaman as a person who, after
recovering from a mental illness (or insanity) takes up the professional
calling of socially recognized religious practitioner, is exemplified among the
Sisala (of northern Gold Coast) : "the fairies "seized" him and made him insane
for several months. Eventually, though, he learned to control their power,
which he now uses to divine." The term "sangoma", as employed in Zulu and
congeneric languages, is effectively equivalent to shaman. Sangomas are highly
revered and respected in their society, where illness is thought to be caused
by witchcraft, pollution (contact with impure objects or occurrences) or by the
ancestors themselves, either malevolently, or through neglect if they are not
respected, or to show an individual her calling to become a sangoma (thwasa).
For harmony between the living and the dead, vital for a trouble-free life, the
ancestors must be shown respect through ritual and animal sacrifice. The term
"inyanga" also employed by the Nguni cultures is equivalent to 'herbalist' as
used by the Zulu people and a variation used by the Karanga, among whom
remedies (locally known as muti) for ailments are discovered by the inyanga
being informed in a dream, of the herb able to effect the cure and also of
where that herb is to be found. The majority of the herbal knowledge base is
passed down from one "inyanga" to the next, often within a particular family
circle in any one village. Shamanism is known among the Nuba of Kordofan in
Sudan. Americas. North America. Native American and First Nations cultures have
diverse religious beliefs. There was never one universal Native American
religion or spiritual system. Though many Native American cultures have
traditional healers, ritualists, singers, mystics, lore-keepers and "Medicine
People", none of them ever used, or use, the term "shaman" to describe these
religious leaders. Rather, like other indigenous cultures the world over, their
spiritual functionaries are described by words in their own languages, and in
many cases are not taught to outsiders. Many of these indigenous religions have
been grossly misrepresented by outside observers and anthropologists, even to
the extent of superficial or seriously mistaken anthropological accounts being
taken as more authentic than the accounts of actual members of the cultures and
religions in question. Often these accounts suffer from "Noble Savage"-type
romanticism and racism. Some contribute to the fallacy that Native American
cultures and religions are something that only existed in the past, and which
can be mined for data despite the opinions of Native communities. Not all
Indigenous communities have roles for specific individuals who mediate with the
spirit world on behalf of the community. Among those that do have this sort of
religious structure, spiritual methods and beliefs may have some commonalities,
though many of these commonalities are due to some nations being closely
related, from the same region, or through post-Colonial governmental policies
leading to the combining of formerly independent nations on reservations. This
can sometimes lead to the impression that there is more unity among belief
systems than there was in antiquity. Navajo medicine men and women, known as
"Hatałii", use several methods to diagnose the patient's ailments. These may
include using special tools such as crystal rocks, and abilities such as hand-
trembling and trances, sometimes accompanied by chanting. The "Hatałii" will
select a specific healing chant for that type of ailment. Navajo healers must
be able to correctly perform a healing ceremony from beginning to end. If they
do not, the ceremony will not work. Training a Hatałii to perform ceremonies
is extensive, arduous, and takes many years. The apprentice learns everything
by watching his teacher, and memorizes the words to all the chants. Many times,
a medicine man or woman cannot learn all sixty of the traditional ceremonies,
so will opt to specialize in a select few. Extirpation in North America. With
the arrival of European settlers and colonial administration, the practice of
Native American traditional beliefs was discouraged and Christianity was
imposed upon the indigenous people. About 1888, a mass movement known as the
Ghost Dance started among the Paviotso (a branch of the Pah-Utes in Nevada) and
swept through many tribes of Native Americans. The belief was that through
practicing the Ghost Dance, a messiah would come with rituals that would make
the white man disappear and bring back game and dead native Americans. This
spread to the Plains tribes, who were starving due to the depletion of the
buffalo. Some Sioux, the Arapahos, Cheyennes and Kiowas accepted the doctrine.
This form of shamanism was brutally suppressed by the United States military
with the death of 128 Sioux at the massacre of Wounded Knee. During the last
hundred years, thousands of surviving Native Americans, First Nations
youngsters from many cultures were sent into Indian boarding schools to destroy
any tribal, shamanic or totemic faith. Mesoamerica. Maya. The Maya people of
Guatemala, Belize, and southern Mexico practice a highly sophisticated form of
shamanism based upon astrology and a form of divination known as "the blood
speaking", in which the shaman is guided in divination and healing by pulses in
the veins of his arms and legs. Aztec. In contemporary Nahuatl, shamanism is
known as "cualli ohtli" ("the good path") leading during dreaming by "friends
of the night" to "Tlalocán". South America. Amazonia. In the Peruvian Amazon
Basin and north coastal regions of the country, the healer shamans are known as
curanderos. "Ayahuasqueros" are Peruvian shamans, such as among the Urarina
people, who specialize in the use of ayahuasca, a psychedelic herbal potion
used for physical and psychological healing, divine revelation, and for the
very reproduction of society itself. "Ayahuasqueros" have become popular among
Western spiritual seekers, who claim that the shamans and their ayahuasca brews
have cured them of everything from depression to addiction to cancer. In
addition to "curanderos" use of ayahuasca and their ritualized ingestion of
mescaline-bearing San Pedro cactuses (Trichocereus pachanoi) for the divination
and diagnosis of sorcery, north-coastal shamans are famous throughout the
region for their intricately complex and symbolically dense healing altars
called mesas (tables). Sharon (1993) has argued that the mesas symbolize the
dualistic ideology underpinning the practice and experience of north-coastal
shamanism. For Sharon, the mesas are the, "physical embodiment of the
supernatural opposition between benevolent and malevolent energies" (Dean 1998:
61). In the Amazon rainforest, at several Indian groups the shaman acts also as
a manager of scarce ecological resources (paper; online). The rich symbolism
behind Tukano shamanism has been documented in some in-depth field works even
in the last decades of the 20th century. Thus, a yaskomo is believed to be able
to reach sky, earth, water, in short, every element. Shamanism among the
Yąnomamö (of the Venezolano Amazonas and the Brazilian Roraima) is described
in "Tales of the Yanomami" by Jacques Lizot. Mapuche. Among the Mapuche people
of Chile, the community shaman, usually a woman, is known as the "Machi", and
serves the community by performing ceremonies to cure diseases, ward off evil,
influence the weather and harvest, and by practicing other forms of healing
such as herbalism. Aymara. For the Aymara people of South America the Yatiri is
a healer who heals the body and the soul, they serve the community and do the
rituals for Pachamama. Fuegians. Although Fuegians (the indigenous peoples of
Tierra del Fuego) were all hunter-gatherers, they did not share a common
culture. The material culture was not homogenous, either: the big island and
the archipelago made two different adaptations possible. Some of the cultures
were coast-dwelling, others were land-oriented. Both Selk'nam and Yámana had
persons filling in shaman-like roles. The Selk'nams believed their s to have
supernatural capabilities, e.g. to control weather. The figure of appeared in
myths, too. The Yámana corresponds to the Selknam . Oceania. On the island of
Papua New Guinea, indigenous tribes believe that illness and calamity are
caused by dark spirits, or "masalai", which cling to a person's body and poison
them. Shamans are summoned in order to purge the unwholesome spirits from a
person. Shamans also perform rainmaking ceremonies and can allegedly improve a
hunter's ability to catch animals. In Australia various aboriginal groups refer
to their shamans as "clever men" and "clever women" also as "kadji". These
aboriginal shamans use "maban" or "mabain", the material that is believed to
give them their purported magical powers. Besides healing, contact with
spiritual beings, involvement in initiation and other secret ceremonies, they
are also enforcers of tribal laws, keepers of special knowledge and may "hex"
to death one who breaks a social taboo by singing a song only known to the
"clever men". Contemporary Western shamanism. There is an endeavor in some
contemporary occult and esoteric circles to reinvent shamanism in a modern
form, often drawing from core shamanism—a set of beliefs and practices
synthesized by Michael Harner—centered use of ritual drumming and dance, and
Harner's interpretations of various indigenous religions. Harner has faced
criticism for taking pieces of diverse religions out of their cultural contexts
and synthesising a set of universal shamanic techniques. Some neoshamans focus
on the ritual use of entheogens, as well as embrace the philosophies of chaos
magic while others (such as Jan Fries) have created their own forms of
shamanism. European-based neoshamanic traditions are focused upon the
researched or imagined traditions of ancient Europe, where many mystical
practices and belief systems were suppressed by the Christian church. Some of
these practitioners express a desire to practice a system that is based upon
their own ancestral traditions. Some anthropologists and practitioners have
discussed the impact of such neoshamanism as "giving extra pay" (Harvey, 1997
and elsewhere) to indigenous American traditions, particularly as many pagan or
heathen shamanic practitioners do not call themselves shamans, but instead use
specific names derived from the European traditions -they work within such as
"völva" or "seidkona" (seid-woman) of the sagas (see Blain 2002, Wallis 2003).
Many New Age spiritual seekers travel to Peru to work with "ayahuasqueros",
shamans who engage in the ritual use of ayahuasca, a psychedelic tea which has
been documented to cure everything from depression to addiction. When taking
ayahuasca, participants frequently report meeting spirits and receiving divine
revelations. Shamanistic techniques have also been used in New Age therapies
which use enactment and association with other realities as an intervention.
Criticism of the term. Certain anthropologists, most notably Alice Kehoe in her
book "Shamans and Religion: An Anthropological Exploration in Critical
Thinking", are highly critical of the term "shaman". Part of this criticism
involves the notion of cultural appropriation. This includes criticism of New
Age and modern Western forms of shamanism, which may not only misrepresent or
dilute genuine indigenous practices but do so in a way that, according to
Kehoe, reinforces racist ideas such as the Noble Savage. Kehoe is highly
critical of Mircea Eliade's work on shamanism as an invention synthesized from
various sources unsupported by more direct research. To Kehoe, what some
scholars of shamanism treat as being definitive of shamanism (most notably
drumming, trance, chanting, entheogens and hallucinogens, spirit communication
and healing) are practices that exist outside of what is defined as shamanism
and play similar roles even in non-shamanic cultures (such as the role of
chanting in Judeo-Christian and Islamic rituals) and that in their expression
are unique to each culture that uses them and cannot be generalized easily,
accurately or usefully into a global religion of shamanism. Because of this,
Kehoe is also highly critical of the notion that shamanism is an ancient,
unchanged, and surviving religion from the Paleolithic period. Mihály Hoppál
also discusses whether the term "shamanism" is appropriate. He recommends using
the term "shamanhood" or "shamanship" (a term used in old Russian and German
ethnographic reports at the beginning of the 20th century) for stressing the
diversity and the specific features of the discussed cultures. He believes that
this places more stress on the local variations and emphasizes that shamanism
is not a religion of sacred dogmas, but linked to the everyday life in a
practical way. Following similar thoughts, he also conjectures a contemporary
paradigm shift. Piers Vitebsky also mentions that, despite really astonishing
similarities, there is no unity in shamanism. The various, fragmented
shamanistic practices and beliefs coexist with other beliefs everywhere. There
is no record of pure shamanistic societies (although, as for the past, their
existence is not impossible).
