Pentecontad calendar The Pentecontad Calendar is a unique agricultural calendar
system thought to be of Amorite origin in which the year is broken down into
seven periods of fifty days ( total of 350 days ), with an annual supplement of
fifteen or sixteen days. Identified and reconstructed by Hildegaard and Julius
Lewy in the 1940s, the calendar's use dates back to at least the 3rd millennium
BCE in western Mesopotamia and surrounding areas. Used well into the modern
age, forms of it have been found in Nestorianism and among the fellaheen of
modern Palestine. Overview. In Akkadian, the pentecontad calendar was known as
"hamšâtum" and the period of fifteen days at the end of the year was known to
Babylonians as "shappatum". The religious injunction to "observe the Sabbath"
is thought to derive from the injunction to observe the "shappatum", the period
of harvest time at the end of each year in the pentecontad calendar system.
Each fifty day period was made up of seven weeks of seven days and seven
Sabbaths, with an extra fiftieth day, known as the "atzeret". Used extensively
by the various Canaanite tribes of Palestine, the calendar was also thought to
have been used by the Israelites until the official adoption of a new type of
solar calendar system by King Solomon. The liturgical calendar of the Essenes
at Qumran was a pentecontad calendar, marked by festivals on the last day of
each fifty day period such as the Feast of New Wine, the Feast of Oil, and the
Feast of New Wheat, etc. Philo expressly connected the "unequalled virtues" of
the pentecontad calendar with the Pythagorean theorem, further describing the
number fifty as the "perfect expression of the right-angled triangle, the
supreme principle of production in the world, and the 'holiest' of numbers."
Tawfiq Canaan (1882 - 1964) described the use of such a calendar among
Palestinians in southern Palestine, as did his contemporary Gustaf Dalman who
wrote of the practices of Muslim agriculturalists who used Christian
designations for the fiftieth day, "which in turn overlaid far more ancient
agricultural practices: grape-watching, grape-pressing, sowing, etc." Julius
Morgenstern argued that the calendar of the Jubilees has ancient origins as a
somewhat modified survival of the pentecontad calendar.
