Shavuot Shavuot commemorates the anniversary of the day God gave the Torah to
the entire nation of Israel assembled at Mount Sinai, although the association
between the giving of the Torah ("Matan Torah") and Shavuot is not explicit in
the Biblical text. The holiday is one of the "Shalosh Regalim", the three
Biblical pilgrimage festivals. It marks the conclusion of the Counting of the
Omer. The date of Shavuot is directly linked to that of Passover. The Torah
mandates the seven-week Counting of the Omer, beginning on the second day of
Passover and immediately followed by Shavuot. This counting of days and weeks
is understood to express anticipation and desire for the Giving of the Torah.
On Passover, the people of Israel were freed from their enslavement to Pharaoh;
on Shavuot they were given the Torah and became a nation committed to serving
God. In Hasidic thought, the word "Shavuot" "Weeks" is interpreted as also an
acronym for "Shavuot, Bikkurim, Atzeret, Torah. Shavuot is one of the lesser
known Jewish holidays among secular Jews in the diaspora, while those in Israel
are more aware of it. According to Jewish law, Shavuot is celebrated in Israel
for one day and in the Diaspora (outside of Israel) for two days. Reform Jews
celebrate only one day, even in the Diaspora. In the Hebrew Bible. In the
Bible, Shavuot is called the "Festival of Weeks" (Hebrew: ◊ó◊í ◊î◊©◊ë◊ï◊¢◊ï◊™,
"·∏§ag ha-Shavuot", , ); "Festival of Reaping" (Hebrew: ◊ó◊í ◊î◊ß◊¶◊ô◊®, "·∏§ag
ha-Katsir", ), and "Day of the First Fruits" (Hebrew ◊ô◊ï◊ù ◊î◊ë◊õ◊ï◊®◊ô◊ù,
"Yom ha-Bikkurim", ). The Talmud refers to Shavuot as "Atzeret" (, literally,
"refraining" or "holding back"), referring to the prohibition against work on
this holiday and to the conclusion of the holiday and season of Passover. Since
Shavuot occurs 50 days after Passover, Hellenistic Jews gave it the name
Pentecost (œÄŒµŒΩœÑŒ∑Œ∫ŒøœÉœÑŒÆ, "fiftieth day"). Besides its significance as
the day on which the Torah was revealed by God to the Israelite nation at Mount
Sinai (which includes the Ten Commandments), Shavuot is also connected to the
season of the grain harvest in Israel. In ancient times, the grain harvest
lasted seven weeks and was a season of gladness (, , ). It began with the
harvesting of the barley during Passover and ended with the harvesting of the
wheat at Shavuot. Shavuot was thus the concluding festival of the grain
harvest, just as the eighth day of Sukkot (Tabernacles) was the concluding
festival of the fruit harvest. During the existence of the Temple in Jerusalem,
an offering of two loaves of bread from the wheat harvest was made on Shavuot.
Second Temple period. The date of Shavuot was disputed in the Second Temple
period. The Qumran community, commonly associated with the Essenes, held in its
library several texts mentioning Shevuot, most notably a Hebrew original of the
Book of Jubilees which sought to fix the celebration of this Feast of Weeks on
15 of Sivan, following their interpretation of Exodus 19:1. Ceremony of First
Fruits, "Bikkurim". Shavuot was also the first day on which individuals could
bring the "Bikkurim" (first fruits) to the Temple in Jerusalem (Mishnah
Bikkurim 1:3). The "Bikkurim" were brought from the Seven Species for which the
Land of Israel is praised: wheat, barley, grapes, figs, pomegranates, olives,
and dates (Deut. 8:8). In the largely agrarian society of ancient Israel,
Jewish farmers would tie a reed around the first ripening fruits from each of
these species in their fields. At the time of harvest, the fruits identified by
the reed would be cut and placed in baskets woven of gold and silver. The
baskets would then be loaded on oxen whose horns were gilded and laced with
garlands of flowers, and who were led in a grand procession to Jerusalem. As
the farmer and his entourage passed through cities and towns, they would be
accompanied by music and parades. At the Temple, each farmer would present his
"Bikkurim" to a kohen in a ceremony that followed the text of . This text
begins by stating, "An Aramean tried to destroy my father," referring to
Laban's efforts to weaken Jacob and rob him of his progeny (Rashi on Deut. 26:
5)‚Äîor by an alternate translation, the text states "My father was a wandering
Aramean," referring to the fact that Jacob was a penniless wanderer in the land
of Aram for 20 years (ibid., Abraham ibn Ezra). The text proceeds to retell the
history of the Jewish people as they went into exile in Egypt and were enslaved
and oppressed; following which God redeemed them and brought them to the land
of Israel. The ceremony of "Bikkurim" conveys the Jew's gratitude to God both
for the first fruits of the field and for His guidance throughout Jewish
history (Scherman, p.¬ 1068). Modern observances. Akdamut. Akdamut (Aramaic:
◊ê◊ß◊ì◊û◊ï◊™) is a liturgical poem extolling the greatness of God, the Torah
and Israel that is read publicly in the synagogue right before the morning
reading of the Torah on the first day of Shavuot. It was composed by Rabbi Meir
of Worms, whose son was murdered during the Crusade of 1096. Rabbi Meir was
forced to defend the Torah and his Jewish faith in a debate with local priests,
and successfully conveyed his certainty of God's power, His love for the Jewish
people, and the excellence of Torah. Afterwards he wrote "Akdamut", a 90-line
poem in Aramaic which stresses these themes. The poem is written in a double
acrostic pattern according to the order of the Hebrew alphabet. In addition,
each line ends with the syllable ""ta"" (◊™◊ê), the last and first letters of
the Hebrew alphabet, alluding to the endlessness of Torah. The traditional
melody which accompanies this poem also conveys a sense of grandeur and
triumph. Sephardim do not read "Akdamut", but before the evening service they
sing a poem called "Azharot" which sets out the 613 Biblical commandments. The
positive commandments are recited on the first day and the negative
commandments on the second day. The liturgical poem of Yatziv Pitgam (Aramaic:
◊ô◊¶◊ô◊ë ◊§◊™◊í◊ù) is recited by some synagogues in the Diaspora on the second
day of Shavuot. The author and his father's name appear in an acrostic at the
beginning of the poem's 15 lines. Dairy foods. Dairy foods such as cheesecake,
cheese blintzes, and cheese kreplach among Ashkenazi Jews; cheese sambusak,
kelsonnes (cheese ravioli), and atayef (a cheese-filled pancake) among Syrian
Jews; kahee (a dough that is buttered and sugared) among Iraqi Jews; and a
seven-layer cake called "siete cielos" (seven heavens) among Tunisian and
Moroccan Jews are traditionally consumed on the Shavuot holiday. Yemenite Jews
do not eat dairy foods on Shavuot. In keeping with the observance of other Yom
Tovs, there is both a night meal and a day meal on Shavuot. Meat is usually
served at night and dairy is served either for the day meal or for a morning
kiddush. Book of Ruth. There are five books in Tanakh that are known as
"Megillot" (Hebrew: ◊û◊í◊ô◊ú◊ï◊™, "scrolls") and are publicly read in the
synagogues on different Jewish holidays. The Book of Lamentations, which
details the destruction of the Holy Temple, is the reading for Tisha B'Av; the
Book of Ecclesiastes, which touches on the ephemeralness of life, corresponds
to Sukkot; the Book of Esther ("Megillat Esther") retells the events of Purim;
and the Song of Songs, which echoes the themes of springtime and God's love for
the Jewish people, is the reading for Passover. The Book of Ruth (◊û◊í◊ô◊ú◊™
◊®◊ï◊™, "Megillat Ruth") corresponds to the holiday of Shavuot both in its
descriptions of the barley and wheat harvest seasons and Ruth's desire to
become a member of the Jewish people, who are defined by their acceptance of
the Torah. Moreover, the lineage described at the end of the Book lists King
David as Ruth's great-grandson. According to tradition, David was born and died
on Shavuot. The story of Ruth can also be seen as an allegory of the Children
of Israel leaving Egypt behind and reaching Mount Sinai where they received the
Torah. Greenery. According to the Midrash, Mount Sinai suddenly blossomed with
flowers in anticipation of the giving of the Torah on its summit. Greenery also
figures in the story of the baby Moses being found among the bulrushes in a
watertight cradle () when he was three months old (Moses was born on 7 Adar and
placed in the Nile River on 6 Sivan, the same day he later brought the Jewish
nation to Mount Sinai to receive the Torah). For these reasons, many Jewish
families traditionally decorate their homes and synagogues with plants, flowers
and leafy branches in honor of Shavuot. Some synagogues decorate the bimah with
a canopy of flowers and plants so that it resembles a chuppah, as Shavuot is
mystically referred to as the day the matchmaker (Moses) brought the bride (the
nation of Israel) to the chuppah (Mount Sinai) to marry the bridegroom (God);
the "ketubbah" (marriage contract) was the Torah. Some Eastern Sephardi
communities actually read out a "ketubbah" between God and Israel as part of
the service. The Vilna Gaon cancelled the tradition of decorating with plants
because it too closely resembles the Christian decorations for their holidays.
All-night Torah study. The practice of staying up all Shavuot night to study
Torah ‚Äì known as "Tikkun Leil Shavuot" () ‚Äì has its source in the Midrash,
which relates that the night before the Torah was given, the Israelites retired
early to be well-rested for the momentous day ahead. They overslept and Moses
had to wake them up because God was already waiting on the mountaintop. To
rectify this perceived flaw in the national character, many religious Jews stay
up all night to learn Torah. The custom of all-night Torah study goes back to
1533 when Rabbi Joseph Caro, author of the "Shulchan Aruch", then living in
Ottoman Salonika, invited Rabbi Shlomo Halevi Alkabetz and other Kabbalistic
colleagues to hold Shavuot-night study vigils for which they prepared for three
days in advance, just as the Israelites had prepared for three days before the
giving of the Torah. During one of those study sessions, an angel appeared and
taught them Jewish law. Any subject may be studied on Shavuot night, although
Talmud, Mishnah, and Torah typically top the list. People may learn alone or
with a "chavruta" (study partner), or attend late-night "shiurim" (lectures)
and study groups. Both men and women participate in this tradition. In
Jerusalem, tens of thousands of people finish off the nighttime study session
by walking to the Western Wall before dawn and joining the sunrise minyan
there. This practice began in 1967. One week before Shavuot of that year, the
Israeli army recaptured the Old City in the Six-Day War, and on Shavuot day,
the army opened the Western Wall to visitors. Over 200,000 Jews came to see and
pray at the site that had been off-limits to them since 1948. The custom of
walking to the Western Wall on Shavuot has continued every year since. "Tikkun
Leil Shavuot". In keeping with the custom of engaging in all-night Torah study,
the Arizal, a leading Kabbalist of the 16th century, arranged a special service
for the evening of Shavuot. The "Tikkun Leil Shavuot" ("Rectification for
Shavuot Night") consists of excerpts from the beginning and end of each of the
24 books of Tanakh (including the reading in full of several key sections such
as the account of the days of creation, The Exodus, the giving of the Ten
Commandments and the Shema) and the 63 books of Mishnah. This is followed by
the reading of Sefer Yetzirah, the 613 commandments as enumerated by
Maimonides, and excerpts from the Zohar, with opening and concluding prayers.
The whole reading is divided into thirteen parts, after each of which a
"Kaddish di-Rabbanan" is recited when the Tikkun is studied in a group of at
least ten Jewish, Bar Mitzvahed men. This service is printed in a special book,
and is widely used in Eastern Sephardic, some German and Hasidic communities.
There are similar books for the vigils before the seventh day of Pesach and
Hosha'ana Rabbah. Spanish and Portuguese Jews do not observe this custom. Other
observances. Confirmation ceremonies. In the 19th century, several Orthodox
synagogues in Britain and Australia held confirmation ceremonies for 12-year
old girls on Shavuot, a precursor to the modern Bat Mitvah. The early Reform
movement made Shavuot into a religious school graduation day. Today, Reform
synagogues in North America typically hold confirmation ceremonies on Shavuot
for students aged 16 to 18 who are completing their religious studies. The
graduating class stands in front of an open ark, recalling the standing of the
Israelites at Mount Sinai for the giving of the Torah. Dates in dispute. Since
the Torah does not specify the actual day on which Shavuot falls, differing
interpretations of this date have arisen both in traditional and non-
traditional Jewish circles. These discussions center around two ways of looking
at Shavuot: the day it actually occurs (i.e., the day the Torah was given on
Mount Sinai), and the day it occurs in relation to the Counting of the Omer
(being the 50th day from the first day of the Counting). Giving of the Torah.
While most of the Talmudic Sages concur that the Torah was given on the sixth
of Sivan; R. Jose holds that it was given on the seventh of that month.
According to the classical timeline, the Israelites arrived at the wilderness
of Sinai on the new moon () and the Ten Commandments were given on the
following Shabbat (i.e., Saturday). The question of whether the new moon fell
on Sunday or Monday is undecided (Talmud, tractate Shabbat 86b). In practice,
Shavuot is observed on the sixth day of Sivan in Israel and a second day is
added in the Jewish diaspora (in keeping with a separate rabbinical ruling that
applies to all biblical holidays, called "Yom Tov Sheini Shebegaluyot", Second-
Day Yom Tov in the Diaspora). Counting of the Omer. The Torah states that the
Omer offering (i.e., the first day of counting the Omer) is the first day of
the barley harvest (). It should begin "on the morrow after the Shabbat", and
continue to be counted for seven Sabbaths. (). The Talmudic Sages determined
that "Shabbat" here means a day of rest and refers to the first day of
Passover. Thus, the counting of the Omer begins on the second day of Passover
and continues for the next 49 days, or seven complete weeks, ending on the day
before Shavuot. According to this calculation, Shavuot will fall on the day of
the week after that of the first day of Passover (e.g., if Passover starts on a
Thursday, Shavuot will begin on a Friday). Most secular scholarship, and the
Karaites, as well as Catholics and the historical Sadducees and Boethusians,
dispute this interpretation. They infer the "Shabbat" referenced is the weekly
Shabbat. Accordingly, Shavuot falls on the day after the weekly shabbat,
counting from seven weeks since the day after the first shabbat during Pesach.
This interpretation was shared by the 2nd-century BCE author of the Book of
Jubilees who was motivated by the priestly sabbatical solar calendar of the 3rd
and 2nd centuries BCE, which was designed to have festivals and Sabbaths fall
on the same day of the week every year. On this calendar (best known from the
Book of Luminaries in 1 Enoch), Shavuot fell on the 15th of Sivan, a Sunday.
The date was reckoned fifty days from the first Sabbath after Passover (i.e.
from the 25th of Nisan). Thus, Jub. 1:1 claims that Moses ascended Mount Sinai
to receive the Torah "on the sixteenth day of the third month in the first year
of the Exodus of the children of Israel from Egypt". In Jub. 6:15-22 and 44:1-
5, the holiday is traced to the appearance of the first rainbow on the 15th of
Sivan, the day on which God made his covenant with Noah. Qumran school Gabriele
Boccaccini has suggested that the 1,290 and 1,335 days of point to the
observance of Shavuot in a restored Israel, as reckoned by the priestly solar
calendar. These durations are exactly 30 and 45 days longer than the years
mentioned in and . The period of years amounts to 1,260 days in the priestly
solar calendar because the equinoxes and solstices count as markers of the
seasons rather than monthly days (1 En. 74:11, 75:1, 82:4). The blessings
expected at the end of the 1,335 days pertain to the resurrection to
"everlasting life" mentioned a few verses earlier (), and this is the reward to
those who refused to forsake the covenant unto death (, , , ), while those who
forsook the covenant () face "everlasting contempt". Boccaccini sees the years
as ending at the spring equinox (equinoxes and solstices were important markers
of the seasons in the solar calendar), to be followed by 30 days to complete
the 1,290 days (the month of Passover), and an additional 45 days to reach the
15th of Sivan, the purported day of Shavuot. For those who refused to forsake
the covenant, this would be the day the covenant would be renewed and the
expected blessings would be realized. The Jewish Encyclopedia points to the
similarities between the Christian and Jewish Pentecost, as an outpouring of
the Spirit or the giving of the Law in seventy languages.
