Shia Islam Shia Islam (, "Shīʿah") is the second largest denomination of
Islam. Adherents of Shia Islam are called Shi'ites or Shias. "Shia" is the
short form of the historic phrase "Shīʻatu ʻAlī" (), meaning "followers",
"faction", or "party" of Muhammad's son-in-law Ali, whom the Shia believe to be
Muhammad's successor. Like other branches of Islam, Shia Islam is based on the
teachings of the Quran and the message of the Islamic prophet Muhammad. In
contrast to other types, the Shia believe that only God has the right to choose
a representative to safeguard Islam, the Quran and "sharia". Thus the Shias
look to Ali, Muhammad's son-in-law, whom they consider divinely appointed, as
the rightful successor to Muhammad, and the first imam. The Shia extend this
belief to Muhammad's family, the "Ahl al-Bayt" ("the People of the House"), and
certain individuals among his descendants, known as "imams", who have special
spiritual and political authority over the community. Although there were many
Shia branches throughout history, modern Shia Islam is divided into three main
branches. The largest Shia sect in the early 21st century is the "Ithna
ashariyya", commonly referred to in English as the Twelvers, while smaller
branches include the Ismaili and Zaidi ("Fivers"). Alevis, Alawis and Druze are
also considered sects of Shia Islam. Etymology. The word "Shia" (Classical
Arabic: ' ) means follower and is the short form of the historic phrase ' ( ),
meaning "followers of Ali", "faction of Ali", or "party of Ali". "Shi'a" and
"Shiism" are forms used in English, while "Shi'ite" or "Shiite", as well as
"Shia", refer to its adherents. Beliefs. Imamate. Succession of Ali. Shia
Muslims believe that just as a prophet is appointed by God alone, only God has
the prerogative to appoint the successor to his prophet. They believe God chose
Ali to be Muhammad's successor, infallible, the first caliph ("khalifa", head
of state) of Islam. They believe Muhammad, before his death, designated Ali as
his successor. Ali was Muhammad's first cousin and closest living male relative
as well as his son-in-law, having married Muhammad's daughter Fatimah. Ali
would eventually become the fourth Muslim caliph. After the last pilgrimage,
Muhammad ordered the gathering of Muslims at the pond of Khumm and it was there
the Shia believe Muhammad nominated Ali to be his successor. The hadith of the
pond of Khumm was narrated on 18th of Dhu al-Hijjah of 10 AH in the Islamic
calendar (March 10, 632 AD) at a place called Ghadir Khumm, located near the
city of al-Juhfah, Saudi Arabia. Shia Muslims believe this to be Muhammad's
appointment of Ali as his successor, while Sunni Muslims believe it a simple
defense of Ali in the face of unjust criticism. Ali's caliphate. When Muhammad
died in 632 CE, Ali and Muhammad's closest relatives made the funeral
arrangements. While they were preparing his body, Abu Bakr, Umar, and Abu
Ubaidah ibn al Jarrah met with the leaders of Medina and elected Abu Bakr as
caliph. Ali and his family were dismayed, but accepted the appointment for the
sake of unity in the early Muslim community. It was not until the murder of the
third caliph, Uthman, in 657 CE that the Muslims in Medina invited Ali to
become the fourth caliph, and he established his capital in Kufah, in present-
day Iraq. Ali's rule over the early Muslim community was often contested, and
wars were waged against him. As a result, he had to struggle to maintain his
power against the groups who broke away after giving him allegiance, or those
who wished to take his position. This dispute eventually led to the First
Fitna, which was the first major civil war within the Islamic Caliphate. The
Fitna began as a series of revolts fought against the first Imam, Ali ibn Abi
Talib, caused by the assassination of his political predecessor, Uthman ibn
Affan. While the rebels who accused Uthman of nepotism affirmed Ali's "khilafa"
(caliph-hood), they later turned against him and fought him. Ali ruled from 656
CE to 661 CE, when he was assassinated while prostrating in prayer ("sujud").
Ali's main rival Muawiyah then claimed the caliphate. Hasan. Upon the death of
Ali, his elder son Hasan became leader of the Muslims of Kufa, and after a
series of skirmishes between the Kufa Muslims and the army of Muawiyah, Hasan
agreed to cede the caliphate to Muawiyah and maintain peace among Muslims.
Hasan then retired to Medina, where in 50 AH he died by poisoning. Hussein.
Hussein, Ali's younger son and brother to Hasan, initially resisted calls to
lead the Muslims against Muawiyah and reclaim the caliphate. In 680 CE Muawiyah
died and passed the caliphate to his son Yazid; Ali's faction saw this as a
betrayal of the peace treaty, having expected the caliphate to return to Ali's
line upon Muawiyah's death. There was a groundswell of support in Kufa for
Hussein to return there and take his position as caliph and imam, so Hussein
collected his family and followers in Medina and set off for Kufa. En route to
Kufa, he was blocked by an army of Yazid's men near Karbala (modern Iraq), and
Hussein and approximately 72 of his family and followers were killed in the
Battle of Karbala. The Shia regard Hussein as martyr ("shahid"), and count him
as an imam from the Ahl al-Bayt. They view Hussein as the defender of Islam
from annihilation at the hands of Yazid I. Hussein is the last imam following
Ali whom all Shia sub-branches mutually recognise.
