Shinto The word "Shinto" ("Way of the Gods") was adopted from the written
Chinese (Á•ûÈÅì, ), combining two "kanji": , meaning "spirit" or "kami"; and ,
meaning a philosophical path or study (from the Chinese word "d√ o"). "Kami"
are defined in English as "spirits", "essences" or "deities", that are
associated with many understood formats; in some cases being human-like, in
others being animistic, and others being associated with more abstract
"natural" forces in the world (mountains, rivers, lightning, wind, waves,
trees, rocks). Kami and people are not separate; they exist within the same
world and share its interrelated complexity. Creation myth. The creation myth
of Shinto is recorded in the ca. 712 Kojiki. It is a depiction of the events
leading up to and including the creation of the Japanese Islands. There are
many translations of the story with variations of complexity. The islands of
Japan are to be considered a paradise as they were directly created by the gods
for the people of Japan, and were ordained by the higher spirits to be created
into the Japanese empire. Shinto is the fundamental connection between the
power and beauty of nature (the land) and the people of Japan. It is the
manifestation of a path to understanding the institution of divine power. Kami.
Shinto teaches that everything contains a . Shinto's spirits are collectively
called , an expression literally meaning "eight million kami", but interpreted
as meaning "myriad", although it can be translated as "many Kami". There is a
phonetic variation "kamu" and a similar word among Ainu "kamui". There is an
analog ""mi-koto"". Kami is generally accepted to describe the innate
supernatural force that is above the actions of man, the realm of the sacred,
and is inclusive of gods, spirit figures, and human ancestors. All mythological
creatures of the Japanese cultural tradition, of the Buddhistic tradition,
Christian God, Hindu gods, Islamic Allah, various angels and demons of all
faiths among others are considered Kami for the purpose of Shinto faith. The
kami reside in all things, but certain places are designated for the interface
of people and kami (the common world and the sacred): "sacred nature",
"shrines", and "kamidana". There are natural places considered to have an
unusually sacred spirit about them, and are objects of worship. They are
frequently mountains, trees, unusual rocks, rivers, waterfalls, and other
natural edifices. In most cases they are on or near a shrine grounds. The
shrine is a building built in which to house the kami, with a separation from
the "ordinary" world through sacred space with defined features based on the
age and lineage of the shrine. The "kamidana" is a home shrine (placed on a
wall in the home) that is a "kami residence" that acts as a substitute for a
large shrine on a daily basis. In each case the object of worship is considered
a sacred space inside which the kami spirit actually dwells, being treated with
the utmost respect and deference. Types. To distinguish between these different
focuses of emphasis within Shinto, many feel it is important to separate Shinto
into different types of Shinto expression. All these main types of Shinto and
some subtypes have given birth to many and diverse schools and sects since
medieval times to the present days. A list of the most relevant can be found at
the article Shinto sects and schools. Shrines. The principal worship of "kami"
is done at public shrines or worship at small home shrines called "kamidana"
(Á•ûÊ£ö, lit. "god-shelf"). The public shrine is a building or place that
functions as a conduit for "kami". A fewer number of shrines are also natural
places called "mori". The most common of the "mori" are sacred groves of trees,
or mountains, or waterfalls. All shrines are open to the public at some times
or throughout the year. While many of the public shrines are elaborate
structures, all are characteristic Japanese architectural styles of different
periods depending on their age. Shrines are fronted by a distinctive Japanese
gate (È≥•Â±Ö, "torii") made of two uprights and two crossbars denoting the
separation between common space and sacred space. The "torii" have 20 styles
and matching buildings based on the enshrined kami and lineage. There are a
number of symbolic and real barriers that exist between the normal world and
the shrine grounds including: statues of protection, gates, fences, ropes, and
other delineations of ordinary to sacred space. Usually there will be only one
or sometimes two approaches to the Shrine for the public and all will have the
"torii" over the way. In shrine compounds, there are a "haiden" (ÊãùÊÆø) or
public hall of worship, "heiden" (Âπ£ÊÆø) or hall of offerings and the "honden"
(Êú¨ÊÆø). The innermost precinct of the grounds is the "honden" or worship
hall, which is entered only by the high priest, or worshippers on certain
occasions. The "honden" houses the symbol of the enshrined "kami". The heart of
the shrine is periodic rituals, spiritual events in parishioners' lives, and
festivals. All of this is organized by priests who are both spiritual conduits
and administrators. Shrines are private institutions, and are supported
financially by the congregation and visitors. Some shrines may have festivals
that attract hundreds of thousands, especially in the New Year season. Beliefs.
Impurity. Shinto teaches that certain deeds create a kind of ritual impurity
that one should want cleansed for one's own peace of mind and good fortune
rather than because impurity is wrong. Wrong deeds are called , which is
opposed to . Normal days are called "day" ("ke"), and festive days are called
"sunny" or, simply, "good" ("hare"). Those who are killed without being shown
gratitude for their sacrifice will hold a (grudge) and become powerful and evil
"kami" who seek revenge ("aragami"). Additionally, if anyone is injured on the
grounds of a shrine, the area must be ritually purified. Purification.
Purification rites called Harae are a vital part of Shinto. They are done on a
daily, weekly, seasonal, lunar, and annual basis. These rituals are the
lifeblood of the practice of Shinto. Such ceremonies have also been adapted to
modern life. New buildings made in Japan are frequently blessed by a Shinto
priest called during the groundbreaking ceremony (Jichinsai Âú∞ÈéÆÁ•≠), and
many cars made in Japan have been blessed as part of the assembly process.
Moreover, many Japanese businesses built outside Japan have had ceremonies
performed by a Shinto priest, with occasionally an annual visitation by the
priest to re-purify. Afterlife. It is common for families to participate in
ceremonies for children at a shrine, yet have a Buddhist funeral at the time of
death mostly due to the negative Japanese conception of the afterlife and death
as well as buddhism's historical monopoly on funeral rites. In old Japanese
legends, it is often claimed that the dead go to a place called "yomi"
(ÈªÑÊ≥â), a gloomy underground realm with a river separating the living from
the dead mentioned in legend of Izanami and Izanagi. This "yomi" is very close
to the Greek Hades however later myths include notions of resurrection and even
elysium-like descriptions such as with the legend of Okuninushi and Susanoo.
Shinto tends to hold negative views on death and corpses as a source of
pollution called "kegare". However death is also viewed as a path towards
apotheosis in Shintoism as can be evidenced by how legendary individuals become
enshrined after death. Perhaps the most famous would be Emperor Ojin who was
enshrined as Hachiman the God of War after his death. Unlike many religions,
one does not need to publicly profess belief in Shinto to be a believer.
Whenever a child is born in Japan, a local Shinto shrine adds the child's name
to a list kept at the shrine and declares him or her a . After death an "ujiko"
becomes a . One may choose to have one's name added to another list when moving
and then be listed at both places. Names can be added to the list without
consent and regardless of the beliefs of the person added to the list. This is
not considered an imposition of belief, but a sign of being welcomed by the
local "kami", with the promise of addition to the pantheon of "kami" after
death. Practices. Omairi. Any person may visit a shrine and one need not be
"Shinto" to do this. Doing so is called Omairi. Typically there are a few basic
steps to visiting a shrine. Harae. The rite of ritual purification usually done
daily at a shrine is a ceremony of offerings and prayers of several forms.
Shinsen (food offerings of fruit, fish, vegetables), Tamagushi (Sakaki Tree
Branches), Shio (salt), Gohan (rice), Mochi (rice paste), and Sake (rice wine)
are all typical offerings. On holidays and other special occasions the inner
shrine doors may be opened and special offerings made. Water purification.
Misogi harai or Misogi Sh≈´h≈ç (Á¶ä‰øÆÊ≥ï) is the term for water purification.
The practice of purification by ritual use of water while reciting prayers is
typically done daily by regular practitioners, and when possible by lay
practitioners. There is a defined set of prayers and physical activities that
precede and occur during the ritual. This will usually be performed at a
shrine, in a natural setting, but can be done anywhere there is clean running
water. The basic performance of this is the hand and mouth washing (Temizu
ÊâãÊ∞¥) done at the entrance to a shrine. The more dedicated believer may
purify him- or herself by standing beneath a waterfall or performing ritual
ablutions in a river. This practice comes from Shinto history, when the kami
Izanagi-no-Mikoto first performed misogi after returning from the land of Yomi,
where he was made impure by Izanami-no-Mikoto after her death. Imi. Another
form of ritual cleanliness is avoidance, which means that a taboo is placed
upon certain persons or acts. To illustrate, one would not visit a shrine if a
close relative in the household had died recently. Killing is generally unclean
and is to be avoided. When one is performing acts that harm the land or other
living things, prayers and rituals are performed to placate the Kami of the
area. This type of cleanliness is usually performed to prevent ill outcomes.
Amulets and protective items. Ema are small wooden plaques that wishes or
desires are written upon and left at a place in the shrine grounds so that one
may get a wish or desire fulfilled. They have a picture on them and are
frequently associated with the larger Shrines. "Ofuda" are talismans‚Äîmade of
paper, wood, or metal‚Äîthat are issued at shrines. They are inscribed with the
names of kamis and are used for protection in the home. They are typically
placed in the home at a kamidana. Ofuda may be kept anywhere, as long as they
are in their protective pouches, but there are several rules about the proper
placement of kamidana. They are also renewed annually. "Omamori" are personal-
protection amulets that sold by shrines. They are frequently used to ward off
bad luck and to gain better health. More recently, there are also amulets to
promote good driving, good business, and success at school. Their history lies
with Buddhist practice of selling amulets. "Omikuji" are paper lots upon which
personal fortunes are written. A "daruma" is a round, paper doll of the Indian
monk, Bodhidharma. The recipient makes a wish and paints one eye; when the goal
is accomplished, the recipient paints the other eye. While this is a Buddhist
practice, darumas can be found at shrines, as well. These dolls are very
common. Other protective items include "dorei", which are earthenware bells
that are used to pray for good fortune. These bells are usually in the shapes
of the zodiacal animals: "hamaya", which are symbolic arrows for the fight
against evil and bad luck; and "Inuhariko", which are paper dogs that are used
to induce and to bless good births. Kagura. "Kagura" is the ancient Shinto
ritual dance of shamanic origin. The word "kagura" is thought to be a
contracted form of "kami no kura" or "seat of the kami" or the "site where the
kami is received." There is a mythological tale of how "kagura" dance came into
existence. The sun goddess Amaterasu became very upset at her brother so she
hid in a cave. All of the other gods and goddesses were concerned and wanted
her to come outside. Ame-no-uzeme began to dance and create a noisy commotion
in order to entice Amaterasu to come out. The kami (gods) tricked Amaterasu by
telling her there was a better sun goddess in the heavens. Amaterasu came out
and light returned to the universe. Music plays a very important role in the
"kagura" performance. Everything from the setup of the instruments to the most
subtle sounds and the arrangement of the music is crucial to encouraging the
kami to come down and dance. The songs are used as magical devices to summon
the gods and as prayers for blessings. Rhythm patterns of five and seven are
common, possibly relating to the Shinto belief of the twelve generations of
heavenly and earthly deities. There is also vocal accompaniment called "kami
uta" in which the drummer sings sacred songs to the gods. Often the vocal
accompaniment is overshadowed by the drumming and instruments, reinforcing that
the vocal aspect of the music is more for incantation rather than aesthetics.
In both ancient Japanese collections, the Nihongi and Kojiki, Ame-no-uzeme‚Äôs
dance is described as "asobi", which in old Japanese language means a ceremony
that is designed to appease the spirits of the departed, and which was
conducted at funeral ceremonies. Therefore, "kagura" is a rite of "tama
shizume", of pacifying the spirits of the departed. In the Heian period
(8th‚Äì12th centuries) this was one of the important rites at the Imperial
Court and had found its fixed place in the "tama shizume" festival in the
eleventh month. At this festival people sing as accompaniment to the dance:
‚ÄúDepart! Depart! Be cleansed and go! Be purified and leave!‚Äù This rite of
purification is also known as "chinkon". It was used for securing and
strengthening the soul of a dying person. It was closely related to the ritual
of "tama furi" (shaking the spirit), to call back the departed soul of the dead
or to energize a weakened spirit. Spirit pacification and rejuvenation were
usually achieved by songs and dances, also called "asobi". The ritual of
"chinkon" continued to be performed on the emperors of Japan, thought to be
descendents of Amaterasu. It is possible that this ritual is connected with the
ritual to revive the sun goddess during the low point of the winter solstice.
There is a division between the "kagura" that is performed at the Imperial
palace and the shrines related to it, and the "kagura" that is performed in the
countryside. Folk "kagura", or "kagura" from the countryside is divided
according to region. The following descriptions relate to "sato kagura",
"kagura" that is from the countryside. The main types are: "miko kagura", "Ise
kagura", "Izumo kagura", and "shishi kagura". Miko kagura is the oldest type of
"kagura" and is danced by women in Shinto shrines and during folk festivals.
The ancient miko were shamanesses, but are now considered priestesses in the
service of the Shinto Shrines. "Miko kagura" originally was a shamanic trance
dance, but later, it became an art and was interpreted as a prayer dance. It is
performed in many of the larger Shinto shrines and is characterized by slow,
elegant, circular movements, by emphasis on the four directions and by the
central use of torimono (objects dancers carry in their hands), especially the
fan and bells. Ise kagura is a collective name for rituals that are based upon
the "yudate" (boiling water rites of Shugend≈ç origin) ritual. It includes
"miko" dances as well as dancing of the "torimono" type. The "kami" are
believed to be present in the pot of boiling water, so the dancers dip their
"torimono" in the water and sprinkle it in the four directions and on the
observers for purification and blessing. Izumo kagura is centered in the Sada
shrine of Izumo, Shimane prefecture. It has two types: "torimono ma", unmasked
dances that include held objects, and "shinno" (sacred No), dramatic masked
dances based on myths. "Izumo kagura" appears to be the most popular type of
"kagura". Shishi kagura also known as the Shugen-No tradition, uses the dance
of a "shishi" (lion or mountain animal) mask as the image and presence of the
deity. It includes the "Ise daikagura" group and the "yamabushi kagura" and
"bangaku" groups of the Tohoku area (Northeastern Japan). "Ise daikagura"
employs a large red Chinese type of lion head which can move its ears. The lion
head of the "yamabushi kagura" schools is black and can click its teeth. Unlike
other "kagura" types in which the "kami" appear only temporarily, during the
"shishi kagura" the "kami" is constantly present in the shishi head mask.
During the Edo period, the lion dances became showy and acrobatic losing its
touch with spirituality. However, the "yamabushi kagura" tradition has retained
its ritualistic and religious nature. Originally, the practice of "kagura"
involved authentic possession by the "kami" invoked. In modern day Japan it
appears to be difficult to find authentic ritual possession, called
"kamigakari", in "kagura" dance. However, it is common to see choreographed
possession in the dances. Actual possession is not taking place but elements of
possession such as losing control and high jumps are applied in the dance.
History. Historical records. There is no core sacred text in Shinto, as the
Bible is in Christianity or Qur'an is in Islam. Instead there are books of lore
and history which provide stories and background to many Shinto beliefs.
Origins. Shinto has very ancient roots in the Japanese islands. The recorded
history dates to the Kojiki (712) and Nihon Shoki (720), but archeological
records date back significantly further. Both are compilations of prior oral
traditions. The Kojiki establishes the Japanese imperial family as the
foundation of Japanese culture, being the descendants of Amaterasu Omikami.
There is also a creation myth and a genealogy of the gods. The Nihonshoki was
more interested in creating a structural system of government, foreign policy,
religious hierarchy, and domestic social order. There is an internal system of
historical Shinto development that configures the relationships between Shinto
and other religious practices over its long history; the inside and outside
Kami (spirits). The inside or "ujigami" ("uji" meaning clan) Kami roles that
supports cohesion and continuation of established roles and patterns; and the
"hitogami" or outside Kami, bringing innovation, new beliefs, new messages, and
some instability. Jomon peoples of Japan used natural housing, predated rice
farming, and frequently were hunter-gatherers, the physical evidence for ritual
practices are difficult to document. There are many locations of stone ritual
structures, refined burial practices and early Torii that lend to the
continuity of primal Shinto. The Jomon had a clan-based tribal system developed
similar to much of the worlds indigenous people. In the context of this clan
based system, local beliefs developed naturally and when assimilation between
clans occurred, they also took on some beliefs of the neighboring tribes. At
some point there was a recognition that the ancestors created the current
generations and the reverence of ancestors ("tama") took shape. There was some
trade amongst the indigenous peoples within Japanese islands and the mainland,
as well as some varying migrations. The trade and interchange of people helped
the growth and complexity of the peoples spirituality by exposure to new
beliefs. The natural spirituality of the people appeared to be based on the
worship of nature forces or "mono", and the natural elements to which they all
depended. The gradual introduction of methodical religious and government
organizations from mainland Asia starting around 300 BCE seeded the reactive
changes in primal Shinto over the next 700 years to a more formalized system.
These changes were directed internally by the various clans frequently as a
syncratic cultural event to outside influences. Eventually as the Yamato gained
power a formalization process began. The genesis of the Imperial household and
subsequent creation of the Kojiki helped facilitate the continuity needed for
this long term development through modern history. There is today a balance
between outside influences of Buddhist, Confucian, Taoist, Abrahamic, Hindu and
secular beliefs. In more modern times Shinto has developed new branches and
forms on a regular basis, including leaving Japan. Jomon Period. By the end of
the J≈çmon period, a dramatic shift had taken place according to archaeological
studies. New arrivals from the continent seem to have invaded Japan from the
West, bringing with them new technologies such as rice farming and metallurgy.
The settlements of the new arrivals seem to have coexisted with those of the
J≈çmon for some time. Under these influences, the incipient cultivation of the
J≈çmon evolved into sophisticated rice-paddy farming and government control.
Many other elements of Japanese culture also may date from this period and
reflect a mingled migration from the northern Asian continent and the southern
Pacific areas. Among these elements are Shinto mythology, marriage customs,
architectural styles, and technological developments such as lacquerware,
textiles, laminated bows, metalworking, and glass making. The J≈çmon is
succeeded by the Yayoi period. Yayoi Period. Japanese culture begins to develop
in no small part due to influences from mainland trade and immigration from
China. During this time in the pre-writing historical period, objects from the
mainland start appearing in large amounts, specifically mirrors, swords, and
jewels. All three of these have a direct connection to the imperial divine
status as they are the symbols of imperial divinity and are Shinto honorary
objects. Also the rice culture begins to blossom throughout Japan and this
leads to the settlement of society, and seasonal reliance of crops. Both of
these changes are highly influential on the Japanese people's relationship to
the natural world, and likely development of a more complex system of religion.
This is also the period that is referenced as the beginning of the divine
imperial family. The Yayoi culture was a clan based culture that lived in
compounds with a defined leader who was the chief and head priest. They were
responsible for the relationship with their "gods" Kami and if one clan
conquered another, their "god" would be assimilated. The earliest records of
Japanese culture were written by Chinese traders who described this land as
"Wa". This time period led to the creation of the Yamato culture and
development of formal Shinto practices. The development of "niiname" or the
(now) Shinto harvest festival is attributed to this period as offerings for
good harvests of similar format (typically rice) become common. Kofun Period.
The great bells and drums, Kofun burial mounds, and the founding of the
imperial family are important to this period. This is the period of the
development of the feudal state, and the Yamato and Izumo cultures. Both of
these dominant cultures have a large and central shrine which still exists
today, Ise Shrine in the South West and Izumo Taisha in the North East. This
time period is defined by the increase of central power in Naniwa, now Osaka,
of the feudal lord system. Also there was an increasing influence of Chinese
culture which profoundly changed the practices of government structure, social
structure, burial practices, and warfare. The Japanese also held close alliance
and trade with the Gaya confederacy which was in the south of the peninsula.
The Paekche in the Three Kingdoms of Korea had political alliances with Yamato,
and in the 5th century imported the Chinese writing system to record Japanese
names and events for trade and political records. In 513 they sent a Confucian
scholar to the court to assist in the teachings of Confucian thought. In 552 or
538 a Buddha image was given to the Yamato leader which profoundly changed the
course of Japanese religious history, especially in relation to the undeveloped
native religious conglomeration that was Shinto. In the latter 6th century,
there was a breakdown of the alliances between Japan and Paekche but the
influence led to the codification of Shinto as the native religion in
opposition to the extreme outside influences of the mainland. Up to this time
Shinto had been largely a clan ('uji') based religious practice, exclusive to
each clan. Asuka Period. The Theory of Five Elements in Yin and Yang philosophy
of Taoism and the esoteric Buddhism had a profound impact on the development of
a unified system of Shinto beliefs. In the early Nara period, the "Kojiki" and
the "Nihon Shoki" were written by compiling existing myths and legends into a
unified account of Japanese mythology. These accounts were written with two
purposes in mind: the introduction of Taoist, Confucian, and Buddhist themes
into Japanese religion; and garnering support for the legitimacy of the
Imperial house, based on its lineage from the sun goddess, Amaterasu. Much of
modern Japan was under only fragmentary control by the Imperial family, and
rival ethnic groups. The mythological anthologies, along with other poetry
anthologies like the "Collection of Ten Thousand Leaves" ("Man'y≈çsh≈´") and
others, were intended to impress others with the worthiness of the Imperial
family and their divine mandate to rule. In particular the Asuka rulers of
552‚Äì645 saw disputes between the more major families of the clan Shinto
families. There were disputes about who would ascend to power and support the
imperial family between the Soga and Mononobe/Nakatomi Shinto families. The
Soga family eventually prevailed and supported Empress Suiko and Prince
Shotoku, who helped impress Buddhist faith into Japan. However, it was not
until the Hakuho ruling period of 645‚Äì710 was Shinto installed at the
imperial faith along with the Fujiwara Clan and reforms that followed. Hakuho
Period. Beginning with Emperor Temmu (672‚Äì686), continuing through Empress
Jito (686‚Äì697) and Emperor Mommu (697‚Äì707) Court Shinto rites are
strengthened and made parallel to Buddhist beliefs in court life. Prior to this
time clan Shinto had dominated and a codification of "Imperial Shinto" did not
exist as such. The Nakatomi family are made the chief court Shinto chaplains
and chief priests at Ise Daijingu which held until 1892. Also the practice of
sending imperial princesses to the Ise shrine begins. This marks the rise of
Ise Daijingu as the main imperial shrine historically. Due to increasing
influence from Buddhism and mainland Asian thought, codification of the
"Japanese" way of religion and laws begins in earnest. This culminates in three
major outcomes: Taiho Code (701 but started earlier), The Kojiki (712),and The
Nihon Shoki (720). The Taiho Code also called Ritsury≈ç (Âæã‰ª§?) was an
attempt to create a bulwark to dynamic external influences and stabilize the
society through imperial power. It was a liturgy of rules and codifications,
primarily focused on regulation of religion, government structure, land codes,
criminal and civil law. All priests, monks, and nuns were required to be
registered, as were temples. The Shinto rites of the imperial line were
codified, especially seasonal cycles, lunar calendar rituals, harvest
festivals, and purification rites. The creation of the imperial Jingi-kan or
Shinto Shrine office was completed. Nara Period. This period hosted many
changes to the country, government, and religion. The capital is moved again to
Heij≈ç-ky≈ç, or Nara, in AD 710 by Empress Gemmei due to the death of the
Emperor. This practice was necessary due to the Shinto belief in the impurity
of death and the need to avoid this pollution. However, this practice of moving
the capital due to "death impurity" is then abolished by the Taih≈ç Code and
rise in Buddhist influence. The establishment of the imperial city in
partnership with Taih≈ç Code is important to Shinto as the office of the Shinto
rites becomes more powerful in assimilating local clan shrines into the
imperial fold. New shrines are built and assimilated each time the city is
moved. All of the grand shrines are regulated under Taih≈ç and are required to
account for incomes, priests, and practices due to their national
contributions. During this time, Buddhism becomes structurally established
within Japan by Emperor Sh≈çmu (reign 724‚Äì749), and several large building
projects are undertaken. The Emperor lays out plans for the Buddha Dainichi
(Great Sun Buddha), at T≈çdai-ji assisted by the Priest Gyogi (or Gyoki)
Bosatsu. The priest Gyogi went to Ise Daijingu Shrine for blessings to build
the Buddha Dainichi. They identified the statue of Viarocana with Amatarasu
(the sun goddess) as the manifestation of the supreme expression of
universality. The priest Gyogi is known for his belief in assimilation of
Shinto Kami and Buddhas. Shinto kami are commonly being seen by Buddhist clergy
as guardians of manifestation, guardians, or pupils of Buddhas and
bodhisattvas. The priest Gyogi conferred boddhisattva precepts on the Emperor
in 749 effectively making the Imperial line the head of state and divine to
Shinto while beholden to Buddhism. Syncretism with Buddhism. With the
introduction of Buddhism and its rapid adoption by the court in the 6th
century, it was necessary to explain the apparent differences between native
Japanese beliefs and Buddhist teachings. One Buddhist explanation saw the
"kami" as supernatural beings still caught in the cycle of birth and rebirth
(reincarnation). The "kami" are born, live, die, and are reborn like all other
beings in the karmic cycle. However, the "kami" played a special role in
protecting Buddhism and allowing its teachings of compassion to flourish. This
explanation was later challenged by K≈´kai (Á©∫Êµ∑, 774‚Äì835), who saw the
"kami" as different embodiments of the Buddhas themselves ("honji suijaku"
theory). For example, he linked Amaterasu (the sun goddess and ancestor of the
Imperial family) with Dainichi Nyorai, a central manifestation of the
Buddhists, whose name means literally "Great Sun Buddha". In his view, the
"kami" were just Buddhas by another name. "Kokugaku". Buddhism and Shinto
coexisted and were amalgamated in the "shinbutsu sh≈´g≈ç" and K≈´kai's
syncretic view held wide sway up until the end of the Edo period. There was no
theological study that could be called "Shinto" during medieval and early
modern Japanese history, and a mixture of Buddhist and popular beliefs
proliferated. At that time, there was a renewed interest in "Japanese studies"
("kokugaku"), perhaps as a result of the closed country policy. In the 18th
century, various Japanese scholars, in particular Motoori Norinaga (Êú¨Â±Ö
ÂÆ£Èï∑, 1730‚Äì1801), tried to tear apart the "real" Shinto from various
foreign influences. The attempt was largely unsuccessful, since as early as the
"Nihon Shoki" parts of the mythology were explicitly borrowed from Taoism
doctrines. For example, the co-creator deities Izanami and Izanagi are
explicitly compared to yin and yang. However, the attempt did set the stage for
the arrival of state Shinto, following the Meiji Restoration (c.1868), when
Shinto and Buddhism were separated ("shinbutsu bunri"). State Shinto. Fridell
argues that scholars call the period 1868-1945 the "State Shinto period"
because, "during these decades, Shinto elements came under a great deal of
overt state influence and control as the Japanese government systematically
utilized shrine worship as a major force for mobilizing imperial loyalties on
behalf of modern nation-building." The Meiji Restoration reasserted the
importance of the emperor and the ancient chronicles to establish the Empire of
Japan, and in 1868 the government attempted to recreate the ancient imperial
Shinto by separating shrines from the temples that housed them. During this
period, numerous scholars of "kokugaku" believed that this national Shinto
could be the unifying agent of the country around the Emperor while the process
of modernization was undertaken with all possible speed. The psychological
shock of the Western "Black Ships" and the subsequent collapse of the shogunate
convinced many that the nation needed to unify in order to resist being
colonized by outside forces. In 1871, a Ministry of Rites was formed and Shinto
shrines were divided into twelve levels with the Ise Shrine (dedicated to
Amaterasu, and thus symbolic of the legitimacy of the Imperial family) at the
peak and small sanctuaries of humble towns at the base. The following year, the
ministry was replaced with a new Ministry of Religion, charged with leading
instruction in ""shushin"" (moral courses). Priests were officially nominated
and organized by the state, and they instructed the youth in a form of Shinto
theology based on the official dogma of the divinity of Japan's national
origins and its Emperor. However, this propaganda did not take, and the
unpopular Ministry of Rites was dissolved in the mid-1870s. Although the
government sponsorship of shrines declined, Japanese nationalism remained
closely linked to the legends of foundation and emperors, as developed by the
"kokugaku" scholars. In 1890, the Imperial Rescript on Education was issued,
and students were required to ritually recite its oath to "offer yourselves
courageously to the State" as well as to protect the Imperial family. The
practice of Emperor worship was further spread by distributing imperial
portraits for esoteric veneration. All of these practices were used to fortify
national solidarity through patriotic observance at shrines. This use of Shinto
gave Japanese patriotism a special tint of mysticism and cultural introversion,
which became more pronounced as time went on. Such processes continued to
deepen throughout the early Sh≈çwa period, when State Shinto became a main
force of militarism, finally coming to an abrupt end in August 1945 when Japan
lost the war in the Pacific. On 1 January 1946, Emperor Sh≈çwa issued the
Ningen-sengen, in which he quoted the Five Charter Oath of Emperor Meiji and
declared that he was not an "akitsumikami". Post-war. The era of State Shinto
came to an abrupt close with the end of World War II, when Americans decided to
bring separation of church and state to Japanese shores in the wake of the
Japanese surrender. Most Japanese had come to believe that the hubris of Empire
had led to their downfall. The Shinto system included the belief that the
emperor, in this case Hirohito, was divine. Soon after the war, the Emperor
issued a statement renouncing his claims to the status of "living god"
(arahitogami). In the post-war period, numerous "New Religions" cropped up,
many of them ostensibly based on Shinto, but on the whole, Japanese religiosity
may have decreased. However, the concept of religion in Japan is a complex one.
A survey conducted in the mid 1970s indicated that of those participants who
claimed not to believe in religion, one-third had a Buddhist or Shinto altar in
their home, and about one quarter carried an "omamori" (an amulet to gain
protection by "kami") on their person. Following the war, Shinto shrines tended
to focus on helping ordinary people gain better fortunes for themselves through
maintaining good relations with their ancestors and other "kami". The number of
Japanese citizens identifying their religious beliefs as Shinto has declined a
great deal, yet the general practice of Shinto rituals has not decreased in
proportion, and many practices have persisted as general cultural beliefs (such
as ancestor worship), and community festivals ("matsuri")‚Äîfocusing more on
religious practices. The explanation generally given for this anomaly is that,
following the demise of State Shinto, modern Shinto has reverted to its more
traditional position as a traditional religion which is culturally ingrained,
rather than enforced. In any case, Shinto and its values continue to be a
fundamental component of the Japanese cultural mindset. Shinto has also spread
abroad to a limited extent, and a few non-Japanese Shinto priests have been
ordained. A relatively small number of people practice Shinto in America. There
are several Shinto shrines in America. Shrines were also established in Taiwan
and Korea during the Japanese occupation of those areas, but following the war,
they were either destroyed or converted into some other use. New sects. Within
Shinto, there are a variety of new sects outside Shrine Shinto and the
officially defunct State Shinto. Sect Shinto, like Tenrikyo and Konkokyo, have
a unique dogma or leader, with some exhibiting the influence of Messianic
Christianity and cult of personality, in the 19th and 20th century,
particularly the "New Religions" like ("Shinsh≈´ky≈ç") that proliferated in the
post-war era. Cultural heritage. Shinto has been called "the religion of
Japan". Some Japanese practices have origins either directly or indirectly
rooted in Shinto. A number of other Japanese religions have originated from or
been influenced by Shinto.
