Shirk (Islam) In Islam, shirk ( "≈°irk") is the sin of idolatry or polytheism.
i.e. the deification or worship of anyone or anything other than the singular
God, or more literally the establishment of "partners" placed beside God. It is
the vice that is opposed to the virtue of "Tawheed" (monotheism). Within Islam,
"shirk" is an unforgivable crime when unpardoned before death ; God may forgive
any sin if one dies in that state except for committing "shirk". The word
"≈°hirk" comes from the Arabic root ≈ -R-K (), with the general meaning of "to
share". In the context of the Qur'an, the particular sense of "sharing as an
equal partner" is usually understood, so that polytheism is "attributing a
partner to Allah". In the Qur'an, "≈°irk" and the related word (plural Stem IV
active participle) "mu≈°rik≈´n" (ŸÖÿ¥ÿ±ŸÉŸàŸÜ) "those who commit shirk and plot
against Islam" often clearly refers to the enemies of Islam (as in verse
9.1‚Äì15) but sometimes it also refers to erring Muslims. Qur'an. Islamic
commentators on the Qur'an have emphasized that pre-Islamic Arabic idolatry
made a number of godlings (most memorably the three goddesses al-ManƒÅt, al-
LƒÅt and  ªUzzƒÅ) equal associates of Allah (as the Qur'an discusses in the
53rd surat) and the word "mushrik≈´n" (singular: "mushrik") is often translated
into English as "polytheists". Other forms of "shirk" include the worship of
wealth and other material objects. This is pointed out in the Qur'an in one of
the stories of the Children of Israel, when they took a calf made of gold for
worship, and for which Moses ordered them to repent. Another form of shirk
mentioned in the Qur'an is to take scholars of religion, monks, divines or
religious lawyers as Lord/(s) in practice by following their doctrines, and/or
by following their rulings on what is lawful when it is at variance to the law
or doctrines prescribed by God's revelation. Yet another form, is to treat a
prophet, such as Jesus, as God. Theological interpretation. Medieval Muslim (as
well as Jewish) philosophers identified belief in the Trinity with the heresy
of "shirk", in Arabic, (or "shituf" in Hebrew), meaning "associationism," in
limiting the infinity of God by associating his divinity with physical
existence. In a theological context one commits "shirk" by associating some
lesser being with "Allah". This sin is committed if one imagines that there is
some other spirit than "Allah" whom it is suitable to worship. Many Islamic
theologians extend the sense of worship to include praying to some other being
to intercede with Allah on one's behalf, rather than taking one's case to God
Himself. The limits of the concept of worship are quite elastic and theologians
often describe excessive veneration of some artifact here on earth as "shirk".
Atheism is described as "shirk" because it denies the position of "Allah" as
the unique creator and sustainer of the universe ("tawhid ar-rububiyya", the
Unity of Lordship). In the same way, the act of "shirk" is extended to include
such things as the notion that God possesses human-like anthropomorphic
qualities as well as acts of worship or piety whose inward goal is pride,
caprice, or a desire for public admiration, although public prayer is a core
Islamic aspect of faith, encouraged and supported in the Quran. Greater and
lesser shirk. "Shirk" is defined in various ways. Some argue that there is only
one type of "shirk". Greater shirk. Greater "shirk" or "Shirke-al-Akbar" means
open polytheism. Other interpretations also derived from the Qur'an and the
prophetic tradition (Sunnah) divide "shirk" into three main categories. "Shirk"
can be committed by acting against the three different categories In
Rub≈´bƒ´yah (Lordship). This category of "shirk" refers to either the belief
that others share God's Lordship over creation as His equal or near equal, or
to the belief that there exists no Lord over creation at all. In al-Asma was-
Sifat (the names and attributes). "Shirk" in this category includes both the
non-believer practices of giving God the attributes of His creation as well as
the act of giving created beings God's names and attributes. In al-'Ibadah
(worship). In this category of "shirk", acts of worship are directed to other
than Allah and the reward for worship is sought from the creation instead of
the Creator. As in the case of the previous categories, "shirk" in al-'Ebadah
has two main aspects. This form of "shirk" occurs when any act of worship is
directed to other than Allah. It represents the most obvious form of idolatry
which the prophets were specifically sent by God to call the masses of mankind
away from. Examples of this "shirk", asking forgiveness, admittance to
paradise, and other things that only Allah can provide, from other than Allah.
Lesser shirk. Lesser "shirk" or "Shirke-e-Asghar" means hidden polytheism. A
person commits hidden polytheism when he says "tawhid", there is no god except
Allah, but his thoughts and action does not reflect his belief. Lesser "shirk"
fundamentally stems from an underestimation of God. This intellectual defect
leads to pride, arrogance, and self-delusion. Umar Ibn Al-Khattab narrated that
the Messenger of Allah said: 'Whoever swears by other than Allah has committed
an act of kufr or shirk.‚Äô‚Äù (graded "hasan" by Al-Tirmidhi and "saheeh" by
Al-Hakim) Ibn Mas‚Äôood, one of Muhammad‚Äôs companions, said: "That I should
swear by Allah upon a lie is more preferable to me than that I should swear by
another upon the truth.‚Äù
