Shofar A shofar () is a horn, traditionally that of a ram, used for Jewish
religious purposes. Shofar-blowing is incorporated in synagogue services on
Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur. Shofar come in a variety of sizes. Bible and
rabbinic literature. The "shofar" is mentioned frequently in the Hebrew Bible,
the Talmud and rabbinic literature. The blast of a shofar emanating from the
thick cloud on Mount Sinai made the Israelites tremble in awe (Exodus 19:16).
The shofar was used to announce holidays (Ps. lxxxi. 4), and the Jubilee year
(Lev. 25:9). The first day of the seventh month (Tishri) is termed "a memorial
of blowing" (Lev. 23:24), or "a day of blowing" (Num. 29:1), the shofar. They
were for signifying the start of a war (Josh. 6:4; Judges 3:27; 7:16, 20; I
Sam. 8:3). Later, it was also employed in processions (II Sam. 6:15; I Chron.
15:28), as musical accompaniment (Ps. 98:6; comp. ib. 47:5) and eventually it
was inserted into the temple orchestra by David (Ps. 150:3). Note that the
'trumpets' described in Numbers 10 are a different instrument, described by the
Hebrew word 'trumpet' (; ḥaṣoṣrah), not the word for shofar (). The Torah
describes the first day of the seventh month (1st of Tishri = Rosh ha-Shanah)
as a "zikron teruˁah" (; memorial of blowing; Lev. xxiii) and as a "yom
teruˁah" (; day of blowing; Num. 29). This was interpreted by the Jewish sages
as referring to the sounding of the shofar. In the Temple in Jerusalem, the
shofar was sometimes used together with the trumpet. On New Year's Day the
principal ceremony was conducted with the shofar, which instrument was placed
in the center with a trumpet on either side; it was the horn of a wild goat and
straight in shape, being ornamented with gold at the mouthpiece. On fast days
the principal ceremony was conducted with the trumpets in the center and with a
shofar on either side. On those occasions the shofarot were rams' horns curved
in shape and ornamented with silver at the mouthpieces. On Yom Kippur of the
jubilee year the ceremony was performed with the shofar as on New Year's Day.
On Rosh Hashanah and other full holidays (Day of Atonement, Ingathering of the
harvest (Sukkot), Passover and the Feast of Weeks – Pentecost) a single
Priest perfected two sacrifices in honor of the full holiday, (Note that
festivals such as Hanukah and Purim, are not considered full holidays requiring
an extra sacrifice). On Rosh Hashanah, something special occurred during the
special sacrifice. Arguably two Shofar Sounders played the long notes and one
Trumpet player played the short note. Accordingly, Rosh HaShanah is called Yom
Teruah (the day of the blast) Otherwise, the Trumpets had "top billing." Rosh
Hashanah27a, supports this claim: "Said Raba or it may have been R. Joshua B.
Levi: What is the scriptural warrant for this? – Because it is written, "With
trumpets and the sound of the Shofar shout ye before the King in the Temple, we
require trumpets and the sound of the Shofar; elsewhere not." Indeed, on Yom
Kippur, the Shofar was sounded to announce the Jubilee Year (every 50 years,
Jews were granted forgiveness, debts were forgiven, indentured Israelites were
granted freedom, and the fields "shall become owned by the priests." Shofar
first indicated in Yovel (Jubilee Year - Lev. 25:8-13). Indeed, in Rosh
Hashanah 33b, the sages ask why the Shofar sounded in Jubilee year. Further
support is found in Rosh Hashanah 29a, where the Talmud talks of trumpets for
sacrifices but Shofar in the Jubilee Year does not apply to priests who are
exempt from the obligations of the jubilee. Perhaps, we have the first mention
of Shofar Sounding by non-Priests. Perhaps the first distancing away from the
Sacrificial Cult. Otherwise, for all other special days, the Shofar is sounded
shorter and two special silver Trumpets announced the sacrifice. When the
trumpets sound the signal, all the people who were within the sacrifice
prostrate themselves, stretching out flat, face down and on the ground. The
shofar was blown in the times of Joshua to help him capture Jericho. As they
surrounded the walls, the shofar was blown and the Jews were able to capture
the city. The shofar was commonly taken out to war so the troops would know
when a battle would begin. The person who would blow the shofar would call out
to the troops from atop a hill. All of the troops were able to hear the call of
the shofar from their position because of its distinct sound. Post-Biblical
times. In post-Biblical times, the shofar was enhanced in its religious use
because of the ban on playing musical instruments as a sign of mourning for the
destruction of the temple. (It is noted that a full orchestra played in the
temple.) The shofar continues to announce the New Year, and the new moon, to
introduce Shabbat, to carry out the commandment to sound it on Rosh Hashanah,
and to mark the end of the day of fasting on Yom Kippur once the services have
completed in the evening. Secular uses have been discarded (see a notable
exception in a section further down). The shofar is primarily associated with
Rosh Hashanah. Indeed, Rosh Hashanah is called "Yom T’ruah" (or "Yom Teruah")
(the day of the shofar blast). In the Mishnah (book of early rabbinic laws
derived from the Torah), a discussion centers on the centrality of the shofar
in the time before the destruction of the second temple (70 AD). Indeed, the
shofar was the center of the ceremony, with two silver trumpets playing a
lesser role. On other solemn holidays, fasts, and new moon celebrations, two
silver trumpets were featured, with one shofar playing a lesser role. The
shofar is also associated with the jubilee year in which, every fifty years,
Jewish law provided for the release of all slaves, land, and debts. The sound
of the shofar on Rosh Hashanah announced the jubilee year, and the sound of the
shofar on Yom Kippur proclaimed the actual release of financial encumbrances.
The halakha (Jewish law) rules that the shofar may not be sounded on Shabbat
due to the potential that the ba’al tekiyah (shofar sounder) may
inadvertently carry it which is in a class of forbidden Shabbat work. The
historical explanation is that in ancient Israel, the shofar was sounded on
Shabbat in the temple located in Jerusalem. After the temple’s destruction,
the sounding of the shofar on Shabbat was restricted to the place where the
great Sanhedrin (Jewish legislature and court from 400 BCE to 100 C.E.) was
located. However, when the Sanhedrin ceased to exist, the sounding of the
shofar on Shabbat was discontinued. The shofar says, "Awake, sleepers from your
sleep, and slumberers arise from your slumber!" Mishneh Torah, Laws of
Repentance 3:4. Mitzvah. The Sages indicated that the mitzvah was to hear the
sounds of the shofar. They went so far as to consider a shofar blown into a pit
or cave and to decide whether a person who hears the original sound or the echo
has fulfilled the mitzvah. Mishnah (Rosh Hashanah 27b). The Shulchan Aruch sums
up that if the hearer hears the reverberation, the mitzvah is not valid.
However, if the listener perceives the direct sounds, he fulfils the mitzvah.
Thus, most modern halakhic authorities hold that hearing a shofar on the radio
or the Internet would not be valid to satisfy the mitzvah because
"electronically reproduced sounds do not suffice for mitzvot that require
hearing a specific natural sound. . . . However, one should consult a competent
rabbi if an unusually pressing situation arises, as some authorities believe
that performing mitzvot through electronically reproduced sound is preferable
to not performing them at all." According to Jewish law women and minors are
exempt from the commandment of hearing the shofar blown (as is the case with
any positive, time-bound commandment), but they are encouraged to attend the
ceremony. If the Baal Tekiyah (shofar sounder) blows with the intention that
all who hear will perform the mitzvah, then anyone listening—even someone
passing by—who intends to hear the Shofar can perform the mitzvah because the
community blower blows for everybody. If the listener stands still, it is
presumed he intends to hear. If one hears the blast but with no intention of
fulfilling the mitzvah, then the mitzvah has not been fulfilled.
Qualifications. The expert who blows (or "blasts" or "sounds") the shofar is
termed the "Tokea" (lit. "Blaster") or "Ba'al T'qiah" (lit. "Master of the
Blast"). Being a Ba'al T'qiah (shofar sounder) is an honor. Every male Jew is
eligible for this sacred office, providing he is acceptable to the
congregation. "The one who blows the shofar on Rosh Hashanah . . . should
likewise be learned in the Torah and shall be God-fearing; the best man
available." If a potential choice will cause dissension, he should withdraw his
candidacy, even if the improper person will be chosen. If a blind blower was
dismissed, but the community did not find a blower as proficient, he should be
appointed as community blower. The Shulchan Aruch discusses who is fit to blow
the shofar on behalf of a congregation: The "Ba'al T'qiah" shall abstain from
anything that may cause ritual contamination for three days prior to Rosh
Hashanah. Shape and material. Choice of animal. According to the Talmud, a
shofar may be made from the horn of any animal from the Bovidae family except
that of a cow although a ram is preferable. Bovidae horns are made of keratin
(the same material as human toenails and fingernails). An antler, on the other
hand, is not a horn but solid bone. Antlers cannot be used as a shofar because
they cannot be hollowed out. There is no requirement for ritual slaughter
(shechita), and theoretically, the horn can come from a non-kosher animal
because under most interpretations of Jewish law the shofar is not required to
be "muttar be-fikha" (literally: permissible in your mouth); the mitzvah is
hearing the shofar, not eating the animal it came from. The shofar falls into
the category of "tashmishei mitzvah", objects used to perform a mitzvah that do
not themselves have inherent holiness. Moreover, because horn is always
inedible, it is considered "afra be-alma" (mere dust) and not an unkosher
substance. The Elef Hamagan (586:5) delineates the order of preference: 1)
curved ram; 2) curved other sheep; 3) curved other animal; 4) straight—ram or
otherwise; 5) non-kosher animal; 6) cow. The first four categories are used
with a "bracha" (blessing), the fifth without a "bracha", and the last, not at
all. Construction. In practice two species are generally used: the Ashkenazi
and Sefardi shofar is made from the horn of a domestic ram, while a Yemeni
shofar is made from the horn of a kudu. A Moroccan Shofar is a flat Shofar with
no curves besides the main curve. A crack or hole in the shofar affecting the
sound renders it unfit for ceremonial use. A shofar may not be painted in
colors, but it may be carved with artistic designs (Shulkhan Arukh, Orach
Chayim, 586, 17). Shofars (especially the Sephardi shofars) are sometimes
plated with silver across part of their length for display purposes, although
this invalidates them for use in religious practices. The horn is flattened and
shaped by the application of heat, which softens it. A hole is made from the
tip of the horn to the natural hollow inside. It is played much like a European
brass instrument, with the player blowing through the hole, causing the air
column inside to vibrate. Sephardi shofars usually have a carved mouthpiece
resembling that of a European trumpet or French horn, but smaller. Ashkenazi
shofars do not. Because the hollow of the shofar is irregular in shape, the
harmonics obtained when playing the instrument can vary: rather than a pure
perfect fifth, intervals as narrow as a fourth, or as wide as a sixth may be
produced. Sounds. Biblical commandment. The "T'qiah" and "teruah" sounds
mentioned in the Bible were respectively bass and treble. The t'qiah was a
plain deep sound ending abruptly; the teruah, a trill between two t'qiahs.
These two sounds, constituting a single unit of shofar sounding, were rendered
three times during a service added specially for Rosh HaShanah: first in honor
of God's Kingship (malchiot); next to recall the near sacrifice of Isaac, in
order to cause the congregation to be remembered before God (zichronot); and a
third time to comply with the precept regarding the shofar (shofrot). The word
t'ruah (a broken sound) appears three times in the Bible in the context of the
shofar, from which the Talmud derives the rule that three such sounds must be
made. In addition, other verses connect the word t'qiah (an unbroken sound) to
t'ruah twice, thus leading the Talmud to rule that each t'ruah must be preceded
and followed by a t'qiah, leading to a total of nine blasts (t'qiah-teruah-
t'qiah three times). This series is also known by its acronyms: "TaShRaT,
TaShaT, TaRaT," respectively. When blowing the sh'varim-teruah, the t'qiah is
lengthened to be slightly longer the duration of the sh'varim and the teruah
together. Some opinions require trebling the series, based on the mention of
teruah three times in connection with the seventh month (Lev. xxiii, xxv; Num.
xxix), and also on the above-mentioned division of the service into malchiyot,
zichronot, and shofarot. Alternatively, although fewer opinions are satisfied,
some communities sound a single series of "Tashrat-Tashat-Tarat" without
trebling. This may also fulfill the required total of thirty blasts, if t'qiah
is counted as one note, sh'varim three, and teruah nine. Regardless, all
halachic authorities teach that one should follow one's community's custom.
Modern practice. It is customary to hear 100 or 101 sounds in the synagogue,
although the minimum requirement is to hear 30 sounds. The shofar is sounded
just before, during and after the Musaf prayer on Rosh HaShanah. For the
sounding just before Musaf, after the Torah reading, relevant verses from the
Bible are recited, followed by two blessings: one on the Biblical commandment
of "hearing the sound of the shofar" and the blessing of Shehecheyanu. After
that, thirty shofar blasts are sounded. In the Musaf prayer itself, the shofar
is sounded three times during the silent prayer, and then again three times
during the leader's repetition. For each of these soundings, ten appropriate
selections from the Bible are recited, followed by a benediction, followed
finally by a series of ten shofar blasts. After leader's repetition of the
Musaf prayer is completed, a final series of ten (or eleven, depending on the
community's custom) shofar blasts are sounded, yielding a total of 100 or 101
blasts. (Some communities do not blow the shofar during the silent Musaf
prayer, instead blowing the 30 blasts after the leader's repetition.) After the
service is over, it is customary to blow another series of thirty blasts "to
confuse the Adversary." According to the Sephardic tradition, a full 101 blasts
are sounded, corresponding to the 100 cries of the mother of Sisera, the
captain of Jabin's army who did not return home after being killed by the Yael
(Judges 5:28). One cry is added to symbolize the legitimate love of a mother
mourning her son. Use in modern times. Religion. The shofar is used mainly on
Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur. It is blown in synagogues to mark the end of the
fast at Yom Kippur, and blown at four particular occasions in the prayers on
Rosh Hashanah. Because of its inherent ties to the Days of Repentance and the
inspiration that comes along with hearing its piercing blasts, the shofar is
also blown after morning services for the entire month of Elul, the last month
of the Jewish civil year and the sixth of the Jewish ecclesiastical year. It is
not blown on the last day of month, however, to mark the difference between the
voluntary blasts of the month and the mandatory blasts of the holiday. Shofar
blasts are also used during penitential rituals such as Yom Kippur Katan and
optional prayer services called during times of communal distress. The exact
modes of sounding can vary from location to location. In an effort to improve
the skills of shofar blowers, an International Day of Shofar Study is observed
on Rosh Chodesh Elul, the start of the month preceding Rosh Hashanah. National
liberation. During the Ottoman and the British rule of Jerusalem, Jews were not
allowed to sound the shofar at the Western Wall. After the Six Day War, Rabbi
Shlomo Goren famously approached the Wall and sounded the shofar. This fact
inspired Naomi Shemer to add an additional line to her song "Jerusalem of
Gold", saying: "a shofar calls out from the Temple Mount in The Old City". Non-
religious musical usage. The shofar is sometimes used in Western classical
music. Edward Elgar's oratorio "The Apostles" includes the sound of a shofar
blowing, although other instruments, such as the flugelhorn, are usually used
instead. In pop music, the shofar is used by the Israeli Oriental metal band
Salem in their adaptation of ""Al Taster"" psalm. The late trumpeter Lester
Bowie played a shofar with the Art Ensemble of Chicago. In the film version of
the musical "Godspell", the first act opens with cast member David Haskell
blowing the shofar. In his performances, Israeli composer and singer Shlomo
Gronich uses the shofar to produce a very wide range of notes. Since 1988 Rome-
based American composer Alvin Curran's project "Shofar" features the shofar as
a virtuoso solo instrument and in combination with sets of natural and
electronic sounds. In Jerry Goldsmith's scores to the film "Alien" and Planet
of the Apes, the shofar is part of the orchestration. Madonna used a shofar
played by Yitzhak Sinwani on the "Confessions Tour" and the album Confessions
on a Dance Floor for the song "Isaac", based on Im Nin'alu.
