Shrine A shrine ( "case or chest for books or papers"; Old French: "escrin"
"box or case") is a holy or sacred place, which is dedicated to a specific
deity, ancestor, hero, martyr, saint, daemon or similar figure of awe and
respect, at which they are venerated or worshipped. Shrines often contain
idols, relics, or other such objects associated with the figure being
venerated. A shrine at which votive offerings are made is called an altar.
Shrines are found in many of the world's religions, including Christianity,
Islam, Hinduism, Buddhism, Wicca, Chinese folk religion and Shinto, as well as
in secular and non-religious settings such as a war memorial. Shrines can be
found in various settings, such as churches, temples, cemeteries, or in the
home, although portable shrines are also found in some cultures. A shrine may
become a focus of a cult image. Types of shrines. Temple shrines. Many shrines
are located within buildings designed specifically for worship, such as a
church in Christianity, or a mandir in Hinduism. A shrine here is usually the
centre of attention in the building, and is given a place of prominence. In
such cases, adherents of the faith assemble within the building in order to
venerate the deity at the shrine. Household shrines. Historically, in Hinduism,
Buddhism and Roman Catholicism, and also in modern faiths, such as Neopaganism,
a shrine can commonly be found within the home or shop. This shrine is usually
a small structure or a setup of pictures and figurines dedicated to a deity
that is part of the official religion, to ancestors or to a localised household
deity. Small household shrines are very common among the Chinese and people
from South and Southeast Asia, whether Hindu, Buddhist or Christian. Usually a
small lamp and small offerings are kept daily by the shrine. Buddhist household
shrines must be on a shelf above the head; Chinese shrines must stand directly
on the floor. Yard shrines. Small outdoor yard shrines are found at the places
of many peoples, following various religions, including historically,
Christianity. Many consist of a statue of Christ or a saint, on a pedestal or
in an alcove, while others may be elaborate booths without ceilings, some
include paintings, statuary, and architectural elements, such as walls, roofs,
glass doors and ironwork fences, etc. In the United States, some Christians
have small yard shrines; some of these resemble side altars, since they are
composed of a statue placed in a niche or grotto; this type is colloquially
referred to as a "bathtub madonna". Religious shrines. Shrines are found in
most, though not all, religions. As distinguished from a temple, a shrine
usually houses a particular relic or cult image, which is the object of worship
or veneration, or is constructed to set apart a site which is thought to be
particularly holy, as opposed to being placed for the convenience of
worshippers. Shrines therefore attract the practice of pilgrimage.
Christianity. Shrines are found in many, though not all, forms of Christianity.
Roman Catholicism, the largest denomination of Christianity, has many shrines,
as do Orthodox Christianity and Anglicanism. In the Roman Catholic Code of
Canon law, canons 1230 and 1231 read: "The term shrine means a church or other
sacred place which, with the approval of the local Ordinary, is by reason of
special devotion frequented by the faithful as pilgrims. For a shrine to be
described as national, the approval of the Episcopal Conference is necessary.
For it to be described as international, the approval of the Holy See is
required." Another use of the term "shrine" in colloquial Catholic terminology
is a niche or alcove in most – especially larger – churches used by
parishioners when praying privately in the church. They were also called
Devotional Altars, since they could look like small Side Altars or bye-altars.
Shrines were always centered on some image of Christ or a saint – for
instance, a statue, painting, mural or mosaic, and may have had a reredos
behind them (without a Tabernacle built in). However, Mass would not be
celebrated at them; they were simply used to aid or give a visual focus for
prayers. Side altars, where Mass could actually be celebrated, were used in a
similar way to shrines by parishioners. Side altars were specifically dedicated
to The Virgin Mary, Saint Joseph as well as other saints. A nativity set could
also be viewed as a shrine, as the definition of a shrine is any holy or sacred
place. Islam. Sunni Islam. According to the classical chief sources of
legislation and jurisprudence in orthodox Sunni Islam, primarily the Quran and
Hadith texts (and notably the practice of the Salafi school of thought and
early Muslims), it is understood to be totally forbidden to build structures
over graves based on the legal evidences where the Prophet Muhammad ordered to
demolish all the structures over graves and forbade acts of worship at the
graveyards (aside from the funeral prayer) including calling upon other than
Allah. It is commonly misunderstood that the grave of the Prophet is an
exception to this rule however historically the grave was originally located in
the home of Aisha and the Mosque was extended over and the grave incorporated
due to lack of space for the growing number of worshipers. There is a clear
prohibition of raising the grave in the name of venerating the dead as it may
lead to Shirk such as accounted in the story of the people of Noah, from Surah
An Nuh 71: 23 it is quoted; “And they have said: ‘You shall not leave your
gods, nor shall you leave Wadd, nor Suwâ’, nor Yaghûth, nor Ya’ûq, nor
Nasr (these are the names of their idols)." Ibn Abbas commented on this saying,
"“These are the names of the pious people from among them. Following their
deaths, Shaytan inspired their people to erect status in the place where they
used to sit, and to call them with their names. They did so, however at this
point, they were not worshiped until that generation died and the new
generation deviated.”" However in contrast to this, throughout parts of the
Islamic world there has developed a deep cultural tradition of shrine
veneration. Although classically in orthodox Islam it is prohibited to worship
or engage in acts of worship surrounding graves; various movements and sects
took the stance that it is permitted to supplicate with the 'Tawasul' or
intercession of the deceased pious person (Sufi/Wali). For these groups,
shrines hold a notable position and considered as places to seek spiritual
guidance. Most venerated shrines are dedicated to various Sufi Saints and are
widely scattered throughout the Islamic world. For them it is seen as a
tradition to commemorate the death of the Saint, by holding festivals at his
tomb to commemorate his life. In several countries, the local shrine is a focal
point of the community, with several localities named specifically for the
local saint. In some parts of the Islamic world, such as in Pakistan, these
festivals are multi-day events and even draw members of the Hindu and Christian
minority who often revere the Muslim saint, such as in the case of the famous
Lal Baz Qalandar shrine in Sindh, Pakistan – an important example of
religious syncretism that blurs the distinction between members of different
religions. Sufi shrines in Bangladesh, India, and Pakistan are also host to a
night of commemoration by Mehfil Samaaa (Qawali) and 'Zikr' every Thursday.
Some academics assert that such practices were influenced by Hinduism long ago
when Muslims and Hindus co-existed in the sub-continent. In Turkey, the famous
Sufi Whirling Dervishes perform their whirling at the shrine of Jalal-ud-Din
Rumi in Konya, while in Morocco and Algeria, brotherhoods of Black African
Sufis, the Gnouia, perform elaborate songs at the shrines of their Saints.
Numerous shrines were once located in Saudi Arabia in its initial days.
However, due to the revival of Islamic orthodoxy by Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab
(strongly clinging to the Hadith texts and Quran) against developed cultural
practices they were destroyed by local authorities who identified them as
sources of Shirk and of being reprehensible innovations in Islam or 'Bid‘ah'.
Other important Shrines were once found in Central Asia, but many were
destroyed by the Soviets. Shia Islam. Shia's have several shrines dedicated to
various religious figures important in their history, and several elaborate
shrines are dedicated to Shia Saints and religious figures, most notably in
Kerbala, Najaf, and Samarra in Iraq, and Qum and Mashad in Iran. Other
important Shia shrines are located in Mazar-e-Sharif ("the Noble Shrine") in
Afghanistan, and in Damascus, Syria. Buddhism. In Buddhism, a shrine refers to
a place where veneration is focused on the Buddha or one of the bodhisattvas.
Monks, nuns and laypeople all give offerings to these revered figures at these
shrines and also meditate in front of them. Typically, Buddhist shrines contain
a statue of either the Buddha, or (in the Mahayana and Vajrayana forms of
Buddhism), one of the various bodhisattvas. They also commonly contain candles,
along with offerings such as flowers, purified water, food, and incense. Many
shrines also contain sacred relics, such as the alleged tooth of the Buddha
held at a shrine in Sri Lanka. Site-specific shrines in Buddhism, particularly
those that contain relics of deceased buddhas and revered monks, are often
designed in the traditional form known as the stupa. Hinduism. In Hinduism, a
shrine is a place where a god or goddess is worshipped. Shrines are typically
located inside a temple known as a mandir, though many Hindus also have a
household shrine as well. Sometimes a human is venerated at a Hindu shrine
along with a deity, for instance the 19th century religious teacher Sri
Ramakrishna is venerated at the Ramakrishna Temple in Kolkata, India. Central
to a Hindu shrine is a statue of a deity, which is known as a murti. Hindus
believe that the deity that they are worshiping actually enters and inhabits
the murti. This is given offerings like candles, food, flowers, and incense. In
some cases, particularly among devotees of the goddess Kālī in northern
India, animals are sacrificed to the deity (animal sacrifice is not a part of
Hinduism). At a mandir, the congregation often assembles in front of a shrine,
and, led by priests, give offerings and sing devotional hymns. Taoism. The line
between a temple and a shrine in Taoism is not fully defined; shrines are
usually smaller versions of larger Taoist temples or small places in a home
where a yin-yang emblem is placed among peaceful settings to encourage
meditation and study of Taoist texts and principles. Taoists place less
emphasis on formalized attendance and ritualized worship than other Asian
religions; formal temples and structures of worship came about in Taoism mostly
in order to prevent losing adherents to Buddhism. Frequent features of Taoist
shrines include the same features as full temples, often including any or all
of the following features : gardens, running water or fountains, small burning
braziers or candles (with or without incense), and copies of Taoist texts such
as the Tao Te Ching, Zhuangzi or other texts by Lao Tzu, Chuang Tzu or other
Taoist sages. As with all Taoist worship, Taoist shrines are organized around a
sense of appreciation of nature and surroundings that inspire meditation on,
and living in accordance with, the Tao ("Way" or "Path", a concept of living
harmoniously with one's natural surroundings and environment) and the Three
Jewels Of Taoism (different from Buddhism's concept of Three Jewels) -
compassion, moderation, and humility. Secular shrines. Halls of fame also serve
as shrines into which single or multiple individuals are inducted on the basis
of their influence upon regions, cultures or disciplines. Busts or full-body
statues are often erected and placed alongside each other in commemoration. By
extension the term "shrine" has come to mean any place (or virtual cyber-place)
dedicated completely to a particular person or subject such as the Shrine of
the Sun in Colorado Springs, Colorado.
