Shunning Shunning can be the act of social rejection, or mental rejection.
Social rejection is when a person or group deliberately avoids association
with, and habitually keeps away from an individual or group. This can be a
formal decision by a group, or a less formal group action which will spread to
all members of the group as a form of solidarity. It is a sanction against
association, often associated with religious groups and other tightly knit
organizations and communities. Targets of shunning can include persons who have
been labeled as, apostates, whistleblowers, dissidents, strikebreakers, or
anyone the group perceives as a threat or source of conflict. Social rejection
has been established to cause psychological damage and has been categorized as
torture. Mental rejection is a more individual action, where a person
subconsciously or willfully ignores an idea, or a set of information related to
a particular viewpoint. Some groups are made up of people who shun the same
ideas. Social rejection was and is a punishment used by many customary legal
systems. Such sanctions include the ostracism of ancient Athens and the still-
used "kasepekang" in Balinese society. Overview. Shunning. Shunning can be
broken down into behaviours and practices that seek to accomplish either or
both of two primary goals. Shunning is usually approved of (if sometimes with
regret) by the group engaging in the shunning, and usually highly disapproved
of by the target of the shunning, resulting in a polarization of views. Those
subject to the practice respond differently, usually depending both on the
circumstances of the event, and the nature of the practices being applied.
Extreme forms of shunning have damaged some individuals' psychological and
relational health. Responses to the practice have developed, mostly around
anti-shunning advocacy; such advocates highlight the detrimental effects of
many of such behaviors, and seek to limit the practice through pressure or law.
Such groups often operate supportive organizations or institutions to help
victims of shunning to recover from damaging effects, and sometimes to attack
the organizations practicing shunning, as a part of their advocacy. Stealth
shunning. Stealth shunning is a practice where a person or an action is
silently banned. When a person is silently banned, the group they have been
banned from doesn't interact with them. This can be done by secretly announcing
the policy to all except the banned individual, or it can happen informally
when all people in a group or email list each conclude that they do not want to
interact with the person. When an action is silently banned, requests for that
action are either ignored or turned down with faked explanations. Effects.
Shunning is often used as a pejorative term to describe any organizationally
mandated disassociation, and has acquired a connotation of abuse and relational
aggression. This is due to the sometimes extreme damage caused by its
disruption to normal relationships between individuals, such as friendships and
family relations. Disruption of established relationships certainly causes
pain, which is at least an unintended consequence of the practices described
here, though it may also in many cases be an intended, coercive consequence.
This pain, especially when seen as unjustly inflicted, can have secondary
general psychological effects on self-worth and self-confidence, trust and
trustworthiness, and can, as with other types of trauma, impair psychological
function. Shunning often involves implicit or explicit shame for a member who
commits acts seen as wrong by the group or its leadership. Such shame may not
be psychologically damaging if the membership is voluntary and the rules of
behavior were clear before the person joined. However, if the rules are
arbitrary, if the group membership is seen as essential for personal security,
safety, or health, or if the application of the rules is inconsistent, such
shame can be highly destructive. This can be especially damaging if perceptions
are attacked or controlled, or various tools of psychological pressure applied.
Extremes of this cross over the line into psychological torture and can be
permanently scarring. A key detrimental effect of some of the practices
associated with shunning relate to their effect on relationships, especially
family relationships. At its extremes, the practices may destroy marriages,
break up families, and separate children and their parents. The effect of
shunning can be very dramatic or even devastating on the shunned, as it can
damage or destroy the shunned member's closest familial, spousal, social,
emotional, and economic bonds. Shunning contains aspects of what is known as
relational aggression in psychological literature. When used by church members
and member-spouse parents against excommunicant parents it contains elements of
what psychologists call parental alienation. Extreme shunning may cause traumas
to the shunned (and to their dependents) similar to what is studied in the
psychology of torture. Civil rights implications. Some aspects of shunning may
also be seen as being at odds with civil rights or human rights, especially
those behaviours that coerce and attack. When a group seeks to have an effect
through such practices outside its own membership, for instance when a group
seeks to cause financial harm through isolation and disassociation, they can
come at odds with their surrounding civil society, if such a society enshrines
rights such as freedom of association, conscience, or belief. Many civil
societies do not extend such protections to the internal operations of
communities or organizations so long as an ex-member has the same rights,
prerogatives, and power as any other member of the civil society. In cases
where a group or religion is state-sanctioned, a key power, or in the majority
(Singapore), a shunned former member may face severe social, political, and/or
financial costs. In religious practice. Christianity. Early Christianity.
Passages in the New Testament, such as . and , suggest shunning as a practice
of early Christians, and are cited as such by its modern-day practitioners
within Christianity. However, not all Christian scholars or denominations agree
on this interpretation of these verses. Policies governing the use of shunning
vary from one organization to another. Catholicism. Prior to the Code of Canon
Law of 1983, the Catholic Church expected in rare cases (known as
excommunication "vitandi") the faithful to shun an excommunicated member in
secular matters. In 1983, the distinction between "vitandi" and others
("tolerandi") was abolished, and thus the expectation is not made any more.
Anabaptism. Shunning occurs in Old Order Amish and some Mennonite churches.
Shunning can be particularly painful for the shunned individuals in these
denominations, which are generally very close-knit, as the shunned person may
have no significant social contact with anyone other than those in their
denomination. Upon taking instruction classes, each applicant must make a
confession to uphold shunning of all excommunicated adult members, and also
submit to being shunned if they are excommunicated. The stated intention is not
to punish, but to be used in love to win the member back by showing them their
error. (Ref Johns Hopkins Press, below). The Amish call shunning "Meidung", the
German word for "avoidance". Shunning was a key issue of disagreement in the
Amish-Mennonite split. Former Amish Ruth Irene Garrett provides an account of
Amish shunning in her community from perspective of shunned individuals in
"Crossing Over: One Woman's Escape from Amish Life". Amish shunning is also the
subject of popular fiction novels about shunning. Different Amish communities
vary in the severity and strictness of shunning employed. The Mennonite ban
does not usually involve shunning, but excommunicated members are banned from
participation in communion. A few Mennonite groups do practice shunning, or
have in the past. Mainstream and progressive Mennonites either do not shun, or
employ less extreme forms of shunning. Some very conservative Mennonite
churches use shunning to exclude, punish, and shame excommunicated members. In
its extreme form, Mennonites who practice shunning do so by condemning,
snubbing, and shaming excommunicated individuals in all social, spousal, and
familial contexts without regard for family ties. When a member is
excommunicated, shunning continues until the individual's death unless they
repent. Jehovah's Witnesses. Jehovah's Witnesses practise a form of shunning
which they refer to as "disfellowshipping". A disfellowshipped person is not to
be greeted either socially or at their meetings. Disfellowshipping follows a
decision of a judicial committee established by a local congregation that a
member is guilty of a "serious sin", including "fornication, adultery,
homosexuality, greed, extortion, thievery, lying, drunkenness, reviling,
spiritism, murder, idolatry, apostasy, and the causing of divisions in the
congregation"; Watch Tower publications cite sexual immorality as the most
common reason. The Watch Tower Society directs that those who voluntarily
renounce membership of the religion ("disassociation") are also to be shunned.
The organization cites their interpretation of various passages in the Bible,
such as 1 Corinthians 5:11-13, and 2 John 10-11 to support their practice of
shunning. Total shunning is not enforced in the case of disfellowshipped
members living in the same household, although in this case the remaining
members will not usually discuss spiritual matters with the disfellowshipped
person. Parents are still expected to give Bible instruction to a
disfellowshipped minor. Contact with family members not living in the family
home is to be kept to a minimum. Sociologist Andrew Holden claims his research
indicated many Witnesses who would otherwise defect because of disillusionment
with the organization and its teachings retain affiliation out of fear of being
shunned and losing contact with friends and family members. Judaism. Cherem is
the highest ecclesiastical censure in the Jewish community. It is the total
exclusion of a person from the Jewish community. Except in rare cases in the
Ultra-Orthodox and Chassidic community, the practice of cherem ceased in the
Age of Enlightenment, when local Jewish communities lost their political
autonomy and Jews were legally enfranchised into the Gentile nations in which
they lived. Bahá'í faith. Members of the Bahá'í Faith are expected to shun
those that have been declared Covenant-breakers, and expelled from the
religion, by the head of their faith. Covenant-breakers are defined as leaders
of schismatic groups that resulted from challenges to legitimacy of Bahá'í
leadership, as well as those who follow or refuse to shun them. Unity is
considered the highest value in the Bahá'í Faith, and any attempt at schism
by a Bahá'í is considered a spiritual sickness, and a negation of that for
which the religion stands. Church of Scientology. The Church of Scientology
asks its members to quit all communication with Suppressive Persons (those whom
the Church deems antagonistic to Scientology). The practice of shunning in
Scientology is termed disconnection. Members can disconnect from any person
they already know, including existing family members. Many examples of this
policy's application have been established in court. It used to be customary to
write a "disconnection letter" to the person being disconnected from, and to
write a public disconnection notice, but these practices have not continued.
The Church states that typically only people with "false data" about
Scientology are antagonistic, so it encourages members to first attempt to
provide "true data" to these people. According to official Church statements,
disconnection is only used as a last resort and only lasts until the antagonism
ceases. Failure to disconnect from a Suppressive Person is itself labelled a
Suppressive act. In the United States, the Church has tried to argue in court
that disconnection is a constitutionally-protected religious practice. However,
this argument was rejected because the pressure put on individual
Scientologists to disconnect means it is not voluntary.
