Sign of the Cross The sign of the cross (), or crossing oneself, is a ritual
hand motion made by members of many branches of Christianity, often accompanied
by spoken or mental recitation of a trinitarian formula. The motion is the
tracing of the shape of a cross in the air or on one's own body, echoing the
traditional shape of the cross of the Christian Crucifixion narrative. There
are two principal forms: the one—three fingers, right to left—is
exclusively used in the Eastern Orthodox churches and the Eastern Rites of the
Catholic Church of the Byzantine and Chaldean Tradition; the other—left to
right, other than three fingers—is the one used in the Latin, Syriac, Syro-
Malankara, Armenian, Coptic, Maronite, and Syro-Malabar Catholic Church,
Anglicanism, Lutheranism and Oriental Orthodoxy (see below). The ritual is rare
within other Christian traditions. Gesture. The open right hand is used in
Western Christianity. The five open fingers are often said to represent the
Five Wounds of Christ (a common misunderstanding says that they are four
fingers symbolizing the Trinity and the Virgin Mary), although this symbolism
was applied after the more ancient gesture of two or three fingers was
simplified. Though this is the most common method of crossing by Western
Christians, other forms are sometimes used. The West also employs the "Small
Sign of the Cross" in which a small cross is traced with the thumb over the
forehead, lips, and breast of the individual while whispering the words "May
Christ's words be in my mind, on my lips, and in my heart". This is used at the
Proclamation of the Gospel at Holy Mass and also is commonly used when blessing
oneself with holy water when leaving or entering a church. In the Eastern
Orthodox and Eastern Catholic Churches, the thumb, index, and middle finger are
brought to a point, symbolizing the Trinity (the Father, Son and the Holy
Spirit/Ghost, three persons ["hypostases"] sharing a single essence ["ousia"]),
the remaining two fingers (kept pressed together and touching the palm)
representing the human and divine natures of Jesus Christ. However, the Russian
Orthodox in the past used two fingers brought to a point with the three
remaining fingers pressed down. Russian Old Believers still use this form. The
Oriental Orthodox (Armenians, Copts, Ethiopians etc.) generally use the
"Western" direction as well, though often with the Byzantine finger formation.
In Russia, until the reforms of Patriarch Nikon in the 17th century, it was
customary to make the sign of the cross with two fingers (symbolising the dual
nature of Christ). The enforcement of the three-finger sign was one of the
reasons for the schism with the Old Believers whose congregations continue to
use the two-finger sign of the cross. The sign of the Cross is made by touching
the hand sequentially to the forehead, lower chest or navel area, and both
shoulders, accompanied by the Trinitarian formula: at the forehead "In the name
of the Father" (or "In nomine Patris" in Latin); at the stomach or heart "and
of the Son" ("et Filii"); across the shoulders "and of the Holy Spirit/Ghost"
("et Spiritus Sancti"); and finally: "Amen". There are several interpretations,
according to Church Fathers: the forehead symbolizes Heaven; the stomach, the
earth; the shoulders, the place and sign of power. There are some variations:
for example a person may first place the right hand in holy water. After moving
the hand from one shoulder to the other, it may be returned to the stomach. It
may also be accompanied by the recitation of a prayer e.g. the Jesus Prayer, or
simply "Lord have mercy". In some cultures it is customary to kiss one's hand
or fingers at the conclusion of the gesture. Sequence This is how to bless
someone with your hand and make the sign of the cross over them. Hold three
fingers, as equals, together, to represent the Trinity: God the Father, God the
Son, and God the Holy Ghost. These are not three gods, but one God in Trinity.
The names are separate, but the divinity one. The Father was never incarnate;
the Son incarnate, but not created; the Holy Ghost neither incarnate nor
created, but issued from the Godhead: three in a single divinity. Divinity is
one force and has one honor. They receive on obeisance from all creation, both
angels and people. Thus the decree for these three fingers. You should hold the
other two fingers slightly bent, not completely straight. This is because these
represent the dual nature of Christ, divine and human. God in His divinity, and
human in His incarnation, yet perfect in both. The upper finger represents
divinity, and the lower humanity; this way salvation goes from the higher
finger to the lower. So is the bending of the fingers interpreted, for the
worship of Heaven comes down for our salvation. This is how you must cross
yourselves and give a blessing, as the holy fathers have commanded. Then we
should also marvel how demons and various diseases are dispelled by the sign of
the precious and life-giving Cross, which all can make without cost or effort.
Who can number the panegyrics composed in its honor? The holy fathers have
handed down to us the inner significance of this sign, so that we can refute
heretics and unbelievers. The two fingers and single hand with which it is made
represent the Lord Jesus Christ crucified, and He is thereby acknowledged to
exist in two natures and one hypostasis or person. The use of the right hand
betokens His infinite power and the fact that He sits at the right hand of the
Father. That the sign begins with a downward movement from above signifies His
descent to us from heaven. Again, the movement of the hand from the right side
to the left drives away our enemies and declares that by His invincible power
the Lord overcame the devil, who is on the left side, dark and lacking
strength. The sign of the cross is made with three fingers, because the signing
is done together with the invocation of the Trinity. ... This is how it is
done: from above to below, and from the right to the left, because Christ
descended from the heavens to the earth, and from the Jews (right) He passed to
the Gentiles (left). Others, however, make the sign of the cross from the left
to the right, because from misery (left) we must cross over to glory (right),
just as Christ crossed over from death to life, and from Hades to Paradise.
priests do it this way so that they and the people will be signing themselves
in the same way. You can easily verify this — picture the priest facing the
people for the blessing — when we make the sign of the cross over the people,
it is from left to right... Writers such as Herbert Thurston, author of the
article "Sign of the Cross" in the Catholic Encyclopedia interpret this as
indicating that at that time both Eastern and Western Christians moved the hand
from the right shoulder to the left. However, Thurston confesses that the point
is not entirely clear. He quotes another liturgist who inclined to the opinion
that in this passage of Innocent III, and in those of Belethus, Sicardus and
Durandus, which are usually appealed to in proof of this, these authors had in
mind the small cross made upon the forehead or external objects, in which the
hand moves naturally from right to left, and not the big cross made from
shoulder to shoulder. Andreas Andreopoulos, author of "The Sign of the Cross",
gives a more detailed description of the development and the symbolism of the
placement of the fingers and the direction of the movement. Today, Western
Christians and the Oriental Orthodox touch the left shoulder before the right.
Orthodox Christians use the right-to-left movement. Use. The Sign of the Cross
may be made by individuals upon themselves as a form of prayer, and by clergy
upon others or objects as an act of blessing. The gesture of blessing is
certainly related to the sign of the cross, but the two gestures developed
independently after some point. In Eastern Christianity, the two gestures
differ significantly. Priests are allowed to bless using the right hand, while
bishops may bless simultaneously with both, the left mirroring the right. While
individuals may make it at any time, clergy must make it at specific times (as
in liturgies), and it is customary to make it on other occasions (see below).
In the Catholic Church, a priest blesses with one sign of the cross over an
object or person, but a bishop blesses with a triple sign of the cross;
ordained bishops and priests are the only people empowered to bless objects and
people other than themselves. During rituals such as the Roman Catholic Mass,
the Sign is required at certain points: the laity sign themselves during the
introductory greeting of the service, before the Gospel reading (small Signs on
forehead, lips, and heart), and at the final blessing; optionally, other times
during the Mass when the laity often cross themselves are during a sprinkling
with holy water, when concluding the penitential rite, immediately after
receiving Communion, and when concluding private prayer after Communion. The
celebrant makes the Sign over the bread and wine before the Words of
Institution (i.e., words of Christ). In the Tridentine Mass the priest signs
the bread and wine 25 times during the Canon of the Mass, ten times before and
fifteen times after they have been consecrated. In the Mass of Paul VI the
priest signs them only once: before the consecration. The priest also uses the
Sign of the Cross when blessing a deacon before the deacon reads the Gospel,
when sending an Extraordinary Minister of Holy Communion to take the Eucharist
to the sick (after Communion, but before the end of the Mass), and when
blessing the congregation at the conclusion of the Mass. Roman Catholic bishops
make the Sign of the Cross three times when they are blessing a large group of
people, in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit. In the Eastern
traditions, both celebrant and congregation make the Sign of the Cross much
more frequently than in Western Christianity. It is customary in some Eastern
traditions to cross oneself at each petition in a litany, and to closely
associate oneself with a particular intention being prayed for or with a saint
being named. The Sign of the Cross is also made upon entering or leaving a
church building, at the start and end of personal prayer, when passing the main
altar (which represents Christ), whenever all three persons of the Trinity are
addressed, and when approaching an icon. When an Eastern Orthodox or Eastern
Catholic bishop or priest blesses with the sign of the cross, he holds the
fingers of his right hand in such a way that they form the Greek abbreviation
for Jesus Christ "IC XC". The little finger is extended to make the "I"; the
index finger and middle finger are also raised, with the middle finger bent
slightly so that the two fingers together form the "X"; the thumb touches the
lowered third finger to signify the two "C"s. When a priest blesses in the sign
of the cross, he positions the fingers of his right hand in the manner
described as he raises his right hand, then moves his hand downwards, then to
his left, then to his right. A bishop blesses with both hands (unless he is
holding some sacred object such as a blessing cross, chalice, Gospel Book,
icon, etc.), holding the fingers of both hands in the same configuration, but
when he moves his right hand to the left, he simultaneously moves his left hand
to the right, so that the two hands cross, the left in front of the right, and
then the right in front of the left. The blessing of both priests and bishops
consists of three movements, in honour of the Holy Trinity. Some Christians
make the Sign of the Cross in a way that may seem idiomatic: for example, in
response to perceived blasphemy. Others sign themselves to seek God's blessing
before or during an event with uncertain outcome. In Latin countries people
often sign themselves in public. Athletes can be seen crossing themselves
before entering the field or while concentrating for competition. In societies
with constant Christian observance the Sign of the Cross is employed during
everyday activities. For example the spoon crosses the newly poured mixture
before stirring, housewives bless food when placing it in the oven, potters
bless the clay before creating a vessel, and one slicing bread crosses the
bread with the knife before cutting, as bread is considered to represent the
body of Christ. During religious persecutions, such as in Communist Romania,
some believers would hide the gesture by moving their tongues in a cross
pattern inside their mouths. Origins. The Christian sign of the cross was
originally made in some parts of the Christian world with the right-hand thumb
across the forehead only. In other parts of the early Christian world it was
done with the whole hand or with two fingers. Around the year 200 in Carthage
(modern Tunisia, Africa), Tertullian says: "We Christians wear out our
foreheads with the sign of the cross". Vestiges of this practice remain: some
Christians sign a cross on their forehead before hearing the Gospels during
Mass; foreheads are marked with an ash cross on Ash Wednesday; holy oil (called
chrism) is applied on the forehead for the sacrament of Confirmation (in the
East, the Holy Mystery of Chrismation, as Orthodox call the Sacraments by the
name "Holy Mystery"). By the fourth century, the sign of the cross involved
other parts of the body beyond the forehead. Protestant views. Although the
Sign of the Cross dates to ante-Nicene Christianity, it was rejected by some of
the Reformers, and is absent from most forms of Protestantism. Since the
Reformation it has often been rejected by Protestants and some Low-Church
Anglicans as being a Catholic practice, despite Martin Luther's positive
personal view, the prescribed use of the sign in "Book of Common Prayer" and
the defence of the sign of the cross in Anglican canon law in 1604.
Lutheranism. Among Lutherans the practice was widely retained. For example,
Luther's Small Catechism states that it is expected before the morning and
evening prayers. Lutheranism never abandoned the practice of making the sign of
the cross in principle and it was commonly retained in worship at least until
the early 19th century. During the 19th and early 20th centuries it was largely
in disuse until the liturgical renewal movement of the 1950s and 1960s. Since
then, the sign of the cross has become fairly commonplace among Lutherans at
worship. The sign of the cross is now customary in the Divine Service. Rubrics
in Contemporary Lutheran worship manuals, including Evangelical Lutheran
Worship and Lutheran Service Book, provide for making the sign of the cross at
certain points in the liturgy. Most places are the same as the Roman Catholic
practice, such as at the trinitarian formula, the benediction, at the
consecration of the Eucharist, and following reciting the Nicene or Apostles'
Creed. Devotional use of the sign of the cross among Lutherans also includes
after receiving the Host and Chalice in the Eucharist, following Holy
Absolution. Sometimes there is also holy water font or baptismal font at the
entrance of the church, where they may dip their fingers in it and make the
sign of the cross upon entering. Methodism. Methodist churches, such as the
United Methodist Church, are essentially a product of the Protestant
Reformation. and so the sign of the cross is generally uncommon in a Methodist
service (especially as compared to an Anglican service or a Catholic Mass).
John Wesley, the principle leader of the early Methodists, prepared a revision
of "The Book of Common Prayer" for Methodist use called "The Sunday Service of
the Methodists in North America" which does instruct the minister to make the
sign of the cross on the forehead of children just after they have been
baptized. Making the sign of the cross at baptism is retained in the current
Book of Worship, and widely practiced (sometimes with oil). Furthermore, on Ash
Wednesday the sign of the cross is almost always applied by the elder to the
foreheads of the laity. The liturgy for healing and wholeness, which is
becoming more commonly practiced, calls for the pastor to make the sign of the
cross with oil upon the foreheads of those seeking healing. Whether or not a
Methodist uses the sign for private prayer is a personal choice, and is
encouraged by the bishops of the United Methodist Church. Some United
Methodists also perform the sign before and after receiving Holy Communion, and
some ministers also perform the sign when blessing the congregation at the end
of the sermon or service. Reformed Tradition. In some Reformed churches, such
as the PCUSA and the Cumberland Presbyterian Church, the sign of the cross is
used on the foreheads during baptism or during an Ash Wednesday service when
ashes are imposed on the forehead. In rare instances during a Benediction, when
the minister concludes the service using the trinitarian blessing, a hand is
extended and a sign of the cross is made out toward the congregation.
