Sikhism Sikhism ( or ; , "", ) is a monotheistic religion founded during the
15th century in the Punjab region, by Guru Nanak Dev which continued to
progress with ten successive Sikh gurus (the last teaching being the holy
scripture "Gurū Granth Sāhib Ji"). It is the fifth-largest organized religion
in the world, with approximately 30 million Sikhs. This system of religious
philosophy and expression has been traditionally known as the Gurmat (literally
'wisdom of the Gurū'). Punjab, India is the only region in the world with a
majority Sikh population. Sikhs are expected to embody the qualities of a
"Sant-Sipāhī"—a saint-soldier. One must have control over one's internal
vices and be able to be constantly immersed in virtues clarified in the Guru
Granth Sahib. The principal beliefs of Sikhi are faith in
"Waheguru"—represented by the phrase "", meaning one God, along with a praxis
in which the Sikh is enjoined to engage in social reform through the pursuit of
justice for all human beings. Sikhi advocates the pursuit of salvation in a
social context through the congregational practice of meditation on the name
and message of God. The followers of Sikhi are ordained to follow the teachings
of the ten Sikh gurus, or enlightened leaders, as well as the holy scripture
entitled the "Gurū Granth Sāhib Ji", which, along with the writings of six of
the ten Sikh Gurus, includes selected works of many devotees from diverse
socio-economic and religious backgrounds. Guru Gobind Singh Ji, the tenth guru,
conferred the leadership of the Sikh community to the Gurū Granth Sāhib and
the corporate body of the Khālsā Panth (the Granth and the Panth). Sikhi's
traditions and teachings are associated with the history, society and culture
of Punjab. Adherents of Sikhī are known as Sikhs ("students" or "disciples")
and number over 30 million across the world. Most Sikhs live in Punjab, India,
although there is a significant Sikh diaspora. Until the Partition of India
with the division of Punjab and the subsequent independence of Pakistan and
later India, millions of Sikhs lived in what is now Pakistani Punjab.
Philosophy and teachings. The origins of Sikhi lie in the teachings of Guru
Nanak and his successors. The essence of Sikh teaching is summed up by Nanak in
these words: "Realization of Truth is higher than all else. Higher still is
truthful living". Sikh teaching emphasizes the principle of equality of all
humans and rejects discrimination on the basis of caste, creed, and gender.
Sikh principles encourage living life as a householder. Sikhi is a monotheistic
and a revealed religion. In Sikhi, God—termed "Vāhigurū"—is shapeless,
timeless, and sightless (i.e., unable to be seen with the physical eye): "",
"akaal", and "alakh". The beginning of the first composition of Sikh scripture
is the figure "1"—signifying the universality of God. It states that God is
omnipresent and infinite with power over everything, and is signified by the
term "ēk ōaṅkār". Sikhs believe that before creation, all that existed was
God and God's "hukam" (will or order). When God willed, the entire cosmos was
created. From these beginnings, God nurtured "enticement and attachment" to
"māyā", or the human perception of reality. While a full understanding of God
is beyond human beings, Nanak described God as not wholly unknowable. God is
omnipresent ("sarav viāpak") in all creation and visible everywhere to the
spiritually awakened. Nanak stressed that God must be seen from "the inward
eye", or the "heart", of a human being: devotees must meditate to progress
towards enlightenment. Guru Nanak Dev emphasized the revelation through
meditation, as its rigorous application permits the existence of communication
between God and human beings. God has no gender in Sikhi (though translations
may incorrectly present a male God); indeed Sikhi teaches that God is "Akaal
Purkh" with characteristic of "Nirankar" (Niran meaning "without" and kar
meaning "form", hence "without form"). In addition, Nanak wrote that there are
many worlds on which God has created life. Pursuing salvation and Khalsa. Guru
Nanak's teachings are founded not on a final destination of heaven or hell, but
on a spiritual union with God which results in salvation. The official Khalsa
Code of Conduct laid out by the tenth guru, Guru Gobind Singh, makes it clear
that human birth is obtained with great fortune, therefore one needs to be able
to make the most of this chance. The Sikhs believe in living "Chakar
Vati"—roaming free as freedom, not as slaves or be oppressed.
"Māyā"—defined as illusion or "unreality"—is one of the core deviations
from the pursuit of God and salvation: people are distracted from devotion by
worldly attractions which give only illusory satisfaction. However, Nanak
emphasised māyā as not a reference to the unreality of the world, but of its
values. In Sikhi, the influences of ego, anger, greed, attachment, and
lust—known as the "Five Evils"—are believed to be particularly pernicious.
The fate of people vulnerable to the Five Evils is separation from God, and the
situation may be remedied only after intensive and relentless devotion.
"Nśabad" (the divine Word) emphasizes the totality of the revelation. Nanak
designated the word "guru" (meaning "teacher") as the voice of God and the
source and guide for knowledge and salvation. Salvation can be reached only
through rigorous and disciplined devotion to God. Nanak distinctly emphasised
the irrelevance of outward observations such as rites, pilgrimages, or
asceticism. He stressed that devotion must take place through the heart, with
the spirit and the soul. According to Gurbani the supreme purpose of human life
is to reconnect with Truth. However, our Ego is the biggest disease in the
reunion with Truth / God and the solution to this disease also lies within
human ego (mind and body). With Guru's grace the seeker meditates honestly on
"Word" which leads to the end of ego. Guru is indistinguishable from God and
are one and same thing as God which cannot be found with thousands of wisdoms.
One gets connected with Guru only with accumulation of selfless search of
truth. Ultimately the seeker realizes that it is the consciousness within the
body which is seeker / follower and Word is true Guru. Human body is just a
means to achieve the reunion with Truth. Truth is a form of matter which lies
within human body but is beyond the realm of time / death. Once truth starts to
shine in a person’s heart, the essence of current and past holy books of all
religions is understood by the person. A key practice to be pursued is ':
remembrance of the divine Name. The verbal repetition of the name of God or a
sacred syllable is an established practice in religious traditions in India,
but Nanak's interpretation emphasized inward, personal observance. Nanak's
ideal is the total exposure of one's being to the divine Name and a total
conforming to Dharma or the "Divine Order". Nanak described the result of the
disciplined application of ' as a "growing towards and into God" through a
gradual process of five stages. The last of these is "" ("The Realm of
Truth")—the final union of the spirit with God. Guru Nanak stressed now
"kirat karō": that a Sikh should balance work, worship, and charity, and
should defend the rights of all creatures, and in particular, fellow human
beings. They are encouraged to have a ', or "optimistic", view of life. Sikh
teachings also stress the concept of sharing—'—through the distribution of
free food at Sikh gurdwaras (""), giving charitable donations, and working for
the good of the community and others ("sēvā"). Sikhs believe that no matter
what race, sex, or religion one is, all are equal in God's eyes. Men and women
are equal and share the same rights, and women can lead in prayers. Ten gurus
and religious authority. The term guru comes from the Sanskrit "gurū", meaning
teacher, guide, or mentor. The traditions and philosophy of Sikhi were
established by ten specific gurus from 1469 to 1708. Each guru added to and
reinforced the message taught by the previous, resulting in the creation of the
Sikh religion. Guru Nanak Dev was the first guru and appointed a disciple as
successor. Guru Gobind Singh was the final guru in human form. Before his
death, Guru Gobind Singh decreed that the Gurū Granth Sāhib would be the
final and perpetual guru of the Sikhs. Guru Angad Dev succeeded Guru Nanak.
Later, an important phase in the development of Sikhi came with the third
successor, Guru Amar Das. Guru Nanak's teachings emphasised the pursuit of
salvation; Guru Amar Das began building a cohesive community of followers with
initiatives such as sanctioning distinctive ceremonies for birth, marriage, and
death. Amar Das also established the "manji" (comparable to a diocese) system
of clerical supervision. Guru Amar Das's successor and son-in-law Guru Ram Das
founded the city of Amritsar, which is home of the Harimandir Sahib and
regarded widely as the holiest city for all Sikhs. When Guru Ram Das's youngest
son Arjan succeeded him, the line of male gurus from the "Sodhi Khatri" family
was established: all succeeding gurus were direct descendants of this line.
Guru Arjan Dev was captured by Mughal authorities who were suspicious and
hostile to the religious order he was developing. His persecution and death
inspired his successors to promote a military and political organization of
Sikh communities to defend themselves against the attacks of Mughal forces. The
Sikh gurus established a mechanism which allowed the Sikh religion to react as
a community to changing circumstances. The sixth guru, Guru Hargobind, was
responsible for the creation of the concept of Akal Takht ("throne of the
timeless one"), which serves as the supreme decision-making centre of Sikhi and
sits opposite the Darbar Sahib. The "" (a representative portion of the Khalsa
Panth) historically gathers at the Akal Takht on special festivals such as
Vaisakhi or Hola Mohalla and when there is a need to discuss matters that
affect the entire Sikh nation. A "gurmatā" (literally, "guru's intention") is
an order passed by the in the presence of the Gurū Granth Sāhib. A gurmatā
may only be passed on a subject that affects the fundamental principles of Sikh
religion; it is binding upon all Sikhs. The term "hukamnāmā" (literally,
"edict" or "royal order") is often used interchangeably with the term gurmatā.
However, a hukamnāmā formally refers to a hymn from the Gurū Granth Sāhib
which is a given order to Sikhs. ImageSize = width:1100 height:200 PlotArea =
left:105 bottom:65 top:0 right:55 Alignbars = justify DateFormat = yyyy Period
= from:1469 till:1708 TimeAxis = orientation:horizontal format:yyyy Colors =
Legend = orientation:horizontal position:bottom ScaleMajor = increment:20
start:1469 BarData= PlotData=  History. Guru Nanak (1469–1539), the founder
of Sikhism, was born in the village of "Rāi Bhōi dī Talwandī", now called
Nankana Sahib (in present-day Pakistan). His parents were Khatri Hindus of the
Bedi clan. As a boy, Nanak was fascinated by God and religion. He would not
partake in religious rituals or customs and oddly meditated alone. His desire
to explore the mysteries of life eventually led him to leave home and take
missionary journeys. In his early teens, Nanak caught the attention of the
local landlord Rai Bular Bhatti, who was moved by his amazing intellect and
divine qualities. Rai Bular Bhatti was witness to many incidents in which Nanak
enchanted him and as a result Rai Bular Bhatti and Nanak's sister Bibi Nanki,
became the first persons to recognise the divine qualities in Nanak. Both of
them then encouraged and supported Nanak to study and travel. At the age of
thirty, Nanak went missing and was presumed to have drowned after going for one
of his morning baths to a local stream called the "Kali Bein". On the day he
arrived, he declared: "There is no Hindu, there is no Muslim" (in Punjabi,
""nā kōi hindū nā kōi musalmān""). It was from this moment that Nanak
would begin to spread the teachings of what was then the beginning of Sikhi.
Although the exact account of his itinerary is disputed, he is widely
acknowledged to have made five major journeys, spanning thousands of miles, the
first tour being east towards Bengal and Assam, the second south towards Andhra
and Tamil Nadu, the third north towards Kashmir, Ladakh, and Tibet, and the
fourth tour west towards Baghdad and Mecca. In his last and final tour, he
returned to the banks of the Ravi River to end his days. Growth of Sikhism and
rise of Khalsa. The tenth guru of Sikhism, Guru Gobind Singh, created the
Khalsa in the year 1699, which means "Akal Purakh de fauj" – the Army of God.
The Sikh Khalsa rise to power began in the 17th century during a time of
growing militancy against Muslim rule. The creation of a Sikh Empire began when
Guru Gobind Singh sent his brave Sikh general, Banda Singh Bahadur along with
some hundred Singhs to punish those who had committed atrocities against Pir
Buddhu Shah and avenge the murder of his youngest sons. Banda Singh, with a
large group of Sikhs, advanced towards the main Muslim Mughal city of Sirhind
and, following the instructions of the guru, punished all the culprits. Soon
after the invasion of Sirhind, Guru Gobind Singh was stabbed by a Pathan
assassin hired by Mughals, Jamshed Khan stabbed the Guru in the left side below
the heart while he was resting in his chamber after the Rehras prayer. Guru
Gobind Singh killed the attacker with his sword, while the assassin's companion
tried to flee but was killed by some Sikhs who had rushed in upon hearing the
noise. A European surgeon stitched the Guru's wound. However, the wound re-
opened as the Guru tugged at a hard strong bow after a few days, and caused
profuse bleeding. The death of the Guru reached Banda Singh and Sikhs all over
Punjab. After this the Sikhs took over many Muslim and Mughal lands,
establishing a Sikh Empire. Other existing Muslim Emperors proclaimed a jihad
or a holy war against Banda Singh and the Khalsa. However, many Muslim armies
and their generals fled in dismay and despair after Wazir Khan's head was stuck
up on a spear and lifted high up by a Sikh who took his seat at Sirhind in
1710, Muslim troops on beholding the head took alarm. Many Muslims embraced
Sikhism and joined the Khalsa. Banda Singh at this time also married the
daughter of a Muslim general. Banda Singh's mission played an important
development of the Dal Khalsa and the Sikh Misls, which eventually led to a new
king, Maharaja Ranjit Singh capturing Lahore in 1799 and establishing the Sikh
Kingdom of Punjab. The new king and the Sikh Misls rose to power in a series of
sweeping military and diplomatic victories. Increasing the number of Sikhs and
spreading the Empire further. His vast empire comprised almost of what is now
Afghanistan, Pakistan and Northern India. The empire of the Sikhs was widely
feared by many natives including Afghans, Persians and many Asian countries.
Even many Pathans who had previously lived there during the Islamic rule,
attempted many times to attack the Empire with over 20,000 troops, in which
case Maharaja Ranjit Singh sent his bravest Sikh warrior, named Akali Phula
Singh Nihang (at the age of 65) and a few hundred Singhs to deal with the
invading Pathans and bring them under control. The Sikhs retained control of
the Sikh Empire. However, another challenge was yet to come. In the East, the
British Empire took over thousands of square miles of land, including eastern
parts of India and many Asian countries, soon reaching the Sikh Empire where
the British would also meet their biggest challenge during their Conquest. Both
British and Sikh sides lost many troops and heavy number of materials in
various battles, such as the Anglo-Sikh wars. The British was claimed to be
unbeatable, but Maharaja Ranjit Singh and the Sikhs were the only people who
could stand toe to toe with the British forces. For the first time during the
British conquest the British were unable to invade and resulted in both sides
having to stop and come to terms. This led to further Anglo-Sikh wars and
further loss on both sides. In 1839, the death of Maharaja Ranjit Singh, the
Empire fell on the shoulders of his son, Maharaja Duleep Singh (at the age of
11). The Empire then gradually fell into the hands of the British. Political
advancement. Hargobind, became the sixth guru of the Sikhs. He carried two
swords—one for spiritual and the other for temporal reasons (known as
"mīrī" and "pīrī" in Sikhi). Sikhs grew as an organized community and under
the 10th Guru the Sikhs developed a trained fighting force to defend their
independence. In 1644, Har Rai became guru followed by Harkrishan, the boy
guru, in 1661. No hymns composed by these three gurus are included in the Guru
Granth Sahib. Tegh Bahadur became guru in 1665 and led the Sikhs until 1675.
Tegh Bahadur was executed by Aurangzeb for helping to protect the faith of
Hindus, after a delegation of Kashmiri Pandits came to him for help when the
Emperor was killing those who refused to convert to Islam. He was succeeded by
his son, Gobind Rai who was just nine years old at the time of his father's
death. Gobind Rai further militarised his followers, and was baptised by the ""
when he formed the Khalsa on 30 March 1699. From here on in he was known as
Gobind Singh. this was done as a defense. From the time of Nanak the Sikhs had
significantly transformed. Even though the core Sikh spiritual philosophy was
never affected, the followers now began to develop a political identity.
Conflict with Mughal authorities escalated during the lifetime of Teg Bahadur
and Gobind Singh. The latter founded the Khalsa in 1699. The Khalsa is a
disciplined community that combines its spiritual purpose and goals with
political and military duties. After Aurangzeb killed four of his sons, Gobind
Singh sent Aurangzeb the Zafarnamah ("Notification/Epistle of Victory").
Shortly before his death, Gobind Singh ordered that the Gurū Granth Sāhib
(the Sikh Holy Scripture), would be the ultimate spiritual authority for the
Sikhs and temporal authority would be vested in the Khalsa—the Sikh Nation. A
former ascetic was charged by Gobind Singh with the duty of punishing those who
had persecuted the innocents in Punjab. After the Guru's death, Baba Banda
Singh Bahadur became the commander-in-chief of the Khalsa and was responsible
for several attacks on the Mughal empire. He was executed by the emperor Farukh
Siyar after refusing the offer of a pardon if he converted to Islam. The Sikh
nation's embrace of military and political organisation made it a considerable
regional force in medieval India and it continued to evolve after the demise of
the gurus. After the death of Baba Banda Singh Bahadur, Sikh Confederacy of
Sikh warrior bands known as "misls" were formed. With the decline of the Mughal
empire, a Sikh Empire arose in the Punjab under Maharaja Ranjit Singh, with its
capital in Lahore and limits reaching the Khyber Pass and the borders of China.
The order, traditions and discipline developed over centuries culminated at the
time of Ranjit Singh to give rise to the common religious and social identity
that the term "Sikhi" describes. After the death of Ranjit Singh, the Sikh
Empire fell into disorder and was eventually annexed by the United Kingdom
after the hard-fought First and Second Anglo-Sikh Wars. This brought the Punjab
under the British Raj. Sikhs formed the Shiromani Gurdwara Prabandhak Committee
and the Shiromani Akali Dal to preserve Sikhs' religious and political
organization a quarter of a century later. With the partition of India in 1947,
thousands of Sikhs were killed in violence and millions were forced to leave
their ancestral homes in West Punjab. Sikhs faced initial opposition from the
Government in forming a linguistic state that other states in India were
afforded. The Akali Dal started a non-violence movement for Sikh and Punjabi
rights. Jarnail Singh Bhindranwale emerged as a leader of the Damdami Taksal in
1977 and promoted a more militant solution to the problem. In June 1984, Indian
Prime Minister Indira Gandhi ordered the Indian army to launch Operation Blue
Star to remove Bhindranwale and his followers from the Darbar Sahib.
Bhindranwale and his accompanying followers were killed during the army's
operations. In October, Indira Gandhi was assassinated by two of her Sikh
bodyguards. The assassination was followed by the 1984 anti-Sikh riots. and
Hindu-Sikh conflicts in Punjab, as a reaction to Operation Blue Star and the
assassin. Scripture. There is one primary source of scripture for the Sikhs:
the Gurū Granth Sāhib. The Gurū Granth Sāhib may be referred to as the Ādi
Granth—literally, "The First Volume"—and the two terms are often used
synonymously. Here, however, the Ādi Granth refers to the version of the
scripture created by Arjan Dev in 1604. The Gurū Granth Sāhib is the final
version of the scripture created by Gobind Singh. There are other sources of
scriptures such as the Dasam Granth and so called Janamsakhis. These however,
have been the subject of controversial debate amongst the Sikh community. Adi
Granth. The Ādi Granth was compiled primarily by Bhai Gurdas under the
supervision of Guru Arjan Dev between the years 1603 and 1604. It is written in
the Gurmukhī script, which is a descendant of the script used in the Punjab at
that time. The Gurmukhī script was standardised by Angad Dev, the second guru
of the Sikhs, for use in the Sikh scriptures and is thought to have been
influenced by the Śāradā and Devanāgarī scripts. An authoritative
scripture was created to protect the integrity of hymns and teachings of the
Sikh gurus and fifteen bhagats. These fifteen bhagats are Namdev, Ravidas,
Jaidev, Trilocan, Beni, Ramanand, Sainu, Dhanna, Sadhna, Pipa, Sur, Bhikhan,
Paramanand, Farid, and Kabir. At the time, Arjan Sahib tried to prevent undue
influence from the followers of Prithi Chand, the guru's older brother and
rival. Guru Granth Sahib. The final version of the Gurū Granth Sāhib was
compiled by Guru Gobind Singh in 1678. It consists of the original Ādi Granth
with the addition of Guru Tegh Bahadur's hymns. The Guru Granth Sahib is
considered the Eleventh and final spiritual authority of the Sikhs. It contains
compositions by the first five Gurus, Guru Teg Bahadur and just one ""
("couplet") from Guru Gobind Singh. It also contains the traditions and
teachings of "sants" ("saints") such as Kabir, Namdev, Ravidas, and Sheikh
Farid along with several others. The bulk of the scripture is classified into
"rāgs", with each rāg subdivided according to length and author. There are 31
main rāgs within the Gurū Granth Sāhib. In addition to the rāgs, there are
clear references to the folk music of Punjab. The main language used in the
scripture is known as "", a language related to both Punjabi and Hindi and used
extensively across medieval northern India by proponents of popular devotional
religion. As per the name "Gurmukhi", it is not merely a script but it is the
language which came out of Guru's mouth – by using this definition, all words
in Guru Granth Sahib constitute "Gurbani" words, thus making Gurmukhi language
which then constitute two components – spoken Gurmukhi words (in form of
Gurbani which originated from different languages (like world's different
languages have similar roots) and Gurmukhi script. The text further comprises
over 5000 "śabads", or hymns, which are poetically constructed and set to
classical form of music rendition, can be set to predetermined musical "tāl",
or rhythmic beats. All text within the Granth is known as "gurbānī". And
Gurbani is the Guru "Baani Guru Guru hai Baani" (The word is the Guru and Guru
is the word) and "Shabd Guru Surat Dhun Chaylaa" (The Shabad is the Guru, upon
whom I lovingly focus my consciousness; I am the disciple.). Therefore, as
evident from the message of the Guru Nanak (first Guru) Shabad (or word) was
always the Guru (the enlightener); however, as Sikhism stand on the dual
strands of Miri-Piri, the Guru in Sikhism is a combination of teacher-leader.
Therefore, the lineage from Guru Nanak to Guru Gobind Singh was of the teacher-
leaders eventually wherein the temporal authority was passed on to the Khalsa
and spiritual authority, which always was with, passed to Adi Granth(thence the
Guru Granth Sahib). Therefore, Guru Granth Sahib and its 11th body -the Khalsa
is the Guru, teacher-leader, of the Sikhs till eternity. Dasam Granth. The
Dasam Granth is a scripture of Sikhs which contains texts attributed to the
Tenth Guru. The Dasam Granth holds a significance of great amount for Sikhs,
however it doesn't have the same authority as Adi Granth. Some compositions of
the Dasam Granth like Jaap Sahib, (Amrit Savaiye), and Benti Chaupai are part
of the daily prayers/lessons (Nitnem) of/for Sikhs. Janamsakhis. The
Janamsākhīs (literally "birth stories"), are writings which profess to be
biographies of Nanak. Although not scripture in the strictest sense, they
provide an interesting look at Nanak's life and the early start of Sikhism.
There are several—often contradictory and sometimes
unreliable—Janamsākhīs and they are not held in the same regard as other
sources of scriptural knowledge. Observances. Observant Sikhs adhere to long-
standing practices and traditions to strengthen and express their faith. The
daily recitation from memory of specific passages from the Gurū Granth Sāhib,
especially the "Japu" (or "Japjī", literally "chant") hymns is recommended
immediately after rising and bathing. Family customs include both reading
passages from the scripture and attending the gurdwara (also "gurduārā",
meaning "the doorway to God"; sometimes transliterated as "gurudwara"). There
are many gurdwaras prominently constructed and maintained across India, as well
as in almost every nation where Sikhs reside. Gurdwaras are open to all,
regardless of religion, background, caste, or race. Worship in a gurdwara
consists chiefly of singing of passages from the scripture. Sikhs will commonly
enter the gurdwara, touch the ground before the holy scripture with their
foreheads. The recitation of the eighteenth century "ardās" is also customary
for attending Sikhs. The ardās recalls past sufferings and glories of the
community, invoking divine grace for all humanity. The Sikh faith also
participates in the custom of "Langar" or the community meal. All gurdwaras are
open to anyone of any faith for a free meal. People can enter and eat together
and are served by faithful members of the community. This is the main cost
associated with gurdwaras and where monetary donations are primarily spent.
Ceremonies and customs. Guru Nanak Dev Ji taught that rituals, religious
ceremonies, or idol worship are of little use and Sikhs are discouraged from
fasting or going on pilgrimages. Sikhs do not believe in converting people but
converts to Sikhi by choice are welcomed. The morning and evening prayers take
about two hours a day, starting in the very early morning hours. The first
morning prayer is Guru Nanak's "Jap Ji". Jap, meaning "recitation", refers to
the use of sound, as the best way of approaching the divine. Like combing hair,
hearing and reciting the sacred word is used as a way to comb all negative
thoughts out of the mind. The second morning prayer is Guru Gobind Singh's
universal Jaap Sahib. The Guru addresses God as having no form, no country, and
no religion but as the seed of seeds, sun of suns, and the song of songs. The
Jaap Sahib asserts that God is the cause of conflict as well as peace, and of
destruction as well as creation. Devotees learn that there is nothing outside
of God's presence, nothing outside of God's control. Devout Sikhs are
encouraged to begin the day with private meditations on the name of God. Upon a
child's birth, the Guru Granth Sahib is opened at a random point and the child
is named using the first letter on the top left hand corner of the left page.
All boys are given the last name Singh, and all girls are given the last name
Kaur (this was once a title which was conferred on an individual upon joining
the Khalsa). Sikhs are joined in wedlock through the "anand kāraj" ceremony.
Sikhs are required to marry when they are of a sufficient age (child marriage
is taboo), and without regard for the future spouse's caste or descent. The
marriage ceremony is performed in the company of the Guru Granth Sahib; around
which the couple circles four times. After the ceremony is complete, the
husband and wife are considered "a single soul in two bodies." According to
Sikh religious rites, neither husband nor wife is permitted to divorce unless
special circumstances arise. A Sikh couple that wishes to divorce may be able
to do so in a civil court. Upon death, the body of a Sikh is usually cremated.
If this is not possible, any means of disposing the body may be employed. The
"kīrtan sōhilā" and "ardās" prayers are performed during the funeral
ceremony (known as "antim sanskār"). Baptism and the Khalsa. Khalsa (meaning
"Sovereign") is the collective name given by Gobind Singh to all Sikhs, male or
female, who have been baptised or initiated by taking "ammrit" in a ceremony
called "ammrit sañcār". The first time that this ceremony took place was on
Visakhi, which fell on 30 March 1699 at Anandpur Sahib in Punjab. It was on
that occasion that Gobind Singh baptised the Pañj Piārē—the five beloved
ones, who in turn baptised Gobind Singh himself. The last name, Singh, meaning
lion, is given to baptized Sikh males, and the last name Kaur, meaning
princess/lioness, is given to baptized Sikh females. Baptised Sikhs are bound
to wear the Five Ks (in Punjabi known as "pañj kakkē" or "pañj kakār"), or
articles of faith, at all times. The 5 items are: "kēs" (uncut hair), "Kanga
(Sikhism)" (small wooden comb), "Kara (Sikhism)" (circular steel or iron
bracelet), "kirpān" (sword/dagger), and "kacchera" (special undergarment). The
Five Ks have both practical and symbolic purposes. Sikh people. Worldwide,
there are 25.8 million Sikhs, which make up only 0.39% of the world's
population. Approximately 75% of Sikhs live in the Punjab, where they
constitute about 60% of the state's population. Large communities of Sikhs live
in the neighboring states such as Indian State of Haryana which is home to the
second largest Sikh population in India with 1.1 million Sikhs as per 2001
census, and large communities of Sikhs can be found across India. However,
Sikhs only make up about 2% of the Indian population. Sikh migration beginning
from the 19th century led to the creation of significant communities in Canada
(predominantly in Brampton, along with British Columbia), East Africa, the
Middle East, Southeast Asia, the United Kingdom as well as United States and
Australia. These communities developed as Sikhs migrated out of Punjab to fill
in gaps in imperial labour markets. In the early twentieth century a
significant community began to take shape on the west coast of the United
States. Smaller populations of Sikhs are found in within many countries in
Western Europe, Mauritius, Malaysia, Fiji, Nepal, China, Pakistan, Afghanistan,
Iraq, Singapore, Mexico, the United States and many other countries. Beginning
in 1968, Yogi Bhajan (later of the 3HO movement) began to teach classes
kundalini yoga, resulting in a number of non-Punjabi converts to Sikhism (known
as "gora" ["white"] Sikhs) in the United States. Since then, thousands of non-
Punjabis have taken up the Sikh belief and lifestyle primarily in the United
States, Canada, Latin America, the Far East and Australia. Since 2010, the Sikh
Directory has organized The Sikh Awards, the first Sikh award ceremony in the
world. Prohibitions in Sikhism. There are a number of religious prohibitions in
Sikhism.
