Simony Simony (pron. or ) is the act of paying for sacraments and consequently
for holy offices or for positions in the hierarchy of a church, named after
Simon Magus, who appears in the Acts of the Apostles 8:9-24. Simon Magus offers
the disciples of Jesus, Peter and John, payment so that anyone on whom he would
place his hands would receive the power of the Holy Spirit. This is the origin
of the term "simony"; but it also extends to other forms of trafficking for
money in "spiritual things". Simony was also one of the important issues during
the Investiture Controversy. History. Simony is an offence against the law of
the church. In the canon law the word bears a more extended meaning than in
English law. "Simony according to the canonists", says John Ayliffe in his
"Parergon", "is defined to be a deliberate act or a premeditated will and
desire of selling such things as are spiritual, or of anything annexed unto
spirituals, by giving something of a temporal nature for the purchase thereof;
or in other terms it is defined to be a commutation of a thing spiritual or
annexed unto spirituals by giving something that is temporal." In the "Corpus
Juris Canonici" the Decretum and the Decretals deal with the subject. The
offender whether "simoniacus" (one who had bought his orders) or "simoniace
promotus" (one who had bought his promotion), was liable to deprivation of his
benefice and deposition from orders if a secular priest - to confinement in a
stricter monastery if a regular. No distinction seems to have been drawn
between the sale of an immediate and of a reversionary interest. The innocent
"simoniace promotus" was, apart from dispensation, liable to the same penalties
as though he were guilty. Certain matters were simoniacal by the canon law
which would not be so regarded in English law. So grave was the crime of simony
considered that even infamous persons could accuse of it. English provincial
and legatine constitutions continually assailed simony. Church of England. The
Church of England also struggled with the practice after its separation from
Rome. For the purposes of English law, simony is defined by William Blackstone
as the corrupt presentation of any person to an ecclesiastical benefice for
money, gift or reward. While English law recognised simony as an offence, it
treated it as merely an ecclesiastical matter, rather than a crime, for which
the punishment was forfeiture of the office or any advantage from the offence
and severance of any patronage relationship with the person who bestowed the
office. Both Edward VI of England and Elizabeth I promulgated statutes against
simony. The cases of Bishop of St. David's Thomas Watson in 1699 and of Dean of
York William Cockburn in 1841 were particularly notable. By the Benefices Act
1892, a person guilty of simony is guilty of an offence for which he may be
proceeded against under the Clergy Discipline Act 1892. An innocent clerk is
under no disability, as he might be by the canon law. Simony may be committed
in three ways – in promotion to orders, in presentation to a benefice, and in
resignation of a benefice. The common law (with which the canon law is
incorporated, as far as it is not contrary to the common or statute law or the
prerogative of the Crown) has been considerably modified by statute. Where no
statute applies to the case, the doctrines of the canon law may still be of
authority. , simony remains an offence. An unlawfully bestowed office can be
declared void by the Crown, and the offender can be disabled from making future
appointments and fined up to £1000. Clergy are no longer required to make a
declaration as to simony on ordination but offences are now likely to be dealt
with under the Clergy Discipline Measure 2003, r.8.
