Prophetic biography The sīrat rasūl allāh ("Life of the Messenger of God"; )
or al-sīra al-nabawiyya (Prophetic biography; ) or just al-sīra, is the
Arabic term used for the various traditional Muslim biographies of Muhammad
from which, in addition to the Qur'an and Hadith, most historical information
about his life and the early period of Islam is derived. Etymology. In the
Arabic language the word "sīra" or "sīrat" () comes from the verb "sāra"
(Present tense: "yasīru"), which means to travel or to be on a journey. A
person's "sīra" is that person’s journey through life, or biography,
encompassing their birth, events in their life, manners and characteristics,
and their death. In modern usage it may also refer to a person's resume. It is
sometimes written as "seera", "sirah" or "sirat", all meaning "life" or
"journey". In Islamic literature, the plural form, "siyar", could also refer to
the rules of war and dealing with non-Muslims. The phrase "sīrat rasūl
allāh", or "al-sīra al-nabawiyya", refers to the study of the life of
Muhammad. The term "sīra" was first linked to the biography of Muhammad by Ibn
Shihab al-Zuhri, and later popularized by the work of Ibn Hisham. In the first
two centuries of Islamic history, sīra was more commonly known as "maghāzī"
(literally, stories of military expeditions), which is now considered to be
only a subset of sīra. Early works of sīra consist of multiple historical
reports, or "akhbār", and each report is called a "khabar". Sometimes the word
"tradition" or "hadith" is used instead. Content. The sīra literature includes
a variety of heterogeneous materials, containing mainly stories of military
expeditions undertaken by Muhammad and his companions. These stories are
intended as historical accounts and used for veneration. The sīra also
includes a number of written documents, such as political treaties (e.g.,
Treaty of Hudaybiyyah or Constitution of Medina), military enlistments,
assignments of officials, letters to foreign rulers, and so forth. It also
records some of the speeches and sermons made by Muhammad, like his speech at
the Farewell Pilgrimage. The sīra literature also includes verses of poetry
commemorating certain events and battles. While some of which are considered to
be of a lesser quality and lacking authenticity, the most serious of those are
the ones by Hassan ibn Thabit. At later periods, certain type of stories
included in sīra developed into their own separate genres. One genre is
concerned with stories of prophetic miracles, called "aʿlām al-nubuwa"
(literally, proofs of prophethood—the first word is sometimes substituted for
"amārāt" or "dalāʾil"). Another genre, called "faḍāʾil wa mathālib",
is concerned with tales that show the merits and faults of individual
companions, enemies, and other notable contemporaries of Muhammad. Some works
of sīra also positioned the story of Muhammad as part of a narrative that
includes stories of earlier prophets, Persian Kings, pre-Islamic Arab tribes,
and the Rashidun. Parts of sīra were inspired by, or elaborate upon, events
mentioned in the Qur'an. These parts were often used by writers of tafsir and
asbab al-nuzul to provide background information for events mentioned in
certain ayat. Comparison to Hadith. The main difference between a hadith and a
historical report ("khabar") is that a hadith is not concerned with an event as
such, and normally does not specify a time or place. Rather the purpose of
hadith is to record a religious doctrine as an authoritative source of Islamic
law. By contrast, while a khabar may carry some legal or theological
implications, its main aim is to convey information about a certain event. In
terms of structure, a hadith and a khabar are very similar. They both contain
isnads (chains of transmission). Thus starting from the 8th and 9th century,
many scholars have devoted their efforts to both kinds of texts equally. Also
some historians consider the "sīra" and "maghāzī" literature to be a subset
of Hadith. Reception. During the early centuries of Islam, the sīra literature
was taken less seriously compared to Hadith. In Umayyad times, storytellers
(qaṣṣ, or pl. "quṣṣāṣ") used to tell stories of Muhammad and earlier
prophets in private gatherings and mosques, given they obtain permission from
the authorities. Many of these storytellers are now unknown. After the Umayyad
period, their reputation deteriorated because of their inclination to
exaggerate and fantasize, and for relying on the Isra'iliyat. Thus they were
banned from preaching at mosques. In later periods, however, works of sīra
became more prominent. More recently, western historical criticism and debate
concerning sīra have elicited a defensive attitude from some Muslims who wrote
apologetic literature defending its content. Authenticity. For centuries,
Muslim scholars have recognized the problem of authenticity of hadith. Thus
they have developed sophisticated methods (see Hadith studies) of evaluating
"isnāds" (chains of transmission). This was done in order to classify each
hadith into "sound" ("ṣaḥīḥ") for authentic reports, as opposed to
"weak" ("ḍaʿīf") for ones that are probably fabricated, in addition to
other categories. Since many sīra reports also contain isnād information and
some of the sīra compilers ("akhbārīs") were themselves practicing jurists
and hadīth transmitters ("muḥaddiths"), it was possible to apply the same
methods of hadīth criticism to the sīra reports. However, some sīra reports
were written using an imprecise form of isnād, or what modern historians call
the "collective isnād" or "combined reports". The use of collective isnād
meant that a report may be related on the authority of multiple persons without
distinguishing the words of one person from another. This lack of precision led
some hadith scholars to take any report that used a collective isnād to be
lacking in authenticity. Nevertheless, other content of sīra, like the
Constitution of Medina, are generally considered to be authentic.
