Skepticism Skepticism or scepticism (see spelling differences) is generally any
questioning attitude towards knowledge, facts, or opinions/beliefs stated as
facts, or doubt regarding claims that are taken for granted elsewhere.
Philosophical skepticism is an overall approach that requires all information
to be well supported by evidence. Classical philosophical skepticism derives
from the 'Skeptikoi', a school who "asserted nothing". Adherents of Pyrrhonism,
for instance, suspend judgment in investigations. Skeptics may even doubt the
reliability of their own senses. Religious skepticism, on the other hand is
"doubt concerning basic religious principles (such as immortality, providence,
and revelation)". Most scientists are empirical skeptics, who admit the
possibility of knowledge based on evidence, but hold that new evidence may
always overturn these findings. Philosophical skepticism. In philosophical
skepticism, pyrrhonism is a position that refrains from making truth claims. A
philosophical skeptic does not claim that truth is impossible (which would be a
truth claim), instead it recommends "suspending belief". The label is commonly
used to describe other philosophies which appear similar to philosophical
skepticism, such as academic skepticism, an ancient variant of Platonism that
claimed knowledge of truth was impossible. Empiricism is a closely related, but
not identical, position to philosophical skepticism. Empiricists see empiricism
as a pragmatic compromise between philosophical skepticism and nomothetic
science; philosophical skepticism is in turn sometimes referred to as "radical
empiricism." Philosophical skepticism originated in ancient Greek philosophy.
The Greek Sophists of the 5th century BC were for the most part skeptics.
Pyrrhonism was a school of skepticism founded by Aenesidemus in the first
century BC and recorded by Sextus Empiricus in the late 2nd century or early
3rd century AD. One of its first proponents was Pyrrho of Elis (c. 360-275
B.C.), who traveled and studied as far as India and propounded the adoption of
"practical" skepticism. Subsequently, in the "New Academy" Arcesilaus (c. 315-
241 B.C.) and Carneades (c. 213-129 B.C.) developed more theoretical
perspectives, by which conceptions of absolute truth and falsity were refuted
as uncertain. Carneades criticized the views of the Dogmatists, especially
supporters of Stoicism, asserting that absolute certainty of knowledge is
impossible. Sextus Empiricus (c. A.D. 200), the main authority for Greek
skepticism, developed the position further, incorporating aspects of empiricism
into the basis for asserting knowledge. Greek skeptics criticized the Stoics,
accusing them of dogmatism. For the skeptics, the logical mode of argument was
untenable, as it relied on propositions which could not be said to be either
true or false without relying on further propositions. This was the regress
argument, whereby every proposition must rely on other propositions in order to
maintain its validity (see the five tropes of Agrippa the Sceptic). In
addition, the skeptics argued that two propositions could not rely on each
other, as this would create a circular argument (as p implies q and q implies
p). For the skeptics, such logic was thus an inadequate measure of truth and
could create as many problems as it claimed to have solved. Truth was not,
however, necessarily unobtainable, but rather an idea which did not yet exist
in a pure form. Although skepticism was accused of denying the possibility of
truth, in fact it appears to have mainly been a critical school which merely
claimed that logicians had not discovered truth. In Islamic philosophy,
skepticism was established by Al-Ghazali (1058–1111), known in the West as
"Algazel", as part of the orthodox Ash'ari school of Islamic theology, whose
method of skepticism shares many similarities with Descartes' method. René
Descartes is credited for developing a global skepticism as a thought
experiment in his attempt to find absolute certainty on which to base the
foundation of his philosophy. Descartes discussed skeptical arguments from
dreaming and radical deception. David Hume has also been described as a global
skeptic. However, Descartes was not ostensibly a skeptic and developed his
theory of an absolute certainty to disprove other skeptics who argued that
there is no certainty. Pierre Le Morvan (2011) has distinguished between three
broad philosophical approaches to skepticism. The first he calls the "Foil
Approach." According to the latter, skepticism is treated as a problem to be
solved, or challenge to be met, or threat to be parried; skepticism's value on
this view, insofar as it is deemed to have one, accrues from its role as a foil
contrastively illuminating what is required for knowledge and justified belief.
The second he calls the "Bypass Approach" according to which skepticism is
bypassed as a central concern of epistemology. Le Morvan advocates a third
approach—he dubs it the "Health Approach"--that explores when skepticism is
healthy and when it is not, or when it is virtuous and when it is vicious.
Scientific skepticism. A scientific (or empirical) skeptic is one who questions
beliefs on the basis of scientific understanding. Most scientists, being
scientific skeptics, test the reliability of certain kinds of claims by
subjecting them to a systematic investigation using some form of the scientific
method. As a result, a number of claims are considered "pseudoscience" if they
are found to improperly apply or ignore the fundamental aspects of the
scientific method. Scientific skepticism may discard beliefs pertaining to
things outside perceivable observation and thus outside the realm of
systematic, empirical falsifiability/testability. Religious skepticism.
Religious skepticism generally refers to doubting given religious beliefs or
claims. Historically, religious skepticism can be traced back to Socrates, who
doubted many religious claims of the time. Modern religious skepticism
typically places more emphasis on scientific and historical methods or
evidence, with Michael Shermer writing that it is a process for discovering the
truth rather than blanket non-acceptance. For this reason, a religious skeptic
may not believe that Jesus existed, or if he did, that he was not the messiah
and did not perform miracles. Religious skepticism is not the same as atheism
or agnosticism, though these often do involve skeptical attitudes toward
religion and philosophical theology (for example, towards divine omnipotence).
Religious people are generally skeptical about claims of other religions, at
least when the two denominations conflict in some stated belief.
