Sky father The sky father or heavenly father is a recurring theme in mythology
all over the world. The "sky father" can be the complement of the "earth
mother" and appears in some creation myths, many of which are Indo-European or
ancient Near Eastern. Other cultures have quite different myths; Egyptian
mythology features a "sky mother" or "Heavenly Mother" and an earthly dying and
reviving god of vegetation. A sky father is often also a solar deity, a god
identified with the sun, while in contrast, Shinto has a sun goddess. A sky
father figure also appears in ancient Turkic religion. History of the concept.
In late nineteenth century opinions on comparative religion, in a line of
thinking that begins with Friedrich Engels and J. J. Bachofen, and which
received major literary promotion in "The Golden Bough" by "Sir" James G.
Frazer, it was believed that worship of a sky father was characteristic of
nomadic peoples, and that worship of an earth mother similarly characterised
farming peoples. According to this body of doctrine, nomads militarily overran
farming societies, and replaced goddesses with male gods. During the process,
it was believed that the invaders devalued the status of women and replaced a
matriarchy with a patriarchy. The religious changes were imagined to reflect
this change in the status of the sexes. This belief system was linked to the
discovery of the Indo-European languages, and it was fancied that the military
conquest underlying this model spread those languages. The sky father was held
to be an Indo-European cultural ideal. "Aryan" and "Indo-European" were
synonymous during this period. The sky father is frequently invoked in feminist
spirituality, which has helped revive the concept even as the notion of earth
mothers and sky fathers was rejected as oversimplified and implausible in the
world of anthropology, archaeology, and comparative religion. Let us be exposed
to the soothing effect of plant life by the wind, Mother Earth and Father Sky.
Let the stone that grinds the herbs also do the same. O' Ashvins, accept our
prayer for this. The Ashvins are offspring of Surya and have been portrayed as
charioteers, thus invoking and calling upon the Nature itself to nurture human
beings. The ancient God of the Turks, Tengri or Tangra, is usually referred to
as the "kok Tanri" or sky god, therefore heavenly father. Reconsideration of
theory. The theory of a common sky father is rejected by most archaeologists
and anthropologists as an explanation of early European religious life. The
archaeological record does not indicate that Indo-European languages spread
throughout their area in Europe and Asia by military conquest alone. Many non-
Indo-European cultures also have male-dominated pantheons, without being
conquered or bent on conquest. There is no direct historical correlation
between the worship of goddesses and the social status of women; nor is there a
great deal of evidence that the worship of female deities is associated with
agriculture, or that male gods accompany nomadism. There are no reasons to
believe that the Indo-Europeans practiced a religion that was more male-
dominated, patriarchal, or wont to promote male gods at the expense of
goddesses, than any other polytheistic religion. It is in fact true that a male
sky god, whose name has been reconstructed as *"Dyēus ph2ter", and which
survive in Vedic mythology as Dyaus Pita, in Greek mythology as Zeus, and in
Roman mythology as Jupiter, seems to have been shared and inherited from a
common stock of Proto-Indo-European religion. Each of these names is cognate to
the others. This is not, in fact, the most widespread inherited Indo-European
deity. The dawn goddess whose name is reconstructed as Vedic Ushas or *"aus-os-
" is even more widespread; she appears in Greek mythology as Eos, in Rome as
Aurora, in Germanic mythology as Eostre, in Baltic mythology as Aušra, in
Slavic mythology as Zorya, and in Vedic and Hindu mythology as Ushas. These
names (except Zorya) are all cognate and share a common root. It is apparent
that in Indo-European culture, there was neither a systematic bias against
goddesses or a religious motivation towards male dominance greater than any
other comparable culture. In their inculturation efforts, Christian
missionaries have often used the name of the local sky gods to translate the
name of the Christian God. The "Liber Sancti Iacobi" by Aymericus Picaudus
tells that the Basques called God "Urcia", a word found in compounds for the
names of some week days and meteorological phenomena. The current usage is
Jaungoikoa, that can be interpreted as "the lord of above". The imperfect
grammaticality of the word leads some to conjecture that it is a folk etymology
applied to "jainkoa", now considered a shorter synonym. Cultural influences.
The theory about earth goddesses, sky father, and patriarchal invaders was a
stirring tale that fired various imaginations. The story was important in
literature, and was referred to in various ways by important poets and
novelists, including T. S. Eliot, D. H. Lawrence, James Joyce, and most
influentially, Robert Graves. How it worked out in practice depended on the
side for which the believers chose to root. Belief in the sky father and the
military prowess of Aryan supermen was a feature of Nazi racial ideology; the
swastika was chosen to embody this belief system because it was a symbol
thought to be used by the ancient Vedic religion (as well as modern Hinduism
and Buddhism.) Sympathy with the lost utopia of the matriarchal goddessdom
arose later. Established as a recurring theme in important literature, the tale
lived on among the literature faculty long after it had been dropped by the
anthropology department. Its truth was assumed by several historical novelists
and fantasy authors, including Mary Renault, Mary Stewart, and more recently
Mercedes Lackey and Marion Zimmer Bradley, among many others.
