Socinianism Socinianism is a system of Christian doctrine named for Fausto
Sozzini (Latin: Faustus Socinus), which was developed among the Polish Brethren
in the Minor Reformed Church of Poland during the 15th and 16th centuries and
embraced also by the Unitarian Church of Transylvania during the same period.
It is most famous for its Nontrinitarian Christology but contains a number of
other unorthodox beliefs as well. Origins. The ideas of Socinianism date from
the element of the Protestant Reformation known as the Radical Reformation, and
have their root in the Italian Anabaptist movement of the 1540s, such as the
Antitrinitarian Council of Venice in 1550. Lelio Sozzini was the first of the
Italian Antitrinitarians to go beyond Arian beliefs in print and deny the pre-
existence of Christ in his "Brevis explicatio in primum Johannis caput" – a
commentary on the meaning of the Logos in (1562). Lelio Sozzini considered that
the "Beginning" of John 1:1 was the same as 1 John 1:1 and referred to the new
creation not the Genesis creation. His nephew Fausto Sozzini published his own
longer "Brevis explicatio" later, developing his uncle's arguments. Many years
after the death of his uncle in Switzerland Fausto Sozzini passed via the
Unitarian Church in Transylvania, attempting to mediate in the dispute between
Giorgio Biandrata and Ferenc Dávid, then moved to Poland, where he married the
daughter of a leading member of the Polish Brethren, the anti-trinitarian
minority, or "ecclesia minor", which had in 1565 split from the Calvinist
Reformed Church in Poland. Sozzini never actually joined the "ecclesia minor",
but was influential in reconciling several controversies among the Brethren –
on conscientious objection, on prayer to Christ, and on the virgin birth.
Fausto persuaded many in the Polish Brethren who were formerly Arian, such as
Marcin Czechowic to adopt his uncle Lelio's views. Fausto Sozzini was further
influential through the posthumous Racovian Catechism which set out his uncle
Lelio's views on Christology and replaced earlier catechisms of the "Ecclesia
Minor", and also after his death through the writings of his students issued in
Polish and Latin from the press of the Racovian Academy at Raków, Kielce
County. The name "Socinian" only started to be used in Holland and England as
the Latin publications were circulated among early Arminians, Remonstrants,
Dissenters, and early English Unitarians from the 1610s onward. In the 1660s
Fausto Sozzini's grandson Andreas Wiszowaty and great-grandson Benedykt
Wiszowaty published the nine-volume "Biblioteca Fratrum Polonorum quos
Unitarios vocant" 1668 in Amsterdam, with the works of F. Sozzini, the Austrian
Johann Ludwig von Wolzogen, the Poles Johannes Crellius, Jonasz Szlichtyng, and
Samuel Przypkowski. These books circulated among thinkers like Isaac Newton,
John Locke, Voltaire and Pierre Bayle. In Britain and America "Socinianism"
later became a catch-all term for any kind of Dissenting belief. Sources in the
18th and 19th century frequently attributed the term "Socinian"
anachronistically, using it to refer to ideas which covered a much wider range
from the narrowly defined position of the Racovian catechisms and library.
Beliefs. Socinian theology, as summarised in the Racovian Catechism, rejected
the views of orthodox Christian theology on God's knowledge, on the doctrine of
the Trinity and the divinity of Christ, and on soteriology. Christology. The
Racovian publications, like the Sozzinis, rejected the pre-existence of Christ
and held that Jesus Christ did not exist until he was conceived of the virgin
birth as a human being. This view had occurred before with the 4th century
bishop Photinus, but differed both from the mainline Protestant and Catholic
views, which hold that the Logos referred to in the Gospel of John was God,
thus is uncreated and eternal. Human nature. The Socinians held that humans
were created mortal in the beginning and would have died naturally whether Adam
and Eve had eaten from the tree or not. They also rejected the doctrine of
original sin. Atonement. Socinianism also rejected the propitiatory view of
atonement. Predestination and omniscience. The Socinians believed that God's
omniscience was limited to what was a necessary truth in the future (what would
"definitely" happen), and did not apply to what was a contingent truth (what
"might" happen). They believed that, if God knew every possible future, human
free will was impossible, and as such rejected the "hard" view of omniscience.
Skepticism. Later writers such as Archibald Alexander Hodge (1823–1886)
asserted that Socinian theology was rooted in skepticism. However the original
Polish Socinians were believers in miracles, and the virgin birth, though there
were a few radicals, such as Symon Budny and Jacobus Palaeologus, who denied
these. Conscientious objection. Although not directly a doctrinal belief, the
principle of conscientious objection and the obedient relation of the believer
to the state became a distinct position of "Socinianism" as it was formalized
in the Racovian publications. Before F. Sozzini's arrival in Poland there had
been a wide range of positions from the total otherworldiness, common property,
and withdrawal from the state of Marcin Czechowic of Lublin through to the
advocacy of military service by Symon Budny. The next generation of Polish
Brethren stabilized between these two positions, carrying wooden swords to
follow the letter of the law, and allowing senior Socinians such as Hieronim
Moskorzowski to vote in the Sejm. Offshoots of Socinians. The direct doctrinal
descendants of the original Socinians are the Unitarian Christians of
Transylvania and England. Although the Polish Brethren never adopted the name
"Unitarian" while in Poland, when they were disbanded in 1658, those who fled
to Holland eventually embraced the term "Unitarian" (which they got from the
Transylvanians), as they did not prefer to be called "Socinians." The term had
been used by the Unitarian Church of Transylvania as early as 1600. Socinian
theology continued in Transylvania, where Polish exiles such as Andrzej
Wiszowaty Jr. taught in the Unitarian College (1726–1740), as evidenced in
the "Summa Universae Theologiae Christianae secundum Unitarios" of Mihály
Lombard de Szentábrahám recognized as the statement of faith of the Unitarian
Church of Transylvania by Emperor Joseph II in 1782. Early English Unitarians
such as Henry Hedworth and John Biddle retroactively applied the term
"Unitarian" to the Polish Brethren. By 1676 there were at least three Socinian
meeting houses in London, even if the Act of Toleration of 1689 saw Socinians
and Catholics excluded from official recognition. Socinian ideas continued to
have significant influence on Unitarians in England throughout the entire
period of their development. Modern Socinians (in Christological terms) include
the small number of "Biblical Unitarian" churches such as Christadelphians and
the Church of the Blessed Hope, though these churches are not direct
descendants of the Polish Brethren. Related beliefs. A related idea to
Socinianism is adoptionism, Ebionitism Psilanthropism (from the Greek
ψιλῶς "psilōs"; merely, only and ἄνθρωπος "anthropos"; man,
human being) an idea held by Samuel Coleridge, Thomas Jefferson and others in
the 18th Century. At the time of Fausto Sozzini Symon Budny held this view –
specifically that Jesus was the son of Joseph, but it, and Budny, were excluded
from the Racovian community. Psilanthropism, under the name of Ebionitism, was
rejected by the ecumenical councils, especially in the First Council of Nicaea,
which was convened to deal directly with this.
