Sodom and Gomorrah Sodom and Gomorrah (; ) were cities mentioned in the Book of
Genesis and throughout the Hebrew Bible, the New Testament and Deuterocanonical
sources, as well as the Qur'an. According to the Torah, the kingdoms of Sodom
and Gomorrah were allied with the cities of Admah, Zeboim and Bela. These five
cities, also known as the "cities of the plain", were situated on the Jordan
river plain in the southern region of the land of Canaan. The Jordan river
plain (which corresponds to area just north of the modern day Dead Sea) has
been compared to the garden of Eden, being a land well-watered and green,
suitable for grazing livestock. Divine judgment by Yahweh was then passed upon
Sodom and Gomorrah along with two other neighboring cities that were completely
consumed by fire and brimstone. Neighboring Zoar was the only city to be spared
during that day of judgment. In Abrahamic traditions, Sodom and Gomorrah have
become synonymous with impenitent sin, and their fall with a proverbial
manifestation of God's wrath. Sodom and Gomorrah have been used as metaphors
for vice and homosexuality viewed as a deviation. The story has therefore given
rise to words in several languages, including the English word "sodomy", used
in so-called sodomy laws to describe a sexual "crime against nature" consisting
of anal and/or oral sex, either homosexual or heterosexual. Etymology. The name
Sodom is derived from , and Greek "Sódoma". The name Gomorrah is derived from
, and Greek / "Gómorrha". The exact meaning of the names is uncertain. The
name "Sodom" could be a word from an early Semitic language ultimately related
to the Arabic "sadama", meaning "fasten", "fortify", "strengthen", and Gomorrah
could be based on the root "gh m r", which means "be deep", "copious (water)".
Historicity. The historical existence of Sodom and Gomorrah is still in dispute
by archaeologists, as little archaeological evidence has ever been found in the
regions where they were supposedly situated. The Bible indicates they were
located near the Dead Sea (, , ). Strabo states that locals living near Moasada
(as opposed to Masada) say that "there were once thirteen inhabited cities in
that region of which Sodom was the metropolis". Strabo identifies a limestone
and salt hill at the south western tip of the Dead Sea, and Kharbet Usdum ruins
nearby as the site of biblical Sodom. Archibald Sayce translated an Akkadian
poem describing cities that were destroyed in a rain of fire, written from the
view of a person who escaped the destruction; the names of the cities are not
given. However, Sayce later mentions that the story more closely resembles the
doom of Sennacherib's host. In 1976 Giovanni Pettinato claimed that a cuneiform
tablet that had been found in the newly discovered library at Ebla contained
the names of all five of the cities of the plain (Sodom, Gomorrah, Admah,
Zeboim, and Bela), listed in the same order as in Genesis. The names "si-da-mu"
and "ì-ma-ar" [TM.75.G.1570 and TM.75.G.2233 were identified as representing
Sodom and Gomorrah, which gained some acceptance at the time. However, Alfonso
Archi states that, judging from the surrounding city names in the cuneiform
list, "si-da-mu" lies in northern Syria and not near the Dead Sea, and "ì-ma-
ar" is a variant of "ì-mar", known to represent Emar, an ancient city located
near Ebla. William Shea points out in 1983 that on the 'Eblaite Geographical
Atlas' [TM.75.G.2231], "ad-mu-ut" and "sa-dam" are good readings by Pettinato
and correspond to Admah and Sodom, and they are contained in a list of cities
that traces a route along the shores of, or quite possibly within the Dead Sea,
whose position may have since shifted along its fault. Today, the scientific
consensus is reported as being that "Ebla has no bearing on ... Sodom and
Gomorra." If the cities actually existed, they might have been destroyed as the
result of a natural cataclysm. Geologists have confirmed that no volcanic
activity occurred within the last 4000 years. However, it is possible that the
towns were destroyed by an earthquake in the region, especially if the towns
lay along a major fault, the Jordan Rift Valley. However, there is a lack of
contemporary accounts of seismic activity within the necessary timeframe to
corroborate this theory. Possible candidates for Sodom or Gomorrah are the
sites discovered or visited by Walter E. Rast and R. Thomas Schaub in 1973,
including Bab edh-Dhra, which was originally excavated in 1965 by archaeologist
Paul Lapp, only to have his work continued by Rast and Schaub following his
death by accidental drowning in the waters off of Cyprus in 1970. Other
possibilities also include Numeira, es-Safi, Feifeh and Khanazir, which were
also visited by Schaub and Rast. All sites were located near the Dead Sea, with
evidence of burning and traces of sulfur. Archaeological remains excavated from
Bab edh-Dhra are currently displayed in Karak Archaeological Museum (Karak
Castle) and Amman Citadel Museum. Another possible candidate for Sodom is the
Tall el-Hammam dig site which began in 2006 under the direction of Steven
Collins. Tall el-Hammam is located in the southern Jordan river valley
approximately 14 kilometers Northeast of the Dead Sea, and seemingly fitting
the Bible descriptions of the lands of Sodom. The ongoing dig is a result of
joint cooperation between Trinity South Western University and the Department
of Antiquities of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan. The site is 36 hectares,
while the footprint size of general settlement extends beyond this—well over
40 hectares. This size puts Tall el-Hammam as one of the largest Bronze sites
that has been discovered in Jordan. Analysis of the findings indicates that the
site was occupied from the Chalcolithic period on up the Iron Age (however
there may likely be period gaps as well, along with evidences of glazed
artifacts—such as pottery and rocks, and destruction). In addition there is
evidence of Hellenistic, Eastern Roman, and Byzantium occupation on the site.
The Jewish historian Josephus identifies the Dead Sea in geographic proximity
to the ancient biblical city of Sodom. However, he refers to the lake by its
Greek name, Asphaltites. According to an ancient Sumerian planesphere, using
modern astronomical software, a match for the sky as then existed was seen in
the early morning around 4:30am on June 29, 3123 BC with an asteroid exploding
in an airburst producing massive fiery plumes over the area. Biblical
narratives. The Book of Genesis is the primary source that mentions the cities
of Sodom and Gomorrah. Major and minor prophets in the Hebrew Bible have also
referred to Sodom and Gomorrah to parallel their prophetic events. In suite,
the New Testament also contains passages of parallels to the destruction and
surrounding events that pertained to these cities and those who were involved.
Later Deuterocanonical texts attempt to glean additional insights about these
cities of the Jordan Plain. Political climate. In , Sodom and Gomorrah's
political situation is described during the time biblical Lot had encamped in
Sodom's territory. indicates that at that time, "the men of Sodom "" wicked and
sinners before the exceedingly." Sodom was ruled by king Bera while Gomorrah
was ruled by king Birsha. Their kingship, however, was not sovereign, because
all of the river Jordan plain was under Elamite rule for twelve years. The
kingdom of Elam was ruled by king Chedorlaomer. In the thirteenth year of
subjection to Elam, the five kings of the river Jordan plain aligned together
to rebel against Elamite rule. These kings included those of Sodom and Gomorrah
as well as their neighbors: king Shinab of Admah, king Shemeber of Zeboiim, and
the unnamed king of Bela (later called Zoar). In response, Elam's king
Chedorlaomer, gathered additional forces from Shinar, Ellasar and Goyim to
suppress this rebellion from the cities of the plain. They waged war in the
Vale of Siddim in the fourteenth year. The battle was brutal with heavy losses
in the cities of the plain, with their resultant defeat. Sodom and Gomorrah
were spoiled of their goods, and captives were taken, including Lot. The tide
of war turned when Lot's uncle Abram gathered an elite force that slaughtered
king Chedorlaomer's forces in Hobah, north of Damascus. The success of his
mission freed the cities of the plain from under Elam's rule. Judgment. In ,
three men came, thought by most commentators to have been angels appearing as
men, to Abram (Abraham) in the plains of Mamre. After the angels received the
hospitality of Abraham and Sarah, his wife, the revealed to Abraham that he
would destroy Sodom and Gomorrah, because their cry was great, "and because
their sin is very grievous." In response, Abraham inquired of the if he would
spare the city if 50 righteous people were found in it, to which the agreed he
would not destroy it for the sake of the righteous yet dwelling therein.
Abraham then inquired of God for mercy at lower numbers (first 45, then 40,
then 30, then 20, and finally at 10), with the agreeing each time. Two of the
angels proceeded to Sodom and were met by Abraham's nephew Lot, who convinced
the angels to lodge with him, and they ate with Lot. know them. (NRSV: know
them, NIV: can have sex with them, NJB: can have intercourse with them). Lot
refused to give his guests to the inhabitants of Sodom and, instead, offered
them his two virgin daughters "which have not known man" and to "do ye to them
as "" good in your eyes". However, they refused this offer and threatened to do
worse to Lot than they would have done to his guests, and then came near to
break down the door. Lot's angelic guests rescued him and struck the men with
blindness, thereby revealing to Lot that they were not ordinary men but angels,
and they informed Lot of their mission to destroy the city. Then (not having
found even 10 righteous people in the city), they commanded Lot to gather his
family and leave. As they made their escape, one angel commanded Lot to "look
not behind thee" (singular "thee"). However, as Sodom and Gomorrah were
destroyed with brimstone and fire from the , Lot's wife looked back at the
city, and she became a pillar of salt. Religious views. Jewish. Rictor Norton
views classical Jewish texts as stressing the cruelty and lack of hospitality
of the inhabitants of Sodom to the "stranger". The "Jewish Encyclopedia" has
information on the importance of hospitality to the Jewish people. The people
of Sodom were seen as guilty of many other significant sins. Rabbinic writings
affirm that the Sodomites also committed economic crimes, blasphemy and
bloodshed. One of the worst was to give money or even gold ingots to beggars,
after inscribing their names on them, and then subsequently refusing to sell
them food. The unfortunate stranger would end up starving and after his death,
the people who gave him the money would reclaim it. A rabbinic tradition,
described in the Mishnah, postulates that the sin of Sodom was related to
property: Sodomites believed that "what is mine is mine, and what is yours is
yours" (Abot), which is interpreted as a lack of compassion. Another rabbinic
tradition is that these two wealthy cities treated visitors in a sadistic
fashion. One major crime done to strangers was almost identical to that of
Procrustes in Greek mythology. This would be the story of the "bed" that guests
to Sodom were forced to sleep in: if they were too short they were stretched to
fit it, and if they were too tall, they were cut up (indeed, in Hebrew and
Yiddish, the corresponding term for a Procrustean bed is a "Sodom bed"). In
another incident, Eliezer, Abraham's servant, went to visit Lot in Sodom and
got in a dispute with a Sodomite over a beggar, and was hit in the forehead
with a stone, making him bleed. The Sodomite demanded Eliezer pay him for the
service of bloodletting, and a Sodomite judge sided with the Sodomite. Eliezer
then struck the judge in the forehead with a stone and asked the judge to pay
the Sodomite. The Talmud and the book of Jasher also recount two incidents of a
young girl (one involved Lot's daughter Paltith) who gave some bread to a poor
man who had entered the city. When the townspeople discovered their acts of
kindness, they burned Paltith and smeared the other girl's body with honey and
hung her from the city wall until she was eaten by bees. (Sanhedrin 109a.) It
is this gruesome event, and her scream in particular, the Talmud concludes,
that are alluded to in the verse that heralds the city's destruction: "So said,
'Because the outcry of Sodom and Gomorrah has become great, and because their
sin has been very grave, I will descend and see...'" A modern orthodox position
is one that holds, "The paradigmatic instance of such aberrant behavior is
found in the demand of the men of Sodom to 'know' the men visiting Lot, the
nephew of Abraham, thus lending their name to the practice of 'sodomy'." The
scholar and activist Jay Michaelson proposes a reading of the story of Sodom
that emphasizes the violation of hospitality as well as the violence of the
Sodomites. "Homosexual rape is the way in which they violate hospitality—not
the essence of their transgression. Reading the story of Sodom as being about
homosexuality is like reading the story of an ax murderer as being about an
ax." Michaelson places the story of Sodom in context with other Genesis stories
regarding Abraham's hospitality to strangers, and argues that when other texts
in the Hebrew Bible mention Sodom, they do so without commentary on
homosexuality. The verses cited by Michaelson include Jeremiah 23:14, where the
sins of Jerusalem are compared to Sodom and are listed as adultery, lying, and
strengthening the hands of evildoers; Amos 4:1-11 (oppressing the poor and
crushing the needy); and Ezekiel 16:49-50, which defines the sins of Sodom as
"pride, fullness of bread, and abundance of idleness was in her and in her
daughters, neither did she strengthen the hand of the poor and needy. And they
were haughty, and did "toevah" before me, and I took them away as I saw fit."
Michaelson uses "toevah" in place of "abomination" to emphasize the original
Hebrew, which he explains as being more correctly translated as "taboo".
Christian. Several theories have been advanced in Christian thought concerning
the sin of Sodom, two of which are prevailing opinions—a sexual and a
nonsexual view. The more prominent theory, representing orthodox Christian
opinion, holds that the demand of Lot's countrymen was referring to a militant
solicitation for homosexual sex—a same-sex orgy. Those who favor the non-
sexual interpretation argue against a denotation of sexual behavior in this
context, noting that while the Hebrew word for "know" appears over 900 times in
the Hebrew Scriptures, only approximately 1% (13-14 times) of those references
is it clearly used as a euphemism for realizing sexual intimacy. Instead, those
who hold to this interpretation usually see the demand to know as demanding the
right to interrogate the strangers. This reference to "going after strange
flesh" is understood in different ways to include something akin to bestiality,
having illicit sex with strangers, having sex with angels, but most often God's
destruction of the populations of the four cities is interpreted to mean
homosexual (same-sex) relations. Many who interpret the stories in a non-sexual
context contend that as the word for "strange" is akin to "another", "other",
"altered" or even "next", the meaning is unclear, and if the condemnation of
Sodom was the result of sexual activities perceived to be perverse, then it is
likely that it was because women sought to commit fornication with "other than
human" angels, perhaps referring to or the apocryphal Book of Enoch. Countering
this, it is pointed out that refers to angels seeking women, not men seeking
angels, and that both Sodom and Gomorrah were engaged in the sin Jude describes
before the angelic visitation, and that, regardless, it is doubtful that the
Sodomites knew they were angels. In addition, it is argued the word used in the
King James Version of the Bible for "strange", can mean unlawful or corrupted
(; ), and that the apocryphal Second Book of Enoch (different from the one Jude
quotes from) condemns "sodomitic" sex (Enoch 10:3; 34:1), thus indicating that
homosexual relations was the prevalent physical sin of Sodom. Both the non-
sexual and the homosexuality view invoke certain classical writings as well as
other portions of the Bible. Here the nonsexual view focuses on the
inhospitality aspect, while the other notes the description "detestable" or
"abomination", the Hebrew word for which often denotes moral sins, including
those of a sexual nature. The nonsexual view focuses on the cultural importance
of hospitality, which this biblical story shares with other ancient
civilizations, such as Greece and Rome, where hospitality was of singular
importance and strangers were under the protection of the gods. The orthodox
position does not deny this important cultural aspect, but tends to see the
refusal to repent as being the main issue behind Jesus's condemnation, with
this being causative of the particular inhospitality shown by the cities Jesus
referred to. In addition, they see the information regarding Sodom as best
indicating that forced perverse sex was the specific means of inhospitality,
and the primary physical sin of Sodom. Islamic. The 'people of Lot'
transgressed consciously against the bounds of God. Their avarice led to
inhospitality and robbery, which in turn led to the humiliation of strangers by
mistreatment and rape. It was their abominable sin of homosexual sex which was
seen as symptomatic of their attitudes, and upon Lot's exhorting them to
abandon their transgression against God, they ridiculed him, and threatened him
with dire consequences; Lot only prayed to God to be saved from doing as they
did. Then Gabriel met Lot and said that he must run from the town quickly, as
Allah gave this command for Gabriel to give to Lot for saving his life. In the
Quran it was written that Lot's wife was killed when she turned her head back
to look at the disaster, and that only Lot was saved during the destruction of
their town, with the understanding that the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah are
identified in Genesis, but "the location remains unnamed in the Qur'an" Other
references. Moses. See also: Major Prophets. , and addresses people as from
Sodom and Gomorrah, associates Sodom with shameless sinning and tells Babylon
that it will end like Sodom and Gomorrah. , , and associate Sodom and Gomorrah
with adultery and lies, prophesies the fate of Edom, south of the Dead Sea,
prophesies the fate of Babylon and uses Sodom as a comparison. In God compares
Jerusalem to Sodom, saying "Sodom never did what you and your daughters have
done." He explains that the sin of Sodom was that "She and her daughters were
arrogant, overfed and unconcerned; they did not help the poor and needy. They
were haughty and did detestable things before me." Minor Prophets. In God tells
the Israelites he had warned them and treated them like Sodom and Gomorrah,
still they did not repent. In the prophet tells Moab and Ammon, southeast and
northeast of the Dead Sea, that they will end up like Sodom and Gomorrah. New
Testament. In , cf. , Jesus declares certain cities more damnable than Sodom
and Gomorrah, due to their response to Jesus' disciples, in the light of
greater grace (RSV): In Jesus prophesies the fate of some cities where he did
some of his works (RSV): In Jesus compares his second-coming to the judgment of
Sodom and Gomorrah (RSV): In Paul quotes (RSV): "And as Isaiah predicted, 'If
the Lord of hosts had not left us children, we would have fared like Sodom and
been made like Gomor'rah.'" In Peter uses the time of Sodom and Lot in his
description of the time of the second coming of Jesus. Deuterocanonical
references. Wisdom 10:6 refers to Five Cities, including Sodom, or Pentapolis:
"Wisdom rescued a righteous man when the ungodly were perishing; he escaped the
fire that descended on the Five Cities." Sodom was one of a group of five
towns, the Pentapolis (): Sodom, Gomorrah, Admah, Zeboim and Bela—also called
Zoar. The Pentapolis region is also collectively referred to as "the cities of
the plain". Modern Sodom. The site of the present Dead Sea Works, a large
operation for the extraction of Dead Sea minerals, is called ""Sdom""
(סדום) according to its traditional Arab name, "Khirbet as-sudūm". Nearby
is unique Mount Sodom (הר סדום in Hebrew) consisting mainly of salt. In
the Plain of Sdom (מישור סדום) to the south there are a few springs
and two small agricultural villages.
