Sol Invictus Sol Invictus ("Invincible Sun") was the official sun god of the
later Roman Empire. In 274 the Roman emperor Aurelian made it an official cult
alongside the traditional Roman cults. Scholars disagree whether the new deity
was a refoundation of the ancient Latin cult of Sol, a revival of the cult of
Elagabalus or completely new. The god was favored by emperors after Aurelian
and appeared on their coins until Constantine. The last inscription referring
to Sol Invictus dates to 387 AD and there were enough devotees in the 5th
century that Augustine found it necessary to preach against them. It is
commonly claimed that the date of December 25th for Christmas was selected in
order to correspond with the Roman festival of "Dies Natalis Solis Invicti", or
"Birthday of Sol Invictus" but Pope Benedict XVI has argued that the December
25 date was determined simply by calculating nine months after March 25,
regarded as the day of Jesus’ conception (the Feast of the Annunciation).
This claim was mainly based on a passage of the "Commentary on the prophet
Daniel" by Hippolytus of Rome, which was written around year 204. However, even
Pope Benedict has stated that "Christmas acquired its definitive form in the
fourth century when it replaced the Roman Feast of the "Sol invictus"." Use of
the phrase. "Invictus" (unconquered) was an epithet used for various Roman
divinities in the Roman Empire. In the Roman Calendar of the early empire these
include "Jupiter Invictus" and "Mars Invictus". It was in use from the late
Republic and throughout the Imperial period for a range of deities, such as
Hercules, Apollo and Silvanus, and was therefore a well-established form when
applied to Mithras by Roman devotees from the 2nd century onwards. It has a
clear association with solar deities and solar monism; as such, it became the
preferred epithet of Rome's traditional Sol and the novel, short-lived Roman
state cult to Elagabalus, an Emesan solar deity who headed Rome's official
pantheon under his namesake emperor. The earliest dated use of "Sol invictus"
is in a dedication from Rome, AD 158. Another, stylistically dated to the 2nd
century AD, is inscribed on a Roman "phalera": ""inventori lucis soli invicto
augusto"" (to the contriver of light, sol invictus augustus ). Here "augustus"
is most likely a further epithet of Sol as "august" (an elevated being, divine
or close to divinity), though the association of Sol with the Imperial house
would have been unmistakable and was already established in iconography and
stoic monism. These are the earliest attested examples of Sol as "invictus",
but in AD 102 a certain Anicetus restored a shrine of Sol; Hijmans (2009, 486,
n. 22) is tempted "to link Anicetus' predilection for Sol with his name, the
Latinized form of the Greek word ἀνίκητος, which means "invictus"".
Elagabalus. The first sun god consistently termed "invictus" was the provincial
Syrian god Elagabalus. According to the "Historia Augusta", the teenaged
Severan heir adopted the name of his deity and brought his cult image from
Emesa to Rome. Once installed as emperor, he neglected Rome's traditional State
deities and promoted his own as Rome's most powerful deity. This ended with his
murder in 222. The "Historia Augusta" refers to the deity Elagabalus as "also
called Jupiter and Sol" ("fuit autem Heliogabali vel Iovis vel Solis"). This
has been seen as an abortive attempt to impose the Syrian sun god on Rome; but
because it is now clear that the Roman cult of Sol remained firmly established
in Rome throughout the Roman period, this Syrian Sol Elagabalus has become no
more relevant to our understanding of the Roman Sol than, for example, the
Syrian Jupiter Dolichenus is for our understanding of the Roman Jupiter.
Aurelian. The Roman "gens" Aurelia was associated with the cult of Sol. After
his victories in the East, the Emperor Aurelian thoroughly reformed the Roman
cult of Sol, elevating the sun-god to one of the premier divinities of the
Empire. Where previously priests of Sol had been simply "sacerdotes" and tended
to belong to lower ranks of Roman society, they were now "pontifices" and
members of the new college of pontifices instituted by Aurelian. Every pontifex
of Sol was a member of the senatorial elite, indicating that the priesthood of
Sol was now highly prestigious. Almost all these senators held other
priesthoods as well, however, and some of these other priesthoods take
precedence in the inscriptions in which they are listed, suggesting that they
were considered more prestigious than the priesthood of Sol. Aurelian also
built a new temple for Sol, bringing the total number of temples for the god in
Rome to (at least) four He also instituted games in honor of the sun god, held
every four years from AD 274 onwards. The confusion surrounding Aurelian's
reforms has been significant, much of it rooted in the mistaken opinion that he
was introducing a new cult, which, as is now clear, he was not. The following
constitute the most common errors of fact attributed to Aurelian and his
reforms. 1. Aurelian called his sun god Sol "Invictus" to differentiate him
from the earlier Roman god Sol. Actually, Aurelian is twice as likely to call
Sol "Oriens" on his coins as he is Sol "Invictus". Only one of the fifteen or
so pontifices of Sol adds the epithet "invictus"; all others simply call
themselves "pontifex Solis". 2. Aurelian built his new temple for a Syrian sun
god, not the Roman one. There is no credible evidence to support this, and
ample evidence to refute it. The "Syrian Sol-hypothesis" is therefore now
rejected by all specialists in the field. 3. Aurelian inaugurated his new
temple dedicated to Sol Invictus and held the first games for Sol on December
25, 274, on the supposed day of the winter solstice and day of rebirth of the
Sun. This is not only pure conjecture, but goes against the best evidence
available. The only explicit reference to a celebration of Sol in late December
is made by Julian the Apostate in his hymn to King Helios written immediately
afterwards in early AD 363. Julian explicitly differentiates between the one-
day, annual celebration of late December 362 and the multi-day quadrennial
games of Sol which, of course, had also been held in 362, but clearly at a
different time. Taken together, the evidence of the Calendar of Filocalus and
Julian's hymn to Helios clearly shows, according to Hijmans and others, that
the "ludi" of October 19–22 were the Solar Games instituted by Aurelian. They
presumably coincided with the dedication of his new temple for Sol. 4. After
Aurelian, Sol became supreme deity of the Roman Empire. Constantine. Emperors
portrayed Sol Invictus on their official coinage, with a wide range of legends,
only a few of which incorporated the epithet "invictus", such as the legend
SOLI INVICTO COMITI, claiming the Unconquered Sun as a companion to the
Emperor, used with particular frequency by Constantine. Statuettes of Sol
Invictus, carried by the standard-bearers, appear in three places in reliefs on
the Arch of Constantine. Constantine's official coinage continues to bear
images of Sol until 325/6. A solidus of Constantine as well as a gold medallion
from his reign depict the Emperor's bust in profile twinned ("jugate") with Sol
Invictus, with the legend INVICTUS CONSTANTINUS Constantine's triumphal arch
was carefully positioned to align with the colossal statue of Sol by the
Colosseum, so that Sol formed the dominant backdrop when seen from the
direction of the main approach towards the arch. Sol and the other Roman
Emperors. Berrens deals with coin-evidence of Imperial connection to the Solar
cult. Sol is depicted sporadically on imperial coins in the 1st and 2nd
centuries AD, then more frequently from Septimius Severus onwards until AD 325/
6. "Sol invictus" appears on coin legends from AD 261, well before the reign of
Aurelian. Connections between the imperial radiate crown and the cult of Sol
are postulated. Augustus was posthumously depicted with radiate crown, as were
living emperors from Nero (after AD 65) to Constantine. Some modern scholarship
interprets the imperial radiate crown as a divine, solar association rather
than an overt symbol of Sol; Bergmann calls it a pseudo-object designed to
disguise the divine and solar connotations that would otherwise be politically
controversial but there is broad agreement that coin-images showing the
imperial radiate crown are stylistically distinct from those of the solar crown
of rays; the imperial radiate crown is depicted as a real object rather than as
symbolic light. Hijmans argues that the Imperial radiate crown represents the
honorary wreath awarded to Augustus, perhaps posthumously, to commemorate his
victory at the battle of Actium; he points out that henceforth, living emperors
were depicted with radiate crowns, but state "divi" were not. To Hijmans this
implies the radiate crown of living emperors as a link to Augustus. His
successors automatically inherited (or sometimes acquired) the same offices and
honours due to Octavian as "saviour of the Republic" through his victory at
Actium, piously attributed to Apollo-Helios. Wreaths awarded to victors at the
Actian Games were radiate. Sol Invictus and Christianity. The Philocalian
calendar of 354 AD gives a festival of "Natalis Invicti" on 25 December. There
is limited evidence that this festival was celebrated before the mid 4th
century AD. Whether the 'Sol Invictus' festival "has a strong claim on the
responsibility for our December date" of Christmas (as per the 1908 Catholic
Encyclopedia) or not has been called into question by Joseph Cardinal
Ratzinger, now Pope Benedict XVI, who challenged this theory by arguing that a
December 25 date was determined simply by calculating nine months after March
25, regarded as the day of Jesus’ conception (the Feast of the Annunciation).
"But this Nativity which is to be adored in heaven and on earth is suggested to
us by no day more than this when, with the early light still shedding its rays
on nature, there is borne in upon our senses the brightness of this wondrous
mystery." Some consider this to be in opposition to Sol Invictus. Some see an
allusion to .
