Christian mortalism Christian mortalism incorporates the belief that the human
soul is not naturally immortal, and the belief that the soul is uncomprehending
during the time between bodily death and Judgment Day resurrection, known as
the Intermediate state. "Soul sleep" is an often pejorative term so the more
neutral term "materialism" was also used in the 19th century, and "Christian
mortalism" since the 1970s. Historically the term psychopannychism was also
used, despite problems with the etymology and application. Some have identified
a distinction between psychopannychism and , for example Gordon Campbell (2008)
identified Milton as believing in the latter though in fact both "De doctrina
Christiana" and "Paradise Lost" make reference to death as "sleep" and the dead
being "raised from sleep". The difference is difficult to identify in practice.
Etymology and terminology. Since the phrase "soul sleep" does not occur either
in the Bible or in early Anabaptist materials, an explanation is required for
the origin of the term. Additionally several other terms have been introduced
relating to the view. "Soul sleep". The phrase "soul sleep" appears to have
been popularised by John Calvin in the subtitle to his Latin tract
"Psychopannychia" (manuscript Orléans 1534, Latin Strasbourg 1542, 2nd.ed.
1545, French, Geneva 1558, English 1581). The title of the booklet comes from
Greek "psyche" (soul, mind) with "pan-nychis" (παν-νυχίς, all-night
vigil, all-night banquet), so "Psychopannychia", originally, represents
Calvin's view, the one he was defending; that the soul was conscious, active.
"Psychopannychism". In the Latin it is clearer that "Psychopannychia" is
actually the refutation of, the opposite of, the idea of soul sleep. The French
version, "Psychopannychie – La nuit ou le sommeil de l'âme"
("Psychopannychia – the night or the sleep of the soul", Geneva 1558), may
have caused the confusion that by "-pannychis" Calvin meant sleep (in Greek "-
hypnos" not "-pannychis", vigil). The French subtitle ""le sommeil de l'âme""
was taken up in German as "Seelenschlaf" ("soul-sleep"). The tract first
appeared in English, translated by T. Stocker, as "An excellent treatise of the
Immortalytie of the Soule by John Calvin" (London, 1581). "Hypnopsychism".
"Hypnopsychism" from "hypno-" + "psyche" ("sleep of soul") was a more correct
coinage from Greek than that of Calvin's editor. Eustratios of Constantinople
(after 582) denounced mortalism as a heresy using this term. "Thnetopsychism".
A possibly contrasting phrase is (from Greek "thnetos" (mortal) + "psyche"
(soul, mind)). However the term has its origin in the descriptions of Eusebius
of Caesarea and John of Damascus of mortalist views among Arab Christians, In
the 1960s also this phrase was applied also to the views of Tyndale, Luther and
others engaged in mortal introspection, from awareness that Calvin's term
"Psychopannychia" originally described his own belief, not the belief he was
calling error as well as in view of the Anabaptists, since their own writings
held that the soul dies and the dead sleep. Their view is that the soul dies,
with the body to be recalled to life at the resurrection of the dead, or that
the soul is not separate from the body and so there is no "spiritual" self to
survive bodily death. In both cases, the deceased does not begin to enjoy a
reward or suffer a punishment until Judgment Day. Mortalist arguments.
Historically, Christian mortalists have advanced theological, lexical, and
scientific arguments in support of their position. Theological arguments. Some
early eastern Christians argued for mortalism on the basis of the identity of
blood with life in Leviticus 17:11. Theological arguments for mortalism which
contended it was not taught in the Bible were made by mortalists such as
Francis Blackburne, Joseph Priestley, and Samuel Bourne. Mortalists such as
Richard Overton advanced a combination of theological and philosophical
arguments in favor of mortalism. Thomas Hobbes likewise made extensive use of
theological argumentation. Some mortalists viewed their beliefs as a return to
original Christian teaching. Mortalist theological arguments were also used to
contest the Roman Catholic doctrine of purgatory and masses for the dead.
Lexical arguments. In the late eighteenth century, the standard Hebrew lexicon
and grammar of John Parkhurst expressed the view that the traditional rendering
of the Hebrew word "nephesh" as reference to an immortal soul, had no lexical
support. Mortalists in the nineteenth century used lexical arguments to deny
the traditional doctrines of hell and the immortal soul. Scientific arguments.
The eighteenth century mortalist Henry Layton presented arguments based on
physiology. Scientific arguments became important to the nineteenth century
discussion of mortalism and natural immortality, and mortalist Miles Grant
cited extensively from a number of scientists who observed that the immortality
of the soul was unsupported by scientific evidence. Historic proponents of the
mortality of the soul. The mortality of the soul has been held throughout the
history of both Judaism and Christianity. Judaism. Although in the Book of
Genesis Jacob mentions he would descend into the Sheol where he thought his son
Joseph already was and the Witch of Endor summons the ghost of the deceased
prophet Samuel at the behest of King Saul, modern scholars believe the concept
of an immortal soul going to bliss or torment after death entered mainstream
Judaism after the exile and existed throughout the Second Temple era, though
both ‘soul sleep’ and ‘soul death’, were also held, Mortalism is
present in certain Second Temple Period pseudepigraphal works, later rabbinical
works, and among medieval era rabbis such as Abraham Ibn Ezra (1092–1167),
Maimonides (1135–1204), and Joseph Albo (1380–1444). Some authorities
within Conservative Judaism, notably Neil Gillman, also support the notion that
the souls of the dead are unconscious until the Resurrection. Traditional
rabbinic Judaism, however, has always been of the opinion that belief in
immortality of at least most souls, and punishment and reward after death, was
a consistent belief back through the giving of the Torah at Mt. Sinai.
Traditional Judaism reads the Torah accordingly. As an example, the punishment
of kareth (excision) is understood to mean that soul is cut off from God in the
Afterlife. Christian views. Second to eighth centuries. The date of this synod
in Arabia would be during the reign of Emperor Philip the Arab (244-249).
Redepenning (1841) was of the opinion that Eusebius' terminology here, "the
human soul dies" was probably that of their critics rather than the Arabian
Christians' own expression and they were more likely simply
"psychopannychists", believers in "soul sleep". Some Syriac writers such as
Aphrahat, Ephrem and Narsai believed in the "dormition", or "sleep", of the
soul, in which "souls of the dead are largely inert, having lapsed into a state
of sleep, in which they can only dream of their future reward or punishments."
John of Damascus denounced the ideas of some Arab Christians as
"thnetopsychism" (‘soul death’). Eustratios of Constantinople (after 582)
denounced this and what he called "hypnopsychism" (‘soul sleep’). The issue
was connected to that of the Intercession of saints. The writings of Christian
ascetic Isaac of Nineveh (d.700), reflect several perspectives which include
mortalism. Ninth to fifteenth centuries. Mortalism evidently persisted since
various Byzantine writers had to defend the doctrine of the veneration of
saints against those who said the saints sleep. John the Deacon (11th C)
attacked those who "dare to say that praying to the saints is like shouting in
the ears of the deaf, as if they had drunk from the mythical waters of
Oblivion." Pope John XXII inadvertently caused the Beatific vision controversy
(1331–1334) by suggesting that the saved do not attain the Beatific Vision,
or "see God" until Judgment Day, (In Italian: "Visione beatifica differita",
"deferred beatific vision") which was a view possibly consistent with soul
sleep. The Sacred College of Cardinals held a consistory on the problem in
January 1334, and Pope John conceded to the more orthodox understanding. His
successor, in that same year, Pope Benedict XII, declared it ex cathedra
doctrine that the righteous do see Heaven immediately upon death. The
Reformation. After a brief hiatus, mortalism emerged in Christianity during the
Late Middle Ages, and was promoted by some Reformation as well as some minor
Protestant denominations. Conti has argued that during the Reformation both
psychosomnolence (the belief that the soul sleeps until the resurrection) and
thnetopsychism (the belief that the body and soul both die and then both rise
again) were quite common. William Tyndale, "An Answer to Sir Thomas More's
Dialogue" (1530) Morey suggests that William Tyndale (1494–1536) and John
Wycliffe (1320–1384) taught the doctrine of soul sleep "as the answer to the
Catholic teachings of purgatory and masses for the dead." Many Anabaptists in
this period, such as Michael Sattler (1490–1527), were Christian mortalists.
However, the best known advocate of soul sleep was Martin Luther (1483–1546).
In writing on Ecclesiastes, Luther says Martin Luther, "An Exposition of
Salomon's Booke, called Ecclesiastes or the Preacher" (translation 1573)
Elsewhere Luther states that Martin Luther, WA 37.191. Jürgen Moltmann (2000)
concludes from this that "Luther conceived the state of the dead as a deep,
dreamless sleep, removed from time and space, without consciousness and without
feeling." That Luther believed in soul sleep is also the view of Watts (1985).
Some writers have claimed that Luther changed his view later in life. Gottfried
Fritschel (1867) noted that quotes from Luther's Latin works had occasionally
been misread in Latin or in German translation to contradict or qualify
specific statements, and Luther's overall teaching that the sleep of the dead
was unconscious: These readings can still be found in some English sources.
Others included Camillo Renato (1540) Mátyás Dévai Bíró (1500–1545)
Michael Servetus (1511–1553) Laelio Sozzini (1562) Fausto Sozzini (1563) the
Polish Brethren (1565 onwards) Dirk Philips (1504–1568) Gregory Paul of
Brzezin (1568) the Socinians (1570–1800) John Frith (1573) George Schomann
(1574) Simon Budny (1576) Seventeenth to eighteenth centuries. Soul sleep was a
significant minority view from the eighth to the seventeenth centuries, and
soul death became increasingly common from the Reformation onwards. Soul sleep
has been called a "major current of seventeenth century protestant ideology."
John Milton wrote in his unpublished "De Doctrina Christiana", John Milton, A
Treatise on Christian Doctrine: Compiled from the Holy Scriptures Alone, p.
280. Gordon Campbell (2008) identifies Milton's views as "thnetopsychism", a
belief that the soul dies with the body but is resurrected at the last
judgment. however Milton speaks also of the dead as "asleep". Those holding
this view include: 1600s: Sussex Baptists d. 1612: Edward Wightman 1627: Samuel
Gardner 1628: Samuel Przypkowski 1636: George Wither 1637: Joachim Stegmann
1624: Richard Overton 1654: John Biddle (Unitarian) 1655: Matthew Caffyn 1658:
Samuel Richardson 1608–1674: John Milton 1588–1670: Thomas Hobbes
1605–1682: Thomas Browne 1622–1705: Henry Layton 1702: William Coward
1632–1704: John Locke 1643–1727: Isaac Newton 1676–1748: Pietro Giannone
1751: William Kenrick 1755: Edmund Law 1759: Samuel Bourn 1723–1791: Richard
Price 1718–1797: Peter Peckard 1733–1804: Joseph Priestley Francis
Blackburne (1765) (1765). Nineteenth to twentieth centuries. Belief in
conditional immortality and the annihilation of the unsaved became increasingly
common during the nineteenth century, entering mainstream Christianity in the
twentieth century. From this point it is possible to speak in terms of entire
groups holding the belief, and only the most prominent individual nineteenth
century advocates of the doctrine will be mentioned here. Others include:
Millerites (from 1833), Edward White (1846), Christadelphians (from 1848),
Thomas Thayer (1855), François Gaussen (d.1863), Henry Constable (1873), Louis
Burnier (Waldensian, d.1878), the Baptist Conditionalist Association (1878),
Cameron Mann (1888), Emmanuel Pétavel-Olliff (1891), Miles Grant (1895) George
Gabriel Stokes (1897), Modern Christian groups. Present-day defenders of
mortalism include many Anglicans, such as N. T. Wright and Nicky Gumbel, some
Lutherans, the Seventh-day Adventist Church, Advent Christian Church, the non
denominational group Afterlife Christadelphians, the Church of God (Seventh
Day), Church of God (7th day) - Salem Conference, the Church of God Abrahamic
Faith, and various other Church of God organizations including most Related
Denominations which adhered to the older teachings of Herbert W. Armstrong's
Worldwide Church of God and the Bible Student movement. Jehovah's Witnesses
also teach a form of mortalism but represent a special case. They believe that
144,000 believers began to be raised from the dead in October 1914 to receive
immortality in heaven, but all other believers will be raised from the dead on
Judgment Day to receive eternal life on earth. Opponents. Immortality of the
soul. The more common Christian belief about the Intermediate State between
death and Judgment Day is "immortality of the soul" followed immediately after
death of the body by Particular Judgment. Most Protestants believe the soul is
judged to go to Heaven or Hell immediately after death. In Catholicism most
souls temporarily stay in Purgatory to be purified for Heaven (as described in
the Catechism of the Roman Catholic Church, 1030–1032). In Eastern Orthodoxy,
the soul waits in the Abode of the Dead, specifically Hades, until the
Resurrection of the Dead, the saved resting in light and the damned suffering
in darkness. According to James Tabor this Eastern Orthodox picture of
Particular Judgment is similar to the 1st-century Jewish and Early Christian
concept that the dead either "Rest in Peace" in the Bosom of Abraham (mentioned
in the Gospel of Luke) or suffer in Hades. This view was also promoted by John
Calvin in his treatise attacking "soul sleep". Opponents of Psychopannychism
and Thnetopsychism include the Roman Catholic Church, most mainline Protestant
denominations, and most conservative Protestants, Evangelicals, and
Fundamentalists. Roman Catholic Church. The Roman Catholic Church has called
"soul mortality" a serious heresy. "Whereas some have dared to assert
concerning the nature of the reasonable soul that it is mortal, we, with the
approbation of the sacred council do condemn and reprobate all those who assert
that the intellectual soul is mortal, seeing, according to the canon of Pope
Clement V, that the soul is [...] immortal [...] and we decree that all who
adhere to like erroneous assertions shall be shunned and punished as heretics."
Fifth Council of the Lateran (1513) Modern scholarship. As early as 1917 Harvey
Scott could write "That there is no definite affirmation, in the Old Testament
of the doctrine of a future life, or personal immortality, is the general
consensus of Biblical scholarship.". The modern scholarly consensus is that the
canonical teaching of the Old Testament made no reference to an "immortal soul"
independent of the body. This view is represented consistently in a wide range
of scholarly reference works. According to Donelley, "Twentieth century
biblical scholarship largely agrees that the ancient Jews had little explicit
notion of a personal afterlife until very late in the Old Testament period,"
and "only the latest stratum of the Old Testament asserts even the resurrection
of the body." Scholars have noted that the notion of the "disembodied existence
of a soul in bliss" is not in accordance with a Hebrew world view: "While
Hebrew thought world distinguished soul from body (as material basis of life),
there was no question of two separate, independent entities." Gillman argues
that Gillman, ‘Death and Afterlife, Judaic Doctrines Of’, in Neusner,
‘The Encyclopedia of Judaism’, volume 1, p. 176 (2000) However, N. T.
Wright suggests that "the Bible offers a spectrum of belief about life after
death." While Goldingay suggests that Qohelet points out that there is no
evidence that "human beings would enjoy a positive afterlife," Philip Johnston
argues that a few Psalms, such as Psalm 16, Psalm 49 and Psalm 73, "affirm a
continued communion with God after death," but "give no elaboration of how,
when or where this communion will take place." Neyrey suggests that, "for a
Hebrew, ‘soul’ indicated the unity of a human person," and "this Hebrew
field of meaning is breached in the Wisdom of Solomon by explicit introduction
of Greek ideas of soul. Avery-Peck argues that Avery-Peck, ‘Soul’, in
Neusner, et al. (eds.), ‘The Encyclopedia of Judaism’, p. 1343 (2000)
Regardless of the character of the soul's existence in the intermediate state,
biblical scholarship affirms that a disembodied soul is unnatural and at best
transitional. Bromiley argues that "the soul and the body belong together, so
that without either the one or the other there is no true man. Disembodied
existence in Sheol is unreal. Paul does not seek a life outside the body, but
wants to be clothed with a new and spiritual body (1 Cor. 15; 2 Cor. 5)." The
mortalist disbelief in the existence of a naturally immortal soul, is affirmed
as biblical teaching by a range of standard scholarly Jewish and Christian
sources. The Blackwell Encyclopedia of Modern Christian Thought (1995), says
"There is no concept of an immortal soul in the Old Testament, nor does the New
Testament ever call the human soul immortal.", Harper's Bible Dictionary (1st
ed. 1985), says that 'For a Hebrew, ‘soul’ indicated the unity of a human
person; Hebrews were living bodies, they did not have bodies", the New Bible
Dictionary’ (3rd. ed. 1996), says "But to the Bible man is not a soul in a
body but a body/soul unity", the Encyclopedia of Judaism’ (2000), says
"Scripture does not present even a rudimentarily developed theology of the
soul", the New Dictionary of Theology’ (2000), and "The notion of the soul as
an independent force that animates human life but that can exist apart from the
human body—either prior to conception and birth or subsequent to life and
death—is the product only of later Judaism", Eerdmans Dictionary of the Bible
(2000), says "Far from referring simply to one aspect of a person, “soul”
refers to the whole person", the International Standard Bible Encyclopedia says
"Possibly Jn. 6:33 also includes an allusion to the general life-giving
function. This teaching rules out all ideas of an emanation of the soul.", and
"The soul and the body belong together, so that without either the one or the
other there is no true man", Eerdmans Bible Dictionary (1987), says "Indeed,
the salvation of the “immortal soul” has sometimes been a commonplace in
preaching, but it is fundamentally unbiblical.", the Encyclopedia of
Christianity (2003), says "The Hebrew Bible does not present the human soul
(nepeš) or spirit (rûah) as an immortal substance, and for the most part it
envisions the dead as ghosts in Sheol, the dark, sleepy underworld", The Oxford
Dictionary of the Christian Church (2005), says "there is practically no
specific teaching on the subject in the Bible beyond an underlying assumption
of some form of afterlife (see immortality)", and the Zondervan Encyclopedia of
the Bible (rev. ed. 2009), says "It is this essential soul-body oneness that
provides the uniqueness of the biblical concept of the resurrection of the body
as distinguished from the Greek idea of the immortality of the soul". The
mortalist disbelief in the existence of a naturally immortal soul, is also
affirmed as biblical teaching by various modern theologians, and Hebblethwaite
observes the doctrine is "not popular amongst Christian theologians or among
Christian philosophers today".
