Spirit possession Spirit possession is a paranormal or supernatural event in
which it is said that animas, demons,extraterrestrials, gods, spirits, or other
disincarnate entities take control of a human body, resulting in noticeable
changes in health and behaviour. The term can also describe a similar action of
taking residence in an inanimate object, possibly giving it animation. The
concept of spiritual possession exists in many religions, including
Christianity, Buddhism, Haitian Vodou, Wicca, and Southeast Asian and African
traditions. Depending on the cultural context in which it is found, possession
may be considered voluntary or involuntary and may be considered to have
beneficial or detrimental effects. Spirit possession is cross-culturally more
common among women than men. African traditions. Ethiopia. Gurage people. The
Gurage people of Ethopia experience spirit possession. Wiliam A. Shack
postulated that spirit possession is caused by Gurange cultural attitudes about
food and hunger, because while they have a plentiful food supply, cultural
pressures that force the Gurange to either share it to meet social obligations,
or hoard it and eat it secretly cause them anxiety. Distinctions are drawn
between spirits that only possess men, spirits that only possess women, and
spirits that possess victims of either sex. A ritual illness that only affects
men believed to because by a spirit called "awre". This affliction presents
itself by loss of appetite, nausea, and attacks from severe stomach pains. If
it persists the victim may enter a trancelike stupor, in which he sometimes
regains conciousness long enough to take food and water. Breathing is often
labored. Seizures and trembling overcome the patient, and in extreme cases,
partial paralysis of the extremities. If the victim does not recover naturally,
a traditional healer, or "sagwara", is summoned. Once the "sagwara" has
determined the spirit's name through the use of divinitation, he prescribes a
routine formula to exorcise the spirit. This is not a permanent cure, however,
it is believed to allow the victim to form a relationship with the spirit.
Nevertheless, the victim is subject to chronic repossession, which is treated
by repeating the formula. This formula involves the preparation and consumption
of a dish of ensete, butter, and red pepper. During this ritual, the victim's
head is covered with a drape, and he eats the ensente ravenously while other
ritual participants chant. The ritual ends when the possessing spirit announces
that it is satisfied. Shack notes that the victims are overwhelmingly poor men,
and that women are not as food-deprived as men are due to ritual activities
that involve food redistribution and consumption. Shack postulates that the
"awre" serves to bring the possessed man to the center of social attention, and
to relieve his anxieties over his inability to gain prestige from
redistrubiting food, which is the primary way in which Gurange men gain status
in their society. Sidama people. In southwest Ethiopia, the Sidama people also
experience spirit possession. The anthropologists Irene and John Hamer
postulated that spirit possession is a form of compensation for being deprived
within Sidama society, although they do not draw from I.M Lewis (see Cultural
anthropology section under Scientific views). The majority of the possessed are
women whose spirits demand luxury goods to alleviate their condition, but men
can be possessed as well. Possessed individuals of both sexes can become
healers due to their condition. Hamer and Hamer suggest that this is a form of
compensation among deprived men in the deeply competitive society of the
Sidama, for if a man cannot gain prestige as an orator, warrior, or farmer, he
may still gain prestige as a spirit healer. Women are sometimes accused of
faking possession, but men never are. Kenya. Digo people. Spirit possession
occurs among the women of the Digo people of Kenya. The Digo refer to the
spirits in question as "shaitani". These "shaitani" typically demand luxury
items to make the patient well again. Despite the fact that men sometimes
accuse women of faking the possessions in order to get luxury items, attention,
and sympathy, they do generally regard spirit possession as a genuine
condition, and view victims of it as being ill through no fault of their own.
However, men sometimes suspect women of actively colluding with spirits in
order to be possessed. Giriama people. The Giriama people of coastal Kenya also
experience spirit possession. Mayotte. In Mayotte, approximately 25% of the
adult population, and five times as many women as men, enter trance states in
which they are possessed by certain identifiable spirits who maintain stable
and coherent identities from one possession to the next. Mozambique. In
Mozambique, a new phenomenon of spirit possession appeared after the Mozambican
Civil War. These spirits, called "gamba", are identified as dead soldiers, and
overwhelmingly possess women. Prior to the war, spirit possession was limited
to certain families and was less common. South Africa. Spirit possession
appears among the Xesibe, a Xhosa speaking people from Transkei, South Africa.
The majority of possessed are married women. The condition of spirit possession
among them is called "inwatso". Those who develop the condition of "inwatso"
are regarded as having a special calling to divine the future. They are first
treated with sympathy, and then with respect as they develop their abilities to
foretell the future. Tanzania. The Sukuma people of Tanzania experience spirit
possession. Uganda. In Uganda, a woman named Alice Auma was reportedly
possessed by the spirit of a male Italian soldier named Lakwena, meaning
messenger. She ultimately led a failed insurrection against governmental
forces. Zanzibar. A now extinct spirit possession cult existed among the Hadimu
women of Zanzibar, revering a spirit called "kitimiri". This cult described in
a 1869 account by a French missionary. The cult faded by the 1920s and was
virtually unknown by the 1960s. Zār cult. In Sudan and certain other East
African cultures the Zār cult conducts ethnomedical healing ceremonies
involving possession typically of Muslim women by a Zār spirit. African
diasporic traditions. Haitian Vodou. In Haitian Vodou and related African
diasporic traditions, one way that those who participate or practice can have a
spiritual experience is by being possessed by the "Loa" (or "lwa"). When the
"loa" descends upon a practitioner, the practitioner's body is being used by
the spirit, according to the tradition. Some spirits are believed to be able to
give prophecies of upcoming events or situations pertaining to the possessed
one, also called "Chwal" or the "Horse of the Spirit." Practitioners describe
this as a beautiful but very tiring experience. Most people who are possessed
by the spirit describe the onset as a feeling of blackness or energy flowing
through their body as if they were being electrocuted. According to Vodou
believers, when this occurs, it is a sign that a possession is about to take
place. The practitioner has no recollection of the possession and in fact when
the possessing spirit leaves the body, the possessed one is tired and wonders
what has happened during the possession. Not all practitioners have the ability
to become possessed, but practitioners who do generally prefer not to make
excessive use of it because it drains immense energy from them. It is said that
only the "loa" can choose who it wants to possess, for the spirit may have a
mission that it can carry out spiritually. It is believed that those possessed
by the "loa" probably are at a very high spiritual level such that their soul
is mature and at an advanced level. It is also believed that there are those
who feign possessions because they want attention or a feeling of importance,
because those who are possessed carry a high importance in ceremony. Often, a
"chwal" will undergo some form of trial or testing to make sure that the
possession is indeed genuine. As an example, someone possessed by one of the
Guédé spirits may be offered "piment", a liqueur made by steeping twenty-one
chili peppers in "kleren", a potent alcoholic beverage. If the "chwal" consumes
the "piment" without showing any evidence of pain or discomfort, the possession
is regarded as genuine. Umbanda. Spirit possession is also found in Umbanda, an
Afro-Brazilian folk religion. One such possessing spirit is Pomba Gira, who
possesses both women and effeminate males. Asian traditions. Buddhism.
According to the Indian medical literature and Tantric Buddhist scriptures,
most of the "seizers," or those that threaten the lives of young children,
appear in animal form: cow, lion, fox, monkey, horse, dog, pig, cat, crow,
pheasant, owl, and snake. But apart from these "nightmare shapes," the
impersonation or incarnation of animals could in some circumstances also be
highly beneficial, according to Michel Strickmann. Ch'i Chung-fu, a Chinese
gynecologist writing early in the thirteenth century, for example, wrote that
in addition to five sorts of falling frenzy classified according to their
causative factors, there were also four types of other frenzies distinguished
by the sounds and movements given off by the victim during his seizure: cow,
horse, pig, and dog frenzies. East-Asian religions. Certain sects of Taoism,
Korean shamanism, Shinto, some Japanese new religious movements, and other
East-Asian religions feature spirit possession. Some sects feature shamans who
become possessed, or mediums who channel beings' supernatural power, or
enchanters who imbue or foster spirits within objects, like samurai swords.
Indian traditions. Rajasthan. Spirit possession has been documented in modern
Rajasthan. Some of the spirits possessing Rajasthanis are seen as good and
beneficial, while others are seen as malevolent. The good spirits include
murdered royalty, the underworld god Bhaironji, and Muslim saints. Bad spirits
include perpetual debtors who die in debt, stillborn infants, deceased widows,
and foreign tourists. The possessed individual is referred to as a "ghorala",
or "mount". Possession, even if it is by a benign spirit, is regarded as
undesirable, as it entails loss of self-control, and violent emotional
outbursts. Tamil. Tamil women in India sometimes experience possession by "pey"
spirits. These spirits overwhelmingly possess new brides, and are usually
identified as the ghosts of young men who died while romantically or sexually
frustrated. These spirits are then ritually exorcised. Indonesian traditions.
Bali. The animist traditions of the island of Bali (Indonesia) include a
practice called "sanghyang", induction of voluntary possession trance states
for specific purposes. Roughly similar to voluntary possession in Vaudon
(Voodoo), "sanghyang" is a sacred state in which hyangs (deities) or helpful
spirits temporarily inhabit the bodies of participants. The purpose of
"sanghyang" is to cleanse people and places of evil influences and restore
spiritual balance. Thus, it is often referred to as an exorcism ceremony.
Sulawesi. The women of the Bonerate people of Sulawesi, Indonesia practice a
possession-trance ritual in which they smother glowing embers with their bare
feet at the climax. Malaysian traditions. Female workers in Malaysian factories
sometimes experience spirit possession. Factory owners generally regard this
behavior as the intrusion of irrational and archaic beliefs into a modern
setting, and would typically respond by dosing the worker in question with
Valium and sending them home. Policymakers and factory owners tend to be
extremely dismissive of the phemenonon, regarding it as “mass hysteria”.
The anthropologist Aihwa Ong noted that spirit possession in Malaysia typically
affected older, married women, whereas the female factory workers are typically
young and unmarried. She connects this to the rapid industrialization and
modernization of Malaysia. Ong argued that spirit possession is a traditional
way of rebelling against authority without punishment, and suggests that the
spirit possession events that took place in the factories were in fact, a means
of protesting the untenable working conditions and sexual harassment that the
women were compelled to endure. Sri Lankan traditions. The Coast Veddas, a
social group within the minority group of Sri Lankan Tamil people in Eastern
Province, Sri Lanka, enter trances during religious festivals in which they are
regarded as being possessed by a spirit. Though they speak a dialect of Tamil,
during trances they will sometimes use a mixed language that contains words
from the Vedda language. Oceanic traditions. Micronesia. Spirit possession
appears in Chuuk State, one of the four states of Federated States of
Micronesia. Although Chuuk is an overwhelmingly Christian society, traditional
beliefs in spirit possession by the dead still exist. These spirits
overwhelmingly possess women and spirit possession is usually brought on by
family conflicts. The spirits, speaking through the women, typically admonish
family members to treat each other better. Christianity. Roman Catholic
doctrine states that angels are non-corporeal, spiritual beings with
intelligence and will. Fallen angels, or demons, are able to "demonically
possess" individuals without the victim's knowledge or consent, leaving them
morally blameless. Islam. No verses in the Quran clearly support stories of
spirit possession. Muslims are told to "seek refuge in Allah from the accursed
devil" but the meaning of this prayer relates to the fear Muslims should have
of the wrath of God, as the purpose of the devil/satan is to mislead humans and
make them disobey God. It is also stated in the Quran that the devil/satan has
no power of influence over those who God has guided. Judaism. Although
forbidden in the Hebrew Bible, magic was widely practiced in the late Second
Temple Period and well documented in the period following the destruction of
the Temple into the 3rd, 4th and 5th centuries C.E. In Jewish folklore, a
Dybbuk is a disembodied spirit that wanders restlessly until it inhabits the
body of a living person. The Baal Shem could expel the harmful dybbuk through
exorcism. Jewish magical papyri were inscriptions on amulets, ostraca and
incantation bowls used in Jewish magical practices against shedim and other
unclean spirits. Spiritism and Spiritualism. In Spiritism and in some schools
of Spiritualism, the undue influence exerted by spirits upon new and
imperfectly trained mediums is considered a distinct danger to both the mediums
themselves and to the communities they serve. Both the Spiritist author Allan
Kardec and the Spiritualist author Paschal Beverly Randolph wrote on this
topic. In modern Spiritism and Spiritualism, deleterious spirit possession is
generally referred to as spirit obsession, to distinguish it from African-
influenced traditions of spiritual possession. Wicca. Wiccans believe in
voluntary possession by the Goddess, connected with the sacred ceremony of
Drawing Down the Moon. The high priestess solicits the Goddess to possess her
and speak through her. Scientific views. Cultural anthropology. The
anthropologist I.M. Lewis noted that women are more likely to be involved in
spirit possession cults than men are, and postulated that such cults act as a
means of compensation for their exclusion from other spheres within their
respective cultures. Physical anthropology. Anthropologists Alice B. Kehoe and
Dody H. Giletti argued that the reason that women are more commonly seen in
Afro-Eurasian spirit possession cults is because of deficiencies in thiamine,
tryptophan-niacin, calcium, and vitamin D. They argued that a combination of
poverty and food taboos cause this problem, and that it is exacerbated by the
strains of pregnacy and lactation. They postulated that the involuntary
symptoms of these deficiencies affecting their nervous systems have been
institutionalized as spirit possession. Psychology. Spirit possession is not
recognized as a psychiatric or medical diagnosis by the DSM-IV or the ICD-10.
Possessees sometimes exhibit symptoms similar to those associated with mental
illnesses such as psychosis, hysteria, mania, Tourette's syndrome, epilepsy,
schizophrenia, or dissociative identity disorder, including involuntary,
uncensored behavior, and an extra-human, extra-social aspect to the
individual's actions. In cases of dissociative identity disorder in which the
alter personality is questioned as to its identity, 29% are reported to
identify themselves as demons, but doctors see this as a mental disease called
demonomania or demonopathy, a monomania in which the patient believes that he
or she is possessed by one or more demons. However, cultural context is
critical for proper diagnosis of spirit, or demonic, possession as psychosis or
spiritual. In western industrialized nations such as the United States, spirit
possession is not normative, and therefore calls for caution in acceptance of
this condition as actually caused by spirits. The DSM-IV-TR, in describing the
differences between spirit possession and dissociative identity disorder,
identifies only the claim that the extra personality is an external spirit or
entity, lacking that, there would be no difference between the two conditions.
Dissociative identity disorder in the United States is itself extremely rare.
All forms of DID constitute only about 1% of the entire population. Of those,
98-99% are of the type of DID commonly recognized as the traditional form of
multiple personality disorder, rather than related to spirits. Those most
susceptible to being possessed are people with weak boundaries and low self-
esteem, pointing to dysfunctional ego involvement in manifestations of this
phenomenon rather than actual outside entities.
