Spiritualism Spiritualism is a belief system or religion, postulating the
belief that spirits of the dead residing in the spirit world have both the
ability and the inclination to communicate with the living. Anyone may receive
spirit messages, but formal communication sessions (séances) are held by
"mediums", who can then provide information about the afterlife. Spiritualism
developed and reached its peak growth in membership from the 1840s to the
1920s, especially in English-language countries. By 1897, it was said to have
more than eight million followers in the United States and Europe, mostly drawn
from the middle and upper classes, while the corresponding movement in
continental Europe and Latin America is known as Spiritism. The religion
flourished for a half century without canonical texts or formal organization,
attaining cohesion through periodicals, tours by trance lecturers, camp
meetings, and the missionary activities of accomplished mediums. Many prominent
Spiritualists were women, and like most Spiritualists, supported causes such as
the abolition of slavery and women's suffrage. By the late 1880s the
credibility of the informal movement had weakened due to accusations of fraud
being perpetrated by mediums, and formal Spiritualist organizations began to
appear. Spiritualism is currently practiced primarily through various
denominational Spiritualist Churches in the United States, Canada and United
Kingdom. Beliefs. Mediumship and spirits. Spiritualists believe in
communicating with the spirits of discarnate humans. They believe that spirit
mediums are humans gifted to do this, often through seances. Anyone may become
a medium through study and practice. They believe that spirits are capable of
growth and perfection, progressing through higher spheres or planes. The
afterlife is not a static place, but one in which spirits evolve. The two
beliefs—that contact with spirits is possible, and that spirits may lie on a
higher plane—lead to a third belief, that spirits can provide knowledge about
moral and ethical issues, as well as about God and the afterlife. Thus many
members speak of "spirit guides"—specific spirits, often contacted, relied
upon for worldly and spiritual guidance. Compared with other religions. As
Spiritualism emerged in a Christian environment, it has features in common with
Christianity, ranging from an essentially Christian moral system to practices
such as Sunday services and the singing of hymns. Nevertheless, on significant
points Christianity and Spiritualism are different. Spiritualists do not
believe that the works or faith of a mortal during a brief lifetime can serve
as a basis for assigning a soul to an eternity of Heaven or Hell; they view the
afterlife as containing hierarchical "spheres", through which each spirit can
progress. Spiritualists differ from Protestant Christians in that the Judeo-
Christian Bible is not the primary source from which they derive knowledge of
God and the afterlife: for them, their personal contacts with spirits provide
that. Christians, generally speaking, accept and believe that Jesus Christ died
on the cross to pay for all the sins of all humanity from the dawn of time to
eternity. The great majority of Spiritualists do not accept that the death of
Jesus Christ on the cross was to pay for all of humanity's sins. Instead, they
believe that each individual is personally responsible and may have to answer
for all of their own thoughts, words, and deeds after death upon their return
to the spirit realms. Most dramatically, Christianity, following the Council of
Nicaea and the teachings of Paul ("And though worms destroy this body, yet in
my flesh shall I see God"), has traditionally asserted that there will be a
bodily resurrection of the dead, and a physical, not merely spiritual,
afterlife. This view is self-evidently incompatible with Spiritualism, where
the merely spiritual existence is superior to the embodied one. In the same way
that Christians have the guidance of the Ten Commandments, Spiritualists follow
a number of principles, which are different depending on the tradition
followed. There are quite a number of Spiritualist churches which are
explicitly Christian in theology, forms of worship and praise, and liturgical
orientation. Among these Christian Spiritualist groups are the historically
African American denominations collectively known as the Spiritual Church
Movement, a group which includes multi-church organizations such as the
Metropolitan Spiritual Churches of Christ, and Pentecostal Spiritual Assemblies
of Christ International. It is held by some adherents of the Jewish religion
that Spiritualism is strictly forbidden by the Bible (Old Testament). In
Leviticus, one of the books concerning God's laws to Moses, it is written that
God says: "I will set my face against the person who turns to mediums and
spiritists to prostitute himself by following them, and I will cut him off from
his people." (Leviticus 20:6). On the other hand, among Jews who are inclined
toward Spiritualism it is common to refer to trance mediumship as "prophecy," a
"vision," or a "dream," and to cite as a counter-text the verse from Numbers
12:6 in which God says, "Hear my words: If there be among you a prophet of the
Lord, I will appear to him in a vision, or I will speak to him in a dream."
Within Islam, certain traditions, notably Sufism, consider communication with
spirits possible. Additionally, the concept of Tawassul recognises the
existence of Good Spirits on a Higher Plane of existence closer to God, and
thus able to intercede on behalf of humanity. Hinduism, though heterogeneous,
shares with Spiritualism a belief in the existence of the soul after death and
also the belief of ghosts or spirits. Hinduism teaches both reincarnation and
ghosts, as Hindus believe that if a person were to die at an early age, such as
by suicide or unnatural death, the spirit then roams the earth until their
natural date of death. The spirit is only then reincarnated into its next
physical form. Spiritism, the branch of Spiritualism developed by Allan Kardec
and today found mostly in Brazil, has emphasised reincarnation. According to
Arthur Conan Doyle, most British Spiritualists of the early 20th century were
indifferent to the doctrine of reincarnation, few supported it, while a
significant minority were opposed, since it had never been mentioned by spirits
contacted in séances. Thus, according to Doyle, it is the empirical bent of
Anglophone Spiritualism—its effort to develop religious views from
observation of phenomena, that kept Spiritualists of this period from embracing
reincarnation. Spiritualism also differs from occult movements, such as the
Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn or the contemporary Wiccan covens, in that
spirits are not contacted to obtain magical powers (with the exception of power
for healing). For example, Madame Blavatsky (1831–91), the founder of the
Theosophical Society, only practiced mediumship to contact powerful spirits
capable of conferring esoteric knowledge. Blavatsky did not believe these
spirits were deceased humans, and held beliefs in reincarnation different from
the views of most Spiritualists. Spiritualists at that time viewed Theosophy as
unscientific and both occultist and cult-like. Theosophists viewed Spiritualism
as unsophisticated and uncosmopolitan. Origins. Spiritualism first appeared in
the 1840s in the "Burned-over District" of upstate New York, where earlier
religious movements such as Millerism, and Mormonism had emerged during the
Second Great Awakening. This region of New York State was an environment in
which many thought direct communication with God or angels was possible, and
that God would not behave harshly—for example, that God would not condemn
unbaptised infants to an eternity in Hell. Swedenborg and Mesmer. In this
environment, the writings of Emanuel Swedenborg (1688–1772) and the teachings
of Franz Mesmer (1734–1815) provided an example for those seeking direct
personal knowledge of the afterlife. Swedenborg, who claimed to communicate
with spirits while awake, described the structure of the spirit world. Two
features of his view particularly resonated with the early spiritualists:
first, that there is not a single hell and a single heaven, but rather a series
of higher and lower heavens and hells; second, that spirits are intermediates
between God and humans, so that the Divine sometimes uses them as a means of
communication. Although Swedenborg warned against seeking out spirit contact,
his works seem to have inspired in others the desire to do so. Mesmer did not
contribute religious beliefs, but he brought a technique, later known as
hypnotism, that it was claimed could induce trances and cause subjects to
report contact with supernatural beings. There was a great deal of professional
showmanship inherent to demonstrations of Mesmerism, and the practitioners who
lectured in mid-19th-century North America sought to entertain their audiences
as well as to demonstrate methods for personal contact with the Divine. Perhaps
the best known of those who combined Swedenborg and Mesmer in a peculiarly
North American synthesis was Andrew Jackson Davis, who called his system the
"Harmonial Philosophy". Davis was a practicing Mesmerist, faith healer and
clairvoyant from Poughkeepsie, New York. His 1847 book, "The Principles of
Nature, Her Divine Revelations, and a Voice to Mankind", dictated to a friend
while in a trance state, eventually became the nearest thing to a canonical
work in a Spiritualist movement whose extreme individualism precluded the
development of a single coherent worldview. Image:Emanuel Swedenborg full
portrait.jpg|Emanuel Swedenborg. Image:Franz Anton Mesmer.jpg|Franz Mesmer.
Image:Andrew Jackson Davis.003.jpg|Andrew Jackson Davis, about 1860  Reform-
movement links. Spiritualists often set March 31, 1848, as the beginning of
their movement. On that date, Kate and Margaret Fox, of Hydesville, New York,
reported that they had made contact with the spirit of a murdered peddler. What
made this an extraordinary event was that the spirit communicated through
rapping noises, audible to onlookers. The evidence of the senses appealed to
practically minded Americans, and the Fox sisters became a sensation. However,
the Fox Sisters later admitted that this "contact" with the spirit was a hoax.
Amy and Isaac Post, Hicksite Quakers from Rochester, New York, had long been
acquainted with the Fox family, and took the two girls into their home in the
late spring of 1848. Immediately convinced of the genuineness of the sisters'
communications, they became early converts and introduced the young mediums to
their circle of radical Quaker friends. It therefore came about that many of
the early participants in Spiritualism were radical Quakers and others involved
in the reforming movement of the mid-nineteenth century. These reformers were
uncomfortable with established churches, because they did little to fight
slavery and even less to advance the cause of women's rights. Women were
particularly attracted to the movement, because it gave them important roles as
mediums and trance lecturers. In fact, Spiritualism provided one of the first
forums in which American women could address mixed public audiences. The most
popular trance lecturer prior to the American Civil War was Cora L. V. Scott
(1840–1923). Young and beautiful, her appearance on stage fascinated men. Her
audiences were struck by the contrast between her physical girlishness and the
eloquence with which she spoke of spiritual matters, and found in that contrast
support for the notion that spirits were speaking through her. Cora married
four times, and on each occasion adopted her husband's last name. During her
period of greatest activity, she was known as Cora Hatch. Another famous woman
spiritualist was Achsa W. Sprague, who was born November 17, 1827, in Plymouth
Notch, Vermont. At the age of 20, she became ill with rheumatic fever and
credited her eventual recovery to intercession by spirits. An extremely popular
trance lecturer, she traveled about the United States until her death in 1861.
Sprague was an abolitionist and an advocate of women's rights. Yet another
prominent spiritualist and trance medium prior to the Civil War was Paschal
Beverly Randolph (1825–1875), of mixed race, who also played a part in the
Abolition movement. Nevertheless, many abolitionists and reformers held
themselves aloof from the movement; among the skeptics was the eloquent ex-
slave, Frederick Douglass. Believers and skeptics. In the years following the
sensation that greeted the Fox sisters, demonstrations of mediumship (séances
and automatic writing, for example) proved to be a profitable venture, and soon
became popular forms of entertainment and spiritual catharsis. The invention of
the telegraph in 1844 led spiritualists to claim that an unseen "spiritual
telegraph" to the dead also existed. The Foxes were to earn a living this way
and others would follow their lead. Showmanship became an increasingly
important part of Spiritualism, and the visible, audible, and tangible evidence
of spirits escalated as mediums competed for paying audiences. As independent
investigating commissions repeatedly established, most notably the 1887 report
of the Seybert Commission, fraud was widespread, and some of these cases were
prosecuted in the courts. Despite numerous instances of chicanery, the appeal
of Spiritualism was strong. Prominent in the ranks of its adherents were those
grieving the death of a loved one. Many families during the time of the
American Civil War had seen their men go off and never return, and images of
the battlefield, produced through the new medium of photography, demonstrated
that their loved ones had not only died in overwhelmingly huge numbers, but
horribly as well. One well known case is that of Mary Todd Lincoln who,
grieving the loss of her son, organized séances in the White House which were
attended by her husband, President Abraham Lincoln. The surge of spiritualism
during this time, and later during World War I was a direct response to those
massive battlefield casualties. In addition, the movement appealed to
reformers, who fortuitously found that the spirits favored such "causes du
jour" as equal rights. It also appealed to some who had a materialist
orientation and rejected organized religion. The influential socialist and
atheist Robert Owen embraced religion following his experiences in Spiritualist
circles. Many scientists who investigated the phenomenon also became converts.
They included chemist and physicist William Crookes (1832–1919), evolutionary
biologist Alfred Russel Wallace (1823–1913) and Nobel-laureate physiologist
Charles Richet. Other prominent adherents included journalist and pacifist
William T. Stead (1849–1912) and physician and author Arthur Conan Doyle
(1859–1930). Conan Doyle, who lost his son as a result of the war, was also a
member of The Ghost Club. Founded in London in 1862, its focus was the
scientific study of alleged paranormal activities in order to prove (or refute)
the existence of paranormal phenomena. Famous members of the club have included
Charles Dickens, Sir William Crookes, Sir William Fletcher Barrett and Harry
Price. Pioneering American psychologist William James studied spiritualism,
publishing supportive conclusions. The séances of Eusapia Palladino were
attended by investigators including Pierre and Marie Curie. The celebrated New
York City physician, John Franklin Gray, was also a well-known and prominent
Spiritualist in New York City. The claims of spiritualists and others as to the
reality of ghosts were investigated by the Society for Psychical Research,
founded in London in 1882. The Society set up a Committee on Haunted Houses and
a Literary Committee which looked at the literature on the subject. Prominent
investigators who exposed cases of fraud came from a variety of backgrounds,
including professional researchers such as Frank Podmore of the Society for
Psychical Research or Harry Price of the National Laboratory of Psychical
Research, and professional conjurers such as John Nevil Maskelyne. Maskelyne
exposed the Davenport Brothers by appearing in the audience during their shows
and explaining how the trick was done. During the 1920s, professional magician
Harry Houdini undertook a well-publicised campaign to expose fraudulent
mediums. He was adamant that "Up to the present time everything that I have
investigated has been the result of deluded brains." Image:Frank
Podmore.jpg|Frank Podmore, ca. 1895. Image:Crookes William.jpg|William Crookes.
Photo published 1904. Image:Harry price by william hope.jpg|Harry Price, 1922.
Unorganized movement. The movement quickly spread throughout the world; though
only in the United Kingdom did it become as widespread as in the United States.
Spiritualist organizations were formed in America and Europe, such as the
London Spiritualist Alliance, which published a newspaper called "The Light",
featuring articles such as “Evenings at Home in Spiritual Séance”,
“Ghosts in Africa” and “Chronicles of Spirit Photography”,
advertisements for "mesmerists” and patent medicines, and letters from
readers about personal contact with ghosts. In Britain, by 1853, invitations to
tea among the prosperous and fashionable often included table-turning, a type
of séance in which spirits would communicate with people seated around a table
by tilting and rotating the table. A particularly important convert was the
French pedagogist Allan Kardec (1804–1869), who made the first attempt to
systematise the movement's practices and ideas into a consistent philosophical
system. Kardec's books, written in the last 15 years of his life, became the
textual basis of Spiritism, which became widespread in Latin countries. In
Brazil, Kardec's ideas are embraced by many followers today. In Puerto Rico,
Kardec's books were widely read by the upper classes, and eventually gave birth
to a movement known as Mesa Blanca (White Table). Spiritualism was mainly a
middle- and upper-class movement, and especially popular with women. U.S.
spiritualists would meet in private homes for séances, at lecture halls for
trance lectures, at state or national conventions, and at summer camps attended
by thousands. Among the most significant of the camp meetings were Camp Etna,
in Etna, Maine; Onset Bay Grove, in Onset, Massachusetts; Lily Dale, in western
New York State; Camp Chesterfield, in Indiana; the Wonewoc Spiritualist Camp,
in Wonewoc, Wisconsin; and Lake Pleasant, in Montague, Massachusetts. In
founding camp meetings, the spiritualists appropriated a form developed by U.S.
Protestant denominations in the early nineteenth century. Spiritualist camp
meetings were located most densely in New England and California, but were also
established across the upper Midwest. Cassadaga, Florida, is the most notable
spiritualist camp meeting in the southern states. A number of spiritualist
periodicals appeared in the nineteenth century, and these did much to hold the
movement together. Among the most important were the weeklies "The Banner of
Light" (Boston), "The Religio-Philosophical Journal" (Chicago), "Mind and
Matter" (Philadelphia), "The Spiritualist" (London), and "The Medium" (London).
Other influential periodicals were the "Revue Spirite" (France), "Le Messager"
(Belgium), "Annali dello Spiritismo" (Italy), "El Criterio Espiritista"
(Spain), and "The Harbinger of Light" (Australia). By 1880, there were about
three dozen monthly spiritualist periodicals published around the world. These
periodicals differed a great deal from each other, reflecting the great
differences among Spiritualists. Some, such as the British "Spiritual Magazine"
were Christian and conservative, openly rejecting the reform currents so strong
within Spiritualism. Others, such as "Human Nature", were pointedly non-
Christian and supportive of socialism and reform efforts. Still others, such as
"The Spiritualist", attempted to view spiritualist phenomena from a scientific
perspective, eschewing discussion on both theological and reform issues. Books
on the supernatural were published for the growing middle class, such as
1852’s "Mysteries", by Charles Elliott, which contains “sketches of spirits
and spiritual things”, including accounts of the Salem witch trials, the Cock
Lane Ghost, and the Rochester Rappings. "The Night Side of Nature", by
Catherine Crowe, published in 1853, provided definitions and accounts of
wraiths, doppelgangers, apparitions and haunted houses. Mainstream newspapers
treated stories of ghosts and haunting as they would any other news story. An
account in the "Chicago Daily Tribune" in 1891, "sufficiently bloody to suit
the most fastidious taste", tells of a house believed to be haunted by the
ghosts of three murder victims seeking revenge against their killer’s son,
who was eventually driven insane. Many families, “having no faith in
ghosts”, thereafter moved into the house, but all soon moved out again. In
the 1920s many "psychic" books were published of varied quality. Such books
were often based on excursions initiated by the use of Ouija boards. A few of
these popular books displayed unorganized Spiritualism, though most were less
insightful. The movement was extremely individualistic, with each person
relying on her own experiences and reading to discern the nature of the
afterlife. Organisation was therefore slow to appear, and when it did it was
resisted by mediums and trance lecturers. Most members were content to attend
Christian churches, and particularly Universalist churches harbored many
Spiritualists. As the Spiritualism movement began to fade, partly through the
bad publicity of fraud accusations and partly through the appeal of religious
movements such as Christian Science, the Spiritualist Church was organised.
This church can claim to be the main vestige of the movement left today in the
United States. Other mediums. William Stainton Moses (1839–92) was an
Anglican clergyman who, in the period from 1872 to 1883, filled 24 notebooks
with automatic writing, much of which was said to describe conditions in the
spirit world. In his sessions he was able to channel a spirit who called
himself Imperator. Imperator described himself as a leader of forty-nine other
spirits. He conveyed information to Moses about the spirit world, its workings,
and how information is passed along to people. In sessions, he was allegedly
levitated several times, and was able (through spirits who channeled energy to
his hands) to levitate a large table just by touching it. Similar incidents
were reported during his automatic writing sessions. His pen was said to write
of its own accord without his direction. London-born Emma Hardinge Britten
(1823–99) moved to the United States in 1855 and was active in spiritualist
circles as a trance lecturer and organiser. She is best known as a chronicler
of the movement's spread, especially in her 1884 "Nineteenth Century Miracles:
Spirits and their Work in Every Country of the Earth", and her 1870 "Modern
American Spiritualism", a detailed account of claims and investigations of
mediumship beginning with the earliest days of the movement. Eusapia Palladino
(1854–1918) was an Italian Spiritualist medium from the slums of Naples who
made a career touring Italy, France, Germany, Britain, the United States,
Russia and Poland. Her stratagems were unmasked on several occasions, though
some investigators, including Nobel laureate scientists, credited her
mediumistic abilities. One believer was the Polish psychologist Julian
Ochorowicz, who in 1893 brought her from St. Petersburg, Russia, to Warsaw,
Poland. He introduced her to the novelist Bolesław Prus, who participated in
her séances and incorporated Spiritualist elements into his 1895 historical
novel "Pharaoh". Ochorowicz studied as well, 15 years later, a home-grown
Polish medium, Stanisława Tomczyk. Adelma Vay (1840–1925), Hungarian (by
origin) spiritistic medium, homeopath and clairvoyant, authored many books
about spiritism, written in German and translated into English. Evolution.
Spiritualists reacted with an uncertainy to the theories of evolution in the
late 19th and early 20th century. Broadly speaking the concept of evolution
fitted the spiritualist thought of the progressive development of humanity. At
the same time however, the belief in the animal origins of man threatened the
foundation of the immortality of the spirit, for if man had not been created,
it was scarely plausible that he would be specially endowed with a spirit. This
led to spiritualists embracing spiritual evolution. The spiritualists' view of
evolution did not stop at death. Spiritualism taught that after death spirits
progressed to spiritual states in new spheres of existence. According to
spiritualists evolution occurred in the spirit world “at a rate more rapid
and under conditions more favourable to growth” then encountered on earth. In
a talk at the London Spiritualist Alliance, Rev. John Page Hopps (1834–1911)
supported both evolution and spiritualism. Hopps claimed man had started off
imperfect “out of the animals darkness” but will rise into the “angel’s
marvellous light”, Hopps claimed man was not a fallen but a rising creature
and that after death man would evolve on a number of spheres of existence to
perfection. Theosophy is in opposition to the spiritualist interpretation of
evolution, theosophy teaches a metaphysical theory of evolution mixed with
human devolution, spiritualists do not accept the devolution of the
theosophists. To theosophy man starts in a state of perfection (see Golden age)
and falls into a process of progressive materialization (devolution),
developing the mind and losing the spiritual consciousness. After the gathering
of experience and growth through repeated reincarnations humanity will regain
the original spiritual state, which is now one of self-conscious perfection.
Theosophists and Spiritualists were both very popular metaphysical schools of
thought especially in the early 20th century and thus were always clashing in
their different beliefs. Madame Blavatsky was critical of spiritualism, she
distanced theosophy from spiritualism as far as she could and allied herself
with eastern occultism. Gerald Massey, Concerning evolution, p. 55
Spiritualists believed that without spiritualism "the doctrine of Darwin is a
broken link". The spiritualist Gerald Massey said "Spiritualism will accept
evolution, and carry it out and make both ends meet in the perfect circle". A
famous medium who rejected evolution was Cora L. V. Scott, she dismissed
evolution in her lectures and instead supported a type of pantheistic
spiritualism. Alfred Russel Wallace believed qualitative novelties could arise
through the process of spiritual evolution, in particular the phenomena of life
and mind, Wallace attributed these novelties to a supernatural agency. Later in
his life, Wallace was advocate of spiritualism and believed in an immaterial
origin for the higher mental faculties of humans, he believed that evolution
suggested that the universe had a purpose, and that certain aspects of living
organisms are not explainable in terms of purely materialistic processes, in a
1909 magazine article entitled "The World of Life", which he later expanded
into a book of the same name. Wallace argued in his 1911 book "World of life"
for a spiritual approach to evolution and described evolution as “creative
power, directive mind and ultimate purpose”. Wallace believed natural
selection could not explain intelligence or morality in the human being so
suggested that non-material spiritual forces accounted for these. Wallace
believed the spiritual nature of man could not have come about by natural
selection alone, the origins of the spiritual nature must originate “in the
unseen universe of spirit”. Oliver Lodge also promoted a version of spiritual
evolution in his books "Man and the Universe" (1908), "Making of Man" (1924)
and "Evolution and Creation" (1926). The spiritualist element in the synthesis
was most prominent in Lodge’s 1916 book "Raymond, or Life and Death" which
revived a large interest for public in the paranormal. After the 1920s. After
the 1920s, Spiritualism evolved in three different directions, all of which
exist today. Syncretism. The first of these continued the tradition of
individual practitioners, organised in circles centered on a medium and
clients, without any hierarchy or dogma. Already by the late 19th century
Spiritualism had become increasingly syncretic, a natural development in a
movement without central authority or dogma. Today, among these unorganised
circles, Spiritualism is similar to the New Age movement. However, Theosophy
with its inclusion of Eastern religion, astrology, ritual magic and
reincarnation is an example of a closer precursor of the 20th century New Age
movement. Today's syncretic Spiritualists are quite heterogeneous in their
beliefs regarding issues such as reincarnation or the existence of God. Some
appropriate New Age and Neo-Pagan beliefs, whilst others call themselves
'Christian Spiritualists', continuing with the tradition of cautiously
incorporating Spiritualist experiences into their Christian faith. Spiritualist
church. The second direction taken has been to adopt formal organization,
patterned after Christian denominations, with established liturgies and a set
of Seven Principles, and training requirements for mediums. In the United
States the Spiritualist churches are primarily affiliated either with the
National Spiritualist Association of Churches or the loosely allied group of
denominations known as the spiritual church movement; in the U.K. the
predominant organization is the Spiritualists' National Union, founded in 1890.
Formal education in Spiritualist practice emerged in 1920s, with organizations
like the William T. Stead Center in Chicago, Illinois, and continue today with
the Arthur Findlay College at Stansted Hall in England, and the Morris Pratt
Institute in Wisconsin, USA. Diversity of belief among organized Spiritualists
has led to a few schisms, the most notable occurring in the U.K. in 1957
between those who held the movement to be a religion "sui generis" (of its own
with unique characteristics), and a minority who held it to be a denomination
within Christianity. In the United States, this distinction can be seen between
the less Christian National Spiritualist Association of Churches and the more
Christian spiritual church movement. The practice of organized Spiritualism
today resembles that of any other religion, having discarded most showmanship,
particularly those elements resembling the conjurer's art. There is thus a much
greater emphasis on "mental" mediumship and an almost complete avoidance of the
apparently miraculous "materializing" mediumship that so fascinated early
believers such as Arthur Conan Doyle. The first Spiritualist Church in
Australia was the United Stanmore & Enmore Spiritualist Church established in
1913. In 1921 Arthur Conan Doyle gave a farewell to Australia speech there.
Survivalism. The third direction taken has been a continuation of its empirical
orientation to religious phenomena. Already as early as 1882, with the founding
of the Society for Psychical Research, secular organisations emerged to
investigate spiritualist claims. Today many persons with this empirical
approach avoid the label of "Spiritualism", preferring the term "survivalism".
Survivalists eschew religion, and base their belief in the afterlife on
phenomena susceptible to at least rudimentary scientific investigation, such as
mediumship, near-death experiences, out-of-body experiences, electronic voice
phenomena, and reincarnation research. Many Survivalists see themselves as the
intellectual heirs of the Spiritualist movement. An example of the modern
approach is the work of the Professor of Psychology, David Fontana, who has
written about the subject from a number of points of view.
