Spiritual (music) Spirituals (or Negro spirituals) are religious (generally
Christian) songs that were created by enslaved African people in the United
States. Terminology and origin. The term "spiritual" is derived from "spiritual
song." The King James Bible's translation of Ephesians 5:19 is: "Speaking to
yourselves in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, singing and making melody
in your heart to the Lord." The term "spiritual song" was often used in the
black and white Christian community through the 19th century (and indeed much
earlier), and "spiritual" was used as a noun to mean, according to the context,
"spiritual person" or "spiritual thing", but not specifically with regard to
song. "Negro spiritual" first appears in print in the 1860s, where slaves are
described as using "spirituals" for religious songs sung sitting or standing in
place, and "spiritual shouts" for more dance-like music. Musicologist George
Pullen Jackson extended the term "spiritual" to a wider range of folk hymnody,
as in his 1938 book "White Spirituals in the Southern Uplands", but this does
not appear to have been widespread usage previously. The term, however, has
often been broadened to include subsequent arrangements into more standard
European-American hymnodic styles, and to include post-emancipation songs with
stylistic similarities to the original Negro spirituals. Although numerous
rhythmical and sonic elements of Negro spirituals can be traced to African
sources, Negro spirituals are a musical form that is indigenous and specific to
the religious experience in the United States of Africans and their
descendants. They are a result of the interaction of music and religion from
Africa with music and religion of European origin. Further, this interaction
occurred only in the United States. Africans who converted to Christianity in
other parts of the world, even in the Caribbean and Latin America, did not
evolve this form. Religious significance. Negro spirituals were primarily
expressions of religious faith. Some may also have served as socio-political
protests veiled as assimilation to white American culture. They originated
among enslaved Africans in the United States. Slavery was introduced to the
British colonies in the early 17th century, and enslaved people largely
replaced indentured servants as an economic labor force during the 17th
century. In the United States, these people would remain in bondage for the
entire 18th century and much of the 19th century. Most were not fully
emancipated until the ratification of the Thirteenth Amendment to the
Constitution in 1865. Suppression of indigenous religion. During slavery in the
United States, there were systematic efforts to de-Africanize the captive Black
workforce. Slaves were forbidden from speaking their native languages, and were
generally converted to Christianity. Because they were unable to express
themselves freely in ways that were spiritually meaningful to them, enslaved
Africans often held secret religious services. During these “bush
meetings,” worshipers were free to engage in African religious rituals such
as spiritual possession, speaking in tongues and shuffling in counterclockwise
ring shouts to communal shouts and chants. It was there also that enslaved
Africans further crafted the impromptu musical expression of field songs into
the so-called "line singing" and intricate, multi-part harmonies of struggle
and overcoming, faith, forbearance and hope that have come to be known as
"Negro spirituals". Restrictions were placed on the religious expression of
slaves. Rows of benches in places of worship discouraged congregants from
spontaneously jumping to their feet and dancing. The use of musical instruments
of any kind often was forbidden, and slaves were ordered to desist from the
"paganism" of the practice of spiritual possession. However, several traditions
rooted in Africa continue to the present day in African-American spiritual
practices. Examples include the "call and response" style of preaching in which
the speaker speaks for an interval and the congregation responds in unison in a
continual pattern throughout the sermon. The "call and response" is often
accompanied by instruments and sounds much like a song. Speaking in tongues is
a persistent practice, as is "shouting." Shouting may involve anything from
jumping in one place repeatedly, running through the sanctuary, raising hands
and arms in the air, shouting traditional praise phrases, or being "slain in
the spirit" (fainting). The locations and the era may be different; but the
same emphasis on combining sound, movement, emotion, and communal interaction
into one focus on faith and its role in overcoming struggles, whether as an
individual or a people group, remain the same. Replacement with Christianity.
The lyrics of Christian spirituals reference symbolic aspects of Biblical
images such as Moses and Israel's Exodus from Egypt in songs such as "Michael
Row the Boat Ashore". Christian hymns and songs were very influential on the
writing of African-American spirituals. Slave composers took material from
older songs, such as Christian hymns, and the Bible to create something
entirely new and special to the culture. Spirituals were not simply different
versions of hymns or Bible stories, but rather a creative altering of the
material; new melodies and music, refashioned text, and stylistic differences
helped to set apart the music as distinctly African-American. There is also a
duality in the lyrics of spirituals. They communicated many Christian ideals
while also communicating the hardship that was a result of being an African-
American slave. The spiritual was often directly tied to the composer's life.
It was a way of sharing religious, emotional, and physical experience through
song. Claims of coded messages. Many internet sources and popular books claim
that songs such as "Wade in the Water" contained explicit instructions to
fugitive slaves on how to avoid capture, and on which routes to take to
successfully make their way to freedom. "Wade in the Water" allegedly
recommends leaving dry land and taking to the water as a strategy to throw
pursuing bloodhounds off one's trail. "The Gospel Train", "Song of the Free",
and "Swing Low, Sweet Chariot" are likewise supposed to contain veiled
references to the Underground Railroad, and many sources assert that "Follow
the Drinking Gourd" contained a coded map to the Underground Railroad. The
authenticity of such claims has been challenged as speculative, and critics
have pointed to the apparent lack of primary source material in support of
them. Collections. Jubilee Singers of Fisk University. In the 1850s, Reverend
Alexander Reid, superintendent of the Spencer Academy in the old Choctaw
Nation, hired some enslaved Africans from the Choctaws for some work around the
school. He heard two of them, "Uncle Wallace" and "Aunt Minerva" Willis,
singing religious songs that they had apparently composed. Among these were
"Swing Low, Sweet Chariot", "Steal Away to Jesus", "The Angels are Coming",
"I'm a Rolling", and "Roll Jordan Roll". Later, Reid, who left Indian Territory
at the beginning of the Civil War, attended a musical program put on by a group
of Negro singers from Fisk University. They were singing mostly popular music
of the day, and Reid thought the songs he remembered from his time in the
Choctaw Nation would be at least as appropriate. He and his wife transcribed
the songs of the Willises as they remembered them and sent them to Fisk
University. The Jubilee Singers put on their first performance singing the old
captives' songs at a religious conference in 1871. The songs were first
published in 1872 in a book entitled "Jubilee Songs as Sung by the Jubilee
Singers of Fisk University", by Theodore F. Seward. Wallace Willis died in 1883
or 1884. Over time, the pieces the Jubilee Singers performed came to be
arranged and performed by trained musicians. In 1873, Mark Twain, whose father
had owned slaves, found Fisk singing to be "in the genuine old way" he
remembered from childhood. By contrast an anonymous 1881 review in the "Peoria
Journal" said: “they have lost the wild rhythms, the barbaric melody, the
passion….hey smack of the North….” Some fifty years later, Zora Neale
Hurston in her 1938 book "The Sanctified Church" criticized Fisk singers, and
similar groups at Tuskegee and Hampton, as using a "Glee Club style" that was
"full of musicians' tricks" not to be found in the original Negro spirituals,
urging readers to visit an "unfashionable Negro church" to experience real
Negro spirituals. Other collections. A second important early collection of
lyrics is "Slave Songs of the United States" by William Francis Allen, Charles
Pickard Ware, and Lucy McKim Garrison (1867). A group of lyrics to Negro
spirituals was published by Colonel Thomas Wentworth Higginson, who commanded a
regiment of former slaves during the Civil War, in an article in "The Atlantic
Monthly" and subsequently included in his 1869 memoir "Army Life in a Black
Regiment" (1869). The latter half of the 20th century saw a resurgence of the
Spiritual. This trend was impacted strongly by composers and musical directors
such as Moses Hogan and Brazeal Dennard.
