Stations of the Cross Stations of the Cross (or Way of the Cross; in Latin, Via
Crucis; also called the Via Dolorosa or Way of Sorrows, or simply, The Way) is
a series of artistic representations, very often sculptural, depicting Christ
Carrying the Cross to his crucifixion in the final hours (or Passion) of Jesus
before he died, and the devotions using that series to commemorate the Passion,
often moving physically around a set of stations. The vast majority of Roman
Catholic churches now contain such a series, typically placed at intervals
along the side walls of the nave; in most churches these are small plaques with
reliefs or paintings, simpler than most of the examples shown here. The
tradition as chapel devotion began with St. Francis of Assisi and extended
throughout the Roman Catholic Church in the medieval period. It is commonly
observed in Lutheranism, and amongst the Anglo-Catholic wing of Anglicanism. It
may be done at any time, but is most commonly done during the Season of Lent,
especially on Good Friday and on Friday evenings during Lent. History. The
Stations of the Cross originated in pilgrimages to Jerusalem. A desire to
reproduce the holy places in other lands seems to have manifested itself at
quite an early date. At the monastery of Santo Stefano at Bologna a group of
connected chapels was constructed as early as the 5th century, by St.
Petronius, Bishop of Bologna, which was intended to represent the more
important shrines of Jerusalem, and in consequence, this monastery became
familiarly known as "Hierusalem." These may perhaps be regarded as the germ
from which the Stations afterwards developed, though it is tolerably certain
that nothing that we have before about the 15th century can strictly be called
a Way of the Cross in the modern sense. Although several travelers who visited
the Holy Land during the twelfth, thirteenth, and 14th centuries (e.g. Riccoldo
da Monte di Croce, Burchard of Mount Sion, James of Verona), mention a "Via
Sacra," i.e., a settled route along which pilgrims were conducted, there is
nothing in their accounts to identify this with the Way of the Cross, as we
understand it. The devotion of the Via Dolorosa, for which there have been a
number of variant routes in Jerusalem, was probably developed by the
Franciscans after they were granted administration of the Christian holy places
in Jerusalem in 1342. The earliest use of the word "stations," as applied to
the accustomed halting-places in the Via Sacra at Jerusalem, occurs in the
narrative of an English pilgrim, William Wey, who visited the Holy Land in the
mid-15th century, and described pilgrims following the footsteps of Christ to
the cross. In 1521 a book called Geystlich Strass was printed with
illustrations of the stations in the Holy Land. During the 15th and 16th
centuries the Franciscans began to build a series of outdoor shrines in Europe
to duplicate their counterparts in the Holy Land. The number of stations varied
between seven and thirty; seven was common. These were usually placed, often in
small buildings, along the approach to a church, as in a set of 1490 by Adam
Kraft, leading to the Johanneskirche in Nuremberg. A number of rural examples
were established as attractions in their own right, usually on attractive
wooded hills. These include the Sacro Monte di Domodossola (1657) and Sacro
Monte di Belmonte (1712), and form part of the Sacri Monti of Piedmont and
Lombardy World Heritage Site, together with other examples on different
devotional themes. In these the sculptures are often approaching life-size and
very elaborate. In 1686, in answer to their petition, Pope Innocent XI granted
to the Franciscans the right to erect stations within their churches. In 1731,
Pope Clement XII extended to all churches the right to have the stations,
provided that a Franciscan father erected them, with the consent of the local
bishop. At the same time the number was fixed at fourteen. In 1857, the bishops
of England were allowed to erect the stations by themselves, without the
intervention of a Franciscan priest, and in 1862 this right was extended to
bishops throughout the church. Spiritual significance. The object of the
Stations is to help the faithful to make a spiritual pilgrimage of prayer,
through meditating upon the chief scenes of Christ's sufferings and death. It
has become one of the most popular devotions for Roman Catholics, and is often
performed in a spirit of reparation for the sufferings and insults that Jesus
endured during His Passion. In his encyclical letter, "Miserentissimus
Redemptor", on reparations, Pope Pius XI called Acts of Reparation to Jesus
Christ a duty for Catholics and referred to them as ""some sort of compensation
to be rendered for the injury"" with respect to the sufferings of Jesus. Pope
John Paul II referred to Acts of Reparation as the ""unceasing effort to stand
beside the endless crosses on which the Son of God continues to be crucified"".
Stations. Traditional form. Although not traditionally part of the Stations,
the Resurrection of Jesus is sometimes included as a fifteenth station.
Scriptural Way of the Cross. Out of the fourteen traditional Stations of the
Cross, only eight have clear scriptural foundation. Stations 3, 4, 6, 7, and 9
are not specifically attested to in the gospels (in particular, no evidence
exists of station 6 ever being known before medieval times) and Station 13
(representing Jesus's body being taken down off the cross and laid in the arms
of His mother Mary) seems to embellish the gospels' record, which states that
Joseph of Arimathea took Jesus down from the cross and buried him. To provide a
version of this devotion more closely aligned with the biblical accounts, Pope
John Paul II introduced a new form of devotion, called the Scriptural Way of
the Cross on Good Friday 1991. He celebrated that form many times but not
exclusively at the Colosseum in Rome. In 2007, Pope Benedict XVI approved this
set of stations for meditation and public celebration: They follow this
sequence: Modern usage. The devotion may be conducted personally by the
faithful, making their way from one station to another and saying the prayers,
or by having an officiating celebrant move from cross to cross while the
faithful make the responses. The stations themselves must consist of, at the
very least, fourteen wooden crosses, pictures alone do not suffice, and they
must be blessed by someone with the authority to erect stations. In the Roman
Catholic Church, Pope John Paul II led an annual public prayer of the Stations
of the Cross at the Roman Colosseum on Good Friday. Originally, the Pope
himself carried the cross from station to station, but in his last years when
age and infirmity limited his strength, John Paul presided over the celebration
from a stage on the Palatine Hill, while others carried the cross. Just days
prior to his death in 2005, Pope John Paul II observed the Stations of the
Cross from his private chapel. Each year a different person is invited to write
the meditation texts for the Stations. Past composers of the Papal Stations
include several non-Catholics. The Pope himself wrote the texts for the Great
Jubilee in 2000 and used the traditional Stations. The celebration of the
Stations of the Cross is especially common on the Fridays of Lent, especially
Good Friday. Community celebrations are usually accompanied by various songs
and prayers. Particularly common as musical accompaniment is the Stabat Mater.
At the end of each station the Adoramus Te is sometimes sung. The Alleluia is
also sung, except during Lent. Structurally, Mel Gibson's 2004 film, "The
Passion of the Christ", follows the Stations of the Cross. The fourteenth and
last station, the Burial, is not prominently depicted (compared to the other
thirteen) but it is implied since the last shot before credit titles is Jesus
resurrected and about to leave the tomb. Debates. Place of Christ's
resurrection. Some modern liturgists say the traditional Stations of the Cross
are incomplete without a final scene depicting the empty tomb and/or the
resurrection of Jesus, because Jesus' rising from the dead was an integral part
of His salvific work on earth. Advocates of the traditional form of the
Stations ending with the body of Jesus being placed in the tomb say the
Stations are intended as a meditation on the atoning death of Jesus, and not as
a complete picture of His life, death, and resurrection. The Stations of the
Resurrection (also known by the Latin name of "Via Lucis") are used in some
churches at Eastertide to meditate on the Resurrection and Ascension of Jesus
Christ. Ukrainian Byzantine Catholic Church. As part of a process of de-
Latinization, the Ukrainian Byzantine Catholic Church eliminated the devotion
of the Stations of the Cross. In response to this, a schismatic group called
the Society of Saint Josaphat (SSJK) has formed with a seminary of its own in
Lviv with thirty students at present. Music. Franz Liszt wrote a "Via Crucis"
for choir, soloists and piano or organ or harmonium in 1879. David Bowie
regarded his 1976 song, "Station to Station" as "very much concerned with the
stations of the cross." Michael Valenti (known predominantly as a Broadway
composer) wrote, with librettist Diane Seymour, an oratorio depicting the
fourteen Stations of the Cross entitled "The Way." It was premiered in 1991.
Stefano Vagnini's 2002 modular oratorio, "Via Crucis", composition for organ,
computer, choir, string orchestra and brass quartet, depicts the fourteen
Stations of the Cross. As the Stations of the Cross are prayed during the
season of Lent in Catholic churches, each station is traditionally followed by
a verse of the Stabat Mater, composed in the 13th century by Franciscan
Jacopane da Todi. Gallery. Image:Droga krzyżowa we Woźnikach.jpg|14th Station
at the Franciscan Monastery in Woźniki, Poland
