Apotheosis Apotheosis (from Greek ἀποθέωσις from ἀποθεοῦν,
"apotheoun" "to deify"; in Latin "deificatio" "making divine"; also called
divinization and deification) is the glorification of a subject to divine
level. The term has meanings in theology, where it refers to a belief, and in
art, where it refers to a genre. In theology, the term "apotheosis" refers to
the idea that an individual has been raised to godlike stature. In art, the
term refers to the treatment of any subject (a figure, group, locale, motif,
convention or melody) in a particularly grand or exalted manner. Antiquity.
Prior to the Hellenistic period, imperial cults were known in Ancient Egypt
(pharaohs) and Mesopotamia (since Naram-Sin). From the New Kingdom, all
deceased pharaohs were deified as Osiris. Ancient Greece. From at least the
Geometric period of the ninth century BC, the long-deceased heroes linked with
founding myths of Greek sites were accorded chthonic rites in their "heroon",
or "hero-temple". In the Greek world, the first leader who accorded himself
divine honours was Philip II of Macedon, who was a king, when the Greeks had
set kingship aside, and who had extensive economic and military ties, though
largely antagonistic, with Achaemenid Persia, where kings were divine. At his
wedding to his sixth wife, Philip's enthroned image was carried in procession
among the Olympian gods; "his example at Aigai became a custom, passing to the
Macedonian kings who were later worshipped in Greek Asia, from them to Julius
Caesar and so to the emperors of Rome". Such Hellenistic state leaders might be
raised to a status equal to the gods before death (e.g., Alexander the Great)
or afterwards (e.g., members of the Ptolemaic dynasty). Heroic cult similar to
apotheosis was also an honour given to a few revered artists of the distant
past, notably Homer. Archaic and Classical Greek hero-cults became primarily
civic, extended from their familial origins, in the sixth century; by the fifth
century none of the worshipers based their authority by tracing descent back to
the hero, with the exception of some families who inherited particular priestly
cult, such as the Eumolpides (descended from Eumolpus) of the Eleusinian
mysteries, and some inherited priesthoods at oracle sites. The Greek hero cults
can be distinguished on the other hand from the Roman cult of dead emperors,
because the hero was not thought of as having ascended to Olympus or become a
god: he was beneath the earth, and his power purely local. For this reason hero
cults were chthonic in nature, and their rituals more closely resembled those
for Hecate and Persephone than those for Zeus and Apollo. Two exceptions were
Heracles and Asclepius, who might be honoured as either gods or heroes,
sometimes by chthonic night-time rites and sacrifice on the following day.
Ancient Rome. Apotheosis in ancient Rome was a process whereby a deceased ruler
was recognized as having been divine by his successor, usually also by a decree
of the Senate and popular consent. In addition to showing respect, often the
present ruler deified a popular predecessor to legitimize himself and gain
popularity with the people. The upper-class did not always take part in the
imperial cult, and some privately ridiculed the apotheosis of inept and feeble
emperors, as in the satire "The Pumpkinification of (the Divine) Claudius",
usually attributed to Seneca. At the height of the imperial cult during the
Roman Empire, sometimes the emperor's deceased loved ones—heirs, empresses,
or lovers, as Hadrian's Antinous—were deified as well. Deified people were
awarded posthumously the title "Divus" ("Diva" if women) to their names to
signify their divinity. Traditional Roman religion distinguished between a
"deus" (god) and a "divus" (a mortal who became divine or deified), though not
consistently. Temples and columns were sometimes erected to provide a space for
worship. Ancient China. The Ming dynasty epic "Investiture of the Gods" deals
heavily with deification legends. Numerous mortals have been deified into the
Daoist pantheon, such as Guan Yu, Iron-crutch Li and Fan Kuai. Song Dynasty
General Yue Fei was deified during the Ming Dynasty and is considered by some
practitioners to be one of the three highest ranking heavenly generals. South
East Asia. Various Hindu and Buddhist rulers in the past have been represented
as deities, especially after death, from Thailand to Indonesia. Even several
Sultans of Yogyakarta were semi-deified, posthumously. Christianity. Generally.
Instead of the word "apotheosis", Christian theology uses in English the words
"deification" or "divinization" or the Greek word ""theosis"". Traditional
mainstream theology, both East and West, views Jesus Christ as the preexisting
God who undertook mortal existence, not as a mortal being who attained
divinity. It holds that he has made it possible for human beings to be raised
to the level of sharing the divine nature: he became one of us to make us
"partakers of the divine nature" "For this is why the Word became man, and the
Son of God became the Son of man: so that man, by entering into communion with
the Word and thus receiving divine sonship, might become a son of God."" "For
He was made man that we might be made God." "The only-begotten Son of God,
wanting to make us sharers in his divinity, assumed our nature, so that he,
made man, might make men gods." In Eastern Christianity. Christian theology
traditionally makes a distinction between "theosis" and "apotheosis". Orthodox
Trinitarian Christianity views Jesus Christ as the preexisting God who
undertook mortal existence, not a mortal being who attained divinity. Regarding
human beings, the mystical theology of the Eastern Orthodox churches and
Eastern Catholic churches characteristically describes the situation as
"theosis", a Greek word. Roman Catholic Church. Corresponding to the Greek word
"theosis" are the Latin-derived words "divinization" and "deification" used in
the parts of the Catholic Church that are of Latin tradition. The concept has
been given less prominence in Western theology than in that of the Eastern
Catholic Churches, but is present in the Latin Church's liturgical prayers,
such as that of the deacon or priest when pouring wine and a little water into
the chalice: "By the mystery of this water and wine may we come to share in the
divinity of Christ who humbled himself to share in our humanity." The Catechism
of the Catholic Church quotes with approval Saint Athanasius's saying, "The Son
of God became man so that we might become God." Catholic theology stresses the
concept of supernatural life, "a new creation and elevation, a rebirth, it is a
participation in and partaking of the divine nature" (cf. ). In Catholic
teaching there is a vital distinction between natural life and supernatural
life, the latter being "the life that God, in an act of love, freely gives to
human beings to elevate them above their natural lives" and which they receive
through prayer and the sacraments; indeed the Catholic Church sees human
existence as having as its whole purpose the acquisition, preservation and
intensification of this supernatural life. The Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church
or Mormons) do not believe in the tradition of apotheosis, but rather in the
Christian tradition of divinization or deification (which in Mormonism is
usually referred to as exaltation, eternal life, or eternal progression) which
to Mormons is the belief that mankind may live with God in families and become
"gods" themselves, though eternally subordinate and subject to God the Father,
God the Son, and the Holy Spirit. While the primary focus of the LDS Church is
on Jesus of Nazareth and His atoning sacrifice for man, Mormon Christians
believe that one purpose for Christ's mission and for His atonement is the
exaltation or Christian deification of man. The third Article of Faith of
Mormon Christianity states that all men may be saved from sin through the
atonement of Jesus Christ and LDS Gospel Doctrine (as published) states that
all men will be saved and will be resurrected from death. However, only those
who are sufficiently obedient and to accept the atonement and the grace and
mercy of Jesus Christ before the resurrection and final judgment will be
"exalted" and, thereby, receive a literal Christian deification. One popular
Mormon quote which is often coined by the early Mormon leader Lorenzo Snow in
1837, is “As man now is, God once was: As God now is, man may be.” The
teaching was taught first by Joseph Smith, Jr. while pointing to in the New
Testament; he said that "God himself, the Father of us all, dwelt on an earth,
the same as Jesus Christ himself did." Many LDS and non-LDS scholars also have
discussed the correlation between Mormon belief in exaltation and the ancient
Christian theosis or deification as set forth by early Church Fathers. Several
LDS and non-LDS historians specializing in studies of the early Christian
Church also claim that the Mormon belief in eternal progression is most similar
to the ancient Christian deification as set forth in numerous patristic
writings of the first through fourth centuries A.D. than the beliefs of any
other modern faith group of the Christian tradition. Art. In art the matter is
practical: the elevation of a figure to divine level entails certain
conventions. So it is that the apotheosis genre exists in Christian art as in
other art. The features of the apotheosis genre may be seen in subjects that
emphasize Christ's divinity (Transfiguration, Ascension, Christ Pantocrator)
and that depict holy persons "in glory"--that is, in their roles as "God
revealed" (Assumption, Ascension, etc.). Later artists have used the concept
for motives ranging from genuine respect for the deceased (Constantino
Brumidi's fresco "The Apotheosis of Washington" on the dome of the United
States Capitol Building in Washington, D.C.), to artistic comment (Salvador
Dalí's or Ingres's "The Apotheosis of Homer"), to mock-heroic and burlesque
apotheoses for comedic effect. Many modern leaders have exploited the artistic
imagery if not the theology of apotheosis. Examples include Rubens's depictions
of James I of England at the Banqueting House (an expression of the Divine
Right of Kings) or Henry IV of France, or Appiani's apotheosis of Napoleon. The
term has come to be used figuratively to refer to the elevation of a dead
leader (often one who was assassinated and/or martyred) to a kind of superhuman
charismatic figure and an effective erasing of all faults and controversies
which were connected with his name in life - for example, Abraham Lincoln in
the US, Lenin in USSR, Yitzchak Rabin in Israel, or Kim Jong-il of North Korea.
In literature. Joseph Campbell, in his book "The Hero With a Thousand Faces",
writes that the Universal Hero from monomyth must pass through a stage of
Apotheosis. According to Campbell, apotheosis is the expansion of consciousness
that the hero experiences after defeating his foe. Arthur C Clarke's novel
"Childhood's End" has the Overlords refer to Mankind's "apotheosis" when the
world's children evolve into their union with the Overmind (see also post-
human). "But as in landlessness alone resides the highest truth, shoreless,
indefinite as God- so, better is it to perish in that howling infinite, than be
ingloriously dashed upon the lee, even if that were safety! For worm-like,
then, oh! who would craven crawl to land! Terrors of the terrible! is all this
agony so vain? Take heart, take heart, O Bulkington! Bear thee grimly demigod!
Up from the spray of thy ocean-perishing- straight up, leaps thy apotheosis."
In "The Dark Tower" by Stephen King, the desert which is the main setting of
the first book in the series; "The Gunslinger", is referred to as "the
apotheosis of all deserts". The Mistborn series by Brandon Sanderson several
times employs the concept of apotheosis: for Mistborn Kelsier, for the Lord
Ruler, and arguably for Kelsier's Mistborn apprentice, Vin. In music.
"Apotheosis" in music refers to the appearance of a theme in grand or exalted
form. It represents the musical equivalent of the apotheosis genre in visual
art, especially where the theme is connected in some way with historical
persons or dramatic characters. When crowning the end of a large-scale work the
apotheosis functions as a peroration, following an analogy with the art of
rhetoric. Apotheosis moments abound in music, and the word itself appears in
some cases. Hector Berlioz used "Apotheose" as the title of the final movement
of his "Grande symphonie funèbre et triomphale", a work composed in 1846 for
the dedication of a monument to France's war dead. Two of Tchaikovsky’s
ballets, "The Sleeping Beauty" and "The Nutcracker", as well as La Bayadère,
contain apotheoses as finales. The very beautiful concluding tableau of Maurice
Ravel's "Ma Mere l'Oye" is also titled "Apotheose." Czech composer Karel Husa,
concerned in 1970 about arms proliferation and environmental deterioration,
named his musical response "Apotheosis for This Earth". Aram Khachaturian
entitled a segment of his ballet "Spartacus" "Sunrise and Apotheosis." Richard
Wagner, referring to the lively rhythms which permeate Beethoven's Symphony No.
7, called it the "apotheosis of the dance".
