Sukkot Sukkot ( or ' or ', Feast of Booths, Feast of Tabernacles) is a biblical
holiday celebrated on the 15th day of the month of Tishrei (variously from late
September to late October). It is one of the three biblically mandated
festivals Shalosh regalim on which Hebrews were commanded to make a pilgrimage
to the Temple in Jerusalem. It follows the solemn holiday of Yom Kippur, or the
Day of Atonement. The holiday lasts seven days (eight in the diaspora). The
first day (and second in the diaspora) is a sabbath-like yom tov when work is
forbidden, followed by the intermediate Chol Hamoed and Shemini Atzeret. The
Hebrew word "sukkōt" is the plural of "sukkah", "booth or tabernacle", which
is a walled structure covered with "skhakh" (plant material such as leafy tree
overgrowth or palm leaves). The sukkah is intended as a reminiscence of the
type of fragile dwellings in which the Israelites dwelt during their 40 years
of travel in the desert after the Exodus from slavery in Egypt. Throughout the
holiday, meals are eaten inside the sukkah and some people sleep there as well.
On each day of the holiday, members of the household recite a blessing over the
lulav and etrog (Four species). According to the prophet Zechariah, in the
messianic era Sukkot will become a universal festival and all nations will make
pilgrimages annually to Jerusalem to celebrate the feast there. History. Sukkot
is agricultural in origin. This is evident from the biblical name "The Feast of
Ingathering," from the ceremonies accompanying it, from the season – "The
festival of the seventh month" – and occasion of its celebration: "At the end
of the year when you gather in your labors out of the field" (Ex. 23:16);by its
designation as "the Feast of the Lord" or simply "the Feast". Perhaps because
of its wide attendance, Sukkot became the appropriate time for important state
ceremonies. Moses instructed the children of Israel to gather for a reading of
the Law during Sukkot every seventh year (Deut. 31:10-11). King Solomon
dedicated the Temple in Jerusalem on Sukkot (1 Kings 8; 2 Chron. 7). And Sukkot
was the first sacred occasion observed after the resumption of sacrifices in
Jerusalem following the Babylonian captivity (Ezra 3:2-4). In Leviticus, God
told Moses to command the people: "On the first day you shall take the product
of hadar trees, branches of palm trees, boughs of leafy trees, and willows of
the brook" (Lev. 23:40), and "You shall live in booths seven days; all citizens
in Israel shall live in booths, in order that future generations may know that
I made the Israelite people live in booths when I brought them out of the land
of Egypt" (Lev. 23:42-43). Laws and customs. Sukkot is a seven day holiday,
with the first day celebrated as a full festival with special prayer services
and holiday meals. The remaining days are known as Chol HaMoed ("festival
weekdays"). The seventh day of Sukkot is called Hoshana Rabbah ("Great
Hoshana", referring to the tradition that worshippers in the synagogue walk
around the perimeter of the sanctuary during morning services) and has a
special observance of its own. Outside Israel, the first two days are
celebrated as full festivals. Throughout the week of Sukkot, meals are eaten in
the sukkah and Orthodox Jewish families sleep there, although the requirement
is waived in case of rain. Every day, a blessing is recited over the Lulav and
the Etrog. Observance of Sukkot is detailed in the Book of Nehemiah and
Leviticus 23:34-44 in the Bible, the Mishnah (Sukkah 1:1–5:8); the Tosefta
(Sukkah 1:1–4:28); and the Jerusalem Talmud (Sukkah 1a–) and Babylonian
Talmud (Sukkah 2a–56b). Building a sukkah. The sukkah walls can be
constructed of any material (wood, canvas, aluminum siding, sheets). The walls
can be free-standing or include the sides of a building or porch. The roof must
be of organic material, known as S'chach, such as leafy tree overgrowth or palm
fronds. It is customary to decorate the interior of the sukkah with hanging
decorations, the Seven Species. Special prayers. Prayers during Sukkot include
the reading of the Torah every day, reciting the Mussaf (additional) service
after morning prayers, reciting Hallel, and adding special additions to the
Amidah and Grace after Meals. In addition, the service includes rituals
involving the Four Species. The lulav and etrog are not brought to the
synagogue on Shabbat. On each day of the festival, worshippers walk around the
synagogue carrying their Four species while reciting Psalm 118:25 and special
prayers known as "Hoshanot". This takes place either after the morning's Torah
reading or at the end of Mussaf. This ceremony commemorates the willow ceremony
at the Temple in Jerusalem, in which willow branches were piled beside the
altar with worshipers parading around the altar reciting prayers. During the
holiday, some Jews recite the "ushpizin" prayer which symbolises the welcoming
of seven "exalted guests" into the sukkah. These "ushpizin" (Aramaic 'guests'),
represent the seven shepherds of Israel: Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, Aaron,
Joseph and David. According to tradition, each night a different guest enters
the sukkah followed by the other six. Each of the "ushpizin" has a unique
lesson which teaches the parallels of the spiritual focus of the day on which
they visit. A new tradition has arisen among some Jews to invite seven female
counterparts to the above shepherds. A number of different lists exist which
may include any of the following: Sarah, Rebecca, Rachel, Leah, Miriam,
Deborah, Esther, Ruth, and Tamar among others. Chol HaMoed. The second through
seventh days of Sukkot (third through seventh days outside Israel) are called
Chol HaMoed ( - lit. "festival weekdays"). These days are considered by halakha
to be more than regular weekdays but less than festival days. In practice, this
means that all activities that are needed for the holiday—such as buying and
preparing food, cleaning the house in honor of the holiday, or traveling to
visit other people's sukkot or on family outings—are permitted by Jewish law.
Activities that will interfere with relaxation and enjoyment of the
holiday—such as laundering, mending clothes, engaging in labor-intensive
activities—are not permitted. Observant Jews typically treat Chol HaMoed as a
vacation period, eating nicer than usual meals in their sukkah, entertaining
guests, visiting other families in their sukkot, and taking family outings.
Many synagogues and Jewish centers also offer events and meals in their sukkot
during this time to foster community and goodwill. On the Shabbat which falls
during the week of Sukkot (or in the event when the first day of Sukkot is on
Shabbat), the Book of Ecclesiastes is read during morning synagogue services in
Israel. (Diaspora communities read it the following Shabbat). This Book's
emphasis on the ephemeralness of life ("Vanity of vanities, all is vanity...")
echoes the theme of the sukkah, while its emphasis on death reflects the time
of year in which Sukkot occurs (the "autumn" of life). The second-to-last verse
reinforces the message that adherence to God and His Torah is the only
worthwhile pursuit. Ecclesiastes 12:13,14 Hakhel. In the days of the Temple in
Jerusalem, all Jewish men, women, and children on pilgrimage to Jerusalem for
the festival would gather in the Temple courtyard on the first day of Chol
HaMoed Sukkot to hear the Jewish king read selections from the Torah. This
ceremony, which was mandated in Deuteronomy 31:10-13, was held every seven
years, in the year following the Shmita (Sabbatical) year. This ceremony was
discontinued after the destruction of the Temple, but it has been revived in
Israel on a smaller scale. Simchat Beit HaShoevah. During the Intermediate days
of Sukkot, gatherings of music and dance, known as "Simchat Beit HaShoeivah",
take place. This commemorates the Water Libation Ceremony in which water was
carried up the Jerusalem pilgrim road from the Pool of Siloam to the Temple in
Jerusalem. Hoshana Rabbah. The seventh day of Sukkot is known as Hoshana
Rabbah, meaning the "Great Supplication". This day is marked by a special
service in which seven circuits are made by worshippers holding their Four
species, reciting Psalm 118:25 with additional prayers. In addition, a bundle
of five willow branches are beaten on the ground. Shemini Atzeret and Simchat
Torah. The holiday immediately following Sukkot is known as Shemini Atzeret
(lit. "Eighth of Assembly"). Shemini Atzeret is viewed as a separate holiday.
In the Diaspora a second additional holiday, Simchat Torah (lit. "Joy of the
Torah") is celebrated. In the Land of Israel, Simchat Torah is celebrated on
Shemini Atzeret. On Shemini Atzeret the sukkah is left and meals are eaten
inside the house. Outside of Israel, many eat in the sukkah without making the
blessing. The sukkah is not used on Simchat Torah.
