Sumerian religion Sumerian religion refers to the mythology, pantheon, rites,
and cosmology of the Sumerian civilization. The Sumerian religion influenced
Mesopotamian mythology as a whole, surviving in the mythologies and religions
of the Hurrians, Akkadians, Babylonians, Assyrians, and other culture groups.
Sumerians believed their world was controlled by gods, goddesses, demons, and
monsters. Just like Egyptians, Sumerians thought each god or goddess was
responsible for one thing, like the rivers and trees, pottery and bread etc.
Therefore there were hundreds of gods/goddesses. Also, each Sumerian city was
guarded by a god or goddess. There were also temples for them to live in, and
people could go there and make an offering, like a sacrificed animal, food, and
valuables. Demons were creatures with human bodies and animal heads created by
the gods. They could be either evil or good. The good one convinces people to
do good, and the bad one persuades people to be bad. Worship of the Sumerian
culture. Written cuneiform. Sumerian myths were passed down through the oral
tradition until the invention of writing. Early Sumerian cuneiform was used
primarily as a record-keeping tool; it was not until the late early dynastic
period that religious writings first became prevalent as temple praise hymns
and as a form of "incantation" called the "nam-šub" (prefix + "to cast").
Temples. In the Sumerian city-states, temple complexes originally were small,
elevated one-room structures. In the early dynastic period, temples developed
raised terraces and multiple rooms. Toward the end of the Sumerian
civilization, Ziggurats became the preferred temple structure for Mesopotamian
religious centers. Temples served as cultural, religious, and political
headquarters until approximately 2500 BCE, with the rise of military kings
known as Lu-gals (“man” + “big”) after which time the political and
military leadership was often housed in separate "palace" complexes. The
priesthood. Until the advent of the Lugals, Sumerian city states were under a
virtually-complete theocratic government controlled by independent groups of
En, or high priests. Priests were responsible for continuing the cultural and
religious traditions of their city-state, and were viewed as mediums between
humans and the cosmic and terrestrial forces. The priesthood resided full-time
in temple complexes, and administered to matters of state including the large
irrigation processes necessary for the civilization’s survival. Ceremony.
During the Third Dynasty of Ur, the Sumerian city-state of Lagash was said to
have had 62 "lamentation priests" who were accompanied by 180 vocalists and
instrumentalists. Cosmology. The Sumerians envisioned the universe as a closed
dome surrounded by a primordial saltwater sea. Underneath the terrestrial
earth, which formed the base of the dome, existed an underworld and a
freshwater ocean called the Apsu. The deity of the dome-shaped firmament was
named An; the earth was named Ki. First the underground world was believed to
be an extension of the goddess Ki, but later developed into the concept of
Kigal. The primordial saltwater sea was named Nammu, who became known as Tiamat
during and after the Sumerian Renaissance. Creation story. According to
Sumerian mythology, the gods originally created humans as servants for
themselves, but freed them when they became too much to handle. The primordial
union of An and Ki produced Enlil, who became leader of the Sumerian pantheon.
After the other deities banished Enlil from Dilmun (the “home of the
deities”) for raping the air goddess Ninlil, Ninlil had a child: Nanna, god
of the moon. Nanna and Ningal gave birth to Inanna, the goddess of war and
fertility, and to Utu, god of the sun. Deities. The Sumerians originally
practiced a polytheistic religion, with anthropomorphic deities representing
cosmic and terrestrial forces in their world. During the middle of the third
millennium BCE, Sumerian deities became more anthropocentric and were
"...nature gods transformed into city gods." Deities such as Enki and Inanna
were viewed as having been assigned their rank, power, and knowledge from An,
the heaven deity, or Enlil, head of the Sumerian pantheon. This cosmological
shift may have been caused by the growing influence of the neighboring Akkadian
religion, or as a result of increased warfare between the Sumerian city-states;
the assignment of certain powers to deities may have mirrored the appointment
of the Lugals, who were given power and authority by the city-state and its
priesthood. Pantheon. The majority of Sumerian deities belonged to a
classification called the "Anunna" (“of An”), whereas seven deities,
including Enlil and Inanna, belonged to a group of “underworld judges" known
as the "Anunnaki" (“[offspring of An” + Ki). During the Third Dynasty of
Ur, the Sumerian pantheon was said to include sixty times sixty (3600) deities.
Legacy. Akkadians. The Sumerians experienced an ongoing linguistic and cultural
exchange with the Semitic Akkadian peoples in northern Mesopotamia for
generations prior to the usurpation of their territories by Sargon of Akkad in
2340 BCE. Sumerian mythology and religious practices were rapidly integrated
into Akkadian culture, presumably blending with the original Akkadian belief
systems that have been mostly lost to history. Sumerian deities developed
Akkadian counterparts. Some remained virtually the same until later Babylonian
and Assyrian rule. The Sumerian god An, for example, developed the Akkadian
counterpart Anu; the Sumerian god Enki became Ea; and the Sumerian gods Ninurta
and Enlil remained very much the same in the Akkadian pantheon. Babylonians.
The Amorite Babylonians gained dominance over southern Mesopotamia by the mid-
seventeenth century BCE. During the Old Babylonian Period, the Sumerian and
Akkadian languages were retained for religious purposes; the majority of
Sumerian mythological literature known to historians today comes from the Old
Babylonian Period, either in the form of transcribed Sumerian texts (most
notably the Babylonian version of the Epic of Gilgamesh) or in the form of
Sumerian and Akkadian influences within Babylonian mythological literature
(most notably the Enûma Eliš). The Sumerian-Akkadian pantheon was altered,
most notably with the introduction of a new supreme deity, Marduk. The Sumerian
goddess Inanna also developed the counterpart Ishtar during the Old Babylonian
Period. Hurrians and Hittites. The Hurrians adopted the Akkadian god Anu into
their pantheon sometime no later than 1200 BCE. Other Akkadian deities adapted
into the Hurrian pantheon include Ayas, the Hurrian counterpart to Ea;
Shaushka, the Hurrian counterpart to Ishtar; and the goddess Ninlil, whose
mythos had been drastically expanded by the Babylonians. Parallels. Some
stories in Sumerian religion appear similar to stories in other Middle-Eastern
religions. For example, the biblical account of Noah and the flood myth
resembles some aspects of the Sumerian deluge myth. The Judaic underworld Sheol
is very similar in description with the Sumerian and Babylonian Kigal, ruled by
the goddess Ereshkigal and in the Babylonian religion, with their introduced
consort, the death god Nergal. Sumerian scholar Samuel Noah Kramer noted
similarities between many Sumerian and Akkadian "proverbs" and the later Hebrew
proverbs, many of which are featured in the Book of Proverbs.
