Sunni Islam Sunni Islam ( or ) is the largest branch of Islam; its adherents
are referred to in Arabic as "ʾAhlu-s-Sunnati wa-l-Jamāʿah" (), "people of
the tradition of Muhammad and the consensus of the Ummah" or "ʾAhlu-s-Sunnah"
(). For short, in English, they are known as Sunni Muslims, Sunnis, Sunnites or
simply Muslims. Sunni Islam is sometimes referred to as the orthodox version of
the religion. The word "Sunni" comes from the term "Sunnah" (), which refers to
the sayings and actions of Muhammad that are recorded in hadiths (collections
of narrations regarding prophet Muhammad). The primary hadiths Al-Kutub Al-
Sittah (the six books), in conjunction with the Quran, form the basis of all
jurisprudence methodologies within Sunni Islam. Laws are derived from the text
of the Quran and the hadith, in addition to using methods of juristic reasoning
(like qiyas) and consensus (ijma). There are a multitude of scholarly opinions
in each field; however, these can be summarised as either derived from the four
major schools of thought (Madh'hab) or from an expert scholar who exercises
independent derivation of Islamic Law (ijtihad). Both are considered valid as
differences of opinion (which were present at the time of the early Muslims,
the Salaf). Etymology. (Classical Arabic: ) is a broad term derived from ' ( ,
pl. ' ), means "" or "usual practice". The Muslim usage of this term refers to
the sayings and living habits of Muhammad. In its full form, this branch of
Islam is referred to as "Ahl al-Sunnah wa Jama'ah" (literally, "People of the
"Sunah" and the Community"). People claiming to follow the Sunnah who can
demonstrate that they have no action or belief against the prophetic Sunnah can
consider themselves to be Sunni Muslims. History. After the death of Muhammad,
Sunni Muslims accepted Abu Bakr as the first caliph. However many years later,
a new sect known as Shiism was founded. Those who accepted Abu Bakr were known
as the Ahlus Sunnah wa`l Jamah, in order to differentiate them from the sect of
Shiism which said that Ali should be caliph (see "History of Shi'a Islam").
According to Sunni Muslims, the first four caliphs were known as the "Four
Rightly Guided Caliphs". The first was Abu Bakr Siddique, followed by the
second, Umar ibn al-Khattāb. Uthman ibn Affan and Ali ibn Abi Talib also were
called by the same title. The rulers succeeding these first four did not
receive this title by consensus, and eventually a monarchy succeeded thereafter
until the Caliphate was brought back under various empires throughout history.
After the first four caliphs, the Caliphate was upheld as a political system by
dynasties such as the Umayyads, the Abbasids, and the Ottomans, this was also
upheld for relatively short periods of time by other competing dynasties in al-
Andalus, North Africa and Egypt. Mustafa Kemal Atatürk abolished the system of
the Ottoman Caliphate after Abdülmecid II was officially deposed and expelled
from Turkey, whereby the Republic of Turkey was founded in 1924 upon secular
principles. To this day, the Ottoman Empire is regarded as the last major
Islamic Caliphate. Companions and summary. Sunnis believe that the companions
were the best of the Muslims, based on hadiths such as this one: It was
narrated from ‘Abd-Allah ibn Mas’ud that Muhammad said: "The best of the
people are my generation, then those who come after them, then those who come
after them." Support for this view is also found in verses of Quran such as
this one in Surah Tawba verse 100 (9:100) "Those who believed, and went into
exile and fought for God's cause with their property and their persons, as well
as those who sheltered and helped them,- these shall be friends, one of
another." Sunnis believe that the companions were true believers since it was
the companions who were given the task of compiling the Quran. However many
scholars have proven that it was the prophet's family who had the biggest hand
in this affair. Furthermore, narrations that were narrated by the companions
are a great source of knowledge for Muslims and a great source on the Sunnah
i.e. example of Muhammad. Estimates of the world Sunni population varies from
over 75% to 90% of all Muslims. Schools of law. There are several intellectual
traditions within the field of Islamic law. These varied traditions reflect
differing viewpoints on some laws and obligations within Islamic law. While one
school of thought may see a certain act as a religious obligation, another may
see the same act as optional. These schools of thought aren't regarded as
sects; rather, they represent differing viewpoints on issues that are not
considered the core of Islamic belief. Historians have differed regarding the
exact delineation of the schools based on the underlying principles they
follow. Many traditional scholars saw Sunni Islam in two groups: Ahl al-Ra'i,
or people of opinions, due to their emphasis on scholarly judgment and reason;
and Ahl al-Hadith, or people of traditions, due to their emphasis on
restricting juristic thought to only what is found in scripture. Ibn Khaldun
defined the Sunni schools as three: the Hanafi school representing opinions,
the Zahiri school representing scripture, and a broader, middle school
encompassing the Shafi'i, Maliki and Hanbali schools. Hanafi. Abu Hanifah (699
— 767 CE / 80 — 148 AH) was the founder of the Hanafi school. He was born
in the year 699 CE in Kufa, Iraq in a family of Afghan-Persian / Persian
ancestry. Sunni Muslims of Iraq, Syria, Lebanon, Bangladesh, Mauritius,
Pakistan, India, Afghanistan, Central Asia, the Muslim areas of Southern
Russia, the Caucasus, most of the Muslim areas of the Balkans and Turkey and
parts of Egypt, all follow this school of jurisprudence. Maliki. Imam Malik ibn
Anas (c. 711 – 795CE / 93 AH – 179 AH ) developed his Islamic jurisprudence
in the holy city of Medina. His collection of narrated Hadith are recorded in
the Muwatta from which much of the fiqh of his school of fiqh was developed.
His Madh'hab was adopted by most North African and West African countries such
as upper Egypt, Libya, Tunisia, Algeria, Morocco, Senegal, Mali, Nigeria,
Mauritania and Sudan along with parts of the Persian Gulf. The Maliki school of
jurisprudence is the official state Madh'hab of Kuwait, Bahrain and the United
Arab Emirates. He was one of the teachers of Imam Al-Shafi‘i as well as Imam
Abū Ḥanīfa eldest student, Muhammad al-Shaybani. One of greatest historical
centers of Maliki teaching, especially during the ninth, tenth and eleventh
centuries, is the Mosque of Uqba also known as the Great Mosque of Kairouan (in
Tunisia). Shafi'i. Muhammad ibn Idris ash-Shafi`i (767 — 820 CE / 150 — 204
AH) was a student of Malik. He taught in Iraq and then in Egypt. Al-Shafi'i
placed great emphasis on the Sunnah of Muhammad, as embodied in the Hadith, as
a source of the Shari'ah. The Shafi'i madhab today is the dominant school of
jurisprudence in Yemen, Lower Egypt, Djibouti, Eritrea, Somalia, Sudan, Syria,
the Palestinian Territories, Jordan, the North Caucasus, Kurdistan (East
Turkey, North west Iran, North Iraq, Northern Syria), Maldives, Malaysia,
Brunei Darussalam and Indonesia. It is also practised by large communities in
Kuwait, Saudi Arabia (in the Hejaz and Asir), the United Arab Emirates,
Palestine, the Swahili Coast, Mauritius, Singapore, South Africa, Thailand,
Vietnam, Cambodia, the Philippines, Sri Lanka, Ethiopia, Kazakhstan (by
Chechens) and Indian states of Kerala (most of the Mappilas), Karnataka
(Bhatkal, Mangalore and Coorg districts), Maharashtra (by Konkani Muslims),
Tamil Nadu, Lakshadweep Islands. Hanbali. Ahmad bin Hanbal (780 — 855 CE /
164 — 241 AH) was the namesake of the Hanbali school of thought in fiqh. He
was born in Baghdad and learned extensively from the great Imam al-Shafi'i
whilst studying under him. Imam Ahmed was known for challenging the ruling
Mu'tazila caliphate at the time - Ibn Hanbal was famously called before the
Inquisition or ""Mihna"" of the Abassid Caliph al-Ma'mun. Al-Ma'mun wanted to
assert the religious authority of the Caliph by pressuring scholars to adopt
the Mu'tazila view that the Qur'an was created rather than uncreated. According
to Sunni tradition, Imam ibn Hanbal was among the scholars to resist the
Caliph's interference and the Mu'tazila doctrine of a created Qur'an and
championed the creed or aqidah of Ahlus Sunnah wa'l Jamah. The Hanbali school
of jurisprudence is followed predominantly in the Arabian Peninsula as well as
parts of Europe and the Americas. The methodology focuses primarily on sound
textual evidence and scholarly consensus (Ijma) in deriving fiqh. The majority
of Hanbali scholars, as well as many from the other schools of thought, follow
the Athari methodology and creed in Aqidah which adopts the middle path of
accepting the texts of Qur'an and Hadith without extensive philosophical
interpretation or denial. This regarded by them as being the way of the early
generations of Muslims (the salaf) and those that followed them (the
Tabi‘un), and so on, where the key points of Islamic belief are established
and any attributes regarding Allah are accepted as they are without delving
into possible rational and philosophical explanations, thus keeping far from
anthropomorphism, complete denial or speculative interpretation. Differences in
the Schools. Interpreting Islamic law by deriving specific rulings - such as
how to pray - is known as fiqh, commonly termed jurisprudence. A madh'hab is a
particular tradition of interpreting this jurisprudence. These schools possess
different focuses, such as specific evidence (Shafi'i and Hanbali) or general
principles (Hanafi and Maliki) derived from specific evidences. As these
schools represent clearly spelled out methodologies for interpreting Islamic
law, there has been little change in the methodology with regard to each
school. All four madh'habs are recognised viable legal schools and are not seen
as in error in contrast to one another, each school has their evidences and
differences are respected as being "Ikhtilaf"; this is because all the schools
are united upon the usul ("base") issues but generally differ on furu'
("branches"). As the social and economic environment changes, new rulings are
derived - this is known as Ijtihad - this can be from a Mujtahid who
specialises in one or more Madh'habs. For example, when tobacco appeared, it
was considered disliked because of its smell. When medical information showed
that smoking was dangerous, most jurists took the view that it is forbidden.
Current issues include social topics such as downloading pirated software and
scientific issues such as cloning. The Six pillars of Iman. Sunni Islam has six
articles of faith known as the six pillars of "iman" that all Sunni Muslims are
united upon in belief, along with the 105 key points of creed mentioned in
"Aṭ-Ṭaḥāwī's Islamic Theology". Sunni theological traditions. Some
Islamic scholars faced questions that they felt were not explicitly answered in
the "Qur'an" and "Sunnah", especially questions with regard to philosophical
conundra such as the nature of God, the existence of human free will, or the
eternal existence of the "Qur'an." Various schools of theology and philosophy
developed to answer these questions, each claiming to be true to the "Qur'an"
and the Muslim tradition ("sunnah"). Among Sunni Muslims, various schools of
thought in theology began to be born out of the sciences of kalam in opposition
to the textualists who stood by affirming texts without delving into
philosophical speculation as they saw it as an innovation in Islam. The
following were the four dominant traditions that grew however the key beliefs
of the Sunni Islam are all agreed upon (being the six pillars of Iman) and
codified in the treatise on Aqeedah by Imam Ahmad ibn Muhammad al-Tahawi in his
Aqeedat Tahawiyyah. Maturidi. Founded by Abu Mansur al-Maturidi (died 944).
Maturidiyyah was a minority tradition until it was accepted by the Turkish
tribes of Central Asia (previously they had been Ash'ari and followers of the
Shafi'i school, it was only later on migration into Anatolia that they became
Hanafi and followers of the Maturidi creed). One of the tribes, the Seljuk
Turks, migrated to Turkey, where later the Ottoman Empire was established.
Their preferred school of law achieved a new prominence throughout their whole
empire although it continued to be followed almost exclusively by followers of
the Hanafi school while followers of the Shafi and Maliki schools within the
empire followed the Ash'ari and Athari schools of thought. Thus, wherever can
be found Hanafi followers, there can be found the Maturidi creed. Maturidis
argue that the knowledge of God's existence can be derived through pure reason.
Ash'ari. Founded by Abu al-Hasan al-Ash'ari (873–935). This theological
school of Aqeedah was embraced by plenty of Muslim scholars and developed in
parts of the Islamic world throughout history, Imam al-Ghazali wrote on the
creed discussing it and agreeing upon some of its principles. Ash'arism
historically and today has the greatest backing of the Muslim Scholars,
followed by the Maturidis. Together, both are known as "Sunni Orthodoxy". These
two schools of doctrine are followed by the bulk of Sunni Muslims and differ
only in minor details. Ash'ari theology stresses divine revelation over human
reason. Contrary to the Mu'tazilites, they say that ethics cannot be derived
from human reason, but that God's commands, as revealed in the "Qur'an" and the
"Sunnah" (the practices of Muhammad and his companions as recorded in the
traditions, or "hadith"), are the sole source of all morality and ethics.
Regarding the nature of God and the divine attributes, the Ash'ari rejected the
Mu'tazili position that all Qur'anic references to God as having real
attributes were not metaphorical. The Ash'aris insisted that these attributes
were as they "best befit him". The Arabic language is a wide language in which
one word can have 15 different meanings, so the Ash'aris endeavor to find the
meaning that best befits Allah and is not contradicted by the Qur'an. Therefore
when Allah states in the Holy Qur'an, "He who does not resemble any of this
creation," this clearly means Allah can't be attributed with body parts because
he created body parts. This is one way which differentiates these Muslims from
most Christians and Jews. Ash'aris tend to stress divine omnipotence over human
free will and they believe that the Qur'an is eternal and uncreated. Athari.
Athari (Arabic: أثري), or "textualism", is derived from the Arabic word
"athar", literally meaning "remnant", and also referring to "narrations". Their
disciples are called the Atharis or "al-Atharia". The Atharis are considered to
be one of four Sunni schools of Aqidah. The Athari methodology of textual
interpretation is to avoid delving into any extensive theological speculation.
They believe in Allah and his attributes in the exact fashion that they were
mentioned in the Quran, the Sunnah, and by the Sahabah. They do not attempt to
further interpret the aforementioned texts by giving a literal meaning like in
Ẓāhirīya (literalism) or the Tashbih (simile or likening), nor through
tahrif (distortion), nor ta`weel (allegory or metaphor), nor ta'teel (denial).
They avoid entering into deep rational philosophical discussions of matters
relating to Islamic beliefs that are not supported by the Quran, the Sunnah or
the understanding of the Sahabah with specific wording; rather, their
discussion and presentation of beliefs revolves entirely around textual
evidences found in these three main sources, while remaining cautious to avoid
taking the path of the Ẓāhirīs (literalists) either. The Atharis believe
this to be the methodology adhered to by the first three generations of Muslims
(i.e. the Salaf), therefore making it the school of Sunni Aqeedah that they
believe is adhering to the truth and keeping to the balanced middle path of
Islam. While often used interchangeably, there is a nuanced difference between
Atharism and the Salafi Aqeedah. The Salafi movement often lays claim to
Atharism, however traditional Atharis, although small in number, generally
resent this claim. The distinguishing characteristic between the two is that
Atharism accepts The Tahawi Creed exactly as it is in its ambiguity, without
going as far as to clarify that the attributes of God are 'literal', as
according to Salafi belief. The codifier of the Athari Aqeedah was the great
Islamic Classical Scholar Ahmad ibn Hanbal who today is perhaps better known
for his School of Jurisprudence than his school of Aqeedah. Prominent
proponents of Classical Atharism today include Dr. Yusuf Al-Qaradawi and
Mauritanian scholar Sheikh Muhammad Al-Hassan Ad-Dedew, amongst others. Sunni
view of hadith. The Qur'an as it exists today in book form was compiled by
Muhammad's companions (Sahaba) within a handful of months of his death, and is
accepted by all Muslim denominations. However, there were many matters of
belief and daily life that were not directly prescribed in the Qur'an, but were
actions that were observed by Muhammad and the early Muslim community. Later
generations sought out oral traditions regarding the early history of Islam,
and the practices of Muhammad and his first followers, and wrote them down so
that they might be preserved. These recorded oral traditions are called
"hadith". Muslim scholars have through the ages sifted through the "hadith" and
evaluated the chain of narrations of each tradition, scrutinizing the
trustworthiness of the narrators and judging the strength of each "hadith"
accordingly.
