Sunnah The word ' ( , plural ' , Arabic) is derived from the root ( Arabic)
meaning smooth and easy flow water or direct flow path. The word literally
means a clear and well trodden path. In the discussion of the sources of
religion, Sunnah denotes the practice of Prophet Muhammad that he taught and
practically instituted as a teacher of the sharī‘ah and the best exemplar.
According to Muslim belief, this practice is to be adhered to in fulfilling the
divine injunctions, carrying out religious rites and moulding life in accord
with the will of God. To institute these practices was, the Qur’ān states, a
part of the Prophet’s responsibility as a Messenger of God The sunnah of
Muhammad includes his specific words, habits, practices, and silent approvals:
it is significant because it addresses ways of life dealing with friends,
family and government. Recording "sunnah" was an Arabian tradition and, once
people converted to Islam, they brought this custom to their religion. The
"sunnah" is consulted after referring to the Qur'an, if the issue is not
addressed there. The term ""Sunni"" denotes those who claim to practice these
usages, as part of the "Ummah". Etymology. ' ( , plural ' ) is an Arabic word
that means "habit" or "usual practice". Sunnis are also referred to as Ahl as-
Sunnah wa'l-Jamā'ah ("people of the tradition and the community (of
Muhammad)") or "Ahl as-Sunnah" for short. Sunnah and hadith. In the context of
biographical records of Muhammad "sunnah" often stands as synonymous with
"hadith" since most of the personality traits of Muhammad are known from
descriptions of him, his sayings and his actions after becoming a prophet at
the age of forty. "Sunnah", which consists of what Muhammad believed, implied,
or tacitly approved, was noted down by his companions in "ahadith". Allegiance
to the tribal "sunnah" had been partially replaced by submission to a new
universal authority and the sense of brotherhood among Muslims. Early Sunni
scholars often considered "sunnah" equivalent to the biography of Mohammed
("sira") as the "hadith" was then poorly validated while contemporary accounts
of Muhammad's life were better known. As the "hadith" came to be better
documented and the scholars who validated them gained prestige, the "sunnah"
came often to be known mostly through the "hadith", especially as variant or
fictional biographies of Muhammad spread. How far "hadith" contributes to
"sunnah" is disputed and highly dependent on context. Classical Islam often
equates the "sunnah" with the "hadith". Scholars who studied the narrations
according to their context ("matn") as well as their transmission ("isnad") in
order to discriminate between them were influential in the development of early
Muslim philosophy. In the context of Islamic Law Imam Malik and the Hanafi
scholars are assumed to have differentiated between the two: for example Imam
Malik is said to have rejected some traditions that reached him because,
according to him, they were against the "established practice of the people of
Medina". Sunnah and Islam. Passages in the Qur'an command that the prophet be
followed, such as 3:32 "Obey God and His messenger". For Muslims the imitation
of Muhammad helps one to know and be loved by God: one lives in constant
remembrance of God. Shi'a Muslims do not use the six major "hadith" collections
followed by the Sunni. Instead, their primary collections were written by three
authors known as the 'Three Muhammads'. They are: "Kitab al-Kafi" by Muhammad
ibn Ya'qub al-Kulayni al-Razi (329 AH), "Man la yahduruhu al-Faqih" by Muhammad
ibn Babuya and "Al-Tahdhib" and "Al-Istibsar" both by Shaykh Muhammad Tusi.
Unlike Akhbari Twelver Shi'a, Usuli Twelver Shi'a scholars do not believe that
everything in the four major books is authentic. In Shia "hadith" one often
finds sermons attributed to Ali in The Four Books or in the Nahj al-Balagha.
Traditional Muslims believe that the "sunnah" is justified by verses such as "A
similar (favour have ye already received) in that We have sent among you a
Messenger of your own, rehearsing to you Our Signs, and sanctifying you, and
instructing you in Scripture and Wisdom, and in new knowledge.(2:151) The verse
"Verily in the messenger of God you have a good example for him who looks unto
God and the Last Day and remembers God much". (33:21), further emphasizes that
Muhammad's mission is to teach and exemplify The Qur'an, not just to relate its
verses and leave. Muhammad was not to be worshipped or deified but his role was
to deliver The Qur'an with comprehensive explanations of how to live according
to the Qur'anic guidelines preserved in Sunnah. The teachings of "wisdom" have
been declared to be a function of Muhammad along with the teachings of the
scripture. For a better understanding of "wisdom" ("hikmah"), one can refer to
The Quran itself. For example, verse 4:113 states; "God reveals the Book (i.e.
the books of revealed religion, especially The Qur'an) to you, and wisdom, and
teaches you that which you did not know. The grace of God towards you has been
very great". Verse 2:231 states; "And remember God's grace upon you, and that
which He has revealed unto you of Scripture and wisdom whereby He exhorts you".
Verse 33:34 states, "And bear in mind which is recited in your houses of the
revelations of God and of wisdom". Some have said that "wisdom" here is simply
another name for "sunnah". Therefore, along with divine revelation the "sunnah"
was directly taught by God. Modern Sunni scholars are beginning to examine both
the "sira" and the "hadith" in order to justify modifications to jurisprudence
("fiqh"). The "sunna", in one form or another, would retain its central role in
providing a moral example and ethical guidance. Alternative views on Sunnah.
According to the view of some Sufi Muslims who incorporate both the outer and
inner reality of Prophet Muhammad, hold the view that the deeper and true
Sunnah are the noble characteristics and inner state of Prophet Muhammad. To
them the Prophet's attitude, his piety, the quality of his character constitute
the truer and deeper aspect of what it means by Sunnah in Islam, rather than
the external aspects alone. They argue that the external customs of the Prophet
loses its meaning without the inner attitude and also many Sunnah are simply
custom of the Arabs, not something that is unique to Prophet. and "Khuluqin
Azim" or 'Exalted Character' in the Quran, real Sunnah cannot be upheld.
According to some scholars, Sunnah predates both the Quran as well as Muhammad,
and is actually the tradition of the Prophets of God, specifically the
tradition of Abraham. A broad form of Sunnah was already being practised by the
Christians, Jews and the Arab descendants of Ismail, when Muhammad reinstituted
this practice as an integral part of Islam. Sunnah and Quran both are equally
authentic and the former includes worship rituals like Salah, Zakah, Hajj,
fasting in Ramadan as well as customs like circumcision
