Supersessionism Supersessionism, also called fulfillment theology and
replacement theology, is the Christian theological position that the New
Covenant replaces the Mosaic Covenant, which is commonly referred to as the
"Old Covenant". Supersessionism views Christendom and the Christian Church as
being the inheritor of the promises made to the biblical Israelites and
proselytes. This position is in direct contrast with dual-covenant theology
which posits that both biblical covenants still apply. Etymology. The word
"supersessionism" comes from English "supersede", first known to have been used
with the meaning "replace" in 1642. Prior to this time the word is attested in
Scottish legal English to describe restraining orders against debt collection,
"restraint" being its original Latin sense. (The Latin for "replace" is
"succedere".) The preposition "super" is applied to intensify the verb
"sedere", as in English "hold up". Both forms can mean "to delay". Hence the
term "supersessionism" does not come from the Latin Church Fathers' description
of their own views but as the application of a modern term to older views. The
word "supersession" is used by S. Thelwall in the title of chapter three of his
1870 translation of Tertullian's "Adversus Iudaeos" (written between 198 and
208). The title is provided by Thelwall; it is not in the original Latin.
Types. Both Christian and Jewish theologians have identified different types of
supersessionism in Christian reading of the Bible. R. Kendall Soulen notes
three categories of supersessionism are identified by Christian theologians:
punitive, economic, and structural. These three views are neither mutually
exclusive, nor logically dependent, and it is possible to hold all of them or
any one with or without the others. He observes, "In the early Church, it
seems, the new covenant presented by the New Testament was either taken to be
an addition to the old covenant (the religion of the Torah and the Jewish
Pharisaic tradition, summarized in the Ten Commandments), or it was taken to be
a replacement for the old covenant." Novak considers both understandings to be
supersessionist. He designates the first as "soft supersessionism" and the
second as "hard supersessionism." The former "does not assert that God
terminated the covenant of Exodus-Sinai with the Jewish people. Rather, it
asserts that Jesus came to fulfill the promise of the old covenant, first for
those Jews "already" initiated into the covenant, who "then" accepted his
messiahhood as that covenant's fulfillment. "And," it asserts that Jesus came
to both initiate and fulfill the promise of the covenant for those Gentiles
whose sole connection to the covenant is through him. Hence, in this kind of
supersessionism, those Jews who do not accept Jesus' messiahhood are still part
of the covenant in the sense of 'what God has put together let no man put
asunder' original." See also Dual-covenant theology. Hard supersessionism, on
the other hand, asserts that "he old covenant is dead. The Jews by their sins,
most prominently of rejecting Jesus as the Messiah, have forfeited any
covenantal status." See also Antinomianism. This classification provides
mutually exclusive options. Hard supersessionism implies both punitive and
economic supersessionism; soft supersessionism does not fall into any of the
three classes recognized as supersessionist by Christian theologians; instead
it is associated with Jewish Christianity. Christian views. The early Christian
theologians saw the New Covenant in Christ as a replacement for the Mosaic
Covenant (see "Roman Catholicism", below). Historically, statements on behalf
of the Roman Catholic Church have claimed her ecclesiastical structures to be a
fulfillment and replacement of Jewish ecclesiastical structures (see also
Jerusalem as an allegory for the Church). As recently as 1965 Vatican Council
II affirmed, "the Church is the new people of God," without intending to make
"Israel according to the flesh", the Jewish people, irrelevant in terms of
eschatology (see "Roman Catholicism, below). Modern Catholicism affirms these
spokesmen as authoritative for doctrine, alongside the New Testament. Modern
Protestants hold to a range of positions, some with more emphasis on continuity
(covenant theology) and others with more emphasis on discontinuity
(dispensationalism and New Covenant Theology). The Jewish-Christian dialog has
changed dramatically since the early centuries. In the first century Gentile
(non-Jewish) inclusion was the significant issue, see Circumcision controversy
in early Christianity, while two millennia later Jewish exclusion is the issue
(though Jewish exclusion may have begun as early as the exclusion of Jews from
Aelia Capitolina c.135, see also Jewish Bishops of Jerusalem and Anti-Judaism).
The New Testament repeatedly gives Jews priority, as in Jesus' expression of
his central mission as being to the Jews rather than Gentiles and in Paul's
formula "first for the Jew, then for the Gentile." Yet after the death of
Jesus, the inclusion of the Gentiles as equals in this burgeoning sect of
Judaism also caused problems, particularly when it came to Gentiles keeping the
Mosaic Law, which was both a major issue at the Council of Jerusalem and a
theme of Paul's Epistle to the Galatians, though the relationship of Paul of
Tarsus and Judaism is still disputed today. By contrast, in modern discourse,
the term "supersessionism" arises as a criticism of a (perceived) Christian
belief in Jewish exclusion, not as a Christian articulation of their own
understanding of the relation between the Christians and Jews. Modern Christian
descriptions of the New Testament teaching in this area focus on Gentile
inclusion in God's plans, without much if any consideration of Jewish
exclusion. Although modern Christians, nearly all of whom are Gentiles,
naturally believe in Gentile inclusion, they are divided in their understanding
of whether the New Testament teaches Jewish exclusion. In short, some modern
Christians believe in supersessionism and others don't. There is also some
disagreement among Christians in regard to what, precisely, is superseded: the
Old Covenant, or the Jewish people themselves. New Testament. The parable of
the Wicked Vinedressers (), addressed to "the chief priests and the Pharisees",
is often invoked as providing scriptural support to some form of
supersessionism: "'When therefore the lord of the vineyard comes, what will he
do to those farmers?' They told him, 'He will miserably destroy those miserable
men, and will lease out the vineyard to other farmers, who will give him the
fruit in its season.'" Church fathers. Augustine (354–430) follows these
views of the earlier Church Fathers, but he emphasizes the importance to
Christianity of the continued existence of the Jewish people: "The Jews ... are
thus by their own Scriptures a testimony to us that we have not forged the
prophecies about Christ." Jeremy Cohen, followed by John Y. B. Hood and James
Carroll, sees this as having had decisive social consequences, with Carroll
saying, "It is not too much to say that, at this juncture, Christianity
'permitted' Judaism to endure because of Augustine." Various forms of
supersessionism have been the mainstream Christian interpretation of the New
Testament since the inception of all three main historical traditions within
Christianity — Orthodox, Catholic and Protestant. Roman Catholicism.
Supersessionism is not the name of any official Roman Catholic doctrine and the
word appears in no Church documents; however, the Catholic Church does
officially teach that the Mosaic covenant was fulfilled and replaced by the New
Covenant in Christ. Nevertheless, the Catholic Church does not teach that the
Jewish people themselves are effectively irrelevant in terms of eschatology and
Biblical prophecy (see: Avery Cardinal Dulles). For the Catholic Church, the
Jewish people are a reminder that the “gifts and calling of God are
irrevocable” (Rom 11:29). The Church recognizes an ongoing and unique
relationship between the Jewish people, God and the Church. Additionally, the
Church teaches that there is an integral continuity between the covenants
rather than a rupture. At a Jewish synagogue, St. Paul preached the following:
“Let it be known to you therefore, brethren, that through this man
forgiveness of sins is proclaimed to you, and by him every one that believes is
freed from everything from which you could not be freed by the law of Moses”
(Acts 13:38–39). In the book of Hebrews, it is written: “On the one hand, a
former commandment is set aside because of its weakness and uselessness (for
the law made nothing perfect).” (Heb. 7:18) St. Justin Martyr states in his
dialogue with Trypho the Jew, “We do not trust through Moses or through the
law” because there is “a final law, and a covenant, the chiefest of all,
which it is now incumbent on all men to observe,” and “law placed against
law has abrogated that which is before it, and a covenant which comes after in
like manner has put an end to the previous one.” St. Augustine writes:
“Instead of the grace of the law which has passed away, we have received the
grace of the gospel which is abiding; and instead of the shadows and types of
the old dispensation, the truth has come by Jesus Christ. Jeremiah also
prophesied thus in God’s name: ‘Behold, the days come, says the Lord, that
I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of
Judah; not according to the covenant which I made with their fathers, in the
day that I took them by the hand, to bring them out of the land of Egypt.’
31:31–32 Observe what the prophet says, not to Gentiles, who had not been
partakers in any former covenant, but to the Jewish nation. He who has given
them the law by Moses, promises in place of it the new covenant of the gospel,
that they might no longer live in the oldness of the letter, but in the newness
of the spirit.” (Letters, 75, 4) Pope Pius XII, in the encyclical "Mystici
corporis" (1943) states: By the death of our Redeemer, the New Testament took
the place of the Old Law which had been abolished; then the Law of Christ
together with its mysteries, enactments, institutions, and sacred rites was
ratified for the whole world in the blood of Jesus Christ. For, while our
Divine Savior was preaching in a restricted area - He was not sent but to the
sheep that were lost of the House of Israel - the Law and the Gospel were
together in force; but on the gibbet of His death Jesus made void the Law with
its decrees fastened the handwriting of the Old Testament to the Cross,
establishing the New Testament in His blood shed for the whole human race.
“To such an extent, then,” says St. Leo the Great, speaking of the Cross of
our Lord, “was there effected a transfer from the Law to the Gospel, from the
Synagogue to the Church, from the many sacrifices to one Victim, that, as Our
Lord expired, that mystical veil which shut off the innermost part of the
temple and its sacred secret was rent violently from top to bottom.”
(paragraph 29) In "Lumen Gentium" (1964), the Church stated that God “chose
the race of Israel as a people” and “set up a covenant” with them,
instructing them and making them holy. However, “all these things . . . were
done by way of preparation and as a figure of that new and perfect covenant”
instituted by and ratified in Christ (no. 9). In "Notes on the Correct Way to
Present the Jews and Judaism" (1985), the Church stated that the “Church and
Judaism cannot then be seen as two parallel ways of salvation and the Church
must witness to Christ as the Redeemer of all.” And in "Dominus Iesus"
(2000), the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith states, “There is only
one salvific economy” (no. 12), and “God has willed that the Church founded
by him be the instrument for the salvation of all humanity. . . . The certainty
of the universal salvific will of God does not diminish, but rather increases
the duty and urgency of the proclamation of salvation and of conversion to the
Lord Jesus Christ” (no. 22) While acting as prefect for the Congregation for
the Doctrine of the Faith, "Pope Benedict XVI" wrote: “God, according to the
Prophet, will replace the broken Sinai covenant with a New Covenant that cannot
be broken . . . . The conditional covenant, which depended on man’s faithful
observance of the Law, is replaced by the unconditional covenant in which God
binds himself irrevocably.” Protestant. Protestant views on supersessionism
revolve around their understanding of the relationship between the various
covenants of the Bible, particularly the relationship between the covenants of
the Old Testament and the New Covenant. The most prominent Protestant views on
this relationship are called Law and Gospel, Covenant theology, New Covenant
Theology, and Dispensationalism. These views are not restricted to a single
denomination. Law and Gospel. The approach among many early Protestants that
predominates today in Lutheran churches and some Reformed churches emphasizes
the discontinuity between the old covenant and the new and sees the Mosaic Law
primarily as negative. Most of the early advocates of this approach, such as
Martin Luther (1483–1546), rejected the Jews as having a continuing positive
relationship with God. Covenant theology. Covenant theology, while sometimes
mixed with Law and Gospel, is a framework for thinking about biblical ideas
typical of (but not exclusive to) the Reformed churches (see also Roman
Catholic covenantal theology). The Protestant Reformer John Calvin is typically
credited with establishing the basic principles of covenant theology in his
"Institutes of the Christian Religion" (2:9–11). The three covenants Calvin
saw implied by the Bible are the Covenant of Redemption, the Covenant of Works
and the Covenant of Grace. In the view of Calvin, and those who follow him, the
first is a covenant between God the Father and God the Son and states that the
Son would be the ruler of a people he would personally redeem. Covenant
Theology deliberately views the rescue of humanity as part of God's plan, prior
even to creating the world. This idea is as objectionable to some Christians,
as it is loved by others, its most common name being "predestination". A key
New Testament passage is , which also deals with the place of Israel. The
covenants of works and grace, on the other hand, refer to God's covenants with
human beings, not the Godhead per se, and these occur later in time, during
human history. Briefly stated, both covenants are conceived of as "gifts" from
God to humankind. They differ in that the covenant of works is a gift received
by obedience — God promises good to those who do good. The covenant of grace,
however, is an unconditional gift that can be received only by faith — God
promises good even to those who have done bad. Dispensationalism. The early
development of Dispensationalism is generally attributed to John Nelson Darby
(1800–1882), initially of the Plymouth Brethren denomination, but later the
founder of the Exclusive Brethren. Although Darby's ideas started in the United
Kingdom, they became much more widespread in the United States, perhaps due to
population, and the non-exclusive nature of the American denominations that
valued the teaching. The notes of the Scofield Reference Bible (1909 revised
1917) are frequently considered to have been particularly influential in
establishing the popularity of Dispensationalism. A natural misunderstanding of
Dispensationalism sees the covenant of Sinai (dispensation #5) to have been
replaced by the gospel (dispensation #6). However, Dispensationalists believe
that ethnic Israel, distinct from the Church, and on the basis of the Sinai
covenant, are featured in New Testament promises, which they interpret as
referring to a future time associated with the Millennium of Revelation 20
(dispensation #7). In Dispensational thought, although the time from Jesus'
resurrection until his return (or the advent of the Millennium) is dominated by
the proclamation of the gospel, the Sinai covenant is neither terminated nor
replaced, rather it is "quiescent" awaiting a fulfillment at the Millennium
(click to expand diagram). This time of Jewish restoration has an especially
prominent place within Dispensationalism. Dispensationalists do not base this
view on the New Testament alone, but consider that certain Old Testament
prophecies concerning Israel will also be fulfilled in a return to the Promised
Land, and ultimately a large-scale conversion of the Jews to Christianity.
Those who hold this view often note that the Bible does not promise that every
individual Jew will be saved, but that the nation (or family) as a whole will
be saved. It will still be up to individuals to accept Jesus as Messiah, but
the nation as a whole will be blessed, because many (or most) will do so. A
distinctive feature of the dispensationalist scheme is that it conceives of the
Church age as primarily an arrangement through which God gathers in the
Gentiles, a parenthesis in his dealing with the Jews, instituted due to many
1st century Jews having rejected the Messiah at his first coming. In the
dispensationalist view, the Jewish restoration and acceptance of the Messiah
will be as a people distinct from the Christian Church. Some believe the Church
will have actually ceased to exist on the earth at this time, having been
removed by a miracle called the "Rapture". Most dispensationalists believe that
the 144,000 from the tribes of Israel, spoken of in the Book of Revelation, are
either the literal or symbolic number of ethnic Jews who will be followers of
the Messiah during a Great Tribulation. In the meantime, dispensationalists
typically hold that the promise "I will bless those who bless you, and him who
dishonors you I will curse" (Genesis 12:3) has abiding reference to the Jewish
people; and some apply this to the modern, political state of Israel. Such
ideas are often used in support of Christian Zionism. With regard to
supersessionism, then, Dispensationalism's key contribution to the history of
Christian interpretation is this view that the fulfillment of God's covenant
with Israel is "postponed" until the end of history. Traditional Christian
interpretation, on the other hand, has seen the fulfillment of the covenant as
"progressive" — starting with the apostles and early Jewish Christians and
continuing throughout subsequent history in Messianic Judaism, until finally
"complete" at the return of the Messiah. In either view, individual Jews are
anticipated to accept Jesus as Messiah, and not by becoming Gentile Christians
first, but directly on the basis of the original promises to ethnic Israel.
Neither of these interpretations is, as such, viewing the promises to Israel as
either "terminated" or "replaced". New Covenant Theology. By comparison New
Covenant Theology (or NCT) is a recently expressed Christian theological system
on this issue that incorporates aspects of Dispensationalism and Covenant
theology. New Covenant Theology claims that all Old Covenant laws have been
cancelled or abrogated in favor of the Law of Christ or New Covenant law. This
can be summarized as the ethical expectation found in the New Testament. Thus
NCT don't accept supersessionism per se, as they see the Old Covenant itself as
abrogated. Dispensationalism is similar to NCT, but New Covenant Theology may
be still evolving a full system to better distinguish itself from
Dispensationalism. Olive Tree Theology. "Olive Tree theology" is a view derived
from , put forward by David H. Stern, a Messianic Jewish theologian, which
maintains that the Messianic Congregation (or Church) and Israel are part of
same spiritual entity which is represented as an olive tree, having one common
root stock with original growth and grafted-in branches from "wild stock"
(gentiles) and "broken branches" (Jewish people who come to faith in Jesus).
Gentiles are grafted into the promises and covenants made to Israel and
together they are now treated as "one people of God" and thus there is no real
"replacement" happening. It is different from both dispensationalism and
supersessionism, which both make a distinction between Israel and the Church.
Other views. Eastern Orthodox and Pentecostal groups, although quite different,
have in common a focus on the work of the Holy Spirit in defining church
membership. It has long been noted by theologians that pursuit of a dynamic,
experiential and personal experience of faith has been typical of eastern
theology, where legal and logical formulations have dominated in the Western
churches. When articulated in formal ways, Orthodox theology looks very similar
to Catholicism; Pentecostalism, on the other hand, is often associated with
Dispensationalism. However, in practice, the focus on personal spirituality
rather than intellectual assent, means detailed analysis of covenantal issues
is considerably less a feature of these traditions. A few groups assert that
their group is literally descended from Abraham, and has a better claim to
being considered the chosen people than the Jewish people. In adopting the
identity of "the true Israel," they necessarily see the Jewish people as false
Israel (see, for example, Anglo-Israelism, Christian Identity and Black Hebrew
Israelite). Dual-covenant theology is a Liberal Christian view that holds that
Jews may simply keep the Law of Moses, because of the "everlasting covenant" ()
between Abraham and God expressed in the Hebrew Bible, whereas gentiles (those
not Jews or Jewish proselytes) must convert to Christianity or alternatively
accept the Seven Laws of Noah. Jewish view. From a Jewish perspective, however,
the Torah was given to the Jewish people as an eternal covenant (for example ,
) and will never be replaced or added to (for example , ), and hence Judaism
rejects supersessionism as contrary to the Hebrew Bible at best (see also
Antinomianism) and antisemitic at worst. For Judaism and other critics,
supersessionism is a theology of replacement, which substitutes the Christian
church, consisting of Christians, for the Jewish and B'nei Noah people. Modern
Jews are offended by the traditional Christian belief in supersessionism, and
some historians see supersessionism as one source of anti-semitism in western
culture.
