Surat Shabd Yoga Surat Shabd Yoga or Surat Shabda Yoga is a form of spiritual
practice that is followed in the Sant Mat and many other related spiritual
traditions. Surat means "attention," or "face," which is the outward expression
of the soul, "shabd" means "word" and "yoga" means "union." The term "word"
means the “Sound Current,” the “Audible Life Stream” or the “Essence
of the Absolute Supreme Being,” that is, the dynamic force of creative energy
that was sent out, as sound vibration, from the Supreme Being into the abyss of
space at the dawn of the universe's manifestation, and that is being sent
forth, through the ages, framing all things that constitute and inhabit the
universe. The etymology of "Surat Shabda Yoga" presents its purpose: the "Union
of the Soul with the Essence of the Absolute Supreme Being." Other expressions
for Surat Shabda Yoga include Sehaj Yoga (an easy path leading to Sehaj or
equipoise) The Path of Light and Sound, The Path of the Sants, The Journey of
Soul, and The Yoga of the Sound Current. __TOC__ Basic principles. Sehaj word
states as Guru of love, Guru of Trust, Guru of War, Guru of Time, Guru of
Power. The stated purpose of Surat Shabda Yoga is to realize the individual's
"True Self" (Self-Realization), "True Essence" (Spirit-Realization) and "True
Divinity" (God-Realization) while living in the human physical body. This
"Journey of Soul" involves reuniting in stages with what is called the "Essence
of the Absolute Supreme Being", the Shabd. Attaining self-realization and above
also results in "jivan" "moksha/mukti", liberation/release from samsara, the
cycle of karma and reincarnation while in the physical body. Initiation by an
"Outer Living" Satguru (Sat - true, Guru - teacher) is required, and involves
reactivating the Shabd and stationing the Inner Shabda Master (the Radiant Form
of the Master) at the third eye (tisra til) chakra. The spiritual exercises
(sadhanas) include simran (repetition, particularly silent repetition of a
mantra given at initiation), dhyan (concentration, viewing, or contemplation,
particularly on the Inner Master), and bhajan (listening to the inner sounds of
the Shabda or the Shabda Master). Surat Shabd Yoga cosmology depicts the whole
of creation (the macrocosm) as being emanated and arranged in a spiritually
differentiated hierarchy, often referred to as anda (eggs), regions, or planes.
Typically, eight spiritual levels are described above the physical plane,
although names and subdivisions within these levels will vary to some extent by
movement and Master. In this arrangement, Self-Realization is attained in the
third heaven level, Daswan Dwar, Spirit-Realization is attained in the fourth
heaven level, Bhanwar Gupha, and God-Realization is attained in the fifth
heaven level, Sach Kand (Sat Lok). (One version of the creation from a Surat
Shabda Yoga perspective is depicted at the Sant Ajaib Singh Ji Memorial Site ).
All planes below the purely spiritual regions are subject to cycles of creation
and dissolution (pralya) or great dissolution (maha pralya). This cosmology
presents the constitution of the initiate (the microcosm) as an exact replica
of the macrocosm. Consequently, the microcosm consists of a number of bodies,
each one suited to interact with its corresponding plane or region in the
macrocosm. These bodies developed over the yugas through involution (emanating
from higher planes to lower planes) and evolution (returning from lower planes
to higher planes), including by karma and reincarnation in various states of
consciousness. The Path of Light and Sound involves the initiate traveling the
microcosm dharmicly in consciousness (soul) with the guidance and protection of
the Outer Living Master in the physical world and the Inner Shabd Master in the
higher worlds until the regions of pure spirituality are reached and God-
Realization is attained. Movements and masters. Adherents believe Surat Shabda
Yoga has been expressed through the movements of many different masters.
However, because a basic principle of Surat Shabd Yoga's tradition is the
requirement for an outer Living Master to initiate followers onto the Path,
those movements whose historical Satgurus have died and their successors do not
purport themselves to be Surat Shabd Yoga Satgurus, usually are not considered
currently to be Surat Shabd Yoga movements, either by their own leaders or by
movements with current Living Masters. The Radhasoami movement of Surat Shabda
Yoga was established by Shiv Dayal Singh (1818–1878) in 1861 and named
"Radhasoami Satsang" circa 1866. Soamiji Maharaj, as he was known, presided
over the satsang meetings for seventeen years at Panni Gali and Soami Bagh in
Agra, India, until he died on June 15, 1878. Accounts of his guru and
successors vary, although he did give verbal instructions on his last day as to
how his followers should be cared for. According to Radha Soami Satsang Beas,
his guru was Tulsi Sahib of Hathras. According to Soami Bagh and Dayal Bagh
successors, Tulsi Sahib was a contemporary guru of the same teachings, but
being a natural born Satguru, Shiv Dayal Singh himself had no guru. After his
death, six immediate successors carried on Shiv Dayal Singh’s teachings,
including Huzur Maharaj Rai Salig Ram of Peepal Mandi, Agra, and Babaji Maharaj
Jaimal Singh of Dera Baba Jaimal Singh the present day headquarters of (RSSB),
Radha Soami Satsang Beas. More information on living masters related to Shiv
Dayal Singh's lineage can be found in the Contemporary Sant Mat movement
article. The more recently promulgated Quan Yin Method of meditation espoused
via the spiritual teachings of Supreme Master Ching Hai has notable
similarities to Surat Shabd Yoga. Eckankar, an American movement, has many
links to Surat Shabd Yoga, including terminology, although its American founder
Paul Twitchell disassociated himself from his former teacher Kirpal Singh. The
Movement of Spiritual Inner Awareness, also founded in America in 1971 by John-
Roger and now with students in 32 countries, also teaches a similar form of
active meditation, called "spiritual exercises", using the Sound Current and
ancient Sanskrit tones in order to traverse and return back to the higher
realms of Spirit and into God. MasterPath is another contemporary American
movement of Surat Shabda Yoga. Gary Olsen, the current Living Master (of this
branch), contends that several historical figures are Sat Gurus of Surat Shabda
Yoga as representatives for the eternal Inner Shabda Master. A few of these
Living Masters of their times include Lao Tsu, Jesus, Pythagoras, Socrates,
Kabir, the Sufi Masters and mystic poets Hafez and Rumi, the Ten Sikh Gurus
beginning with Guru Nanak, Tulsi Sahib, and the Radhasoami/Radha Soami and
offshoot Masters, including Shiv Dayal Singh, Baba Sawan Singh, Baba Faqir
Chand and Sant Kirpal Singh. The ten Sikh Satgurus discuss the inner sound and
inner light a lot in their scriptures. The first Sikh Satguru was Guru Nanak,
but his master (guru) was Waheguru. The above masters teach these 2 techniques.
There is a master that teaches 4 techniques that include these 2 of inner light
and inner music. He teaches inner light (sight), inner music (hearing),
primordial vibration (sense of touch) and nectar (taste and smell). These
correspond to the 5 senses and this is how you turn them inward to experience
what is inside of you. See Vishnu with his 4 arms and they correspond to these.
One hand is holding a circle (chakra) of light. Another is holding a conch
shell for the inner sound (hold it to your ear and you hear something). Another
hand is holding a lotus flower to refer to nectar and the 4th hand is holding a
metal club (mace) for the inner vibration. If you hit something with it, it
vibrates like a tuning fork. Some people refer to this inner energy as the
soul. Variations in movements. Although all movements of Surat Shabd Yoga will
have common elements related to the basic principles, notable variations also
exist. For example, before he left his physical body, the tenth Sikh Guru, Guru
Gobind Singh, nominated the Guru Granth Sahib (a sacred text) as the next and
perpetual Guru of the Sikhs. Other movements continue to require a Living
Master to initiate students into the Shabda. Movements also will vary in the
names used to describe the Absolute Supreme Being (God), including Anami Purush
(nameless power) and Radha Soami (lord of the soul); the presiding deities and
divisions of the macrocosm; the number of outer initiations; the words given as
mantras; and the initiation vows or the prerequisites that must be agreed to
before being accepted as an initiate.
