Sūtra Sūtra (, Pāli: "sutta", Ardhamagadhi: "sūya") is an aphorism (or
line, rule, formula) or a collection of such aphorisms in the form of a manual
or, more broadly, a text in Hinduism or Buddhism. Literally it means a thread
or line that holds things together and is derived from the verbal root "siv-",
meaning "to sew" (these words, including Latin ' and English ', all ultimately
deriving from PIE *"siH-/syuH-" 'to sew'), as does the medical term "suture."
The word "sutra" was very likely meant to apply quite literally to these texts,
as they were written down in books of palm leaves sewn together with thread.
This distinguishes them from the older sacred Vedas, which until recently were
only memorised, never committed to paper. In ancient Indian literature, "sutra"
denotes a distinct type of literary composition, based on short aphoristic
statements, generally using various technical terms. This literary form was
designed for concision, as the texts were intended to be memorized by students
in some of the formal methods of scriptural and scientific study (Sanskrit: ').
Since each line is highly condensed, another literary form arose in which
commentaries (Sanskrit: ') on the "sutras" were added, to clarify and explain
them. In Brahmin lineage, each family is supposed to have one Gotra, and one
Sutra, meaning that a certain Veda (Śruti) is treasured by this family in way
of learning by heart. "alpākṣaraṃ asandigdhaṃ sāravad
viśvatomukhamastobhaṃ anavadyaṃ ca sūtram sūtravido viduḥ" Of minimal
syllabary, unambiguous, pithy, comprehensive, continuous, and without flaw: who
knows the sūtra knows it to be thus. In Jainism, "sūtra" refers to canonical
sermons of the Mahavira contained in the Jain Agamas, and to some later (post-
canonical) normative texts. In Buddhism, the "sūtra" refers mostly to
canonical scriptures, many of which are regarded as records of the oral
teachings of Gautama Buddha. In Chinese, these are known as 經 (pinyin:
"jīng"). These teachings are assembled in part of the "Tripitaka" which is
called "Sutra Pitaka". There are also some Buddhist texts, such as the Platform
Sutra, that are called sūtras despite being attributed to much later authors.
In the book "Modern Buddhism", Geshe Kelsang Gyatso defines sūtra as "The
teachings of Buddha that are open to everyone to practice without the need for
empowerment. These include Buddha's teachings of the three turnings of the
dharma wheel. Some scholars consider that the Buddhist use of "sūtra" is a
mis-Sanskritization of Prakrit or Pali "sutta", and that the latter represented
Sanskrit "sūkta", "well spoken", "good news" (as the Buddha himself refers to
his speech in his first sermon; compare the original meaning of "Gospel"),
which would also resolve as "sutta" in Pali. The early Buddhist sutras do not
present the aphoristic, nearly cryptic nature of the Hindu sutras, even though
they also have been designed for mnemonic purposes in an oral tradition. On the
contrary, they are most often lengthy, with many repetitions which serve the
mnemonic purpose of the audience. They share the character of sermons of "good
news" with the Jaina sūtras, whose original name of "sūya" (in Ardhamagadhi
language) can derive from Sanskrit "sūkta", but hardly from "sūtra". The Pali
form of the word, sutta is used exclusively to refer to the scriptures of the
early Pali Canon, the only texts recognized by Theravada Buddhism as canonical.
