Synagogue A synagogue (from Greek: transliterated "synagogē", meaning
"assembly") is a Jewish or Samaritan house of prayer. Synagogues have a large
hall for prayer (the main sanctuary) with an Ark holding Torah scrolls, and can
also have smaller rooms for study and sometimes a social hall for occasions as
well as offices for bookkeeping. Some have a separate room for Torah study,
called the "beit midrash (Sfard) "beis midrash (Ashkenaz)"— ("House of
Study"). Synagogues are consecrated spaces intended for the purpose of prayer;
however, a synagogue is not necessary for worship. Communal Jewish worship can
be carried out wherever ten Jews (a "minyan") assemble. Worship can also be
carried out alone or with fewer than ten people assembled together. However,
there are certain prayers that are communal prayers and therefore can be
recited only by a minyan. Except in Reform Judaism, a synagogue is not viewed
as replacing the long-since destroyed Temple in Jerusalem. Israelis use the
Hebrew term "bet knesset" (assembly house). Jews of Ashkenazi descent have
traditionally used the Yiddish term "shul" (cognate with the German "Schule",
school) in everyday speech. Spanish and Portuguese Jews call the synagogue an
"esnoga". Persian Jews and Karaite Jews use the term "kenesa", which is derived
from Aramaic, and some Arabic-speaking Jews use "knis". Some Reform and
Conservative Jews use "temple". The Greek word "synagogue" is a good all-around
term, used in English (and German and French), to cover the preceding
possibilities. Synagogues often take on a broader role in modern Jewish
communities and may include additional facilities such as a catering hall,
kosher kitchen, religious school, library, day care center and a smaller chapel
for daily services. Etymology and translations. The use of the Greek term
"synagogue" originates in the Septuagint where it sometimes translates the
Hebrew word for assembly, "kahal". In modern Hebrew a synagogue is called
either a "beyt knesset", meaning "house of assembly"; or "beyt t'fila" (also
written as "bet tepilla" ), meaning "house of prayer", in Yiddish "shul", from
the German for "school," and in Ladino "esnoga". In the Hebrew term "bet
tepilla" Beth means "house" and tepilla (תפילה) means "prayer". "Beth
Tepilla" is derived from the cognate verb, "hitpallel" (פּליל) which is
also spelled as pa^li^yl (pronounced: paleel) which implies "estimate, judge,
render a verdict" thus "hitpallel" means "to pray" or "to seek a judgment for
oneself" or "to plead". Here the underlying meaning of "tepilla" or "prayer" is
a conception of petitionary prayer that has a sense of judgment or a "plea" in
the court of judgment. This reduces the word root to *P*L*L as "intervene,
interpose" and the act of intervention is an act of *P'LiLah*. (Note: the first
two letters of the word "plea" are also PL). The Hebrew cognate word
"hitpallel" gives a rendering to Beth Tepilla or synagogue as a "house of
prayer" or as a "house to plead". Origins. There is a wide variety of
speculative theories about the origins of the synagogue (in the sense of
purpose-built spaces for worship, or rooms originally constructed for some
other purpose but reserved for formal, communal prayer), some of which date the
origins as early as the eighth century BCE or the time of the Babylonian
captivity (sixth century BCE). The earliest archeological remains of a
synagogue building on the island of Delos in the Aegean indicate a late second-
century or possibly mid-first century BCE date of construction, while earlier
inscriptions and papyri have been discovered in Egypt, commencing with the
third century BCE. A number of very early Palestinian synagogues date from the
1st-century CE. A synagogue dating from between 75 and 50 BCE has been
uncovered at a Hasmonean-era winter palace near Jericho. More than a dozen
Second Temple era synagogues have been identified by archaeologists. Although
synagogues existed a long time before the destruction of the Second Temple in
70 CE, communal worship during the time the Temple still stood centered around
the "korbanot" ("sacrificial offerings") brought by the "kohanim" ("priests")
in the Holy Temple. The all-day Yom Kippur service, in fact, was an event in
which the congregation both observed the movements of the "kohen gadol" ("the
high priest") as he offered the day's sacrifices and prayed for his success. At
the end of the Second Temple era, Rabbi Yohanan ben Zakkai, promulgated the
idea of creating individual houses of worship in whatever locale Jews found
themselves. This contributed to the continuity of the Jewish people by
maintaining a unique identity and a portable way of worship despite the
destruction of the Temple, according to many historians. Architectural design.
Although there are some standard laws which govern the layout of a synagogue,
there is no set architectural design and therefore exteriors and interiors of
synagogues vary greatly. Historically, synagogues were built in the prevailing
architectural style of their time and place. Thus, the synagogue in Kaifeng,
China looked very like Chinese temples of that region and era, with its outer
wall and open garden in which several buildings were arranged. The styles of
the earliest synagogues resembled the temples of other sects of the eastern
Roman Empire. The surviving synagogues of medieval Spain are embellished with
mudéjar plasterwork. The surviving medieval synagogues in Budapest and Prague
are typical Gothic structures. The emancipation of Jews in European countries
not only enabled Jews to enter fields of enterprise from which they were
formerly barred, but gave them the right to build synagogues without needing
special permissions, so synagogue architecture blossomed. Large Jewish
communities wished to show not only their wealth but also their newly acquired
status as citizens by constructing magnificent synagogues. These were built
across Europe and in the United States in all of the historicist or revival
styles then in fashion. Thus there were Neoclassical, Neo-Byzantine, Romanesque
Revival Moorish Revival, Gothic Revival, and Greek Revival. There are Egyptian
Revival synagogues and even one Mayan Revival synagogue. In the 19th century
and early 20th century heyday of historicist architecture, however, most
historicist synagogues, even the most magnificent ones, did not attempt a pure
style, or even any particular style, and are best described as eclectic. In the
post World War II era, synagogue architecture abandoned historicist styles for
modernism. Interior elements. All synagogues contain a "bimah" also written as
"bema" , a table from which the Torah is read, and a desk for the prayer
leader. The name and use for 'bema' is traced back to Ezra's reading of the
Torah "on a wooden pulpit" (Neh 8:4-5) The Torah ark, (Hebrew: "Aron
Kodesh"—ארון קודש) (called the "heikhal"—היכל or "by Sephardim)
is a cabinet in which the Torah scrolls are kept. The ark in a synagogue is
positioned in almost always such a way that those who face it, face towards
Jerusalem. Thus, sanctuary seating plans in the Western world generally face
east, while those east of Israel face west. Sanctuaries in Israel face towards
Jerusalem. Occasionally synagogues face other directions for structural
reasons; in such cases, some individuals might turn to face Jerusalem when
standing for prayers, but the congregation as a whole does not. The ark is
reminiscent of the Ark of the Covenant which contained the tablets with Ten
Commandments. This is the holiest spot in a synagogue, equivalent to the Holy
of Holies. The ark is often closed with an ornate curtain, the "" , also
written as "Paroket" or "Parokta" (from Aramaic) meaning "veil" or "Curtain" or
'screen' which hangs outside or inside the ark doors. A large, raised, reader's
platform called the ' () by Ashkenazim and ' by Sephardim, where the Torah
scroll is placed to be read. Is a feature of all synagogues. In Sephardi
synagogues it is also used as the prayer leader's reading desk. Other
traditional features include a continually lit lamp or lantern, usually
electric in contemporary synagogues, called the "" (), the "Eternal Light",
used as a reminder of the western lamp of the menorah of the Temple in
Jerusalem, which remained miraculously lit always. Many have an elaborate chair
named for the prophet Elijah and only sat upon during the ceremony of Brit
milah. Many synagogues have a large seven-branched candelabrum commemorating
the full Menorah. Most contemporary synagogues also feature a lectern for the
rabbi. A synagogue may be decorated with artwork, but in the Rabbinic and
Orthodox tradition, three-dimensional sculptures and depictions of the human
body are not allowed, as these are considered akin to idolatry. Until the 19th
century, an Ashkenazi synagogue, all seats most often faced the 'Torah Ark. In
a Sephardi synagogue, seats were usually arranged around the perimeter of the
sanctuary, but when the worshippers stood up to pray, everyone faced the Ark.
In Ashkenazi synagogues The Torah was read on a reader's table located in the
center of the room, while the leader of the prayer service, the "", stood at
his own lectern or table, facing the Ark. In Sephardic synagogues, the table
for reading the Torah was commonly placed at the opposite side of the room from
the Torah Ark, leaving the center of the floor empty for the use of a
ceremonial procession carrying the Torah between the Ark and the reading table.
Denominational differences. Orthodox synagogues feature a partition () dividing
the men's and women's seating areas, or a separate women's section located on a
balcony. The German Reform movement which arose in the early 19th century made
many changes to the traditional look of the synagogue, keeping with its desire
to simultaneously stay Jewish yet be accepted by the host culture. The first
Reform synagogue, which opened in Hamburg in 1811, introduced changes that made
the synagogue look more like a church. These included an organ to accompany the
prayers (even on Shabbat, when musical instruments are proscribed by halakha),
a choir to accompany the "Hazzan", and vestments for the synagogue rabbi to
wear. In following decades, the central reader's table, the bimah, was moved to
the front of the Reform sanctuary—previously unheard-of in Orthodox
synagogues. The rabbi now delivered his sermon from the front, much as the
Christian ministers delivered their sermons in a church. The synagogue was
renamed a "temple", to emphasize that the movement no longer looked forward to
the rebuilding of the Temple in Jerusalem. Synagogue offshoots. Since Orthodox
Jews prefer to collect a minyan (a quorum of ten) rather than pray alone, they
commonly assemble at pre-arranged times in offices, living rooms, or other
spaces when these are more convenient than formal synagogue buildings. A room
or building that is used this way can become a dedicated small synagogue or
prayer room. Among Ashkenazi Jews they are traditionally called ' (, pl. ' or
"", Yiddish for "little house"), and are found in Orthodox communities
worldwide. Another type of communal prayer group, favored by some contemporary
Jews, is the "Chavurah" (חבורה, pl. "chavurot", חבורות), or prayer
fellowship. These groups meet at a regular place and time, usually in a private
home. In antiquity, the Pharisees lived near each other in "chavurot" and dined
together to ensure that none of the food was unfit for consumption. Great
synagogues. During the 19th and early 20th century, it was fairly common for
Jewish communities, particularly in Europe, to construct very large, showpiece
synagogues. These edifices were intended not simply to accommodate worshipers,
but to serve as emblems of Jewish participation in modern society. For this
purpose, they were built to be not merely large, but architecturally
impressive. Even small cities had elaborate synagogues of this type, albeit
smaller than the synagogues of Vienna and New York. They are often designated
as "The Great Synagogue of...", or, in Russia, "The Choral Synagogue." These
notable synagogues include; the Portuguese Synagogue (Amsterdam), the Great
Synagogue of Rome, the New Synagogue (Berlin), the Leopoldstädter Tempel, the
Grand Choral Synagogue (St. Petersburg), the Great Synagogue (Sydney), the
Moscow Choral Synagogue, the Great Synagogue of Florence, the Great Synagogue,
Plzeň, the Great Synagogue (Warsaw), the Košice Orthodox Synagogue, the Novi
Sad Synagogue, the Szeged Synagogue, the Sofia Synagogue and the Great
Synagogue of Oran.
