Temple A temple (from the Latin word ) is a structure reserved for religious or
spiritual activities, such as prayer and sacrifice, or analogous rites. A
templum constituted a sacred precinct as defined by a priest, or augur. It has
the same root as the word "template," a plan in preparation of the building
that was marked out on the ground by the augur. Templa also became associated
with the dwelling places of a god or gods. Despite the specific set of meanings
associated with the religion of the ancient Rome, the word has now become quite
widely used to describe a house of worship for any number of religions and is
even used for time periods prior to the Romans. Oldest temple. "Göbekli Tepe",
located in southern Turkey, is the oldest-known, existing temple in the world.
It was built approximately 11,000 years ago. Mesopotamian temples. The temple
of Mesopotamia derived from the cult of gods and deities in Mesopotamian
religion. It spanned several civilizations; from Sumerian, Akkadian, Assyrian,
and Babylonian. The most common temple architecture of Mesopotamia is the
structure of sun-baked bricks called Ziggurat, having the form of a terraced
step pyramid with flat upper terrace where shrine or temple stood Egyptian
temples. Ancient Egyptian temples were meant as places for the gods to reside
on earth. Indeed, the term the Egyptians most commonly used to describe the
temple building, "ḥwt-nṯr", means "mansion (or enclosure) of a god". A
god's presence in the temple linked the human and divine realms and allowed
humans to interact with the god through ritual. These rituals, it was believed,
sustained the god and allowed it to continue to play its proper role in nature.
They were therefore a key part of the maintenance of "maat", the ideal order of
nature and of human society in Egyptian belief. Maintaining "maat" was the
entire purpose of Egyptian religion, and thus it was the purpose of a temple as
well. Ancient Egyptian temples were also of economic significance to Egyptian
society. The temples stored and redistributed grain and came to own large
portions of the nation's arable land (some estimate as much as 33% by the New
Kingdom period). Greco-Roman temples. Though today we call most Greek religious
buildings "temples," the ancient pagans would have referred to a temenos, or
sacred precinct. Its sacredness, often connected with a holy grove, was more
important than the building itself, as it contained the open air altar on which
the sacrifices were made. The building which housed the cult statue in its naos
was originally a rather simple structure, but by the middle of the 6th century
BCE had become increasingly elaborate. Greek temple architecture had a profound
influence on ancient architectural traditions. The rituals that located and
sited the temple were performed by an augur through the observation of the
flight of birds or other natural phenomenon. Roman temples usually faced east
or toward the rising sun, but the specifics of the orientation are often not
known today; there are also notable exceptions, such as the Pantheon which
faces north. In ancient Rome only the native deities of Roman mythology had a
"templum"; any equivalent structure for a foreign deity was called a "fanum".
Pagan temples. The Romans usually referred to a holy place of a pagan religion
as "fanum"; in some cases this referred to a sacred grove, in others to a
temple. Medieval Latin writers also used the word "templum". In some cases it
is hard to determine whether it was a building or an outdoor shrine. For temple
buildings of Germanic paganism, the Old Norse term "hof" is often used.
Zoroastrian temples. Zoroastrian temples may also be called the "darb-e meh"
and "Atashkadeh". A fire temple in Zoroastrianism is the place of worship for
Zoroastrians. Zoroastrians revere fire in any form. In the Zoroastrian
religion, fire (Atar), together with clean water (Aban), are agents of ritual
purity. Clean, white "ash for the purification ceremonies is regarded as the
basis of ritual life," which, "are essentially the rites proper to the tending
of a domestic fire, for the temple fire is that of the hearth fire raised to a
new solemnity. Sikh temples. A Sikh temple or shrine is called a Gurudwara,
that is, the House of God, the House of the Guru, where the Guru dwells. Its
most essential element also known as Shurk is the presence of the Guru. The
temples have entrance from all sides, signifying that they are open to all
without any distinction whatsoever. Hindu temples. These may also be called by
other names, including "mandir" or "mandira", "ambalam", "kavu", "koil" or
"kovil", "déul", "devasthana" and "devalaya", depending on the region in the
Indian subcontinent and its local language. Hindu temples are large and
magnificent with a rich history. Some date as far back as the Bronze Age and
later the Indus Valley Civilization. In the present day magnificent Hindu
temples have been built in various countries of the world including India,
Nepal, Great Britain, the United States, Australia, South Africa and Canada.
Buddhist temples. They include the structures called stupa, wat and pagoda in
different regions and languages. Temples in Buddhism represent the pure land or
pure environment of a Buddha. Traditional Buddhist temples are designed to
inspire inner and outer peace. Jain temples. A Jain temple is the place of
worship for Jains, the followers of Jainism. Some famous Jain temples are
Shikharji, Palitana Jain Temples, Ranakpur Jain Temple, Shravan Belgola,
Dilwara Temples and Lal Mandir. Jain temples are built with various
architectural designs. Jain temples in North India are completely different
from the Jain temples in South India, which in turn are quite different from
Jain temples in West India. Additionally, a Manastambha (meaning column of
honor) is a pillar that is often constructed in front of Jain temples. Jewish
synagogues and temples. In Judaism, the ancient Hebrew texts refer not to
temples, the word having not existed yet, but to a "sanctuary", "palace" or
"hall". Each of the two ancient temples in Jerusalem was called "Beit
Hamikdash", which translates literally as "the Holy House." The Temple Mount in
Jerusalem is the site where the First Temple of Solomon and the Second Temple
were built. At the center of the structure was the Holy of Holies where only
the high priest could enter. The Temple Mount is now the site of the Islamic
shrine, the Dome of the Rock (c. 690). The Greek word "synagogue" came into use
to describe Jewish places of worship during Hellenistic times and it, along
with the Yiddish term "shul", and the original Hebrew term "Bet Knesset"
("House of meeting") are the terms in most universal usage. From the beginning
of the nineteenth century, the word "temple" began to be used for Jewish houses
of worship, almost exclusively by the followers of Reform Judaism, first in
Germany, then in other countries, especially in the United States, as in Temple
Beth-El. Orthodox Judaism considers this usage inappropriate, as it does not
consider synagogues a replacement for the Temple in Jerusalem (there were local
places of worship contemporaneous with the existence of the Temple, e.g. the
one that can be seen at Masada). Christian temples. The word "temple" has
traditionally been rarely used in the Western Christian tradition. The
principal words typically used to distinguish houses of worship in Western
Christian architecture are "basilica, cathedral" and "church". The Catholic
Church has used the word temple in reference of a place of worship on rare
occasions. An example is the Roman Catholic Sagrada Familia Temple in
Barcelona, Spain and the Roman Catholic Basilique du Sacré-Cœur Temple in
Paris, France. The word "temple", however, is used frequently in the tradition
of Eastern Christianity and particularly the Eastern Orthodox Church, where the
principal words used for houses of worship are "temple" and "church". The use
of the word "temple" comes from the need to distinguish "a building of the
church" vs. "the church seen as the Body of Christ". In the Russian language
(similar to other Slavic languages) while the general-purpose word for "church"
is "tserkov", the term "khram" (Храм), "temple", is used to refer to the
church building as a temple of God ("Khram Bozhy"). The words "church" and
"temple", in this case are interchangeable; however, the term "church" () is
far more common. The term "temple" () is also commonly applied to larger
churches. Some famous churches which are referred to as temples include Hagia
Sophia, Saint Basil's Cathedral, Cathedral of Christ the Saviour, or the Temple
of Saint Sava in Belgrade, Serbia. See also: Orthodox church (building) and
catholicon. Beginning in the late eighteenth century, following the
Enlightenment, some Protestant denominations in France and elsewhere began to
use the word "temple" to distinguish these spaces from Catholic churches.
Evangelical and other Protestant churches make use of a wide variety of terms
to designate their worship spaces, such as church, tabernacle or temple.
Additionally some Breakaway Catholic Churches such as the Mariavite Church in
Poland have chosen to also designate their central church building as a temple,
as in the case of the Temple of Mercy and Charity in Płock. The Iglesia ni
Cristo called their Central House of Worship as Central Temple, the Largest
Ecclesiastical Edifice of Iglesia ni Cristo located at INC Central Complex,
Diliman, Quezon City, Philippines. Temples in the Latter Day Saint movement.
According to Latter Day Saints, in 1832, Joseph Smith, Jr. received a
revelation to restore the practice of temple worship, in a "house of the Lord".
The Kirtland Temple was the first temple of the Latter-day Saint movement and
the only one completed in Smith's lifetime, although the Nauvoo Temple was
partially complete at the time of his death. The schisms stemming from a
succession crisis have led to differing views about the role and use of temples
between various groups with competing succession claims. The Book of Mormon:
Another Testament of Jesus Chirst, which Latter-day Saints believe is a
companion book of scripture with the Bible, refers to temple building in the
ancient Americas by a group of people called the Nephites. Though Book of
Mormon authors are not explicit about the practices in these Nephite temples,
they were patterned "after the manner of the temple of Solomon" () and served
as gathering places for significant religious and political events (e.g. Mosiah
1-6; 3rd Nephi 11-26). Temples of the LDS church. The Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints is a prolific builder of "Latter-day Saint" or "Mormon"
temples. Latter-day Saint temples are reserved for performing and undertaking
only the most holy and sacred of covenants and special of ordinances. They are
distinct from meeting houses and chapels where weekly worship services are
held. The temples are built and kept under strict sacredness and are not to be
defiled. Thus, strict rules apply for entrance, including Church membership and
regular attendance. During the open-house period after its construction and
before the temple is dedicated, the temple is open to the public for tours.
Other Latter Day Saint denominations. Various other sects of the church founded
by Joseph Smith, Jr., initially known as the Church of Christ, also have
temples. Masonic temples. Freemasonry is a fraternal organization with its
origins in the eighteenth century whose membership is held together by a shared
set of moral and metaphysical ideals. Freemasons meet as a Lodge. Lodges meet
in a Masonic Temple, Masonic Center or a Masonic Hall, such as Freemasons'
Hall, London. Some confusion exists as Masons usually refer to a Lodge meeting
as being "in Lodge". Other religions. Though the word "temple" is used broadly,
one should use it with discretion in the context of some religions. For
example, a masjid or "mosque" should not be considered a temple because
"masjid" in Arabic means "the place for kneeling (to God)."
