Temple in Jerusalem The Temple in Jerusalem or Holy Temple (Hebrew: , Modern:
', Tiberian: ', Ashkenazi: "Beis HaMikdosh"; : "Beit al-Quds") was one of a
series of structures which were historically located on the Temple Mount in the
Old City of Jerusalem, the current site of the Dome of the Rock. Historically,
these successive temples stood at this location and functioned as the centre of
ancient Israelite and later Jewish worship. According to classical Jewish
belief, the Temple acted as the figurative "footstool" of God's presence and a
Third Temple will be built there in the future. Construction. The Bible reports
that the First Temple was built in 957 BCE by King Solomon (reigned c. 970-c.
930 BCE). As the sole place of Jewish sacrifice, the Temple replaced the
portable sanctuary constructed in the Sinai Desert under the auspices of Moses,
as well as local sanctuaries, and altars in the hills. This temple was however
sacked a few decades later by Sheshonk I, Pharaoh of Egypt. Although efforts
were made at partial reconstruction, it was only in 835 BCE when Jehoash, King
of Judah in the second year of his reign invested considerable sums in
reconstruction, only to have it stripped again for Sennacherib, King of Assyria
c. 700 BCE. The First Temple was totally destroyed by the Babylonians in 586
BCE when they sacked the city. According to the Book of Ezra, construction of
the Second Temple was authorized by Cyrus the Great and began in 538 BCE, after
the fall of the Babylonian Empire the year before. It was completed 23 years
later, on the third day of Adar, in the sixth year of the reign of Darius the
Great (12 March 515 BCE), dedicated by the Jewish governor Zerubbabel. Despite
the fact that the new temple wasn't as extravagant or imposing as its
predecessor, it still dominated the Jerusalem skyline and remained an important
structure throughout the time of Persian suzerainty. The temple narrowly
avoided being destroyed again in 332 BCE when the Jews refused to acknowledge
the deification of Alexander the Great of Macedonia. Alexander was allegedly
“turned from his anger” at the last minute by astute diplomacy and
flattery. After the death of Alexander on 13 June 323 BCE, and the dismembering
of his empire, the Ptolemies came to rule over Judea and the Temple. Under the
Ptolemies, the Jews were given many civil liberties and lived content under
their rule. However, when the Ptolemaic army was defeated at Panium by
Antiochus III of the Seleucids in 198 BCE, this policy changed. Antiochus
wanted to Hellenize the Jews, attempting to introduce the Greek pantheon into
the temple. A rebellion ensued and was brutally crushed, but no further action
by Antiochus was taken. When Antiochus died in 187 BCE at Luristan, his son
Seleucus IV Philopator succeeded him. However, his policies never took effect
in Judea, since he was assassinated the year after his ascension. Antiochus IV
Epiphanes succeeded his older brother to the Seleucid throne and immediately
adopted his father's previous policy of universal Hellenisation. The Jews
rebelled again and Antiochus, in a rage, retaliated in force. Considering the
previous episodes of discontent, the Jews became incensed when the religious
observances of Sabbath and circumcision were officially outlawed. When
Antiochus erected a statue of Zeus in their temple and Hellenic priests began
sacrificing pigs (the usual sacrifice offered to the Greek gods in the Hellenic
religion) their anger began to spiral. When a Greek official asked a Jewish
priest to perform a Hellenic sacrifice, the priest (Mattathias) killed him.
Predictably, Antiochus resorted to the same bloody reprisals. In 167 BCE the
Jews rose up en masse behind Mattathias and his five sons to fight and win
their freedom from Seleucid authority. Mattathias' son Judas Maccabeus, now
called "The Hammer", re-dedicated the temple in 165 BCE and the Jews celebrate
this event to this day as a major part of the festival of Hanukkah. The temple
was rededicated under Judas Maccabaeus in 164 BCE. The temple was desecrated
again in 54 BCE by Crassus, only for him to die the year after at the Battle of
Carrhae against Parthia. When news of this reached the Jews, they revolted
again, only to be put down in 43 BCE. Around 20 BCE, the building was renovated
by Herod the Great, and became known as Herod's Temple. During the Roman
occupation of Judea, the Temple remained under control of the Jewish people. It
was later destroyed by the Romans in 70 CE during the Siege of Jerusalem.
During the last revolt of the Jews against the Romans in 132–135 CE, Simon
bar Kokhba and Rabbi Akiva wanted to rebuild the Temple, but bar Kokhba's
revolt failed and the Jews were banned from Jerusalem (except for Tisha B'Av)
by the Roman Empire. The emperor Julian failed to have the Temple rebuilt in
363 CE. After the Muslim conquest of Jerusalem in the 7th century, Umayyad
Caliph Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan ordered the construction of an Islamic shrine,
the Dome of the Rock, on the site of the Temple. The shrine has stood on the
mount since 691 CE; the al-Aqsa Mosque, from roughly the same period, also
stands in the Temple courtyard. The mount bears significance in Islam as it
acted as a sanctuary for many Hebrew prophets. Islamic tradition says that a
temple was first built on the Temple Mount by Jacob and later renovated by
Solomon, son of David. In addition, it is considered to be the site of the
Prophet Muhammad's Night Ride (Isra and Mi'raj) and his ascent into Heaven -
one of the most significant events recounted in the Koran. Recent history. The
Temple Mount, along with the entire Old City of Jerusalem, was captured from
Jordan by Israel in 1967 during the Six-Day War, allowing Jews once again to
pray at the holy site. Israel officially unified East Jerusalem, including the
Temple Mount, with the rest of Jerusalem in 1980 under the Jerusalem Law,
though United Nations Security Council Resolution 478 declared the Jerusalem
Law to be in violation of international law. The Muslim Waqf has administrative
control of the Temple Mount. Etymology. The Hebrew name given in the Hebrew
Bible for the building complex is either "Beit YHWH" "House of the ," or simply
"Beiti" "my house", "Beitekhah" "your house" etc. The term "hekhal" "hall" or
main building is often translated "temple" in older English Bibles. In
rabbinical literature the temple is "Beit HaMikdash", "The Sanctified House",
and only the Temple in Jerusalem is referred to by this name. Location. Other
theories have the Temple either to the north or to the south of the Temple
Mount. Physical layout. According to the Talmud, the Temple had an "Ezrat
Nashim" (Women's Court) to the east and main area to the west. The main area
contained the butchering area for the sacrifices and the Outer Altar on which
portions of most offerings were burned. An edifice contained the "ulam"
(antechamber), the "hekhal" (the "sanctuary", the main building), and the Holy
of Holies. The sanctuary and the Holy of Holies were separated by a wall in the
First Temple and by two curtains in the Second Temple. The sanctuary contained
the seven branched candlestick, the table of showbread and the Incense Altar.
On the east side was "Shaar Nikanor", between the Women's Courtyard and the
main Temple Courtyard, which had two minor doorways, one on its right and one
on its left. On the western wall, which was relatively unimportant, there were
two gates that did not have any name. Temple services. The Temple was the place
where offerings described in the course of the Hebrew Bible were carried out,
including daily morning and afternoon offerings and special offerings on
Sabbath and Jewish holidays. Levites recited Psalms at appropriate moments
during the offerings, including the Psalm of the Day, special psalms for the
new month, and other occasions, the Hallel during major Jewish holidays, and
psalms for special sacrifices such as the "Psalm for the Thanksgiving Offering"
(Psalm 100). In the Talmud. The Talmud (Yoma 9b) provides theological reasons
for the destruction: Why was the first Temple destroyed? Because the three
cardinal sins were rampant in society: idol worship, licentiousness, and
murder… And why then was the second Temple – wherein the society was
involved in Torah, commandments and acts of kindness – destroyed? Because
gratuitous hatred was rampant in society. This teaches that gratuitous hatred
is equal in severity to the three cardinal sins: idol worship, licentiousness,
and murder. Role in contemporary Jewish services. Part of the traditional
Jewish morning service, the part surrounding the Shema prayer, is essentially
unchanged from the daily worship service performed in the Temple. In addition,
the Amidah prayer traditionally replaces the Temple's daily "tamid" and
special-occasion "Mussaf" (additional) offerings (there are separate versions
for the different types of sacrifices. They are recited during the times their
corresponding offerings were performed in the Temple. The destruction of the
Temple is mourned on the Jewish fast day of Tisha B'Av. Three other minor fasts
(Tenth of Tevet, 17th of Tammuz, and Third of Tishrei), also mourn events
leading to or following the destruction of the Temple. There are also mourning
practices which are observed at all times, for example, the requirement to
leave part of the house unplastered. In other religions. In Christianity. In
addition to the Hebrew Bible, the Temple is mentioned many times in the New
Testament. In these scriptures, Jesus prays there () and chases away money
changers and other merchants from the courtyard, turning over their tables and
accusing them of desecrating a sacred place with secular ways. According to the
New Testament Gospels, it was to the Temple Court that Jesus was brought as a
child, to be presented at the Temple (Luke 2:22) and to attend festivals (Luke
2:41). Jerusalem historian Dan Mazar reported in the Jerusalem Christian Review
on the numerous archaeological discoveries made at this location by his
grandfather, Prof. Benjamin Mazar, which included the 1st century stairs of
ascent, where Jesus and his disciples preached, as well as the "mikvaot" (or
baptismals) used by both Christian and Jewish pilgrims. The events of
Pentecost, which are recorded in the Book of Acts, also took place at this
location. At the area in which Jesus cleanses the Temple of the moneychangers,
chasing various commercial traders of doves necessary for the sacrificial
rituals away from the sacred precincts (Mark 11), remarkable findings were
uncovered by the elder Mazar, such as a 1st century vessel with the Hebrew word
"Korban", meaning sacrifice(s). It was believed by Benjamin Mazar that inside
this vessel, merchants would have stored the sacrifices sold at the Temple
Court. Jesus predicts the destruction of the Second Temple () and allegorically
compares his body to a Temple that will be torn down and raised up again in
three days. This idea, of the Temple as the body of Christ, became a rich and
multi-layered theme in medieval Christian thought (where Temple/body can be the
heavenly body of Christ, the body of the Church, and the Eucharistic body on
the altar). In Islam. Imam Abdul Hadi Palazzi, leader of Italian Muslim
Assembly, quotes the Qur'an to support Judaism's special connection to the
Temple Mount. According to Palazzi, "The most authoritative Islamic sources
affirm the Temples,". He adds that Jerusalem is sacred to Muslims because of
its prior holiness to Jews and its standing as home to the biblical prophets
and kings David and Solomon, all of whom he says are sacred figures also in
Islam. He claims that the Qur'an "expressly recognizes that Jerusalem plays the
same role for Jews that Mecca has for Muslims". This view is not universally
accepted. Assertions by Muslims that Jews never inhabited the land of Israel in
ancient times and therefore have no claim to live in the land today and denial
of the authenticity of Jewish claims to ancient holy sites—such as the Temple
Mount and the Cave of Machpelah—appear to be on the increase. In his 2007
book, "The Fight for Jerusalem: Radical Islam, the West, and the Future of the
Holy City," Ambassador Dore Gold calls such claims "Temple Denial". Israeli
intellectual David Hazony has described the phenomenon as "a campaign of
intellectual erasure Palestinian leaders, writers, and scholars ... aimed at
undermining the Jewish claim to any part of the land" and compared the
phenomenon to Holocaust denial. Archaeological evidence. Archaeological
excavations have found dozens of ritual immersion or baptismal pools dating to
the 1st century in this area surrounding the Temple Mount. This is strong
evidence that the area was considered one of the holiest sites at the time.
Building a Third Temple. Ever since the Second Temple's destruction, a prayer
for the construction of a Third Temple has been a formal and, by some
authorities, optional part of the thrice-daily Jewish prayer services. However,
the question of whether and when to construct the Third Temple is disputed both
within the Jewish community and without; groups within Judaism argue both for
and against construction of a new Temple, while the expansion of Abrahamic
religion since the 1st century CE has made the issue contentious within
Christian and Islamic thought as well. Furthermore, the complicated political
status of Jerusalem makes initiation of reconstruction presently difficult,
while the traditional physical location of the historic Temple is presently
occupied by the Al-Aqsa Mosque and the Dome of the Rock. In 363 CE, the Roman
emperor Julian ordered Alypius of Antioch to rebuild the Temple as part of his
campaign to strengthen non-Christian religions. The attempt failed, perhaps due
to sabotage, an accidental fire, or an earthquake in Galilee.
