Territorial Spirit Territorial Spirits are national angels, or demons, who rule
over certain geographical areas in the world, a concept accepted within the
Charismatic movement, Pentecostal traditions, and Kingdom Now theology. This
belief has been popularized by the fiction novel, "This Present Darkness" by
Frank Peretti, as well as by the ministry of Peter Wagner. The existence of
territorial spirits is viewed as significant in spiritual warfare within these
Christian groups. Biblical context. Deuteronomy 32:8-9. In both the Septuagint
and the Dead Sea Scrolls, Deuteronomy 32:8-9 refers a time when God divided the
nations of the earth among the "sons of God" (Israel is excepted as the special
possession of God Himself). Given the meaning of this phrase in the Book of
Job, it is suggested that this is a reference to the origin of territorial
spirits who were, at one time, angels administering the earth on God's behalf.
Wagner appeals to F. F. Bruce, who points out that the Septuagint reading
"implies that the administration of various nations has been parceled out among
a corresponding number of angelic powers." The question remains, however, as to
whether these spirits are malevolent. Daniel 10. Daniel 10 concerns the
visitation of a strange "man" to the prophet Daniel. This man explains to
Daniel that he was delayed by the "Prince of Persia" (10:13), but was helped by
"Michael, one of the chief princes" (a reference to the archangel Michael, who
was recognized in Jewish literature to be a chief angel guarding over Israel).
Later in the chapter, the man warns Daniel that soon the "Prince of Greece"
(10:20) will join his Persian counterpart to make war upon them. Wagner regards
this chapter is a key passage supporting the existence of territorial spirits,
and appeals to Keil and Delitzsch, who suggest that the "prince of Persia" is
the "guardian spirit of the kingdom." George Otis says that Daniel 10 is "a
well-defined case of an evil spiritual being ruling over an area with
explicitly defined boundaries." David E. Stevens notes that many scholars take
the Prince of Persia to be an earthly political authority, such as Cambyses II.
Stevens personally accepts the angelic interpretation, but argues that the
"influence exerted by these angelic princes is personal and sociopolitical in
nature and not territorial." Stevens notes that in Daniel 12:1, the archangel
Michael, is described as "the great prince who protects your people" (NIV),
which "emphasizes the protective role of Michael in relation to the people of
God rather than with respect to a given territory. Michael remained the
guardian angel of the people of God, whether Israel was in the Promised Land or
was dispersed in exile among the nations." Criticism. Melvin Tinker argues that
the literary use of "territorial" spirits is a misnomer, since spirits referred
to in various Biblical passages "are to be more associated with political and
religious power and ideologies." Scholars such as Robert Priest, Paul Hiebert
and A. Scott Moreau detect animist ideas in the arguments of supporters of the
theory of territorial spirits. Robert Guelich of Fuller Theological Seminary
does not find the concept of territorial spirits within the Gospels, and has
analyzed this problem in a critical review of Frank E. Peretti's novel "This
Present Darkness". Peter Wagner promotes "Strategic-Level Spiritual Warfare"
(SLSW) which involves the practice of learning the names and assignments of
demonic spirits as the first step to effective spiritual warfare. Opponents of
this theological construct, and associated beliefs in "spiritual warfare",
point out that while the Bible may describe some form of demonic control over
geography, it does not prescribe many of the behaviors and teachings that
proponents advocate in response. There is no mention in either the Hebrew Bible
or the New Testament of believers banding together and praying a form of
"spiritual warfare" against particular territorial demons. The battles
occurring in the spiritual realms (as described in Daniel 10) have no
Biblically identified link to the actions and prayers of God's people in the
physical world.
