Tetragrammaton The term tetragrammaton (from Greek ', meaning "four letters")
refers to the Hebrew theonym () transliterated to the Latin letters YHWH'". It
is derived from a verb that means "to be", and is considered in Judaism to be a
proper name of the God of Israel used in the Hebrew Bible. The most widely
accepted pronunciation of the Tetragrammaton (YHWH) is "Yahweh", though
"Jehovah" is used in many Bibles, but in few modern ones. The Samaritans
understood the pronunciation for the Tetragrammaton to be "Iabe". Some
patristic sources give evidence to a Greek pronunciation "Iao". As Jews are
forbidden to say or write the Tetragrammaton in full, when reading the Torah
they use the term "Adonai". Christians do not have any prohibitions on
vocalizing the Tetragrammaton; in most Christian translations of the Bible, ""
is used in place of the Tetragrammaton after the Hebrew "Adonai", and is
written with small capitals (or in all caps) to distinguish it from other words
translated "Lord". Origins. Etymology. Scholars widely propose that the name
YHWH is a verb form derived from the Biblical Hebrew triconsonantal root ◊î◊ô◊î
("h-y-h") "to be", which has ◊î◊ï◊î ("h-w-h") as a variant form, with a third
person masculine "y-" prefix. It is connected to the passage in in which God
gives his name as ◊ê÷∂◊î÷∞◊ô÷∂◊î ◊ê÷≤◊©÷∂◊Å◊® ◊ê÷∂◊î÷∞◊ô÷∂◊î ("Ehyeh Asher
Ehyeh"), translated most basically as "I am that I am" (or "I Will Be What I
Will Be"). ◊ô◊î◊ï◊î with the vocalization "Yahweh" could theoretically be a
"hif'il" (causative) verb inflection of root HWH, with a meaning something like
"he who causes to exist" or "who gives life" (the root idea of the word being
"to breathe", and hence, "to live"). As a "qal" (basic stem) verb inflection,
it could mean "he who is, who exists". Occurrences. The oldest known
inscription of the tetragrammaton dates to 840 BC, on the Mesha Stele. It bears
the earliest certain extra-biblical reference to the Israelite god "Yahweh".
The most recent discovery of a tetragrammaton inscription, was found written in
Hebrew on two silver scrolls recovered from Jerusalem, dating to the 6th
Century BC. In the Hebrew Bible, the tetragrammaton occurs 6,828 times, as can
be seen in the Biblia Hebraica and Biblia Hebraica Stuttgartensia. According to
the Brown-Driver-Briggs Lexicon, (Qr ) occurs 6,518 times, and (Qr ) occurs 305
times in the Masoretic Text. It first appears in Hebrew in Genesis 2:4. The
only books it does not appear in are Ecclesiastes, the Book of Esther, and Song
of Songs. The Septuagint typically translates YHWH as "kyrios" or "Lord". Most
English translations use "Lord" which serves as a mnemonic device for YHWH,
since they both have four letters. Pronunciation. The most widely accepted
pronunciation of the Tetragrammaton (YHWH) is "Yahweh". Genebrardus suggested
the pronunciation "Jahve" based on Theodoret's assertion that the Samaritans
used the pronunciation "Iabe". For the Jews, however, it was forbidden to
pronounce or even write in full, the Tetragrammaton. A. Lukyn Williams proposed
the pronunciations of the Tetragrammaton to be "Yaho" or "Yahu" based on
theophoric names in the Hebrew Bible that end in YHW. The current scholarly
consensus is that the vowel diacritic points attached to the written consonants
YHWH in the Masoretic orthography of Biblical Hebrew were not intended to
represent the vowels of such an authentic and historically correct
pronunciation. Tiberian vocalization. Vowel points. The original consonantal
text of the Hebrew Bible was provided with vowel marks by the Masoretes to
assist reading. In places where the consonants of the text to be read (the
Qere) differed from the consonants of the written text (the Kethib), they wrote
the Qere in the margin as a note showing what was to be read. In such a case
the vowels of the Qere were written on the Kethib. For a few frequent words the
marginal note was omitted: this is called Q're perpetuum. One of these frequent
cases was the tetragrammaton, which according to later Jewish practices should
not be pronounced, but read as "" ("My Lord"), or, if the previous or next word
already was "" or "", as "" ("God"). This combination produces and
respectively, non-words that would spell "yehovah" and "yehovih" respectively.
The oldest manuscripts of the Hebrew Bible, such as the Aleppo Codex and the
Codex Leningradensis, mostly write (yehvah), with no pointing on the first H;
this could be because the "o" diacritic point plays no useful role in
distinguishing between "Adonai" and "Elohim" (and so is redundant), or could
point to the Qere being ", which is Aramaic for "the Name". Consonantal semi-
vowels. In ancient Hebrew, the letter , known to modern Hebrew speakers as
"vav", was a semivowel (as in English, not as in German) rather than a . The
letter is referred to as "waw" in the academic world. Because the ancient
pronunciation differs from the modern pronunciation, it is common today to
represent as YHWH rather than YHVH. In unpointed Biblical Hebrew, most vowels
are not written and the rest are written only ambiguously, as the vowel letters
are also used as consonants (similar to the Latin use of V to indicate both U
and V). See Matres lectionis for details. For similar reasons, an appearance of
the Tetragrammaton in ancient Egyptian records of the 13th century BCE sheds no
light on the original pronunciation. Therefore it is, in general, difficult to
deduce how a word is pronounced from its spelling only, and the Tetragrammaton
is a particular example: two of its letters can serve as vowels, and two are
vocalic place-holders, which are not pronounced. This difficulty occurs
somewhat also in Greek when transcribing Hebrew words, because of Greek's lack
of a letter for consonant 'y' and (since loss of the digamma) of a letter for
"w", forcing the Hebrew consonants yod and waw to be transcribed into Greek as
vowels. Also, non-initial 'h' caused difficulty for Greeks and was liable to be
omitted; —Ö (chi) was pronounced as 'k' + 'h' (as in modern Hindi "lakh") and
could not be used to spell 'h' as in Modern Greek = "Harry", for example.
Adonai. The vocalizations of ("Yehowah") and ("Adonai") are not identical. The
schwa in YHWH (the vowel under the first letter, ) and the hataf patakh in 'DNY
(the vowel under its first letter, ), appear different. One reason suggested is
that the spelling (with the hataf patakh) risks that a reader might start
pronouncing "Yah", which is a form of the Name, thus completing the first half
of the full Name. Alternatively, the vocalization can be attributed to Biblical
Hebrew phonology, where the hataf patakh is grammatically identical to a schwa,
always replacing every schwa na·∏• under a guttural letter. Since the first
letter of is a guttural letter, while the first letter of is not, the hataf
patakh under the (guttural) aleph reverts to a regular schwa under the (non-
guttural) yodh. Note in the table directly above that the "simple shewa" in
"Yehowah" and the "hatef patah" in "Adonai" are not the same vowel. The same
information is displayed in the table above and to the right where ""YHWH"
intended to be pronounced as "Adonai"" and ""Adonai", with its slightly
different vowel points" are shown to have different vowel points. Jehovah. The
origins for the composite term "Jehovah" came from early English translators
who transposed the vowels from "Adonai" to the Tetragrammaton, and read the
word literally so that the "Y" in YHWH, was pronounced as a "J" in English, and
the "W" as a "V". Taking the spellings at face value may have been as a result
of not knowing about the Q're perpetuum, thus resulting in the term "Jehovah"
and its spelling variants. The Catholic Encyclopedia Vol. VIII, p.¬ 329 states:
"Jehovah (Yahweh), the proper name of God in the Old Testament." Had they known
about the Q're perpetuum, the term "Jehovah" might never have come into being.
Modern scholars recognize Jehovah to be "grammatically impossible" (Jewish
Encyclopedia, Vol VII, p.¬ 8). Yahweh. In the early 19th century, Hebrew
scholars were still critiquing "Jehovah" Iehovah and Iehouah because they
believed that the vowel points of did not represent (and were never intended to
represent) the vowel sounds of the early authentic pronunciation of the
Tetragrammaton. The Latin pronunciation of the letter I/J as a consonant sound
was , the 'y' sound of the English word 'you'. This changed in descendant
languages into various stronger consonants, including, in English, the sound ,
the 'j' sound of the word 'juice'. Thus the English pronunciation of the older
form "Jehovah" has this 'j' sound. In order to preserve the approximate
original Hebrew pronunciation, however, English spelling uses an initial Y and
for the third consonant uses W, a letter unknown in Latin, thus producing the
form "Yahweh". The Hebrew scholar Wilhelm Gesenius had suggested that the
Hebrew punctuation , which is transliterated into English as "Yahweh", might
more accurately represent the pronunciation of the Tetragrammaton than the
Biblical Hebrew punctuation "", from which the English name "Jehovah" has been
derived. His proposal to read YHWH as "" (see image to the left) was based in
large part on various Greek transcriptions, such as ŒπŒ±Œ≤Œµ, dating from the
first centuries CE, but also on the forms of theophoric names. In his "Hebrew
Dictionary," Gesenius supports "Yahweh" (which would have been pronounced ,
with the final letter being silent) because of the Samaritan pronunciation
reported by Theodoret, and that the theophoric name prefixes YHW and YH can be
explained from the form "Yahweh". Today many scholars accept Gesenius's
proposal to read YHWH as . Gesenius' proposal gradually became accepted as the
best scholarly reconstructed vocalized Hebrew spelling of the Tetragrammaton.
Leningrad Codex. G√©rard Gertoux wrote that in the Leningrad Codex the
Masoretes used 7 different vowel pointings 7 different Q're's for YHWH. that
one of these different vowel pointings is not a true variant, but was the
result of the addition of an inseparable preposition to YHWH. A version of the
BHS text, which is derived from the Leningrad Codex, is used to translate the
Old Testament of almost all English Bibles other than the King James Bible. The
Brown‚ÄìDriver‚ÄìBriggs Lexicon of 1905 shows only two different vowel
pointings [ i.e. variants ] of YHWH are found in the Ben Chayyim Hebrew Text of
1525, which underlies the Old Testament of the King James Bible. Six Hebrew
spellings of the tetragrammaton are found in the Leningrad Codex of
1008‚Äì1010, as shown below. The entries in the Close Transcription column are
not intended to indicate how the name was intended to be pronounced by the
Masoretes, but only how the word would be pronounced if read without "q're
perpetuum". ' is hataf segol; ' is the pronounced form of plain shewa. The "o"
diacritic dot over the letter waw is often omitted because it plays no useful
role in distinguishing between the two intended pronunciations Adonai and
Elohim (which both happen to have an "o" vowel in the same position).
Theophoric names. Those who argue for argument 1 above are: George Wesley
Buchanan in "Biblical Archaeology Review"; Smith's 1863 "A Dictionary of the
Bible"; Section # 2.1 "The Analytical Hebrew & Chaldee Lexicon" (1848) in its
article . Smith's 1863 "A Dictionary of the Bible" says that "Yahweh" is
possible because shortening to "Yahw" would end up as "Yahu" or similar. The
Jewish Encyclopedia of 1901‚Äì1906 in the Article:Names Of God has a very
similar discussion, and also gives the form Yo () contracted from Yeho (). The
Encyclop√¶dia Britannica also says that "Yeho-" or "Yo" can be explained from
"Yahweh", and that the suffix "-yah" can be explained from "Yahweh" better than
from "Yehovah". Usages and translations. Judaism. Maimonides relates that only
the priests in Temple in Jerusalem pronounced the Tetragrammaton, when they
recited the Priestly Blessing over the people daily. Since the destruction of
Second Temple of Jerusalem in 70¬ CE, the Tetragrammaton is no longer
pronounced. Rabbinical sources indicate that there was an exception for the
temple liturgy, where the name of God was only pronounced once a year, by the
high priest, on the Day of Atonement. Others argue that the name was also
pronounced in the liturgy of the Temple in the priestly benediction (Num. vi.
27) after the regular daily sacrifice, while in the synagogues a substitute
(probably Adonai) was used. According to the Talmud, in the last generations
before the fall of Jerusalem, however, it was pronounced in a low tone so that
the sounds were lost in the chant of the priests. Some time after the
destruction of Solomon's Temple, the spoken use of God's name, as it was
written, had ceased even though knowledge of how it was pronounced was
perpetuated in rabbinic schools. It was certainly known in Babylonia in the
latter part of the 4th century. Philo calls it ineffable, and says that it is
lawful for those only whose ears and tongues are purified by wisdom to hear and
utter it in a holy place (that is, for priests in the Temple). In another
passage, commenting on Lev. xxiv. 15 seq.: "If any one, I do not say should
blaspheme against the Lord of men and gods, but should even dare to utter his
name unseasonably, let him expect the penalty of death." Verbal prohibitions.
The vehemence with which the utterance of the name is denounced in the Mishna
suggests that use of Yahweh was unacceptable in rabbinical Judaism. "He who
pronounces the Name with its own letters has no part in the world to come!"
Such is the prohibition of pronouncing the Name as written that it is sometimes
called the "Ineffable", "Unutterable" or "Distinctive Name". Halakha (Jewish
Law) prescribes that whereas the Name written "yud-hei-vav-hei", it is only to
be pronounced "Adonai;" and the latter name too is regarded as a holy name, and
is only to be pronounced in prayer. Thus when someone wants to refer in third
person to either the written or spoken Name, the handle ""HaShem"" ("the Name")
is used; and this handle itself can also be used in prayer. The Masoretes added
vowel points (niqqud) and cantillation marks to the manuscripts to indicate
vowel usage and for use in the ritual chanting of readings from the Bible in
synagogue services. To they added the vowels for "" ("My Lord"), the word to
use when the text was read. Written prohibitions. The written Tetragrammaton,
as well as six other names of God, must be treated with special sanctity. They
cannot be disposed of regularly, lest they be desecrated, but are usually put
in long term storage or buried in Jewish cemeteries in order to retire them
from use. Similarly, it is prohibited to write the Tetragrammaton (or these
other names) unnecessarily. In order to guard the sanctity of the Name
sometimes a letter is substituted by a different letter in writing (e.g.
◊ô◊ß◊ï◊ß), or the letters are separated by one or more hyphens. Some Jews are
stringent and extend the above safeguard by also not writing out other names of
God in other languages, for example writing "God" in English as written "G-d,"
and so forth. However this is beyond the letter of the law. Samaritans. The
Samaritans shared the scruples of the Jews about the utterance of the name.
However Sanhedrin 10:1 includes the comment of Rabbi Mana "for example those
Kutim who take an oath" would also have no share in the world to come, which
suggests that Mana thought some Samaritans used the name in making oaths.
Though there is no evidence that this was common Samaritan practice. (Their
priests have preserved a liturgical pronunciation "Yahwe" or "Yahwa" to the
present day.) As with Jews, the Aramaic "ha-Shema" (◊©◊û◊ê "the Name") remains
the everyday and liturgical usage of the name among Samaritans, akin to Hebrew
"the Name" (Hebrew ◊î◊©◊ù "HaShem"). Septuagint. The oldest complete Septuagint
(Greek Old Testament) versions, from around the 2nd century CE, consistently
use ("Lord"), where the Hebrew has YHWH, corresponding to substituting Adonay
for YHWH in reading the original; in books written in Greek in this period
(e.g., Wisdom, 2 and 3 Maccabees), as in the New Testament, takes the place of
the name of God. However, older fragments contain the name YHWH. In the P. Ryl.
458 (perhaps the oldest extant Septuagint manuscript) there are blank spaces,
leading some scholars to believe that the Tetragrammaton must have been written
where these breaks or blank spaces are. Sidney Jellicoe concluded that "Kahle
is right in holding that LXX texts, written by Jews for Jews, retained the
Divine Name in Hebrew Letters (palaeo-Hebrew or Aramaic) or in the Greek-
letters imitative form "Œ ŒôŒ Œô", and that its replacement by "ŒöœçœÅŒπŒøœÇ"
was a Christian innovation". Jellicoe draws together evidence from a great many
scholars (B. J. Roberts, Baudissin, Kahle and C. H. Roberts) and various
segments of the Septuagint to draw the conclusions that the absence of "Adonai"
from the text suggests that the insertion of the term "Kyrios" was a later
practice; in the Septuagint "Kyrios" is used to substitute the Name YHWH; and
the Tetragrammaton appeared in the original text, but Christian copyists
removed it. Eusebius and Jerome (translator of the Latin Vulgate) used the
Hexapla. Both attest to the importance of the sacred Name and that some
manuscripts of Septuagint contained the Tetragrammaton in Hebrew letters. This
is further affirmed by The New International Dictionary of New Testament
Theology, which states "Recently discovered texts doubt the idea that the
translators of the LXX (Septuagint) have rendered the Tetragrammaton JHWH with
KYRIOS. The most ancient mss (manuscripts) of the LXX today available have the
Tetragrammaton written in Hebrew letters in the Greek text. This was custom
preserved by the later Hebrew translator of the Old Testament in the first
centuries (after Christ)" Dead Sea Scrolls. The Dead Sea Scrolls and other
Hebrew and Aramaic texts write (only) the tetragrammaton in paleo-Hebrew
script, showing that the name was treated specially. A Greek fragment of
Leviticus (26:2-16) discovered in the Dead Sea scrolls (Qumran) has ŒπŒ±œâ
("Iao"), the Greek form of the Hebrew trigrammaton YHW. The historian John the
Lydian (6th century) wrote: "The Roman Varo defining him [that is the Jewish
god says that he is called Iao in the Chaldean mysteries". (De Mensibus IV 53)
Van Cooten mentions that Iao is one of the "specifically Jewish designations
for God" and "the Aramaic papyri from the Jews at Elephantine show that 'Iao'
is an original Jewish term". Christianity. Christians do not have any taboo on
pronouncing the name, either as "Yahweh" or similar variations. Early Jewish
Christians inherited from Jews the practice of reading "Lord" where the
tetragrammaton appeared in the Hebrew text, or where a tetragrammaton may have
been marked in a Greek text. Gentile Christians, primarily non-Hebrew speaking
and using Greek texts, read "Lord" as it occurred in the Greek text of the New
Testament and their copies of the Greek Old Testament. This practice continued
into the Latin Vulgate where "Lord" represented "Yahweh" in the Latin text. In
Petrus Alphonsi's Tetragrammaton-Trinity diagram, the name is written as
"Jeve." Only at the Reformation did the Luther Bible restore "Jehova" in the
German text of Luther's Old Testament. Christian translations. The Septuagint
(Greek translation) and Vulgate (Latin translation) use the word "Lord" (,
"kyrios", and , respectively). New Testament. Since the Tetragrammaton does not
appear in the Greek manuscripts of the New Testament, virtually all
translations refrain from inserting it into the English. The vast majority of
New Testament translations therefore render the Greek "kyrios" as "Lord" or
"lord", and "theos" as "God". Nevertheless, the Sacred Scriptures Bethel
Edition inserts the name "Yahweh" in the New Testament, while the New World
Translation inserts the name "Jehovah" in the New Testament. The main notable
exception is Delitzsch's translation of the New Testament into Hebrew (1877)
which frequently uses the tetragrammaton, i.e. Hebrew (), particularly in
verses where the New Testament quotes or makes reference to Old Testament
texts. It is however still read aloud as "Adonai" by most Hebrew-speaking
Christians in Israel. Catholicism. In the second edition of the "Nova Vulgata
Bibliorum Sacrorum Editio, editio typica altera", published in 1986, these few
occurrences of the form "Iahveh" were replaced with "Dominus", in keeping with
the long-standing Catholic tradition of avoiding direct usage of the Ineffable
Name. On August 8, 2008, Bishop Arthur J. Serratelli, chairman of the American
bishops' "Committee on Divine Worship", announced a new directive from the
Vatican regarding the use of the name of God in the sacred liturgy.
Specifically, the word "Yahweh" may no longer be "used or pronounced" in songs
and prayers during liturgical celebrations. In fact, for most of the Church's
2,000-year history use of the name was prohibited in public worship, out of
respect for the Divine Name, according to Catholic tradition. After Second
Vatican Council (1962‚Äì65), some songs and hymns had begun to use the
Tetragrammaton, which caused the Vatican to issue a clarification that the
Divine Name was not to be used. Hymnals with these hymns have since inserted
the word "Lord God" or other two-syllable alternatives in the place of the
Tetragrammaton. Jewish mysticism. Magical papyri. The spellings of the
tetragrammaton occur among the many combinations and permutations of names of
powerful agents that occur in Jewish magical papyri found in Egypt. One of
these forms is the heptagram . In the Jewish magical papyri, "Iave" and "Yaba"
occurs frequently. In an Ethiopic Christian list of magical names of Jesus,
purporting to have been taught by him to his disciples, "Yawe" is found.
Kabbalah. Kabbalistic tradition holds that the correct pronunciation is known
to a select few people in each generation, it is not generally known what this
pronunciation is. In late kabbalistic works the Tetragrammaton is sometimes
referred to as the name of "Havayah"‚Äî, meaning "the Name of Being/Existence."
This name also helps when one needs to refer specifically to the written Name;
similarly, "Shem Adonoot," meaning "the Name of Lordship" can be used to refer
to the spoken name "Adonai" specifically. ◊¢"◊ë/"`AV" : ◊ô◊ï"◊ì ◊î"◊ô ◊ï◊ô"◊ï
◊î"◊ô, so called "`AV" according to its gematria value ◊¢"◊ë=70+2=72. ◊°"◊í/
"SaG": ◊ô◊ï"◊ì ◊î"◊ô ◊ï◊ê"◊ï ◊î"◊ô, gematria 63. ◊û"◊î/"MaH": ◊ô◊ï"◊ì ◊î"◊ê
◊ï◊ê"◊ï ◊î"◊ê, gematria 45. ◊ë"◊ü/"BaN": ◊ô◊ï"◊ì ◊î"◊î ◊ï"◊ï ◊î"◊î, gematria
52. Luzzatto summarizes, "In sum, all that exists is founded on the mystery of
this Name and upon the mystery of these letters of which it consists. This
means that all the different orders and laws are all drawn after and come under
the order of these four letters. This is not one particular pathway but rather
the general path, which includes everything that exists in the Sefirot in all
their details and which brings everything under its order." Another parallel is
drawn between the four letters of the Tetragrammaton and the Four Worlds: the
◊ô is associated with Atziluth, the first ◊î with Beri'ah, the ◊ï with
Yetzirah, and final ◊î with Assiah.
