Thai lunar calendar The Thai lunar calendar () (literally, "Against-the-Sun
Moon-Ways"), Dai calendar (ÂÇ£ÂéÜ), or Tai calendar, is Thailand's version of
the lunisolar Buddhist calendar. It is used in the southeast Asian countries of
Cambodia, Laos and Burma for calculating lunar-regulated holy days. Based on
the third-century "Surya Siddhanta" (a Hindu calendar), these combine lunar and
solar calendars for a nominal year of 12 months. An extra day or an extra 30-
day month is intercalated at regular intervals; Thai, Lao, and Cambodian
versions do not add an extra day to years with an extra month. Legal v.
religious calendar. The Thai solar calendar ("Patitin Suriyakati", ),
Thailand's version of the Gregorian calendar, replaced the "Patitin
Chantarakati" in AD 1888 / 2431 BE for legal and commercial purposes. In both
calendars, the four principal lunar phases determine Buddhist Sabbaths
(uposatha), obligatory holy days for observant Buddhists. Significant days also
include feast days. Thai Chinese likewise observe their Sabbaths and
traditional Chinese holidays according to lunar phases. These move with respect
to the solar calendar, so common Thai calendars incorporate both Thai and
Chinese lunar dates for religious purposes. Mundane astrology also figures
prominently in Thai culture, so modern Thai birth certificates include lunar
calendar dates and the appropriate Chinese calendar zodiacal animal year-name
for both Thai Hora ( and Chinese astrology. Years. To keep the years in sync
with the seasons, Thai lunar years may add a day to the 7th month or repeat the
8th month. Therefore, years may have one of three lengths ‚Äì 354, 355 or 384
days ‚Äì yet retain a nominal length of twelve months. New year. The Thai lunar
calendar does not mark the beginning of a new year when it starts a new 1-to-12
count, which occurs most frequently in December. The Thai solar calendar
determines a person's legal age and the dates of secular holidays, including
the civil new year and the three days of the traditional Thai New Year. Should
the holidays fall on a weekend, it also accommodates these as well as some of
the principal lunar festivals with a compensatory day off . For Thai Chinese
communities in Thailand, the Chinese calendar] determines the day that a year
assumes the name of the next animal in the twelve-year animal cycle. In the
traditional Thai lunar and solar calendars, however, the new zodiacal animal
year-name changes on Songkhran (April 13). Months. In the modern Thai calendar,
months ("Deuan", , meaning "month" or "Lunation") are defined by lunar cycles.
Successive months (or lunations) are numbered from 1 to 12 within the Thai
year. As in other Buddhist calendars, these months have names that derive from
Sanskrit, but for the most part are only known by Thai astrologers. Two
successive lunations take slightly more than 59 days. The Thai lunar calendar
approximates this interval with "normal-month" pairs ( that are alternately 29
and 30 days long. 29-day "hollow months" () are odd-numbered (); 30-day "full
months" () are even-numbered (). To keep the beginning of the month in sync
with the new moon, from time to time either the normally "hollow" Month 7 takes
an extra day, or an extra "full" Month 8 follows a normal "full" Month 8.
Months 1 and 2 are named in archaic alternate numbers, with the remainder being
named in modern numbers. Months 1 ‚Äì 6. Month 1, "Deuan Aai" (), begins the
cycle of counting the months anew, most frequently in December, but does not
signify the beginning of a new year. Aai, an archaic word in Thai but not in
other dialects, means "first-born" (or "eldest"). An odd-numbered hollow month,
it is 29 days long. Month 2, "Deuan Yi", ( from archaic ‡∏ç‡∏µ‡πà meaning "2")
is an even-numbered full month. Months 3‚Äì6, "Deuan 3‚Äì6", use the modern
reading of Thai numerals, as do all remaining months. Months 3‚Äì6, alternate
between 29-day hollow months and 30-day full months. Month 7 and Atigawan.
Month 7, "Deuan 7", a hollow month is normally 29 days long in years of 354
days, but adds an extra day () when required for 355-day-long years ()). Month
8. The eighth month, "Deuan 8", is a 30-day full month. Month 8/8 "Atigamas".
"Atigamas () is the extra month needed for a 384-day-long "piathikmas" (extra-
month year - ). Month 8 repeats as ‡πÄ‡∏î‡∏∑‡∏≠‡∏ô ‡πò/‡πò Month 8/8, variously
read as "Deuan pat thap pat" () ‚Äî "Month 8 slash 8", "Deuan pat song khang"
() ‚Äî "Month 8 Side Two", or "Deuan pat song Hon" () ‚Äî "Month 8 Time Two".
Months 9 ‚Äì 12. Months 9‚Äì12, "Deuan 9‚Äì12", complete the lunar cycle.
Weeks. A week is called or , pronounced s√ b-da, s√ b-ph√ -daa, or s√ b-da-
h√ }}. From a Sanskrit word for "seven", it is now defined by the Royal
Institute Dictionary (RID) as a 7 day period beginning on Sunday and ending
Saturday. When referring to lunations, however, it is the 7-, 8- or (rarely) 9-
day interval between quartile lunar phases; that is, from one to the next.
Days. While solar-calendar weekdays have names, lunar-calendar days number
sequentially from 1 to 14 or 15 in two segments depending on whether the moon
is waxing or waning. For example, "Raem 15 Kham Deuan 12 " means "Waning 15
Evening Month 12". "Kham ", evening, is considered to be the evening of the
common day that begins and ends at midnight, rather than of a day that begins
and ends at dusk. Past practice may have been different. Holidays regulated by
the moon. Buddhist Sabbaths, colloquially called , are the New, First-quarter,
Full, and Third-quarter Moon-days. These are not normally days off (), except
for butcher, barber, and beautician shops that observe the Eight Precepts.
Annual holidays and seasonal festivals collectively are called . Festivals or
fairs are called ; these may be further styled as "traditional" and as , "rite"
or "ceremony". The table shows the principal ones governed by the moon in
yellow. Work holidays prescribed by the government are called ; those regulated
by the moon are red. Weekends are normally days off; if a holiday normally
observed by a day off falls on a weekend, the following Monday is a
compensatory day off . Thai year vocabulary. Thai orthography spells most
native words phonetically, though there is no definitive system for Literally
means "self-made" or "self-done", or "cultured" in a modern usage (which
implies the language of cultured persons); Sanskrit alphabet, language,
writing; compound of
