Problem of evil In the philosophy of religion, the problem of evil is the
question of how to reconcile the existence of evil with that of a deity who is
omnipotent, omniscient, and omnibenevolent (see theism). An argument from evil
attempts to show that the co-existence of evil and such a deity is unlikely or
impossible, and attempts to show the contrary have been traditionally known as
theodicies. A wide range of responses have been given to the problem of evil.
These include the explanation that God's act of creation and God's act of
judgement are the same act. God's condemnation of evil is believed to be
executed and expressed in His created world; a judgement that is unstoppable
due to God's all powerful, opinionated will; a constant and eternal judgement
that becomes announced and communicated to other people on Judgement Day. In
this explanation, God is viewed as good because His judgement of evil is a good
judgement. Other explanations include the explanation of evil as the result of
free will misused by God's creatures, the view that our suffering is required
for personal and spiritual growth, the denial that God is omnipotent,
omniscient, or omnibenevolent, and skepticism concerning the ability of humans
to understand God's reasons for permitting the existence of evil. There are
also many discussions of "evil" and associated "problems" in other
philosophical fields, such as secular ethics, and scientific disciplines such
as evolutionary ethics. But as usually understood, the "problem of evil" is
posed in a theological context. Detailed arguments. Numerous versions of the
problem of evil have been formulated. Logical problem of evil. Both of these
arguments are understood to be presenting the "logical" problem of evil. They
attempt to show that the assumed propositions lead to a logical contradiction
and therefore cannot all be correct. Most philosophical debate has focused on
the propositions stating that God cannot exist with, or would want to prevent,
all evils (premises 3 and 6), with defenders of theism arguing that God could
very well exist with and allow evil in order to achieve a greater good. One
greater good that has been proposed is that of free will, famously argued for
by Alvin Plantinga in his free will defense. The first part of this defense
accounts for moral evil as the result of free human action. The second part of
this defense argues for the logical possibility of "a mighty nonhuman spirit"
such as Satan who is responsible for so-called 'natural evils', including
earthquakes, tidal waves, and virulent diseases. Many philosophers accept that
Plantinga successfully solves the logical problem of evil, as he appears to
have shown that God and evil are logically compatible, though others demur.
Evidential problem of evil. The "evidential" version of the problem of evil
(also referred to as the probabilistic or inductive version), seeks to show
that the existence of evil, although logically consistent with the existence of
God, counts against or lowers the probability of the truth of theism. As an
example, a critic of Plantinga's idea of "a mighty nonhuman spirit" causing
natural evils may concede that the existence of such a being is not logically
impossible but argue that due to lacking scientific evidence for its existence
this is very unlikely and thus it is an unconvincing explanation for the
presence of natural evils. These arguments are probability judgments since they
rest on the claim that, even after careful reflection, one can see no good
reason for God’s permission of evil. The inference from this claim to the
general statement that there exists unnecessary evil is inductive in nature and
it is this inductive step that sets the evidential argument apart from the
logical argument. The logical possibility of hidden or unknown reasons for the
existence of evil still exist. However, the existence of God is viewed as any
large-scale hypothesis or explanatory theory that aims to make sense of some
pertinent facts. To the extent that it fails to do so it is disconfirmed.
According to Occam's razor, one should make as few assumptions as possible.
Hidden reasons are assumptions, as is the assumption that all pertinent facts
can be observed, or that facts and theories humans have not discerned are
indeed hidden. Thus, as per Draper's argument above, the theory that there is
an omniscient and omnipotent being who is indifferent requires no hidden
reasons in order to explain evil. It is thus a simpler theory than one that
also requires hidden reasons regarding evil in order to include
omnibenevolence. Similarly, for every hidden argument that completely or
partially justifies observed evils it is equally likely that there is a hidden
argument that actually makes the observed evils worse than they appear without
hidden arguments. As such, from a probabilistic viewpoint hidden arguments will
neutralize one another. Author and researcher Gregory S. Paul offers what he
considers to be a particularly strong problem of evil. Paul describes
conservative calculations that at least 100 billion people have been born
throughout human history (starting roughly 50 000 years ago, when Homo Sapiens
– humans – first appeared). He then performed what he calls "simple"
calculations to estimate that the historical death rate of children throughout
this time. He found that the historical death rate was over 50%, and that the
deaths of these children were mostly due to diseases (like malaria). Paul thus
sees it as a problem of evil, because this means, throughout human history,
over 50 billion people died naturally before they were old enough to give
mature consent. He adds that as many as 300 billion humans may never have
reached birth, instead dying naturally but prenatally (the prenatal death rate
being about 3/4 historically). Paul says that these figures could have
implications for calculating the population of a heaven (which could include
the aforementioned 50 billion children, 50 billion adults, and roughly 300
billion fetuses – excluding any living today). A common response to instances
of the evidential problem is that there are plausible (and not hidden)
justifications for God’s permission of evil. These theodicies are discussed
below. Related arguments. Doctrines of hell, particularly those involving
eternal suffering, pose a particularly strong form of the problem of evil (see
problem of hell). If unbelief, incorrect beliefs, or poor design are considered
evils, then the argument from nonbelief, the argument from inconsistent
revelations, and the argument from poor design may be seen as particular
instances of the argument from evil. Responses: defences and theodicies.
Responses to the problem of evil have sometimes been classified as "defences"
or "theodicies". However, authors disagree on the exact definitions. Generally,
a "defence" may refer to attempts to defuse the logical problem of evil by
showing that there is no logical incompatibility between the existence of evil
and the existence of God. This task does not require the identification of a
plausible explanation of evil, and is successful if the explanation provided
shows that the existence of God and the existence of evil are logically
compatible. It need not even be true, since a false though coherent explanation
would be sufficient to show logical compatibility. A "theodicy", on the other
hand, is more ambitious, since it attempts to provide a plausible
justification—a morally sufficient reason—for the existence of evil and
thereby rebut the "evidential" argument from evil. Richard Swinburne maintains
that it does not make sense to assume there are greater goods that justify the
evil's presence in the world unless we know what they are—without knowledge
of what the greater goods could be, one cannot have a successful theodicy.
Thus, some authors see arguments appealing to demons or the fall of man as
indeed logically possible, but not very "plausible" given our knowledge about
the world, and so see those arguments as providing defences but not good
theodicies. Denial of omniscience, omnipotence, omnibenevolence. If God lacks
any one of these qualities, the existence of evil is explicable, and so the
problem of evil will not be encountered. In polytheism the individual deities
are usually not omnipotent or omnibenevolent. However, if one of the deities
has these properties the problem of evil applies. Belief systems where several
deities are omnipotent would lead to logical contradictions. Ditheistic belief
systems (a kind of dualism) explain the problem of evil from the existence of
two rival great, but not omnipotent, deities that work in polar opposition to
each other. Examples of such belief systems include Zoroastrianism,
Manichaeism, and possibly Gnosticism. The Devil in Islam and in Christianity is
not seen as equal in power to God who is omnipotent. Thus the Devil could only
exist if so allowed by God. The Devil, if so limited in power, can therefore by
himself not explain the problem of evil. Process theology and open theism are
other positions that limit God's omnipotence and/or omniscience (as defined in
traditional Christian theology). Denial of omnibenevolence. Dystheism is the
belief that God is not wholly good. Pantheists and panentheists who are
dytheistic may avoid the problem of evil. Greater good responses. The
omnipotence paradoxes raise questions as to the nature of God's omnipotence,
with some solutions proposing that omnipotence does not require the ability to
actualize the logically impossible. Greater good responses to the problem make
use of this insight by arguing for existence of goods of great value which God
cannot actualize without also permitting evil, and thus that there are evils he
cannot be expected to prevent despite being omnipotent. The most popular
greater good response appeals to free will. Free will. The free will response
asserts that the existence of free beings is something of tremendous value,
because with free will comes the ability to make morally significant choices
(and, it may be added, to enter into authentic loving relationships). With it
also comes the potential for abuse, as when we fail to act morally. But the
disvalue created by such abuse of free will is easily outweighed by the great
value of free will and the good that comes of it, and so God is justified in
creating a world which offers free will existence, and with it the potential
for evil, over a world with neither free beings nor evil. A world with free
beings and no evil would be still better, however this would require the
cooperation of free beings with God, as it is logically impossible for God to
prevent abuses of freedom without thereby curtailing that freedom. Critics of
the free will response have questioned whether it accounts for the degree of
evil seen in this world. One point in this regard is that while the value of
free will may be thought sufficient to counterbalance minor evils, it is less
obvious that it outweighs the disvalue of evils such as rape and murder.
Particularly egregious cases known as horrendous evils, which " prima facie
reason to doubt whether the participant’s life could (given their inclusion
in it) be a great good to him/her on the whole”, have been the focus of
recent work in the problem of evil. Another point is that those actions of free
beings which bring about evil very often diminish the freedom of those who
suffer the evil - for example, the murder of a young child (e.g. Death of Baby
P) may prevent the child from ever exercising their free will in a significant
way. Given that in such a case pits the freedom of an innocent child against
the freedom of the evil-doer, it is not clear why God would not intervene for
the sake of the child. A second criticism is that the potential for evil
inherent in free will may be limited by means which do not impinge on that free
will. God could accomplish this by making moral actions especially pleasurable,
so that they would be irresistible to us; he could also punish immoral actions
immediately, and make it obvious that moral rectitude is in our self-interest;
or he could allow bad moral decisions to be made, but intervene to prevent the
harmful consequences from actually happening. A reply is that such a "toy
world" would mean that free will has less or no real value. Critics may respond
that this view seems to imply it would be similarly wrong for humans to try to
reduce suffering in these ways, a position which few would advocate. The debate
depends on the definitions of free will and determinism, which are deeply
disputed concepts themselves, as well as their relation to one another. See
also compatibilism and incompatibilism and predestination. A third reply is
that though the free will defence has the potential to explain moral evil, as
described it fails to address natural evils, such as earthquakes, hurricanes
and diseases. Advocates of the free will response may advert to a different
explanation of these natural evils, or extend the free will response to account
for them. As an example of the latter, Alvin Plantinga has famously suggested
that natural evils are caused by the free choices of supernatural beings such
as demons. Others have argued that natural evils are the result of the fall of
man, which corrupted the perfect world created by God; or that natural laws
which are prerequisite for the existence of intelligent free beings; or again
that natural evils provide us with a knowledge of evil which makes our free
choices more significant than they would otherwise be, and so our free will
more valuable. Lastly, it has been suggested that natural evils are a mechanism
of divine punishment for evils that humans have committed, and so the evil is
justified (see also Karma, just-world phenomenon, and original sin. Finally,
because the free will response assumes a libertarian account of free will, the
debate over its adequacy naturally widens into a debate concerning the nature
and existence of free will. Compatibilists deny that a being who is determined
to act morally lacks free will, and so also that God cannot ensure the moral
behavior of the free beings he creates. Pessimists deny the existence of free
will, and therefore that the existence of free will justifies the evil in our
world. There is also debate regarding the compatibility of libertarian free
will with the absence of evil from heaven, with God's omniscience (see the
argument from free will), and with his omnibenevolence. Soul-making or Irenaean
theodicy. Distinctive of the soul-making theodicy is the claim that evil and
suffering are necessary for spiritual growth. This theodicy was developed by
the second-century Christian theologian, Irenaeus of Lyons, and its most recent
and outspoken advocate has been the influential philosopher of religion, John
Hick. A perceived inadequacy with the theodicy is that many evils do not seem
to promote such growth, and can be positively destructive of the human spirit.
A second issue concerns the distribution of evils suffered: were it true that
God permitted evil in order to facilitate spiritual growth, then we would
expect evil to disproportionately befall those in poor spiritual health. This
does not seem to be the case, as the decadent enjoy lives of luxury which
insulate them from evil, whereas many of the pious are poor, and are well
acquainted with worldly evils. A third problem attending this theodicy is that
the qualities developed through experience with evil seem to be useful
precisely because they are useful in overcoming evil. But if there were no
evil, then there would seem to be no value in such qualities, and consequently
no need for God to permit evil in the first place. Against this it may be
asserted that the qualities developed are intrinsically valuable, but this view
would need further justification. Afterlife. Philosopher Stephen Maitzen has
called this the "Heaven Swamps Everything" theodicy, and argues that it is
false because it conflates compensation and justification. He observes that
this reasoning: Previous lives and karma. The theory of karma holds that good
acts result in pleasure and bad acts with suffering. Thus it accepts that there
is suffering in the world, but maintains that there is no "undeserved"
suffering, and in that sense, no evil. The obvious objection that people
sometimes suffer misfortune that was undeserved is met with by coupling karma
with reincarnation, so that such suffering is the result of actions in previous
lifetimes. Skeptical theism. Skeptical theists argue that due to humanity's
limited knowledge, we cannot expect to understand God or his ultimate plan.
When a parent takes an infant to the doctor for a regular vaccination to
prevent childhood disease, it's because the parent cares for and loves that
child. The infant however will be unable to appreciate this. It is argued that
just as an infant cannot possibly understand the motives of its parent due to
its cognitive limitations, so too are humans unable to comprehend God's will in
their current physical and earthly state. Given this view, the difficulty or
impossibility of finding a plausible explanation for evil in a world created by
God is to be expected, and so the argument from evil is assumed to fail unless
it can be proven that God's reasons would be comprehensible to us. A related
response is that good and evil are strictly beyond human comprehension. Since
our concepts of good and evil as instilled in us by God are only intended to
facilitate ethical behaviour in our relations with other humans, we should have
no expectation that our concepts are accurate beyond what is needed to fulfil
this function, and therefore cannot presume that they are sufficient to
determine whether what we call evil really is evil. Such a view may be
independently attractive to the theist, as it permits an agreeable
interpretation of certain biblical passages, such as "...Who makes peace and
creates evil; I am the Lord, Who makes all these.". A counterpoint to the above
is that while these considerations harmonize belief in God with our inability
to identify his reasons for permitting evil, there remains a question as to why
we have not been given a clear and unambiguous assurance by God that he has
good reasons for allowing evil, which would be within our ability to
understand. Here discussion of the problem of evil shades into discussion of
the argument from nonbelief. Denial of the existence of evil. Evil as the
absence of good. The fifth century theologian Augustine of Hippo maintained
that evil exists only as a privation or absence of the good. Ignorance is an
evil, but is merely the absence of knowledge, which is good; disease is the
absence of health; callousness an absence of compassion. Since evil has no
positive reality of its own, it cannot be caused to exist, and so God cannot be
held responsible for causing it to exist. In its strongest form, this view may
identify evil as an absence of God, who is the sole source of that which is
good. A related view, which draws on the Taoist concept of yin-yang, allows
that both evil and good have positive reality, but maintains that they are
complementary opposites, where the existence of each is dependant on the
existence of the other. Compassion, a valuable virtue, can only exist if there
is suffering; bravery only exists if we sometimes face danger; self-sacrifice
is called for only where others are in need. This is sometimes called the
"contrast" argument. Perhaps the most important criticism of this view is that,
even granting its success against the argument from evil, it does nothing to
undermine an 'argument from the absence of goodness' which may be pushed
instead, and so the response is only superficially successful. Evil as
illusory. It is possible to hold that evils such as suffering and disease are
mere illusions, and that we are mistaken about the existence of evil. This
approach is favored by some Eastern religious philosophies such as Hinduism and
Buddhism, and by Christian Science. It is most plausible when considering our
knowledge of evils which are geographically or temporally distant, for these
might not be real after all. However, when considering our own sensations of
pain and mental anguish, there does not seem to be a difference in apprehending
that we are afflicted by such sensations and suffering under their influence.
If that is the case, it seems that not all evils can be dismissed as illusory.
Turning the tables. "Evil" suggests an ethical law. The standard criticism of
this view is that an argument from evil is not necessarily a presentation of
the views of its proponent, but is instead intended to show how premises which
the theist is inclined to believe lead him or her to the conclusion that God
does not exist (i.e. as a reductio of the theist's worldview). Another tact is
to reformulate the argument from evil so that this criticism does not apply -
for example, by replacing the term "evil" with "suffering", or what is more
cumbersome, "state of affairs that orthodox theists would agree are properly
called “evil”. General criticisms of all defenses and theodicies. Several
philosophers have argued that just as there exists a problem of evil for
theists who believe in an omniscient, omnipotent and omnibenevolent being, so
too is there a problem of good for anyone who believes in an omniscient,
omnipotent, and omnimalevolent (or perfectly evil) being. As it appears that
the defenses and theodicies which might allow the theist to resist the problem
of evil can be inverted and used to defend belief in the omnimalevolent being,
this suggests that we should draw similar conclusions about the success of
these defensive strategies. In that case, the theist appears to face a dilemma:
either to accept that both sets of responses are equally bad, and so that the
theist does not have an adequate response to the problem of evil; or to accept
that both responses are equally good, and so to consider the existence of an
omnipotent, omniscient, and omnimalevolent being as plausible. Critics have
noted that theodicies and defenses are often addressed to the logical problem
of evil. As such, they are intended only to demonstrate that it is "possible"
that evil can co-exist with an omniscient, omnipotent and omnibenevolent being.
Since the relevant parallel commitment is only that good can co-exist with an
omniscient, omnipotent and omnimalevolent being, not that it is plausible that
they should do so, the theist who is responding to the problem of evil need not
be committing themselves to something they are likely to think is false. This
reply, however, leaves the evidential problem of evil untouched. Another
general criticism is that though a theodicy may harmonize God with the
existence of evil, it does so at the cost of nullifying morality. This is
because most theodicies assume that whatever evil there is exists because it is
required for the sake of some greater good. But if an evil is necessary because
it secures a greater good, then it appears we humans have no duty to prevent
it, for in doing so we would also prevent the greater good for which the evil
is required. Even worse, it seems that any action can be rationalized, as if
one can actually perform it, then it must be permitted by God for the sake of
the greater good. From this line of thought one may conclude that, as these
conclusions violate our basic moral intuitions, no greater good theodicy is
true, and God does not exist. Alternatively, one may point out that greater
good theodicies lead us to see every conceivable state of affairs as compatible
with the existence of God, and in that case the notion of God's goodness is
rendered meaningless. By religion. Ancient Mesopotamia and Egypt. The problem
of evil takes at least four formulations in ancient Mesopotamian religious
thought, as in the extant manuscripts of Ludlul bēl nēmeqi ("I Will Praise
the Lord of Wisdom"), "Erra and Ishum", "The Babylonian Theodicy", and "The
Dialogue of Pessimism". In this type of polytheistic context, the chaotic
nature of the world implies multiple gods battling for control. In ancient
Egypt, it was thought the problem takes at least two formulations, as in the
extant manuscripts of "Dialogue of a Man with His Ba" and "The Eloquent
Peasant". Due to the conception of Egyptian gods as being far removed, these
two formulations of the problem focus heavily on the relation between evil and
people; that is, moral evil. Judaism. The Hebrew Bible. A verse in the Book of
Isaiah is interpreted in the King James Bible as "I form the light, and create
darkness: I make peace, and create evil: I the LORD do all these things.". The
Hebrew word is רע "Ra`", which occurs over 600 times in the Hebrew Bible. It
is a generalized term for something considered bad, not held to mean
specifically wickedness or injustice in this context, but to mean calamity, or
bad times, or disaster. The Book of Job is one of the most widely known
formulations in Western thought questioning why suffering exists. Originally
written in Hebrew as an epic poem, the story centers on Job, a perfectly just
and righteous person. He makes no serious errors in life and strives to do
nothing wrong; as a result he is very successful. A character described only as
the 'Accuser' challenges God, claiming that Job is only righteous because God
has rewarded him with a good life. The Accuser proposes that if God were to
allow everything Job loved to be destroyed, Job would then cease to be
righteous. God allows the Accuser to destroy Job's wealth and children, and to
strike him with sickness and boils. Job discusses his condition with three
friends. His three friends insist that God never allows bad things to happen to
good people, and assert that Job must have done something to deserve his
punishment. Job responds that is not the case and that he would be willing to
defend himself to God. A fourth friend, Elihu, arrives and criticizes all of
them. Elihu states that God is perfectly just and good. God then responds to
Job in a speech delivered from "out of a whirlwind", explaining the universe
from the scope of God's perspective and demonstrating that the workings of the
world are beyond human understanding. In the end God states that the three
friends were incorrect, and that Job was incorrect for assuming he could
question God. God more than restores Job's prior health, wealth, and gives him
new children, as though he has been awakened from a nightmare into a new
awareness of spiritual reality. The ultimate purpose of the story is a matter
of much debate. Professor of Religious Studies Bart D. Ehrman argues that
different parts of the Bible give different answers. One example is evil as
punishment for sin or as a consequence of sin. Ehrman writes that this seems to
be based on some notion of free will although this argument is never explicitly
mentioned in the Bible. Another argument is that suffering ultimately achieves
a greater good, possibly for persons other than the sufferer, that would not
have been possible otherwise. The Book of Job offers two answers: suffering is
a test, and you will be rewarded later for passing it; another that God is not
held accountable to human conceptions of morality. Ecclesiastes sees suffering
as beyond human abilities to comprehend. Later Jewish interpretations. An oral
tradition exists in Judaism that God determined the time of the Messiah's
coming by erecting a great set of scales. On one side, God placed the captive
Messiah with the souls of dead laymen. On the other side, God placed sorrow,
tears, and the souls of righteous martyrs. God then declared that the Messiah
would appear on earth when the scale was balanced. According to this tradition,
then, evil is necessary in the bringing of the world's redemption, as
sufferings reside on the scale. Tzimtzum in Kabbalistic thought holds that God
has withdrawn himself so that creation could exist, but that this withdrawal
means that creation lacks full exposure to God's all-good nature. Christianity.
Apocalyptism. Bart D. Ehrman argues that apocalyptic parts of the Bible,
including the New Testament, see suffering as due to cosmic evil forces, that
God for mysterious reasons has given power over the world, but which will soon
be defeated and things will be set right. Gnosticism. Gnosticism refers to
several beliefs seeing evil as due to the world being created by an imperfect
god, the demiurge and is contrasted with a superior entity. However, this by
itself does not answer the problem of evil if the superior entity is omnipotent
and omnibenevolent. Different gnostic beliefs may give varying answers, like
Manichaeism, which adopts dualism, in opposition to the doctrine of
omnipotence. Pelagianism. The consequences of the original sin were debated by
Pelagius and Augustine of Hippo. Pelagius argues on behalf of original
innocence, while Augustine indicts Eve and Adam for original sin. Pelagianism
is the belief that original sin did not taint all of humanity and that mortal
free will is capable of choosing good or evil without divine aid. Augustine's
position, and subsequently that of much of Christianity, was that Adam and Eve
had the power to topple God's perfect order, thus changing nature by bringing
sin into the world, but that the advent of sin then limited mankind's power
thereafter to evade the consequences without divine aid. Eastern Orthodox
theology holds that one inherits the nature of sinfulness but not Adam and
Eve's guilt for their sin which resulted in the fall. Augustinian Theodicy. St
Augustine of Hippo (354 AD – 430) in his Augustinian theodicy focuses on the
Genesis story that essentially dictates that God created the world and that it
was good; evil is merely a consequence of the fall of man (The story of the
Garden of Eden where Adam and Eve disobeyed God and caused inherent sin for
man). Augustine stated that natural evil (evil present in the natural world
such as natural disasters etc.) is caused by fallen angels, whereas moral evil
(evil caused by the will of human beings) is as a result of man having become
estranged from God and choosing to deviate from his chosen path. Augustine
argued that God could not have created evil in the world, as it was created
good, and that all notions of evil are simply a deviation or privation of
goodness. Evil cannot be a separate and unique substance. For example,
Blindness is not a separate entity, but is merely a lack or privation of sight.
Thus the Augustinian theodicist would argue that the problem of evil and
suffering is void because God did not create evil; it was man who chose to
deviate from the path of perfect goodness. This, however, poses a number of
questions involving genetics: if evil is merely a consequence of our choosing
to deviate from God's desired goodness, then genetic disposition of 'evil' must
surely be in God's plan and desire and thus cannot be blamed on Man. St. Thomas
Aquinas. Saint Thomas systematized the Augustinian conception of evil,
supplementing it with his own musings. Evil, according to St. Thomas, is a
privation, or the absence of some good which belongs properly to the nature of
the creature. There is therefore no positive source of evil, corresponding to
the greater good, which is God; evil being not real but rational—i.e. it
exists not as an objective fact, but as a subjective conception; things are
evil not in themselves, but by reason of their relation to other things or
persons. All realities are in themselves good; they produce bad results only
incidentally; and consequently the ultimate cause of evil is fundamentally
good, as well as the objects in which evil is found. Catholic Encyclopedia.
Catholic Encyclopedia's entry on evil Luther and Calvin. Both Luther and Calvin
explained evil as a consequence of the fall of man and the original sin.
However, due to the belief in predestination and omnipotence, the fall is part
of God's plan. Ultimately humans may not be able to understand and explain this
plan. Christian Science. Christian Science views evil as having no reality and
as due to false beliefs. Evils such as illness and death may be banished by
correct understanding. This view has been questioned, aside from the general
criticisms of the concept of evil as an illusion discussed earlier, since the
presumably correct understanding by Christian Science members, including the
founder, has not prevented illness and death. However, Christian Scientists
believe that the many instances of spiritual healing (as recounted e.g. in the
Christian Science periodicals and in the textbook Science and Health with Key
to the Scriptures by Mary Baker Eddy) are evidence of the correctness of the
teaching of the unreality of evil. Jehovah's Witnesses. Jehovah's Witnesses
believe that Satan is the original cause of evil. Though once a perfect angel,
Satan developed feelings of self-importance and craved worship, and eventually
challenged God's right to rule. Satan caused Adam and Eve to disobey God, and
humanity subsequently became participants in a challenge involving the
competing claims of Jehovah and Satan to universal sovereignty. Other angels
who sided with Satan became demons. God's subsequent tolerance of evil is
explained in part by the value of free will. But Jehovah's Witnesses also hold
that this period of suffering is one of non-interference from God, which serves
to demonstrate that Jehovah's "right to rule" is both correct and in the best
interests of all intelligent beings, settling the "issue of universal
sovereignty". Further, it gives individual humans the opportunity to show their
willingness to submit to God's rulership. At some future time known to him, God
will consider his right to universal sovereignty to have been settled for all
time. The reconciliation of "faithful" humankind will have been accomplished
through Christ, and nonconforming humans and demons will have been destroyed.
Thereafter, evil (any failure to submit to God's rulership) will be summarily
executed. Islam. Islamic scholar Sherman Jackson states that the Mu'tazila
school emphasized God's omnibenevolence. Evil arises not from God but from the
actions of His creations who create their own actions independent of God. The
Ash'ari school instead emphasized God's omnipotence. God is not restricted to
follow some objective moral system centered on humans but has the power do
whatever He wants with his world. The Maturidi school argued that evil arises
from God but that evil in the end has a wiser purpose as a whole and for the
future. Some theologians have viewed God as all-powerful and human life as
being between the hope that God will be merciful and the fear that he will not.
Hinduism. Hinduism is a complex religion with many different currents or
schools. As such the problem of evil in Hinduism is answered in several
different ways such as by the concept of karma. Buddhism. In Buddhism, the
problem of evil, or the related problem of dukkha, is one argument against a
benevolent, omnipotent creator god, identifying such a notion as attachment to
a false concept. By philosophers. Epicurus. Either God wants to abolish evil,
and cannot; or he can, but does not want to. If he wants to, but cannot, he is
impotent. If he can, but does not want to, he is wicked. If God can abolish
evil, and God really wants to do it, why is there evil in the world? –
Epicurus, as quoted in "2000 Years of Disbelief" Epicurus himself did not leave
any written form of this argument. It can be found in Christian theologian
Lactantius's "Treatise on the Anger of God" where Lactantius critiques the
argument. Epicurus's argument as presented by Lactantius actually argues that a
god that is all-powerful and all-good does not exist and that the gods are
distant and uninvolved with man's concerns. The gods are neither our friends
nor enemies. David Hume.  "power we allow [is infinite: Whatever he wills is
executed: But neither man nor any other animal are happy: Therefore he does not
will their happiness. His wisdom is infinite: He is never mistaken in choosing
the means to any end: But the course of nature tends not to human or animal
felicity: Therefore it is not established for that purpose. Through the whole
compass of human knowledge, there are no inferences more certain and infallible
than these. In what respect, then, do his benevolence and mercy resemble the
benevolence and mercy of men?" Gottfried Leibniz. In his "Dictionnaire
Historique et Critique", the sceptic Pierre Bayle denied the goodness and
omnipotence of God on account of the sufferings experienced in this earthly
life. Gottfried Leibniz introduced the term theodicy in his 1710 work "Essais
de Théodicée sur la bonté de Dieu, la liberté de l'homme et l'origine du
mal" ("Theodicic Essays on the Benevolence of God, the Free will of man, and
the Origin of Evil") which was directed mainly against Bayle. He argued that
this is the best of all possible worlds that God could have created. Imitating
the example of Leibniz, other philosophers also called their treatises on the
problem of evil theodicies. Voltaire's popular novel "Candide" mocked
Leibnizian optimism through the fictional tale of a naive youth. Thomas Robert
Malthus. The population and economic theorist Thomas Malthus argued that evil
exists to spur human creativity and production. Without evil or the necessity
of strife mankind would have remained in a savage state since all amenities
would be provided for. Immanuel Kant. We can understand the necessary limits of
our reflections on the subjects which are beyond our reach. This can easily be
demonstrated and will put an end once and for all to the trial. Victor Cousin.
Victor Cousin argued for a form of eclecticism to organize and develop
philosophical thought. He believed that the Christian idea of God was very
similar to the Platonic concept of "the Good," in that God represented the
principle behind all other principles. Like the ideal of Good, Cousin also
believed the ideal of Truth and of Beauty were analogous to the position of
God, in that they were principles of principles. Using this way of framing the
issue, Cousin stridently argued that different competing philosophical
ideologies all had some claim on truth, as they all had arisen in defense of
some truth. He however argued that there was a theodicy which united them, and
that one should be free in quoting competing and sometimes contradictory
ideologies in order to gain a greater understanding of truth through their
reconciliation. Peter Kreeft. Christian philosopher Peter Kreeft provides
several answers to the problem of evil and suffering, including that a) God may
use short-term evils for long-range goods, b) God created the possibility of
evil, but not the evil itself, and that free will was necessary for the highest
good of real love. Kreeft says that being all-powerful doesn't mean being able
to do what is logically contradictory, e.g., giving freedom with no
potentiality for sin, c) God's own suffering and death on the cross brought
about his supreme triumph over the devil, d) God uses suffering to bring about
moral character, quoting apostle Paul in Romans 5, e) Suffering can bring
people closer to God, and f) The ultimate "answer" to suffering is Jesus
himself, who, more than any explanation, is our real need. William Hatcher.
Mathematical logician William Hatcher (a member of the Baha'i Faith) made use
of relational logic to claim that very simple models of moral value cannot be
consistent with the premise of evil as an absolute, whereas goodness as an
absolute is entirely consistent with the other postulates concerning moral
value. In Hatcher's view, one can only validly say that if an act A is "less
good" than an act B, one cannot logically commit to saying that A is absolutely
evil, unless one is prepared to abandon other more reasonable principles.
