The Varieties of Religious Experience The Varieties of Religious Experience: A
Study in Human Nature is a book by Harvard University psychologist and
philosopher William James. It comprises his edited Gifford Lectures on natural
theology, which were delivered at the University of Edinburgh in Scotland in
1901 and 1902. These lectures concerned the nature of religion and the neglect
of science, in James' view, in the academic study of religion. Soon after its
publication, the book entered the canon of psychology and philosophy and has
remained in print for over a century. James went on to develop his philosophy
of pragmatism. There are many overlapping ideas in "Varieties" and his 1907
book, "Pragmatism". Topics. Proposition of value versus existential judgment.
James believed that the study of the origin of an object or an idea does not
play a role in the study of its value. He asserted that existential judgment,
or the scientific examination of an object's origin, is a separate matter from
that object's value. As an example, he alluded to the Quaker religion and its
founder, George Fox. Many of the scientists in James' audience immediately
reject all aspects of the Quaker religion because evidence suggests that Fox
was schizophrenic. Calling this rejection "medical materialism", James insisted
that the origin of Fox's notions about religion should not come into account
when propositioning the value of the Quaker religion. As an aside, many believe
El Greco to have suffered from astigmatism, yet no one would dismiss his art
based on this medical detail. James proposed, somewhat sarcastically, that his
audience's atheism was perhaps a dysfunction of the liver. Some believe science
to be superior to religion because of religion's seemingly vain, unfounded, or
perhaps insane origin. In his lectures, James asserted that these claims, while
perhaps historically or epistemologically interesting, play no role in the
separate question of religion's value. Reality versus symbols of reality. The
lectures discussed the distinction between symbolism and reality. Symbols, such
as the word "steak" on a menu, do not embody the actuality of the objects they
represent. The word "steak" on a menu merely points to some slab of meat in the
back of the restaurant. In a similar way, James posits that all of science is
fundamentally detached from reality since the tools of science are merely
pointers to some actual objective realm. He criticized his audience for the
scientific tendency to ignore the unseen aspects of life and the universe. As
an example, he discussed the way the notion of a lemon causes salivation in the
mouth of an individual; while there is no lemon, there is clearly a process
occurring worthy of academic inquiry. Reception. Everywhere there is a frolic
welcome to the eccentricities and extravagances of the religious life. Many
will question whether its more sober exhibitions would not have been more
fruitful of results, but the interest and fascination of the treatment are
beyond dispute, and so, too, is the sympathy to which nothing human is
indifferent. In making little allowance for the fact that people can also be
converted to vicious creeds, he acquired admirers he would have deplored.
Mussolini, for instance, hailed James as a preceptor who had showed him that
"an action should be judged by its result rather than by its doctrinary basis."
James...had no intention of giving comfort to latter-day totalitarians. He was
simply impatient with his fellow academicians and their endless hairsplitting
over matters that had no relation to life. A vibrant, generous person, he hoped
to show that religious emotions, even those of the deranged, were crucial to
human life. The great virtue of "The Varieties", noted pragmatist philosopher
Charles Peirce, is its "penetration into the hearts of people." Its great
weakness, retorted George Santayana, is its "tendency to disintegrate the idea
of truth, to recommend belief without reason and to encourage superstition."
Editions. also contained in:
