The White Goddess The White Goddess: a Historical Grammar of Poetic Myth is a
book-length essay on the nature of poetic myth-making by author and poet Robert
Graves. First published in 1948, based on earlier articles published in "Wales"
magazine, corrected, revised and enlarged editions appeared in 1948, 1952 and
1961. "The White Goddess" represents an approach to the study of mythology from
a decidedly creative and idiosyncratic perspective. Graves proposes the
existence of a European deity, the "White Goddess of Birth, Love and Death,"
much similar to the "Mother Goddess", inspired and represented by the phases of
the moon, who lies behind the faces of the diverse goddesses of various
European and pagan mythologies. Graves argues that "true" or "pure" poetry is
inextricably linked with the ancient cult-ritual of his proposed White Goddess
and of her son. History. Graves first wrote the book under the title of "The
Roebuck in the Thicket" in a three-week period during January 1944, only a
month after finishing "The Golden Fleece". He then left the book, to focus on
"King Jesus", a historical novel about the life of Jesus. Returning to "The
Roebuck in the Thicket", he renamed it "The Three-Fold Muse", before finishing
it and retitling it as "The White Goddess". In January 1946 he sent it to the
publishers, and in May 1948 it was published in the UK, and in June 1948 in the
US, as "The White Goddess: a Historical Grammar of Poetic Myth". Poetry and
myth. Graves described "The White Goddess" as "a historical grammar of the
language of poetic myth." The book draws from the mythology and poetry of Wales
and Ireland especially, as well as that of most of Western Europe and the
ancient Middle East. Relying on arguments from etymology and the use of
forensic techniques to uncover what he calls 'iconotropic' redaction of
original myths, Graves argues for the worship of a single goddess under many
names, an idea that came to be known as "Matriarchal religion" in feminist
theology of the 1970s. In response to critics, Graves has accused literary
scholars of being psychologically incapable of interpreting myth or too
concerned with maintaining their perquisites to go against the majority view.
(See Frazer quote below.) "The Golden Bough" (1922, but begun in 1890), an
early anthropological study by Sir James George Frazer, is the starting point
for much of Graves's argument, and Graves thought in part that his book made
explicit what Frazer only hinted at. Graves wrote: Sir James Frazer was able to
keep his beautiful rooms at Trinity College, Cambridge, until his death by
carefully and methodically sailing all around his dangerous subject, as if
charting the coastline of a forbidden island without actually committing
himself to a declaration that it existed. What he was saying-not-saying was
that Christian legend, dogma and ritual are the refinement of a great body of
primitive and even barbarous beliefs, and that almost the only original element
in Christianity is the personality of Jesus. Graves's "The White Goddess" deals
with goddess worship as the prototypical religion, analyzing it largely from
literary evidence, in myth and poetry. Graves admitted he was not a medieval
historian, but a poet, and thus based his work on the premise that the language
of poetic myth anciently current in the Mediterranean and Northern Europe was a
magical language bound up with popular religious ceremonies in honor of the
Moon-goddess, or Muse, some of them dating from the Old Stone Age, and that
this remains the language of true poetry... Graves concluded, in the second and
expanded edition, that the male-dominant monotheistic god of Judaism and its
successors were the cause of the White Goddess's downfall, and thus the source
of much of the modern world's woe. He describes Woman as occupying a higher
echelon than mere poet, that of the Muse Herself. He adds "This is not to say
that a woman should refrain from writing poems; only, that she should write as
a woman, not as an honorary man." He seems particularly bothered by the spectre
of women's writing reflecting male-dominated poetic conventions. Graves openly
considered poetic inspiration, or "Analepsis" as he termed it, a valid
historical methodology. Visual iconography was also important to Graves's
conception. Graves created a methodology for reading images he called
"iconotropy". To practice this methodology one is required to reduce "speech
into its original images and rhythms" and then to combine these "on several
simultaneous levels of thought". By applying this methodology Graves decoded a
woodcut of "The Judgement of Paris" as depicting a singular Triple Goddess
rather than the traditional Hera, Athena and Aphrodite of the narrative the
image illustrates. "Celtic Astrology". Graves also argues that the names of the
Ogham letters in the alphabet used in parts of Gaelic Ireland and Britain
contained a calendar that contained the key to an ancient liturgy involving the
human sacrifice of a sacred king, and, further, that these letter names
concealed lines of Ancient Greek hexameter describing the goddess. While
Graves's "Celtic Astrology" has been popularized by some New Age authors, his
"Tree Calendar" has no relation to any historical Celtic calendar. His
interpretations rather rely on the book "Ogygia" by the 17th-century bard
Roderick O'Flaherty Criticism. "The White Goddess" has been seen as a poetic
work where Graves gives his notion of man's subjection to women in love an
"anthropological grandeur" and further mythologises all women in general (and
several of Graves's lovers in specific) into a three-faced moon goddess model.
Graves's value as a poet aside, flaws in his scholarship such as poor
philology, misdating texts (for example, the "Hanes Taliesin" a 16th-18th
century text which Graves believed originated centuries earlier), and use of
out-dated archeology have been criticised. Some scholars, particularly
archeologists, historians and folklorists have not received the work
favourably. Graves was disappointed that his work was "loudly ignored" by many
Celtic scholars; however, it was accepted as history by many non-scholarly
readers and, according to Ronald Hutton, "The White Goddess" remains a major
source of confusion about the ancient Celts and influences many un-scholarly
views of Celtic paganism. Hilda Ellis Davidson criticized Graves as having
"misled many innocent readers with his eloquent but deceptive statements about
a nebulous goddess in early Celtic literature", and stated that he was "no
authority" on the subject matter he presented. While Graves made the
association between Goddesses and the moon appear "natural," it was not so to
the Celts or some other ancient peoples. Some Neopagans have been bemused and
upset by the scholarly criticism that "The White Goddess" has received in
recent years, while others have appreciated its poetic insight but never
accepted it as a work of historical veracity. Michael W. Pharand, though
quoting earlier criticisms, rebutted, "Graves's theories and conclusions,
outlandish as they seemed to his contemporaries (or may appear to us), were the
result of careful observation."
