The Golden Bough The Golden Bough: A Study in Magic and Religion is a wide-
ranging, comparative study of mythology and religion, written by Scottish
anthropologist Sir James George Frazer (1854–1941). It was first published in
two volumes in 1890; and the third edition, published 1906–15, comprised
twelve volumes. The work was aimed at a wide literate audience raised on tales
as told in such publications as Thomas Bulfinch's "The Age of Fable, or Stories
of Gods and Heroes" (1855). It offered a modernist approach to discussing
religion, treating it dispassionately as a cultural phenomenon rather than from
a theological perspective. The impact of "The Golden Bough" on contemporary
European literature was substantial. Subject matter. "The Golden Bough"
attempts to define the shared elements of religious belief to scientific
thought, discussing fertility rites, human sacrifice, the dying god, the
scapegoat and many other symbols and practices which have influenced the 20th
century. Its thesis is that old religions were fertility cults that revolved
around the worship of, and periodic sacrifice of, a sacred king. Specifically,
that mankind progresses from magic through religious belief to scientific
thought. This thesis was concocted around Turner's picture of "The Golden
Bough", a sacred grove where a certain tree grew day and night; a transfigured
landscape in a dream-like vision of the little wood-land lake of Nemi -
- "Diana's Mirror" where religious ceremonies and the "fulfillment of vows" of
priests and kings were held. This king was the incarnation of a dying and
reviving god, a solar deity who underwent a mystic marriage to a goddess of the
Earth, who died at the harvest, and was reincarnated in the spring. Frazer
claims that this legend is central to almost all of the world's mythologies.
The book's title was taken from an incident in the "Aeneid", illustrated by the
British artist Joseph Mallord William Turner: Aeneas and the Sibyl present the
golden bough to the gatekeeper of Hades to gain admission. Reception. The book
scandalized the British public upon its first publication, because it included
the Christian story of Jesus in its comparative study, thus inviting an
agnostic reading of the Lamb of God as a relic of a pagan religion. Frazer
removed his analysis of the Crucifixion to a speculative appendix for the third
edition, and it was entirely missing from the single-volume abridged edition.
Its influence on the emerging discipline of anthropology was pervasive and
undeniable. For example, Bronisław Malinowski, stricken with tuberculosis
shortly after receiving his doctorate in physics and mathematics, read Frazer's
work in the original English to distract himself from his illness. "No sooner
had I read this great work than I became immersed in it and enslaved by it. I
realized then that anthropology, as presented by Sir James Frazer, is a great
science, worthy of as much devotion as any of her elder and more exact studies
and I became bound to the service of Frazerian anthropology." Despite whatever
controversy the work may have generated, and its critical reception amongst
other scholars, "The Golden Bough" had a tremendous effect on the literature of
the period. Robert Graves adapted Frazer's concept of the dying king who is
sacrificed for the good of the kingdom to the romantic idea of the poet's
necessary suffering for the sake of his Muse-Goddess in his Frazer-esque book
on poetry, rituals, and myths "The White Goddess", which was published in 1948.
William Butler Yeats makes reference to it in his poem "Sailing to Byzantium".
H. P. Lovecraft mentions the book in his short story "The Call of Cthulhu". T.
S. Eliot acknowledged indebtedness to Frazer in his first note to his poem "The
Waste Land". William Carlos Williams references it as well in Book Two, part
two, of his extended poem in five books "Paterson". Sigmund Freud, James Joyce,
Ernest Hemingway, D. H. Lawrence, Aleister Crowley, Ezra Pound, William Gaddis,
Mary Renault, Joseph Campbell, Roger Zelazny, Naomi Mitchison (in her "The Corn
King and the Spring Queen"), and Camille Paglia, are some of the authors deeply
influenced by "The Golden Bough". Its literary impact has given it continued
life, even as its direct influence in anthropology has waned. Critical
analysis. The philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein returned time and again to "The
Golden Bough", often enough that his commentaries have been compiled as
"Remarks on Frazer's Golden Bough", edited by Rush Rhees, originally published
in 1967, with the English edition following in 1971. He writes, "Frazer is much
more savage than most of these savages." Weston LaBarre made the observation
that Frazer was "the last of the scholastics", and wrote "The Golden Bough" "as
an extended footnote to a line in Virgil he felt he did not understand." Some
modern criticism sets Frazer in the broader context of the history of ideas,
for example, Robert Ackerman in his "The Myth and Ritual School: J. G. Frazer
and the Cambridge Ritualists". The myth and ritual school includes scholars
Jane Harrison, Gilbert Murray, F. M. Cornford, and A.B. Cook, who were
connecting the new discipline of myth theory and anthropology with traditional
literary classics at the end of the nineteenth century. This school was an
important influence on a great deal of Modernist literature. Publishing
history. Supplement. 1937 edition: "Aftermath: A Supplement to the Golden
Bough"
