Problem of Hell The "Problem of Hell" is a possible ethical problem related to
religions in which portrayals of Hell are cruel, and are thus inconsistent with
the concepts of a just, moral and omnibenevolent God. The problem of Hell
revolves around four key points: it exists in the first place, some people go
there, there is no escape, and it is punishment for actions or inactions done
on Earth. The concept that non-believers of a particular religion face
damnation is called special salvation. The concept that all are saved
regardless of belief is referred to as universal reconciliation. The minority
Christian doctrine that sinners are destroyed rather than punished eternally is
referred to as annihilationism or conditional immortality Issues. There are
several major issues to the problem of hell. The first is whether the existence
of hell is compatible with justice. The second is whether it is compatible with
God's mercy, especially as articulated in Christianity. A third issue,
particular to Christianity, is whether hell is actually populated, or if God
will ultimately restore all immortal souls (universal reconciliation) in the
World to Come. Criticisms of the doctrines of hell can focus on the intensity
or eternity of its torments, and arguments surrounding all these issues can
invoke appeals to the omnipotence, omniscience, and omnibenevolence of God. In
some aspects, the problem of Hell is similar to the problem of evil, assuming
the suffering of Hell is something God could have prevented; The discussion
regarding the problem of evil may thus also be of interest for the problem of
Hell. Judaism. Some forms of Judaism do not share the traditional majority
Christian belief in the immortality of the soul, therefore Sheol (Hades in the
Septuagint, "the grave" in many instances in the King James Bible) is simply
the destination for all the dead, and no "problem of Sheol" exists. Gehenna,
found in the Mishnah, is the destination of the living and raised wicked at
judgement day, and the place of either of destruction, in the Mishnah, or in
some rabbinical texts eternal torment, which would potentially create a
"problem of Gehenna." Christianity. In Christianity, Hell has traditionally
been regarded as a punishment for wrongdoing or sin in this life, as a
manifestation of divine justice. Nonetheless, the extreme severity or infinite
duration of the punishment might be seen as incompatible with justice. However,
Hell is not seen as strictly a matter of retributive justice even by the more
traditionalist churches. For example, the Eastern Orthodox see it as a
condition brought about by, and the natural consequence of, free rejection of
God's love. The Roman Catholic Church teaches that hell is a place of
punishment brought about by a person's self-exclusion from communion with God.
In some ancient Eastern Christian traditions, Hell and Heaven are distinguished
not spatially, but by the relation of a person to God's love. [http://
www.theandros.com/restoration.html Justice. Some opponents of the doctrine of
hell claim that the punishment is disproportionate to any crimes that could be
committed, an overkill. Because human beings have a finite lifespan, they can
commit only a finite number of sins, yet hell is an infinite punishment. In
this vein, Jorge Luis Borges suggests in his essay "La duración del Infierno"
that no transgression can warrant an infinite punishment on the grounds that
there is no such thing as an "infinite transgression". The philosopher Immanuel
Kant wrote in "Religion Within the Boundaries of Mere Reason" that since
morality lies ultimately in a person's disposition, and as disposition is
concerned with the adoption of universal principles, or as he called them:
"maxims", that every human being is guilty of, in one sense, an infinite amount
of violations of the law, and so consequently an infinite punishment is not
unjustified. Against the injustice of Hell, some theists, particularly in the
Thomistic tradition, have argued that God's infinite dignity requires that any
transgression against him warrants an infinite punishment. On this view, the
correct punishment for a crime is proportional to the status of the wronged
individual. Opponents of this view object citing that the severity of a crime
is determined by the amount of harm done to the victim, not by their lifespan
or scope of being. An omnipotent being, by definition, cannot be harmed.
Therefore, by condemning souls to an "eternal" damnation, God would be
punishing souls for actions that had no effect on him. Others reply that the
correct punishment is also proportional to the intentions and understanding of
the wrongdoer. Another justice problem involves some denominations of
Christianity which believe that only by accepting Jesus can one be saved from
Hell. The apparent contradiction in this postulate is brought to light by the
realization that some people have never heard of Jesus and then must
automatically go to Hell. There is an apparent injustice in being punished for
something one does not know exists. However a few branches of Christianity
teach that one cannot sin unless one performs an action knowing it is wrong, or
performs an action knowing it could result in harm. Catholics say that as far
as strict necessity is concerned, faith in Christ may suffice in implicit form,
though explicitly is better; and implicit faith in Christ may even be
compatible with misled rejection of appearing Christendom. The eternity of Hell
has also been justified in the Scholastic tradition by appeal to the
irrevocability of the reprobate's decision to oppose God after death. Eternity
is perceived not as an infinite stretch of time, but as an unchanging present.
This argument however, could be challenged by the view that if wrongdoers are
punished in hell, they must suffer, for which it is required that the
wrongdoers must retain their sentience, in order to experience it. If this
sentience is retained it follows that the wrongdoers would be aware of their
transgressions and capable of repenting them. Another argument against the
justice of Hell is that humans are not culpable for their sins, since sinning
is unavoidable to them. "For all have sinned, and come short of the glory of
God;" (Epistle to the Romans, 3:23) Also, if God is omniscient/prescient, He
knows the final state long before they enter into either heaven or hell, except
in the case of free will. From the reasoning that God created them in the first
place, and this in this knowledge some go so far as to ascribe to Him the
culpability for a person's eternal fate. The question is all the more burning
if one states exactly this (positive reprobation, Calvinism). However, the
(theoretically distinct) doctrine of negative reprobation without consideration
of future demerits (Domingo Báñez) — God elects some, the others fall into
sin on their own, but of necessity, and are bluff by God to scare us ...then
judged for their sins—will be felt not so much distinct "in practice". If the
angels and the blessed without inconvenience to their free-will partake of an
irresistible grace (which is thus shown possible), even who holds an at least
conditional election of every human being (Molinism and, despite notable
academic success of Thomist grace theology within the Catholic pale, in
practice the stand of Catholics) needs to say that God could have rescued some
and did not. Most Christians attribute this inclination to sin to some variant
of the doctrine of original sin, rather than to God directly. This aspect of
the problem of hell reduces in part to the theistic problem of free will. The
monotheistic religions, even those that lack a doctrine of original sin, agree
that sin is to be imputed to the sinner and not to God. In fact, to state that
humans are inculpable for their sins is a contradiction in terms, for guilt is
part of a sin's definition; if re-formulated to "there are no such things as
sins, only bad actions inculpable", Christians generally will disagree. Some
theological schools, most notably the Scotists and Calvinists, have taken the
position that divine justice is entirely a matter of God's positive law, not
deducible by natural reason. Thus, whatever God does is just by definition, and
if this contradicts our human intuitions of justice, then our intuitions are
mistaken. This view is opposed by Thomists and others who espouse a natural law
view of morality, or consider that divine goodness ought to be congruent with
human virtue and rationality. Modern scholars find the concept of Hell to be
compatible with society's concept of Justice during the time of Jesus Christ.
Romans and Egyptians and many others cultures during that time included torture
as part of their justice system. Romans had crucifixion and Egyptians had
desert sun death. All these acts of torture were considered necessary (as to
deter others) or good (as to punish the immoral). Divine mercy. Another issue
is the problem of harmonizing the existence of Hell with God's infinite mercy
or omnibenevolence. As in the problem of evil, some apologists argue that the
torments of Hell are attributable not to a defect in God's benevolence, but in
human free will. Although a benevolent God would prefer to see everyone saved,
he would also allow humans to control their own destinies. This view opens the
possibility of seeing Hell not as retributive punishment, but rather as an
option that God allows, so that people who do not wish to be with God are not
forced to be. C. S. Lewis most famously proposed this view in his book "The
Great Divorce", saying: "There are only two kinds of people in the end: those
who say to God, 'Thy will be done,' and those to whom God says, in the end,
'Thy will be done.'" A problem remains regarding Christian theologies' teaching
about grace, which grant that God could indeed convert the heart of every
sinner and yet leave the freedom of the will in its integrity. In the Thomistic
tradition, God grants sufficient grace for salvation to all people, yet it only
effects salvations for some. The early modern controversies on grace among the
Jansenists, Jesuits and Dominicans focused in part on the question of
sufficient and efficient grace, and whether these differed in kind. Some modern
critics of the doctrine of Hell (such as Marilyn McCord Adams) claim that, even
if Hell is seen as a choice rather than as punishment, it would be unreasonable
for God to give such flawed and ignorant creatures as ourselves the
responsibility of our eternal destinies. Jonathan Kvanvig, in "The Problem of
Hell" (1993), agrees that God would not allow one to be eternally damned by a
decision made under the wrong circumstances. One should not always honor the
choices of human beings, even when they are full adults, if, for instance, the
choice is made while depressed or careless. On Kvanvig's view, God will abandon
no person until they have made a settled, final decision, under favorable
circumstances, to reject God, but God will respect a choice made under the
right circumstances. Once a person finally and competently chooses to reject
God, out of respect for the person's autonomy, God allows them to be
annihilated. The fact that one must believe in God or be subject to eternal
damnation or annihilation, even if the choice is completely made by a person,
is often perceived as a scare tactic that inevitably forces or scares one into
having to believe in God, and God would seem corrupt and evil in saying, "You
can believe in me or not, but if you do not, you will either suffer for all
eternity in Hell (i.e., eternal damnation) or else be destroyed or obliterated
out-of-existence (i.e., annihilation)". The argument runs flaw in that as a
matter of fact, God does not say "you can believe in me or not". But this
rebuttal seems to work against itself by implying that since God does not give
any other option, humans have no choice but to believe in God to enter Heaven;
this view would ultimately brand God as evil for demanding worship on the
threat of eternal damnation or annihilation. Islam. Discussion of a problem of
hell is not common in Islam. However, Edip Yüksel recognises the contradiction
between Allah the merciful and eternal torture. He argues that evildoers will
be punished in hell for an appropriate period then cease to exist, so their
suffering (which is graphically described in the Quran and therefore must
happen) will not be eternal, but only a just amount. Proposed answers.
Annihilationism. As with other Jewish writings of the Second Temple period, the
New Testament distinguishes two words for "hell": Hades, the grave, and Gehenna
where God "can destroy both body and soul". A minority of Christians read this
to mean that neither Hades nor Gehenna are eternal. Annihilationism is the
doctrine that sinners are destroyed rather than tormented forever in "hell" or
the lake of fire. It is directly related to the doctrine of conditional
immortality, the idea that a human soul is not immortal unless it is given
eternal life. Annihilationism asserts that God will eventually destroy or
annihilate the wicked (even if the souls of the wicked would be immortal
otherwise), leaving only the righteous to live on in immortality. Conditional
immortality asserts that souls are naturally mortal and those who reject Christ
are separated from the sustaining power of God, thus dying off on their own.
Annihilationist proponents include the Seventh-day Adventists, Bible Students,
Jehovah's Witnesses, Christadelphians, and some other Protestant Christians.
Free will. An example from popular culture can be found in the graphic novel
series The Sandman. In it, souls go to Hell because they believe they deserve
to, rather than being condemned to it by God or Satan. Universal
reconciliation. Universal reconciliation is the doctrine or belief of some
Christians that all will receive salvation because of the love and mercy of
God. Universal reconciliation does not commit one to the position that one can
be saved apart from Christ. It only commits one to the position that all will
eventually be saved through Christ. Neither does universal reconciliation
commit one to the position that there is no hell or damnation – hell can well
be the consuming fire through which Christ refines those who turn from him.
Universal reconciliation only claims that one day Death and Hades themselves
will be destroyed and all immortal souls will be reconciled to Him. It was
traditionally claimed by some western scholars such as the Universalist
historian George T. Knight (1911) and Pierre Batiffol (English translation
1914) that a form of universal salvation could be found among some theologians
in early Christianity. Origen interpreted the New Testament's reference (Acts
3:21) to a "restoration of all things", (Greek: apocatastasis of all things),
as meaning that sinners "might" be restored to God and released from Hell,
returning the universe to a state identical to its pure beginnings. This theory
of apocatastasis could be easily interpreted to imply that even devils would be
saved, as was the case during the later Origenist controversies. Greek orthodox
scholars do not count Gregory of Nyssa (A.D. 331-395) as a believer in
Universal Salvation. In the 17th century, a belief in Christian universalism
appeared in England and the USA. Christian Universalists such as Hosea Ballou
argued that Jesus taught Universalist principles including universal
reconciliation and the divine origin and destiny of all souls, and that these
teachings were further developed by Saint Paul, Saint Peter, and Saint John the
Apostle. Ballou also argued that some Universalist principles were taught or
foreshadowed in the Old Testament. Critics of universalism maintain that the
Bible does not teach universal salvation. Empty Hell theory. Some Catholic
theologians such as Karl Rahner, Gisbert Greshake, and Cardinal Hans Urs von
Balthasar have at length discussed the possibility that any man may be led by a
final grace to freely willed repentance if necessary at least at some point in
the process of dying. This possible process is described thus by the late
Munich dogmatic Prof. Michael Schmaus: "If in terms of theology death is a
meeting of a man with God in so far as God calls man and he answers obedience,
readiness and love, it would be surprising if in the moment of dying the
chances of taking position never were given, even contrary to the outward look.
[...] One cannot apply to experience as counter-argument, because [...] what
happens then in the interior and behind the physiological processes is only
known by someone who experiences dying itself, and this unto its very end. We
may assume that in the dissolving process of the earthly union of body and soul
and with the progressing breakaway from earthly entanglements, a special
awakeness accrues to man [...] in which he can say yea or nay to God.". If this
be true, there is room for speculation that confronted with God and given grace
by him, the number of those breaking away from Him may be zero. This is not a
contradiction of the fixed Church doctrine of an existing and eternal hell,
which remains a possibility. However, there is difficulty in interpreting the
vast amount of Hell's Scriptural descriptions as only what-ifs. Balthasar was
careful to describe his opinion that Hell might be empty as merely a hope, but
even this claim was rejected by most conservative Catholics, including Cardinal
Avery Dulles. The Syllabus says in no. 17 that we may not (even) hope for the
salvation of all non-Catholics; this seems to mean conversely that there is at
least one non-Catholic in all history who will not be saved. Matthew 7:21-23
seems to say that "many" will be reprobed; of course "many" need not be many
statistically because even one would be too much in a respect, however "many"
seems to be at least "some" and not nobody.
