The Urantia Book The Urantia Book (sometimes called the Urantia Papers or The
Fifth Epochal Revelation) is a spiritual and philosophical book that discusses
God, Jesus, science, cosmology, religion, history and destiny. It originated in
Chicago sometime between 1924 and 1955. The authorship remains unverified. The
authors introduce the word "Urantia" as the name of the planet Earth and state
that their intent is to "present enlarged concepts and advanced truth" in an
"endeavor to expand cosmic consciousness and enhance spiritual perception."
Among other topics, the book expounds on the origin and meaning of life,
humankind's place in the universe, the relationship between God and people, and
the life of Jesus. The Urantia Foundation, a U.S.-based non-profit group, first
published "The Urantia Book" in 1955 in English and has since translated it
into 14 other languages. In 2001, a jury found that the English book's
copyright was no longer valid after 1983. The English text is a public domain
work in the United States, and in 2006, the international copyright on the
English text expired. Authorship. The exact circumstances of the origin of "The
Urantia Book" are unknown. The book and its publishers do not name a human
author. Instead, it is written as if directly presented by numerous celestial
beings appointed to the task of providing an "epochal" religious revelation.
For each paper, either a named celestial being, an order of being, or a group
of beings is credited as its author. As early as 1911, William S. Sadler and
his wife Lena Sadler, physicians in Chicago and well known in the community,
are said to have been approached by a neighbor who was concerned because she
would occasionally find her husband in a deep sleep and breathing abnormally.
She reported that she was unable to wake him at these times. The Sadlers came
to observe the episodes, and over time, the individual produced verbal
communications that claimed to be from "student visitor" spiritual beings. This
changed in early 1925 with a "voluminous handwritten document," which from then
on became the regular method of purported communication. The Sadlers were both
respected physicians, and William Sadler was a debunker of paranormal claims,
who is portrayed as not believing in the supernatural. In 1929, he published a
book called "The Mind at Mischief", in which he explained the fraudulent
methods of mediums and how self-deception leads to psychic claims. He wrote in
an appendix that there were two cases that he had not explained to his
satisfaction. The other exception has to do with a rather peculiar case of
psychic phenomena, one which I find myself unable to classify... I was brought
in contact with it, in the summer of 1911, and I have had it under my
observation more or less ever since, having been present at probably 250 of the
night sessions, many of which have been attended by a stenographer who made
voluminous notes. A thorough study of this case has convinced me that it is not
one of ordinary trance...In no way are these night visitations like the
séances associated with spiritualism. At no time during the period of eighteen
years' observation has there been a communication from any source that claimed
to be the spirit of a deceased human being... Eighteen years of study and
careful investigation have failed to reveal the psychic origin of these
messages... Psychoanalysis, hypnotism, intensive comparison, fail to show that
the written or spoken messages of this individual have origin in his own
mind... Its philosophic content is quite new, and we are unable to find where
very much of it has ever found human expression... Its philosophy is
consistent. It is essentially Christian and is, on the whole, entirely
harmonious with the known scientific facts and truths of this age. In 1924, a
group of Sadler's friends, former patients, and colleagues began meeting for
Sunday intellectual discussions, but became interested in the strange
communications when Sadler mentioned the case and read samples at their
request. Shortly afterwards, a communication reportedly was received that this
group would be allowed to devise questions and that answers would be given by
celestial beings through the "contact personality." Sadler presented this
development to the group, and they generated hundreds of questions without full
seriousness, but their claim is that it resulted in the appearance of answers
in the form of fully written papers. They became more impressed with the
quality of the answers and continued to ask questions, until all papers now
collected together as "The Urantia Book" were obtained. The group was known as
the Forum. A smaller group of five individuals called the Contact Commission,
including the Sadlers, was responsible for gathering the questions from the
Forum, acting as the custodians of the handwritten manuscripts that were
presented as answers, and arranging for proofreading and typing of the
material. The Sadlers and others involved, now all deceased, claimed that the
papers of the book were physically materialized from 1925 until 1935 in a way
that was not understood even by them, with the first three parts being
completed in 1934 and the fourth in 1935. The last Forum gathering was in 1942.
After the last of Part IV was obtained in 1935, an additional period of time
supposedly took place where requests for clarifications resulted in revisions.
Sadler and his son William (Bill) Sadler, Jr. at one point wrote a draft
introduction and were told that they could not add their introduction. The
Foreword was then "received." Bill Sadler is noted to have composed the table
of contents that is published with the book. The communications purportedly
continued for another two decades while members of the Forum studied the book
in depth, and according to Sadler and others, permission to publish it was
given to them in 1955. The Urantia Foundation was formed in 1950 as a tax-
exempt educational society in Illinois, and through privately raised funds, the
book was published under international copyright on October 12, 1955. Only the
members of the Contact Commission witnessed the activities of the sleeping
subject, and only they knew his identity. The individual is claimed to have
been kept anonymous in order to prevent undesirable future veneration or
reverence for him. Martin Gardner states that an explanation concerning the
origin of the book more plausible than celestial beings is that the Contact
Commission, particularly William Sadler, was responsible. Gardner's conclusion
is that a man named Wilfred Kellogg was the sleeping subject and authored the
work from his subconscious mind, with William Sadler subsequently editing and
authoring parts. A statistical analysis using the Mosteller and Wallace methods
of stylometry indicates at least nine authors were involved, and by
comparatively analyzing the book against Sadler's "The Mind at Mischief", does
not indicate authorship or extensive editing by Sadler, without ruling out the
possibility of limited edits. Copyright status. In 1999, Harry McMullan III and
the Michael Foundation published a book, "Jesus–A New Revelation", which
included verbatim 76 of the 196 papers included in "The Urantia Book". McMullan
and the Michael Foundation subsequently sought a legal declaration that the
Urantia Foundation's copyright in "The Urantia Book" was either invalid or,
alternatively, that the copyright had not been infringed upon. Urantia
Foundation's copyright was held to have expired in 1983 because the book was
deemed to have been neither a composite work nor a commissioned work for hire.
These two arguments having been rejected, a U.S. court held that, since the
Conduit had deceased prior to 1983, only the Conduit's heirs would have been
eligible to renew the copyright in 1983 and, since they had not done so, the
Urantia Foundation's copyright in the book had expired and the book had
therefore passed into the public domain. This decision was upheld on appeal.
The international copyright on the English text expired in 2006. Teachings.
Nature of God. According to "The Urantia Book", God is the creator and upholder
of all reality—an omniscient, omnipresent, omnipotent, infinite, and eternal
spirit personality. The most fundamental teaching about God in the book is that
he is a Father. "The face which the Infinite turns toward all universe
personalities is the face of a Father, the Universal Father of love." Even
during the development of numerous other themes in "The Urantia Book", God as a
loving Father is emphasized as the central, unifying attitude of God toward the
universe. God is said to be a mystery though because of the infinite scope of
his perfection and his attributes. God, according to the book, is one Deity who
functions on a range of different levels of reality, both personal and
impersonal. God is taught to exist in a Trinity of three perfectly
individualized persons who are co-equal: God the Father, God the Son, and God
the Spirit. These persons are referred to by additional titles in the book,
primarily as the "Universal Father," "Eternal Son," and "Infinite Spirit."
While stating that the concept of one God in three persons is difficult to
fully understand, the book says that the idea "in no manner violates the truth
of the divine unity. The three personalities of Paradise Deity are, in all
universe reality reactions and in all creature relations, as one." The Father,
Son, and Spirit are considered "existential" persons of Deity, those in
existence from the eternal past to the eternal future. In addition, three
persons of Deity are described who are "experiential," or incomplete and in the
process of actualizing: God the Supreme, God the Ultimate, and God the
Absolute. Of these three, God the Supreme, or "the Supreme Being," is given the
most explanation, as the person of Deity evolving in time and space to unify
finite reality and the infinite. The persons of God the Ultimate and God the
Absolute are considered to be remote from the possibility of comprehension and
are covered on a limited basis. Many types of celestial beings are enumerated
in the book, and one of particular note is a joint "offspring" of the Universal
Father and Eternal Son called a "Creator Son." A divine Creator Son is
considered the full representation of the Universal Father and Eternal Son that
is possible to people. Jesus of Nazareth is identified as a Creator Son who
incarnated on Earth and whose life and teachings are portrayed as the fullest
revelation of the personality and attitude of God ever given to humanity. God
and the individual. Each person is said to receive one such fragment at the
time of his or her first independent moral decision, on average around the age
of five years and ten months. The Adjuster then serves noncoercively as a
divine partner in the mind of the individual for the rest of life, and to the
extent that a person consents with their free will to want to find God, it
leads the person toward more mature, spiritualized thinking. Through the
practice of learning how to follow the inner leadings of the Adjuster—choose
"God's will"—the individual progresses to greater God consciousness and
spiritual growth. A person's Thought Adjuster is described as distinct from
either the soul or the conscience. In "The Urantia Book"'s teachings, the
degree to which a human mind chooses to accept its Adjuster's guidance becomes
the degree to which a person's soul "grows" and becomes a reality that can then
survive death. The soul is in essence an embryonic spiritual development, one
parental factor being the divine Adjuster and the other being the human will.
The book many times links the biblical New Testament teachings of becoming like
a little child in attitude of trust and sincerity as being the stance each
person should have toward God. It says the attitude of open-minded teachability
facilitates spiritual growth in liaison with the work of the Thought Adjuster
and invariably leads a person to love and serve other people. It also says,
"But you yourself are mostly unconscious of this inner ministry. You are quite
incapable of distinguishing the product of your own material intellect from
that of the conjoint activities of your soul and the Adjuster." Persistently
embracing sin is considered the same as rejecting the leadings of the Adjuster,
rejecting the will of God. Constant selfishness and sinful choosing lead
eventually to iniquity and full identification with unrighteousness, and since
unrighteousness is unreal, it results in the eventual annihilation of the
individual's identity. Personalities like this become "as if they never were."
The book says that "in the last analysis, such sin-identified individuals have
destroyed themselves by becoming wholly unreal through their embrace of
iniquity." The concepts of Hell and reincarnation are not taught. The book says
that a person ultimately is destined to fuse with his or her divine fragment
and become one inseparable entity with it, if the person chooses to accept the
Adjuster's leadings and become self-identified with it. The act of fusion is
the moment when a human personality has successfully and unalterably won
eternal life, described as typically taking place in the afterlife, but also a
possibility during earthly life. The result during human life is a "fusion
flash," with the material body consumed in a fiery light and the soul
"translated" to the afterlife. The Hebrew prophet Elijah being taken to heaven
without death in "chariots of fire" is said to be a rare example in recorded
history of a person who attained fusion. Once fused with his or her fragment of
God, a person continues as an ascending citizen in the universe and travels
through numerous worlds on a long, adventurous pilgrimage of growth and
learning that eventually leads to God and residence on Paradise. Mortals who
reach this stage are called "finaliters." The book goes on to discuss the
potential destinies of these "glorified mortals." "The Urantia Book" places
much emphasis on the idea that all individuals have the same opportunity to
know God, and it says nothing can hinder a human being's spiritual progression
if he or she is motivated to be spirit led. The book regards human life on
earth as a "short and intense test," and "is not so much a probation as an
education" and the afterlife as a continuation of training that begins in
material life. The "religion of Jesus" is considered to be practiced by way of
loving God the Father with a person's whole being, thereby learning to love
each person the way Jesus loves people; that is, recognizing others as brothers
and sisters and being of unselfish service to them. Cosmology. The book teaches
that the universe is vastly older than current scientific theories state, and
that the universe is the product of intelligent and purposeful organization.
Information about cosmology and astronomy is provided in parts I, II, and III
of the book. The book discusses space and time, describes the formation and
evolution of galaxies, stars, and planets. The authors claim that the universe
is teeming with intelligent life located mainly on the planets of extrasolar
planetary systems. The book describes that at the center of the cosmos is the
stationary Isle of Paradise — the dwelling place of God — with Paradise
being surrounded by "Havona," a created universe containing a billion perfect
worlds, around which seven evolutionary "superuniverses" circle. All the
groupings of galaxies of inhabited and uninhabited universes circle around the
Isle of Paradise, the gravitational center of the universe, which some Urantia
Book readers believe is located in Great Attractor. The term "universe" in the
book is used to denote a number of different scales of organization. A
"superuniverse" is roughly the size of a galaxy or group of galaxies, and the
seven superuniverses along with Paradise-Havona are together designated as the
"grand universe." A "local universe" is a portion of a superuniverse, with
100,000 local universes being in each superuniverse. Beyond the seven
superuniverses, enormous uninhabited "outer space levels" are described. The
term "master universe" refers to what in modern usage would be the total
universe — all existing matter and space taken as a whole. The physical size
of a local universe is not directly stated, but each is said to have up to 10
million inhabited worlds. Urantia is said to be located in a remote local
universe named "Nebadon," which itself is part of superuniverse number seven,
"Orvonton." The book discusses alternative explanations for the universe's
origin and offers explanations for some observed astronomical phenomena. For
example, the book claims that astronomic redshift arises from "numerous factors
of error" and is "wholly unreliable" beyond nearby galaxies, the greatest
distortion being caused by the seven superuniverses revolving around Paradise
in the direction opposite from the galaxies in the "outer space levels."
Science. The book attempts to synchronize religion, science and philosophy and
many statements about science appear in the text. "The ideal human estate is
that in which philosophy, religion, and science are welded into a meaningful
unity.." "Science teaches man to speak the new language of mathematics and
trains his thoughts along lines of exacting precision. And science also
stabilizes philosophy through the elimination of error, while it purifies
religion by the destruction of superstition." The book holds science in high
regard, however it opposes the purely materialistic science. About conflict
between science and religion the book states: "In reality, true religion cannot
become involved in any controversy with science; it is in no way concerned with
material things." "The Urantia Book" debunks astrology as "pseudo science of
Babylon" and also states: "But the frank, honest, and fearless search for true
causes gave birth to modern science: It turned astrology into astronomy,
alchemy into chemistry, and magic into medicine."  The only apparent
anticipation of science the book has made, in Gardner's opinion, is that it
says the magnetic sense that homing pigeons possess is "not wholly wanting as a
conscious possession by mankind." In 1980, a British zoologist, Robin Baker,
published evidence that humans have a limited magnetic sense. Kary Mullis a
Nobel Prize winning American biochemist indicates on his personal website a
striking coincidences between a story of Adam and Eve in "The Urantia Book" and
the finding published in "Science": 309 (2005) that a variant of a gene that
regulates brain size arose roughly 37,000 years ago with a 95% confidence
interval of 14,000 to 60,000 years. According to The Urantia Book: "Adam and
Eve arrived on Urantia, from the year A.D. 1934, 37,848 years ago". Mark
McMenamin, a professor of geology, quotes a section of the book describing a
billion-year-old supercontinent that subsequently split apart, forming ocean
basins where early marine life developed. He says, "This amazing passage,
written in the 1930s, anticipates scientific results that did not actually
appear in the scientific literature until many decades later." McMenamin also
states, "Of course I am being selective here in my choice of quotations, and
there are reams of scientifically untenable material in "The Urantia Book"." In
his book "Supercontinent: Ten Billion Years in the Life of Our Planet" Ted
Nield comments on McMenamin's statement, saying "These quotations are
selective, of course, which is always the key to making the prophecies of
mystics look 'uncanny' If you look at other parts of the same passage from
which those quotations come, you can find a rich and colourful mixture of half-
correct ideas and plain nonsense... But the trick of a successful prophet is to
say enough things, and to phrase them sufficiently elliptically, so that the
occasional correct hits within the general rambling leap out at the prepared
mind - just like cloud patterns, or the face of the Man in the Moon." In this
case, he says, both scientists and mystics "apparently independently
'discovered'" this supercontinent, "and it was the mystics who sleepwalked
there first." Adherents believe that there are some examples of scientific
foreknowledge "in The Urantia Book". History and future of the world. The
book's extensive teachings about the history of the Earth include its physical
development about 4.5 billion years ago, the gradual changes in conditions that
allowed life to develop, and long ages of organic evolution that started with
microscopic marine life and led to plant and animal life in the oceans, later
on land. The emergence of humans is presented as having occurred about a
million years ago from a branch of superior primates originating from a lemur
ancestor. "The Urantia Book" says "this story is graphically told within the
fossil pages of the vast 'stone book' of world record ... the pages of this
gigantic biogeologic record unfailingly tell the truth if you but acquire skill
in their interpretation." Unlike current scientific views, evolution is said to
be orderly and controlled. Primordial life is taught to have been intelligently
planned, implanted, and monitored by "Life Carriers," instead of arising
spontaneously. The book says that "mortal man is not an evolutionary accident,"
and that the purpose of evolution on a planet such as Urantia is to produce
creatures of "will dignity" that can develop spiritual natures and survive
material existence, going on to have eternal spiritual careers. "The Urantia
Book" teaches not only biological evolution, but that human society and
spiritual understandings evolve by slow progression, subject both to periods of
rapid improvement and the possibility of retrogression. Progress is said to
follow a divine plan that includes periodic gifts of revelation and ministry by
heavenly teachers, which eventually will lead to an ideal world status of
"light and life" in the far distant future. Though there is the ideal and
divine plan, it is said to be fostered and administered by various orders of
celestial beings who are not always perfect. Through mistakes or deliberate
rebellion, the plan can be wrecked, requiring long spans of time to recoup lost
progress. Urantia is said to be a markedly "dark and confused" planet that is
"greatly retarded in all phases of intellectual progress and spiritual
attainment" compared to more typical inhabited worlds, due to an unusually
severe history of rebellion and default by its spiritual supervisors. The
Urantia Book describes the successive eras of biologic, intellectual, and
spiritual uplifting as "epochal revelations" of God and his ministering agents
to man. According to The Urantia Book the Lucifer Rebellion was a disruption of
God's divine plan in the history of Urantia. In the book, Lucifer is classified
as a "Primary Lanonandek Son" and head administrator of his attending system.
He proposed the concepts of personal liberty, self-autonomy, and self-
assertion. These concepts were adopted on Urantia first by the head of its
human affairs, Caligastia. By joining Lucifer, Caligastia caused the eventual
collapse of the same fragile civilization he had come to guide as "Planetary
Prince" of the realm. The Urantia Book emphasizes that despite its dark
history, Urantia has been the beneficiary of much good. The life of Jesus,
designated in The Urantia Book as the "fourth epochal revelation," is said to
have redeemed the planet of the blunders of rebellion. "And when Jesus came
down from his sojourn on Mount Hermon, the Lucifer rebellion in Satania and the
Caligastia secession on Urantia were virtually settled." Life and teachings of
Jesus. More than one third of the content of the book (Part IV) is devoted to a
narrative of the life and teachings of Jesus. From his birth in Bethlehem and
infancy in Alexandria, the story extends through his years of school in
Nazareth and his work as a young carpenter after the death of his father
Joseph, in order to sustain his widowed mother and eight brothers and sisters.
Topics include a girl Rebecca who fell in love with him, and Jesus's rejection
of her proposal for marriage. Jesus is said to have traveled around the
Mediterranean Basin (Alexandria, Rome, Athens etc. ) and regions of the Middle
East (Mesopotamia and Caspian Sea region) in his late 20s, and after these
trips, the narrative begins to parallel what is depicted in the New Testament,
but with numerous extra details. John the Baptist and the twelve Apostles are
people of flesh and blood with their virtues and flaws. Jesus's teachings, as
presented to his apostles and followers, is exhaustive, enlarged and presented
in contemporary language. The work of the Women's Evangelistic Corps appointed
by Jesus is also narrated. As Jesus's mission on Earth, the book describes the
seventh bestowal of a Creator Son. Each Creator Son can rule his part of the
universe – (termed the "local universe") – after completing seven
bestowals, the final of them is in the likeness of mortal flesh. This is the
one of reasons why the Creator Son came to Earth – Urantia. The other purpose
of his mission is stated in the book: "A Creator Son did not incarnate in the
likeness of mortal flesh and bestow himself upon the humanity of Urantia to
reconcile an angry God but rather to win all mankind to the recognition of the
Father's love and to the realization of their sonship with God." The core of
Jesus's teaching is that men are children of God and their fellows are their
brethren in one big family; when Jesus is their elder brother. The idea of the
kingdom of God as presented by Jesus is the spiritual rule of Heavenly Father
in the hearts of men, but many of his followers misinterpret this idea as a
purely earthly kingdom. The book states that today Christianity is rather a
religion about Jesus instead religion of Jesus – his original teaching –
which the book reinstates. Consideration as literature. "The Urantia Book" has
been enjoyed by some as a form of science fiction, historical fiction or
fantasy. "The Urantia Book" is noted for its high level of internal consistency
and an advanced writing style. Skeptic Martin Gardner, in a book otherwise
highly critical of "The Urantia Book", writes that it is "highly imaginative"
and that the "cosmology outrivals in fantasy the cosmology of any science-
fiction work known to me." Parts I, II, and III are chiefly written in
expository language. The papers are informational, matter-of-fact, and
instructional. Part IV of the book is written as a biography of Jesus's life,
and some feel it is a rich narrative with well-developed characters, high
attention to detail, woven sub-plots, and realistic dialogue. Considered as
literature, Part IV is favorably compared to other retellings of Jesus's life,
such as "The Gospel According to Jesus Christ" by José Saramago and "Behold
the Man" by Michael Moorcock. Martin Gardner considers Part IV to be an
especially "well-written, impressive work," and says, "Either it is accurate in
its history, coming directly from higher beings in position to know, or it is a
work of fertile imagination by someone who knew the New Testament by heart and
who was also steeped in knowledge of the times when Jesus lived." He assesses
that in his view the narrative is consistent with human authorship. Critical
views. Criticisms of claims as a revelation. In Paper 92, "The Later Evolution
of Religion," the authors refer to the papers as the fifth revelation of
"epochal significance" to humankind, the fourth epochal revelation having been
the life of Jesus. The claim of revelation in "The Urantia Book" has been
criticized for various reasons. Skeptics such as Martin Gardner say it is a
product of human efforts rather than a revelation because some of its science
is flawed. Because the book does not support certain tenets of Christianity,
such as the atonement doctrine, while at the same time presenting an account of
parts of Jesus's life absent in the Bible, others with a Christian viewpoint
have argued it cannot be genuine. Other critics have felt that at over 2,000
pages, nearly twice the length of the King James Bible, it is too long,
complex, and bureaucratic. Criticism of its science. Skeptics like Martin
Gardner see the science in "The Urantia Book" as clear reflections of the views
that prevailed at the time the book is said to have originated. The claim by
the authors that no unknown scientific discoveries could be imparted is seen as
a ruse to allow mistakes to be dismissed later. That presentation of post-1955
scientific knowledge is avoided is taken to be evidence it was written by
humans and not by celestial beings with superior knowledge. While some
adherents of the book believe that all of the information in "The Urantia Book"
including its science is literally true, others accept the book's caveats and
do not believe that the science is fully accurate. Meredith Sprunger, a liberal
believer in "The Urantia Book" and retired minister in the United Church of
Christ, writes, "research has revealed that virtually all of the scientific
material found in "The Urantia Book" was the accepted scientific knowledge of
the period in which the book was written, was held by some scientists of that
time, or was about to be discovered or recognized." He argues against its
literal infallibility and that fundamentalism over the book is "just as
untenable as Biblical fundamentalism." Other believers maintain that the book
has prophetically anticipated scientific advances already. They believe more of
its science — if not all of it — will be proven correct in the future.
Gardner evaluated many of these claims as of 1995 and found them unconvincing.
Some arise because the book is said to have been indited by the revelators by
1935, but then was not published until 1955. Discoveries from science during
the two intervening decades can be perceived as prophetic by believers, while
skeptics think such facts were added prior to publication. For instance, the
catalytic role that carbon plays in the sun's nuclear reactions is described in
the book, though Hans Bethe's announcement of the discovery was not made until
1938. Most criticism of "The Urantia Book" is based on Martin Gardner's book,
"Urantia: The Great Cult Mystery". However this book has also been severely
criticized. Sandra Collins, SLIS, Univ. of Pittsburg, wrote in "Library
Journal": "Given the lack of scholarly distance from the subject, the
patronizing tone and the gross editorializing, it would be difficult to
recommend this book to any library." Sarah Lewis, of the Univ. of Wales,
stated: "Martin Gardner is one of the few people outside the Urantia Foundation
who has undertaken research into the movement. His research is worth noting,
although his position as a great skeptic does not allow his conclusions much
academic credibility." "The Urantia Book" and the use of published material.
"The Urantia Book" states in its Foreword that more than one thousand "human
concepts representing the highest and most advanced planetary knowledge of
spiritual values and universe meanings" were selected in preparing the papers.
The authors say that they were required to "give preference to the highest
existing human concepts pertaining to the subjects to be presented" and would
"resort to pure revelation only when the concept of presentation has had no
adequate previous expression by the human mind." One of the authors wrote in
Part IV: "I well know that those concepts which have had origin in the human
mind will prove more acceptable and helpful to all other human minds." In
recent years, students of the papers have found that the free use of other
sources appears to be true. None of the material allegedly used from other
sources is directly cited or referenced within the book. In 1992, a reader of
"The Urantia Book", Matthew Block, self-published a paper that showed nineteen
possible examples of "The Urantia Book" utilizing material published earlier.
All of the source authors identified in Block's paper were published in English
between 1905 and 1943 by U.S. publishers and are typically scholarly or
academic works that contain concepts and wording similar to what is found in
"The Urantia Book". Block has since claimed to have discovered over 125 source
books and articles, written by over 90 authors, which were incorporated into
the papers. The use of outside source materials was studied separately by
Gardner and Gooch, and they concluded that the book did plagiarize many of the
sources noted by Block. For instance, Gardner and Block note that Paper 85
appears to have been taken from the first eight chapters of "Origin and
Evolution of Religion" by Edward Washburn Hopkins, published by Yale University
Press in 1923. Each section of the paper corresponds to a chapter in the book,
with several passages possibly used as direct material, and further material
used in Papers 86-90 and 92. (In addition to the book's "heavy indebtedness to
Hopkins," Gardner discovered that Hopkins was a major reference in an earlier
book authored by Sadler, adding to Gardner's view that it is more likely Sadler
had a hand in writing or editing "The Urantia Book" than that celestial beings
wrote it.) Likewise, much of "The Urantia Book" material relating to the
evolution of mankind appears to have been directly taken from Henry Fairfield
Osborn, "Man Rises to Parnassus: Critical Epochs in the Prehistory of Man"
published by Princeton University Press in 1928. Block and other believers do
not see the use of the source materials as plagiarism, but express a view
instead that the quality of the way the material was borrowed is consistent
with authorship by celestial beings. Meredith Sprunger, a believer and defender
of "The Urantia Book", stated in a letter to Gardner that if humans wrote the
book, the plagiarisms would indeed be disturbing, but not if it was written by
supermortals. As we mentioned earlier, the authors of The Urantia Book clearly
state that they have used human sources and why they are using them. The use of
these human sources is often handled in such a way as to arrive at a position
differing from that of the human author. To accuse the superhuman authors of
plagiarism is a bit far fetched, as they are not concealing the use of human
sources and they deliberately avoided reference to specific human
personalities... Adherents. There is no way to gauge how many adherents there
may be as there is no central organization to census. Informal study groups
"tend to sprout, ripen, then vanish or splinter" and have not been counted
reliably. Readers sometimes join study groups after reading on their own for
years or decades, others join them soon after developing an interest in the
book, while "for most, worship remains as individual as the act of reading."
Disagreements over the legal ownership of the book, its interpretation, and the
reception of new revelations have led to some splintering, though these
disagreements appear to have been settled to the satisfaction of most
adherents. The movement generally incorporates a nonsectarian view, contending
that individuals with different religious backgrounds can receive the book's
teachings as an enrichment rather than as a contradiction of their faiths. The
small movement inspired by "The Urantia Book" has not developed clergy or
institutions such as churches, reading rooms, or temples. As of 2006, the
Urantia Foundation had one office in Chicago and five people on staff. Sarah
Lewis notes that, "The Urantia Revelation is not securing legitimacy through
historically known and accepted means to any great degree, nor is it even using
common language that would increase the likelihood of understanding and
therefore acceptance. It introduces new concepts and a new language, and this
does not make acceptance any easier." She assesses that the movement is
uncontroversial compared to other ones, "lacking the zealous proselytizing
found within many other groups," and that it is therefore likely to remain
small and unaffected by opposing views. Urantia Foundation advocated a "slow
growth" policy in the past and had not significantly marketed the book. Sales
by Urantia Foundation went from 7,000 in 1990 to 24,700 in 1997, and steadily
increased to nearly 38,000 in 2000, an "upturn that seems to represent a
genuine trend rather than just some spike on a sales chart," however in 2011
the Foundation reported worldwide annual sales of 16,000 copies and over 60,000
downloads from various sites. More than half of the books printed by Urantia
Foundation are in languages other than English, particularly Spanish and
Portuguese. Since the book was determined to be in the public domain in 2001,
other organizations, such as The Urantia Book Fellowship under the publishing
name Uversa Press, have also published the book. Copies of "The Urantia Book"
are on the Internet in various formats and it has been adapted to more recent
platforms such as the Kindle and the iOS App Store. Several audio books of the
text are also on the Internet. The International Urantia Association had
twenty-six reader associations worldwide as of 2002, and the Urantia Book
Fellowship (formerly the Urantia Brotherhood, founded in 1955 with Urantia
Foundation as the original social fraternal organization of believers) claimed
roughly twelve hundred official members, with the highest concentrations in the
West of the United States and the Sun Belt, especially California, Colorado,
Florida, and Texas. It appears an increasing number of people are forming study
groups, participating in Internet discussion groups, and hosting or visiting
websites about it. Teaching Mission. The Teaching Mission is a group of Urantia
channellers. According to Richard Landes, "The foundation considers them self-
deluded, but they have created a schism that continues to disrupt the
movement." Symbols. One symbol described in "The Urantia Book" consists of
three concentric azure circles on a white background. The circles are said to
have symbolized several trinity associations in the history of humankind. The
authors of "The Urantia Book" indicate its revealed meaning as being "the
infinity, eternity, and universality of the Paradise Trinity of divine
maintenance and direction." Urantia Foundation, the original publisher, placed
the concentric circles on the cover of "The Urantia Book" and has a United
States trademark. The circles are used to indicate other organizations
affiliated with the foundation. The Urantia Association International, one of
the main readership organizations in the movement, has been licensed by Urantia
Foundation to use the three azure concentric circles on a white background.
Some other groups use the symbol in various altered forms. The Urantia Book
Fellowship, an independent reader organization established in 1955, uses a
similar symbol.
