Theology Theology (from Ancient Greek meaning "God" and , "-logy", meaning
"study of") is the systematic and rational study of religion and its influences
and of the nature of religious truths, or the learned profession acquired by
completing specialized training in religious studies, usually at a university
or school of divinity or seminary. Definition. Augustine of Hippo defined the
Latin equivalent, "theologia", as "reasoning or discussion concerning the
Deity"; Richard Hooker defined "theology" in English as "the science of things
divine". The term can, however, be used for a variety of different disciplines
or forms of discourse. History of the term. "Theology" translates into English
from the Greek "theologia" (θεολογία) which derived from "theos"
(θεός), meaning God, and "logia" (λόγια), meaning utterances, sayings,
or oracles (a word related to "logos" [λόγος], meaning word, discourse,
account, or reasoning) which had passed into Latin as "theologia" and into
French as "théologie". The English equivalent "theology" (Theologie, Teologye)
had evolved by 1362. The sense the word has in English depends in large part on
the sense the Latin and Greek equivalents had acquired in Patristic and
medieval Christian usage, though the English term has now spread beyond
Christian contexts. Various religions. In academic theological circles there is
some debate as to whether theology is an activity peculiar to the Christian
religion, such that the word "theology" should be reserved for Christian
theology, and other words used to name analogous discourses within other
religious traditions. It is seen by some to be a term only appropriate to the
study of religions that worship a deity (a "theos"), and to presuppose belief
in the ability to speak and reason about this deity (in "logia")—and so to be
less appropriate in religious contexts that are organized differently
(religions without a deity, or that deny that such subjects can be studied
logically). ("Hierology" has been proposed as an alternative, more generic
term.) Analogous discourses. Some academic inquiries within Buddhism, dedicated
to the rational investigation of a Buddhist understanding of the world, prefer
the designation Buddhist philosophy to the term Buddhist theology, since
Buddhism lacks the same conception of a "theos". Jose Ignacio Cabezon, who
argues that the use of "theology" "is" appropriate, can only do so, he says,
because "I take theology not to be restricted to discourse on God ... I take
'theology' not to be restricted to its etymological meaning. In that latter
sense, Buddhism is of course "a"theological, rejecting as it does the notion of
God." Within Hindu philosophy, there is a solid and ancient tradition of
philosophical speculation on the nature of the universe, of God (termed
"Brahman" in some schools of Hindu thought) and of the Atman (soul). The
Sanskrit word for the various schools of Hindu philosophy is Darshana (meaning
"view" or "viewpoint"). Vaishnava theology has been a subject of study for many
devotees, philosophers and scholars in India for centuries, and in recent
decades also has been taken on by a number of academic institutions in Europe,
such as the Oxford Centre for Hindu Studies and Bhaktivedanta College. "See
also: Krishnology" Islamic theological discussion that parallels Christian
theological discussion is named "Kalam"; the Islamic analogue of Christian
theological discussion would more properly be the investigation and elaboration
of Islamic law, or "Fiqh". "Kalam ... does not hold the leading place in Muslim
thought that theology does in Christianity. To find an equivalent for
'theology' in the Christian sense it is necessary to have recourse to several
disciplines, and to the usul al-fiqh as much as to kalam." (L. Gardet) In
Judaism, the historical absence of political authority has meant that most
theological reflection has happened within the context of the Jewish community
and synagogue, rather than within specialized academic institutions.
Nevertheless, Jewish theology historically has been very active and highly
significant for Christian and Islamic theology. It is sometimes claimed,
however, that the Jewish analogue of Christian theological discussion would
more properly be Rabbinical discussion of Jewish law and Jewish Biblical
commentaries. Theology as an academic discipline. The history of the study of
theology in institutions of higher education is as old as the history of such
institutions themselves. For example, Taxila was an early centre of Vedic
learning, possible from the 6th century BC or earlier; the Platonic Academy
founded in Athens in the 4th century BC seems to have included theological
themes in its subject matter; the Chinese Taixue delivered Confucian teaching
from the 2nd century BC; the School of Nisibis was a centre of Christian
learning from the 4th century AD; Nalanda in India was a site of Buddhist
higher learning from at least the 5th or 6th century AD; and the Moroccan
University of Al-Karaouine was a centre of Islamic learning from the 10th
century, as was Al-Azhar University in Cairo. Modern Western universities
evolved from the monastic institutions and (especially) cathedral schools of
Western Europe during the High Middle Ages (see, for instance, the University
of Bologna, Paris University and Oxford University). From the beginning,
Christian theological learning was therefore a central component in these
institutions, as was the study of Church or Canon law): universities played an
important role in training people for ecclesiastical offices, in helping the
church pursue the clarification and defence of its teaching, and in supporting
the legal rights of the church over against secular rulers. At such
universities, theological study was initially closely tied to the life of faith
and of the church: it fed, and was fed by, practices of preaching, prayer and
celebration of the Mass. During the High Middle Ages, theology was therefore
the ultimate subject at universities, being named "The Queen of the Sciences"
and serving as the capstone to the Trivium and Quadrivium that young men were
expected to study. This meant that the other subjects (including Philosophy)
existed primarily to help with theological thought. Christian theology’s
preeminent place in the university began to be challenged during the European
Enlightenment, especially in Germany. Other subjects gained in independence and
prestige, and questions were raised about the place in institutions that were
increasingly understood to be devoted to independent reason of a discipline
that seemed to involve commitment to the authority of particular religious
traditions. Since the early nineteenth century, various different approaches
have emerged in the West to theology as an academic discipline. Much of the
debate concerning theology's place in the university or within a general higher
education curriculum centres on whether theology's methods are appropriately
theoretical and (broadly speaking) scientific or, on the other hand, whether
theology requires a pre-commitment of faith by its practitioners, and whether
such a commitment conflicts with academic freedom. Theology and ministerial
training. In some contexts, theology has been held to belong in institutions of
higher education primarily as a form of professional training for Christian
ministry. This was the basis on which Friedrich Schleiermacher, a liberal
theologian, argued for the inclusion of theology in the new University of
Berlin in 1810. For instance, in Germany, theological faculties at state
universities are typically tied to particular denominations, Protestant or
Roman Catholic, and those faculties will offer denominationally bound
(konfessionsgebunden) degrees, and have denominationally bound public posts
amongst their faculty; as well as contributing ‘to the development and growth
of Christian knowledge’ they ‘provide the academic training for the future
clergy and teachers of religious instruction at German schools.’ In the
United States, several prominent colleges and universities were started in
order to train Christian ministers. Harvard, Georgetown University, Boston
University, and Princeton all had the theological training of clergy as a
primary purpose at their foundation. Seminaries and bible colleges have
continued this alliance between the academic study of theology and training for
Christian ministry. There are, for instance, numerous prominent US examples,
including The Catholic Theological Union in Chicago, the Graduate Theological
Union in Berkeley, Criswell College in Dallas, the Southern Baptist Theological
Seminary in Louisville, Trinity Evangelical Divinity School in Deerfield,
Illinois, and Dallas Theological Seminary. Assemblies of God Theological
Seminary in Springfield, Missouri. Theology as an academic discipline in its
own right. In some contexts, theology is pursued as an academic discipline
without formal affiliation to any particular church (though individual members
of staff may well have affiliations to different churches), and without
ministerial training being a central part of their purpose. This is true, for
instance, of many departments in the United Kingdom, including the Department
of Theology and Religion at the University of Exeter, and the Department of
Theology and Religious Studies at the University of Leeds. Traditional academic
prizes, such as the University of Aberdeen's Lumsden and Sachs Fellowship, tend
to be awarded for performance in theology (or divinity as it is known at
Aberdeen) and religious studies. But see below, Critics of theology as an
academic discipline. Theology and religious studies. Theology and religious
studies are sometimes seen as being in tension; they are sometimes held to
coexist without serious tension; and it is sometimes denied that there is as
clear a boundary between them as the brief description here suggests.
Criticism. There is an ancient tradition of skepticism about theology, followed
by a more modern rise in secularist and atheist criticism. Criticism by
philosophers. Whether or not reasoned discussion about the divine is possible
has long been a point of contention. Protagoras, as early as the fifth century
BC, who is reputed to have been exiled from Athens because of his agnosticism
about the existence of the gods, said that "Concerning the gods I cannot know
either that they exist or that they do not exist, or what form they might have,
for there is much to prevent one's knowing: the "obscurity of the subject" and
the shortness of man's life." Thomas Paine the American revolutionary, wrote in
his two part work "The Age of Reason", "The study of theology, as it stands in
Christian churches, is the study of nothing; it is founded on nothing; it rests
on no principles; it proceeds by no authorities; it has no data; it can
demonstrate nothing; and it admits of no conclusion. Not anything can be
studied as a science, without our being in possession of the principles upon
which it is founded; and as this is the case with Christian theology, it is
therefore the study of nothing." Ludwig Feuerbach, the atheist philosopher
sought to dissolve theology in his work "Principles of the Philosophy of the
Future": "The task of the modern era was the realization and humanization of
God – the transformation and dissolution of theology into anthropology." This
mirrored his earlier work "The Essence of Christianity" (pub. 1841), for which
he was banned from teaching in Germany, in which he had said that theology was
a "web of contradictions and delusions". A.J. Ayer the logical-positivist,
sought to show in his essay "Critique of Ethics and Theology" that all
statements about the divine are nonsensical and any divine-attribute is
unprovable. He wrote: "It is now generally admitted, at any rate by
philosophers, that the existence of a being having the attributes which define
the god of any non-animistic religion cannot be demonstratively proved... ll
utterances about the nature of God are nonsensical." Walter Kaufmann the
philosopher, in his essay "Against Theology", sought to differentiate theology
from religion in general. "Theology, of course, is not religion; and a great
deal of religion is emphatically anti-theological... An attack on theology,
therefore, should not be taken as necessarily involving an attack on religion.
Religion can be, and often has been, untheological or even anti-theological."
However, Kaufmann found that "Christianity is inescapably a theological
religion". Bertrand Russell felt the Earth, the Solar system, the sun and even
the Milky Way Galaxy are all insignificant in the vast universe, therefore it
is highly improbable that the universe was created for mankind. Russell further
believed the various arguments for the existence of God were unsound and the
vindictiveness of Jesus towards those who did not accept his teachings
suggested moral weakness rather than Godlike perfection. Critics of theology as
an academic discipline. Critics dating back to the 18th century have questioned
the suitability of theology as an academic discipline and In the 21st century
criticism continues. Dr. Maarten Boudry, a philosopher and outspoken atheist in
2012 persuaded two theology conferences to accept meaningless word salad as
serious theology. This illustrates the difficulty of telling meaningful
theology from what is meaningless. Jerry Coyne feels theology is “beliefs
that have no basis in fact.” Coyne suspects theologians are deliberately
obscure and baffling. He suggests asking theologians how they know reality
corresponds to what they say and how they know they personally are closer to
understanding reality than other theologians. Coyne feels theology confuses
ordinary people. Richard Dawkins, a prominent member of the New Atheism
movement, believes that theology is not a suitable subject for a university
because it is not scientific, saying that "a positive case now needs to be made
that it has any real content at all, and that it has any place in today's
universities." Science enabled spectacular achievements ranging from space
exploration through to development of vaccines and other life saving treatments
for infections while in Dawkins' opinion theology has achieved nothing. PZ
Myers has described theology as "smart old white guys" inventing
rationalizations for what they personally want to believe. Myers sees no
difference in principle between the mutually contradictory theologies of
different denominations and sects or even religious cults. He also believes
that answers to important questions have come from outside theology. General
criticism. Charles Darwin used theology to show that in Darwin's opinion living
organisms are not the way an intelligent designer would have made them.
Therefore in Darwin's opinion theology supports natural selection. Steven
Dilley, a philosopher of science educated at Arizona State University claims
the above. Charles Bradlaugh believed theology prevented human beings achieving
liberty. Bradlaugh noted theologians of his time stated that modern scientific
research contradicted sacred scriptures therefore the scriptures must be wrong.
Robert G. Ingersoll stated that when theologians had power the majority of
people lived in hovels while a privileged few had palaces and cathedrals. In
Ingersol's opinion science rather than theology improved people's lives.
Ingersol maintained further that trained theologians reason no better than a
person who assumes the devil must exist because pictures resemble the devil so
exactly. Mark Twain stated that several mutually incompatible religions claimed
to be the True Religion and that people cut each the throats of others for
following a different theology.
