Divinization (Christian) In Christian theology, divinization (deification,
making divine, or theosis) is the transforming effect of divine grace, the
spirit of God, or the atonement of Christ. It literally means to become more
divine, more like God, and/or take upon a divine nature. New Testament. Paul
the Apostle taught in numerous passages that humans are sons of God (as in of
Paul's Epistle to the Romans). Paul conceives of the resurrection as
immortalization. Paul also writes that the saints would judge the world and the
angels, and "all things are yours, whether Paul or Apollos or Cephas or the
world or life or death or the present or the future—all are yours, and you
are Christ's, and Christ is God's." In his Second Epistle to the Corinthians he
writes "we all, with unveiled face, beholding the glory of the Lord, are being
transformed into the same image from one degree of glory to another." The fact
that Christians attain "the same image" indicates a close union and even
identification with Christ, the image of God. In , Jesus is described as
defending himself against a charge of blasphemy, There are ample biblical
passages to support the belief that men can become "Gods" by overcoming the
world through the sacrifice of Jesus Christ. There are also several biblical
passages which state that men may become heirs of God and joint heirs with
Christ and will inherit all things just as Christ inherits all things. Latter-
day Saints believe that they are received into the "church of the firstborn,"
meaning they inherit as though they were the firstborn. Those who become as God
shall inherit all things, become one with Christ and with the Father and
receive glory, although man will always be subject to God. Western Christian
theology. Roman Catholicism. Of a more modern Roman Catholic theologian it has
been said: "The theological vision of Karl Rahner, the German Jesuit whose
thought has been so influential in the Roman Catholic Church and beyond over
the last fifty years, has at its very core the symbol of "theopoiesis". The
process of divinization is the center of gravity around which move Rahner's
understanding of creation, anthropology, Christology, ecclesiology, liturgy,
and eschatology. The importance of this process for Rahner is such that we are
justified in describing his overall theological project to be largely a matter
of giving a coherent and contemporary account of divinization." The Roman Rite
liturgy expresses the doctrine of divinization or "theosis" in the prayer said
by the deacon or priest when preparing the Eucharistic chalice: "By the mystery
of this water and wine may we come to share in the divinity of Christ who
humbled himself to share in our humanity." The Catholic Church teaches that God
gives to some souls, even in the present life, a very special grace by which
they can be mystically united to God even while yet alive: this is true
mystical contemplation. This is seen as the culmination of the three states, or
stages, of perfection through which the soul passes: the purgative way (that of
cleansing or purification), the illuminative way (so called because in it the
mind becomes more and more enlightened as to spiritual things and the practice
of virtue), and the unitive way (that of union with God by love and the actual
experience and exercise of that love). The writings attributed to St. Dionysius
the Areopagite were highly influential in the West, and their theses and
arguments were adopted by Peter Lombard, Alexander of Hales, Albert the Great,
St. Thomas Aquinas and St. Bonaventure. According to these writings, mystical
knowledge must be distinguished from the rational knowledge by which we know
God, not in his nature, but through the wonderful order of the universe, which
is a participation of the divine ideas. Through the more perfect knowledge of
God that is mystical knowledge, a knowledge beyond the attainments of reason
even enlightened by faith, the soul contemplates directly the mysteries of
divine light. In the present life this contemplation is possible only to a few
privileged souls, through a very special grace of God: it is the θέωσις
(theosis), μυστικὴ ἕνωσις (mystical union). Meister Eckhart too
taught a deification of man and an assimilation of the creature into the
Creator through contemplation. Deification, to which, in spite of its presence
in the liturgical prayers of the West, Western theologians have given less
attention than Eastern, is nevertheless prominent in the writing of Western
mystics. Catherine of Siena had God say: "They are like the burning coal that
no one can put out once it is completely consumed in the furnace, because it
has itself been turned into fire. So it is with these souls cast into the
furnace of my charity, who keep nothing at all, not a bit of their own will,
outside of me but are completely set afire in me. There is no one who can seize
them or drag them out of my grace. They have been made one with me and I with
them." John of the Cross wrote: "In thus allowing God to work in it, the
soul... is at once illumined and transformed in God, and God communicates to it
His supernatural Being, in such wise that it appears to be God Himself, and has
all that God Himself has. And this union comes to pass when God grants the soul
this supernatural favour, that all the things of God and the soul are one in
participant transformation; and the soul seems to be God rather than a soul,
and is indeed God by participation; although it is true that its natural being,
though thus transformed, is as distinct from the Being of God as it was
before." Protestant views. Theosis is not emphasized in Protestant theology
except among Methodists and Wesleyans, whose religious tradition has always
placed strong emphasis on entire sanctification, and whose doctrine of
sanctification has many similarities with the Catholic/Eastern Orthodox concept
of theosis or divinization. Early during the Reformation, thought was given to
the doctrine of union with Christ ("unio cum Christo") as the precursor to the
entire process of salvation and sanctification. This was especially so in the
thought of John Calvin. "Theosis" as a doctrine developed in a distinctive
direction among Methodists, and elsewhere in the pietist movement which
reawakened Protestant interest in the asceticism of the early Catholic Church,
and some of the mystical traditions of the West. Distinctively, in Wesleyan
Protestantism theosis sometimes implies the doctrine of "entire sanctification"
which teaches, in summary, that it is the Christian's goal, in principle
possible to achieve, to live without any (voluntary) sin ("Christian
perfection"). In 1311 the Roman Catholic Council of Vienne declared this
notion, "that man in this present life can acquire so great and such a degree
of perfection that he will be rendered inwardly sinless, and that he will not
be able to advance farther in grace" (Denziger §471), to be a heresy. Thus
this particular Protestant (primarily Methodist) understanding of theosis is
substantially different from that of the Roman Catholic, Orthodox, or Anglican
Churches. This doctrine of Christian perfection was sharply criticized by many
in the Church of England during the ministry of John Wesley and continues to be
controversial among Protestants and Anglicans to this day. Dietrich Bonhoeffer
echoed the convictions of Athanasius when he wrote "He became like human
beings, so that we would be like him" More recently, the Finnish school of
Lutheran thought has drawn close associations between theosis and
justification. Primarily spearheaded by Tuomo Mannermaa, this line of
theological development grew out of talks between the Evangelical Lutheran
Church of Finland and the Russian Orthodox Church between 1970 and 1986.
Mannermaa argues in his book, "Christ Present in Faith", that the real exchange
between Christ and sinful humanity, a theme prevalent in Luther's writing, is
synonymous with Eastern views of theosis. It is in this real exchange which
Mannermaa says "the union between Christ and the believer makes the latter a
‘completely divine ." While this departure from traditional Lutheran thought
is sometimes hailed as "the threshold of a third Luther Renaissance," other
Lutheran scholars disagree and argue that the idea of theosis violates Luther's
theology of the cross principles by ignoring the real distinction that is
axiomatic for not only Luther, but for orthodox Christianity as a whole. One of
the most prominent scholars is Robert Kolb, who primarily roots this critique
in Luther's use of marriage metaphors concerning the Christian's relationship
with God. Kolb writes "This view ignores the nature of the ‘union’ of bride
and bridegroom that Luther employed so far." Evangelical scholarship has
yielded yet another view of theosis. Patristic scholar Donald Fairbairn has
argued that theosis in the Greek Fathers is not an ontological exchange between
the Son and the Christian. In general Fairbairn argues that the change that
occurs in theosis is "something more than mere status but less than the
possession of God's very substance." In his book, "Life in the Trinity", he
argues that through our relationship with the Son we are brought into the same
kind of relationship with the Father (and Spirit) that the Son has. He supports
this argument by identifying a distinction between the Son's warm-fellowship
with the Father, and his ontological union with the Father. He argues that the
Greek Fathers, primarily Athanasius and Cyril of Alexandria were clear that we
never share ontological union with God, but only this intimate fellowship.
Nevertheless, similarities of doctrine notwithstanding, within the whole of the
conception of the Christian life which the idea of theosis is intended to
comprehend, differences of doctrine are disclosed especially in differences of
practice among the various branches of Christianity. Eastern Orthodox theology.
Theosis. The teaching of deification or "theosis" in Eastern Orthodoxy refers
to the attainment of "likeness of God", "union with God" and/or "reconciliation
with God". Deification has three stages in its process of transformation:
"katharsis", "theoria", "theosis". "Theosis" as such is the goal, it is the
purpose of life, and it is considered achievable only through a synergy (or
cooperation) between humans' activities and God's uncreated energies (or
operations). "Theosis" is an important concept in Orthodox theology deriving
from the fact that Orthodox theology is of an explicitly mystical character.
Theology in the Eastern Orthodox church is what is derived from saints or
mystics of the tradition, and Eastern Orthodox consider that ""no one who does
not follow the path of union with God can be a theologian."" In Eastern
Orthodoxy, theology is not treated as an academic pursuit, but it is based on
revelation (see gnosiology), meaning that Orthodox theology and its theologians
are validated by ascetic pursuits, rather than academic degrees (i.e.
scholasticism). Vision of God. Through "theoria", the contemplation of the
triune God, human beings come to know and experience what it means to be fully
human (the created image of God); through their communion with Jesus Christ,
God shares Himself with the human race, in order to conform them to all that He
is in knowledge, righteousness, and holiness. As God became human, in all ways
except sin, He will also make humans god (Holy or saintly), in all ways except
his divine essence (uncaused or uncreatedness). As a patristic and historical
teaching. For many Church Fathers, "theosis" goes beyond simply restoring
people to their state before the Fall of Adam and Eve, teaching that because
Christ united the human and divine natures in Jesus' person, it is now possible
for someone to experience closer fellowship with God than Adam and Eve
initially experienced in the Garden of Eden, and that people can become more
like God than Adam and Eve were at that time. Some Orthodox theologians go so
far as to say that Jesus would have become incarnate for this reason alone,
even if Adam and Eve had never sinned. Ascetic practice. The journey toward
theosis includes many forms of praxis. The most obvious form being Monasticism
and Clergy. Of the Monastic tradition the practice of hesychasm is most
important as a way to establish a direct relationship with God. Living in the
community of the church and partaking regularly of the sacraments, and
especially the Eucharist, is taken for granted. Also important is cultivating
"prayer of the heart", and prayer that never ceases, as Paul exhorts the
Thessalonians (1 and 2). This unceasing prayer of the heart is a dominant theme
in the writings of the Fathers, especially in those collected in the
Philokalia. It is considered that no one can reach theosis without an
impeccable Christian living, crowned by faithful, warm, and, ultimately, silent
(hesychast), continuous Prayer of the Heart. The "doer" in deification is the
Holy Spirit, with whom the human being joins his will to receive this
transforming grace by praxis and prayer, and as Saint Gregory Palamas teaches,
the Christian mystics are deified as they become filled with the Light of Tabor
of the Holy Spirit in the degree that they make themselves open to it by
asceticism (divinization being not a one-sided act of God, but a loving
cooperation between God and the advanced Christian, which Palamas considers a
synergy). This synergeia or co-operation between God and Man does not lead to
mankind being absorbed into the God as was taught in earlier pagan forms of
deification like Henosis. Rather it expresses unity, in the complementary
nature between the created and the creator. Acquisition of the Holy Spirit is
key as the acquisition of the spirit leads to self-realization. Western
rejection of Eastern Orthodox hesychasm as a path to theosis. The practice of
ascetic prayer called hesychasm in the Eastern Orthodox Church is centered on
the enlightenment or deification, theosis of man. Roman Catholic theologians
have generally expressed a negative view of hesychasm. The (hesychasm) doctrine
of Gregory Palamas won almost no following in the West, and the distrustful
attitude of Barlaam in its regard prevailed among Western theologians,
surviving into the early 20th century, as shown in Adrian Fortescue's article
on hesychasm in the 1910 Catholic Encyclopedia. In the same period, Siméon
Vailhé described some aspects of the teaching of Palamas as "monstrous
errors", "heresies" and "a resurrection of polytheism", and called the
hesychast method for arriving at perfect contemplation "no more than a crude
form of auto-suggestion" The twentieth century saw a remarkable change in the
attitude of Roman Catholic theologians to Palamas, a "rehabilitation" of him
that has led to increasing parts of the Western Church considering him a saint,
even if uncanonized. Some Western scholars maintain that there is no conflict
between Palamas's teaching and Roman Catholic thought. According to G. Philips,
the essence-energies distinction is "a typical example of a perfectly
admissible theological pluralism" that is compatible with the Roman Catholic
magisterium. Jeffrey D. Finch claims that "the future of East-West
rapprochement appears to be overcoming the modern polemics of neo-scholasticism
and neo-Palamism". Some Western theologians have incorporated the theology of
Palamas into their own thinking. Among the treasures of "the venerable and
ancient tradition of the Eastern Churches" with which Pope John Paul II said
Catholics should be familiar, so as to be nourished by it, he mentioned in
particular "the teaching of the Cappadocian Fathers on divinization (which)
passed into the tradition of all the Eastern Churches and is part of their
common heritage. This can be summarized in the thought already expressed by
Saint Irenaeus at the end of the second century: God passed into man so that
man might pass over to God. This theology of divinization remains one of the
achievements particularly dear to Eastern Christian thought." Other Christian
theologies. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The Latter Day
Saint movement teaches the doctrine of "exaltation," by which is meant a
literal divinization. Certain similarities can be drawn between the two, though
a significant difference exists in that Mormons believe that humanity may not
only be given God's holiness and perfection but also his essential divinity or
godhood. This doctrine stems from the movement's founder Joseph Smith, Jr., who
taught that God the Father is an advanced and glorified man. According to
Smith, through obedience to Christ and the gradual acquisition of knowledge,
the faithful may eventually become gods in the afterlife. Although they achieve
this status, they continue to worship God and Christ. Christian universalist
views. There has been a modern revival of the concept of theosis (often called
"manifest sonship" or "Christedness") among Christians who hold to the doctrine
of universal reconciliation or "apocatastasis", especially those with a
background in the charismatic Latter Rain Movement or even the New Age and New
Thought movements. The statement of faith of the Christian Universalist
Association includes theosis in one of its points. A minority of charismatic
Christian universalists believe that the "return of Christ" is a corporate body
of perfected human beings who are the "Manifested Sons of God" instead of a
literal return of the person of Jesus, and that these Sons will reign on the
earth and transform all other human beings from sin to perfection during an age
that is coming soon (a particularly "universalistic" approach to
millennialism). Some liberal Christian universalists with New Age leanings
share a similar eschatology.
