Theoria Theoria (Œ∏ŒµœâœÅŒØŒ±) is Greek for contemplation. It corresponds to
the Latin word "contemplatio", "looking at", "gazing at", "being aware of," and
it is an important term in theology. Introduction. The Greek "theoria"
(Œ∏ŒµœâœÅŒØŒ±), from which the English word "theory" is derived, meant
"contemplation, speculation, a looking at, things looked at", from "theorein"
(Œ∏ŒµœâœÅŒµ·øñŒΩ) "to consider, speculate, look at", from "theoros"
(Œ∏ŒµœâœÅœåœÇ) "spectator", from "thea" (Œ∏Œ≠Œ±) "a view" + "horan"
(·ΩÅœÅ·æ∂ŒΩ) "to see". It expressed the state of being a . Both Greek
"Œ∏ŒµœâœÅŒØŒ±" and Latin "contemplatio" primarily meant looking at things,
whether with the eyes or with the mind. Taking philosophical and theological
traditions into consideration, the term was used by the ancient Greeks to refer
to the act of experiencing or observing and then comprehending through
consciousness, which is called the nous or "eye of the soul" (Matthew 6:
22‚Äì34). Insight into being and becoming (called Noesis) through the intuitive
truth called faith, in God (action through faith and love for God), leads to
truth through our contemplative faculties. This theory, or speculation, as
action in faith and love for God, is then expressed famously as "Beauty shall
Save the World". This expression comes from a mystical or gnosiological
perspective, rather than a scientific, philosophical or cultural one.
Christianity took up the use of both the Greek ("theoria") and Latin
("contemplatio", contemplation) terminology to describe various forms of prayer
and the process of coming to know God. Eastern and Western traditions of
Christianity grew apart as they incorporated the general notion of theoria into
their respective teachings. Several scholars have also demonstrated the
similarities between the Greek idea of "theoria" and the Indian idea of
"dar≈õana" (darshan), including Ian Rutherford, Binod Kumar Agarwala, Gregory
Grieve, and Michael A. Di Giovane. Fourth-century B.C. Athens. For Plato, what
the contemplative ("theoros") contemplates ("theorei") are the Forms, the
realities underlying the individual appearances, and one who contemplates these
atemporal and aspatial realities is enriched with a perspective on ordinary
things superior to that of ordinary people. Philip of Opus viewed "theoria" as
contemplation of the stars, with practical effects in everyday life similar to
those that Plato saw as following from contemplation of the Forms. "Leading a
contemplative life can be considered Aristotle's answer to the question what
life humans ought to live. ‚Ä¶ The more humans engage in contemplation, the
closer they are to their gods and the more perfect will be their happiness."
Aristotle's view that the best life would be a purely contemplative
(intellectual) one was disputed by the Stoics and others, such as the
Epicureans, who saw speculation as inferior to practical ethics. Middle
Platonism and Neoplatonism considered contemplation superior and saw as its
goal the knowledge of God or union with him, so that a "contemplative life" was
a life devoted to God rather than to any kind of activity. Commenting on
Aristotle's view of the lack of practical usefulness of the contemplation of
"theoria", Andrew Louth said: "The word "theoria" is derived from a verb
meaning to look, or to see: for the Greeks, knowing was a kind of seeing, a
sort of intellectual seeing. Contemplation is, then, knowledge, knowledge of
reality itself, as opposed to knowing how: the kind of know-how involved in
getting things done. To this contrast between the active life and contemplation
there corresponds a distinction in our understanding of what it is to be human
between reason conceived as puzzling things out, solving problems, calculating
and making decisions - referred to by the Greek words "phronesis" and
"dianoia", or in Latin by "ratio" - and reason conceived as receptive of truth,
beholding, looking - referred to by the Greek words "theoria" or "sophia"
(wisdom) or "nous" (intellect), or in Latin "intellectus". Augustine expressed
this distinction by using "scientia" for the kind of knowledge attained by
"ratio", and "sapientia", wisdom, for the kind of knowledge received by
"intellectus". Human intelligence operates at two levels: a basic level
concerned with doing things, and another level concerned with simply beholding,
contemplating, knowing reality." Plotinus. In the "Enneads" of Plotinus, a
founder of Neoplatonism, everything is contemplation ("theoria") and everything
is derived from contemplation. The first hypostasis, the One, is contemplation
(by the nous, or second hypostasis) in that "it turns to itself in the simplest
regard, implying no complexity or need"; this reflecting back on itself
emanated (not created) the second hypostasis, Intellect (in Greek ŒùŒø·ø¶œÇ,
"Nous"), Plotinus describes as "living contemplation", being "self-reflective
and contemplative activity par excellence", and the third hypostatic level has
"theoria". Knowledge of The One is achieved through experience of its power, an
experience that is contemplation ("theoria") of the source of all things.
Plotinus agreed with Aristotle's systematic distinction between contemplation
("theoria") and practice ("praxis"): dedication to the superior life of
"theoria" requires abstension from practical, active life. Plotinus explained:
"The point of action is contemplation. ‚Ä¶ Contemplation is therefore the end
of action" and "Such is the life of the divinity and of divine and blessed men:
detachments from all things here below, scorn of all earthly pleasures, the
flight of the lone to the Alone." Christianity. Some Neoplatonic ideas were
adopted by Christianity, among them the idea of contemplation, taken over by
Gregory of Nyssa for example. The Brill Dictionary of Gregory of Nyssa remarks
that contemplation in Gregory is described as a "loving contemplation", and,
according to Thomas Keating, the Greek Fathers of the Church, in taking over
from the Neoplatonists the word "theoria", attached to it the idea expressed by
the Hebrew word "da'ath", which, though usually translated as "knowledge", is a
much stronger term, since it indicates the experiential knowledge that comes
with love and that involves the whole person, not merely the mind. In addition,
the Christian's "theoria" is not contemplation of Platonic Ideas nor of the
astronomical heavens of Pontic Heraclitus, but is contemplative prayer, the
knowledge of God that is impregnated with love. Together with the meaning of
"proceeding through philosophical study of creatures to knowledge of God",
"Œ∏ŒµœâœÅŒØŒ±" had, among the Greek Fathers, another important meaning, namely
"studying the Scriptures", with an emphasis on the spiritual sense. Later,
contemplation came to be distinguished from intellectual life, leading to the
identification of Œ∏ŒµœâœÅŒØŒ± or "contemplatio" with a form of prayer
distinguished from discursive meditation in both East and West. Some make a
further distinction, within contemplation, between contemplation acquired by
human effort and infused contemplation. An exercise long used among Christians
for acquiring contemplation, one that is "available to everyone, whether he be
of the clergy or of any secular occupation", is that of focusing the mind by
constant repetition a phrase or word. Saint John Cassian recommended use of the
phrase "O God, make speed to save me: O Lord, make haste to help me". Another
formula for repetition is the name of Jesus. or the Jesus Prayer, which has
been called "the mantra of the Orthodox Church", although the term "Jesus
Prayer" is not found in the Fathers of the Church. The author of "The Cloud of
Unknowing" recommended use of a monosyllabic word, such as "God" or "Love".
This exercise, which, for the early Fathers, was just a training for repose,
the later Byzantines developed into a spiritual work of its own, attaching to
it technical requirements and various stipulations that became a matter of
serious theological controversy (see below), and are still of great interest to
Byzantine, Russian and other eastern churches. Eastern Orthodox Church. In
Eastern Orthodox theology, "theoria" refers to a stage of illumination on the
path to "theosis", in which one beholds God. "Theosis" is obtained by engaging
in contemplative prayer resulting from the cultivation of watchfulness (Gk:
"nepsis"). In its purest form, "theoria" is considered as the 'beholding',
'seeing' or 'vision' of God. According to the teachings of Eastern Orthodox
Christianity, the quintessential purpose and goal of the Christian life is to
attain "theosis" or 'deification', understood as 'likeness to' or 'union with'
God. Theosis results from leading a pure life, practicing restraint and
adhering to the commandments, putting the love of God before all else. This
metamorphosis (transfiguration) or transformation results from a deep love of
God. Saint Isaac the Syrian says that "Paradise is the love of God, in which
the bliss of all the beatitudes is contained," and that "the tree of life is
the love of God" (Homily 72). "Theoria" is thus achieved by the pure of heart
who are no longer subject to the afflictions of the passions. It is a gift from
the Holy Spirit to those who, through observance of the commandments of God and
ascetic practices (see praxis, kenosis, Poustinia and schema), have achieved
dispassion. According to the standard ascetic formulation of this process,
there are three stages: "katharsis" or purification, "theoria" or illumination,
and "theosis" or deification (also referred to as union with God). Purification
precedes conversion and constitutes a turning away from all that is unclean and
unwholesome. This is a purification of mind and body. As preparation for
"theoria", however, the concept of purification in this three-part scheme
refers most importantly to the purification of consciousness ("nous"), the
faculty of discernment and knowledge (wisdom), whose awakening is essential to
coming out of the state of delusion that is characteristic of the worldly-
minded. After the "nous" has been cleansed, the faculty of wisdom may then
begin to operate more consistently. With a purified "nous", clear vision and
understanding become possible, making one fit for contemplative prayer. In the
Eastern Orthodox ascetic tradition called hesychasm, humility, as a saintly
attribute, is called Holy Wisdom or "sophia". Humility is the most critical
component to mankind's salvation. Following Christ's instruction to "go into
your room or closet and shut the door and pray to your father who is in secret"
(Matthew 6:6), the hesychast withdraws into solitude in order that he or she
may enter into a deeper state of contemplative stillness. By means of this
stillness, the mind is calmed, and the ability to see reality is enhanced. The
practitioner seeks to attain what the apostle Paul called 'unceasing prayer'.
Eastern Orthodox theologians object to what they consider the overly
speculative and insufficiently experiential nature of Roman Catholic theology.
rather than confirming one God in Father having the essence of the Father who
is God. Degrees of prayer. Prayer of the Heart is often associated with a
prayer called The Jesus Prayer. The Jesus Prayer has long been used in
hesychastic asceticism as a spiritual tool to aid the practitioner to bring
about the unceasing, wordless prayer of the heart that St. Theophan describes.
The Jesus Prayer does this by invoking an attitude of humility essential for
the attainment of "theoria". The Jesus Prayer is also invoked to pacify the
passions, as well as the illusions that lead a person to actively express these
passions. The worldly, neurotic mind is habitually accustomed to seek
perpetuation of pleasant sensations and to avoid unpleasant ones. This state of
incessant agitation of the mind is attributed to the corruption of primordial
knowledge and union with God (the Fall of Man and the defilement and corruption
of consciousness, or "nous"). According to St. Theophan the Recluse, though the
Jesus Prayer has long been associated with the Prayer of the Heart, they are
not synonymous. Theological traditions. Alexandrian tradition of theoria.
According to Origen (184/185‚Äì253/254AD) and the Alexandrian theology, theoria
is the knowledge of God in creation and of sensible things, and thus their
contemplation "intellectually" (150‚Äì400AD) (see Clement of Alexandria, and
Evagrius Ponticus). This knowledge and contemplation leads to communion with
God akin to Divine Providence. Cappadocian tradition of theoria. In the
Cappadocian school of thought (see Saint Basil, Saint Gregory of Nyssa, and
Saint Gregory Nazianzus) (350‚Äì400AD), theoria is the experience of the
highest or absolute truth, realized by complete union with God. It is entering
the 'Cloud of Unknowing', which is beyond rational understanding, and can be
embraced only in love of God (Agape or Awe). The Cappadocian fathers went
beyond the intellectual contemplation of the Alexandrian fathers. This was to
begin with the seminal work Philokalia, which, through hesychasm, leads to
Phronema and finally theosis, which is validated by theoria. One must move
beyond gnosis to faith (meta-gnosis). Through ignorance, one moves beyond
knowledge and being, this contemplation being theoria. In this tradition,
theoria means understanding that the Uncreated cannot be grasped by the logical
or rational mind, but only by the whole person (unity of heart and mind); this
perception is that of the nous. God was knowable in his manifestations, but
ultimately, one must transcend knowledge or gnosis, since knowledge is based on
reflection, and because gnosis is limited and can become a barrier between man
and God (as an idolatry). If one wishes to commune with God, one must enter
into the Divine relation with God the Father through Jesus Christ, one in ousia
with the Father, which results in pure faith without any preconceived notions
of God. At this point, one can commune with God just as Moses did. Gregory of
Nyssa presented as the culmination of the Christian religion the contemplation
of the divine Being and its eternal Will. Dionysius the Areopagite's
Apophaticism. In the tradition of St. Dionysus the Areopagite, theoria is the
lifting up of the individual out of time, space and created being, while the
Triune God reaches down, or descends, to the hesychast. This process is also
known as ekstasis. The individual is brought into the presence of the
hypostasises of God in what is called the eighth day. To cultivate the highest
form of contemplation and the experience of the eighth day, one must attend the
Orthodox liturgical services. The services are the applications of the
sacraments, and one has a perspective of sincere mortification. "Memento mori"
is salvation through the grace or acceptance of God in death. This liturgical
experience is the only way for a human being to attain the true knowledge of
the living God; it is the vision of God or theoria to the apophatic theology of
the St. Dionysian tradition within Eastern Orthodoxy. God can be known in his
immanence (kataphatic) or realities, but not in God's apophatic or transcendent
essence, since God is uncreated in his essence or being. St. Macarius of Egypt.
In the theological tradition of St. Macarius of Egypt (ca. 300‚Äì391AD),
theoria is the point of interaction between God and the human in the heart of
the person, manifesting spiritual gifts to the human heart. The highest form of
contemplation originates in the heart (see agape), a higher form of
contemplation than that of the intellect. The concept that theoria is alloted
to each unique individual by their capacity to comprehend God is consistent.
This is also the tradition of theoria, as taught by St. Symeon the New
Theologian (949‚Äì1022AD), that one cannot be a theologian unless one sees the
hypostases of God or the uncreated light. This experience cultivates humility,
meekness and the love of the human race that the Triune God has created. This
invisible fire in the heart for humanity is manifest in absolute kindness and
love for one's neighbor akin to selfless humility, agape or love, growing from
mortification, kenosis, or epiclesis. This agape, or holy fire, is the essence
of Orthodoxy. The Hesychast controversy. Under St. Gregory Palamas
(1296‚Äì1359AD), the different traditions of theoria were synthesized into an
understanding of theoria that, through baptism, one receives the Holy Spirit.
Through participation in the sacraments of the Church and the performance of
works of faith, one cultivates a relationship with God. If one then, through
willful submission to God, is devotional and becomes humble, akin to the
Theotokos and the saints, and proceeds in faith past the point of rational
contemplation, one can experience God. Palamas stated that this is not a
mechanized process because each person is unique, but that the apodictic way
that one experiences the uncreated light, or God, is through contemplative
prayer called hesychasm. Theoria is cultivated through each of the steps of the
growing process of theosis. Gregory was initially asked by his fellow monks on
Mount Athos to defend them from the charges of Barlaam of Calabria. Barlaam
believed that philosophers had a greater knowledge of God than did the
prophets, and valued education and learning more than contemplative prayer.
Palamas taught that the truth is a person, Jesus Christ, a form of objective
reality. In order for a Christian to be authentic, he or she must experience
the Truth (i.e. Christ) as a real person (see hypostasis). Gregory further
asserted that when Peter, James and John witnessed the transfiguration of Jesus
on Mount Tabor, they were seeing the uncreated light of God, and that it is
possible for others to be granted to see it, using spiritual disciplines and
contemplative prayer. The only true way to experience Christ, according to
Palamas, was the Eastern Orthodox faith. Once a person discovers Christ
(through the Orthodox church), they begin the process of theosis, which is the
gradual submission to the Truth (i.e. God) in order to be deified (theosis).
Theoria is seen to be the experience of God hypostatically in person. However,
since the essence of God is unknowable, it also cannot be experienced. Palamas
expressed theoria as an experience of God as it happens to the whole person
(soul or nous), not just the mind or body, in contrast to an experience of God
that is drawn from memory, the mind, or in time. Gnosis and all knowledge are
created, as they are derived or created from experience, self-awareness and
spiritual knowledge. Theoria, here, is the experience of the uncreated in
various degrees, i.e. the vision of God or to see God. The experience of God in
the eighth day or outside of time therefore transcends the self and
experiential knowledge or gnosis. Gnosis is most importantly understood as a
knowledge of oneself; theoria is the experience of God, transcending the
knowledge of oneself. St. Gregory Palamas died on November 14, 1359; his last
words were, "To the heights! To the heights!" He is commemorated on the Second
Sunday of Great Lent because Gregory's victory over Barlaam is seen as a
continuation of the Triumph of Orthodoxy, i.e., the victory of the Church over
heresy. Writings. Theoria appears in a variety of contexts. Ontological or
Trinitarian Theology. The highest theoria, the highest consciousness that can
be experienced by the whole person, is the vision of God. A nous in a state of
ecstasy or ekstasis, called the eighth day, is not internal or external to the
world, outside of time and space; it experiences the infinite and limitless
God. God is beyond being; He is a hyper-being; God is beyond nothingness.
Nothingness is a gulf between God and man. God is the origin of everything,
including nothingness. This experience of God in hypostasis shows God's essence
as incomprehensible, or uncreated. God is the origin, but has no origin; hence,
he is apophatic and transcendent in essence or being, and cataphatic in
foundational realities, immanence and energies. This ontic or ontological
theoria is the observation of God. False spiritual knowledge. Theoria does not
manifest a false spiritual knowledge, like incomplete knowledge akin to human
rationalization as either conjecture or speculation, like that which may be
arrived at through rational thought (called dianoia) or rational speculation
(called Stochastic and dialectics). False spiritual knowledge can also be ,
generated from an evil rather than a holy source. The gift of the knowledge of
Good and Evil is then required: some knowledge is good, and some knowledge is
bad or evil. The most common false spiritual knowledge is derived not from an
experience of God, but from reading another person's experience of God and
subsequently arriving at one's own conclusions, believing those conclusions to
be indistinguishable from the actual experienced knowledge, causing a conflict
in interpretations. Knowledge is derived from experience (i.e. contemplation),
but experience is not derived from knowledge. Knowledge is here defined by the
change in mankind's nous caused by partaking of the tree of the knowledge of
good and evil. Since mankind, in his finite existence as a created being or
creature, can never, by his own accord, arrive at a sufficiently objective
consciousness in order to properly apply such knowledge. Theosis is the gradual
submission of man to the good, who then with Divine grace from his relationship
or union with God, attains deification. Illumination restores mankind to that
state of faith existent in God, called noesis, before mankind's consciousness
and reality was changed by his fall. After illumination or theoria, mankind is
in union with God and can properly discern, or have Holy Wisdom. Hence theoria,
the experience or vision of God, silences all flesh. Spiritual somnolence.
False spiritual knowledge leads to spiritual delusion (Russian prelest, Greek
plani), which is the opposite of sobriety. Sobriety (called nepsis) means full
consciousness and self-realization (enstasis), giving true spiritual knowledge
(called true gnosis). Prelest or plani is the estrangement of the person to
existence or objective reality, an alienation called . This includes damaging
or vilifying the nous, or simply having a non-functioning noetic and neptic
faculty. Evil is, by definition, the act of turning mankind against its creator
and existence. Misotheism, a hatred of God, is a catalyst that separates
mankind from nature, or vilifies the realities of ontology, the spiritual world
and the natural or material world. Reconciliation between God (the uncreated)
and man is reached through submission in faith to God the eternal, i.e.
transcendence rather than transgression (magic). The Trinity as Nous, Word and
Spirit (hypostasis) is, ontologically, the basis of mankind's being or
existence. The Trinity is the creator of mankind's being via each component of
mankind's existence: origin as nous (ex nihilo), inner experience or spiritual
experience, and physical experience, which is exemplified by Christ (logos or
the uncreated prototype of the highest ideal) and his saints. The following of
false knowledge is marked by the symptom of somnolence or "awake sleep" and,
later, psychosis. Theoria is opposed to allegorical or symbolic interpretations
of church traditions. False asceticism or cults. Once the stage of true
discernment (diakrisis) is reached (called phronema), one is able to
distinguish false gnosis from valid gnosis and has holy wisdom. The highest
holy wisdom, Sophia, or Hagia Sophia, is cultivated by humility or meekness,
akin to that personified by the Theotokos and all of the saints that came after
her and Christ, collectively referred to as the ecclesia or church. This
community of unbroken witnesses is the Orthodox Church. Wisdom is cultivated by
humility (emptying of oneself) and remembrance of death against thymos (ego,
greed and selfishness) and the passions. Practicing asceticism is being dead to
the passions and the ego, collectively known as the world. God is beyond
knowledge and the fallen human mind, and, as such, can only be experienced in
his hypostases through faith (noetically). False ascetism leads not to
reconciliation with God and existence, but toward a false existence based on
rebellion to existence. True spiritual knowledge. Theoria is beyond conceptual
knowledge. It is the state in which the mind is placed in the heart (kardio)
and the nous is focused on the or immanence of the Trinity of God rather than
strictly insight or (which is to face the unknown with free will and faith) and
rather than hindsight (determinism and knowledge). It is much like the
difference between reading about the experience of another and reading about
one's own experience. Thus, theoria is an expression of insight (noesis), and
is deeply focused on the 'now', the 'immediate', and the 'present'. Though
theoria is akin to acting by free will and by conscious choice rather than
deterministically, it holds that one moves through time into the future without
knowing, but proceeds by faith (faith is meta-gnosis or beyond knowledge).
Theoria means placing the actual experience above the recollection of an
experience (mnemonic) or memory. As it is the contemplation of the present
(insight) while in the present, rather than the past (knowledge) or future
(unknown), it is ultimately the experience of the hypostases of God. In other
words, theoria places primacy of experience and observation over a speculative,
discursive, rational analysis (Orthodox Empirical theology). This illumination
is photismos, a light that permeates all things and is without source, a light
that illuminates not only the physical world, but also the darkness within
mankind; this light is also called the Tabor light. The Trinity is the three
realities of the single God at once. Each reality or hypostasis is critical to
the ontology of being (ousia). Contemplative differences between Eastern
Christianity and Western Christianity. Relation between being a contemplative
and being a theologian. In the Eastern Christian traditions, theoria is the
most critical component needed for a person to be considered a theologian;
however it is not necessary for one's salvation. Theoria is being with God, in
Eastern Christianity, the one thing that mankind truly desires the most, that
which is infinite (called apophatic or transcendent) and also personal and real
(called cataphatic or immanent). God is ever-new, never-ending love, happiness,
joy and bliss as is glory to glory. An experience of God is necessary to the
spiritual and mental health of every created thing, including human beings.
Eastern theologian Andrew Louth has said, the purpose of theology as a science
is to prepare for contemplation, rather than theology being the purpose of
contemplation. As Vladimir Lossky stated the Mysticism of the Eastern church is
church dogma per excellence. Hans Urs von Balthasar wrote that "prayer cannot
be reduced to the level of a means to improved understanding". Roman Catholic
monk Thomas Merton wrote that the illumination of contemplation is prized much
higher than the intellectual capacity of a theologian, with contemplation being
"the normal perfection of theology". and contemplation seen as beyond
speculative theology. According to Thomas Aquinas the latter can only focus on
what God is not, for instance considering God a spirit by removing from our
conception anything pertaining to the body, while the mystic, instead of trying
to comprehend what God is, is able to intuit it. However, in the West
contemplatives are not considered to be necessarily well-equipped for giving a
rational exposition and explanation of Christian doctrine, which is the humbler
task of the theologian: the experience of contemplatives is often of a more
lofty level, beyond the power of human words to express, so that "they have had
to resort to metaphors, similes, and symbols to convey the inexpressible."
Theosis. "Theosis" (Greek for "making divine", "deification", "to become gods
by Grace") and for "divinization", "reconciliation, union with God" and
"glorification") is expressed as "Being, union with God" and having a
relationship or synergy between God and man. Various Orthodox theologians
including St. Symeon the New Theologian, Vladimir Lossky, Thomas HopkoProfessor
George D. Metallinos Nikolaos Loudovikos, Dumitru StƒÉniloae, Stanley S.
Harakas and Archimandrite George, Abbot of the Holy Monastery of St. Gregorios
of Mount Athos hold that this criterion is at the very heart of many
theological conflicts between Eastern Orthodox Christianity and Western
Christianity, which is seen to culminate in the conflict over hesychasm.
Romanides maintains the idea that Western theology is more dependent upon logic
and reason, culminating in scholasticism used to validate truth and the
existence of God, than upon establishing a relationship with God (theosis and
theoria). Augustine of Hippo. Another example used by certain theologians in
Eastern Christianity is that of St Augustine. Romanides claims that, although
he was a saint, Augustine did not have theoria. Many of his theological
conclusions, Romanides says, appear not to come from experiencing God and
writing about his experiences of God; rather, they appear to be the result of
philosophical or logical speculation and conjecture. Hence, Augustine is still
revered as a saint, but, according to Romanides, does not qualify as a
theologian in the Eastern Orthodox church. In the view of M.C. Steenberg, some
of Augustine's Trinitarian conclusions appear to immanentize characteristics of
theology in a manner improper to those divine things. He says that Eastern
theologians, would, in light of their experiences, articulate their expressions
of those things differently. Augustine's treatment of the inner relationship of
the realities of God in the Trinity and how God has manifested Himself to
mankind throughout time are example of this. Augustine is listed among the
Fathers of the Church in a document of the Fifth Ecumenical Council, held in
Constantinople in 553, which declares that it follows his teaching on the true
faith "in every way". Another document of the same ecumenical council speaks of
Augustine as "of most religious memory, who shone forth resplendent among the
African bishops". In his review of Hieromonk Seraphim Rose's book "The Place of
Blessed Augustine in the Orthodox Church" Archimandite (later, Archbishop)
Chrysostomos wrote: "In certain ultra-conservative Orthodox circles in the
United States, there has developed an unfortunate bitter and harsh attitude
toward one of the great Fathers of the Church, the blessed (Saint) Augustine of
Hippo (354-430 A.D.). These circles, while clearly outside the mainstream of
Orthodox thought and careful scholarship, have often been so vociferous and
forceful in their statements that their views have touched and even affected
more moderate and stable Orthodox believers and thinkers. Not a few writers and
spiritual aspirants have been disturbed by this trend." While Chrysostomos
admits that, "in terms of classical Orthodox thought on the subject, Saint
Augustine placed grace and human free will at odds, if only because his view of
grace was too overstated and not balanced against the Patristic witness as
regards the efficacy of human choice and spiritual labor. Likewise, as an
outgrowth of his understanding of grace, Augustine developed a theory of
predestination that further distorted the Orthodox understanding of free will.
And finally, Augustine's theology proper, his understanding of God, in its
mechanical, overly logical, and rationalistic tone, leads one, to some extent,
away from the mystery of God-which is lost, indeed, in Saint Augustine's
failure to capture fully the very mystery of man". The practice of ascetic
prayer called Hesychasm in the Eastern Orthodox Church is centered on the
enlightenment, deification (theosis) of man. Theosis has also been referred to
as "glorification", It is the vision or revelation of God (theoria) that gives
one knowledge of God. meaning vision of God, is closely connected with
"theosis" (divinization). John Romanides reports that Augustinian theology is
generally ignored in the Eastern Orthodox church. Romanides states that the
Roman Catholic Church, starting with Augustine, has removed the mystical
experience (revelation) of God (theoria) from Christianity and replaced it with
the conceptualization of revelation through the philosophical speculation of
metaphysics. Romanides does not consider the metaphysics of Augustine to be
Orthodox but Pagan mysticism. Romanides states that Augustine's Platonic
mysticism was condemned by the Eastern Orthodox within the church condemnation
of Barlaam of Calabria at the Hesychast councils in Constantinople. Roman
Catholic theologians have generally expressed a negative view of Hesychasm. The
(Hesychasm) doctrine of Gregory Palamas won almost no following in the West,
and the distrustful attitude of Barlaam in its regard prevailed among Western
theologians, surviving into the early 20th century, as shown in Adrian
Fortescue's article on hesychasm in the 1910 Catholic Encyclopedia. Fortescue
translated the Greek words ·º•œÉœÖœáŒøœÇ and ·º°œÉœÖœáŒ±œÉœÑŒÆœÇ as "quiet" and
"quietist". Edward Pace's 1909 article on quietism indicated that, while in the
strictest sense quietism is a 17th-century doctrine proposed by Miguel de
Molinos, the term is also used more broadly to cover both Indian religions and
what Edward Pace called "the vagaries of Hesychasm", thus betraying the same
prejudices as Fortescue with regard to hesychasm and, again in the same period,
Sim√©on Vailh√© described some aspects of the teaching of Palamas as "monstrous
errors", "heresies" and "a resurrection of polytheism", and called the
hesychast method for arriving at perfect contemplation "no more than a crude
form of auto-suggestion" While some Western theologians see the theology of
Palamas as introducing an inadmissible division within God, others have
incorporated his theology into their own thinking, maintaining that there is no
conflict between his teaching and Roman Catholic thought. "Hesychasm, which was
never anything close to a scholar's pursuit, is now studied by Western
theologians who are astounded by the profound thought and spirituality of late
Byzantium." Heaven and Hell. According to Greek Orthodox priest John S.
Romanides, "the Frankish Western understanding of heaven and hell" is "foreign
to the Orthodox tradition". The Eastern Orthodox church teaches that Heaven and
Hell are both in God's presence. The saved and the damned will both experience
God's light. However, the saved will experience this light as Heaven, while the
damned will experience it as Hell. However, according to I≈çannƒìs Polemƒìs,
the important Orthodox theologian Gregory Palamas did not believe that sinners
would experience the divine light: "Unlike Theophanes, Palamas did not believe
that sinners could have an experience of the divine light [...] Nowhere in his
works does Palamas seem to adopt Theophanes' view that the light of Tabor is
identical with the fire of hell." Some Eastern Orthodox express personal
opinions that appear to run counter to these statements, in teaching hell is
separation from God. The Western Church. In the West, contemplation has not
given rise to metaphysical disputes about whether what the contemplative sees
is the essence or the energies of God (a distinction not generally accepted by
Western theologians) and whether the "light" of contemplation is visible to
physical eyes, so that, for instance, Saint Gregory the Great, did not need to
specify when he wrote of people by whom, "while still living in this
corruptible flesh, yet growing in incalculable power by a certain piercingness
of contemplation, the Eternal Brightness is able to be seen." Methods of
prayers are not limited to the recitation of the Jesus Prayer. Other methods
are equally accepted, such as the recitation, as recommended by Saint John
Cassian, of "O God, come to my assistance; O Lord, make haste to help me" or
other verses of Scripture; the repetition of a single monosyllabic word, as
suggested by the Cloud of Unknowing; the method used in Centering Prayer; the
use of Lectio Divina; etc. Like the East, the West teaches that the soul has
three states, or stages, of perfection: the purgative way (that of cleansing or
purification, "katharsis" in Greek), the illuminative way and the unitive way.
Saint Augustine said that, in contemplation, man meets God face-to-face. The
Roman Catholic Church holds that, while the direct vision of God (the Beatific
Vision) can be reached only in the next life, God does give to some a very
special grace, by which he becomes intimately present to the created mind even
before death, enabling it to contemplate him with ineffable joy. The Roman
Catholic Church teaches that God gives to some souls, even in the present life,
a very special grace by which they can be mystically united to God even while
yet alive: this is true mystical contemplation. The writings attributed to St.
Dionysius the Areopagite were highly influential in the West, and their theses
and arguments were adopted by Peter Lombard, Alexander of Hales, Albert the
Great, St. Thomas Aquinas and St. Bonaventure. According to these writings,
mystical knowledge must be distinguished from the rational knowledge by which
we know God, not in his nature, but through the wonderful order of the
universe, which is a participation in the divine ideas. Through the more
perfect mystical knowledge of God, a knowledge beyond the attainments of reason
(even when enlightened by faith), the soul contemplates directly the mysteries
of divine light. The Roman Catholic Church teaches that God gives to some
souls, even in the present life, a very special grace by which they can be
mystically united to God even while yet alive: this is true mystical
contemplation. Nowhere in Roman Catholic teaching is this "grace" defined as
the light of Tabor, which the East teaches as starting in the Old Testament
(i.e. Moses on Mount Sinai) and continuing into the New Testament (i.e. the
transfiguration, the Pentecost event in , St Paul on the road to Damascus).
Instead, it is spoken of as "the Eternal Brightness" seen by "some while still
living in this corruptible flesh, yet growing in incalculable power by a
certain piercingness of contemplation". The writings attributed to St.
Dionysius the Areopagite were highly influential in the West, and their theses
and arguments were adopted by Peter Lombard, Alexander of Hales, Albert the
Great, St. Thomas Aquinas and St. Bonaventure. Vladimir Lossky considers that
Aquinas did violence to Pseudo-Dionysius's distinction between negative and
affirmative theology by a synthesis that makes one a corrective for the other.
Scientific research. Fifteen Carmelite nuns allowed scientists to scan their
brains with fMRI while they were meditating, in a state known as Unio Mystica
or "Theoria". The results showed the regions of the brain that were activated
when they considered themselves to be in mystical union with God. Quotes. "We
ought at all times to wait for the enlightenment that comes from above before
we speak with a faith energized by love; for the illumination which will enable
us to speak. For there is nothing so destitute as a mind philosophising about
God, when it is without Him'." Of "Spiritual Knowledge" Discourse number 7
"Philokalia" volume 1 p¬ 254 ‚Äì St Diadochos of Photiki "Unless the heart be
cleansed it is impossible to attain real contemplation. Only a heart purified
of passion is capable of that peculiar awe and wonder before God which stills
the nous into joyful silence." Archimandrite Sophrony "The question of the
vision of God, not only among Byzantine Theologians of the fourteenth century
but also in earlier history, especially among the Greek Fathers, presents
serious difficulty for those who want to study it from the standpoint of the
concepts appropriate to Latin scholasticism." Vladimir Lossky "The Vision of
God" p¬ 20. "It is necessary that whoever eagerly prosecutes the exercises of
contemplation, first questions himself with particularity how much he loves.
For the force of love is an engine of the soul, which while it draws it out of
the world, lifts it on high." Saint Gregory the Great "In this passing over
(into God in a transport of contemplation), if it is to be perfect, all
intellectual activities ought to be relinquished and the most profound
affection transported to God, and transformed into him. This, however, is
mystical and most secret, 'which no one knows except him who receives it', no
one receives except him who desires it, and no one desires except him who is
penetrated to the marrow by the fire of the Holy Spirit, whom Christ sent into
the world." Saint Bonaventure "I know that many persons who say vocal prayers
are raised by God to high contemplation without their knowing how." Saint
Teresa of Jesus "There are three signs of inner recollection: first, a lack of
satisfaction in passing things; second, a liking for solitude and silence, and
an attentiveness to all that is more perfect; third, the considerations,
meditations and acts that formerly helped the soul now hinder it, and it brings
to prayer no other support than faith, hope, and love." Saint John of the Cross
