Theodicy A theodicy ( from Greek "theos" "god" + "dike" "justice") is an
attempt to resolve the evidential problem of evil by reconciling the
traditional divine characteristics of omnibenevolence, omnipotence, and
omniscience with the occurrence of evil or suffering in the world. Unlike a
defense, which tries to demonstrate that God's existence is logically possible
in the light of evil, a theodicy provides a framework which claims to make
God's existence probable. The term was coined in 1710 by German philosopher
Gottfried Leibniz in his work, "Théodicée", though various responses to the
problem of evil had been previously proposed. British philosopher John Hick
traced the history of theodicy in his work, "Evil and the God of Love",
identifying two major traditions: the Augustinian theodicy, based on the
writings of Augustine of Hippo, and the Irenaean theodicy, which Hick
developed, based on the thinking of St Irenaeus. Other philosophers have
suggested that theodicy is a modern discipline because deities in the ancient
world were often imperfect. German philosopher Max Weber saw theodicy as a
social problem, based on the human need to explain puzzling aspects of the
world; sociologist Peter L. Berger argued that religion arose out of a need for
social order, and theodicy developed to sustain it. Following the Holocaust, a
number of Jewish theologians developed a new response to the problem of evil,
sometimes called anti-theodicy, which maintains that God cannot be meaningfully
justified. As an alternative to theodicy, a defence may be proposed, which is
limited to showing the logical possibility of God's existence. American
philosopher Alvin Plantinga presented a version of the free will defence which
argued that the coexistence of God and evil is not logically impossible, and
that free will further explains the existence of evil without threatening the
existence of God. Similar to a theodicy, a cosmodicy attempts to justify the
fundamental goodness of the universe, and an anthropodicy attempts to justify
the goodness of humanity. Definition. As a response to the problem of evil, a
theodicy is distinct from a defence. A defence attempts to demonstrate that the
occurrence of evil does not contradict God's existence, but it does not propose
that rational beings are able to understand why God permits evil. A theodicy
seeks to show that it is reasonable to believe in God despite evidence of evil
in the world and offers a framework which can account for why evil exists. A
theodicy is often based on a prior natural theology, which attempts to prove
the existence of God, and seeks to demonstrate that God's existence remains
probable after the problem of evil is posed by giving a justification for God's
permitting evil to happen. Defences propose solutions to the logical problem of
evil, while theodicies attempt to answer the evidential problem. History. The
term "theodicy" was coined by German philosopher Gottfried Leibniz in his 1710
work, written in French, "Essais de Théodicée sur la bonté de Dieu, la
liberté de l'homme et l'origine du mal" ("Theodicy: Essays on the Goodness of
God, the Freedom of Man and the Origin of Evil"). Leibniz's "Théodicée" was a
response to skeptical Protestant philosopher Pierre Bayle, who wrote in his
work "Dictionnaire Historique et Critique" that, after rejecting three attempts
to solve it, he saw no rational solution to the problem of evil. Bayle argued
that, because the Bible asserts the coexistence of God and evil, this state of
affairs must simply be accepted. French philosopher Voltaire criticised
Leibniz's concept of theodicy in his "Poème sur le désastre de Lisbonne"
("Poem on the Lisbon disaster"), suggesting that the massive destruction of
innocent lives caused by the Lisbon earthquake demonstrated that God was not
providing the "best of all possible worlds". In "The Catholic Encyclopedia"
(1914), Constantine Kempf argued that, following Leibniz's work, philosophers
called their works on the problem of evil 'theodicies', and philosophy about
God was brought under the discipline of theodicy. He argued that theodicy began
to include all of natural theology, meaning that theodicy came to consist of
the human knowledge of God through the systematic use of reason. In 1966,
British philosopher John Hick published "Evil and the God of Love", in which he
surveyed various Christian responses to the problem of evil, before developing
his own. In his work, Hick identified and distinguished between two types of
philosophy: Augustinian, which had dominated Western Christianity for many
centuries, and Irenaean, which was developed by the Eastern Church Father
Irenaeus, a version of which Hick subscribed to himself. Ancient religions. Dr
Philip Irving Mitchell of the Dallas Baptist University notes that some
philosophers have cast the pursuit of theodicy as a modern one, as earlier
scholars used the problem of evil to support the existence of one particular
god over another, explain wisdom, or explain a conversion, rather than to
justify God's goodness. Professor Sarah Iles Johnston argues that ancient
civilizations, such as the ancient Mesopotamians, Greeks, Romans, and Egyptians
held polytheistic beliefs that may have enabled them to deal with the concept
of theodicy differently. These religions taught the existence of many gods and
goddesses who controlled various aspects of daily life. These early religions
may have avoided the question of theodicy by endowing their deities with the
same flaws and jealousies that plagued humanity. No one god or goddess was
fundamentally good or evil; this explained that bad things could happen to good
people if they angered a deity because the gods could exercise the same free
will that humankind possesses. Such religions taught that some gods were more
inclined to be helpful and benevolent, while others were more likely to be
spiteful and aggressive. In this sense, the evil gods could be blamed for
misfortune, while the good gods could be petitioned with prayer and sacrifices
to make things right. There was still a sense of justice in that individuals
that were right with the gods could avoid punishment. Augustinian theodicy. The
Augustinian theodicy is based on the writings of Augustine of Hippo, a
Christian philosopher and theologian who lived from 354 to 430 AD. This form of
theodicy argues that evil does not exist except as a privation - or corruption
of - goodness, and therefore God did not create evil. Augustinian scholars have
argued that God created the world perfectly, with no evil or human suffering.
Evil entered the world through the disobedience of Adam and Eve and the
theodicy casts the existence of evil as a just punishment for this original
sin. The theodicy argues that humans have an evil nature because it is
inherited from the original sin of Adam and Eve, and maintains that God remains
blameless and good. Irenaean theodicy. Irenaeus (died ca 202) expressed ideas
which explained the existence of evil as necessary for human development.
Irenaeus argued that human creation comprised two parts: humans were made first
in the image, then in the likeness, of God. The image of God consists of having
the potential to achieve moral perfection, whereas the likeness of God is the
achievement of that perfection. To achieve moral perfection, Irenaeus suggested
that humans must have free will. To achieve such free will, humans must
experience suffering and God must be at an epistemic distance (a distance of
knowledge) from humanity. Therefore, evil exists to allow humans to develop as
moral agents. In the twentieth century, John Hick collated the ideas of
Irenaeus into a distinct theodicy. He argued that the world exists as a "vale
of soul-making" (a phrase that he drew from John Keats), and that suffering and
evil must therefore occur. He argued that human goodness develops through the
experience of evil and suffering. Reasons for theodicy. German philosopher Max
Weber interpreted theodicy as a social problem, and viewed theodicy as a
"problem of meaning." Weber argued that, as human society became increasingly
rational, the need to explain why good people suffered and evil people
prospered became more important because religion casts the world as a
"meaningful cosmos". Weber framed the problem of evil as the dilemma that the
good can suffer and the evil can prosper, which became more important as
religion became more sophisticated. He identified two purposes of theodicy: to
explain why good people suffer (a theodicy of suffering), and why people
prosper (a theodicy of good fortune). A theodicy of good fortune seeks to
justify the good fortune of people in society; Weber believed that those who
are successful are not satisfied unless they can justify why they deserve to be
successful. For theodicies of suffering, Weber argued that three different
kinds of theodicy emerged - predestination, dualism, and karma - all of which
attempt to satisfy the human need for meaning, and he believed that the quest
for meaning, when considered in light of suffering, becomes the problem of
suffering. Sociologist Peter L. Berger characterised religion as the human
attempt to build order out of a chaotic world. He believed that humans could
not accept that anything in the world was meaningless and saw theodicy as an
assertion that the cosmos has meaning and order, despite evidence to the
contrary. Berger presented a similar argument to Weber, but suggested that the
need for theodicy arose primarily out of the situation of human society. He
believed that theodicies existed to allow individuals to transcend themselves,
denying the individual in favour of the social order. Alternatives to theodicy.
Jewish anti-theodicy. In 1998, Jewish theologian Zachary Braiterman coined the
term anti-theodicy in his book "(God) After Auschwitz" to describe Jews, both
in a Biblical and post-Holocaust context, whose response to the problem of evil
is protest and refusal to investigate the relationship between God and
suffering. An anti-theodicy acts in opposition to a theodicy and places full
blame for all experience of evil onto God, but must rise from an individuals
belief in and love of God. Anti-theodicy has been likened to Job's protests in
the book of Job. Braiterman wrote that an anti-theodicy rejects the idea that
there is a meaningful relationship between God and evil or that God could be
justified for the experience of evil. The Holocaust prompted a reconsideration
of theodicy in some Jewish circles. French Jewish philosopher Emmanuel Levinas,
who had himself been a prisoner of war in Nazi Germany, declared theodicy to be
"blasphemous", arguing that it is the "source of all immorality", and demanded
that the project of theodicy be ended. Levinas asked whether the idea of
absolutism survived after the Holocaust, which he proposed it did. He argued
that humans are not called to justify God in the face of evil, but to attempt
to live godly life; rather than considering whether God was present during the
Holocaust, the duty of humans is to build a world where goodness will prevail.
Professor of theology David R. Blumenthal, in his book "Facing the Abusing
God", supports the "theology of protest", which he saw as presented in the
play, "The Trial of God". He supports the view that survivors of the Holocaust
cannot forgive God and so must protest about it. Blumenthal believes that a
similar theology is presented in the book of Job, in which Job does not
question God's existence or power, but his morality and justice. Free will
defence. As an alternative to a theodicy, a defence may be offered as a
response to the problem of evil. A defence attempts to show that God's
existence is not made logically impossible by the existence of evil; it does
not need to be true or plausible, merely logically possible. American
philosopher Alvin Plantinga offers a free will defence which argues that human
free will sufficiently explains the existence of evil while maintaining that
God's existence remains logically possible. He argues that, if God's existence
and the existence of evil are to be logically inconsistent, a premise must be
provided which, if true, would make them inconsistent; as none has been
provided, the existence of God and evil must be consistent. Free will furthers
this argument by providing a premise which, in conjunction with the existence
of evil, entails that God's existence remains consistent. Cosmodicy and
anthropodicy. A cosmodicy attempts to justify the fundamental goodness of the
universe in the face of evil, and an anthropodicy attempts to justify the
fundamental goodness of human nature in the face of the evils produced by
humans. Cosmodicy has been identified as a major theme in the philosophy of
Friedrich Nietzsche.
