Theosophy Theosophy (from Greek θεοσοφία "theosophia", from θεός
"theos", divine + σοφία "sophia", wisdom; literally "divine wisdom"),
refers to systems of esoteric philosophy concerning, or investigation seeking
direct knowledge of, presumed mysteries of being and nature, particularly
concerning the nature of divinity. Theosophy is considered a part of the
broader field of esotericism, referring to hidden knowledge or wisdom that
offers the individual enlightenment and salvation. The word esoteric dates back
to the 2nd century CE. The theosophist seeks to understand the mysteries of the
universe and the bonds that unite the universe, humanity and the divine. The
goal of theosophy is to explore the origin of divinity and humanity, and the
end of world, life and humanity. From investigation of those topics
theosophists try to discover a coherent description of the purpose and origin
of the universe. Etymology. The word "theosophia" appeared in both Greek and
Latin in the works of early church fathers as a synonym for “theology”. The
theosophoi are “those who know divine matters.” During the Renaissance, use
of the term diverged to refer to gnostic knowledge that offers the individual
enlightenment and salvation through a knowledge of the bonds that are believed
to unite her or him to the world of divine or intermediary spirits. By the 16th
century the word theosophy was being used in at least one of its current
meanings. History. Antiquity and Medieval ending c. 1450CE. The term theosophy
was used as a synonym for theology as early as the 3rd century CE Hellenistic
Alexandrian culture expressed religion through a syncretism that included
influences from Egypt, Chaldea, Greece etc. It became a "philosophizing and
systematizing" culture containing mythology, theosophy and gnosis of the East.
The 12th c. philosopher Al-Shahrastānī (d. 548AH / 1153CE) explored theosophy
in the context of Islamic thought. In the 13th century a clear distinction was
made between classical philosophers, modern (to the people then) philosophers,
theosophers, and theologians in the work "Summa philosophiae" attributed to
Robert Grosseteste. In Summa theosophists were described as authors inspired by
holy books while theologians were described as persons whose task was to teach
theosophy. During that time the term theosopher was applied retroactively to
include earlier people including Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite, Ambrose,
Jerome, Augustine, and Origen. Theosophy in early modern Europe beginning in
the 1500s. Modern theosophy arose in Germany in the 16th century. In the 16th
century Johannes Arboreus’ Theosophia (volumes published 1540-1553) provided
a lengthy exposition that included no mention of esotericism. In contrast
fellow Germans Paracelsus (1493-1541), Aegidius Gutmann (1490-1584), Valentin
Weigel (1533-1588), Heinrich Khunrath (1560-1605), Johann Arndt (1555-1621),
and Caspar Schwenckfeld (1490-1584) demonstrated an interest in theosophy. The
17th century philosopher and self-identified theosophist Jakob Boehme (1575-
1624) produced a complete explanation of theosophy that included esotericism.
Boehme’s system of philosophical speculation bases knowledge of nature upon
knowledge of the divine nature. During that time the Aristotelian method had
lost favor among intellectuals. Boehme presented his system as an alternative
to the Aristotelian method which he believed could provide a more profound
knowledge and more control of nature than the Aristotelian method did. Other
notable contributors to the theosophical literature of the 16th and 17th
centuries hailed from Holland, England, and France. They included both
theosophists and historians and theologians with a strong interest in
theosophy. This group includes Jan Baptist van Helmont (1618-1699), Robert
Fludd (1574-1637), John Pordage (1608-1681), Jane Leade (1623-1704), Henry More
(1614-1687), Pierre Poiret (1646-1719), and Antoinette Bourignon (1616-1680).
Theosophists of this period often inquired into nature using a method of
interpretation founded upon a specific myth or revelation, applying active
imagination in order to draw forth symbolic meanings and further their pursuit
of knowledge toward a complete understanding of these mysteries. Enlightenment
theosophy, 1650-1775. In the 18th century, the word theosophy came into
widespread use in philosophy. Johann Jakob Brucker(1696-1770) included a long
chapter on theosophy in his monumental work Historia critica philosophia
(1741). He included all the theosophists in what was then a standard reference
in the history of philosophy. German philosophers produced major works of
theosophy during this period: Theophilosophia theoritica et practica (1710) by
Samuel Richter (alias Sincerus Renatus) and Opus magocabalsticum et
theosophicum (1721) by Georg von Welling (alias Salwigt, 1655-1727). Other
notable theosophists of the period include Johann George Gichtel (1638-1710),
Gottfried Arnold (1666-1714), Friedrich Christoph Oetinger (1702-1782), William
Law (1686-1761), and Dionysius Andreas Freher (1649-1728). By the 18th century
the word theosophy was often used in conjunction with panosophy, i.e., a
knowledge of divine things that is acquired by deciphering the supposed
hieroglyphics of the concrete universe. The term theosophy is more properly
reserved for the reverse process of contemplating the divine in order to
discover the content of the concrete universe. In France, Louis Claude de
Saint-Martin (1743-1803) and Jean-Philippe Dutoit-Membrini (alias Keleph Ben
Nathan, 1721-1793) contributed to a resurgence of theosophy in the late 18th
century. Other theosophical thinkers of this period include Karl von
Eckartshausen (1752-1803), Johann Heinrich Jung-Stilling (1740-1817), Frederic-
Rodolphe Salzmann (1749-1821), Michael Hahn (1758-1819), and Franz von Baader
(1765-1841). Denis Diderot gave the word theosophie a permanent place in the
French language by including it in an article in his Encyclopedie, published
during the French Enlightenment. The nineteenth century. The Parliament of the
World's Religions in 1893 marked the first formal gathering of representatives
of Eastern and Western spiritual traditions. Today it is recognized as the
occasion of the birth of formal interreligious dialogue worldwide. During the
late 19th century theosophical initiate societies emerged. Some of these
reflected a fluid boundary between theosophy and occultism. In 1875 Helena
Blavatsky (1831-1891) and others founded one of these theosophical initiate
societies, The Theosophical Society, an organization related to earlier
theosophical ideas which also departed from them significantly. Meanwhile
outside of the initiate societies others such as the Martinist Order founded by
Papus in 1891 followed a prior theosophical current which was closely linked to
the Judeo-Christian-Islamic tradition and Western esotericism. Theosophists
outside of the initiate societies included people such as Vladimir Solovyov
(1853-1900). According to the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Solovyov
thought, “Although empiricism and rationalism (= idealism) rest on false
principles, their respective objective contents, external experience, qua the
foundation of natural science, and logical thought, qua the foundation of pure
philosophy, are to be synthesized or encompassed along with mystical knowledge
in 'integral knowledge,' what Solovyov terms 'theosophy.'" The twentieth
century to present. Several organizations developed from the popularization of
Blavatsky's ideas and are considered new religious movements. Theosophical
Society lodges also continue to exist in many places. Anthroposophy was founded
by Rudolf Steiner (1861-1925) as a schism of the Theosophical Society.
Theosophical concepts can be seen in the work of Sergei Bulgakov (1877-1945),
Nikolai Berdyaev (1874-1945), Leopold Ziegler (1881-1958), Valentin Tomberg
(1901-1973), Auguste-Edouard Chauvet (1885-1955), Wassily Kandinsky (1866-
1944), Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan (1888-1975) and Henry Corbin (1903-1978).
Common characteristics. The use of the term theosophy has changed over time. As
such, the use of the term in antiquity, or even using a strictly etymological
definition, is not common in the academy. Theosophy actually designates a
specific flow of thought, current, stream or tradition within the modern study
of esotericism. Thus it follows the path starting from the more modern period
of the 15th century onward (e.g. neo-Alexandrian, hermeticism, Christian
Kaballah, Rosicrucianism, Alchemy etc.). The usage here is not intended to be
inclusive of the concept as used in The Theosophical Society. Theosophists
engage in analysis of the universe, humanity, divinity, and the reciprocal
effects of each on the other. The starting point for theosophists may be
knowledge of external things in the world or inner experiences and the aim of
the theosophist is to discover deeper meanings in the natural or divine realm.
Antoine Faivre notes, “the theosophist dedicates his energy to inventing (in
the word’s original sense of ‘discovering’) the articulation of all
things visible and invisible, by examining both divinity and nature in the
smallest detail.” The knowledge that is acquired through meditation is
believed to change the being of the meditator. Antoine Faivre successfully
created a taxonomy approach as a means to comparing the various traditions. He
proceeded by taking the concordance of neoplatonism, Hermeticism, Kaballah,
astrology, alchemy, magic etc. and deduced six fundamental characteristics of
esoteric spirituality. He discovered that the first four characteristics of
esotericism are always present, while the latter two are sometimes present.
Along with these six characteristics of esotericism, he identified three
characteristics of theosophy. The three characteristics of theosophy are listed
below. Blavatskyan Theosophy and the Theosophical Society. In 1875 Helena
Blavatsky, Henry Steel Olcott, and William Quan Judge co-founded The
Theosophical Society. Blavatsky combined Eastern religious traditions with
Western esoteric teachings to create a synthesis she called the "Perennial
Religion". She developed this in in "Isis Unveiled" (1877) and "The Secret
Doctrine" (1888), her major works and exposition of her Theosophy. Eventually
the Theosophical Society became virtually synonymous with Theosophy in the
vernacular sense. There are many differences between traditional Western
theosophy and the Theosophical movement begun by Helena Blavatsky, though the
differences "are not important enough to cause an insurmountable barrier." When
referring to the ideas related to Blavatsky and the Theosophical Society, the
word "Theosophy" is capitalized; otherwise it is not. Overview of Blavatsky's
teachings. Helena Blavatsky taught that Theosophy is neither revelation nor
speculation. Blavatsky stated that Theosophy was an attempt at a gradual,
faithful reintroduction of a hitherto hidden science called The Occult science
in Theosophical literature. According to Blavatsky Occult science provides a
description of reality not only at a physical level but also on a metaphysical
one. Blavatsky said Occult science had been preserved and practiced throughout
history by carefully selected and trained individuals. The Theosophical Society
believes its precepts and doctrinal foundation will be verified when a
Theosophist follows prescribed disciplines to develop metaphysical means of
knowledge that transcend the limitations of the senses. Criticisms of Helena
Blavatsky and The Theosophical Society. Helena Blavatsky's skeptics. René
Guénon wrote a detailed critique of Theosophy titled "Theosophism: history of
a pseudo-religion" (1921). In the book Guenon claimed that Blavatsky had
acquired all her knowledge naturally from other books not from any supernatural
masters. Guenon points out that Blavatsky spent a long time visiting a library
at New York where she had easy access to the works of Jacob Boehme, Eliphas
Levi, the Kabbala and other Hermetic treatises. Guenon also wrote that
Blavatsky had borrowed passages taken from a translation of extracts from the
"Kanjur" and "Tanjur" published in 1836 in the twentieth volume of the "Asiatic
Researchers of Calcutta" by Sándor Kőrösi Csoma an eccentric orientalist. K.
Paul Johnson suggests in his book "The Masters Revealed: Madam Blavatsky and
Myth of the Great White Brotherhood" that the Masters that Madam Blavatsky
claimed she had personally met are idealizations of certain people she had met
during her lifetime. Also see the article “Talking to the Dead and Other
Amusements” by Paul Zweig "New York Times" October 5, 1980, which maintains
that Madame Blavatsky's revelations were fraudulent. Robert Todd Carroll in his
book "The skeptic's dictionary" (2003) wrote that Blavatsky used trickery into
deceiving others into thinking she had paranormal powers. Carroll wrote that
Blavatsky had faked a materialization of a tea cup and saucer as well as
written the messages from her masters herself. Blavatsky's Theosophy connected
to antisemitism, racism. Jackson Spielvogel and David Redles of the Simon
Wiesenthal Center's Museum of Tolerance analyze Blavatsky's racial ideas in her
book "Secret Doctrine". According to Spielvogel and Redles Blavatsky labeled
some races superior and others inferior. They clarify that Blavatsky did not
advocate "domination of one race over another" and that she was against
violence. They comment that Blavatsky's work "helped to foster antisemitism,
which is perhaps one of the reasons her esoteric work was so rapidly accepted
in German circles." They state Blavatsky "sharply differentiated Aryan and
Jewish religion" and believed "The Aryans were the most spiritual people on
earth." They quote Blavatsky's writing in "Secret Doctrine" as stating Aryans
used religion as an "everlasting lodestar" in contrast to Judaism which
Blavatsky claimed was based on "mere calculation" while characterizing it as a
"religion of hate and malice toward everyone and everything outside itself."
Post-Blavatskyan Theosophy and New Religious Movements. Notes: Reasons
regarding to the division of traditional theosophy from the Theosophical
Society G.R.S. Mead was an early Theosophist. In 1909 he resigned from the
Theosophical Society which was Orientalist. Prior to his break from the Society
Mead had already begun emphasizing sources from the Western esoteric tradition
in his writing. Mead was among the first Theosophists to explicate a "'Western'
theosophy deriving from Alexandrian and Hellenistic sources in the early
centuries A.D."
