Signs and Wonders Signs and Wonders was a phrase used often by leaders of the
Charismatic movement in the late 1980s and early 1990s. It is closely
associated with the ministry of John Wimber and the Vineyard Movement. One of
the major emphases of the belief is that the Gospel can be communicated more
effectively to unbelievers if accompanied by supernatural manifestations
brought on by the Holy Spirit (such as prophecy and healing). The origin of the
phrase is in , which describes the commandment to tithe first fruits as linked
to God's having brought the Israelites out of Egypt "with a strong hand and an
outstretched arm, and with signs and wonders". This passage is read with
emphasis in the Passover Haggadah and Seder. A key verse in scripture that is
understood by Christian ministries which allow God to move in signs and wonders
is , which states "Then the disciples went out and preached everywhere, and the
Lord worked with them and confirmed his word by the signs that accompanied it."
The beginnings of the movement. The recent emerging emphasis on signs and
wonders began in 1981 when John Wimber delivered a lecture at Fuller
Theological Seminary entitled, "“Signs, Wonders and Church Growth.” " From
1982 to 1985 Wimber taught the course, "“The Miraculous and Church Growth.”
" The story of this course that many in the Pentecostal, Charismatic and
Neocharismatic traditions would consider historic is told in Wagner’s "Signs
and Wonders Today", published in 1983. Prior to John Wimber, most healing
ministries were tied to their leaders. A distinctive feature of Wimber’s
teaching was what some have called the “democratization” of healing. From
1981 onward, a new “Signs and Wonders” movement was underway with an
emphasis on equipping and empowering the laity to minister in the power of the
Spirit. Wimber’s works include "A Brief Sketch of Signs and Wonders through
the Church Age", "Signs and Wonders and Church Growth", "Power Evangelism",
"Power Healing", "Power Encounters " and "Power Points". John Wimber credited
Trevor Martin’s "Kingdom Healing " as a significant item in the formation of
his own theology. As the Signs and Wonders movement began to emerge out of
Wimber’s teaching, dialogue on manifestations of the Spirit became more
active. The 1982 meeting of the Society for Pentecostal Studies in Pasadena,
California focused on the gifts of the Spirit. S. S. Schatzmann, who had
previously released "The Pauline Concept of Charismata in the Light of Recent
Critical Literature" in 1981, presented his work to the society. A compilation
of papers, entitled, "Gifts of the Spirit: Papers Presented at the 12th Annual
Meeting of the Society for Pentecostal Studies, November 18-20, 1982"
represents the content of the 1982 meeting. Critical responses. Controversy
stirred by John Wimber’s teachings on Signs and Wonders brought on a wave of
critical responses. The most persistent criticism centered upon the claim that
effective evangelism cannot properly be exercised without the accompanying
miraculous work. Such a situation, it was argued, added to the Gospel message
and ultimately distorted its message from being one of salvation to being one
of experiencing God's blessings now. While many critics did not deny that God
could perform the miraculous, they also claimed that it was a fallacy to assume
that miracles could be expected - as though God could be "forced" to act as it
were. The following works represent some of those who entered into the
dialogue: J. Woodhouse’s "Signs & Wonders and Evangelicals: A Response to the
Teaching of John Wimber", K. L. Sarles’ "An Appraisal of the Signs & Wonders
Movement", K. M. Bond’s "Signs and Wonders: Perspectives on John Wimber's
Vineyard" and D. H. Shepherd’s "A Critical Analysis of Power Evangelism as an
Evangelistic Methodology of the Signs and Wonders Movement". In the late 1990s,
R. E. Jackson would produce "An Evaluation of the Evangelistic Emphasis of the
North American Power Evangelism Movement, 1977-1997 " as an aid to skeptics, D.
Williams produced "Signs, Wonders, and the Kingdom of God: A Biblical Guide for
the Reluctant Skeptic". Defense and reflection. The ongoing theological
reflection accompanying the Signs and Wonders movement was evidenced by Fuller
Theological Seminary’s 1988 Symposium on Power Evangelism, which produced the
document entitled, "Papers Presented at the Symposium on Power Evangelism". In
the same year, C. Peter Wagner released "The Third Wave of the Holy Spirit:
Encountering the Power of Signs and Wonders Today". The study of the
missiological implications of Signs and Wonders would continue on into the turn
of the century with works such as T. O. Kettenring’s "The Impact on
Confidence for Personal Witnessing through Exposure to Power Evangelism " and
J. Lee’s "Power Evangelism in the Third Wave Movement and Its Implications
for Contemporary Church Growth". The debate would continue. E. B. Dennis
confronted the long-standing objections of cessationists with his thesis
entitled, "The Duration of the Charismata: An Exegetical and Theological Study
of 1 Corinthians 13:10", written in 1989. As reflected by the sources below,
the debate over the Signs and Wonders movement and the present-day function of
the manifestation gifts would continue on into the 1990s: D. T. Tharp’s
"Signs and Wonders in the Twentieth Century Evangelical Church: Corinth
Revisited", J. A. Algera’s "Signs and Wonders of God's Kingdom", J. M.
Ruthven’s "On the Cessation of Charismata: The Protestant Polemic on
Postbiblical Miracles " and J. I. Packer’s "The Kingdom and the Power".
