Biblical Magi The Magi (; Greek: μάγοι, "magoi"), also referred to as the
(Three) Wise Men, (Three) Kings, or Kings from the East, were, according to
Christianity, a group of distinguished foreigners who visited Jesus after his
birth, bearing gifts of gold, frankincense and myrrh. They are regular figures
in traditional accounts of the nativity celebrations of Christmas and are an
important part of the Christian tradition. The Gospel of Matthew, the only one
of the four Canonical gospels to mention the Magi, states that they came "from
the east" to worship the Christ, "born King of the Jews." Although the account
does not tell how many they were, the three gifts led to a widespread
assumption that they were three as well. In the East, the magi traditionally
number twelve. Their identification as kings in later Christian writings is
probably linked to Psalms 72:11, ""May all kings fall down before him"".
Original account. They are mentioned twice shortly thereafter, in reference to
their avoidance of Herod after seeing Jesus, and what Herod had learned from
their earlier meeting. Description. The Magi are popularly referred to as "wise
men" and "kings". The word "magi" is the plural of Latin "magus", borrowed from
Greek μάγος "magos", as used in the original Greek text of the Gospel of
Matthew. Greek "magos" itself is derived from Old Persian "maguŝ" from the
Avestan "magâunô", i.e. the religious caste into which Zoroaster was born,
(see Yasna 33.7: "ýâ sruyê parê magâunô " = " so I can be heard beyond
Magi "). The term refers to the priestly caste of Zoroastrianism. As part of
their religion, these priests paid particular attention to the stars, and
gained an international reputation for astrology, which was at that time highly
regarded as a science. Their religious practices and use of astrology caused
derivatives of the term "Magi" to be applied to the occult in general and led
to the English term "magic". Translated in the King James Version as "wise
men", the same translation is applied to the wise men led by Daniel of earlier
Hebrew Scriptures (). The same word is given as "sorcerer" and "sorcery" when
describing "Elymas the sorcerer" in , and Simon Magus, considered a heretic by
the early Church, in . Names. One candidate for the origin of the name Caspar
appears in the Acts of Thomas as "Gondophares" (AD 21 – c.AD 47), i.e.,
Gudapharasa (from which 'Caspar' might derive as corruption of 'Gaspar'). This
Gondophares declared independence from the Arsacids to become the first Indo-
Parthian king and who was allegedly visited by Thomas the Apostle. According to
at least one scholar his name is perpetuated in the name of the Afghan city
Kandahar, which he is said to have founded under the name Gundopharron.
Christian legend may have chosen Gondofarr simply because he was an eastern
king living in the right (?) time period. In contrast, the Syrian Christians
name the Magi "Larvandad", "Gushnasaph", and "Hormisdas". These names have a
far greater likelihood of being originally Persian, though that does not, of
course, guarantee their authenticity. In the Eastern churches, Ethiopian
Christianity, for instance, has "Hor", "Karsudan", and "Basanater", while the
Armenians have "Kagpha", "Badadakharida" and "Badadilma". Many Chinese
Christians believe that one of the magi came from China. Country of origin and
journey. The phrase "from the east" (ἀπὸ ἀνατολῶν), more
literally "from the rising the sun", is the only information Matthew provides
about the region from which they came. Traditionally the view developed that
they were Babylonians, Persians, or Jews from Yemen as the Makrebs or kings of
Yemen then were Jews, a view held for example by John Chrysostom. There is an
Armenian tradition identifying the 'Magi of Bethlehem' as Balthasar of Arabia,
Melchior of Persia and Gaspar of India. Bible historian Chuck Missler has also
written about this tradition. Historian John of Hildesheim relates a tradition
in the ancient silk road city of Taxila (near Islamabad in Pakistan) that one
of the Magi passed through the city on the way to Bethlehem. According to the
Gospel of Matthew, the Magi found Jesus by 'following' a star, which thus
traditionally became known as the Star of Bethlehem. Various theories have been
presented as to what this phenomenon refers to, since stars do not visibly move
and therefore cannot be followed. Some believe that they followed a planet,
which without a telescope could be mistaken as a star, as it slowly moved
across the sky. On finding him, they gave him three symbolic gifts: gold,
frankincense and myrrh. Warned in a dream that Judean king Herod intended to
kill the child, they decided to return home by a different route. This prompted
Herod to resort to killing all the young children in Bethlehem, an act called
the Massacre of the Innocents, in an attempt to eliminate a rival heir to his
throne. Jesus and his family had, however, escaped to Egypt beforehand. After
these events they passed into obscurity. The story of the nativity in Matthew
glorifies Jesus, likens him to Moses, and shows his life as fulfilling
prophecy. After the visit, the Magi leave the narrative by "returning another
way" so as to avoid Herod, and do not reappear. Gregory the Great waxed lyrical
on this theme, commenting that "having come to know Jesus we are forbidden to
return by the way we came". There are many traditional stories about what
happened to the Magi after this, with one having them baptised by St. Thomas on
his way to India. Another has their remains found by Saint Helena and brought
to Constantinople, and eventually making their way to Germany and the Shrine of
the Three Kings at Cologne Cathedral. The historian of Christianity, Sebastian
Brock, has said: "It was no doubt among converts from Zoroastrianism that…
certain legends were developed around the Magi of the Gospels". And Anders
Hutgård concluded that the Gospel story of the Magi was influenced by an
Iranian legend concerning magi and a star, which was connected with Persian
beliefs in the rise of a star predicting the birth of a ruler and with myths
describing the manifestation of a divine figure in fire and light. A model for
the homage of the Magi might have been provided, it has been suggested, by the
journey to Rome of King Tiridates I of Armenia, with his magi, to pay homage to
the Emperor Nero, which took place in 66 AD, a few years before the date
assigned to the composition of the Gospel of Matthew. In recent tradition the
Magi have been portrayed as three kings, or noble men, of different origin. One
from Western Europe (usually Celtic-like from the British Isles or France),
another of African Origin (usually Abyssinian, Ethiopian), the last from Asia
either from the Arabian Peninsula (e.g. Yemen or Oman) or the Far East (usually
China). The European is often portrayed with the gold as the other two gifts
were native to Africa and Asia so the myrrh and frankincense vary between
"King". There was a tradition that the Central Asian Naimans and their
Christian Kerait relatives were descended from the Biblical Magi. This heritage
passed to the Mongol dynasty of Genghis Khan when Sorghaghtani, niece of the
Kerait ruler Toghrul, married Tolui the youngest son of Genghis and became the
mother of Möngke Khan and his younger brother and successor, Kublai Khan.
Toghrul became identified with the legendary Central Asian Christian king,
Prester John, whose Mongol descendants were sought as allies against the
Muslims by contemporary European monarchs and popes. Gifts. [
(1).jpg|thumb|333px|Byzantine art usually depicts the Magi in Persian clothing
which includes breeches, capes, and Phrygian caps. Mosaic, ca. [http://
mdz10.bib-bvb.de/~db/bsb00000858/images/index.html?id=00000858&seite=347 565.
Basilica of Sant'Apollinare Nuovo, Ravenna, Italy - restored above in 18th
century.]] The Magi are described as "falling down", "kneeling" or "bowing" in
the worship of Jesus. This gesture, together with the use of kneeling in Luke's
birth narrative, had an important effect on Christian religious practices. They
were indicative of great respect, and typically used when venerating a king.
Inspired by these verses, kneeling and prostration were adopted in the early
Church. While prostration is now rarely practiced in the West, it is still
relatively common in the Eastern Churches, especially during Lent. Kneeling has
remained an important element of Christian worship to this day. Three gifts are
explicitly identified in Matthew: gold, frankincense, and myrrh. Many different
theories of the meaning and symbolism of the gifts have been brought forward.
While gold is fairly obviously explained, frankincense, and particularly myrrh,
are much more obscure. Myrrh was used as an embalming ointment and as a
penitential incense in funerals and cremations until the 15th century. The
"holy oil" traditionally used by the Eastern Orthodox Church for performing the
sacraments of chrismation and unction is traditionally scented with myrrh, and
receiving either of these sacraments is commonly referred to as "receiving the
myrrh". The picture of the Magi on the 7th century Franks Casket[http://
www.franks-casket.de/english/front02.html] shows the third visitor - he who
brings myrrh - with a valknut over his back, a pagan symbol referring to Death.
It has been suggested by scholars that the "gifts" were medicinal rather than
precious material for tribute. The Syrian King Seleucus II Callinicus is
recorded to have offered gold, frankincense and myrrh (among other items) to
Apollo in his temple at Miletus in 243 BC, and this may have been the precedent
for the mention of these three gifts in Gospel of Matthew (). It was these
three gifts, it is thought, which were the chief cause for the number of the
Magi becoming fixed eventually at three. This episode can be linked to and to
which report gifts being given by kings, and this has played a central role in
the perception of the Magi as kings, rather than as astronomer-priests. In a
hymn of the late 4th-century hispanic poet Prudentius, the three gifts have
already gained their medieval interpretation as prophetic emblems of Jesus'
identity, familiar in the carol "We Three Kings" by John Henry Hopkins, Jr.,
1857. John Chrysostom suggested that the gifts were fit to be given not just to
a king but to God, and contrasted them with the Jews' traditional offerings of
sheep and calves, and accordingly Chrysostom asserts that the Magi worshiped
Jesus as God. What subsequently happened to these gifts is never mentioned in
the scripture, but several traditions have developed. One story has the gold
being stolen by the two thieves who were later crucified alongside Jesus.
Another tale has it being entrusted to and then misappropriated by Judas. One
tradition suggests that Joseph and Mary used the gold to finance their travels
when they fled Bethlehem after the magi had warned them about King Herod's plan
to kill Jesus. And another story proposes the theory that the myrrh given to
them at Jesus' birth was used to anoint Jesus' body after his crucifixion. In
the Monastery of St. Paul of Mount Athos there is a 15th century golden case
containing purportedly the Gift of the Magi. It was donated to the monastery in
the 15th century by Mara Branković, daughter of the King of Serbia Đurađ
Branković, wife to the Ottoman Sultan Murat II and godmother to Mehmet II the
Conqueror (of Constantinople). Apparently they were part of the relics of the
Holy Palace of Constantinople and it is claimed they were displayed there since
the 4th century. After the Athens earthquake of September 9, 1999 they were
temporarily displayed in Athens in order to strengthen faith and raise money
for earthquake victims. Martyrdom traditions. Christian Scriptures record
nothing about the Biblical Magi after reporting their going back to their own
country. Two separate traditions have surfaced claiming that they were so moved
by their encounter with Jesus that they either became Christians on their own
or were quick to convert fully upon later encountering an Apostle of Jesus. The
traditions claim that they were so strong in their beliefs that they willingly
embraced martyrdom. Chronicon of Dexter. One tradition gained popularity in
Spain during the 17th century, it was found in a work called the Chronicon of
Dexter. The work was ascribed to Flavius Lucius Dexter the bishop of Barcelona,
under Theodosius the Great. The tradition appears in the form of a simple
martyrology reading "In Arabia Felix, in the city of Sessania of the Adrumeti,
the martyrdom of the holy kings, the three Magi, Gaspar, Balthassar, and
Melchior who adored Christ." First appearing in 1610, the Chronicon of Dexter
was immensely popular along with the traditions it contained throughout the
17th century - later this was all brought into question when historians and the
Catholic hierarchy in Rome declared the work a pious forgery. Relics at
Cologne. A competing tradition asserts that the Biblical Magi "were martyred
for the faith, and that their bodies were first venerated at Constantinople;
thence they were transferred to Milan. When Barbarossa , these bodies were
taken to the great Dome of Cologne, and there they are venerated today." Tombs.
There are several traditions on where the remains of the Magi are located,
although none of the traditions is considered as an established fact or even as
particularly likely by secular history. A Shrine of the Three Kings at Cologne
Cathedral, according to tradition, contains the bones of the Three Wise Men.
Reputedly they were first discovered by Saint Helena on her famous pilgrimage
to Palestine and the Holy Lands. She took the remains to the church of Hagia
Sophia in Constantinople; they were later moved to Milan (some sources say by
the city's bishop, Eustorgius I), before being sent to their current resting
place by the Holy Roman Emperor Frederick I in AD 1164. The Milanese celebrate
their part in the tradition by holding a medieval costume parade every 6
January. Queen Helen… began to think greatly of the bodies of these three
kings, and she arrayed herself, and accompanied by many attendants, went into
the Land of Ind… after she had found the bodies of Melchior, Balthazar, and
Gaspar, Queen Helen put them into one chest and ornamented it with great
riches, and she brought them into Constantinople... and laid them in a church
that is called Saint Sophia. Religious significance. The visit of the Magi is
commemorated in most Western Christian churches by the observance of Epiphany,
6 January. The Eastern Orthodox celebrate the visit of the Magi on 25 December.
The identification of the Magi as kings is linked to Old Testament prophesies
that have the Messiah being worshipped by kings in Isaiah 60:3, Psalm 72:10,
and Psalm 68:29. Early readers reinterpreted Matthew in light of these
prophecies and elevated the Magi to kings. By AD 500 all commentators adopted
the prevalent tradition that the three were kings, and this continued until the
Protestant Reformation. Though the Qur'an omits Matthew's episode of the Magi,
it was well known in Arabia. The Muslim encyclopaedist al-Tabari, writing in
the 9th century, gives the familiar symbolism of the gifts of the Magi. Al-
Tabari gave his source for the information to be the later 7th century writer
Wahb ibn Munabbih. Some religious traditions take a critical view of the Magi.
Jehovah's Witnesses do not see the arrival of the Magi as something to be
celebrated, but instead stress the Biblical condemnation of sorcery and
astrology in such texts as Deuteronomy 18:10–11, Leviticus 19:26, and Isaiah
47:13–14. They also point to the fact that the star seen by the Magi led them
first to a hostile enemy of Jesus, and only then to the child's location —
the argument being that if this was an event from God, it makes no sense for
them to be led to a ruler with intentions to kill the child before taking them
to Jesus. Likewise, as informs, the Magi were warned by God not to return to
the familicide King Herod. Thus, they believe, it seems reasonable to consider
that the star, which evidently only the Magi could see (, ), was the product of
God's archenemy designed to perform an unholy act upon an innocent young child,
Jesus. Traditions. Holidays celebrating the arrival of the Magi traditionally
recognise a distinction between the date of their arrival and the date of
Jesus' birth. The account given in the Gospel of Matthew does not state that
they were present on the night of the birth; in the Gospel of Luke, Joseph and
Mary remain in Bethlehem until it is time for Jesus' dedication, in Jerusalem,
and then return to their home in Nazareth. Spanish customs. Western
Christianity celebrates the Magi on the day of Epiphany, January 6, the day
immediately following the "twelve days of Christmas", particularly in the
Spanish-speaking parts of the world. In these areas, the Three Kings (""los
Reyes Magos de Oriente"", also ""Los Tres Reyes Magos"" and ""Los Reyes
Magos"") receive letters from children and so bring them gifts on the night
before Epiphany. In Spain, each one of the Magi is supposed to represent one
different continent, Europe (Melchior), Asia (Caspar) and Africa (Balthasar).
According to the tradition, the Magi come from the Orient on their camels to
visit the houses of all the children; much like Santa Claus with his reindeer,
they visit everyone in one night. In some areas, children prepare a drink for
each of the Magi. It is also traditional to prepare food and drink for the
camels, because this is the only night of the year when they eat. Campaign for
a real black Balthazar in Spain. In Spain there has been a growing concern over
the fact that Balthazar is commonly played by a white person in blackface.
Adoration of the Magi in art. The Magi most frequently appear in European art
in the "Adoration of the Magi"; less often "The Journey of the Magi" has been a
popular "topos", and other scenes such as the "Magi before Herod" and the
"Dream of the Magi" also appear in the Middle Ages. In Byzantine art they are
depicted as Persians, wearing trousers and phrygian caps. Crown appear from the
10th century. Medieval artists also allegorised the theme to represent the
three ages of man. Beginning in the 12th century, and very often by the 15th,
the Kings also represent the three parts of the known (pre-Columbian) world in
Western art, especially in Northern Europe. Balthasar is thus represented as a
young African or Moor and Caspar may be depicted with distinctly Oriental
features. An early Anglo-Saxon picture survives on the Franks Casket, probably
a non-Christian king's hoard-box (early 7th century, whalebone carving); or
rather the hoard-box survived Christian attacks on non-Christian art and
sculpture because of that picture. In its composition it follows the oriental
style, which renders a courtly scene, with the Virgin and Christ facing the
spectator, while the Magi devoutly approach from the (left) side. Even amongst
non-Christians who had heard of the Christian story of the Magi, the motif was
quite popular, since the Magi had endured a long journey and were generous.
Instead of an angel, the picture places a swan, interpretable as the hero's
fylgja (a protecting spirit, and shapeshifter). Austrian artist Gottfried
Helnwein depicted a more controversial tableau in his painting, "Epiphany I:
Adoration of the Magi" (1996). Intended to represent the "many connections
between the Third Reich and the Christian churches in Austria and Germany",
Nazi officers in uniform stand around an Aryan woman, a Madonna. The Christ
toddler who stands on Mary's lap resembles Adolf Hitler. More generally they
appear in popular Nativity scenes and other Christmas decorations that have
their origins in the Neapolitan variety of the Italian "presepio" or Nativity
crèche.
