Three-Chapter Controversy The Three-Chapter Controversy, a phase in the
Chalcedonian controversy, was an attempt to reconcile the Non-Chalcedonian
Christians of Syria (Syriac Orthodox Church) and Egypt (Coptic Orthodox Church)
with Chalcedonian Eastern Orthodoxy, following the failure of the Henotikon.
The "Three Chapters" (, "tría kephálaia") consisted of propositions
anathematizing: Background. At a very early stage of the controversy the
incriminated writings themselves came to be spoken of as the "Three Chapters".
In consequence those who refused to anathematize these writings were said to
defend the Three Chapters, and accused of professing Nestorianism; and, vice
versa, those who did anathematize them, were said to condemn the Three Chapters
as heretical. At the end of 543 or the beginning of 544 the Emperor Justinian I
issued an edict in which the three chapters were anathematized, in hope of
encouraging the Oriental Orthodox to accept the decisions of the Council of
Chalcedon and the Tome of Pope Leo I, thus bringing religious harmony to the
Byzantine Empire. However, Evagrius ("Hist. eccl.", IV, 28) tells us that
Theodorus Ascidas, the leader of the Origenists, had raised the question of the
Three Chapters to divert Justinian from a persecution of his party. Liberatus
("Breviarium", c. 24) adds that Ascidas wished to take revenge on the memory of
Theodore of Mopsuestia, who had written much against Origen. In his letter to
Vigilius, Domitian, Bishop of Ancyra, tells the same story of intrigue.
Although Roman Catholic canonists admit that theological errors, and in the
case of Theodore very serious ones, can be found in the writings, the mistakes
of Theodoret and Ibas were chiefly but not wholly due to a misunderstanding of
the language of Cyril of Alexandria. However these errors do not make the
decision of condemnation easy, for there were no good precedents for dealing
harshly with the memory of men who had died in peace with the Church. Facundus,
Bishop of Hermiane, pointed out in his "Defensio trium capitulorum" that Saint
Cyprian had erred about the rebaptism of heretics, yet no one would dream of
anathematizing him. The condemnation of the "Three Chapters" was demanded
primarily to appease opponents of the Council of Chalcedon. Both Ibas and
Theodoret had been deprived of their bishoprics by condemned heretics, and both
were restored by the Council of Chalcedon upon anathematizing Nestorius. The
Subscription. The leading Eastern bishops were coerced, after a short
resistance, into subscribing. Mennas, Patriarch of Constantinople, first
protested that to sign was to condemn the Council of Chalcedon, and then
yielded, as he told Stephen the Roman apocrisarius at Constantinople, that his
subscription should be returned to him if the Pope disapproved of it. Stephen
and Dacius, Bishop of Milan, who was then at Constantinople, broke off
communion with him. Zoilus the Patriarch of Alexandria, Ephraim the Patriarch
of Antioch, and Peter the Patriarch of Jerusalem, all yielded after a brief
resistance. Of the other bishops those who subscribed were rewarded, those who
refused were deposed or had to "conceal themselves" (Liberatus, "Brev.", 24;
Facundus, "Def.", II, 3 and "Cont. Moc."). While the resistance of the Greek-
speaking bishops collapsed, those from the Latin-speaking world, such as Dacius
of Milan and Facundus, who were then at Constantinople, stood firm. Their
general attitude is represented in two letters still extant. The first is from
an African bishop named Pontianus, in which he entreats the emperor to withdraw
the Three Chapters on the ground that their condemnation struck at the Council
of Chalcedon. The other is that of the Carthaginian deacon, Ferrandus; his
opinion as a most learned canonist was asked by the Roman deacons Pelagius
(afterwards pope, at this time a strong defender of the Three Chapters) and
Anatolius. He fastened on the epistle of Ibas - if this was received at
Chalcedon, to anathematize it now was to condemn the council. An even stronger
use of the benevolence of the council towards this epistle was made by Facundus
at one of the conferences held by Pope Vigilius before he issued his
"Iudicatum". He wished it to protect the memory of Theodore of Mopsuestia
because Ibas had spoken of him in terms of commendation ("Cont. Moc."). When
Vigilius arrived at Constantinople in January 547, Italy, Africa, Sardinia,
Sicily, and the parts of Illyricum and Greece through which he journeyed were
fiercely against the condemnation of the Three Chapters. The matter was further
complicated by the fact that the Latin-speaking bishops, Vigilius among them,
were for the most part ignorant of Greek and therefore unable to judge the
incriminated writings for themselves. Pelagius II in his third epistle to
Elias, probably drawn up by the future Gregory I, ascribes all the trouble to
this ignorance. This handicap should be remembered in judging the conduct of
Vigilius. He came to Constantinople very resolute in his opinions, and his
first step was to excommunicate Mennas. But he must have felt the ground was
being cut from under his feet when he was supplied with translations of some of
the most questionable passages from the writings of Theodore. In 548 he issued
his "Iudicatum" in which the Three Chapters were condemned, then temporarily
withdrew it when the storm it raised showed how ill-prepared the Latins were
for it. He and Justinian agreed to convening a general council, in which
Vigilius pledged himself to bring about the condemnation of the Three Chapters,
but the emperor broke his pledge by issuing another edict condemning the
Chapters. Vigilius had twice to take sanctuary, first in the Basilica of St.
Peter, and then in the Church of St. Euphemia at Chalcedon, from which he
issued an Encyclical letter describing the treatment he had received. An
agreement was patched up and Vigilius agreed to a general council but soon
withdrew his assent. Nevertheless, the council was held, and after refusing to
accept the "Constitutum" of Vigilius, it then condemned the Three Chapters.
Finally Vigilius succumbed, subscribed to the council, and was set free. But he
died before reaching Italy, leaving his successor Pelagius the task of dealing
with the schisms in the West. The schism in the West. The bishops of Aquileia,
Milan, and of the Istrian peninsula all refused to condemn the Three Chapters,
arguing that to do so would be to betray Chalcedon. They in turn were
anathematized by the Council. Meanwhile, since these bishops and most of their
suffragans were soon to become subjects of the Lombards in 568, they would be
beyond the reach of the coercion of the Byzantine Exarch at Ravenna, and able
to maintain their dissent. However, the bishop of Milan renewed communion with
Rome after the death of bishop Fronto around 581. As he had fled from the
Lombards to refuge at Genoa, his successor, Laurence, was dependent upon the
Byzantines for support. He subscribed to the condemnation. In 568, the
schismastic bishop of Aquileia had actually fled eight miles south to Byzantine
controlled Grado. The Byzantines allowed these freedom and archbishop Elias,
already called patriarch by his suffragans, built a cathedral under the
patronage of St. Euphemia as an unabashed statement of his adherence to the
schism since it was the church of St. Euphemia in which the sessions of the
Council of Chalcedon were approved. Gregory the Great's attempts at
conciliation near the end of his pontificate, and especially through the
Lombard queen, Theodelinda, began to have some effect. Thus, in 606, Elias's
successor Severus died and there were many clerics favorable to reconciliation.
The Byzantines encouraged these to elect Candidianus who once elected prompty
restored communion. However, certain stalwart clerics were unhappy and having
fled to mainland Aquileia under Lombard protection elected a John as a rival
bishop who maintained the schism. Thus, the schism deepened now along political
Lombard-Roman lines. Columbanus was involved in the first attempt to resolve
this division through mediation in 613. The bishop of "old" Aquileia formally
ended the schism at the Synod of Aquileia in 698, only after the Lombards
embraced Orthodoxy in the 7th century. The division of the Patriarchate of
Aquileia contributed to the evolution of the Patriarch of Grado into the
present Patriarch of Venice. Its effect in the East. For all of Justinian's
intents, this edict was of negligible effect in the East. In the decades
following Justinian's death, the local Christians were more concerned for their
safety in the wars first against a resurgent Persia, then next against Islamic
Arabs, who came to permanently control the territories beyond the Taurus
Mountains in the 630s. The Christians in those regions either adhered to the
edicts proclaimed in Constantinople and Rome, with determination held to their
own Non-Chalcedonian beliefs, or converted to Islam. Its later effect. This
event is one of several often cited to refute the concept of Papal
Infallibility, which holds that official public proclamations made by the Pope
on doctrine are without error. However, the condemnation of specific writings
or persons is considered by the Catholic Church a matter of prudential judgment
and is not guaranteed to be infallible. "This article uses text from the
Catholic Encyclopedia, but with significant changes."
