Tibetan Buddhism Tibetan Buddhism is the body of Buddhist religious doctrine
and institutions characteristic of Tibet and certain regions of the Himalayas,
including northern Nepal, Bhutan, and India (particularly in Arunachal Pradesh,
Ladakh, Dharamsala, Lahaul and Spiti in Himachal Pradesh, and Sikkim). It is
the state religion of Bhutan. It is also practiced in Mongolia and parts of
Russia (Kalmykia, Buryatia, and Tuva) and Northeast China. Texts recognized as
scripture and commentary are contained in the Tibetan Buddhist canon, such that
Tibetan is a spiritual language of these areas. A Tibetan diaspora has spread
Tibetan Buddhism to many Western countries, where the tradition has gained
popularity. Among its prominent exponents is the 14th Dalai Lama of Tibet. The
number of its adherents is estimated to be between ten and twenty million.
Buddhahood. Tibetan Buddhism comprises the teachings of the three vehicles of
Buddhism: the Foundational Vehicle, Mahāyāna, and Vajrayāna. The Mahāyāna
goal of spiritual development is to achieve the enlightenment of Buddhahood in
order to most efficiently help all other sentient beings attain this state. The
motivation in it is the bodhicitta mind of enlightenment — an altruistic
intention to become enlightened for the sake of all sentient beings.
Bodhisattvas are revered beings who have conceived the will and vow to dedicate
their lives with bodhicitta for the sake of all beings. Tibetan Buddhism
teaches methods for achieving Buddhahood more quickly by including the
Vajrayāna path in Mahāyāna. Buddhahood is defined as a state free of the
obstructions to liberation as well as those to omniscience. When, in
Buddhahood, one is freed from all mental obscurations, one is said to attain a
state of continuous bliss mixed with a simultaneous cognition of emptiness, the
true nature of reality. In this state, all limitations on one's ability to help
other living beings are removed. It is said that there are countless beings who
have attained Buddhahood. Buddhas spontaneously, naturally and continuously
perform activities to benefit all sentient beings. However it is believed that
one's karma could limit the ability of the Buddhas to help them. Thus, although
Buddhas possess no limitation from their side on their ability to help others,
sentient beings continue to experience suffering as a result of the limitations
of their own former negative actions. General methods of practice. Transmission
and realization. There is a long history of oral transmission of teachings in
Tibetan Buddhism. Oral transmissions by lineage holders traditionally can take
place in small groups or mass gatherings of listeners and may last for seconds
(in the case of a mantra, for example) or months (as in the case of a section
of the canon). A transmission can even occur without actually hearing, as in
Asaṅga's visions of Maitreya. An emphasis on oral transmission as more
important than the printed word derives from the earliest period of Indian
Buddhism, when it allowed teachings to be kept from those who should not hear
them. Hearing a teaching (transmission) readies the hearer for realization
based on it. The person from whom one hears the teaching should have heard it
as one link in a succession of listeners going back to the original speaker:
the Buddha in the case of a sutra or the author in the case of a book. Then the
hearing constitutes an authentic lineage of transmission. Authenticity of the
oral lineage is a prerequisite for realization, hence the importance of
lineages. The teaching of buddha. Analytic meditation and fixation meditation.
Spontaneous realization on the basis of transmission is possible but rare.
Normally an intermediate step is needed in the form of analytic meditation,
i.e., thinking about what one has heard. As part of this process, entertaining
doubts and engaging in internal debate over them is encouraged in some
traditions. Analytic meditation is just one of two general methods of
meditation. When it achieves the quality of realization, one is encouraged to
switch to "focused" or "fixation" meditation. In this the mind is stabilized on
that realization for periods long enough to gradually habituate it to it. A
person's capacity for analytic meditation can be trained with logic. The
capacity for successful focused meditation can be trained through calm abiding.
A meditation routine may involve alternating sessions of analytic meditation to
achieve deeper levels of realization, and focused meditation to consolidate
them. The deepest level of realization is Buddhahood itself. Devotion to a
Guru. As in other Buddhist traditions, an attitude of reverence for the
teacher, or guru, is also highly prized. At the beginning of a public teaching,
a lama will do prostrations to the throne on which he will teach due to its
symbolism, or to an image of the Buddha behind that throne, then students will
do prostrations to the lama after he is seated. Merit accrues when one's
interactions with the teacher are imbued with such reverence in the form of
guru devotion, a code of practices governing them that derives from Indian
sources. By such things as avoiding disturbance to the peace of mind of one's
teacher, and wholeheartedly following his prescriptions, much merit accrues and
this can significantly help improve one's practice. There is a general sense in
which any Tibetan Buddhist teacher is called a lama. A student may have taken
teachings from many authorities and revere them all as lamas in this general
sense. However, he will typically have one held in special esteem as his own
root guru and is encouraged to view the other teachers who are less dear to
him, however more exalted their status, as embodied in and subsumed by the root
guru. Often the teacher the student sees as root guru is simply the one who
first introduced him to Buddhism, but a student may also change his personal
view of which particular teacher is his root guru any number of times.
Skepticism. Skepticism is an important aspect of Tibetan Buddhism, an attitude
of critical skepticism is encouraged to promote abilities in analytic
meditation. In favour of skepticism towards Buddhist doctrines in general,
Tibetans are fond of quoting sutra to the effect that one should test the
Buddha's words as one would the quality of gold. The opposing principles of
skepticism and guru devotion are reconciled with the Tibetan injunction to
scrutinise a prospective guru thoroughly before finally adopting him as such
without reservation. A Buddhist may study with a lama for decades before
finally accepting him as his own guru. Preliminary practices and approach to
Vajrayāna. Vajrayāna is acknowledged to be the fastest method for attaining
Buddhahood but for unqualified practitioners it can be dangerous. To engage in
it one must receive an appropriate initiation (also known as an "empowerment")
from a lama who is fully qualified to give it. From the time one has resolved
to accept such an initiation, the utmost sustained effort in guru devotion is
essential. The aim of preliminary practices ("ngöndro") is to start the
student on the correct path for such higher teachings. Just as Sutrayāna
preceded Vajrayāna historically in India, so sutra practices constitute those
that are preliminary to tantric ones. Preliminary practices include all
"Sutrayāna" activities that yield merit like hearing teachings, prostrations,
offerings, prayers and acts of kindness and compassion, but chief among the
preliminary practices are realizations through meditation on the three
principle stages of the path: renunciation, the altruistic bodhicitta wish to
attain enlightenment and the wisdom realizing emptiness. For a person without
the basis of these three in particular to practice Vajrayāna can be like a
small child trying to ride an unbroken horse. While the practices of Vajrayāna
are not known in Sutrayāna, all Sutrayāna practices are common to Vajrayāna.
Without training in the preliminary practices, the ubiquity of allusions to
them in Vajrayāna is meaningless and even successful Vajrayāna initiation
becomes impossible. The merit acquired in the preliminary practices facilitates
progress in Vajrayāna. While many Buddhists may spend a lifetime exclusively
on sutra practices, however, an amalgam of the two to some degree is common.
For example, in order to train in calm abiding, one might use a tantric
visualisation as the meditation object. Esotericism. In Vajrayāna
particularly, Tibetan Buddhists subscribe to a voluntary code of self-
censorship, whereby the uninitiated do not seek and are not provided with
information about it. This self-censorship may be applied more or less strictly
depending on circumstances such as the material involved. A depiction of a
mandala may be less public than that of a deity. That of a higher tantric deity
may be less public than that of a lower. The degree to which information on
Vajrayāna is now public in western languages is controversial among Tibetan
Buddhists. Buddhism has always had a taste for esotericism since its earliest
period in India. Tibetans today maintain greater or lesser degrees of
confidentiality also with information on the "vinaya" and emptiness
specifically. In Buddhist teachings generally, too, there is caution about
revealing information to people who may be unready for it. Esoteric values in
Buddhism have made it at odds with the values of Christian missionary activity,
for example in contemporary Mongolia. Wrathful bodhisattvas. The most
distinctive point in Tibetan Buddhism is the concept of the Wrathful (or
Terrifying) bodhisattvas. Coming from the concept of Vajyarana that
"Everything" is Voidness, and thus in Vajrayana monks not only work with
concepts of "Good"; but they also work with concepts of "Evil". In Vajrayana
buddhism both "good" and "evil" aspects are mixed together, and people and
lamas work and study with all of them. The most important consequence from
this; is that from now and then many lamas are involved in scandals, corruption
or crimes, because they just act as Wrathful bodhisattvas like Mahakala,
Yamantaka, Dorje Phagmo, Vajrapani and others. Wrathful in Tibetan is said
Dragpo or Drakpo. Reincarnating lamas: the Tulkus. Another important point in
Tibetan Buddhism, is the famous concept of the Tulku or Trulku, which means
that lamas make a "reincarnation", and the disciples look for the child as the
new "body" of their old master. The word "tulku" literally means Body of
Emanation; in Sanskrit is Nirmanakaya. Native Tibetan developments. Some
commentators have emphasised Tibetan innovations such as the system of
incarnate lamas, but such genuine innovations have been few. True to its roots
in the "Pāla" system of North India, however, Tibetan Buddhism carried on a
tradition of eclectic accumulation and systematisation of diverse Buddhist
elements, and pursued their synthesis. Prominent among these achievements are
the Stages of the Path and motivational training. Study of tenet systems.
Tibetan Buddhists practice one or more understandings of the true nature of
reality, the emptiness of inherent existence of all things. Emptiness is
propounded according to four classical Indian schools of philosophical tenets.
The primary source for the former is the Abhidharma-kośa by Vasubandhu and its
commentaries. The Abhidharmakośa is also an important source for the
Sautrāntikas. Dignāga and Dharmakīrti are the most prominent exponents.
Yogacārins base their views on texts from Maitreya, Asaṅga and Vasubandhu,
Madhyamakas on Nāgārjuna and Āryadeva. There is a further classification of
Madhyamaka into Svatantrika-Madhyamaka and Prasaṅgika-Madhyamaka. The former
stems from Bhavaviveka, Śāntarakṣita and Kamalaśīla, and the latter from
Buddhapālita and Candrakīrti. The tenet system is used in the monasteries and
colleges to teach Buddhist philosophy in a systematic and progressive fashion,
each philosophical view being more subtle than its predecessor. Therefore the
four schools can be seen as a gradual path from a rather easy-to-grasp,
"realistic" philosophical point of view, to more and more complex and subtle
views on the ultimate nature of reality, that is on emptiness and dependent
arising, culminating in the philosophy of the Mādhyamikas, which is widely
believed to present the most sophisticated point of view. The termas. A
surprising development of the text study is the Terma texts. Termas (Treasury
Texts) are texts composed by great Lamas; but which are hidden away and
occulted to everybody, because that is not the time for the text to be
revealed. When the appropriate time will come (often many years), the monks
will discover the hidden text; when the world is ready for it. History. Early
history. In the reign of King Thothori Nyantsen (5th century CE), a basket of
Buddhist scriptures arrived in Tibet from India. Written in Sanskrit, they were
not translated into Tibetan until the reign of king Songtsän Gampo (618-649).
While there is doubt about the level of Songtsän Gampo's interest in Buddhism,
it is known that he married a Chinese Tang Dynasty Buddhist princess, Wencheng,
who came to Tibet with a statue of Shakyamuni Buddha. It is however clear from
Tibetan sources that some of his successors became ardent Buddhists. The
records show that Chinese Buddhists were actively involved in missionary
activity in Tibet, they did not have the same level of imperial support as
Indian Buddhists, with tantric lineages from Bihar and Bengal. According to a
Tibetan legendary tradition, Songtsän Gampo also married a Nepalese Buddhist
princess, Bhrikuti. By the second half of the 8th century he was already
regarded as an embodiment of the Bodhisattva Avalokiteśvara. The successors of
Songtsän Gampo were less enthusiastic about the propagation of Buddhism but in
the 8th century, King Trisong Detsen (755-797) established it as the official
religion of the state. He invited Indian Buddhist scholars to his court. In his
age the famous tantric mystic Padmasambhāva arrived in Tibet according to the
Tibetan tradition. In addition to writing a number of important scriptures,
some of which he hid for future "tertons" to find, Padmasambhāva, along with
Śāntarakṣita, established the Nyingma school. The outlines of the history
of Buddhism in Tibet from this time are well-known. At this early time also,
from the south came the influence of scholars under the Pāla dynasty in the
Indian state of Magadha. They had achieved a blend of Mahāyāna and Vajrayāna
that has come to characterize all forms of Tibetan Buddhism. Their teaching in
sutra centered on the "Abhisamayālankāra", a 4th century Yogācārin text,
but prominent among them were the Mādhyamika scholars Śāntarakṣita and
Kamalaśīla. A third influence was that of the Sarvāstivādins from Kashmir
in the south west and Khotan in the north west. Although they did not succeed
in maintaining a presence in Tibet, their texts found their way into the
Tibetan Buddhist canon, providing the Tibetans with almost all of their primary
sources about the Foundation Vehicle. A subsect of this school,
Mūlasarvāstivāda was the source of the Tibetan vinaya. The Chinese princess
Jincheng (Kon-co) and the Khotanese monks. The Chinese princess Jincheng
Gongzhu (:zh:金城公主) (?-739), the "real daughter" of the king of Yong,
and an adoptive daughter of Emperor Zhongzong of Tang (r. 705-710), was sent to
Tibet in 710 where, according to most sources, she married Mes-ag-tshoms, who
would have been only six or seven years old at the time. She was known in Tibet
as Gyim shang Ong co, or, simply, Kim-sheng or Kong-co, and was a devout
Buddhist. Five Buddhist temples were built at: 'Ching bu nam ra, Kwa chu in
Brag dmar, 'Gran bzang, 'Khar brag and sMas gong. Buddhist monks from Khotan
(Li), fleeing the persecutions of an anti-Buddhist king, were given refuge by
Kim-sheng about 737. The story of these Khotanese monks is recorded the "Li yul
lung-btsan-pa" or 'Prophecy of the Li Country', a Buddhist history of Khotan
which has been preserved as part of the Tibetan Tanjur. Kim-sheng died during
an outbreak of smallpox sometime between 739 and 741. The rise of anti-Buddhist
factions in Tibet following the death of the Chinese princess began to blame
the epidemic on the support of Buddhism by the king and queen. This forced the
monks to flee once again; first to Gandhara, and then to Kosambi in central
India where the monks apparently ended up quarrelling and slaughtering each
other. Chan Influence. Tibetan king "Khri srong lde btsan" (742–797) invited
the Chan master Mo Ho Yen (和尚摩訶衍) (whose name consists of the same
Chinese characters used to transliterate “Mahayana”) (Tibetan: "Hwa shang
Mahayana") to transmit the Dharma at Samye Monastery. Mo-ho-yen had been
disseminating Dharma in the Tun-huang locale, but, according to Tibetan
sources, lost an important philosophical debate on the nature of emptiness with
the Indian master Kamalaśīla, and the king declared Kamalaśīla's philosophy
should form the basis for Tibetan Buddhism. Kamalaśīla wrote the three
Bhāvanākrama texts (修習次第三篇) after that. However, a Chinese source
found in Dunhuang written by Mo-ho-yen says their side won, and some scholars
conclude that the entire episode is fictitious. Pioneering Buddhologist
Giuseppe Tucci speculated that Hwashang's ideas were preserved by the
Nyingmapas in the form of dzogchen teachings. According to A. W. Barber of the
University of Calgary, Chan Buddhism was introduced to the Nyingmapa in three
principal streams: the teachings of Korean Master Kim, Kim Ho-shang, (Chin ho
shang) 金和尚 transmitted by "Sang Shi" in ca. 750 AD; the lineage of Master
Wu Chu (無住禪師) of the Pao T'ang School was transmitted within Tibet by
Ye-shes Wangpo; and the teaching from Mo-ho-yen, that were a synthesis of the
Northern School of Chan and the Pao T'ang School. John Myrdhin Reynolds and Sam
van Schaik hold a very different point of view. Reynolds states "Except for a
brief flirtation with Ch'an in the early days of Buddhism in Tibet in the
eighth century, the Tibetans exhibited almost no interest at all in Chinese
Buddhism, except for translating a few Sutras from Chinese for which they did
not possess Indian originals." Schaik emphasises that Chan and Dzogchen are
based on two different classes of scripture, Chan being based on sutras, while
Dzogchen being based on tantras. Schaik further states "apparent similarities
can be misleading." Whichever may be the case, Tibetan Buddhists today trace
their spiritual roots to Indian masters such as Padmasambhāva, Atiśa, Tilopa,
Naropa and their later Tibetan students. Later history. From the outset
Buddhism was opposed by the native shamanistic Bön religion, which had the
support of the aristocracy, but with royal patronage it thrived to a peak under
King Rälpachän (817-836). Terminology in translation was standardised around
825, enabling a translation methodology that was highly literal. Despite a
reversal in Buddhist influence which began under King Langdarma (836-842), the
following centuries saw a colossal effort in collecting available Indian
sources, many of which are now extant only in Tibetan translation. Tibetan
Buddhism exerted a strong influence from the 11th century AD among the peoples
of Inner Asia, especially the Mongols. It was adopted as an official state
religion by the Mongol Yuan dynasty and the Manchu Qing dynasty that ruled
China. Coinciding with the early discoveries of "hidden treasures" ("terma"),
the 11th century saw a revival of Buddhist influence originating in the far
east and far west of Tibet. In the west, Rinchen Zangpo (958-1055) was active
as a translator and founded temples and monasteries. Prominent scholars and
teachers were again invited from India. In 1042 Atiśa arrived in Tibet at the
invitation of a west Tibetan king. This renowned exponent of the Pāla form of
Buddhism from the Indian university of Vikramaśīla later moved to central
Tibet. There his chief disciple, Dromtonpa founded the Kadampa school of
Tibetan Buddhism, under whose influence the New Translation schools of today
evolved. Schools. Tibetan Buddhism has four main traditions: Besides these
major schools, there is a minor one, the Jonang. The Jonangpa were suppressed
by the rival Gelugpa in the 17th century and were once thought extinct, but are
now known to survive in Eastern Tibet. It has been recognized by the Dalai Lama
as fifth living Buddhist tradition of Tibet. Thuken Chökyi Nyima's Crystal
Mirror of Philosophical Systems is a classic history of the different schools
provides broad and useful historical information. The pre-Buddhist religion of
Bön has also been recognized by Tenzin Gyatso, the fourteenth Dalai Lama, as a
principal spiritual school of Tibet. There is also an ecumenical movement known
as Rimé. Monasticism. Although there were many householder-yogis in Tibet,
monasticism was the foundation of Buddhism in Tibet. There were over 6,000
monasteries in Tibet, however nearly all of these were ransacked and destroyed
by Red Guards during the Cultural Revolution. Most of the major monasteries
have been at least partially re-established while, many other ones remain in
ruins. In Mongolia during the 1920s, approximately one third of the male
population were monks, though many lived outside monasteries. By the beginning
of the 20th century about 750 monasteries were functioning in Mongolia. These
monasteries were largely dismantled during Communist rule, but many have been
reestablished during the Buddhist revival in Mongolia which followed the fall
of Communism. Nyingma. The Nyingma lineage is said to have "six mother
monasteries," although the composition of the six has changed over time: Also
of note is Kagyu. Many Kagyu monasteries are in Kham, eastern Tibet. Tsurphu,
one of the most important, is in central Tibet, as is Ralung and Drikung.
Tibetan Buddhism in the contemporary world. Today, Tibetan Buddhism is adhered
to widely in the Tibetan Plateau, Nepal, Bhutan, Mongolia, Kalmykia (on the
north-west shore of the Caspian), Siberia and Russian Far East (Tuva and
Buryatia). The Indian regions of Sikkim and Ladakh, both formerly independent
kingdoms, are also home to significant Tibetan Buddhist populations. In the
wake of the Tibetan diaspora, Tibetan Buddhism has gained adherents in the West
and throughout the world. Celebrity practitioners include Brandon Boyd, Richard
Gere, Adam Yauch, Jet Li, Sharon Stone, Allen Ginsberg, Philip Glass, Mike
Barson and Steven Seagal (who has been proclaimed the reincarnation of the
tulku Chungdrag Dorje). In his classic work "Buddhism in China" (Princeton
University Press, 1965), Kenneth Chen proposed the idea that Buddhism adapts
itself to its host culture. Adaptations of Buddhism to contemporary Western
culture include , the modern notion of a dharma center, and Celtic Buddhism.
