Torah study Torah study is the study by Jewish people of the Torah, Hebrew
Bible, Talmud, responsa, rabbinic literature and similar works, all of which
are Judaism's religious texts. According to Rabbinic beliefs the study is
ideally done for the purpose of the mitzvah ("commandment") of Torah study
itself. This practice is present to an extent in all religious branches of
Judaism and is considered of paramount importance among religious Jews. Torah
study has evolved over the generations, as lifestyles changed and also as new
texts were written. Origins. Torah study is counted amongst the 613 mitzvot ("
commandments"), finding its source in the verse (Deuteronomy 6:7): "And you
shall teach it to your children," upon which the Talmud comments that "Study is
necessary in order to teach." The importance of study is attested to in another
Talmudic discussion (Kiddushin 40b) about which is preferred: study or action.
The answer there, a seeming compromise, is "study that leads to action."
Although the word "Torah" refers specifically to the Five Books of Moses, in
Judaism the word also refers to the Tanakh (Hebrew Bible), the Talmud and other
religious works, even including the study of Kabbalah, Hasidism, Mussar and
much more. Forms of traditional Jewish Torah study. Other less universally
studied texts include the Nevi'im and Ketuvim, other rabbinic literature (such
as midrash) and works of religious Jewish philosophy. The initial letters of
the words " Peshat", " Remez", " Derash", " Sod", forming together the Hebrew
word PaRDeS (also meaning "orchard"), became the designation for the four-way
method of studying Torah, in which the mystical sense given in the Kabbalah was
the highest point. In some traditional circles, most notably the Orthodox and
Haredi, Torah study is a way of life for males. Women do not study Torah, but
gain merit for facilitating Torah study for the men. In some communities, men
forgo other occupations and study Torah full-time. Haredi Israelis often choose
to devote many years to Torah study, often studying at a Kollel. National
Religious Israelis often choose to devote time after high school to Torah
study, either during their army service at a Hesder yeshiva, or before their
service at a Mechina. Study cycles. Apart from full-time Torah study as engaged
in at schools and "yeshivot" or for the purpose of rabbinic training, there is
also held to be an obligation on individuals to set aside a regular study
period to review their knowledge. Examples of programmes of study are as
follows. D'var Torah. A "D'var Torah" (Heb: דבר תורה) (Plural: "Divrei
Torah") is a talk on topics relating to a section (parashah) of the Torah –
typically the weekly Torah portion. In respect to its place in synagogues,
rabbis will often give their D'var Torah after the Torah service. Divrei Torah
can range in length, depending on the rabbi and the depth of the talk. In most
congregations, it will not last much longer than fifteen minutes, but in the
case of Rebbes or special occasions, a Dvar Torah can last all afternoon. It is
extremely likely that a D'var Torah will carry a life lesson, backed up by
passages from certain Jewish texts like the Talmud or Mishnah. It is also known
as a "Drasha" in Ashkenazic communities. There are many Torah sites on the web
that contain Divrei Torah to help people learn Torah. One of these sites
provides users the ability to post their own Dvar Torah to help others who are
learning Torah. Torah study by Jewish denominations. Like Orthodox Jews, other
Jewish denominations may use any or all of the traditional areas and modes of
Torah study. They study the Parsha, the Talmud, ethical works, and more. They
may study simply the "peshat" of the text, or they may also study, to a limited
extent, the "remez", "derash" and "sod", which is found in "Etz Hayyim: A Torah
Commentary" (Rabbinical Assembly), used in many Conservative congregations. It
is common in Torah study among Jews involved in Jewish Renewal. Some level of
"PaRDeS" study can even be found in forms of Judaism that otherwise are
strictly rationalist, such as Reconstructionist Judaism. However, non-Orthodox
Jews generally spend less time in detailed study of the classical Torah
commentators, and spend more time studying modern Torah commentaries that draw
on and include the classical commentators, but which are written from more
modern perspectives. Furthermore, works of rabbinic literature (such as the
Talmud) typically receive less attention than the Tanakh. Before the
Enlightenment, virtually all Jews believed that the Torah was dictated to Moses
by God. They also believed that as many parts of the Torah, specifically the
laws and commandments, are written in unspecific terms, Moses also received an
interpretation of the Torah that was transmitted through the generations in
oral form till it was finally put in writing in the Mishnah and later, in
greater detail, the Talmud. After the Enlightenment, many Jews began to
participate in wider European society, where they engaged in study related to
critical methods of textual analysis, including both lower and higher
criticism, the modern historical method, hermeneutics, and fields relevant to
Bible study such as near-Eastern archaeology and linguistics. In time the
documentary hypothesis emerged from these studies. Formulated primarily by non
Jews, the documentary hypothesis holds that the Torah was not written by Moses,
but was simply written by different people who lived during different periods
of Israelite history. Some Jews adapted the findings of these disciplines.
Consequently, biblical study primarily focused on the intentions of these
people, and the circumstances in which they lived. This type of study depends
on evidence external to the text, especially archeological evidence and
comparative literature. Today, Reform, Conservative, and Reconstructionist
rabbis draw on the lessons of modern critical Bible scholarship as well as the
traditional forms of Biblical exegesis. Orthodox, Sephardim, a majority of
Israeli Jews and other Jews, including many whom are not observant, reject
critical Bible scholarship and the documentary hypothesis, holding to the
opinion that it is contradicted by the Torah in Deuteronomy 31:24,25 and 26,
and the Talmud (Gittin 60a, Bava Basra 15b), which state that Moses wrote the
Torah, as well as by the Mishnah, which asserts the divine origin of the Torah
as one of the essential tenets of Judaism. Humanistic Jews value the Torah as a
historical, political, and sociological text written by their ancestors. They
do not believe 'that every word of the Torah is true, or even morally correct,
just because the Torah is old.' The Torah is both disagreed with and
questioned. Humanistic Jews believe that the entire Jewish experience, and not
only the Torah, should be studied as a source for Jewish behavior and ethical
values. Non-religious Torah study. According to Ruth Calderon, there are
currently almost one hundred non-halakhic Torah study centers in Israel. Whilst
influenced by methods used in the yeshiva and in the university, non religious
Torah study includes the use of new tools that are not part of the accepted
hermeneutic tradition of the exegetic literature. These include Feminist, and
post-modernist criticism, historic, sociological and psychological analyses,
and literary analysis. Among these institutions is the Alma Centre for Hebrew
Studies in Tel Aviv. Torah study in Israel. Devoting a year to Torah study in
the modern Land of Israel is a common practice among American, and, to a lesser
extent, European, South African, South American, and Australian Modern Orthodox
Jews. Young adults spend a year studying Torah in the Land of Israel. It is
common both among males and females, with the boys normally going to a yeshiva
and the girls to a midrasha (often called "seminary" or "seminaria"). Common
Yeshivot with year-in-Israel programs include: Yeshivat Har Etzion, Yeshivat
HaMivtar, Machon Meir, Aish HaTorah. Common seminaries or midrashot include:
Midreshet HaRova Midreshet Lindenbaum, Migdal Oz, Nishmat, Bnos Chava,
Michlalah [http://www.machal.michlalah.edu/], and many many others. Chasidic
and Charedi boys from abroad often spend many years studying in the Land of
Israel. Bnei Akiva offers a number of options to spend a year of study in
Israel, as part of their Hachshara programs. Wikimedia Torah study projects.
Text study projects at Wikisource. Please note that in many instances, these
projects proceed much faster in Hebrew than in English!
