Tosefta The Tosefta (Aramaic: ◊™◊ï◊°◊§◊™◊ê. "Additions", "Supplements") is a
compilation of the Jewish oral law from the period of the Mishnah. Overview. In
many ways, the Tosefta acts as a supplement to the Mishnah ("tosefta" means
"supplement or addition"). The Mishnah (Hebrew: ◊û◊©◊ ◊î) is the basic
compilation of the Oral law of Judaism; it was compiled around 220 CE. The
Tosefta closely corresponds to the Mishnah, with the same divisions for
"sedarim" ("orders") and "masekhot" ("tractates"). It is mainly written in
Mishnaic Hebrew, with some Aramaic. At times the text of the Tosefta agrees
nearly verbatim with the Mishnah. At others there are significant differences.
The Tosefta often attributes laws that are anonymous in the Mishnah to named
Tannaim. It also augments the Mishnah with additional glosses and discussions.
It offers additional aggadic and midrashic material, and it sometimes
contradicts the Mishnah in the ruling of Jewish law, or in attributing in whose
name a law was stated. Origins. According to rabbinic tradition, the Tosefta
was redacted by Rabbis ·∏§iya and Oshaiah (a student of ·∏§iya). Whereas the
Mishna was considered authoritative, the Tosefta was supplementary. The Talmud
often utilizes the traditions found in the Tosefta to examine the text of the
Mishnah. The traditional view is that the Tosefta should be dated to a period
concurrent with or shortly after the redaction of the Mishnah. This view pre-
supposes that the Tosefta was produced in order to record variant material not
included in the Mishnah. Modern scholarship can be roughly divided into two
camps. Some, such as Jacob N. Epstein theorize that the Tosefta as we have it
developed from a proto-Tosefta recension which formed much of the basis for
later Amoraic debate. Others, such as Hanokh Albeck, theorize that the Tosefta
is a later compendium of several baraitot collections which were in use during
the Amoraic period. More recent scholarship, such as that of Yaakov Elman,
concludes that since the Tosefta, as we know it, must be dated linguistically
as an example of Middle Hebrew 1, it was most likely compiled in early Amoraic
times from oral transmission of baraitot., Professor Shamma Friedman, has found
that the Tosefta draws on relatively early Tannaitic source material and that
parts of the Tosefta predate the Mishnah. Alberdina Houtman and colleagues
theorize that while the Mishnah was compiled in order to establish an
authoritative text on halakhic tradition, a more conservative party opposed the
exclusion of the rest of tradition and produced the Tosefta to avoid the
impression that the written Mishnah was equivalent to the entire oral Torah.
The original intention was that the two texts would be viewed on equal
standing, but the succinctness of the Mishnah and the power and influence of
Yehuda Ha-Nassi made it more popular among most students of tradition.
Ultimately, the state of the source material is such to allow divergent
opinions to exist. These opinions serve to show the difficulties in
establishing a clear picture of the origins of the Tosefta. Manuscripts /
Editions / Commentaries. Manuscripts. Three manuscripts exist of the Tosefta,
they are: The "Editio Princeps" was printed in Venice in 1521 as an addendum to
Isaac Alfasi's "Halakhot". Many Geniza fragments have been published online by
Bar Ilan University. Editions. Two critical editions have been published. The
first was that of Moses Samuel Zuckermandl in 1882, which relied heavily on the
Erfurt manuscript of the Tosefta. Zuckermandl's work has been characterized as
a "a great step forward" for its time.! In 1955 Saul Lieberman began publishing
his monumental "Tosefta ki-Feshutah". Between 1955 and 1973, ten volumes of the
new edition were published, representing the text and the commentaries on the
entire orders of Zera'im, Mo'ed and Nashim. In 1988, three volumes were
published posthumously on the order of Nezikin, including tractates Bava Kama,
Bava Metziah, and Bava Basrah. Lieberman's work has been called the "pinnacle
of modern Tosefta studies." Translations. The Tosefta has been translated into
English by Rabbi Jacob Neusner and his students in the commentary cited above,
also published separately as "The Tosefta: translated from the Hebrew" (6 vols,
1977‚Äì86) Eli Gurevich's English translation and detailed commentary on the
Tosefta is in the progress of being written. It can be downloaded for free from
his website http://www.toseftaonline.org/.
