Transcendentalism Transcendentalism is a philosophical movement that developed
in the 1830s and 1840s in the Eastern region of the United States as a protest
to the general state of culture and society, and in particular, the state of
intellectualism at Harvard University and the doctrine of the Unitarian church
taught at Harvard Divinity School. Among the transcendentalists' core beliefs
was the inherent goodness of both man and nature. Transcendentalists believed
that society and its institutions—particularly organized religion and
political parties—ultimately corrupted the purity of the individual. They had
faith that man is at his best when truly "self-reliant" and independent. It is
only from such real individuals that true community could be formed. The major
figures in the movement were Ralph Waldo Emerson, Henry David Thoreau, John
Muir, Margaret Fuller and Amos Bronson Alcott. Other prominent
transcendentalists included Louisa May Alcott, Charles Timothy Brooks, Orestes
Brownson, William Ellery Channing, William Henry Channing, James Freeman
Clarke, Christopher Pearse Cranch, Walt Whitman, John Sullivan Dwight, Convers
Francis, William Henry Furness, Nathaniel Hawthorne, Frederic Henry Hedge,
Sylvester Judd, Theodore Parker, Elizabeth Palmer Peabody, George Ripley,
Thomas Treadwell Stone, Emily Dickinson and Jones Very. History. In the same
year, transcendentalism became a coherent movement with the founding of the
Transcendental Club in Cambridge, Massachusetts, on September 8, 1836, by
prominent New England intellectuals including George Putnam (1807–78; the
Unitarian minister in Roxbury) Ralph Waldo Emerson, and Frederick Henry Hedge,
all of them from the same native town. From 1840, the group published
frequently in their journal "The Dial", along with other venues. Early in the
movement's history, the term "Transcendentalists" was used as a term by
critics, who were suggesting their position was beyond sanity and reason. By
the late 1840s, Emerson believed the movement was dying out, and even more so
after the death of Margaret Fuller in 1850. "All that can be said", Emerson
wrote, "is, that she represents an interesting hour and group in American
cultivation". There was, however, a second wave of transcendentalists,
including Moncure Conway, Octavius Brooks Frothingham, Samuel Longfellow and
Franklin Benjamin Sanborn. Notably, the transgression of the spirit, most often
evoked by the poet's prosaic voice, is said to endow in the reader a sense of
purposefulness. This is the underlying theme in the majority of
transcendentalist essays and papers—all of which are centered on subjects
which assert a love for individual expression. Origins. Transcendentalism was
in many aspects the first notable American intellectual movement. It certainly
was the first to inspire succeeding generations of American intellectuals, as
well as a number of literary monuments. Rooted in the transcendental philosophy
of Immanuel Kant (and of German Idealism more generally), it developed as a
reaction against 18th Century rationalism, John Locke's philosophy of
Sensualism, and the predestinationism of New England Calvinism. Its fundamental
belief was in the unity and immanence of God in the world. The
Transcendentalists found inspiration for their philosophy in a variety of
diverse sources such as: Vedic thought, various religions, and German idealism.
The transcendentalists desired to ground their religion and philosophy in
transcendental principles: principles not based on, or falsifiable by, physical
experience, but deriving from the inner spiritual or mental essence of the
human. Immanuel Kant had called "all knowledge transcendental which is
concerned not with objects but with our mode of knowing objects." The
transcendentalists were largely unacquainted with German philosophy in the
original, and relied primarily on the writings of Thomas Carlyle, Samuel Taylor
Coleridge, Victor Cousin, Germaine de Staël, and other English and French
commentators for their knowledge of it. In contrast, they were intimately
familiar with the English Romantics, and the transcendental movement may be
partially described as a slightly later, American outgrowth of Romanticism.
Another major influence was the mystical spiritualism of Emanuel Swedenborg.
Thoreau in "Walden" spoke of the Transcendentalists' debt to Vedic thought
directly. Criticisms. Nathaniel Hawthorne wrote a novel, "The Blithedale
Romance" (1852), satirizing the movement, and based it on his experiences at
Brook Farm, a short-lived utopian community founded on transcendental
principles. Edgar Allan Poe wrote a story, "Never Bet the Devil Your Head", in
which he embedded elements of deep dislike for transcendentalism, calling its
followers "Frogpondians" after the pond on Boston Common. The narrator
ridiculed their writings by calling them "metaphor-run" lapsing into "mysticism
for mysticism's sake". and called it a "disease." The story specifically
mentions the movement and its flagship journal "The Dial", though Poe denied
that he had any specific targets. In Poe's essay "The Philosophy of
Composition" he offers criticism denouncing "the excess of the suggested
meaning... which turns into prose (and that of the very flattest kind) the so-
called poetry of the so-called transcendentalists." Influence on other
movements. Transcendentalists were strong believers in the power of the
individual and divine messages. Their beliefs are closely linked with those of
the Romantics. The movement directly influenced the growing movement of "Mental
Sciences" of the mid-19th century, which would later become known as the New
Thought movement. New Thought considers Emerson its intellectual father. Emma
Curtis Hopkins "the teacher of teachers"; Ernest Holmes, founder of Religious
Science; the Fillmores, founders of Unity; and Malinda Cramer and Nona L.
Brooks, the founders of Divine Science; were all greatly influenced by
Transcendentalism. Other meanings. Transcendental idealism. The term
"transcendentalism" sometimes serves as shorthand for transcendental idealism,
which is the philosophy of Immanuel Kant and later Kantian and German Idealist
philosophers. Transcendental theology. Another alternative meaning for
"transcendentalism" is the classical philosophy that God transcends the
manifest world. As John Scotus Erigena put it to Frankish king Charles the Bald
in the year 840 AD, "We know not what God is. God himself doesn't know what He
is because He is not anything. Literally God is not, because He transcends
being."
