Translation (relic) In Christianity, the translation of relics is the removal
of holy objects from one locality to another (usually a higher status
location); usually only the movement of the remains of the saint's body would
be treated so formally, with secondary relics such as items of clothing treated
with less ceremony. Translations could be accompanied by many acts, including
all-night vigils and processions, often involving entire communities. The
solemn translation (in Latin, "translatio") of relics is not treated as the
outward recognition of sanctity. Rather, miracles confirmed a saint's sanctity,
as evinced by the fact that when, in the twelfth century, the Papacy attempted
to make sanctification an 'official' process, many collections of miracles were
written in the hope of providing proof of the saint-in-question's status. The
date of a translation of a saint's relics was celebrated as a feast day in its
own right. For example, on January 27 is celebrated the translation of the
relics of St. John Chrysostom from the Armenian village of Comana (where he
died in exile in 407) to Constantinople. The most commonly celebrated feast
days, however, are the 'dies natales' (the day on which the saint died, not the
modern idea of birthday). Relics sometimes travelled very far. The relics of
Saint Thyrsus at Sozopolis, Pisidia, in Asia Minor, were brought to
Constantinople and then to Spain. His cult became popular in the Iberian
Peninsula, where he is known as San Tirso or Santo Tirso. Some of his relics
were brought to France: Thyrsus is thus the titular saint of the cathedral of
Sisteron in the Basses Alpes, the Cathédrale Notre Dame et Saint Thyrse.
Thyrsus is thus the patron saint of Sisteron. Liborius of Le Mans became patron
saint of Paderborn, in Germany, after his relics were transferred there in 836.
History. In the early church the disturbance, let alone the division, of the
remains of martyrs and other saints, was not practised. They were allowed to
remain in their often unidentified resting places in cemeteries and the
catacombs of Rome, always outside the walls of the city (continuing a pagan
taboo), but martyriums began to be built over the site of the burial, and it
was considered beneficial to the soul to be buried close to the remains of
saints, several large "funerary halls" being built over the sites of martyr's
graves, including Old Saint Peter's Basilica. The earliest recorded removal of
saintly remains was that of Saint Babylas at Antioch in 354, but, partly
perhaps because Constantinople lacked the many saintly graves of Rome, they
soon became common in the Eastern Empire, though still prohibited in the West.
The Eastern capital was therefore able to acquire the remains of Saints
Timothy, Andrew and Luke, and the division of bodies also began, the 5th
century theologian Theodoretus declaring that "Grace remains entire with every
part". An altar slab dated 357, found in North Africa but now in the Louvre,
records the deposit beneath of relics from several prominent saints. Non-
anatomical relics, above all that of the True Cross, were divided and widely
distributed from the 4th century. In the West a decree of Theodosius I only
allowed the moving of a whole sarcophagus with its contents, but the upheavals
of the barbarian invasions relaxed the rules, as remains needed to be relocated
to safer places. In the 4th century, Basil the Great requested of the ruler of
Scythia Minor, Junius Soranus (Saran), that he should send him the relics of
saints of that region. Basil was sent the relics of Sabbas the Goth to him in
Caesarea, Cappadocia, in 373 or 374 accompanied by a letter, the 'Epistle of
the Church of God in Gothia to the Church of God located in Cappadocia and to
all the Local Churches of the Holy Universal Church'. The sending of Sabbas'
relics and the writing of the actual letter has been attributed to Bretannio.
This letter is the oldest known writing to be composed on Romanian soil and was
written in Greek. The spread of relics all over Europe from the 8th century can
be explained by the fact that after 787 all new Christian churches had to
possess a relic before they could be properly consecrated. New churches,
situated in areas newly converted to Christianity, needed relics and this
encouraged the translation of relics to far-off places. Relics became
collectible items, and owning them became a symbol of prestige for cities,
kingdoms, and monarchs. According to one legend concerning Saint Paternian, the
inhabitants of Fano competed with those of Cervia for possession of his relics.
Cervia would be left with a finger, while Fano would possess the rest of the
saint's relics. The translation of relics was a solemn and important event. In
1261, the relics of Lucian of Beauvais and his two companions were placed in a
new reliquary by William of Grès (Guillaume de Grès), bishop of Beauvais. The
translation took place in the presence of St. Louis IX, king of France, and
Theobald II, king of Navarre, and much of the French nobility. The memory of
this translation was formerly celebrated in the abbey of Beauvais as the "fête
des Corps Saints". On February 14, 1277, while work was being done at the
church of St. John the Baptist (Johanniterkirche) in Cologne, the body of Saint
Cordula, one of the companions of Saint Ursula, was discovered. Her relics were
found to be fragrant and on the forehead of the saint herself were written the
words, “Cordula, Queen and Virgin.” When Albert the Great, who had been
residing in Cologne in his old age, had listened to the account of the finding
of the relics, “he wept, praised God from the depth of his soul, and
requested the bystanders to sing the "Te Deum". Then vesting himself in his
episcopal robes, he removed the relics from under the earth, and solemnly
translated them into the church of the monks of St. John. After singing Mass,
he deposited the holy body in a suitable place, which God has since made
illustrious by many miracles.” Some relics were translated from place to
place, buffeted by the tides of wars and conflicts. The relics of Saint
Leocadia were moved from Toledo to Oviedo during the reign of Abd ar-Rahman II,
and from Oviedo they were brought to Saint-Ghislain (in present-day Belgium).
Her relics were venerated there by Philip the Handsome and Joanna of Castile,
who recovered for Toledo a tibia of the saint. Fernando Álvarez de Toledo, 3rd
Duke of Alba attempted unsuccessfully to rescue the rest of her relics.
Finally, a Spanish Jesuit, after many travels, brought the rest of the
saint’s relics to Rome in 1586. From Rome they were brought to Valencia by
sea, and then finally brought to Toledo from Cuenca. Philip II of Spain
presided over a solemn ceremony commemorating the final translation of her
relics to Toledo, in April 1587. Idesbald’s relics were moved from their
resting-place at the abbey of Ten Duinen after the Geuzen (“Sea Beggars”)
plundered the abbey in 1577; his relics were translated again to Bruges in 1796
to avoid having them destroyed by Revolutionary troops. The translation of the
relics continued into modern times. On December 4, 1796, as a result of the
French Revolution, the relics of Saint Lutgardis were carried to Ittre from
Awirs. Her relics remain in Ittre. Notable translations. Among the most famous
translations is that of St Benedict of Nursia, author of the Regula S.
Benedicti, from Cassino to Fleury. Adrevald's account of this translation, and
the ensuing miracles, helped establish one of medieval Europe's most
influential cults. In England, the lengthy travels of St Cuthbert's remains to
escape the Vikings, and then his less respectful treatment after the English
Reformation, have been much studied, as his coffin, gospel book and other items
buried with him are now very rare representatives of Anglo-Saxon art. Professor
Nevzat Cevik, the Director of Archaeological Excavations in Demre (Myra), has
recently recommended that the Turkish government should request the
repatriation of St Nicholas' relics, alleging that it had always been the
saint's intention to be buried in Myra. The Venetians, who also claimed to have
some parts of St Nicholas, had another story: The Venetians brought the remains
back to Venice, but on the way they left an arm of St Nicholas at Bari (The
Morosini Codex 49A). In 828, Venetian merchants acquired the supposed relics of
Saint Mark the Evangelist from Alexandria, Egypt. These are housed in St Mark's
Basilica; in 1968, a small fragment of bone was donated to the Coptic Church in
Alexandria. In recent times. A famous and recent example is the return of the
relics of St. John Chrysostom and St. Gregory of Nazianzus to the See of
Constantinople (Greek Orthodox Church) by Pope John Paul II in 2007. Another
modern example is the exhumation, display, and reburial of the relics of St.
Padre Pio in 2008-2009.
