Transubstantiation In Roman Catholic theology, transubstantiation (in Latin,
"transsubstantiatio", in Greek μετουσίωσις metousiosis) is the
doctrine that, in the Eucharist, the substance of the bread and the wine used
in the sacrament is changed into the substance of the Body and the Blood of
Jesus, while all that is accessible to the senses (the appearances - "species"
in Latin) remains as before. The Eastern Orthodox Church, Oriental Orthodox
Church, and Church of the East have sometimes used the term
"transubstantiation" ("metousiosis"); however, terms such as "divine mystery",
"trans-elementation" (μεταστοιχείωσις "metastoicheiosis"), "re-
ordination" (μεταρρύθμισις "metarrhythmisis"), or simply "change"
(μεταβολή) are more common among them. History. The earliest known use
of the term "transubstantiation" to describe the change from bread and wine to
body and blood of Christ that was believed to occur in the Eucharist was by
Hildebert de Lavardin, Archbishop of Tours (died 1133), in the eleventh century
and by the end of the twelfth century the term was in widespread use. The
Fourth Council of the Lateran, which convened beginning November 11, 1215,
spoke of the bread and wine as "transubstantiated" into the body and blood of
Christ: "His body and blood are truly contained in the sacrament of the altar
under the forms of bread and wine, the bread and wine having been
"transubstantiated", by God's power, into his body and blood". During the
Protestant Reformation, the doctrine of transubstantiation was heavily
criticised as an Aristotelian "pseudo-philosophy" imported into Christian
teaching and jettisoned in favor of Martin Luther's doctrine of sacramental
union, or in favor, per Huldrych Zwingli, of the Eucharist as memorial. The
Council of Trent in its thirteenth session ending October 11, 1551, defined
transubstantiation as "that wonderful and singular conversion of the whole
substance of the bread into the Body, and of the whole substance of the wine
into the Blood – the species only of the bread and wine remaining – which
conversion indeed the Catholic Church most aptly calls Transubstantiation".
This council officially approved use of the term "transubstantiation" to
express the Catholic Church's teaching on the subject of the conversion of the
bread and wine into the body and blood of Christ in the Eucharist, with the aim
of safeguarding Christ's presence as a literal truth, while emphasizing the
fact that there is no change in the empirical appearances of the bread and
wine. It did not however impose the Aristotelian theory of substance and
accidents: it spoke only of the species (the appearances), not the
philosophical term "accidents", and the word "substance" was in ecclesiastical
use for many centuries before Aristotelian philosophy was adopted in the West,
as shown for instance by its use in the Nicene Creed which speaks of Christ
having the same "οὐσία" (Greek) or "substantia" (Latin) as the Father.
Patristic period. The belief that the Eucharist conveyed to the believer the
body and blood of Christ appears to have been widespread from an early date,
and the elements were commonly referred to as the body and the blood by early
Christian writers. The early Christians who use these terms also speak of it as
the flesh and blood of Christ, the same flesh and blood which suffered and died
on the cross. The short document known as the Teaching of the Apostles or
Didache, which may be the earliest Christian document outside of the New
Testament to speak of the Eucharist, says, "Let no one eat or drink of the
Eucharist with you except those who have been baptized in the Name of the
Lord," for it was in reference to this that the Lord said, "Do not give that
which is holy to dogs." Matthew 7:6 A letter by Saint Ignatius of Antioch to
the Romans, written in AD 106 says: "I desire the bread of GOD, which is the
flesh of Jesus Christ." Writing to the Christians of Smyrna, in about AD 106,
Saint Ignatius warned them to "stand aloof from such heretics", because, among
other reasons, "they abstain from the Eucharist and from prayer, because they
confess not the Eucharist to be the flesh of our Savior Jesus Christ, which
suffered for our sins, and which the Father, of His goodness, raised up again."
In about 150, Justin Martyr wrote of the Eucharist: "Not as common bread and
common drink do we receive these; but in like manner as Jesus Christ our
Savior, having been made flesh by the Word of God, had both flesh and blood for
our salvation, so likewise have we been taught that the food which is blessed
by the prayer of His word, and from which our blood and flesh by transmutation
are nourished, is the flesh and blood of that Jesus who was made flesh." Justin
Martyr wrote, in Dialogue with Trypho, ch 70: "Now it is evident, that in this
prophecy to the bread which our Christ gave us to eat, in remembrance of His
being made flesh for the sake of His believers, for whom also He suffered; and
to the cup which He gave us to drink, in remembrance of His own blood, with
giving of thanks." In about 200 AD, Tertullian wrote (Against Marcion IV. 40):
"Taking bread and distributing it to his disciples he made it his own body by
saying, 'This is my body,' that is a 'figure of my body.' On the other hand,
there would not have been a figure unless there was a true body." The Apostolic
Constitutions (compiled c. 380) says: "Let the bishop give the oblation,
saying, The body of Christ; and let him that receiveth say, Amen. And let the
deacon take the cup; and when he gives it, say, The blood of Christ, the cup of
life; and let him that drinketh say, Amen." Other fourth-century Christian
writers say that in the Eucharist there occurs a "change", "transelementation",
"transformation", "transposing", "alteration" of the bread into the body of
Christ. In AD 400, Augustine quotes Cyprian (AD 200): "For as Christ says 'I am
the true vine,' it follows that the blood of Christ is wine, not water; and the
cup cannot appear to contain His blood by which we are redeemed and quickened,
if the wine be absent; for by the wine is the blood of Christ typified, ..."
Middle Ages. In the eleventh century, Berengar of Tours denied that any
material change in the elements was needed to explain the Eucharistic Presence,
thereby provoking a considerable stir. Berengar's position was never
diametrically opposed to that of his critics, and he was probably never
excommunicated. But the controversy that he aroused forced people to clarify
the doctrine of the Eucharist. The earliest known use of the term
"transubstantiation" to describe the change from bread and wine to body and
blood of Christ was by Hildebert de Lavardin, Archbishop of Tours (died 1133),
in about 1079, long before the Latin West, under the influence especially of
Thomas Aquinas (c. 1227-1274), accepted Aristotelianism. Although it was only
in the West that Aristotelian philosophy prevailed, the objective reality of
the Eucharistic change is also believed in by the Eastern Orthodox Church and
the other ancient Churches of the East (see metousiosis). In 1215, the Fourth
Lateran Council used the word "transubstantiated" in its profession of faith,
when speaking of the change that takes place in the Eucharist. It was only
later in the thirteenth century that Aristotelian metaphysics was accepted and
a philosophical elaboration in line with that metaphysics was developed, which
found classic formulation in the teaching of Saint Thomas Aquinas." In 1551 the
Council of Trent officially defined, with a minimum of technical philosophical
language, that "by the consecration of the bread and wine there takes place a
change of the whole substance of the bread into the substance of the body of
Christ our Lord and of the whole substance of the wine into the substance of
his blood. This change the holy Catholic Church has fittingly and properly
called transubstantiation." Protestant criticisms. In the Protestant
Reformation, the doctrine of transubstantiation became a matter of much
controversy. Martin Luther held that "It is not the doctrine of
transubstantiation which is to be believed, but simply that Christ really is
present at the Eucharist". In his "On the Babylonian Captivity of the Church"
(published on 6 October 1520) Luther wrote: What Luther thus called a
"sacramental union" is often called consubstantiation by non-Lutherans. In "On
the Babylonian Captivity" Luther upheld belief in the Real Presence of Jesus
and in his 1523 treatise The Adoration of the Sacrament defended adoration of
the body and blood of Christ in the Eucharist. Huldrych Zwingli taught that the
sacrament is purely symbolic and memorial in character, arguing that this was
the meaning of Jesus' instruction: "Do this in remembrance of me". The Thirty-
nine articles of religion in the Church of England declare: "Transubstantiation
(or the change of the substance of Bread and Wine) in the Supper of the Lord,
cannot be proved by holy Writ; but is repugnant to the plain words of
Scripture, overthroweth the nature of a Sacrament, and hath given occasion to
many superstitions"; and made Mass illegal. In Roman Catholic theology.
"Substance" here means what something is in itself. A hat's shape is not the
hat itself, nor is its colour, size, softness to the touch, nor anything else
about it perceptible to the senses. The hat itself (the "substance") "has" the
shape, the color, the size, the softness and the other appearances, but is
distinct from them. While the appearances, which are referred to by the
philosophical term accidents, are perceptible to the senses, the substance is
not. Consider the classic example of the human body. All of the separate
chemical compounds, minerals and water—which when piled together constitute
the sum total of the actual physical matter of the human body—are not of
themselves a human body, however much they may be physically compounded and
mixed and rearranged in the laboratory, since they are still only a pile of
organic chemicals, minerals and water in a particular complex configuration. If
this has never been alive it is not a human body. If they are "participant" in
the integral physical expression of a living human being who has absorbed and
metabolized them, or if they are now the physical remains of a once-living
human being, the substance of what they actually are is human, hence, a human
body. The substantial reality of what is before us is human. The "substance"
(substantial reality) of what is seen is not solely that of a complex
organization of organic chemical compounds, but is (or has been) someone. The
chemical elements of the food a person eats become in a few hours part of that
person's human body and are no longer food but have been turned into the human
flesh and blood and bone of that person, yet the physical chemical elements of
what was once food remain the same (calcium, copper, salt, protein, sugars,
fats, water, etc.). The "substance" of any matter that has become an integral
part of any human being has ceased to be the "substance" or "reality" of "food"
and has become incorporated as an integral part of the physical manifestation
or expression of that "human person". To touch that matter now is not to touch
a batch of chemical compounds or food but to touch that person. When at his
Last Supper, Jesus said: "This is my body", what he held in his hands still had
all the "appearances" of bread: these "accidents" remained unchanged. However,
the Roman Catholic Church believes that, when Jesus made that declaration, the
"underlying reality" (the "substance") of the bread was converted to that of
his body. In other words, it "actually was" his body, while all the appearances
open to the senses or to scientific investigation were still those of bread,
exactly as before. The Catholic Church holds that the same change of the
substance of the bread and of the wine occurs at the consecration of the
Eucharist when the words are spoken "This is my body ... this is my blood." In
Orthodox confessions, the change is said to take place during the Epiklesis.
Believing that Christ is risen from the dead and is alive, the Catholic Church
holds that when the bread is changed into his body, not only his body is
present, but Christ as a whole is present (i.e. body and blood, soul and
divinity.) The same holds for the wine changed into his blood. This belief goes
beyond the doctrine of transubstantiation, which directly concerns only the
transformation of the bread and wine into the body and blood of Christ. In
accordance with this belief that Christ is really, truly and substantially
present under the remaining appearances of bread and wine, and continues to be
present as long as those appearances remain, the Catholic Church preserves the
consecrated elements, generally in a church tabernacle, for administering Holy
Communion to the sick and dying, and also for the secondary, but still highly
prized, purpose of adoring Christ present in the Eucharist. The Roman Catholic
Church considers the doctrine of transubstantiation to be concerned with "what"
is changed, and not "how" the change occurs; it teaches that the accidents that
remain are real, not an illusion, and that Christ is "really, truly, and
"substantially" present" in the Eucharist. To touch the smallest particle of
the host or the smallest droplet from the chalice is to touch Jesus Christ
himself, as when one person touches another on the back of the hand with only a
fingertip and in so doing touches not merely a few skin cells but touches the
whole person: "Christ is present whole and entire in each of the species and
whole and entire in each of their parts, in such a way that the breaking of the
bread does not divide Christ." In the arguments which characterised the
relationship between Roman Catholicism and Protestantism in the 16th century,
the Council of Trent declared subject to the ecclesiastical penalty of anathema
anyone who: Protestant denominations have not generally subscribed to belief in
transubstantiation or consubstantiation. As already stated, the Roman Catholic
Church insists that the "accidents" that remain are real. In the sacrament
these are the "signs" of the reality that they efficaciously signify. And by
definition sacraments are "efficacious signs of grace, instituted by Christ and
entrusted to the Catholic Church, by which divine life is dispensed to us."
Interpretations of Biblical evidence. Those who believe that in the Eucharist
the bread and wine become instead the body and blood of Christ see this as
plainly indicated in the New Testament, both in the Eucharistic discourse given
by Christ in John 6, and in 1st Corinthians 11, where St. Paul several times
equates the body and blood of Jesus with the "bread" and "cup of benediction"
used in the Eucharist. Christians who deny that there is such a change
(transubstantiation) deny that the New Testament teaches it. Some of them even
see the New Testament as contradicting it. Eastern Orthodox, Oriental Orthodox,
and Roman Catholics, who together constitute the majority of Christians, hold
that the consecrated elements in a valid celebration of the Eucharist indeed
become the body and blood of Christ. This belief is held also by some Reform
and Protestant Christian churches, Lutherans and Anglicans, though they
generally deny transubstantiation. While there is a large body of theology
noting the many Scriptural supports for transubstantiation, in general,
Orthodox and Catholics consider it unnecessary to "prove" from texts of
Scripture a belief that they see as held by Christians without interruption
from the earliest, apostolic times. They point out that the Church and its
teaching existed before it assembled and canonized the New Testament, and even
before any individual part of the New Testament was written. They also point
out that early Christians such as Ignatius of Antioch, Justin Martyr, and
Clement of Rome (who were much closer to the event than those who have later
proposed a figurative interpretation of the Eucharist), described the Eucharist
as truly the body and blood of Christ. They see nothing in Scripture that in
any way contradicts this age-old Christian belief that the reality beneath the
visible signs in the Eucharist is the body and blood of Christ and no longer
bread and wine. Instead, they see this teaching as the same teaching in the
Bible's reports of what Christ himself and Paul the Apostle taught. As the
scriptural support required by their sola scriptura position, Protestants who
believe that in the Eucharist the bread and wine become the body and blood of
Christ turn to the words of Jesus himself at his Last Supper, as reported in
the Synoptic Gospels and Saint Paul's First Epistle to the Corinthians. In that
context, Jesus said of what to all appearances were bread and wine: "This is my
body … this is my blood" or, in the case of what appeared to be wine, "…
this cup is the new covenant in my blood". Many Protestants reject a literal
interpretation of these words. They compare them to non-literal expressions by
Jesus such as "I am the door", "I am the vine", "You are the salt of the earth
... You are the light of the world" (),"Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees
and the Sadducees" (). In this last example, the disciples thought that the
reason Jesus said it was because they had brought no bread; but Jesus explained
that he was referring to the "teaching" of the Pharisees and the Sadducees.
These Protestants add that "eating and drinking" is sometimes used
metaphorically, as of Jeremiah "eating" God's words (), or David speaking of
water as blood, since it was obtained at the risk of the lives of his men ().
Those who hold that Jesus' words, "This is my body", "This is my blood", were
not metaphorical claim that there is a marked contrast between metaphorical
figurative expressions, which of their nature have a symbolic meaning, and what
Jesus said about concrete things such as the bread and wine. In the phrase
"This is my body"as expressed in the original Greek (Τοῦτό ἐστιν
τὸ σῶμά μου), the word "τοῦτο" ("this" or "this thing") is a
grammatically neuter pronoun, and so of the same grammatical gender as the noun
"σῶμα" (body), but of a different grammatical gender from that of the word
"ἄρτος" (bread), which is a masculine noun. Some claim that this is an
indication of the change of the reality from bread (ἄρτος) to body
(σῶμα). As indications that the bread and wine are indeed changed to the
body and blood of Christ, appeal is made to expressions used by Saint Paul in
his First Epistle to the Corinthians, in particular his rhetorical question,
"The cup of blessing that we bless, is it not a participation in the blood of
Christ? The bread that we break, is it not a participation in the body of
Christ?" (), and his statement, "Whoever, therefore, eats the bread or drinks
the cup of the Lord in an unworthy manner will be guilty concerning the body
and blood of the Lord." (). Protestant commentators, such as Matthew Henry
(1662–1714) say that use of the word "bread" shows there has been no change.
Paul's subsequent recommendation, "Let a person examine himself, then, and so
eat of the bread and drink of the cup. For anyone who eats and drinks without
discerning the body eats and drinks judgment on himself" (), has likewise been
interpreted either as indicating the reality of the disputed change or as
implying no such change. Marvin R. Vincent, in particular, objected to what he
called the mistaken King James Version translation of κρῖμα in verse 29
as "damnation", rather more literally as "judgment". It has been noted that
Paul wrote: "Whoever, therefore, eats the bread "or" drinks the cup of the Lord
in an unworthy manner will be guilty concerning the body "and" blood of the
Lord" (emphases added). This has been interpreted as stating that unworthy
participation of either the bread or the cup of the Lord involves guilt
concerning both the body and blood of the Lord, an indication of the presence
of Christ in each of the two cases. Another Scripture text that Catholics
generally understand as related to the Eucharist is the Gospel of John's
account of Jesus as saying: "Unless you eat the flesh of the Son of Man and
drink his blood you have no life in you … he who eats my flesh and drinks my
blood abides in me and I in him" (), a statement that he did not tone down
when, as a result, many of his disciples then abandoned him (), shocked at the
idea. Protestants tend to interpret this passage in connection with , where
Jesus says "the flesh profits nothing, the words that I speak unto you, they
are spirit, and they are life", which they say means that the redeemed live by
faith. Some also invoke , "Just as the living Father sent me and I live because
of the Father, so the one who feeds on me will live because of me", describing
how one "lives". Views in other churches. Anglicanism. During the reign of King
Henry VIII of England, the official teaching was identical with the Roman
Catholic Church's doctrine before and after Henry's break with Rome by
declaring that the Pope had no jurisdiction in England. A decade before the
break the king wrote a book in defence of Catholic doctrine for which the Pope
rewarded him with the title of Defender of the Faith, a title revoked by the
Pope following Henry's break with Rome but still claimed and held by English
and, after 1707, British monarchs after being bestowed on the monarch by
Parliament. Under Henry's son, Edward VI, the Church of England began to accept
some aspects of Protestant theology and rejected transubstantiation. Elizabeth
I, as part of the Elizabethan Religious Settlement, gave royal assent to the
Thirty-Nine Articles of Religion, which sought to distinguish Anglican from
Roman Church doctrine. The Articles declared that "Transubstantiation (or the
change of the substance of Bread and Wine) in the Supper of the Lord, cannot be
proved by holy Writ; but is repugnant to the plain words of Scripture,
overthroweth the nature of a Sacrament, and hath given occasion to many
superstitions." Indeed for many years it was illegal in Britain to hold public
office whilst believing in transubstantiation, as under the Test Act of 1673.
Archbishop John Tillotson decried the "real barbarousness of this Sacrament and
Rite of our Religion", considering it a great impiety to believe that people
who attend Holy Communion "verily eat and drink the natural flesh and blood of
Christ. And what can any man do more unworthily towards a Friend? How can he
possibly use him more barbarously, than to feast upon his living flesh and
blood?" ("Discourse against Transubstantiation", London 1684, 35). Anglicans
generally consider no teaching binding that, according to the Articles, "cannot
be found in Holy Scripture or proved thereby", and are not unanimous in the
interpretation of such passages as John, Chapter 6, and 1 Corinthians 11.
Consequently, some Anglicans (especially Anglo-Catholics and some other High
Church Anglicans) accept transubstantiation while most Anglicans do not. In any
case, nowadays even Church of England clergy are only required to assent that
the Thirty-nine Articles have borne witness to the Christian faith. In some
Anglican churches other than the Church of England even this is not required.
Official writings of the churches of the Anglican Communion have consistently
upheld belief in the Real Presence, a term that includes transubstantiation as
well as several other eucharistic theologies such as consubstantiation,
transignification, and the purely spiritual presence affirmed by the Thirty
Nine Articles. Some recent Anglican writers explicitly accept the doctrine of
transubstantiation or, while avoiding the term "transubstantiation", speak of
an "objective presence" of Christ in the Eucharist. The term "objective
presence" includes a belief in transubstantiation but does not limit belief to
transubstantiation. Theological dialogue with the Roman Catholic Church has
produced common documents that speak of "substantial agreement" about the
doctrine of the Eucharist: the ARCIC Windsor Statement of 1971, and its 1979
Elucidation. Remaining arguments can be found in the Church of England's
pastoral letter: "The Eucharist: Sacrament of Unity". Lutheranism. Luther
explicitly rejected transubstantiation, believing that the bread and wine
remained fully bread and fully wine while also being fully the body and blood
of Jesus Christ. Luther instead emphasized the sacramental union (not exactly
the consubstantiation, as it is often claimed). Lutherans believe that within
the Eucharistic celebration the body and blood of Jesus Christ are objectively
present "in, with, and under the forms" of bread and wine (cf. Book of
Concord). They place great stress on Jesus' instructions to "take and eat", and
"take and drink", holding that this is the proper, divinely ordained use of the
sacrament, and, while giving it due reverence, scrupulously avoid any actions
that might indicate or lead to superstition or unworthy fear of the sacrament.
Other Protestants. Many Protestant denominations believe that the Lord's Supper
is a merely symbolic act done in remembrance of what Christ has done for them
on the cross. For example, according to the Official Creed of the Assemblies of
God - an Evangelical Protestant church - Holy Communion, or "The Lord's Supper,
consisting of the elements--bread and the fruit of the vine--is the symbol
expressing our sharing the divine nature of our Lord Jesus Christ (); a
memorial of His suffering and death, and a prophecy of His suffering and death
(); and is enjoined on all believers "till He come!" He commanded the apostles:
"This do in remembrance of me", after "he took bread, and gave thanks, and
broke it, and gave unto them, saying, This is my body which is given for you"
(, ). Therefore they see it as a symbolic act done in remembrance and as a
declaration () of faith in what they consider Christ's "finished" () work on
the cross. They see the historical Last Supper as being not a literal event as
Catholics do where Jesus; that is, Jesus humanly present in flesh and blood
simultaneously shared out his sacramental Body and Blood under the appearances
of bread and wine to his disciples, but as a prophetic act: in stating "This is
my body", "This is the cup of my blood", Jesus was giving a figure of the
sacrifice he would make upon the Cross the following day. Other Protestants
also reject the idea that a priest, acting, he believes, in the name of Christ,
not in his own name, can transform bread and wine into the actual body and
blood of God incarnate in Jesus Christ, and many of them see the doctrine as a
problem because of its connection with practices such as Eucharistic adoration,
which they believe may be idolatry. They base their criticism of the doctrine
of transubstantiation (and also of the Real Presence) on a number of verses of
the Bible, including , and on their interpretation of the central message of
the Gospel. Scripture does not explicitly say "the bread was transformed" or
"changed" in any way, and therefore they consider the doctrine of
transubstantiation to be unbiblical from more than one approach. As already
stated above, they also object to using early Christian writings to support
belief that the bread of the Lord's Supper is more than a metaphor for Christ's
body, because such writings are not Scripture nor writings that were able to be
verified by any prophet or apostle, especially when they believe such doctrines
contradict inspired Scripture. Protestant denominations, such as Methodists and
some Presbyterians, profess belief in the Real Presence, but offer explanations
other than transubstantiation. Classical Presbyterianism held the Calvinist
view of "pneumatic" presence or "spiritual feeding." However, when the
Presbyterian Church (USA) signed "A Formula for Agreement" with the Evangelical
Lutheran Church in America, both affirmed belief in the Real Presence. John
Calvin "can be regarded as occupying a position roughly midway between"
(McGrath) the doctrines developed by Martin Luther on the one hand and Huldrych
Zwingli, on the other: "Believers ought always to live by this rule: whenever
they see symbols appointed by the Lord, to think and be convinced that the
truth of the thing signified is surely present there. For why should the Lord
put in your hand the symbol of his body, unless it was to assure you that you
really participate in it? And if it is true that a visible sign is given to us
to seal the gift of an invisible thing, when we have received the symbol of the
body, let us rest assured that the body itself is also given to us." (Calvin);
that is, "the thing that is signified is effected by its sign" (McGrath).
Latter-day Saints. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints does not
believe in literal transubstantiation, but rather that the bread and wine (or
bread and water, as is used in modern LDS churches) are simply symbolic of
Jesus Christ's sacrificial Atonement for mankind. Conceptual art. "An Oak Tree"
is a conceptual art installation in the Tate Modern, consisting of a glass of
water, which the artist, Michael Craig-Martin, declared he had turned into "a
full-grown oak tree", "without altering the accidents of the glass of water".
The text he included as part of his work states: "It's not a symbol. I have
changed the physical substance of the glass of water into that of an oak tree.
I didn't change its appearance. The actual oak tree is physically present, but
in the form of a glass of water." In a Richard Dimbleby Lecture, on 23 November
2000, Sir Nicholas Serota said: "We may not 'like' Craig-Martin's work, but it
certainly reminds us that the appreciation of all art involves an act of faith
comparable to the belief that, through transubstantiation, the bread and wine
of Holy Communion become the body and blood of Christ."
