Trimurti The Trimurti (; Sanskrit: त्रिमूर्तिः "") is a
concept in Hinduism "in which the cosmic functions of creation, maintenance,
and destruction are personified by the forms of Brahmā the creator, Vishnu the
maintainer or preserver and Śhiva the destroyer or transformer," These three
deities have been called "the Hindu triad" or the "Great Trinity", often
addressed as "Brahma-Vishnu-Maheshwara." One type of depiction for the Trimurti
shows three heads on one neck, and often even three faces on one head, each
looking in a different direction. Evolution. The Puranic period (c. CE 300-
1200) saw the rise of post-Vedic religion and the evolution of what R. C.
Majumdar calls "synthetic Hinduism." For quotation see: see: Majumdar, R. C.
"Evolution of Religio-Philosophic Culture in India", in: Radhakrishnan (CHI,
1956), volume 4, p. 49. Maurice Winternitz notes that there are very few places
in Indian literature where the Trimurti is mentioned. The identification of
Vishnu, Shiva, and Brahma as one being is strongly emphasized in the "
Purāṇa", where in 1.6 Brahman is worshipped as Trimurti; 1.9 especially
inculcates the unity of the three gods, and 1.26 relates to the same theme.
Basham, pp. 310-311. Freda Matchett characterizes the Trimurti system as one of
"several frameworks into which various divine figures can be fitted at
different levels." The concept of trimurthi is also present in the Maitri
Upanishad, where the three gods are explained as three of his supreme forms
Views within Hinduism. Sauram. The Saura sect that worships Surya as the
supreme person of godhead and saguna brahman doesn't accept the Trimurti as
they believe Surya is God. Earlier forms of the Trimurti sometimes included
Surya instead of Brahma, or as a fourth above the Trimurti, of whom the other
three are manifestations, Surya is Brahman in the morning, Vishnu in the
afternoon and Shiva in the evening. Surya was also a member of the original
Vedic Trimurti, which included Agni and Vayu. Some Sauras worship either Vishnu
or Shiva as manifestations of Surya, others worship the Trimurti as a
manifestation of Surya, and others exclusively worship Surya alone.
Vaishnavism. Vaishnavism generally does not accept the Trimurti concept. For
example, the Dvaita school holds Vishnu alone to be the supreme God, with Shiva
subordinate, and interprets the Puranas differently. For example, Vijayindra
Tîrtha, a Dvaita scholar interprets the 18 puranas differently. He interprets
that the Vaishnavite puranas as satvic and Shaivite puranas as tamasic and that
only satvic puranas are considered to be authoritative. A. C. Bhaktivedanta
Swami Prabhupada, a leading scholar of Gaudiya Vaishnavism, also distinguishes
between Vishnu and Shiva, and states: ""Similarly, by expanding Himself as Lord
Shiva, the Supreme Lord is engaged when there is a need to annihilate the
universe. Lord Shiva, in association with maya, has many forms, which are
generally numbered at eleven. Lord Shiva is not one of the living entities; he
is, more or less, Krishna Himself. The example of milk and yogurt is often
given in this regard – yogurt is a preparation of milk, but still yogurt
cannot be used as milk. Similarly, Lord Shiva is an expansion of Krishna, but
he cannot act as Krishna... The essential difference is that Lord Shiva has a
connection with material nature, but Vishnu or Lord Krishna has nothing to do
with material nature."" Unlike most other Vaishnavite schools such as those of
Ramanuja, Madhva and Chaitanya, Swaminarayan, guru of the Hindu Swaminarayan
sects (including BAPS),did not differentiate between Vishnu and Shiva;
Swaminarayan, notably differs from practically all Vaishnavite schools in
holding that Vishnu and Shiva are different aspects of the same God.; see also,
verses 47, and 84 of Shikshapatri, a key scripture to all followers of the
Swaminarayan faith.; Moreover, Swaminarayan followed a Smarta approach (see
more detail on the Smarta view below) by instructing his followers to venerate
all five deities of the Panchayatana puja with equal reverence. Shaivism.
Shaivites hold that, according to Shaiva Agama, Lord Shiva performs five
actions - creation, preservation, dissolution, concealing grace, and revealing
grace. Each of the five actions corresponds to a name and form of Shiva.
Respectively, these first three actions are associated with Shiva as Sadyojata
(akin to Brahma), Vamadeva (akin to Vishnu), Aghora (akin to Rudra). Thus,
Brahma, Vishnu and Rudra are not Deities different from Shiva, but rather are
forms of Shiva. As Brahma/Sadyojata, Shiva creates. As Vishnu/Vamadeva, Shiva
preserves. As Rudra/Aghora, he dissolves. This stands in contrast to the idea
that Shiva is the "God of destruction." To Shaivites, Shiva is God and performs
all actions, of which destruction is only but one. Ergo, the Trimurti is a form
of Shiva Himself for Shaivas. Shaivites believe that Lord Shiva is the Supreme,
who assumes various critical roles and assumes appropriate names and forms, and
also stands transcending all these. Smartism. Smartism is a denomination of
Hinduism that places emphasis on a group of five deities rather than just a
single deity. The "worship of the five forms" () system, which was popularized
by the ninth-century philosopher Adi Shankara among orthodox Brahmins of the
Smārta tradition, invokes the five deities Ganesha, Vishnu, Shiva, Devī, and
Sūrya. Adi Shankara later added Kumara (Muruga/Subrahmanya/Karttikeya) to
these five, making six total. This reformed system was promoted by primarily to
unite the principal deities of the six major sects on an equal status. The
monistic philosophy preached by made it possible to choose one of these as a
preferred principal deity and at the same time worship the other four deities
as different forms of the same all-pervading Brahman.
