Trinitarian formula The trinitarian formula is the phrase "in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit" (original Greek , , or in Latin
), or words to that form and effect referring to the three persons of the
Christian Trinity. Biblical origin. These words are quoted from a command of
the resurrected Jesus in Matthew 28:19, commonly called the Great Commission:
"Go ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit". Use in baptism. According to
Roman Catholicism, Eastern Orthodoxy, Anglicanism and most forms of
Protestantism, a baptism is not valid if the Trinitarian formula is not used in
the administration of that sacrament. Consequently, they may not recognize
religious communities that baptize without this formula – "e.g." Unitarians,
Branhamists, Frankists, Jehovah's Witnesses, and Oneness Pentecostals, all of
whom deny the Trinity – as Christian religions. This is also the case with
baptisms within The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS church).
Although LDS members baptize with the same Trinitarian formula, they reject the
Nicene Trinitarian conception and regard the three Persons of the Trinity as
being distinct gods or "divine personages", united not in substance, but in
dominion and purpose. Other faiths (Frankists, Oneness Pentecostals and
Branhamists in particular) use the formula "In the name of Jesus Christ" (based
on Acts 2:38) for baptism, and in turn re-baptize converts who were first
baptized under the Trinitarian formula, sometimes claiming that such persons
would not have been previously aware that "Jesus is the Lord". Other uses.
Together with baptism, the Trinitarian formula is used in other prayers, rites,
liturgies, and sacraments. One of its most common uses apart from baptism is
when Roman Catholics, Eastern and Oriental Orthodox, Anglicans, Lutherans,
Methodists, and others make the Sign of the Cross while reciting the formula.
Views of textual criticism. Some scholars of the Greek New Testament and of the
historical Jesus, both liberal and conservative, regard the trinitarian formula
as an early Christian elaboration. Biblical scholars from the controversial
Jesus Seminar, a group of textual critics (including figures like Robert W.
Funk, John Dominic Crossan, Marcus Borg, Bruce D. Chilton, and John S.
Kloppenborg), have said that the whole of Matthew chapter 28 is the result of
later editorial work on the Gospels and was never uttered by Jesus or his
immediate disciples. Luke Timothy Johnson, a frequent critic of the
methodologies of the Jesus Seminar, says in his book "The Writings of the New
Testament: An Interpretation" that his research affirms a view of Matthew 28:19
as apocryphal. While denying that Jesus spoke the formula, these scholars
acknowledge that the verse does represent Trinitarian ideas in the early
Christian church. Most Christians belong to denominations that recognize church
history as at least partially inspired by the Holy Spirit, so they tend to see
the formula as valid even if not spoken by Jesus himself. However, the formula
does not necessarily endorse the specific Nicene Trinitarian doctrine adopted
at the 4th-century Council of Nicea and elaborated upon by later councils, and
does not necessarily show that 1st-century Christians believed in the
mysterious unity, equality, or co-eternity of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.
Other scholars have challenged the work of the Jesus Seminar, arguing that
those working on the project began with a conclusion and worked to justify it
through their research and exegesis. Feminist critique. From the late twentieth
century onwards, some in liberal and progressive Christianity have become
uncomfortable with the traditional male representation of God and have sought
to de-emphasise or eliminate altogether gender-specific references to God. Some
of these individuals and groups prefer the formula ""in the name of the
Creator, the Redeemer, and the Sanctifier"." The traditionalists respond that
all persons of the Trinity are involved in creation, redemption and
sanctification, and that attempting to redefine the Trinity purely in terms of
"functions" is essentially a form of Sabellianism, or modalism. Because of
this, the Roman Catholic Church has declared that baptisms carried out under
such a formula are not only illicit, but also invalid. The same position has
been enunciated by several authorities in the Eastern Churches.
