Umbanda Umbanda () is a Brazilian religion that blends African religions with
Catholicism, Spiritism, and considerable indigenous lore. Umbanda is related
to, and has many similarities with, other Afro-Brazilian religions like
Candomblé and Quimbanda, but has its own identity. Although some of its
beliefs and most of its practices existed in the late 19th century in almost
all Brazil, it is assumed that Umbanda originated in Rio de Janeiro and
surrounding areas in the early 20th century, mainly due to the work of a
psychic (medium), Zélio Fernandino de Moraes, who practiced Umbanda among the
poor Afro-Brazilian population. Since then, Umbanda has spread across mainly
southern Brazil and even to neighboring countries like Uruguay and Argentina.
Umbanda has many branches, each one with a different set of beliefs and
practices. Some common beliefs are the existence of a single, supreme creator
god represented in the Orixá Olorum or Oxala; the existence of natural forces
or deities called Orixás, some of them synchronistic with Catholic saints that
act as divine energy and forces of nature; spirits of deceased people that
counsel and guide believers through troubles in the material world; psychics,
or "mediums", who have a natural ability that can be perfected to bring
messages from the spiritual world of Orixás and the guiding spirits;
reincarnation and spiritual evolution through many material lives (karmic law)
and the practice of charity and social fraternity. Basic beliefs and practices.
Another important source of creeds and practices are those using the wisdom of
the Oriental, esoteric and occultism philosophies (e.g., Tarot cards, David's
Star, Johrei – healing using the hands). The opposite side of the "Umbanda",
i.e., the practices that intended to cause evil doings, became known as
Quimbanda, although most Umbandists consider Candomblé, a religion closer to
the African roots, a kind of black witchcraft. Umbanda is juxtaposed with
Quimbanda which now reclaims its identity as a separate, more African religion
and distinct from both Umbanda and Candomblé. One hundred years after its
establishment, Umbanda is divided itself into several branches with different
beliefs, creeds and practices. Some of these newer streams, such as "Umbanda
d'Angola" and "Umbanda Jejê", have a body of rituals, ceremonies and
philosophies that makes them closer to other African-Brazilian religion
"Candomblé". The "Umbanda Esotérica" is heavily influenced by Oriental,
esoteric and occultism philosophies. Three principal items. The three major
beliefs claimed by Umbandists are: The Pantheon, the Spirits' World and the
Reincarnation. Pantheon. Umbanda has one supreme being related to the Catholic
God known as Olorum (or Zambi) and many divine intermediary deities called
Orixás. The Orixás are further divided into different legions, phalanges,
sub-phalanges, guides and protectors. These groups can then be divided up even
further into a multitude of spiritual beings. Eight main Orixás World of the
Spirits. Most followers of Umbanda believe that there are three distinct levels
of spirits. They never use black magic or ask for animal sacrifice. They
protect people while they're on the streets, roads, nightclubs, etc., and also
protect them from evil spirits (called obsessing spirits which are spirits that
weren't touched by the light yet and use people to feed their bad habits such
as addictions to drugs or low emotional states like anger, rage, sadness,
guilt, revenge, etc.) and help people opening paths full of learning and
success. Lock-street (the souls of Embaré or the seven crossroads) - Tranca-
ruas Exu Skull - Exu Caveira Exu Marabô - Exu Marabô Exu Tiriri - Exu Tiriri
This line is another type of Exu: The Malandragem. The Phalange Malandragem are
spirits of bohemians who do almost everything as Street Exus. But they also
teach what to do when dealing with people. They're good at giving advices. Zé
Pilintra John Razor (João Navalha) Mary Razor (Maria Navalha) The female exus
are the Pomba Giras. Their action field is love but under no circumstances will
they perform black magic. Pomba Giras, like all Exus, undo black magic that
exists in Quiumbanda always following Christian laws. Reincarnation. The Law of
the Reincarnation is the central point of the Karmic Law. It states that God
creates spirits with Self Will all the time. The spirits universally pass
through many stages of evolution. They have the choice of being good or bad,
through ordinary acts and the love that they display towards other people. When
they "die", they judge themselves; the good ones advance to a superior stage of
spiritual evolution. Those who not succeed should reincarnate in the same or in
an inferior level. Umbanda temples, priests and priestesses. Umbanda temples
are autonomous organizations that focus around a leader, mediums (psychics who
are able to intermediate communications between the physical and the spiritual
worlds), initiates (people with psychic abilities who are being taught in the
ways of Umbanda) and lay members. During its first years, the Umbanda rituals
were performed in poor suburban houses because the followers had no resources,
and also to avoid police persecution. Most often, the leader's own house was
used as a place for religious meetings. The rituals were performed in the
backyard. Sometimes, a tent was pitched to protect the meeting from rain.
Today, the Umbanda religious buildings are still called "Terreiro" (backyard)
or "Tenda" (tent). When the religion flourished, buildings were specially
constructed for ritual use. "Tendas" or "Terreiros" usually look like ordinary
houses when seen from the street. Some religious artifacts like African styled
ceramic vases can be put on the walls or ceilings to give a touch of religious
appearance to the house. A wood board with the name of the temple usually is
placed over the main entrance. Larger Umbanda houses often are laid out in a
fashion similar to a humble Catholic church. Even when the "Tenda" or
"Terreiro" is specially built to be used in Umbanda rituals, a separated part
is used as the home of the leader and his or her family. The areas for
residence and rituals are close enough to be considered a single unit. If a
building is not available, rituals are still performed in a private backyard as
well. Generally the "Terreiro" – the actual room used for rituals – is a
large area covered by a simple roof of ceramic singles, with an altar at the
back. Also, the "Tendas" or "Terreiros" is used directly or in a support
capacity for charitable works to provide child care, medical clinics,
assistance to orphanages, and distribution of medicines and/or food. The
"Terreiros" have as their main leader a priest or priestess called "pai-de-
santo" ("father-of-saint", if he is a male) or "mãe-de-santo" ("mother-of-
saint", if she is female). The initiates, men or women, are usually called
"filhos-de-santo" ("children-of-saint", masculine plural form), to show the
structure within the religion. This does not imply sainthood on the part of the
priest or priestess, but responsibility for certain rituals related to each
saint they serve, (also called Orixás), as well as the saints of the filhos-
de-santo under his/her responsibility. Umbanda developed with almost no sexual
discrimination. The leader could be male or female, pai-de-santo or mãe-de-
santo, and his or her prestige depends only on their psychic powers and the
wisdom shown within their pieces of advice. Its main difference when compared
to the Catholic Church is that in Umbanda, homossexuals face no prejudice, for
Umbanda does not judge his/her believers by sex, race or sexual choice. Each
Umbanda Terreiro practices the same religion with variations, according to the
policies of the pai-de-santo's or the mãe-de-santo's spiritual mentor, as well
as in accordance with the teachings and philosophies of the various traditions
within Umbanda. During these ceremonies, the priests, priestesses, and
initiates wear white costumes and pay homage to the spirits and Orixás.
Rituals & ceremonies. One hundred years after its establishment, Umbanda is
divided into several branches with different rituals and ceremonies. As the
"Terreiros de" Umbanda are loosely united by the Umbanda federations, there is
not a strong adherence to a single code of rite, ceremonies and creeds. The
"Umbanda Branca", the original form created by Zélio de Moraes and his group,
adopts the worship of Orixás and the African incantations practices, but they
rejected the black witchcraft, the colorful costumes and the animal sacrifices
practiced in the Macumba and Quimbanda rituals. The pais-de-santos and the
mães-de-santo always wear white outfits during the ceremonies of the "Umbanda
Branca". On the other hand, "Umbanda d'Angola "and" Umbanda Jejê" are newer
sects with a body of rituals, ceremonies and philosophies that equate
themselves with other African-Brazilian religions such as Candomblé, Jurema
and Catimbó. Another recent branch, called "Umbanda Esotérica", is heavily
influenced by Eastern philosophies. The older "Terreiros de " Umbanda, those
established before 1940, have not integrated these new trends and still
practice the original rites and ceremonies in a simpler way, specially
dedicating themselves to charity works, as preached by Zélio de Moraes and his
group. Umbanda ceremonies are generally open to the public and may take place
several times a week. Atabaque (Conga drums) and chanting play a central role
in some Umbanda congregations, but are almost non-existent in others. The
ceremonies may include offers to the spirits comprising fruits, wine, farofa,
cachaça, popcorn, cigarettes, hard cider and other types of food or beverages.
Each Orixá or spirit receives a proper offering, and initiation rites that
range from the simple to complex. During the ceremonies the priests and
priestesses (pai-de-santo, mãe-de-santo, filhos-de-santo, initiates) and the
public attending the meeting sing together, dance, drink beverages and smoke
cigars under the spirit's influence. However, the use of such elements by these
spirits aren't due to any addictions - they are used as sacred elements that
help the spirits to nulify any negative energies surrounding the assisted
person. The priests and priestesses are separated from the attending public,
usually by a small fence. The priests, priestesses and some of the public
gradually get immersed in the singing and dancing, and suddenly get possessed
by deities and spirits, starting to act and speak with their personas. Those in
the public attending who become possessed are recognized as owners of special
psychic power and, usually, after the ceremony, are invited to become initiates
in the "Terreiro". Sometimes, an experienced pai-de-santo or mãe-de-santo can
dance and sing all night without, for mysterious reasons, being possessed by
deities or spirits. Intervention by spiritual beings in followers' daily lives
is a central belief, so participation in Umbanda rites is important to appease
deities and spirits. History. Historical background. In the late-19th century,
many Brazilian scholars criticized the African-Brazilian religions, claiming
they were primitive and hindered modernization. At the same time, the Allan
Kardec's Spiritism, a development of spiritualism creeds, was increasingly
accepted by the Brazilian urban middle-class with followers since 1865. The
kardecists – followers of the Spiritism – were mainly middle class and
white people, many of them belonging to military and professional careers. They
were deeply influenced by Auguste Comte's philosophy, the Positivism, that
aimed to join religion and science and to help the development of society to a
higher level. Beginning. On November 15, 1908, a group of kardecists met to a
séance in the neighborhood of Neves, São Gonçalo city, near the Federal
Capital, Rio de Janeiro. Among them was Zélio Fernandino de Moraes, a 17-year-
old boy who was studying to join the Naval Academy and became an officer.
During the séance, Zélio de Moraes incorporated a spirit who identified
himself as the "Caboclo das Sete Encruzilhadas" (Half-Indian Peasant of the
Seven Crossroads). After that, Zélio de Moraes incorporated another spirit who
identified himself as "Pai Antônio" (Father Anthony), a wise and old slave
that had died after being savagely flogged by his master (a character similar
to the "Uncle Tom" from Harriet Beecher Stowe's novel). Although the spirits of
Indians and Afro-Brazilians were incorporated by the shamans in the various
forms of Macumba creeds practiced around Rio de Janeiro city in the 19th
century, the kardecists considered them inferior or undeveloped spirits. There
are many, diverse and contradictory depositions of the events of that day, but
most of the séance attendants were deeply outraged by the incorporation of
underdeveloped spirits that could not provide useful or good advices. Some
depositions told that the incorporated spirits, the half-Indian "Caboclo das
Setes Encruzilhadas" and the old black man "Pai Antônio" defied the kardecists
asking them: "Why do you believe that a humble person can not be a soul that
evolved to a superior plane during his physical life?. According to one of the
depositions, the spirit of the "caboclo" prophesied: "If you criticize the
black and Indian ("caboclo") spirits as underdeveloped, I should say that
tomorrow I will be in the house of this instrument (the psychic Zélio de
Moraes) to start a new cult where this black and Indian people could release
their messages and, so, fulfill the mission that the spiritual plane has
entrust them." In 1970 Zélio de Moraes told his own version of the events to
Ronaldo Linares, today chairman of the "Federação Umbandista do Grande ABC"
(Umbandist Federation of the ABC Region, near São Paulo city). He told that
the spirit introduced himself as a Brazilian "caboclo" (half-Indian peasant)
and was contested in the séance by a kardecist psychic who said that he could
see "the remains of a priest garments over him". The "caboclo" then explained:
"You are seeing the remains of a previous existence. I was a priest, my name
was Gabriel Malagrida, I was charged of witchcraft and sacrificed in the
Inquisition bonfire for having prophesied the earthquake that destroyed Lisbon
in 1755. But, in my last physical existence, God allowed the privilege of being
born as a Brazilian Indian". When asked about his name, the spirit answered:
"If a name is necessary, call me the "Caboclo das Sete Encruzilhadas" (Half-
Indian Peasant of the Seven Crossroads), because for me there will be no closed
path. I come bringing the Umbanda, a religion that will harmonize the families
and will last until the End of the Centuries." Due to these events, in the
1970s, November 15 was chosen as the day of Umbanda inauguration. First years
and the development. The first "Terreiro de" Umbanda was founded by Zélio de
Moraes in an uncertain date of the 1920s and named "Centro Espírita Nossa
Senhora da Piedade" (Spiritism Center of Our Lady of Sorrows). In 1940 Zélio
de Moraes made a statute for this first "Terreiro" that was used as reference
by the most of Terreiros that followed. The Umbanda religion started in a time
when the Brazilian society was passing through a strong transformation process.
The predominance of the agriculture in Brazilian economy was decreasing and the
first steps of a late industrial revolution was expanding the working class.
The American anthropologist Diana Brown, that pioneered the studies of Umbanda
in the 1960s, verified that the Umbanda founders were most middle-class people,
unsatisfied with the kardecist Spiritism that they previously followed and were
occasional attendants of the "Centros de Macumba" (Macumba worships places) in
the favelas (slums). The first Umbanda followers preferred the African and
Native Brazilian spirits and gods worshipped in the Macumba rather than the
highly evolved spirits of Spiritism considering them more able to heal and
treat a broader spectrum of diseases and life problems. The first Umbanda
followers felt that the Macumba rituals were more stimulating and dramatic than
the Spiritism séances, but they rejected the animal sacrifices and the
incorporation of what they considered devilish spirits, oftentimes called
Kiumbas or Obsessing Spirits. Umbanda was born with an inner contraction. The
first driving force intend to differentiate its practices from the presumed
primitive African-Brazilian religions that they considered black witchcraft.
The opposite driving force was the psychics incorporation of true Brazilian
characters that honoured the Native Brazilians, the black slaves and their
descendants. The first effort was made to "purify" the new-born religion taking
out some of the African influence from the Umbanda. This kardecist Spiritism
side of Umbanda is called "Umbanda Branca" (White Umbanda). The name does not
refer to white people, but white witchcraft, opposing the Umbanda cult to the
Quimbanda (black witchcraft) of traditional African rites (Macumba). According
to the anthropologist Diana Brown, Zélio de Moraes had just a symbolic
participation in the creation of the Umbanda, acting like the speaker of a
group that previously participated in Macumba cults. A collective effort was
made by Zélio de Moraes and his group to promote the "Umbanda Branca",
developing practices acceptable by the white middle class and modernizing the
African-Brazilian religions. Zélio de Moraes believed that he had made a
rupture with the kardecist Spiritism, but he only expressed the eclectic
mixture that developed before and after the appearance of the Caboclo das Sete
Encruzilhadas. The Umbanda's initial defy was to incorporate the African
influences and simultaneously to be different from its African origins. The
"Centro Espírita Nossa Senhora da Piedade", the first Umbanda's "Terreiro"
keeps in its name the kardecist Spiritism reference ("Centro Espírita" –
Spiritism Center) and also honor a Catholic saint ("Nossa Senhora da Piedade"
– Our Lady of Sorrows). The first followers desperately needed to distinguish
themselves from the Macumba and other African-Brazilian religions followers,
for until the second half of the 20th century, all these faithful were
considered criminals by the Brazilian government and periodically repressed.
Despite the religious freedom assured by the first Brazilian Republican
Constitution in 1891, the Criminal Law of 1890 forbade the "practice of
Spiritism, witchcraft and its sortileges). The Criminal Law of 1942 still
condemned the "sorcerers", but not all, only those accused of using his or hers
powers to evil doings. The anthropologist Yvonne Maggie says that, repressing
the witchcraft, the Criminal Law demonstrates that the elite governing Brazil
somehow believed in the supernatural power of the sorcerers. Note that
Brazilian legislators were not aware of witchcraft like that practiced in
Europe, but only aimed to repress the African-Brazilian religions like Macumba
and Candomblé that they equated to sorcery. Expansion during Vargas
Dictatorship. The first stage of the Umbanda expansion coincides with the
social and political changes that occurred in the 1930s and with the
nationalist and populist dictatorship of Getúlio Vargas (1930 to 1945).
According to the anthropologist Diana Brown, Umbanda chose symbols like the
caboclos (half-Indian Peasants) and pretos-velhos (old black men) influenced by
the intense nationalism of Getúlio Vargas regime and its efforts to create a
national culture that unified the Brazilian people. The esteem of Brazilian
natives and slaves generate the idea that the Umbanda is the only genuinely
Brazilian religion, a fact contested by many scholars. The anthropologist
Émerson Giumbelli remember that when Umbanda was consolidated around the
1930s, many religions also appeared and were reinforced with the same
nationalist appeal. Giumbelli cites the cases of kardecist Spiritism with the
1938 release of the book ""Brasil, Coração do Mundo, Pátria do Evangelho""
("Brazil, Heart of the World, Fatherland of the Gospel") by the renowned
psychic Chico Xavier, and the development of the Santo Daime religion in the
Acre State. Getúlio Vargas became known as "pai dos pobres" (Patron of the
Poors) and, also, as "pai da Umbanda" (Father of the Umbanda) among the
emergent urban and working class. Until 1966 many Umbanda "Terreiros" had a
Getúlio Vargas picture in a place of honor. Despite the identification with
the objectives of the Getúlio Vargas Dictatorship, the Umbanda followers were
persecuted. The police repression interrupted religious meetings, beat the
psychics and followers and confiscated their instruments of cult. An entire
collection of icons, costumes, garbs, amulets, instruments and objects of
African-Brazilian religions confiscated by policemen is still kept in the
"Museu da Polícia" (Museum of Police) in Rio de Janeiro city. Until recently,
this collection was named the Collection of Black Witchcraft. A notable victim
of the police repression was Euclydes Barbosa (1909–88). He was a great
soccer back player known by the nickname Jaú, that played with the Corinthians
team from 1932 to 1937 and with the Brazil's National Team in 1938 World Cup in
France. Jaú was also a pai-de-santo (father-of-saint), priest of Umbanda
cults, the precursor of Umbanda religion in São Paulo city and one of the
first organizers in the 1950s of the Iemanjá feast in the São Paulo State
beaches. Jaú was illegally imprisoned, beaten, tortured and publicly
humiliated by the police because of his religious activities. Some Umbanda
leaders call him the great martyr of their religion. Prime years after the
Vargas Dictatorship. In the latter half of the 20th century the Afro-Brazilian
Umbanda grew rapidly among transformation of Candomblé that was first noticed
in Bahia. The independent "Terreiros" of Umbanda started to unite themselves in
federations to strengthen its position against social discrimination and police
repression. The first federation was founded by Zélio Fernandino in 1939. The
end of the Getúlio Vargas Dictatorship and the reestablishment of democracy in
1945 advanced the religion freedom environment. In 1953, two Umbanda
federations were founded in São Paulo. However, the Umbanda cults were still
looked with suspicion by the Police Departments that demanded a compulsory
registration of the "Terreiros". Only in 1964, this obligation was released and
just a civil registration in a public notary is required. The populist
character of the politics in Brazil between 1945 (the end of Getúlio Vargas
Dictatorship) and 1964 (the start of the Military Dictatorship) supported the
expansion of Umbanda. Then politicians became usual attendants of the
Terreiros, specially before the elections. A research conducted by the
anthropologists Lísias Nogueira Negrão and Maria Helena Concone revealed that
in the 1940s in São Paulo, just 58 religious organizations were registered as
Umbanda "Terreiros", but 803 organizations declared themselves as Spiritism
Centers. In the 1950s, positions inverted: 1,025 organizations declared
themselves as Umbanda "Terreiros", 845 as Spiritism Centers and only one
Candomblé "Terreiro". The apex was during the 1970s, with 7,627 Umbanda
"Terreiros", 856 Candomblé "Terreiros" and 202 Spiritism Centers. Brazil went
from having around 50,000 "Terreiros" in the 1960s to 300,000 by the early
1980s. By the mid 1980s there had been an end to military rule and an increase
in cultural consciousness. These changes allowed for the condemning of slavery
and the celebration of African heritage including the cult of the Orixás
(Yoruba gods). The period from the 1950s to the 1970s was the prime of the
Umbanda religion. Police repression decreased, the number of followers soared,
but the Catholic Church opposition increased. An intense religious campaign
against the Umbanda cults was conducted in the pulpits and the press. Umbanda
received criticism from the Catholic Church, which disagreed with the worship
of spirits and the comparison that many Umbandistas made between Catholic
Saints and Orixás (African gods). Despite the criticism, even today, many
Umbanda members also claim to be devout Catholics as well. After the Vatican
Council II (1962–65), the Catholic Church sought an ecumenical or tolerant
relation even with the African-Brazilian religions. At this time, Umbanda
become part of popular culture as many novelists and songwriters have written
or sung about them. Several of Jorge Amado's works, for instance, are concerned
with the trials and tribulations of the Afro-Brazilians. From the 1960s, many
songs about Umbanda and the other Afro-Brazilian religions became popular.
Among the notable Brazilian composers who treated the subject, Tom Jobim,
Toquinho, Vinícius de Moraes, Geraldo Vandré and Clara Nunes are the most
widely known. In the 1970s poet Vinícius de Moraes married his last wife,
Gesse, in an Umbandista ceremony witnessed by many prominent figures of
Brazilian culture and politics. Although largely accepted as part of Brazilian
culture, at this time, most scholars considered Candomblé the pure and
authentic religion, and despised Umbanda as just a kitsch eclectic cult.
Opposition. In 1974 Umbanda practitioners (Including declared and undeclared)
were estimated to be about 30 million in a population of 120 million
Brazilians. After the 1970s the Umbanda cults begun to be opposed by
Pentecostals. Some Evangelical Pentecostal Churches, which have gained many
adherents in Latin America in the last two decades, have begun attempting to
evangelize and, in some cases, persecute practitioners of Umbanda and other
African-derived religions. Pentecostals always have a deep faith in the
existence of spirits, but consider them demons. The practice of Umbanda and all
the African-Brazilian religions are seen by the Pentecostal Churches as black
witchcraft and devil worship, and the incorporation of Orixás is called demon
possession. Umbanda practitioners have taken cases to national courts and
achieved a high measure of success. In 2005 the "Superior Órgão de Umbanda do
Estado de São Paulo" (Superior Organization of Umbanda in São Paulo State)
won a judicial case in the Federal Court against the television broadcasting
systems Rede Record and Rede Mulher, that belong to the "Igreja Universal do
Reino de Deus", a Neo Pentecostal Church. The Public Attorney (Ministério
Público) denounced television programs that treated the African-Brazilian
religions in a derogatory and discriminating way. The Pentecostal Churches
converted a large number of the Umbanda followers, especially in the favelas.
The "Favela de Dona Marta", a shantytown in Rio de Janeiro, had in the middle
of 1980s, six "Terreiros de " Umbanda, one "Terreiro de" Candomblé and one
Spiritism Center. Today, all of them are closed, and there are eight
Pentecostal Churches in the same shantytown. Since the 1970s Umbanda has been
seen as part of the African heritage of Brazil. This allowed the development of
some Umbanda rites like "Umbanda d'Angola" and "Umbanda Jejê" that emphasize
the African tradition, coming closer to Candomblé rituals, and diverging from
the "Umbanda Branca" created by Zélio de Moraes and his group. The influence
of Oriental religions and the European occult created another Umbanda branch
called the "Umbanda Esotérica." Today. In the 2000 Brazilian census, 432,000
Brazilians declared themselves Umbandistas, a 20% drop in relation to the 1991
census. Many people attend the "Terreiros of" Umbanda seeking counseling or
healing, but they do not consider themselves Umbandistas. Despite all the
troubles in the past or present, the Umbanda remains strong and renovated in
Brazilian main cities like Rio de Janeiro (the greatest concentration of
Umbandists) and São Paulo (the second greatest concentration of Umbandistas).
After the 1970s, Porto Alegre, the capital of the most southern Brazilian
State, became the base of expansion of the Umbanda to Uruguay, Argentina.
Today, Umbanda followers can be found in various parts of the United States as
well. Umbanda was traditionally a religion of the black population and promoted
emancipation and participation; however, since the 1920s and early 1930s,
Umbanda followers (as well as leaders and mediums) have come from various
social, racial, and ethnic groups. The American anthropologist Diana Brown made
a field research in a Rio de Janeiro's favela (shantytown) in 1966. Originally,
she believed that the Umbanda was a religion of poor black people. Her study,
"Umbanda – Politics of an Urban Religious Movement", published in 1974,
demonstrated that Umbanda, despite its strong presence in poor neighborhoods,
was a religion created and dominated by the white middle class. The spread of
Umbanda in the middle class during the 1970s allured the participation even of
descendants of immigrants from countries distant from African traditions. So,
one can find descendants of Italian, Syrian-Lebanese and Japanese immigrants
attending rites in the "Terreiros de" Umbanda, or even as Umbanda religious
leaders (pai-de-santo or mãe-de-santo).
