Unitarian Universalist Association Unitarian Universalist Association (UUA), in
full the Unitarian Universalist Association of Congregations in North America,
is a liberal religious association of Unitarian Universalist congregations
formed by the consolidation in 1961 of the American Unitarian Association and
the Universalist Church of America. Both of these predecessor organizations
began as Christian Unitarian and Christian Universalist denominations. However,
modern Unitarian Universalists do not limit themselves to Christian beliefs or
affinities. Rather, they define themselves as non-creedal, and draw wisdom from
various religions and philosophies in addition to Christianity, including
Humanism, Hinduism, Buddhism, Judaism, and Earth-centered spirituality. Thus,
the UUA qualifies as a form of "post-Christian" liberal religion with
syncretistic leanings. Congregations. Most of the member congregations of the
UUA are in the United States and Canada, but the UUA has also admitted
congregations from Australia, New Zealand, the Philippines and Pakistan
(although UUA policy appears at present to be against admitting any new
congregations from outside North America, rather having them form their own
national bodies and having these bodies join the International Council of
Unitarians and Universalists). Until 2002, almost all member congregations of
the Canadian Unitarian Council (CUC) were also members of the UUA and most
services to CUC member congregations were provided by the UUA. However, after
an agreement between the UUA and the CUC, since 2002 most services have been
provided by the CUC to its own member congregations, with the UUA continuing to
provide ministerial settlement services and as well as a minimal amount of
youth (12–20) and young adult (18–35) programming and services. Since 2002,
some Canadian congregations have continued to be members of both the UUA and
CUC while others are members of only the CUC. The Church of the Larger
Fellowship (CLF) is a member church of the Unitarian Universalist Association
providing denominational services to persons unable to attend a physical
congregation because of distance or mobility, or who wish to belong to a
congregation other than their local congregation. Many of these are Unitarian
Universalists in other countries, members of the military, prisoners or non-
mobile elderly. Organization. The UUA is headquartered at 25 Beacon Street on
historic Beacon Hill, Boston, Massachusetts, the historical center of Unitarian
Christianity in America. As of 2009, the UUA comprised 19 Districts, 1,041
congregations with 164,656 certified members and 61,795 church school enrollees
served by 1,623 ministers.[http://www.uua.org/aboutuua/statistics.html]
However, as of 2011 the UUA had 162,796 certified members and 54,671 church
school enrollees. This shows a decline of 1,860 members and 7,124 enrollees in
church school since 2008. The UUA has, for the first time, also reported
decline in average weekly attendance to 100,693 people. This is a drop of 1.5%
on the 2010 reported figure. Corporate status. The UUA was given corporate
status in May 1961 under special acts of legislature of The Commonwealth of
Massachusetts and the State of New York. See Chapter 148 of the acts of 1960 of
the Massachusetts legislature and Chapter 827 of the Acts of 1960 of the New
York legislature. Copies of said Acts are attached to the minutes of the
organizing meeting of the Association held in Boston, Massachusetts in May 1961
and also are printed in the 1961-62 Directory of the Association. Decentralized
association. The UUA is not a denomination in the traditional sense; the UUA is
an association of congregations with no one organization able to speak
authoritatively for the whole. It is the congregations that have authority over
the larger body, through the annual General Assembly of the Unitarian
Universalist Association. Since the general public understands "denomination"
much more readily than "association of congregations", the distinction is
generally elided in conversation. Because of this relationship between the
congregations and the association, Unitarian Universalist congregations have a
congregational polity of governance. However, for the more day-to-day
decisions, there is a Board of Trustees that is elected by Districts and at
General Assembly. In its role as a national organization representing the
congregations, the UUA is a member of various organizations, both religious and
secular. Principles and purposes. The UUA does not have a central creed in
which members are required to believe, but they have found it useful to
articulate their common values in what has become known as the "Principles and
Purposes". The first version of the principles was adopted in 1960, and the
modern form was adopted in 1984 (including the 7th principle). They were
amended once again in 1995 to include the 6th source. Both of these were added
to explicitly include members with Neopagan, Native American, and other natural
theist spiritualities. General Assembly. General Assembly (GA) is held every
year in June in a different city in the USA. Member congregations (and three
associate member organizations) send delegates and conventioneers to
participate in the plenary sessions, workshops, district gatherings, and
worship services. Finances and membership fees. The UUA requests annual
contributions from its member congregations. The requested contribution, known
as Fair Share, is calculated for each congregation by multiplying an annually
determined membership fee times the number of registered members of that
congregation. The UUA also has alternative modes of raising funds. In order for
congregations to participate in certain programming, they will pay a nominal
fee. Some funds are earned through charitable gifts or estate planning.
Additionally, the UUA pools together investment funds from congregations or
other constituents and manages them for a small percentage. Related
organizations. Three non-congregational organizations belong to the UUA as
Associate Member organizations. Associate Member organizations are esteemed as
inherently integral to the work of the UUA and its member congregations, and
are accorded two voting delegates each to the annual General Assembly. The
Associate Member organizations are the Unitarian Universalist Service Committee
(UUSC), which is active in social change actions; the Unitarian Universalist
Women's Federation, which provides education and advocacy on women's issues;
and the Unitarian Universalist United Nations Office, which is a center of
information and action at the United Nations. The UUA also recognizes many
organizations as Independent Affiliate organizations. These organizations are
created by Unitarian Universalists as needed to meet the special needs of the
diversity within Unitarian Universalism. These groups provide specialized
spiritual support, work for specific social justice issues, provide support for
religious professionals, etc. The UUA owns Beacon Press, a nationally known
publisher of both fiction and non-fiction books. Skinner House Books publishes
books primarily of interest to Unitarian Universalists. The UUA also
participates in interfaith organizations such as the Interfaith Center on
Corporate Responsibility. Presidents. The president of the UUA is its CEO and
the religious leader of Unitarian Universalism in the United States. The
delegates at General Assembly (Unitarian Universalist Association) elect the
president to a four-year term and a president may be re-elected once. The Rev.
Peter Morales was elected at General Assembly in 2009. Moderators. The
moderator of the UUA is the chair of the Board of Trustees of the Unitarian
Universalist Association and is the presiding officer at the General Assembly
(Unitarian Universalist Association). The moderator is the highest UUA position
traditionally held by laity. General Assembly delegates elect the moderator to
a four-year term and a moderator may be re-elected once. Moderator Gini Courter
(2003*) ran unopposed and was elected to a second full four-year term at
General Assembly in 2009. Boy Scouts of America controversy. The Religion in
Life religious emblems program of UUA is no longer recognized by the Boy Scouts
of America (BSA). The UUA published statements opposing the BSA's policies on
homosexuals, atheists, and agnostics in 1992; and in 1993, the UUA updated
Religion in Life to include criticism of these BSA policies. In 1998, the BSA
withdrew recognition of Religion in Life, stating that such information was
incompatible with BSA programs. The UUA removed the material from their
curriculum and the BSA renewed their recognition of the program. When the BSA
found that the UUA was issuing supplemental material with the Religion in Life
workbooks that included statements critical of discrimination on the basis of
sexual orientation or personal religious viewpoint, the BSA again withdrew
recognition. The Unitarian Universalist Scouters Organization (UUSO) created
the Living Your Religion program in May 2005 as a parallel award for Unitarian
Universalist youth. The program was promoted at the 2005 National Scout
Jamboree and shown as having BSA approval in the UUSO membership brochure and
the Living Your Religion Guidebook. The UUA has stated that the UUSO is not
recognized as an affiliate organization. As of March 2006, the UUSO has a
stated goal to create a set of awards that are recognized by the UUA and BSA.
Alternative UU-friendly scouting organizations. In the wake of this
controversy, a number of SpiralScouts International circles have formed within
congregations of the UUA, despite having no official affiliation with the UUA.
Boy Scout Troop 103 was sponsored by All Souls Unitarian Church in New York
City. The BSA policies that excluded the UUA caused the congregation to
terminate its charter and sever ties with the BSA. The volunteers who formerly
led the troop later founded Navigators USA, which its founders describe as
"...committed to providing a quality scouting experience that is inclusive and
available to all children and families regardless of gender, race, religion,
economic status, sexual orientation and social background." There are currently
4 chapters in the metropolitan New York City area, one in upper New York state,
three in Massachusetts, three in California, and one each in Durham, North
Carolina, Fort Collins, Colorado, Norman, Oklahoma, Fayetteville, Arkansas,
Olympia, Washington, and Alpena, MI. In addition to SpiralScouts and Navigators
USA, the UUA website also suggests Camp Fire as an alternative scout-like
organization that comports with UU principles.
