Unitarian Universalism Unitarian Universalism is a theologically liberal
religion characterized by support for a "free and responsible search for truth
and meaning". Unitarian Universalists do not share a creed; rather, they are
unified by their shared search for spiritual growth and by the understanding
that an individual's theology is a result of that search and not obedience to
an authoritarian requirement. Unitarian Universalists draw on many different
theological sources and have a wide range of beliefs and practices.
Contemporary Unitarian Universalism espouses a pluralist approach to religious
belief, whereby members may describe themselves as atheist, agnostic, deist,
monotheist, pantheist, polytheist, pagan, or assume no label at all. As of
2006, fewer than about 20% of Unitarian Universalists identified themselves as
Christian. The Unitarian Universalist Association (UUA) was formed in 1961, a
consolidation of the American Unitarian Association, established in 1825, and
the Universalist Church of America, established in 1866. It is headquartered in
Boston, Massachusetts, and serves churches mostly in the United States. The
Canadian Unitarian Council became an independent body in 2002. History.
Unitarian Universalism was formed from the merger in 1961 of two historically
Christian denominations, the Universalist Church of America and the American
Unitarian Association, both based in the United States. At the time of the
North American merger, the theological significance of these terms had expanded
beyond the traditional Christian understanding. Unitarian Universalists today
draw from a variety of religious traditions. Individuals may or may not self-
identify as Christians or subscribe to Christian beliefs. Unitarian
Universalist congregations and fellowships tend to retain some Christian
traditions, such as Sunday worship with a sermon and the singing of hymns. The
extent to which the elements of any particular faith tradition are incorporated
into personal spiritual practice is a matter of personal choice for
congregants, in keeping with a creedless, non-dogmatic approach to spirituality
and faith development. New England Unitarians evolved from the Pilgrim fathers'
Congregational Christianity, which was originally based on a literal reading of
the Bible. Liberalizing Unitarians rejected the Trinitarian belief in the tri-
partite godhead: Father, Son, and Holy Ghost/Spirit. Instead, they asserted a
unitary notion of God. New England Universalists rejected the Puritan
forefathers' emphasis on the select few, the Elect, who were reportedly saved
from eternal damnation by a just God. Instead Universalists asserted that 'all
were universally saved'. Universalists rejected the hellfire and damnation of
the evangelical preachers, who tried to revive the fundamentalist Christianity
of the early Pilgrim fathers. Universalism. Universalism broadly refers to a
theological belief that all persons and creatures are related to a god or the
divine and will be reconciled to (a) god (Universal Salvation). Christian
Universalism. Proponents of Christian Universalism claim a long history,
beginning with Origen and Gregory of Nyssa, although both of these are
questioned by modern scholarship and Orthodox scholars. It is based upon the
doctrine of universal salvation through Christ (universal reconciliation) and
an interpretation of the "restitution of all things" (apocatastasis). In 1793,
Universalism emerged as a particular denomination of Christianity in the United
States, eventually called the Universalist Church of America. Early American
advocates of Universal Salvation such as Elhanan Winchester, Hosea Ballou and
John Murray taught that all souls would achieve salvation, sometimes after a
period resembling purgatory. Christian Universalism denies the doctrine of
everlasting damnation, and proclaims belief in an entirely loving God who will
ultimately redeem all human beings. Unitarianism. Historically,
Nontrinitarianism consisted of dissenting factions within Christianity. The
term may refer to any belief about the nature of Jesus Christ that affirms God
as a singular entity and rejects the doctrine of the Trinity and is usually
distinguished from Arianism, which was rejected by mainstream Christianity, a
consensus of Christian bishops at the First Council of Nicaea in 325. This
resurfaced later in Church history, especially during the theological turmoils
of the Protestant Reformation. A Spanish physician, Michael Servetus, studied
the Bible and concluded that the concept of the Trinity, as traditionally
conceived, was not biblical. His books "On the Errors of the Trinity" and
"Christianismi Restitutio" caused much uproar. Servetus was eventually
arrested, convicted of heresy, and burned at the stake in Geneva in 1553 when
John Calvin was leading the Reformation there. The term Unitarian entered the
English language via Henry Hedworth in relation to the teachings of Laelio
Sozzini and the Polish Socinians. Unitarian churches were formally established
in Transylvania and Poland (by the Socinians) in the second half of the 16th
Century. The early Unitarian church not only rejected the Trinity, but also the
pre-existence of Christ as well, in many cases, predestination and original sin
as put forward by Augustine of Hippo, and the substitutionary atonement of
Christ developed by Anselm of Canterbury and John Calvin. There were several
different forms of Christology in the beginnings of the Unitarian movement;
ultimately, the variety that became prevalent was that Jesus was a man, but one
with a unique relationship to God. These Unitarian thinkers and groups have
gone by many names, including Anti-trinitarianism. Britain. Samuel Clarke
(1675–1729) revised the Book of Common Prayer, removing the Trinitarian
Nicene Creed and references to Jesus as God. Theophilus Lindsey also revised
the Book of Common Prayer to allow a more Unitarian interpretation. Neither
cleric was charged under the Blasphemy Act 1697 that made it an "offence for
any person, educated in or having made profession of the Christian religion, by
writing, preaching, teaching or advised speaking, to deny the Holy Trinity".
The Act of Toleration (1689), the long title being "An Act for Exempting their
Majestyes Protestant Subjects dissenting from the Church of England from the
Penalties of certaine Lawes", gave relief to English Dissenters, but excluded
Unitarians. The efforts of Clarke and Lindsey met with substantial criticism to
stifle attempts at reform, from the more conservative laity, priests and
bishops who held substantial power within the Church of England. In response,
in 1774, Lindsey applied for registration of the Essex House as a "Dissenting
place of worship" with the assistance of barrister Mr. John Lee. On the Sunday
following the registration — April 17, 1774 — the first true Unitarian
congregation discreetly convened in the provisional Essex Street Chapel. In
attendance were Mr. Lee, Joseph Priestley and the agent of the Massachusetts
Colony, Mr. Benjamin Franklin. Priestley also founded a reform congregation,
but, after his home was burned down in the Priestley Riots, fled with his wife
to America, where he became a leading figure in the founding of the church on
American soil. Once laity and clergy relaxed their vehement opposition to the
Doctrine of the Trinity Act 1813 (sometimes called the "Trinitarian Act 1812"
and also variously known as the "Trinity Act", "Unitarian Relief Act" and
"Unitarian Toleration Bill") that amended the Blasphemy Act 1697 in respect of
its Trinitarian provisions, the British and Foreign Unitarian Association was
founded in 1825. It has its headquarters in Essex Hall, successor to Lindsey's
Essex House. During the late 19th Century there was tension between the
"Biblical Unitarianism" of Robert Spears and Samuel Sharpe and those such as
James Martineau as Unitarians began to move away from belief in scripture.
Unitarian congregations in Britain today meet under the auspices of the General
Assembly of Unitarian and Free Christian Churches. Two that have been
significant in national life are the Cross Street Chapel in Manchester and
Newington Green Unitarian Church in north London. United States. In the United
States, the Unitarian movement began primarily in the Congregational parish
churches of New England, which were part of the state church of Massachusetts.
These churches, whose buildings may still be seen today in many New England
town squares, trace their roots to the division of the Puritan colonies into
parishes for the administration of their religious needs. In the late 18th
century, conflict grew within some of these churches between Unitarian and
Trinitarian factions. In 1805, Unitarians gained key faculty positions at
Harvard. In 1819 William Ellery Channing preached the ordination sermon for
Jared Sparks in Baltimore, outlining the Unitarian position. The American
Unitarian Association was founded as a separate denomination in 1825. By
coincidence and unknown to both parties, the AUA was formed on the same day —
May 26, 1825 — as the British and Foreign Unitarian Association Integration
1825–1961. After the schism, some of those churches remained within the
Congregational fold, while others voted to become Unitarian. In the aftermath
of their various historical circumstances, some of these churches became member
congregations of the Congregational organization (later the United Church of
Christ), others became Unitarian and eventually became part of the UUA.
Universalist churches in contrast followed a different path, having begun as
independent congregations beyond the bounds of the established Puritan churches
entirely. Today, the UUA and the United Church of Christ cooperate jointly on
social justice initiatives such as the Sexuality Education Advocacy Training
project. In the 19th century, under the influence of Ralph Waldo Emerson (who
had been a Unitarian minister) and other transcendentalists, Unitarianism began
its long journey from liberal Protestantism to its present more pluralist form.
Unitarians and Universalists often have had common interests and communication
between them. In the often-quoted words of Thomas Starr King, pastor of the San
Francisco Unitarian Church at the beginning of the Civil War: "The
Universalists believe that God is too good to damn them, and the Unitarians
believe they are too good to be damned!" Mergers of local congregations and use
of the term "Unitarian-Universalist" in printed publicity date from 1932 or
earlier. In 1961, the American Unitarian Association (AUA) was consolidated
with the Universalist Church of America (UCA), thus forming the Unitarian
Universalist Association. In the same year, the Canadian Unitarian Council
(CUC) formed. The Unitarian Universalist Association (UUA) was also given
corporate status in May 1961 under special acts of legislature of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts and the State of New York. In 1998, the CUC and
UUA dissolved their financial accord, although they continue to cooperate in
many ways. Beliefs. There is no single unifying belief that all Unitarian
Universalists (UUs) hold, aside from complete and responsible freedom of
speech, thought, belief, faith, and disposition. Unitarian Universalists
believe that each person is free to search for his or her own personal truth on
issues, such as the existence, nature, and meaning of life, deities, creation,
and afterlife. UUs can come from any religious background, and hold beliefs and
adhere to morals from a variety of cultures or religions. Concepts about deity
are diverse among UUs. Some are monotheistic. Some have no belief in any gods
(atheism); others believe in many gods (polytheism). Some believe that the
question of the existence of any god is most likely unascertainable or
unknowable (agnosticism). Some believe that God is a metaphor for a
transcendent reality. Some believe in a female god (goddess), an Abrahamic god,
or a god identified with nature or the universe (pantheism). Still others may
hold with the Deist notion that a creator God exists, but does not intervene in
the world or reveal itself, and can only be apprehended (if at all) through the
use of reason. Many UUs reject the idea of deities and instead speak of the
"spirit of life" that binds all life on earth. UUs support each person's search
for truth and meaning in concepts of spirituality. Seven "Principles and
Purposes".  Unitarian Universalism is often referred to by its members as a
"living tradition", and the principles and purposes have been modified over
time to reflect changes in spiritual beliefs among the membership. Most
recently, the last principle, adopted in 1985 and generally known as the
"Seventh Principle", "Respect for the interdependent web of all existence of
which we are a part", and a sixth source (adopted in 1995), "Spiritual
teachings of earth-centered traditions which celebrate the sacred circle of
life and instruct us to live in harmony with the rhythms of nature" were added
to explicitly include members with Neopagan, Native American, and pantheist
spiritualities. Unitarian Universalists tend to promote beliefs of a person
that are based on their individual thoughts, and can range from strict
monotheistic belief to less credal or more inclusive views. Diversity among
Unitarian Universalists. Unitarian Universalists hold many different beliefs,
but have no creedal test of membership. Unitarian Universalist congregations
almost always contain members of a variety of different beliefs and religious
practices. Some congregations emphasize this diversity and use it to enrich
individuals' search for their own truths. Other congregations specialize in a
particular theology or religious practice (UU Christian Churches in New
England, for instance, or congregations which focus on the spiritual practice
of justice and service). All congregations are open to any person, regardless
of their beliefs or practices. Theologies/Philosophies. 1. The universe is a
beautiful, intricate, complex place, the foundations of which are a Mystery.
The "whole truth" is too large, and our minds/knowledge/intuitions are too
small to grasp it all. Therefore, we cherish and learn from diversity. 2. If
the Universe can be said to have a purpose, its purpose is for us, not against
us, and it is for, not against, us all. 3. Given how little we can know for
sure, our focus should be on this earth and life; beauty, justice, love. 4. We
claim the rational, eschew the irrational,(contrary to reason) and question the
non-rational (that which is neither provable nor disprovable by reason alone,
i.e. life after death). Poetically, this might be stated, "We come from One
origin, we are headed to One destiny, but we cannot know completely what these
are, so we are to focus on making this life better for all of us, and we use
reason when we can, to find our way. " Diversity of Practices and Heritages.
Unitarian Universalists believe that the divine can be found in all people and
in many faiths. Unitarian Universalists draw inspiration from a variety of
other faith traditions. Many Unitarian Universalist churches celebrate
observances associated with other religious traditions, including Buddhist-
style meditation groups, Jewish Seder, Yom Kipur and Passover dinners, "iftaar"
meals (marking the breaking of Ramadan fast for Muslims), and Christmas Eve/
Winter Solstice services. Children's and youth's religious education classes
teach about the divinity of the world and the sanctity of world religions. One
of its more popular curricula, Neighboring Faiths (formerly Church Across the
Street), takes middle and high school participants to visit the places of
worship of many faith traditions including a Hindu temple, a Reform or Orthodox
synagogue, and a Catholic church. Many Unitarian Universalists consider
themselves humanists, while others hold to Christian, Buddhist, Jewish, natural
theist, atheist, agnostic, absurdist, pantheist, pagan, Taoist, and other
beliefs. Most choose to attach no particular theological label to their
beliefs. This diversity of views is considered a strength in the Unitarian
Universalist movement. The emphasis remains on the individual search for
meaning among its members rather than adherence to any particular doctrine.
Many UU congregations have study groups that examine the traditions and
spiritual practices of Neopaganism, Christianity, Buddhism, Judaism, Islam,
Pantheism, and other faiths. Some UU ministers, such as the Reverend James
Ishmael Ford, are also ordained Zen teachers. Other UU ministers, such as the
Reverend David Miller, are atheists. There are Buddhist meditation teachers,
Sufi teachers, as well as gnostic and episcopi vagantes clerics. Some view
their Jewish heritage as primary, and others see the concept of God as
unhelpful in their personal spiritual journeys. While Sunday services in most
congregations tend to be spiritual in nature (as different from theological),
it is not unusual for a part of a church's membership to attend pagan,
Buddhist, or other spiritual study or worship groups as an alternative means of
worship. In several surveys, Unitarian Universalists in the United States most
often identified themselves as humanists, while smaller numbers identified
themselves as earth-centered, agnostic, theistic, atheistic, Buddhist,
Christian, or pagan. There is great variety among Unitarian Universalist
congregations, with some favoring particular religious beliefs or forms of
worship over others, with many more home to an eclectic mix of beliefs.
Regardless of their orientation, most congregations are fairly open to
differing beliefs, though not always with various faith traditions represented
to the same degree. There is also a wide variety in how congregations conceive
of themselves. Congregations call themselves "churches," "societies,"
"fellowships," "congregations," or eschew the use of any particular descriptor
(e.g. "Sierra Foothills Unitarian Universalists"). Whether a congregation is a
'fellowship' or a 'church' sometimes hinges on whether it is led by one (or
more) minister(s): those without ministers being fellowships, those with
ministers being churches. Many use the name "Unitarian Universalist," (and a
few "Universalist Unitarian"), having gradually adopted this formulation since
consolidation in 1961. Others use names that reflect their historic roots by
keeping simply the designation "Unitarian" or "Universalist" (e.g. "Community
Unitarian Church at White Plains"). A few congregations use neither. For some
congregations, the name can be a clue to their theological orientation. For
others, avoidance of the word "church" indicates a desire to distance itself
from traditional Christian theology. Sometimes the use of another term may
simply indicate a congregation's lay-led or relatively new status. However,
some UU congregations have grown to appreciate alternative terms such as
"fellowship" and retained them even though they have grown much larger or lost
features sometimes associated with their use (such as, in the case of
fellowships, a traditionally lay-led worship model). Also of note is that there
are many more people who identify as UU on surveys than those who attend UU
churches (by a factor of four in a recent survey), reflecting those who have
never joined (and lapsed members) but nonetheless consider themselves part of
the UU movement. Approach to sacred writings. We do not, however, hold the
Bible – or any other account of human experience – to be either an
infallible guide or the exclusive source of truth. Much biblical material is
mythical or legendary. Not that it should be discarded for that reason! Rather,
it should be treasured for what it is. We believe that we should read the Bible
as we read other books – with imagination and a critical eye. We also respect
the sacred literature of other religions. Contemporary works of science, art,
and social commentary are valued as well. We hold, in the words of an old
liberal formulation, that "revelation is not sealed." Unitarian Universalists
aspire to truth as wide as the world – we look to find truth anywhere,
universally. In short, Unitarian Universalists respect the important religious
texts of other religions. UUs believe that all religions can coexist if viewed
with the concept of love for one's neighbor and for oneself. Other church
members who do not believe in a particular text or doctrine are encouraged to
respect it as a historically significant literary work that should be viewed
with an open mind. It is intended that in this way, individuals from all
religions or spiritual backgrounds could live peaceably. Worship and ritual. As
in theology, Unitarian Universalist worship and ritual are often a combination
of elements derived from other faith traditions alongside original practices
and symbols. In form, church services might be difficult to distinguish from
those of a Protestant church, but they vary widely among congregations.
Symbols. The most common symbol of Unitarian Universalism is the flaming
chalice, often framed by two overlapping rings that many interpret as
representing Unitarianism and Universalism (the symbol has no official
interpretation). The chalice itself has long been a symbol of liberal religion,
and indeed liberal Christianity (the Disciples of Christ also use a chalice as
their denomination symbol). The flaming chalice was initially the logo of the
Unitarian Service Committee during the Second World War. It was created by
Austrian artist Hans Deutsch, inspired by "the kind of chalice which the Greeks
and Romans put on their altars. The holy oil burning in it is a symbol of
helpfulness and sacrifice." Nevertheless, other interpretations have been
suggested, such as the chalice used by the followers of Czech Jan Hus , or its
vague resemblance to a cross in some stylized representations. Many UU
congregations light a chalice at the beginning of worship services. Other
symbols include a slightly off-center cross within a circle (a Universalist
symbol associated with the Humiliati movement in the 1950s, a group of
reformist, liturgically minded clergy seeking to revive Universalism). Other
symbols include a pair of open hands releasing a dove. Services of worship.
Religious services are usually held on Sundays and most closely resemble the
form and format of Protestant worship in the Reformed tradition. Services at a
vast majority of congregations utilize a structure that focuses on a sermon or
presentation by a minister, a lay leader of the congregation, or an invited
speaker. Sermons may cover a wide range of topics. Since Unitarian
Universalists do not recognize a particular text or set of texts as primary or
inherently superior, inspiration can be found in many different religious or
cultural texts as well as the personal experiences of the minister. The service
also includes hymn-singing, accompanied by organ, piano, or other available
instruments, and possibly led by a song leader or choir. The most recent
worship songbook published by the denomination, "Singing the Journey" contains
75 songs and is a supplement to the older "Singing the Living Tradition" which
contains readings as well. Hymns typically sung in UU services come from a
variety of sources – traditional hymn tunes with new or adapted lyrics,
spirituals, folk songs from various cultures, or original compositions by
Unitarian Universalist musicians are just a few. Instrumental music is also a
common feature of the typical worship service, including preludes, offertory
music, postludes, or music for contemplation. Pastoral elements of the service
may include a time for sharing Joys and Sorrows/Concerns, where individuals in
the congregation are invited to light a candle and/or say a few words about
important events in their personal lives. Many UU services also include a time
of meditation or prayer, led by the minister or service leader, both spoken and
silent. Responsive readings and stories for children are also typical. Many UU
congregations no longer observe the Christian sacraments of baptism, communion,
or confirmation, at least in their traditional forms or under their traditional
names. Congregations that continue these practices under their more traditional
names are often federated churches or members of the Council of Christian
Churches within the Unitarian Universalist Association (CCCUUA), or may have
active chapters associated with the Unitarian Universalist Christian Fellowship
or similar covenant groups. "Child dedications" often replace more traditional
infant baptisms (though it should be noted that such "dedications" are
sometimes practiced even in "orthodox" Christian communities that do not
baptize infants for theological reasons). Annual celebrations of Water
Communion and Flower Communion may replace or supplement Christian-style
communion (though many pluralist and Christian-oriented congregations may
celebrate or otherwise make provisions for communion on Christian holy days).
Confirmation may be replaced by a "Coming of Age" program, in which teenagers
explore their individual religious identity, often developing their own credo.
After they have completed exploring their spiritual beliefs, they write a
speech about it which they then personally deliver to the congregation.
Politics. Historical politics of Unitarians. In the 19th century, Unitarians
and Universalists were active in abolitionism, the women's movement, the
temperance movement, and other social reform movements. The second woman's
rights convention was held at the First Unitarian Church of Rochester, New
York. Politics of UUs. Historically, Unitarian Universalists have often been
active in political causes, notably the civil rights movement, the gay rights
movement, the social justice movement, and the feminist movement. Susan B.
Anthony, a Unitarian and Quaker, was extremely influential in the women's
suffrage movement. Unitarian Universalists and Quakers still share many
principles, notably that they are creedless religions with a long-standing
commitment to social justice. It is therefore common to see Unitarian
Universalists and Quakers working together. UU's were and are still very
involved in the fight to end racism in the United States. John Haynes Holmes, a
Unitarian minister and social activist at The Community Church of New
York—Unitarian Universalist was among the founders of both the National
Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) in 1909 and the
American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU), chairing the latter for a time. James J.
Reeb, a minister at All Souls Church, Unitarian, in Washington, D.C. and a
member of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference, was clubbed in Selma,
Alabama on March 8, 1965, and died two days later of massive head trauma. Two
weeks after his death, Viola Liuzzo, a Unitarian Universalist civil rights
activist, was murdered by white supremacists after her participation in the
protest march from Selma to Montgomery, Alabama. The Selma to Montgomery
marches for voting rights are best known as Bloody Sunday, although technically
that refers only to March 7, the most violent day of the three. The past head
of the Unitarian Universalist Association 2001–2009, Rev. William G.
Sinkford, is African-American, making Unitarian Universalism one of the first
traditionally white denominations to be headed by a member of a racial
minority. While political liberals make up a clear majority of Unitarian
Universalists, the UU movement aspires to diversity, and officially welcomes
congregants regardless of their political views. Politically conservative
Unitarian Universalists point out that neither religious liberalism nor the
Principles and Purposes of the UUA require liberal politics. Like the beliefs
of Unitarian Universalists, politics are decided by individuals, not by
congregations or the denomination. Several congregations have undertaken a
series of organizational, procedural and practical steps to become acknowledged
as a "Welcoming Congregation": a congregation which has taken specific steps to
welcome and integrate gay, lesbian, bisexual & transgender (GLBT) members. UU
ministers perform same-sex unions and now same-sex marriages where legal (and
sometimes when not, as a form of civil protest). On June 29, 1984, the
Unitarian Universalists became the first major church "to approve religious
blessings on homosexual unions." Unitarian Universalists have been in the
forefront of the work to make same-sex marriages legal in their local states
and provinces, as well as on the national level. Gay men and lesbians are also
regularly ordained as ministers, and a number of gay and lesbian ministers
have, themselves, now become legally married to their partners. In May 2004,
Arlington Street Church was the site of the first state-sanctioned same-sex
marriage in the United States. The official stance of the UUA is for the
legalization of same-sex marriage—"Standing on the Side of Love." In 2004 UU
Minister Rev. Debra Haffner of The Religious Institute on Sexual Morality,
Justice, and Healing published An Open Letter on Religious Leaders on Marriage
Equality to affirm same-sex marriage from a multi-faith perspective. In
December 2009, Washington, DC Mayor Adrian Fenty signed the bill to legalize
same-sex marriage for the District of Columbia in All Souls Church, Unitarian
(Washington, D.C.). Many congregations are heavily involved in projects and
efforts aimed at supporting environmental causes and sustainability. These are
often termed "seventh principle" activities because of the seventh principle
quoted above. Controversies. External. Lack of formal creed. The lack of formal
creed has been a cause for criticism among some who argue that Unitarian
Universalism is thus without religious content. In May 2004, Texas Comptroller
Carole Keeton Strayhorn ruled that Unitarian Universalism was not a "religion"
because it "does not have one system of belief," and stripped the Red River
Unitarian Universalist Church in Denison, Texas, of its tax-exempt status.
However, within weeks, Strayhorn reversed her decision. Confusion with other
groups. There are separate movements and organizations of Christians who hold
to classical Unitarian or Christian Universalist theology and do not belong to
the Unitarian Universalist Association or consider themselves UUs. The American
Unitarian Conference and the Christian Universalist Association are the two
most significant organizations representing these theological beliefs today.
Christians who hold these beliefs tend to consider themselves the true
Unitarians or Universalists and heirs of the theological legacy of the original
American Unitarian Association or Universalist Church of America, and they do
not wish to be confused with UUs and UUism. The Unity Church is another
denomination that is often confused with Unitarian Universalism. Internal.
Language of reverence. During the presidency of the Rev. William Sinkford,
debate within the UU movement has roiled over his call to return to or create
an authentic UU "language of reverence." Sinkford has suggested that UUs have
abandoned traditional religious language, thereby abandoning words with
potential power to others who will then dictate their meanings in the public
sphere. He has suggested that Unitarian Universalists regain their proper seat
at the interfaith table by making this language their own. Others have reacted
to this call by believing it to be part of an effort to return UU congregations
to more orthodox Christian worship patterns. Sinkford has denied this, citing
the words of UU humanists as examples of what he means by the "language of
reverence." The debate seems part and parcel of an attendant effort at
increasing biblical literacy amongst Unitarian Universalists, including the
publication of a book by the UUA's Beacon Press written by former UUA President
John Buehrens. The book is titled "Understanding the Bible: An Introduction for
Skeptics, Seekers, and Religious Liberals", and is meant as a kind of handbook
to be read alongside the Bible itself. It provides interpretative strategies,
so that UUs (among others) might be able to engage in public debate about what
the Bible says from a liberal religious perspective, rather than relinquishing
to religious conservatives, and other more literal interpretations, all control
over the book's contents and significance in matters of public and civic
import. Also an important work by Rev. Buehrens, along with Forrest Church, is
"A Chosen Faith: An Introduction to Unitarian Universalism", in which the
authors explore the many sources of the living tradition of their chosen faith.
Borrowing from other religions. The "borrowing" of religious rituals from other
faith traditions by Unitarian Universalists was discussed at the UU General
Assembly in 2001 during a seminar titled Cultural Appropriation: Reckless
Borrowing or Appropriate Cultural Sharing by the Religious Education Dept, UUA.
Of particular discussion was the borrowing rituals and practices that are
sacred to specific tribes or using spiritual practices without real context.
Number of members. As of February 2011, congregations in the United States
totaled 1,018, and 1,046 when including two congregations in the U.S. Virgin
Islands, 19 in Canada, six in other countries, plus 28 multi-denominational
congregations affiliated with the UUA: 17 in Mass., four in Ill., three in
N.H., two in Vt., and one each in Me. and D.C.. Seven of the ten US states with
the most congregations are also among the most populous states; the state with
the most congregations and members is the fourteenth most populous state,
Massachusetts; Vermont is No. 1 relative to its total population. A map using
2010 U.S. Census data showing the relative number of congregations per 1
million people is posted here. At the time of the merger between Universalists
and Unitarians, membership was perhaps half a million. Membership rose after
the merger but then fell in the 1970s. In 1956, Sam Wells wrote that
"Unitarians and Universalists are considering merger which would have total
U.S. membership of 160,000 (500,000 in world)". In 1965 Conkin wrote that "In
1961, at the time of the merger, membership the United States was 104,821 in
651 congregations, and the joint membership soared to its historically highest
level in the mid-1960s (an estimated 250,000) before falling sharply back in
the 1970s [...]". According to the 2008 "Yearbook of American & Canadian
Churches", the Unitarian Universalist Association of Congregations claimed
214,738 members in 2002. Estimates from the 1990s put world membership between
120,000 and 600,000. In the United States, the American Religious
Identification Survey reported 629,000 members describing themselves as
Unitarian Universalist in 2001, an increase from 502,000 reported in a similar
survey in 1990. The highest concentrations are in New England and around
Seattle, Washington. The U.S. Religious Landscape Survey, conducted in 2007 by
the Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life and featuring a sample size of over
35,000, puts the proportion of American adults identifying as Unitarian
Universalist at 0.3%. While the 2001 Canadian census done by Statistics Canada
put Canadian Unitarians at 17,480, the latest membership statistics from the
Canadian Unitarian Council show as of September 1, 2007 they had 5,150
"official" members.
