Unitarianism Unitarianism is a Christian theological movement, named for its
understanding of God as one person, in direct contrast to Trinitarianism which
defines God as three persons coexisting consubstantially as one in being. Thus,
Unitarians contend that main-line Christianity does not adhere to strict
monotheism as they do, maintaining that Jesus was a prophet, and in some sense
the "son" of God, but not God himself. For most of its history, Unitarianism
has been known for the rejection of several conventional Protestant doctrines
besides the Trinity, including the soteriological doctrines of original sin and
predestination, and, in more recent times, biblical inerrancy. In J. Gordon
Melton's "Encyclopedia of American Religions" it is classified among "the
'liberal' family of churches". The Unitarian movement, although not called
"Unitarian" initially, began almost simultaneously in Poland-Lithuania and
Transylvania in the mid-sixteenth century. Among the adherents were a
significant number of Italians. In England the first Unitarian Church was
established in 1774 on Essex Street, London, where today's British Unitarian
headquarters are still located. The first official acceptance of the Unitarian
faith on the part of a congregation in America was by King's Chapel in Boston,
from where James Freeman began teaching Unitarian doctrine in 1784, and was
appointed rector and revised the Prayer Book according to Unitarian doctrines
in 1786. Terminology. "Unitarianism" is a proper noun and follows the same
English usage as other theologies that have developed within a religious
movement (Calvinism, Anabaptism, Adventism, Wesleyanism, Lutheranism, etc.).
The term existed shortly before it became the name of a religious movement, and
thus occasionally it is used as a common noun that would describe any
understanding of Jesus Christ that denies the Trinity or which believes that
God is only one person. In that case it would be a nontrinitarian belief system
not necessarily associated with the Unitarian religious movement. For example,
the Unitarian movement has never accepted the Godhood of Jesus, and therefore
does not include those "nontrinitarian" belief systems that do—such as
Oneness Pentecostalism, United Pentecostal Church International and the True
Jesus Church—and which maintain that Jesus is God as a single person.
Although these groups are unitarians in the common sense, they are not in the
proper sense. To avoid confusion, this article is about Unitarianism as a
religious movement (proper noun). For the generic form of unitarianism (the
Christology), see Nontrinitarianism. The term "Unitarian" is sometimes applied
to those who belong to a Unitarian church but who do not hold a Unitarian
theological belief. In the past, the vast majority of members of Unitarian
churches were Unitarians also in belief. Over time, however, some Unitarians
and Unitarian Universalists moved away from the traditional Christian roots of
Unitarianism. For example, in the 1890s the American Unitarian Association
began to allow non-Christian and non-theistic churches and individuals to be
part of their fellowship. As a result, people who held no Unitarian belief
began to be called "Unitarians" because they were members of churches that
belonged to the American Unitarian Association. After several decades, the non-
theistic members outnumbered the theological Unitarians. A similar, though
proportionally much smaller, phenomenon has taken place in the Unitarian
churches in the United Kingdom, Canada, and other countries, which remain more
theistically based. Unitarian theology, therefore, is distinguishable from the
belief system of modern Unitarian and Unitarian Universalist churches and
fellowships. This article includes information about Unitarianism as a theology
and about the development of theologically Unitarian churches. For a more
specific discussion of Unitarianism as it evolved into a pluralistic liberal
religious movement, see Unitarian Universalism (and its national groups the
Unitarian Universalist Association in the United States, the Canadian Unitarian
Council in Canada, the General Assembly of Unitarian and Free Christian
Churches in the United Kingdom, and the International Council of Unitarians and
Universalists). Recently some religious groups have adopted the 19th Century
term "biblical unitarianism" to distinguish their theology from Unitarianism.
Since it has no direct relation to the Unitarian movement, it is not discussed
here. History. Unitarianism, both as a theology and as a denominational family
of churches, was defined and developed in four countries: Poland, Transylvania,
England and America. Although there were common beliefs among Unitarians in
each of these regions, they initially grew independently from each other. Only
later did they influence one another and accumulate more similarities. The
"Ecclesia minor" or "Minor Reformed Church of Poland", better known today as
the Polish Brethren, was born as the result of a controversy that started on
January 22, 1556, when Piotr of Goniądz (Peter Gonesius), a Polish student,
spoke out against the doctrine of the Trinity during the general synod of the
Reformed (Calvinist) churches of Poland held in the village of Secemin. After
nine years of debate, in 1565, the anti-Trinitarians were excluded from the
existing synod of the Polish Reformed Church (henceforth the "Ecclesia maior")
and they began to hold their own synods as the "Ecclesia minor". Though
frequently called "Arians" by those on the outside, the views of Fausto Sozzini
became the standard in the church, and these doctrines were quite removed from
Arianism. So important was Sozzini to the formulation of their beliefs that
those outside Poland usually referred to them as Socinians. The Polish Brethren
were disbanded in 1658 by the Sejm (Polish Parliament). They were ordered to
convert to Roman Catholicism or leave Poland. Most of them went to Transylvania
or Holland, where they embraced the name "Unitarian." Sozzini's grandson
Andrzej Wiszowaty Sr. in 1665-1668 published "Bibliotheca Fratrum Polonorum
quos Unitarios vocant" ("Library of the Polish Brethren who are called
Unitarians" 4 vols. 1665–69). The Unitarian Church in Transylvania was first
recognized by the Edict of Torda, issued by the Transylvanian Diet under Prince
John II Sigismund Zápolya (January 1568), and was first led by Ferenc Dávid
(a former Calvinist bishop, who had begun preaching the new doctrine in 1566).
The term "Unitarian" first appeared as "unitaria religio" in a document of the
Diet of Lécfalva, Transylvania on 25 October 1600, though it was not widely
used in Transylvania until 1638, when the formal "recepta Unitaria Religio" was
published. The word "Unitarian" had been circulating in private letters in
England, in reference to imported copies of such publications as the "Library
of the Polish Brethren who are called Unitarians" (1665), Henry Hedworth was
the first to use the word "Unitarian" in print in English (1673), and the word
first appears in a title in Stephen Nye's "A brief history of the Unitarians,
called also Socinians" (1687). The movement gained popularity in England in the
wake of the Enlightenment and began to become a formal denomination in 1774
when Theophilus Lindsey organised meetings with Joseph Priestley, founding the
first avowedly Unitarian congregation in the country, at Essex Street Church in
London. The first official acceptance of the Unitarian faith on the part of a
congregation in America was by King's Chapel in Boston, which settled James
Freeman (1759–1835) in 1782, and revised the Prayer Book into a mild
Unitarian liturgy in 1785. In 1800, Joseph Stevens Buckminster became minister
of the Brattle Street Church in Boston, where his brilliant sermons, literary
activities, and academic attention to the German "New Criticism" helped shape
the subsequent growth of Unitarianism in New England. Unitarian Henry Ware
(1764–1845) was appointed as the Hollis professor of divinity at Harvard
College, in 1805. Harvard Divinity school then shifted from its conservative
roots to teach Unitarian theology. See: Harvard & Unitarianism. Buckminster's
close associate William Ellery Channing (1780–1842) was settled over the
Federal Street Church in Boston, 1803; and in a few years he became the leader
of the Unitarian movement. A theological battle with the Congregational
Churches resulted in the formation of the American Unitarian Association at
Boston in 1825. Beliefs. Christology. Unitarians believe that main-line
Christianity does not adhere to strict monotheism but that they do by
maintaining that Jesus was a great man and a prophet of God, perhaps even a
supernatural being, but not God himself. They believe Jesus did not claim to be
God, and that his teachings did not suggest the existence of a triune God.
Unitarians believe in the moral authority, but not necessarily the divinity of
Jesus. Their theology is thus opposed to the trinitarian theology of other
Christian denominations. Unitarian Christology can be divided according to
whether Jesus is believed to have had a pre-human existence. Both forms
maintain that God is one being and one "person"—the one Jesus called
"Father"—and that Jesus is the (or a) Son of God, but generally not God
himself. "Socinian" Christology. The Christology commonly called "Socinian"
(after Fausto Sozzini, one of the founders of Unitarian theology), refers to
the belief that Jesus Christ began his life when he was born as a human. In
other words, the teaching that Jesus pre-existed his human body is rejected.
There are various views ranging from the belief that Jesus was simply a human
(psilanthropism) who, because of his greatness, was adopted by God as his Son
(adoptionism) to the belief that Jesus literally became the Son of God when he
was conceived by the Holy Spirit (see Virgin birth of Jesus). This Christology
existed in some form or another prior to Sozzini. Theodotus of Byzantium,
Artemon and Paul of Samosata denied the pre-existence of Christ but accepted
the virgin birth. This was continued by Marcellus of Ancyra and his pupil
Photinus in the 4th century AD. In the Radical Reformation and Anabaptist
movements of the 16th century this resurfaced with Sozzini's uncle, Lelio
Sozzini. Having influenced the Polish Brethren to a formal declaration of this
belief in the Racovian Catechism, Fausto Sozzini involuntarily ended up giving
his name to this Christological position, which continued with English
Unitarians such as John Biddle's "Twofold Catechism" (1654). In the early days
of Unitarianism, the stories of the virgin birth were accepted by most, but
there were a number of Unitarians who questioned the historical accuracy of the
Bible (such as Symon Budny, Jacob Paleologus, Thomas Belsham, and Richard
Wright), and this made them question the virgin birth story. Beginning in
England and America in the 1830s, and manifesting itself primarily in
Transcendentalist Unitarianism, which emerged from the German liberal theology
associated primarily with Friedrich Schleiermacher, the psilanthropist view
increased in popularity. Its proponents took an intellectual and humanistic
approach to religion. They embraced evolutionary concepts, asserted the
"inherent goodness of man", and abandoned the doctrine of biblical
infallibility, rejecting most of the miraculous events in the Bible (including
the virgin birth). Notable examples are James Martineau, Theodore Parker, Ralph
Waldo Emerson and Frederick Henry Hedge. Famous American Unitarian William
Ellery Channing was a believer in the virgin birth until later in his life,
after he had begun his association with the Transcendentalists. The denial of
the virgin birth is also sometimes ascribed to the Ebionites; however, Origen
("Contra Celsum" v.61) and Eusebius ("HE" iii.27) both indicate that some
Ebionites did accept the virgin birth. The "Chambers Biographical Dictionary"
(1897) incorrectly ascribes denial of the virgin birth to Ferenc Dávid, leader
of the Transylvanian Unitarians. "Arian" Christology. The Christology commonly
called "Arian" holds that Jesus, before his human life, existed as the Logos, a
being created by God, who dwelt with God in heaven. There are many varieties of
this form of Unitarianism, ranging from the belief that the Son was a divine
spirit of the same nature as God before coming to earth, to the belief that he
was an angel or other lesser spirit creature of a wholly different nature from
God. Not all of these views necessarily were held by Arius, the namesake of
this Christology. It is still Nontrinitarian, because according to this belief
system, Jesus has always been beneath God, though higher than humans. Arian
Christology was not a majority view among Unitarians in Poland, Transylvania or
England. It was only with the advent of American Unitarianism that it gained a
foothold in the Unitarian movement. Proponents attempt to associate this
Christology with early church figures such as Justin Martyr, Lucian of Antioch,
Eusebius of Caesarea, Arius, Eusebius of Nicomedia, Asterius the Sophist,
Eunomius, and Ulfilas, as well as Felix, Bishop of Urgell. Michael Servetus did
not deny the pre-existence of Christ. Isaac Newton had Arian beliefs as well.
Famous 19th century Arian Unitarians include Andrews Norton and Dr. William
Ellery Channing (in his earlier years). Other beliefs. Unitarians have liberal
views of God, Jesus, the world and purpose of life as revealed through reason,
scholarship, science, philosophy, scripture and other prophets and religions.
They believe that reason and belief are complementary and that religion and
science can co-exist and guide them in their understanding of nature and God.
They also do not enforce belief in creeds or dogmatic formulas. Although there
is flexibility in the nuances of belief or basic truths for the individual
Unitarian Christian, general principles of faith have been recognized as a way
to bind the group in some commonality. Adherents generally accept religious
pluralism and find value in all teachings, but remain committed to their core
belief in Christ's teachings. Unitarians generally value a secular society in
which government is kept separate from religious affairs. Most contemporary
Unitarian Christians believe that one's personal moral convictions guide one's
political activities, and that a secular society is the most viable, just and
fair. Unitarian Christians reject the doctrine of some Christian denominations
that God chooses to redeem or save only those certain individuals that accept
the creeds of, or affiliate with, a specific church or religion, from a common
ruin or corruption of the mass of humanity. They believe that righteous acts
are necessary for redemption in addition to faith. In 1938, "The Christian
leader" attributed ""the" religion "of" Jesus, not "a" religion "about" Jesus"
to Unitarians, though the phrase was used earlier by Congregationalist Rollin
Lynde Hartt in 1924. and earlier still by US President Thomas Jefferson.
Worship. Worship within the Unitarian tradition accommodates a wide range of
understandings of God, while the focus of the service may be simply the
celebration of life itself. Each Unitarian congregation is at liberty to devise
its own form of worship, though commonly, Unitarian services lack liturgy and
ritual, while containing readings from many sources, which may include sermons,
prayers, hymns and songs. Modern Christian Unitarian organizations. This
section relates to Unitarian churches and organizations today which are still
specifically Christian within or outside Unitarian-Universalism, which embraces
non-Christian religions. Hungarian and Transylvanian Unitarian Churches. The
largest Unitarian denomination worldwide today is also the oldest surviving
Unitarian denomination (since 1565, first use of the term "Unitarian" 1600);
the Unitarian Church of Transylvania (in Romania, which is union with the
Unitarian Church in Hungary). The church in Romania and Hungary still looks to
the statement of faith, the "Summa Universae Theologiae Christianae secundum
Unitarios" (1787), though today assent to this is not required. The modern
Unitarian Church in Hungary (25,000 members) and the Transylvanian Unitarian
Church (75,000 members) are affiliated with the ICUU and claim continuity with
the historical Unitarian Christian tradition established by Ferenc Dávid in
1565 in Transylvania under John II Sigismund Zápolya. The Unitarian churches
in Hungary and Transylvania are structured and organized along a church
hierarchy that includes the election by the synod of a national bishop who
serves as superintendent of the Church. Many Hungarian Unitarians embrace the
principles of rationalist Unitarianism. Unitarian high schools exist only in
Transylvania (Romania), including the John Sigismund Unitarian Academy in Cluj-
Napoca, and the Berde Mózes Unitárius Gimnázium in Cristuru Secuiesc
(Székelykeresztúr); both teach Rationalist Unitarianism. UCEC (USA). The
Unitarian Christian Emerging Church (UCEC) is a grass roots effort to re-
establish Christian Unitarian churches. The church, and its related ministries
developed due to the lack of actual Unitarian churches that profess Christian
theology. The church takes a post-modern approach to nontrinitarian
Christianity while keeping the classical concepts of unitarianism alive. This
religious body ordains candidates for ministry, affirms faith based ministries,
and endorses home congregations and meet-up groups. The UCEC is a progressive
church of emerging theology that remains inclusive, transparent, and open for
all to witness. This independent USA based organization has attracted the
attention of numerous adherents from other countries, and is in fellowship with
other Unitarian faith based organizations around the world. Founded in 2012 as
the UCEC it has roots dating back to 1968 and most recently in 2009 when a
constitutional reorganization occurred. The ministry branch of the church
(Unitarian Christian Ministries) coordinates all outreach, faith, and social
initiatives. The church is organized and structured as the Unitarian Christian
Emerging Church and Ministries for all lawful & rightful purposes. UUCF (USA).
The Unitarian Universalist Christian Fellowship (UUCF, founded 1945) predates
the consolidation of the American Unitarian Association (AUA) and Universalist
Church of America (UCA) into the Unitarian Universalist Association (UUA) in
1961. UUCF continues as a subgroup of UUA serving the Christian members. ICUU
(international). Other Unitarian Christian groups are affiliated with the
International Council of Unitarians and Universalists (ICUU), founded in 1995.
The ICUU tends to contain a majority membership who express specifically
Unitarian Christian beliefs, rather than the religious pluralism of the UUA,
but nevertheless remain liberal, open-minded and inclusive communities. The
ICUU has "full member" groups in the United States, Australia & New Zealand,
United Kingdom, Canada, Brazil, Czech Republic, Finland, Germany, Hungary,
Indonesia, India, Nigeria, Pakistan, Philippines, Romania, South Africa, Sri
Lanka. The ICUU includes small "Associate groups", including Congregazione
Italiana Cristiano Unitariana, Turin (founded in 2004) and the Bét Dávid
Unitarian Association, Oslo (founded 2005). AUC (USA). The American Unitarian
Conference (AUC) was formed in 2000 and stands between UUA and ICUU in
attachment to the Christian element of modern Unitarianism. The American
Unitarian Conference is open to non-Christian Unitarians—being particularly
popular with non-Christian theists and deists. The AUC has four congregations
in the United States. UMI (USA). Unitarian Ministries International is a
Unitarian ministry incorporated in South Carolina, USA. It is a faith body that
is revitalizing classical Unitarian Christianity on a global scale.
Partnerships have been formed in Africa, India, Australia, and Europe. UCA
(UK). The Unitarian Christian Association (UCA, UK) was founded 1991 by Rev.
Lancelot Garrard (1904–93) and others to promote specifically Christian ideas
within the General Assembly of Unitarian and Free Christian Churches (GAUFCC).
Just as the UUCF and ICUU maintain formal links with UUA in America, so the UCA
does with the GAUFCC in the UK. The majority of Unitarian Christian
publications are sponsored by an organization and published specifically for
their membership. They generally do not serve as a tool for missionary work or
encouraging conversions. Australia. The Sydney Unitarian Church, was founded
1850, under a Reverend Stanley and was a vigorous denomination during the 19th
Century. The modern church has properties in Adelaide, Sydney and Melbourne,
and smaller congregations elsewhere. South Africa. The Unitarian movement in
South Africa was founded in 1867 by the Reverend Dawid Faure, member of a well-
known Cape family. He encountered advanced liberal religious thought while
completing his studies at the University of Leiden in Holland for the ministry
of the Dutch Reformed Church in Cape Town. On his return to South Africa he
preached a probationary sermon in the Groote Kerk, Cape Town. This led to a
public appeal to him to found a community based upon what was called the 'new
theology'. The 'new theology' as preached by Dawid Faure was grounded in what
he described as "the very essence of religion" – Love of God and love of
neighbour. Responding to popular appeal Dawid Faure gathered a congregation of
people who felt the need for a church unfettered by traditional dogmas, open to
the advances of modern knowledge and receptive to new spiritual insights. From
1867 to 1890 the fledgling church, known as the Free Protestant Church, rented
premises in a commercial building in Cape Town, and in 1890 a warehouse in the
city was purchased and converted into the present church. Rev Faure continued
as minister until 1897 when he was succeeded by Rev Ramsden Balmforth, from
England. He conducted a thriving ministry to 1937 and brought the Free
Protestant Church into the international Unitarian Movement in 1921. Ministers
who followed Balmforth were William and Wilma Constable (1937 to 1941), Donald
Livingstone (1941 to 1949), Magnus Ratter (1949 to 1960 and 1971 to 1976),
Victor Carpenter (1962 to 1967), Eugene Widrick (1968 to 1971), Leon Fay (1977
to 1979), Robert Steyn (1979 to 1997). The Cape Town church isn't exclusively
Christian since formal members and friends in the congregation maintain their
own personal beliefs. There is no specific dogma or creed that members must
follow. They consider Unitarianism as a way of life with spiritual dimensions.
The church is in the central city but has congregations in the suburbs as well.
The website for the Unitarian Community of Cape Town is at . There are also
independent fellowships in Durban and Johannesburg. The national website is at
[http://www.unitarian.co.za . Italy. In Italy the Biblical Unitarian Movement
is represented by the churches associated with the Christian Church in Italy.
The believers of these churches keep a strong Christian and Biblical soul.
Biblical Unitarian Movement. In the mainstream of the Protestant Reformation
there is the Biblical Unitarian Movement. Today, biblical Unitarianism (or
"Biblical Unitarianism" or "biblical unitarianism") identifies the Christian
belief that the Bible teaches God is a singular person—the Father—and that
Jesus is a distinct being, his son. A few denominations use this term to
describe themselves, clarifying the distinction between them and those churches
which, from the late 19th century, evolved into modern British Unitarianism
and, primarily in the United States, Unitarian Universalism. In Italy the
Biblical Unitarian Movement powered by the ideas of Sozzini and others is
represented today by the churches associated with the Christian Church in
Italy. This Movement in Italy claims a strong Christian and biblical soul. From
the analysis of documents that you can find on the official site of the CCI, it
is clear that the doctrinal position of this Christian confession of faith is
therefore akin to the so-called Biblical Unitarian movement and on the other
hand, far from that of Unitarian Universalist Association who, although they
have the same origin in 1500 AD, through the centuries have suffered the
influence of many non-biblical ideas (cf. Universalism). The Christian Church
in Italy has significant similarities with the Biblical Unitarian movement,
although it maintains a cautious position on some doctrinal points. Wilbur
wrote about the Unitarian Movement: "The religious movement whose history we
are endeavoring to trace...became fully developed in thought and polity in only
four countries, one after another, namely Poland, Transylvania, England and
America. But in each of these it showed, along with certain individual
characteristics, a general spirit, a common point of view, and a doctrinal
pattern that tempt one to regard them as all outgrowths of a single movement
which passed from one to another; for nothing could be more natural than to
presume that these common features implied a common ancestry. Yet such is not
the fact, for in each of these four lands the movement, instead of having
originated elsewhere, and been translated only after attaining mature growth,
appears to have sprung independently and directly from its own native roots,
and to have been influenced by other and similar movements only after it had
already developed an independent life and character of its own.". From the
analysis of documents that you can find on the official site of the CCI, it is
clear that the doctrinal position of this Christian confession of faith is
therefore akin to the so-called Biblical Unitarian movement and on the other
hand, far from that of Unitarian Universalist Association who, although they
have the same origin in 1500 AD, through the centuries, have suffered the
influence of many non-biblical ideas (cf. Universalism). The Christian Church
in Italy believes that God is only One Person in direct contrast with the
doctrine of the Trinity which defines God as Three coexisting Persons in one
Substance (Essence), merged into one being. So CCI adheres to strict monotheism
by believing that Jesus was a perfect and holy man, virginally begotten in
Mary, the promised Christ, the Son of God and that, as the glorified man, now
is at the right hand of God praying for the whole Church. The movement the
Christian Church in Italy was inspired from, rejects other doctrines taught for
centuries, including the soteriological doctrines of original sin and
predestination. The CCI for its peculiarity has no common trait with other
religious movements which exalt Jesus as the only true God, as for example the
Oneness Pentecostalism, the United Pentecostal Church International and the
True Jesus Church. Ecclesiology. When Unitarianism developed in the 17th
century during the Protestant era of the evolution of Christianity, the
strongholds in Transylvania, Poland, and eventually Britain and the
northeastern parts of the United States were firmly in the congregational
tradition. In the Hungarian-speaking territories it adopted a governance system
that combined the Synodal and Episcopal models. For those churches under the
congregational model, each church governed itself independently of a
hierarchical authority. These small congregations belonged, however, to more
formal associations of churches. The American Unitarian Association, formed in
1825, was one of these. Later, in 1961, the American Unitarian Association and
the Universalist Church of America merged to form the Unitarian Universalist
Association (UUA), which is the largest organization of Unitarians in the US.
The UUA is no longer an explicitly Christian organization and does not focus
exclusively on the core teachings of Jesus Christ or Christianity. Several
Unitarian organizations still promote Christianity as their central theme.
Among them, Unitarian Ministries International, the Unitarian Universalist
Christian Fellowship (UUCF, an affiliate of the UUA), the General Assembly of
Unitarian and Free Christian Churches (GAUFCC) of the United Kingdom, and the
Unitarian Christian Association (UCA, an affiliate of the GAUFCC). In the US,
the newest organization promoting a return to the theistic roots of
Unitarianism is the American Unitarian Conference (AUC), formed in 2000. The
AUC's stated goal is to formulate and promote classical Unitarian-based,
unifying religious convictions, which balance the needs of members with a
practical approach to inclusion and progressive free thought. Interfaith
dialogue and relations. Catholic, Orthodox and Protestant creeds generally
insist on Trinitarian belief as an essential aspect of Christianity and basic
to a group's continuity of identity with the historical Christian faith. As a
result, Unitarians have often been excluded from fellowship with churches that
accept the creeds of the Nicene and pre-Chalcedonian churches. However,
occasionally, especially in Protestant history, traditionally Trinitarian
groups have accepted Unitarians. Friendliness toward Unitarianism has sometimes
gone hand-in-hand with anti-Catholicism. In some cases non-Trinitarian belief
has been adopted by some, and tolerated in Christian churches as a "non-
essential." This was the case in the English Presbyterian Church, and in the
Congregational Church in New England late in the 18th century. The Restoration
Movement also attempted to forge a compatible relation between Trinitarians and
nontrinitarians, as did the Seventh Day Baptists and various Adventists. The
Seventh Day Baptists hold nontrinitarian doctrines in their International
Conference but became Trinitarians in the US. The nontrinitarian tendency in
these latter groups emerged from their original theology and their rejection of
Catholic traditions regarding the Trinity. In some cases, this openness to
Unitarianism within traditionally Trinitarian churches has been inspired by a
very broad ecumenical motive. Modern liberal Protestant denominations are often
accused by Trinitarians within their ranks, and critics outside, of being
indifferent to the doctrine, and therefore self-isolated from their respective
Trinitarian pasts and heritage. In some cases, it is charged that these
Trinitarian denominations are no longer Christian, because of their toleration
of unitarian belief among their teachers, and in their seminaries. At a local
level, many Unitarian Christian groups (or members) have links with
congregations affiliated with the United Church of Christ, Disciples of Christ,
and Unity Church; some argue they feel more at home within these denominations
than Unitarian Universalism. A small proportion of Unitarian Christians also
have links with Progressive Christianity. Despite the close friendship and
shared heritage that exists between adherents to Unitarian Universalism and
Unitarian Christianity, there is an element within Unitarian Universalism that
opposes specifically Unitarian Christian groups, believing them to be exclusive
and intolerant of non-Christian thought. Likewise, some Unitarian Christians
also believe that Unitarian Universalists are intolerant of Christian thought
and tend to marginalize Christians. Notable Unitarians. Notable Unitarians
include Béla Bartók the 20th century composer, Ralph Waldo Emerson and
Theodore Parker in theology and ministry, Charles Darwin, Joseph Priestley and
Linus Pauling in science, George Boole in mathematics, Susan B. Anthony, John
Locke in civil government, and Florence Nightingale in humanitarianism and
social justice, Charles Dickens, John Bowring and Samuel Taylor Coleridge in
literature, Frank Lloyd Wright in arts, Josiah Wedgwood in industry, Thomas
Starr King in ministry and politics, and Charles William Eliot in education.
Eleven Nobel prizes have been awarded to Unitarians: Robert Millikan and John
Bardeen (twice) in Physics; Emily Green Balch, Albert Schweitzer, Linus
Pauling, and Geoff Levermore for Peace; George Wald and David H. Hubel in
Medicine; Linus Pauling in Chemistry, and Herbert A. Simon in Economics. Five
presidents of the United States were Unitarians: John Adams, John Quincy Adams,
Millard Fillmore, Thomas Jefferson, and William Howard Taft. Other Unitarians
include Sir Tim Berners-Lee, Lancelot Ware, founder of Mensa, Sir Adrian Boult,
the conductor, and C. Killick Millard, founder of the Euthanasia Society.
