United Synagogue of Conservative Judaism The United Synagogue of Conservative
Judaism (USCJ) is the primary organization of synagogues practicing
Conservative Judaism in North America. It closely works with the Rabbinical
Assembly, the international body of Conservative rabbis, the Jewish Theological
Seminary of America, and the Ziegler School of Rabbinic Studies. History. The
United Synagogue was founded in 1913 by Rabbi Dr. Solomon Schechter on the
principle that through cooperation they could both develop and perpetuate
Conservative Judaism. Role and description. The USCJ has over 675 congregations
(down from 850 in 1985). The USCJ works in the fields of Jewish education,
youth activities, congregational standards and action and Israel affairs, and
published the magazine "United Synagogue Review". Historically, the Jewish
Theological Seminary has taken the leadership role in the Conservative movement
(unlike the Reform movement, whose congregational organization has dominated
its rabbinical school). The diminished number of affiliated congregations noted
above raised serious concern in the first decade of the century as new
congregational forms, often populated by people who were educated in the
Conservative movement, have become popular. The Conservative movement is
perceived to have lost its uniqueness as its once-path-finding ideology of
tradition and change has spread to and become a bedrock assumption of the
Reform, Reconstructionist and "Renewal" groups, where services use Hebrew and
traditional prayers, (often in updated versions) where study of traditional
texts is considered important, where halacha (Jewish law) is treated with both
respect and flexibility, and where egalitarian gender practices prevail. The
diminished population of USCJ and its congregations is seen by many as a
symptom of a weak organizational culture in the USCJ itself. A strategic plan
undertaken in the 1990s was squelched when the report challenged many of the
USCJ's practices. In 2010, dissension reached the point at which a coalition
known as Hayom ("Today") was formed and threatened to break away from USCJ if
significant changes were not undertaken. The creation of this coalition was in
part a response to a restructuring announced by the new executive director,
Rabbi Steven Wernick, without input from the field. A new strategic planning
committee was formed, co-opting the Hayom group, and in March 2011 a draft of a
new plan was announced and posted on the USCJ website. Projects. The United
Synagogue sponsors the following projects: United Synagogue Youth (USY), a
youth group with chapters all over the United States and Canada. The Solomon
Schechter Day School Association, which provides leadership and services to
approximately 50 Jewish day schools affiliated with the Conservative movement.
KOACH, the organization for Conservative Judaism on college campuses. Project
Reconnect. Project Reconnect seeks to reconnect alumni of USY, Atid, Koach,
Nativ, the Conservative Yeshiva, Camp Ramah, the Solomon Schechter schools, the
Leadership Training Fellowship, and other Conservative movement programs.
Project Reconnect's mission is to reinvolve, reinvigorate, and reconnect the
very many Jewish adults who were touched by the Conservative movement's
programs for teenagers, college students and young adults.
