Universi Dominici Gregis Universi Dominici Gregis is an Apostolic Constitution
of the Catholic Church issued by Pope John Paul II on February 22, 1996. It
superseded Pope Paul VI's 1975 Apostolic Constitution, "Romano Pontifici
Eligendo". "Universi Dominici Gregis" ('the Lord's whole flock', from the
opening statement 'The Shepherd of the Lord's whole flock is the Bishop of the
Church of Rome, ...'), subtitled "On the Vacancy of the Apostolic See and the
Election of the Roman Pontiff", deals with the vacancy of the Chair of St Peter
and Bishop of Rome namely the Pope. The constitution modified or in some cases
confirmed the rules, for the conclave. It also clarified, during a "Sede
Vacante", which matters could be handled by the College of Cardinals and which
matters were reserved for the future Pope. Contents. Layout. "Universi Dominici
Gregis" is laid out into 92 numbered paragraphs (though some paragraphs are
split into two parts), plus a 14-paragraph introduction and a two-paragraph
Promulgation (which are not numbered). Though the text is subdivided into Parts
and Chapters, the numbering remains consecutive throughout and is not restarted
at a new Part or Chapter. Part One. Part One deals with matters during a Sede
Vacante (between the time of the Pope's death and the Papal conclave), such as
what issues can be handled by the College of Cardinals and which ones must be
left to the future Pope. Chapter I. During a "Sede Vacante," the Cardinals have
no power in things which pertain to the Pope during his lifetime or of his
office; such matters are for the future Pope. Any act of jurisdiction
pertaining to the Pope during his lifetime or in the exercise of his office
which the Cardinals might see fit to exercise, beyond the limits expressly
permitted by "Universi Dominici Gregis" is null and void. Secrecy. Strict
secrecy is to be ensured throughout the process. Anyone violating the security
of the Vatican, introducing recording equipment, or communicating with a
cardinal elector in any way, risks excommunication. Other penalties are at the
discretion of the incoming Pope. Various oaths are also required to be taken by
the participants, to ensure that they will act properly. Previous methods of
election. Previously, in addition to secret ballot two other methods were
allowed for the conduct of the election. A committee of nine to fifteen
unanimously chosen cardinals might have been delegated, to make the choice for
all ("election by compromise", "per compromissum"). Alternatively, formal
ballots could be discarded: in "election by acclamation" ("per acclamationem
seu inspirationem") the electors simultaneously shouted out the name of their
preferred candidate. Both of these methods have now been abolished: the
rationale given was that either compromise or acclamation would not require
each cardinal to express his preference. Also, these two methods tended to
produce controversy, and in any case neither had been used for quite some time
- the last compromise election was of Pope John XXII in 1316, and the last
affirmation (acclamation) election was of Pope Gregory XV in 1621. As a result,
election by secret ballot is now the only valid method of electing a Pope.
Living quarters of cardinals. Also "Universi Dominici Gregis" provided that
Cardinals would be housed in Domus Sanctae Marthae, a building with dormitory
type accommodation built within the Vatican City. Previously Cardinals were
housed in improvised accommodation which were often noted for not being
particularly comfortable. Major changes. Three major changes occurred in the
new Apostolic Constitution. 2005 papal conclave. The Papal election of 2005 was
the first papal election to be held under this system. Changes. On June 11,
2007 Pope Benedict XVI issued a Motu Proprio beginning with the words
Constitutione Apostolica, subtitled "De aliquibus mutationibus in normis de
electione romani pontificis" which reinstates the traditional norms for the
vote required to elect the Pope. Unless changed by a future Pope, a two-thirds
vote will be required to elect a new Pope regardless of the number of ballots
it takes to elect a new Pope.[http://www.vatican.va/holy_father/benedict_xvi/
motu_proprio/documents/hf_ben-xvi_motu-proprio_20070611_de-electione_lt.html]
