Upanishads The Upanishads (, IAST: , ) are a collection of philosophical texts
which form the theoretical basis for the Hindu religion. They are also known as
Vedanta, the end of the Veda. In the purest sense, they are not Sruti (revealed
truths) but rather commentaries which explain the essence of the veda (revealed
knowledge). The Upanishads are found mostly in the concluding part of the
Brahmanas and in the "Aranyakas". All Upanishads have been passed down in oral
tradition. More than 200 Upanishads are known, of which the first dozen or so
are the oldest and most important and are referred to as the principal or main
("mukhya") Upanishads. With the Bhagavad Gita and the Brahmasutra (known
collectively as the Prasthanatrayi), the mukhya Upanishads provide a foundation
for several later schools of Indian philosophy ("vedanta"), among them, two
influential monistic schools of Hinduism. Historians believe the chief
Upanishads were composed over a wide period ranging from the Pre-Buddhist
period to the early centuries BCE though minor Upanishads were still being
composed in the medieval and early modern period. However, there has been
considerable debate among authorities about the exact dating of individual
Upanishads. The Upanishads were collectively considered amongst the 100 Most
Influential Books Ever Written by the British poet Martin Seymour-Smith. Their
significance has been recognized by writers and scholars such as Schopenhauer,
Emerson and Thoreau, among others. Scholars also note similarity between the
doctrine of Upanishads and those of Plato and Kant Etymology. The Sanskrit term
"" derives from "upa-" (nearby), "ni-" (at the proper place, down) and "ṣad"
(to sit) thus: "sitting down near", implying sitting near a teacher to receive
instruction or, alternatively, "sitting at the foot of ..(teacher)", or "laying
siege" to the teacher. Monier-Williams' late 19th century dictionary adds that,
"according to native authorities Upanishad means 'setting to rest ignorance by
revealing the knowledge of the supreme spirit.'" A gloss of the term Upanishad
based on Shri Adi Shankara's commentary on the Katha Upanishad and
Brihadaranyaka Upanishad equates it with "Ātmavidyā", that is, "knowledge of
the Self", or "Brahmavidyā" "knowledge of Brahma". Other dictionary meanings
include "esoteric doctrine" and "secret doctrine". Classification. There are
more than 200 known "Upanishads", one of which, the "", gives a list of 108
"Upanishads" – this number corresponding to the holy Hindu number of beads on
a "mala" or Hindu rosary. Modern scholars recognize the first 10, 11, 12 or 13
"Upanishads" as principal or "Mukhya" Upanishads and the remainder as derived
from this ancient canon. If an "Upanishad" has been commented upon or quoted by
revered thinkers like Shankara, it is a "Mukhya Upanishad", accepted as
"shruti" by most Hindus. The new Upanishads recorded in the probably originated
in southern India, and are grouped according to their subject as "(Sāmānya)
Vedānta" (philosophical), "Yoga", "Sanyasa" (of the life of renunciation),
"Vaishnava" (dedicated to the god Vishnu), "Shaiva" (dedicated to Shiva) and
"Shakti" (dedicated to the goddess). New Upanishads are often sectarian since
sects have sought to legitimize their texts by claiming for them the status of
"Śruti". Another way of classifying the Upanishads is to associate them with
the respective Brahmanas. Of nearly the same age are the Aitareya, Kauṣītaki
and Taittirīya Upanishads, while the remnant date from the time of transition
from Vedic to Classical Sanskrit. Mukhya Upanishads. The "Mukhya Upanishads"
can themselves be stratified into periods. Of the early periods are the
"Brihadaranyaka", Jaiminiya Upanisadbrahmana and the "Chandogya", the most
important and the oldest, of which the two former are the older of the two,
though some parts were composed after the "Chandogya". It is alleged that the
"Aitareya, Taittiriya, Kausitaki, Mundaka, Prasna", and "Katha Upanishads" show
Buddha's influence, and must have been composed after the 5th century BCE, but
it could just as easily have been the other way around. It is also alleged that
in the first two centuries A.D., they were followed by the "Kena, Mandukya" and
"Isa Upanishads". Not much is known about the authors except for those, like
Yajnavalkayva and Uddalaka, mentioned in the texts. A few women discussants,
such as Gargi and Maitreyi, the wife of Yajnavalkayva, also feature
occasionally. Each of the principal "Upanishads" can be associated with one of
the schools of exegesis of the four Vedas ("shakhas"). Many Shakhas are said to
have existed, of which only a few remain. The new "Upanishads" often have
little relation to the Vedic corpus and have not been cited or commented upon
by any great Vedanta philosopher: their language differs from that of the
classic "Upanishads", being less subtle and more formalized. As a result, they
are not difficult to comprehend for the modern reader. The and Upanishads are
sometimes added to the list of the mukhya Upanishads. New Upanishads. There is
no fixed list of the "Upanishads" as newer ones have continued to be composed.
On many occasions, when older "Upanishads" have not suited the founders of new
sects, they have composed new ones of their own. 1908 marked the discovery of
four new Upanishads, named "Bashkala", "Chhagaleya", "Arsheya" and "Saunaka",
by Friedrich Otto Schrader, who attributed them to the first prose period of
the Upanishads. The text of three, the "Chhagaleya, Arsheya" and "Saunaka", was
reportedly corrupt and neglected but possibly re-constructable with the help of
their Perso-Latin translations. Texts called "Upanishads" continued to appear
up to the end of British rule in 1947. The main Shakta Upanishads mostly
discuss doctrinal and interpretative differences between the two principal
sects of a major Tantric form of Shaktism called Shri Vidya upasana. The many
extant lists of authentic "Shakta Upaniṣads" vary, reflecting the sect of
their compilers, so that they yield no evidence of their "location" in Tantric
tradition, impeding correct interpretation. The Tantra content of these texts
also weaken its identity as an Upaniṣad for non-Tantrikas and therefore, its
status as shruti and thus its authority. The text composed by Vaishnava saint
Namalvar (Satkopa) is also known as the "Dravidopanisatsangati". Philosophy.
Two words that are of paramount importance in grasping the Upanishads are
"Brahman" and "Atman". The Brahman is the universal spirit and the Atman is the
individual Self. Differing opinions exist amongst scholars regarding the
etymology of these words. Brahman probably comes from the root "brh", which
means "The Biggest ~ The Greatest ~ The ALL". Brahman is "the infinite Spirit
Source and fabric and core and destiny of all existence, both manifested and
unmanifested and the formless infinite substratum and from whom the universe
has grown". Brahman is the ultimate, both transcendent and immanent, the
absolute infinite existence, the sum total of all that ever is, was, or shall
be. The word "Atman" means the immortal perfect Spirit of any living creature,
being, including trees etc. The idea put forth by the Upanishadic seers that
Atman and Brahman are One and the same is one of the greatest contributions
made to the thought of the world. The "Brihadaranyaka" and the "Chandogya" are
the most important of the mukhya Upanishads. They represent two main schools of
thought within the Upanishads. The Brihadaranyaka deals with acosmic or "nis-
prapancha", whereas the Chandogya deals with the cosmic or "sa-prapancha".
Between the two, the Brihadaranyaka is considered more original. The Upanishads
also contain the first and most definitive explications of the divine syllable
Aum, the cosmic vibration that underlies all existence. The mantra "Aum Shānti
Shānti Shānti", translated as "the soundless sound, peace, peace, peace", is
often found in the Upanishads. The path of "bhakti" or "Devotion to God" is
foreshadowed in Upanishadic literature, and was later realized by texts such as
the "Bhagavad Gita". Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan notes that the Upanishads are
primarily presented as conversations between two persons or animals rather than
expository statements of philosophy or ideology. He contends that the frog's
metaphorical speech the Mandukya Upanishad (manduka means frog in Sanskrit) is
a common source of confusion. Metaphysics. The three main approaches in
arriving at the solution to the problem of the Ultimate Reality have
traditionally been the theological, the cosmological and the psychological
approaches. The cosmological approach involves looking outward, to the world;
the psychological approach meaning looking inside or to the Self; and the
theological approach is looking upward or to God. Descartes takes the first and
starts with the argument that the Self is the primary reality, self-
consciousness the primary fact of existence, and introspection the start of the
real philosophical process. According to him, we can arrive at the conception
of God only through the Self because it is God who is the cause of the Self and
thus, we should regard God as more perfect than the Self. Spinoza on the other
hand, believed that God is the be-all and the end-all of all things, the alpha
and the omega of existence. From God philosophy starts, and in God philosophy
ends. The manner of approach of the Upanishadic philosophers to the problem of
ultimate reality was neither the Cartesian nor Spinozistic. The Upanishadic
philosophers regarded the Self as the ultimate existence and subordinated the
world and God to the Self. The Self to them, is more real than either the world
or God. It is only ultimately that they identify the Self with God, and thus
bridge over the gulf that exists between the theological and psychological
approaches to reality. They take the cosmological approach to start with, but
they find that this cannot give them the solution of the ultimate reality. So,
Upanishadic thinkers go back and start over by taking the psychological
approach and here again, they cannot find the solution to the ultimate reality.
They therefore perform yet another experiment by taking the theological
approach. They find that this too is lacking in finding the solution. They give
yet another try to the psychological approach, and come up with the solution to
the problem of the ultimate reality. Thus, the Upanishadic thinkers follow a
cosmo-theo-psychological approach. A study of the mukhya Upanishads shows that
the Upanishadic thinkers progressively build on each other's ideas. They go
back and forth and refute improbable approaches before arriving at the solution
of the ultimate reality. Schools of Vedanta. The later theistic ("Dvaita" and
"Visistadvaita") and absolutist ("Advaita") schools of Vendanta are made
possible because of the difference between these two views. The three main
schools of Vedanta are Advaita, Dvaita and Vishishtadvaita. Other schools of
Vedanta made possible by the Upanishads include Nimbarka's "Dvaitadvaita",
Vallabha's "Suddhadvaita" and Chaitanya's "Acintya Bhedabheda". The philosopher
Adi Sankara has provided commentaries on 11 mukhya Upanishads. Advaita is
considered the most influential sub-school of the "Vedanta" school of Hindu
philosophy, though whether it represents the mainstream Hindu position has been
debated. Gaudapada was the first person to expound the basic principles of the
Advaita philosophy in a commentary on the apparently conflicting statements of
the Upanishads. Advaita literally means non-duality, and it is a monistic
system of thought. It deals with the non-dual nature of Brahman and Atman. The
Advaita school is said to have been consolidated by Shankara. He was a pupil of
Gaudapada's pupil. Radhakrishnan believed that Shankara's views of Advaita are
straightforward developments of the Upanishads and the "Brahmasutra" and he
offered no innovations to these, while other scholars found sharp differences
between Shankara's writings and the "Brahmasutra", and that there are many
ideas in the Upanishads at odds with those of Shankara. Gaudapada lived in a
time when Buddhism was widely prevalent in India, and he was at times conscious
of the similarity between his system to some phases of Buddhist thought. His
main work is infused with philosophical terminology of Buddhism, and uses
Buddhist arguments and analogies. Towards the end of his commentary on the
topic, he clearly said, "This was not spoken by Buddha". Although there are a
wide variety of philosophical positions propounded in the Upanishads,
commentators since Adi Shankara have usually followed him in seeing idealist
monism as the dominant force. The Dvaita school was founded by Madhvacharya.
Born in 1138 near Udipi, Dvaita is regarded as the best philosophic exposition
of theism. Sharma points out that Dvaita, a term commonly used to designate
Madhava's system of philosophy, translates as "dualism" in English. The Western
understanding of dualism equates to two independent and mutually irreducible
substances. The Indian equivalent of that definition would be "Samkya Dvaita".
Madhva's Dvaita differs from the Western definition of dualism in that while he
agrees to two mutually irreducible substances that constitute reality, he
regards only one – God, as being independent. The third school of Vedanta is
the Vishishtadvaita, which was founded by Ramanuja. Traditional dates of his
birth and death are given as 1017 and 1137, though a shorter life span
somewhere between these two dates has been suggested. Modern scholars conclude
that on the whole, Ramanuja's theistic views may be closer to those of the
Upanishads than are Shankara's, and Ramanuja's interpretations are in fact
representative of the general trend of Hindu thought. Ramanuja strenuously
refuted Shankara's works. Visistadvaita is a synthetic philosophy of love that
tries to reconcile the extremes of the other two monistic and theistic systems
of vedanta. It is called Sri-Vaisanavism in its religious aspect. Chari claims
that has been misunderstood by its followers as well as its critics. Many,
including leading modern proponents of this system, forget that "jiva" is a
substance as well as an attribute and call this system "qualified non-dualism"
or the adjectival monism. While the Dvaita insists on the difference between
the Brahman and the Jiva, Visistadvaita states that God is their inner-Self as
well as transcendent. Development. Number and Authorship. New Upanishads were
still composed in the medieval and early modern period: discoveries of newer
Upanishads were being reported as late as 1926. One, the "" Upanishad, predates
1656 and contains a list of 108 canonical Upanishads, including itself as the
last. However, several texts under the title of "Upanishads" originated right
up to the first half of the 20th century, some of which did not deal with
subjects of Vedic philosophy. The newer Upanishads are known to be imitations
of the mukhya Upanishads. Dara Shikoh, son of the Mughal emperor Shah Jahan,
translated 50 Upanishads into Persian in 1657. The first written English
translation came in 1805 from Colebrooke, who was aware of 170 Upanishads.
Sadhale's catalog from 1985, the lists 223 Upanishads. The Upanishads have been
attributed to several authors: Yajnavalkya and Uddalaka Aruni feature
prominently in the early Upanishads. Other important writers include
Shvetaketu, Shandilya, Aitareya, Pippalada and Sanatkumara. Important women
discussants include Yajnavalkya's wife Maitreyi, and Gargi. Sarvepalli
Radhakrishnan considers authorship claims in the text to be unreliable,
believing the supposed authors to be fictional characters. An example is
Shvetaketu from Chāndogya Upaniṣad for whom there are no sources or books
which mention him nor any other works attributed to him. Chronology and
geography. Scholars disagree about the exact dates of the composition of the
Upanishads. Different researchers have provided different dates for the Vedic
and Upanashic eras. Some authors believe the oldest of these, the
"Brihadaranyaka", Jaiminiya Upanisadbrahmana and the "Chandogya" Upanishads,
were composed during the pre-Buddhist era of India, while the "Taittiriya,
Aitareya" and "Kausitaki", which show Buddhist influence, must have been
composed after the 5th century BCE. The remainder of the mukhya Upanishads are
dated to the last few centuries BCE. general area of the composition of the
early Upanishads was northern India, the region bounded on the west by the
Indus valley, on the east by lower Ganges river, on the north by the Himalayan
foothills, and on the south by the Vindhya mountain range. There is confidence
about the early Upanishads being the product of the geographical center of
ancient Brahmanism, comprising the regions of Kuru-Panchala and Kosala-Videha
together with the areas immediately to the south and west of these. While
significant attempts have been made recently to identify the exact locations of
the individual Upanishads, the results are tentative. Witzel identifies the
center of activity in the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad as the area of Videha, whose
king, Janaka, features prominently in the Upanishad. Yajnavalkya is another
individual who features prominently, almost as the personal theologian of
Janaka. Brahmins of the central region of Kuru-Panchala rightly considered
their land as the place of the best theological and literary activities, since
this was the heartland of Brahmanism of the late Vedic period. The setting of
the third and the fourth chapters of the Brihadaranyaka Upanishads were
probably intended to show that Yajnavalkya of Videha defeated all the best
theologians of the Kuru Panchala, thereby demonstrating the rise of Videha as a
center of learning. The Chandogya Upanishad was probably composed in a more
Western than an Eastern location, possibly somewhere in the western region of
the Kuru-Panchala country. The great Kuru-Panchala theologian Uddalaka Aruni
who was vilified in the Brihadaranyaka features prominently in the Chandogya
Upanishad. Compared to the Principal Upanishads, the new Upanishads recorded in
the belong to an entirely different region, probably southern India, and are
considerably relatively recent. Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan claims that most of
the Upanishads were kept secret for centuries, only passed on to others orally
in the form of Shloka, and that it difficult to determine how much the current
texts have changed from the original. Development of thought. While the hymns
of the Vedas emphasize rituals and the Brahmanas serve as a liturgical manual
for those Vedic rituals, the spirit of the Upanishads is inherently opposed to
ritual. The older Upanishads launch attacks of increasing intensity on the
ritual. Anyone who worships a divinity other than the Self is called a domestic
animal of the gods in the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad. The Upanishad parodies
those who indulge in the acts of sacrifice by comparing them with a procession
of dogs chanting "Om! Let's eat. Om! Let's drink". The Mundaka launches the
most scathing attack on the ritual by comparing those who value sacrifice with
an unsafe boat that is endlessly overtaken by old age and death. The opposition
to the ritual is not explicit all the time. On several occasions the Upanishads
extend the task of the Aranyakas by making the ritual allegorical and giving it
a philosophical meaning. For example, the Brihadaranyaka interprets the
practice of horse-sacrifice or "ashvamedha" allegorically. It states that the
over-lordship of the earth may be acquired by sacrificing a horse. It then goes
on to say that spiritual autonomy can only be achieved by renouncing the
universe which is conceived in the image of a horse. In similar fashion, the
pattern of reducing the number of gods in the Vedas becomes more emphatic in
the Upanishads. When Yajnavalkaya is asked how many gods exist, he decrements
the number successively by answering thirty-three, six, three, two, one and a
half and finally one. Vedic gods such as the "Rudras", "Visnu", "Brahma" are
gradually subordinated to the supreme, immortal and incorporeal Brahman of the
Upanishads. In fact Indra and the supreme deity of the Brahamanas, Prajapati,
are made door keepers to the Brahman's residence in the Kausitaki Upanishad. In
short, the one reality or "ekam sat" of the Vedas becomes the "ekam eva a-
dvitiyam" or "the one and only and sans a second" in the Upanishads. Worldwide
transmission. Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan claims that translation often requires
difficult research and subjective choices because most of the Upanishads were
written in an old Sanskrit (comparable to Old Latin), which is no longer spoken
and has a complicated sentence structure. However, the Upanishads have still
influenced world culture in part through later Hindu texts, such as the
Bhagavad Gītā, which Radhakrishnan says conveyed a "message based on the
ancient wisdom, "prajñā purāņī", of the Upaniṣads." The "Gītā
Dhyānam", a 9-verse poetic invocation that is often published with the
"Gītā", celebrates the purported Upanishadic influence in a famous verse
stating that "The Upaniṣads are the cows... and the nectar-like gitā is the
excellent milk." Given that Indian Brahmin seers are reputed to have visited
Greece, it may be that the Upanishadic sages influenced Ancient Greek
philosophy. Many ideas in Plato's Dialogues, particularly, have Indian
analogues – several concepts in the Platonic psychology of reason bear
resemblance to the gunas of Indian philosophy. Professor Edward Johns Urwick
conjectures that "The Republic" owes several central concepts to Indian
influence. Garb and West have also concluded that this was due to Indian
influence. A. R. Wadia dissents in that Plato's metaphysics were rooted in
"this" life, the primary aim being an ideal state. He later proposed a state
less ordered but more practicable and conducive to human happiness. As for the
Upanishadic thinkers, their goal was not an ideal state or society, but
"moksha" or deliverance from the endless cycle of birth and death. Wadia
concludes that there was no exchange of information and ideas between Plato and
the Upanishadic thinkers: Plato remains Greek and the Indian sages remain
Indian. The Upanishads were a part of an oral tradition. Their study was
confined to the higher castes of Indian society. Sudras and women were not
given access to them soon after their composition. The Upanishads have been
translated in to various languages including Persian, Italian, Urdu, French,
Latin, German, English, Dutch, Polish, Japanese and Russian. The Moghul Emperor
Akbar's reign (1556–1586) saw the first translations of the Upanishads into
Persian, and his great-grandson, Dara Shikoh, produced a collection called
"Sirr-e-Akbar" (The Greatest Mysteries) in 1657, with the help of Sanskrit
Pandits of Varanasi. Its introduction stated that the Upanishads constitute the
Qur'an's ""Kitab al-maknun"" or "hidden book". But Akbar's and Sikoh's
translations remained unnoticed in the Western world until 1775. Abraham
Hyacinthe Anquetil-Duperron, a French Orientalist who had lived in India
between 1755 and 1761, received a manuscript of the Upanishads in 1775 from M.
Gentil, and translated it into French and Latin, publishing the Latin
translation in two volumes in 1802–1804 as "Oupneck'hat". The French
translation was never published. The first German translation appeared in 1832
and Roer's English version appeared in 1853. However, Max Mueller's 1879 and
1884 editions were the first systematic English treatment to include the 12
Principal Upanishads. After this, the Upanishads were rapidly translated into
Dutch, Polish, Japanese and Russian. Global scholarship and praise. The German
philosopher Arthur Schopenhauer read the Latin translation and praised the
Upanishads in his main work, "The World as Will and Representation" (1819), as
well as in his "Parerga and Paralipomena" (1851). He found his own philosophy
was in accord with the Upanishads, which taught that the individual is a
manifestation of the one basis of reality. For Schopenhauer, that fundamentally
real underlying unity is what we know in ourselves as "will". Schopenhauer used
to keep a copy of the Latin "Oupnekhet" by his side and is said to have
commented, "It has been the solace of my life, it will be the solace of my
death". Another German philosopher, Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph Schelling, praised
the mystical and spiritual aspects of the Upanishads. Schelling and other
philosophers associated with German idealism were dissatisfied with
Christianity as propagated by churches. They were fascinated with the Vedas and
the Upanishads. In the United States, the group known as the Transcendentalists
were influenced by the German idealists. These Americans, such as Emerson and
Thoreau, were not satisfied with traditional Christian mythology and therefore
embraced Schelling's interpretation of Kant's Transcendental idealism, as well
as his celebration of the romantic, exotic, mystical aspect of the Upanishads.
As a result of the influence of these writers, the Upanishads gained renown in
Western countries. One of the great English-language poets of the 20th century,
T. S. Eliot, inspired by his reading of the Upanishads, based the final portion
of his famous poem "The Waste Land" (1922) upon one of its verses. Erwin
Schrödinger, the great quantum physicist said, "The multiplicity is only
apparent. This is the doctrine of the Upanishads. And not of the Upanishads
only. The mystical experience of the union with God regularly leads to this
view, unless strong prejudices stand in the West." Eknath Easwaran, in
translating the Upanishads, articulates how they "form snapshots of towering
peaks of consciousness taken at various times by different observers and
dispatched with just the barest kind of explanation". Criticism. John Murray
Mitchell, a Western writer, asserts that by suggesting that all appearance is
an illusion, the Upanishads are potentially overturning ethical distinctions.
A.E. Gough, an early European orientalist, remarked that the Upanishads were
"the work of a rude age, a deteriorated race, and a barbarous and unprogressive
community." About the Indian Philosophy in general, Gough continued to say, "In
treating of Indian Philosophy a writer has to deal with thoughts of lower order
than the thoughts of the every day life of Europe. The great difficulty lies in
this, that a low order of ideas has to be expressed in a high order of terms,
and that the English words suggest a wealth of analysis and association
altogether foreign to thoughts that are to be reproduced. The effort is nothing
less than an endeavour to revert to a ruder type of mental culture and to
become for the time being barbarous." According to another writer, David
Kalupahana, the Upanishadic thinkers came to consider change as a mere
illusion, because it could not be reconciled with a permanent and homogeneous
reality. They were therefore led to a complete denial of plurality. He states
that philosophy suffered a setback because of the transcendentalism resulting
from the search of the essential unity of things. Kalupahana explains further
that reality was simply considered to be beyond space, time, change, and
causality. This caused change to be a mere matter of words, nothing but a name
and due to this, metaphysical speculation took the upper hand. As a result, the
Upanishads fail to give any rational explanation of the experience of things.
Paul Deussen criticized the idea of unity in the Upanishads as it excluded all
plurality, and therefore, all proximity in space, all succession in time, all
interdependence as cause and effect, and all opposition as subject and object.
Association with Vedas. All Upanishads are associated with one of the four
Vedas—Rigveda, Samaveda, Yajurveda (there are two primary versions or
"Samhitas" of the Yajurveda: Shukla Yajurveda, Krishna Yajurveda), and
Atharvaveda. The Upanishad's list of 108 Upanishads groups the first 10 as
"mukhya", 21 as Sāmānya Vedānta, 23 as Sannyāsa, nine as Shākta, 13 as
Vaishnava, 14 as Shaiva and 17 as Yoga. The 108 Upanishads as recorded in the
are shown in the table below. The mukhya Upanishads are highlighted.
