Uposatha The Uposatha () is Buddhist day of observance, in existence from the
Buddha's time (500 BCE), and still being kept today in Buddhist countries. The
Buddha taught that the Uposatha day is for "the cleansing of the defiled mind,"
resulting in inner calm and joy. On this day, lay disciples and monks intensify
their practice, deepen their knowledge and express communal commitment through
millennia-old acts of lay-monastic reciprocity. Observance days. Depending on
the culture and time period, uposatha days have been observed from two to six
days each lunar month. Theravada countries. In general, Uposatha is observed
about once a week in Theravada countries in accordance with the four phases of
the moon: the new moon, the full moon, and the two quarter moons in between. In
some communities, such as in Sri Lanka, only the new moon and full moon are
observed as uposatha days. In Burma, Uposatha (called "ubot nei") is observed
by more pious Buddhists on the following days: waxing moon ( "la hsan"), full
moon ( "la pyei nei"), waning moon ( "la hsote"), and new moon ( "la kwe nei").
The most common days of observance are the full moon and the new moon. In pre-
colonial Burma, the Uposatha day (commonly rendered as the Buddhist Sabbath in
English) was a legal holiday that was observed primarily in urban areas, where
secular activities like business transactions came to a halt. However, since
colonial rule, Sunday has replaced the Uposatha day as the legal day of rest.
All major Burmese Buddhist holidays occur on Uposatha days, namely Thingyan,
the beginning of the Buddhist lent (beginning in the full moon of Waso, around
July to the full moon of Thadingyut, around October). During this period,
Uposatha is more commonly observed by Buddhists than during the rest of the
year. During Uposatha days, Buddhist monks at each monastery assemble and
recite the Patimokkha (a concise compilation of the Vinaya. For a 2012 calendar
of Thai uposatha days, see John Bullitt's "Calendar of Uposatha Days." Mahayana
countries. In Mahayana countries that use the Chinese calendar, the Uposatha
days are observed six times a month, on the 8th, 14th, 15th, 23rd and final two
days of each lunar month. In Japan, these six days are known as the . Names of
Full Moon Uposatha Days. The Pali names of the uposatha days are based on the
Sanskrit names of the "nakśatra" (Pali: "nakkhatta"), the constellations or
lunar mansions through which the moon passes within a lunar month. History. The
word "uposatha" is derived from the Sanskrit word "upavasatha," which refers to
the pre-Buddhistic fast day that preceded Vedic sacrifices. In the Buddha's
time, some ascetics used the new and full moon as opportunities to present
their teachings. The Uposatha Day was instituted by the Buddha at the request
of King Bimbisara, and the Buddha instructed the monks to give teachings to the
laypeople on this day, and told the monks to recite the Patimokkha every second
Uposatha day. Practice. Lay practice. On each uposatha day, devout lay people
practice the Eight Precepts. For lay practitioners who live near a monastery,
the uposatha is an opportunity for them to visit a local monastery, make
offerings, listen to Dhamma talks by monks and participate in meditation
sessions. For lay practitioners unable to participate in the events of a local
monastery, the uposatha is a time to intensify one's own meditation and Dhamma
practice, for instance, meditating an extra session or for a longer time,
reading or chanting special suttas, recollecting or giving in some special way.
Monastic practice. On the new-moon and full-moon uposatha, in monasteries where
there are four or more bhikkhus, the local Sangha will recite the Patimokkha.
Before the recitation starts, the monks will confess any violations of the
disciplinary rules to another monk or to the Sangha. Depending on the speed of
the Patimokkha chanter (one of the monks), the recitation may take from 30
minutes to over an hour. Depending on the monastery, lay people may or may not
be allowed to attend. Communal reciprocity. "Early in the morning lay people
give almsfood to the bhikkhus who may be walking on almsround, invited to a
layman's house, or the lay people may take the food to the monastery. Usually
lay people do not eat before serving their food to the bhikkhus and they may
eat only once that day... Before the meal the laity request the Eight Precepts
the bhikkhus ..., which they promise to undertake for a day and night. It is
usual for lay people to go to the local monastery and to spend all day and
night there... monasteries where there is more study, people will hear as many
as three or four discourses on Dhamma delivered by senior bhikkhus and they
will have books to read and perhaps classes on Abhidhamma to attend... In a
meditation monastery ..., most of their time will be spent mindfully employed
– walking and seated meditation with some time given to helping the bhikkhus
with their daily duties. So the whole of this day and night (and enthusiastic
lay people restrict their sleep) is given over to Dhamma..." Special uposatha
days. is the most sacred Buddhist holiday. It is the anniversary of the
Buddha's birth, awakening and parinibbana. Anniversary of the Buddha's
delivering the "Anapanasati Sutta." This event is not connected to an Uposatha
(Poya) day in Sri Lanka and perhaps is particular to Thailand. Anniversary of
the assembling of 1250 monks in the Buddha's presence during which time he
delivered the "Ovada-Patimokkha Gatha." In Sri Lanka three full moon Uposatha
or Poya days are of special significance.
