Uriel Uriel (אוּרִיאֵל "El/God is my light", Auriel/Oriel (God is my
light) Standard Hebrew ) is one of the archangels of post-Exilic Rabbinic
tradition, and also of certain Christian traditions. His name may have
analogies with "Uriah". In apocryphal, kabbalistic and occult works Uriel has
been equated or confused with Urial, Nuriel, Uryan, Jeremiel, Vretil, Sariel,
Suriel, Puruel, Phanuel, Jehoel, Jacob, Ezrail/Azrael and Israfil/Raphael.
Uriel is known to be the funniest angel in the garrison. In Judaism and
Christianity. Name and origins. The angels mentioned in the older books of the
Hebrew Bible are without names. Indeed, rabbi Simeon ben Lakish of Tiberias
(230–270), asserted that all the specific names for the angels were brought
back by the Jews from Babylon, and some modern commentators would tend to
agree. Of the seven Archangels in the angelology of post-Exilic Judaism, only
two, Gabriel, and Michael, are mentioned by name in the Scriptures consistently
recognised by both the post-Jamnia Jewish tradition and the books common to
both the Catholic biblical canon and the smaller Protestant one. Raphael
features prominently in the deuterocanonical book Tobit (initially accepted by
both the Jewish and Christian canons, but removed from the Jewish canon in late
antiquity and rejected by the Protestant reformers in the 17th century). The
Book of Tobit is accepted as scriptural by the Catholic Church, the Eastern
Orthodox Church, and the Oriental Orthodox Church. Where a fourth archangel is
added to the named three, to represent the four cardinal points, Uriel is
generally the fourth. Uriel is listed as the fourth angel in Christian Gnostics
(under the name Phanuel), by Gregory the Great, and in the angelology of
Pseudo-Dionysius. However, the Book of Enoch clearly distinguishes the two
Angels; Uriel means 'the Light of God' while Phanuel means "the Face of God."
Uriel is the third angel listed in the "Testament of Solomon", the fourth being
Sabrael. Uriel also appears in the "Second Book of Esdras" (found in the
Apocrypha section of many bibles, and sometimes called Esdras IV in Catholic
versions, which makes up part of the apocalyptic literature of "Esdras"), in
which the prophet Ezra asks God a series of questions, and Uriel is sent by God
to instruct him. According to the Revelation of Esdras, the angels that will
rule at the end of the world are Michael, Gabriel, Uriel, Raphael, Gabuthelon,
Beburos, Zebuleon, Aker, and Arphugitonos. The last five listed only appear in
this book and nowhere else in apocryphal or apocalyptic works. In Christian
apocryphal gospels Uriel plays a role, differing between sources, in the rescue
of Jesus' cousin John the Baptist from the Massacre of the Innocents ordered by
King Herod. He carries John and his mother Saint Elizabeth to join the Holy
Family after their Flight into Egypt. Their reunion is depicted in Leonardo da
Vinci's Virgin of the Rocks. Uriel is often identified as a cherub and angel of
repentance. He "stands at the Gate of Eden with a fiery sword," or as the angel
who "watches over thunder and terror." In the "Apocalypse of Peter" he appears
as the Angel of Repentance, who is graphically represented as being as pitiless
as any demon. In the "Life of Adam and Eve", Uriel is regarded as the spirit
(i.e., one of the cherubs) of the third chapter of Genesis. He is also
identified as one of the angels who helped bury Adam and Abel in Paradise.
Stemming from medieval Jewish mystical traditions, Uriel has also become the
Angel of Sunday ("Jewish Encyclopedia"), the Angel of Poetry, and one of the
Holy Sephiroth. Uriel is depicted as the destroyer of the hosts of Sennacherib.
He checked the doors of Egypt for lamb's blood during the plague. He also holds
the key to the Pit during the End Times and led Abraham to the West. In modern
angelology, Uriel is identified variously as a seraph, cherub, regent of the
sun, flame of God, angel of the Divine Presence, presider over Tartarus (hell),
archangel of salvation, and, in later scriptures, identified with Phanuel "face
of God." He is often depicted carrying a book or a papyrus scroll representing
wisdom. Uriel is a patron of the Arts. In the Eastern Orthodox Church, Uriel is
commemorated together with the other archangels and angels with a feast day of
the "Synaxis of the Archangel Michael and the Other Bodiless Powers" on
November 8 of the liturgical calendar (for those churches which follow the
Julian Calendar, November 8 falls on November 21 of the modern Gregorian
Calendar). In addition, every Monday throughout the year is dedicated to the
angels. In Thomas Heywood's "Hierarchy of Blessed Angels" (1635), Uriel is
described as an Angel of the Earth. Heywood's list is actually of the Angels of
the Four Winds: Uriel (south), Michael (east), Raphael (west) (serving also a
governor of the south, with Uriel), and Gabriel (north). He is also listed as
an Angel of the four winds in the medieval Jewish "Book of the Angel Raziel"
which lists him as Usiel (Uzziel); according to it, this book was inscribed on
a sapphire stone and handed down from Seraph to Metatron and then to Adam. At
the Council of Rome of 745, Pope St. Zachary, intending to clarify the Church's
teaching on the subject of angels and curb a tendency toward angel worship,
condemned obsession with angelic intervention and angelolatry, but reaffirmed
the approval of the practice of the reverence of angels. This synod struck many
angels' names from the list of those eligible for veneration in the Church of
Rome, including Uriel. Only the reverence of the archangels mentioned in the
recognized Catholic canon of scriptures, Michael, Gabriel and Raphael, remained
licit. In the first half of the 11th century Bulgarian followers of the dualist
heresy called Bogomilism who lived in the dukedom of Ahtum in present day Banat
invoked Uriel in rituals. This is witnessed by Gerard Sagredo, Catholic bishop
of the area after 1028. In Henry Wadsworth Longfellow's translation of "The
Golden Legend", Uriel is one of the angels of the seven planets. Uriel is the
angel of Mars. He is also listed as such in Benjamin Camfield's "A Theological
Discourse of Angels" (1678). Possibly Uriel's highest position is that of an
Angel of Presence, Prince of Presence, Angel of the Face, Angel of
Sanctification, Angel of Glory. A Prince of the Presence is an angel who is
allowed to enter the presence of God. Uriel along with Suriel, Jehoel, Zagagel,
Akatriel, Metatron, Yefefiah, Michael, Gabriel, Raphael, and Nathanel (Zathael)
holds this position. The Angel of His Presence title is often taken to mean
Shekinah but it and the other terms mentioned are also often used as alternate
names for the angel Metatron. R. H. Charles comments in his translation of "The
Book Of Enoch" that in later Judaism "we find Uriel instead of Phanuel" as one
of the four angels of the presence. A scriptural reference to an angel of
presence is found in Isaiah 63:9 — "In all their affliction he was afflicted,
and the angel of his presence saved them: in his love and in his pity he
redeemed them; and he bare them, and carried them all the days of old." In
Enoch. The Book of Enoch, which presents itself as written by Enoch, mentions
Uriel in many of the component books. In Chapter IX which is part of "The Book
of the Watchers" (2nd century BCE) only four Angels are mentioned by name these
are Michael, Uriel, Raphael, and Gabriel. However the later Chapter XX lists
the name and function of seven archangels these are "Uriel, one of the holy
angels, who is over the world and over Tartarus", Raphael, Raguel, Michael,
Saraqâêl, Gabriel, and Remiel. The Book of the Angels as a whole tells us
that Uriel, Raphael, and Gabriel were present before God to testify on behalf
of Humankind. They wish to ask for divine intervention during the reign of the
Fallen Gregori (Fallen Watchers). These fallen take human wives and produced
half-angel, half-human offspring called the Nephilim. Uriel is responsible for
contacting Noah about the upcoming Great Flood. After judgment has been brought
on the Nephilim and the fallen ones including the two main leaders Samyaza and
Azazel, Uriel discusses their fates. Uriel then acts as a guide for Enoch for
the rest of the Book of Watchers. He fulfills this capacity in many of the
other books that make up 1 Enoch. In Anglican tradition. In the traditions and
hagiography of the Episcopal and other Anglican churches, Uriel is mentioned as
an archangel. He is also recognized as the Patron Saint of the Sacrament of
Confirmation. He is celebrated in the Anglican liturgical calendars on the
Feast of the Archangels. The Anglican intercessional prayer to Saint Uriel the
Archangel is as follows; In literature and popular culture. In literature. In
Milton's "Paradise Lost" Book III, Uriel, in charge of the Orb of the Sun,
serves as the eyes of God, but unwittingly steers Satan towards the newly
created earth. He also fills the role of fourth cardinal point (see above).
Milton describes him as the "sharpest sighted spirit in all of Heaven." He is
also responsible along with Raphael for defeating Adramelech. In Haydn's
"Creation", Uriel (tenor) is one of the three angelic narrators (with Gabriel
(soprano) and Raphael (bass). In Ralph Waldo Emerson's poem "Uriel", regarded
as a poetic summary of many strains of thought in Emerson's early philosophy,
Uriel is a young god in Paradise, who upsets the world of gods by proclaiming
relativism and the eternal return. In George Eliot's "Middlemarch", ch. XLI, to
Uriel, "watching the progress of planetary history from the sun, the one result
would be just as much of a coincidence as the other". In Madeleine L'Engle's
book, "A Wrinkle In Time", Uriel is a fictional planet of the galaxy Messier
101 with mountains and beautiful flowers. In L'Engle's novel "Many Waters",
Uriel is a character, one of the Seraphim. In Dean Koontz's book "Hideaway",
Uriel speaks and acts through Hatch, one of the book's protagonists, to battle
the demon Vassago, who "hitched a ride" with Jeremy Nyebern after he was
reanimated. In Katherine Kurtz's series of novels "Chronicles of the Deryni,"
Uriel is the angel of death, escorting souls across the line of life to the
afterlife. In Clive Barker's novel "Weaveworld", the Scourge declares its
eternal name as Uriel. The major character Shadwell recognizes learning "...of
all the angels and archangels by heart: and amongst the mighty Uriel was of the
mightiest. The archangel of salvation; called by some the flame of God." and
"Uriel had been the angel left to stand guard at the gates of Eden." In the
apocrypha of White Wolf Publishing's "Vampire: The Masquerade" series, Uriel is
the last of the angels sent to Cain, after Cain rejects the offers of
redemption from Michael, Gabriel, and Raphael. Uriel tells Cain of Golconda,
and that it is the last road of redemption open to Cain and his "children". In
Jim Butcher's novel, "Small Favor", Uriel is a subtle but powerful player in
the war with the Black Council and the Fallen/Denarians. Called the "Watchman",
he only reveals himself to the book's protagonist, Harry Dresden, as a janitor
named "Jake". In the novel, Harry receives the power of "soulfire" and believes
that it came from Uriel. He is also referred to as Heaven's "spook". Uriel also
appears at the end of Jim Butcher's novella "The Warrior", which was released
as a part of the anthology, "Mean Streets". Uriel appears again in "Changes",
when Harry Dresden asks him for help, after being paralyzed from the waist
down. Uriel tells him that he cannot help him, and that he is limited to what
he has already done. He also tells Harry that Maggie is indeed his daughter,
something that he hadn't been entirely sure of. In Ghost Story, Uriel uses his
influence to offer Harry the opportunity to come back to Earth as a spirit to
find out the identity of his killer. This is not revealed until close to the
end of the book, when Uriel also shows Harry that his friends and family will
be okay in his absence. He also shows how Harry was unduly influenced to take
up the mantle of the Winter Knight and redresses this imbalance by telling him
that Mab, the Winter Queen cannot change who he is. Unlike his appearances in
"Small Favor" and "The Warrior", Uriel's form in "Changes" and Ghost Story is
that of a young man with blond hair, rather than an old janitor. He is not
bound by linear time, and is responsible for protecting Free Will. The author
has described the character as a VP of Creation. In "Angelglass" by David
Barnett, Uriel meddles in Earth's affairs and is cast down to see if he can
"improve" the course of history by personal intervention. In William J. Clark's
novel, "Winning the Lottery", Uriel is the guardian angel of the narrator, and
later of his wife and children. He and the other three archangels, Michael,
Gabriel, and Raphael, play an active role in various plot elements, and become
a common thread in an attempt to open a dialog between the Western and the
Muslim worlds. In Richard Kadrey's "Kill the Dead", Uriel is one of the
original fallen angels and revealed to be the father of protagonist James
"Sandman Slim" Stark. In Garth Nix's Abhorsen Trilogy one of the "nine bright
shiners" is named Yrael and appears as a being of living fire.
