Vetus Latina Vetus Latina is a collective name given to the Biblical texts in
Latin that were translated before St Jerome's Vulgate Bible (382-405 AD) became
the standard Bible for Latin-speaking Western Christians. The phrase "Vetus
Latina" is Latin for Old Latin, and the Vetus Latina is sometimes known as the
Old Latin Bible. It was, however, written in Late Latin, not the early version
of the Latin language known as Old Latin. It is sometimes also known as the
"Itala" (as in the Quedlinburg Itala fragment). Text. There was no single
"Vetus Latina" Bible; there are, instead, a collection of Biblical manuscript
texts that bear witness to Latin translations of Biblical passages that
preceded Jerome's. After comparing readings for Luke 24:4-5 in Vetus Latina
manuscripts, Bruce Metzger counted "no fewer than 27 variant readings!" To
these witnesses of previous translations, many scholars frequently add
quotations of Biblical passages that appear in the works of the Latin Fathers,
some of which share readings with certain groups of manuscripts. As such, many
of the Vetus Latina "versions" were generally not promulgated in their own
right as translations of the Bible to be used in the whole Church; rather, many
of the texts that form part of the Vetus Latina were prepared on an "ad hoc"
basis for the local use of Christian communities, to illuminate another
Christian discourse or sermon, or as the Latin half of a diglot manuscript
(e.g. Codex Bezae). There are some Old Latin texts that seem to have aspired to
greater stature or currency; several manuscripts of Old Latin Gospels exist,
containing the four canonical Gospels; the several manuscripts that contain
them differ substantially from one another. Other Biblical passages, however,
are extant only in excerpts or fragments. The language of the Old Latin
translations is uneven in quality, as Augustine of Hippo lamented in "De
Doctrina Christiana" (2, 16). Grammatical solecisms abound; some reproduce
literally Greek or Hebrew idioms as they appear in the Septuagint. Likewise,
the various Old Latin translations reflect the various versions of the
Septuagint circulating, with the African manuscripts (such as the Codex
Bobiensis) preserving readings of the Western text-type, while readings in the
European manuscripts are closer to the Byzantine text-type. Many grammatical
idiosyncrasies come from the use of Vulgar Latin grammatical forms in the text.
Replacement. With the publication of Jerome's Vulgate, which offered a single,
stylistically consistent Latin text translated from the original tongues, the
Vetus Latina gradually fell out of use. Jerome, in a letter, complains that his
new version was initially disliked by Christians who were familiar with the
phrasing of the old translations. However, as copies of the complete Bible were
infrequently found, Old Latin translations of various books of the Bible were
copied into manuscripts alongside Vulgate translations, inevitably exchanging
readings; Old Latin translations of single books can be found in manuscripts as
late as the 13th century. However, the Vulgate generally displaced the Vetus
Latina and was acknowledged as the official Bible of the Roman Catholic Church
at the Council of Trent. Below are some comparisons of the Vetus Latina with
text from critical editions of the Vulgate. The Old Latin text means, "Glory to
God among the high, and peace [belongs to men of good will on earth". The
Vulgate text means "Glory to God among the most high and peace among men of
good will on earth". Probably the most well known difference between the Old
Latin and the Vulgate is in the Pater Noster, where the phrase from the Vetus
Latina, "quotidianum panem", "daily bread", becomes "supersubstantialem panem",
"supersubstantial bread" in the Vulgate.
