Vibhuti Vibhuti (Sanskrit : "" ; Kannada : ವಿಭೂತಿ / Vibhooti ;
Tamil : திருநீறு / "Thiruneeru " ) is a word that has several
meanings in Hinduism. Generally it is used to denote the sacred ash which is
made of burnt dried cow dung in vedic rituals.The hindu devotees make a paste
by mixing vibhuhti with water and smear it as three horizontal lines across the
forehead and other parts parts of the body to please Lord Shiva.Smearing
Vibhuthi across the forehead to the end of both eyebrows is called as
Tripundra. Meaning. In sanskrit,Bhoothi means Aishwaryam
i.e.wealth,treasure,precious.Vi-bhoothi with an Upasarga (preposition "vi")
means very or more valuable.The synonyms of Vibhuhti in sanskrit as said in the
Amara-kosha is "Vibhuthi: bhoothi: Aishwaryam".Vibhuhti can also be called as
Bhoothi,Aishwaryam,Basma etc.. Sacred ash. Vedic scriptures say as follows
"Lalaata Shoonyam Smashaana Tulyam",which means that "a person without smearing
Vibhuthi in his forehead is equal to a corpse in a burial ground".So, hindus
pay special attention that their forehead is smeared with vibhooti and it
remains all the time over their body in a day.Even the Almighty Lord Shiva who
sports vibhuhti all the time stands as a example to his followers that however
one be considered as great person in this mortal world,he needs to smear his
forehead and the body with holy ash prepared from cow dung as he does (Lord
Shiva) in the Immortal adobe of Kailasa.So,it is considered by vedic scholars
that even great saints,seers,yogis and the like should wear vibhuthi all the
time over forehead and other parts of the body in form of three lines to make a
Tripundra.Smearing vibhuthi horizontally to make three parallel lines with
forefinger,middle finger and ring finger across the forehead & other parts of
the body like chest,stomach,arms,elbows,wrists etc is called as Tripundra.It is
mandatory for the devotees of Lord Shiva to have Tripundra over their body all
the time.A person who smears Vibhuthi purifies himself from sins and also
removes the sins of persons who looks at him besmeared with Vibhuthi. The great
saint Thiru Gyaana Sambandar did many wonders with Vibhuthi and he expounds the
greatness of Vibhuti in one of his Pathigams called "Thiruneetru Pathigam" as
follows, Mandhira maavadhu neeru| Vaanavar meeladhu neeru || Sundhara maavadhu
neeru |Thudhikkap paduvadhu neeru || Thandhira maavadhu neeru| Chamayaththil
ullaadhu neeru || Senthuvar vaayumai pangan|Thiruaalavaayaan "Thiruneerae" ||
Mantra is the ash; Higher than heavenly people is the ash; Beauty is the ash;
Praised is the ash; Technique is the ash; In the religion is the ash; The Lord
of Thiruaalavaay (Lord Sundareshwarar,Madurai) who share the body with the red
lipped Parvathi - His Holy Ash. "Panchakshara mantra and the above Pathigam"
are generally recited by devotees while smearing Vibhuthi.Winning the Jains in
the challenge on fire Thirugnana Sambandhar sang the above marvelous hymn
Thiruppaachuram explaining the king and the world the limitless grace and glory
of Lord Shiva and won the Jains in the water challenge.Thiru Gyana sambandar
won the Jains and re-converted the king and his people back to Shaivism by
Vibhuthi reciting the above Pathigam. Vibhuthi of Vaitheeswaran Koil and
Thiruchendur Murugan Temple is famous for curing many incurable diseases.
"Vibhuti" is the sacred ash used in religious worship in Hinduism.The main
ingredient of Vibuthi is Cow dung.It is burned in a sacred fire (Homa)to form
white ash. Vibhuti is placed on the forehead as it is considered sacred and
holy. Scriptures say that Vibhuthi should not wasted by spilling it in on floor
or walls after receiving it as a Prasaad from a Shiva Temple.Goddess Bhoomi
Devi cannot tolerate the weight of certain substances.They are Vibhuthi,Tulsi
leaves,Sacred Deepa,Sacred Thread etc., due to their sacredness.So,they are
kept over a Asanam to give respect to those articles.They are not kept on
Barren floor. Glorious attributes. "Vibhuti" may refer to glorious attributes
of the divine, and in this context is translated as 'all pervading',
'superhuman power', 'wealth' and so on. The ash of any burnt object is not
regarded as holy ash.Vibhuti (AKA Bhasma,Thiruneeru,the holy ash) is the ash
from the Homa (sacrificial fire) where cow dung is used to perform the ritual.
Or the deity is worshipped by pouring ash as abhisheka and is then distributed
as Prassad to devotees. Bhasma is generally applied on the
forehead,neck,chest,arms,stomach elbow,wrists etc.. Some apply it on other
parts of the body, like the knees,toes,scalp etc..It is considered very
auspicious for the hindus especially shaiva sect of people to smear vibhuthi
all over the body. Sri Adi Shankaracharya praises the greatness of Vibhuthi Of
Lord Murugan in his "Sri Subramnaya Bhujanga Stotra" as follows , ApasmAra
kushta kshayArsha prameha| JvaronmAdha gulmAdhi rogA mahAntha|| PishAchAshcha
sarve bhavatpatra "bhoothim"| Vilokya kshanAth tArakAre dravanthe|| (Shloka
no.25) Oh Conqueror of Taraka! Severe epilepsy, leprosy, consumption, lung
diseases, venereal diseases, fevers, mental diseases of all types, they run
away the moment they see Thy Vibhuti contained in a leaf. The word bhasma means
“that by which our sins are destroyed and the Lord is remembered". ”Bha”
implies Bhartsana (“to destroy”) and “sma” implies smaranam (“to
remember”). The application of Bhasma therefore signifies destruction of the
evil and remembrance of the divine. Bhasma is called Vibhuti (“glory”) as
it gives glory to one who applies it and raksha (which means a source of
protection) as it protects the wearer from ill health and evil, by purifying
him or her. The ash we apply indicates that we should burn false identification
with body and become free of the limitations of birth and death. It also
reminds us that the body is perishable and shall one day be reduced to ashes.
As death can come at any moment, this awareness must increase our drive to make
the best use of time. This is not to be misconstrued as a morose reminder of
death, but as a powerful pointer towards the fact that time and tide wait for
none. Bhasma is specially associated with Lord Shiva, who applies it all over
His body. According to Hindu mythology Vibhuti or Bhasma is said to be favorite
to Lord Shiva and that's why He is often called Vibhuti Bhushan (the one having
ash as his ornament). Shiva devotees apply bhasma as a tripundra (the form of
three lines). When applied with a red spot in the centre, the mark symbolises
Shiva-Shakti (the unity of energy and matter that creates the entire seen and
unseen universe). Ash is what remains when all the wood is burnt away and it
does not decay. Similarly, the Lord is imperishable Truth that remains when the
entire creation of innumerable names and forms is dissolved. In yajna cow dung
is considered very sacred and is used as fuel to burn the offerings like
ghee,milk,curd,rice,holy twigs etc.,in Lord Agni who carries the offerings to
the respective devata in a yajna.The residue left over which is white in colour
is considered as vibhuthi and is given to the devotees as prasaad for daily use
to please Lord Shiva. =Common Adulterants used in Manufacturing= Many Vibhuthi
Manufacturers these days adulterate their Vibhuthi product with Jersey and
Friesian's animals dung ashes,rice bran ashes,rice husk ashes,boiler waste
ashes,Thermal Power plant ashes,Bio-gas energy plants,white stone powder,paper
cellulose, calcium carbonate,paints,chemicals etc..These substances make them
unfit for spiritual use.Due to lack of knowledge and awareness the above
adulterants are used by the manufacturers to gain a huge profit as they are
cheaply available and are considered as waste by-products by various
industries.Many people have developed skin allergies by the use of these
adulterated Vibhuthi.Special care needs to be taken by the Shiva devotees that
Vibhuthi is without adulterants and is prepared in a traditional way from cow
dung to gain the benefits of smearing Vibhuthi.
