Vishnu Vishnu (Sanskrit: विष्णु) is a popular Hindu god, venerated
as the Supreme Being in the Vaishnava sect. He is also commonly known as
Narayana or Hari. Smarta followers of Adi Shankara, among others, venerate
Vishnu as one of Panchayatana puja. The Vishnu Sahasranama declares Vishnu as
Paramatman (supreme soul) and Parameshwara (supreme God). It describes Vishnu
as the All-Pervading essence of all beings, the master of—and beyond—the
past, present and future, one who supports, sustains and governs the Universe
and originates and develops all elements within. This illustrates the
omnipresent characteristic of Vishnu. Vishnu governs the aspect of preservation
and sustenance of the universe, so he is called "Preserver of the universe". In
the Puranas, Vishnu is described as having the divine colour of water filled
clouds, four-armed, holding a lotus, mace, shankha (conch) and chakra (wheel).
Vishnu is also described in the Bhagavad Gita as having a 'Universal Form'
("Vishvarupa") which is beyond the ordinary limits of human perception or
imagination. His eternal or permanent abode beyond the material universe is
Vaikuntha which is a realm of eternal bliss and happiness. It is also known as
Paramdhama, which means final or highest place for liberated souls, where they
enjoy eternal bliss and happiness. Vaikuntha is situated beyond the material
universe and hence, can not be perceived or measured by material science and
logics. His other abode within the material universe is Ksheera Sagara, where
he reclines and rests on Shesha. It is known to be the topmost realm in the
material universe, even higher than Satyaloka where Brahma resides. Vishnu
manages and sustains the universe from there. Hence, Ksheera Sagara is also
sometimes known as local Vaikuntha of the material universe, which is
approachable by demigods in order to meet the lord in case of any emergency or
disturbance in universal balance. In almost all Hindu denominations, Vishnu is
either worshipped directly or in the form of his ten avatara, most famous of
whom are Rama and Krishna. The Puranabharti describes each of these
"Dasavatara" of Vishnu. Among the ten principal Avatara described, nine have
occurred in the past and one will take place in the future, at the end of Kali
Yuga. These incarnations take place in all Yugas in cosmic scales, the avatars
and their stories show that god is indeed unimaginable, unthinkable and
unbelievable. The Bhagavad Gita mentions their purpose as being to rejuvenate
Dharma and vanquish negative forces, the forces of evil that threaten Dharma,
as also to display His divine nature in front of the conditioned/fallen souls.
The Trimurti (; Sanskrit: "") is a concept in Hinduism "in which the cosmic
functions of creation, maintenance, and destruction are personified by the
forms of Brahma the creator, Vishnu the maintainer or preserver, and Shiva the
destroyer or transformer." These three deities have been called "the Hindu
triad" or the "Great Trinity". Of the three members of the Trimurti, the
Bhagavata Purana, which espouses the Vaishnavite viewpoint, explains that the
greatest benefit can be had from Vishnu. In Puranas and Vedas, Narayana or Hari
or Vishnu is the name used for addressing Para Brahman Supreme Being. Vishnu is
used to address the same Supreme Lord who accepts Sattva Guna for sustainance
and maintenance of universe and restores dharma or religion by taking
incarnations or avatar in every Yuga. Name. The traditional explanation of the
name ' involves the root ', meaning "to settle" (cognate with Latin "vicus",
English "-wich" "village", Slavic: vas "-ves", or also (in the Rigveda) "to
enter into, to pervade", glossing the name as "the All-Pervading One". An early
commentator on the Vedas, Yaska, in his Nirukta, defines Vishnu as "vishnu
vishateh" "one who enters everywhere", and "yad vishito bhavati tad
vishnurbhavati," "that which is free from fetters and bondages is Vishnu".
Vishnu itself is the second name in the Vishnu Sahasranama, the thousand names
of Vishnu. Adi Sankara in his commentary on the "Sahasranama" states derivation
from ', with a meaning "presence everywhere" ("As he pervades everything,
"vevesti", he is called "Vishnu"",). Adi Sankara states (regarding Vishnu
Purana, 3.1.45): "The Power of the Supreme Being has entered within the
universe. The root ' means 'enter into.'" Swami Chinmayananda, in his
translation of Vishnu sahasranama further elaborates on that verse: "The root
Vis means to enter. The entire world of things and beings is pervaded by Him
and the Upanishad emphatically insists in its mantra 'whatever that is there is
the world of change.' Hence, it means that He is not limited by space, time or
substance. Chinmayananda states that that which pervades everything is Vishnu."
Smriti and Shruti. Vedas. In the Yajur Veda, Taittiryia Aranyaka (10-13-1),
Narayana sukta, Lord Narayana is mentioned as the supreme being. The first
verse of Narayana sukta mentions the words "paramam padam" which literally
means "highest post" and may be understood as the "supreme abode for all
souls". Rigveda (1.022.20a) for Vishnu also mentions the same "paramam padam".
This special status is not given to any deity in the Vedas apart from Lord
Vishnu and Lord Narayana . This perhaps is an indication that Narayana is just
the another name for Vishnu himself, thus establishing the his supremacy.
Narayana is also one of the thousand names of Vishnu as mentioned in the Vishnu
Sahasranama. In the Rigveda, Vishnu is mentioned 93 times. He is frequently
invoked alongside other deities, especially Indra, who he helps in killing
Vritra, and with whom he drinks Soma. His distinguishing characteristic in the
Vedas is his association with light. Two Rigvedic hymns in Mandala 7 are
dedicated to Vishnu. In 7.99, Vishnu is addressed as the god who separates
heaven and earth. This characteristic he shares with Indra. Griffith's
"princes" are the "sūri", either "inciters" or lords of a sacrifice, or
priests charged with pressing the Soma. The verse is quoted as expressing
Vishnu's supremacy by Vaishnavites. Though such solar aspects have been
associated with Vishnu by tradition as well as modern-scholarship, he was not
just the representation of the sun, as he traverses in his strides both
vertically and horizontally. In hymns 1.22.17, 1.154.3, 1.154.4 he strides
across the earth with three steps, in 6.49.13, 7.100.3 strides across the earth
three times and in 1.154.1, 1.155.5,7.29.7 he strides vertically, with the
final step in the heavens. The same Veda also says he strode wide and created
space in the cosmos for Indra to fight Vritra. By his stride he said to have
made dwelling for men possible, the three being a symbolic representation of
its all-encompassing nature. This all-enveloping nature and benevolence to men
were to remain the enduring attributes of Vishnu. As the triple-strider he is
known as Tri-vikrama and as Uru-krama for the strides were wide. The general
view is that Vedas place Indra in considerably superior position to Vishnu's
Avatar of Vamana. Vamana helps Indra by restoring his Kingdom as mentioned in
the Vamana Purana. An alternate translation is provided by Wilson (page 269 of
document) according to Sayana. When Thy (younger brother) Viṣṇu (Vamana) by
(his) strength stepped his three paces, then verily thy beloved horses bore
thee. (Rigveda 8:12:27) Wilson also mentions the possible translation as given
by Griffith as a footnote. However the following verse from Rig Veda renders
the above translation by Wilson more probable. Wilson also offers alternate
translation for Rigveda 10:113:2 (pages 318–319) This verse glorifies
Viṣṇu as one who is glorified by his own strength, while Indra became
deserving of honor after having slain Vrtra only in association with other
gods. However Viṣṇu praising other gods need not be taken as worship.
Wilson translates as follows. The following verses show categorically Viṣṇu
as distinguished from other gods in Rig Veda. No being that is or that has been
born, divine Viṣṇu, has attained the utmost limit of thy magnitude, by
which thou hast upheld the vast and beautiful heaven, and sustained the eastern
horizon of Earth.(Rigveda 7:99:2) (page 196) However, Jan Gonda, the late
Indologist, states that Vishnu, although remaining in the background of Indra's
exploits, contributes by his presence, or is key to Indra's success. Vishnu is
more than a mere companion, equal in rank or power to Indra, or sometime the
one who made Indra's success possible. Moreover, even when Vishnu is described
as subordinate to Indra, such a description is found in only the hymns to
Indra, but in a kathenotheistic religion like that of the Rigveda, each god,
for the time being, is supreme in the mind of the devotee. But in the Vaishnava
canon the 'Vishnu' who is subordinate to Indra is identified as being none
other than Vamana, who is Vishnu's Avatar, and he is different from the Supreme
God Sreeman Narayana or Narayana who is referred to as Vishnu by Vaishnavites.
Vishnu is not a mere sacrificial deity; he is a God who lives in the highest
celestial region, compared with those who live in the atmospheric or
terrestrial regions; Moreover, Vishnu is a god who is content with mere prayer,
unlike almost all of the other gods who receive sacrificial offerings such as
havis or soma. However, in the Rig Vedic texts, the deity or god referred to as
Vishnu is none other than the Sun God who also bore the name Suryanarayana, who
in turn was also called Vishnu. So the 'Vishnu' referred to in the Rig Veda is
none other than the Sun God Suryanarayana or Surya and he in turn, is entirely
different from the Vishnu who is Sreeman Narayana (the Lord/Consort of Sree or
Lakshmi, who is also the central deity in 'Vishnu Puranam', 'Vishnu
Sahasranamam', 'Purusha Sooktham' (wherein he is identified very clearly not as
the Sun or Suryanarayana (the purveyor of the skies), but as Narayana or Vishnu
and further identified as the Supreme Lord who has Sreedevi (Lakshmi) and
Bhoodevi (Goddess Earth or Bhoomi) as his wives/consorts ("Hreeshcha-tey-
Lakshmeeshcha-patnyauh"). The Vaishnavites make a further distinction by
extolling the qualities of Vishnu or Narayana by highlighting him as a
personality or entity much different from other deities like Siva, Brahma or
the minor deity Surya the Sun who also bears the name Vishnu. In the Puranas
Indra frequently becomes proud and haughty. This act of his incurs the
displeasure of his creators namely Brahma, who along with Siva the Destroyer
God start by giving boons to demons or Asuras like Hiranyaksha,
Hiranyakashyapu, Ravana, who are able to defeat Indra in wars between the Devas
and Asuras. Indra in turn has no option but to take advice of the sages who say
that no one can save him but the Protector God Sreeman Narayana or Vishnu the
Supreme Lord. Indra goes and prays before Vishnu for protection and the Supreme
Lord obliges him by taking avatara or birth or generating himself on Earth in
various forms i.e. first as amphibean, water-born being namely the Matsya or
fish, then as a creature capable of living on land as well as water, i.e. the
Koorma avatara (Tortoise), then half-man, half-animal namely Varaha (the Pig-
faced/human-bodied Lord) and Narasimha (Lord with Lion face and claws and human
body). Later the same Narayana or Vishnu appears as full-fledged human being in
the form of Vamana (the short-heighted person), Parashuram, Ram, Krishna,
Balarama or Buddha and finally as Kalki avataram for performing his task of
protecting his devotees from the Asuras or anti-God, anti-religious entities.
The Vaishnava canon claims absolute clarity in identification of the Supreme
Lord Vishnu (Sreeman Narayana or Narayana) from the Vishnu of the Rig Veda who
they claim is none other than the Sun God Suryanarayana, who incidentally is
also bears a secondary name Vishnu. In the Vaishnava canon, it is none other
than Lord Vishnu or Sreeman Narayana who is their Supreme God who takes
manifest forms or avatarams across various 'yugas (ages or periods) to save
humanity from the clutches of evil beings, who became powerful after receiving
boons from the two other Gods of the Trinity viz. Brahma and Shiva. They
believe the acts of Sreeman Narayana also called Vishnu were certainly not
performed by the minor deity Suryanarayana, or the Sun, also known as Vishnu of
the Rig Vedas to be the Sun God Surya or Suryanarayana, who was also called and
worshipped as Vishnu during the Rig Vedic period. This is borne out by the fact
that neither are there are in number, very few temples dedicated to the Sun or
Suryanarayana, nor indeed of the Vedic God Indra, nor is there any pronounced
importance followed by worship of Indra in the Hindu religion, which practice
was discontinued after Indra's defeat at the hands of the demons and Asuras and
his forced abdication of the throne. Following the defeat of Indra and his
displacement as the Lord of Heaven or Swarga, according to the Vaishnava canon,
the Supreme Lord of the universe Sreeman Narayana or Vishnu takes his
incarnations or avatarams on earth to save mankind, thus taking the place of
the Supreme God with him not being worshipped and eulogized by Vaishnavites
alone, but also getting recognized by Shaivites and the Smarthas. A direct
consequence of this was the almost complete absence of Indra and to a lesser
extent, of the Sun or Suryanarayana, a minor deity from Hindu temples from the
deities being considered fit for worshipping as the chief or most important
deity. A glaring example being quoted in support of non-worship of deities like
Indra or non-prominence of other major Gods like Shiva and Brahma, (who is in
any case not having more than a temple or two on earth) by Vaishnavites is the
fact of their Supreme Lord Vishnu or Narayana taking avatarams to defeat and
kill either the demons or Asuras like Hiranyaksha, Hiranyakashyipu or Ravana
who have vanquished Indra himself and/or demons who have empowered themselves
by pleasing and getting boons from other powerful Gods like Brahma and Shiva.
These demons received boons making them virtually indestructible by any person.
But Narayana or Vishnu outwits them by appearing as half-human half-animal
before demons like Hiranyakashyipu (who had taken a boon that he will not be
killed at any specific time of the day or by any human or animal) or Ravana
(who becomes invincible by taking a boon from God Shiva that he will not be
killed by any Deva – a celestial being with godly powers) who is considered
the greatest among devotees of Shiva gets slayed by Vishnu, who appears before
him as a mere human being i.e. Lord Rama, the son of Dasharatha. The Vaishnava
canon thus claims supremacy of Vishnu even among the Gods by quoting his
victories over or killing of those very powerful entities who are themselves
devotees of other Gods like the creator Brahma or the destroyer Shiva. The
Vaishnava canon finally distinguishes Narayana or the Supreme Lord Vishnu from
other deities like Shiva the Destroyer or Brahma the creator, first by pointing
out the accepted iconography or sculptures of Vishnu in reclining position as
having the creator Brahma sprouting or emerging from Vishnu's navel i.e.
showing Brahma himself as having been created by Vishnu out of his own person.
This is interpreted as the creator being created by his own creator i.e. Brahma
himself being created by Vishnu and going on to create the Universe on the
instructions of Vishnu. Secondly, Rudra or Shiva is none other than the Son of
Brihaspati. Thirdly, there is the act of the creator Brahma and the destroyer
God Shiva go on to give boons to demons or Asuras and as a consequence of
granting boons to evil beings, they divest themselves of their powers to
eliminate them, which are now vested with the Supreme Lord among the Gods i.e.
Vishnu or Narayana also called Sreeman Narayana, who takes various avatars or
forms to come to earth to slay or defeat those demons. This is again
interpreted as the triumph of Lord Vishnu or Narayana because it would mean
that Shiva and Brahma can only grant boons to good beings and since they cannot
distinguish between the two types of beings, they have to entrust this
responsibility to the God who protects all good beings. Thus, they have no
option but to leave all devotees under the care of the Protector Lord, i.e. the
Supreme Lord of the Vaishnava canon, i.e. Lord Narayana or Vishnu. Third and
lastly, the Vaishnava canon makes the final distinction in addition to the
above two qualities of Lord Vishnu or Narayana, so as to reinforce his pre-
eminence and supremacy among all the Gods because Sreeman Narayana or Vishnu in
his myriad forms never ever grants a wish to evil beings, as is done according
to the Puranas by both the creator God Brahma or the destroyer God Shiva. So
they regard Sreeman Narayana or Vishnu as a protector God who makes a clear
distinction between bad and good beings and never favours or grants boons or
wishes to evil entities as would be done by both Shiva and Brahma and is thus
regarded by them as the only God worthy of worship as the preferred deity. The
above actions of Vishnu automatically led to the lowering of status of Indra
among Hindu deities and leads directly to the ascendancy of Vishnu or Narayana,
as per the Vaishnava canon. Brahmanas. In the Rigveda, Shakala shakha: Aitareya
Brahmana Verse 1 : "agnir vai devānām avamo viṣṇuḥ paramas,
tadantareṇa sarvā anyā devatā" declares that Agni is the lowest or
youngest god and Vishnu is the greatest and the oldest God. In the Brahmanas,
the supremacy of Lord Vishnu is clearly announced. Here He is repeatedly
addressed as "Yajnapati" or the one whom all the sacrifices are meant to
please. Even if the sacrifices are offered to the demigods, Lord Vishnu is the
one who accepts the sacrifice and allots the respective fruits to the
performer. There is mention of one such incident where a demonic person
performs a sacrifice by abducting the rishis (Sanskrit name for sages who
constantly meditate by chanting God's name) forcefully. The sacrifice was meant
to bring about the destruction of Indra. But the rishis,who used to worship
Indra as a demigod were intelligent enough to alter a single pronunciation of
the ved-mantra. The purpose of the entire sacrifice was reversed. When the
fruit of the sacrifice was given, when the demon was on the verge of dying, he
clearly calls out to lord Vishnu,whom he addresses as Supreme Godhead and "the
father of all living entities including himself". Aitareya Brahmana: 1:1:
1 mentions Vishnu as the Supreme God. But in the Vaishnava canon, in different
ages, with Vishnu in different forms, his relationship with the 'asuras' or
evil-beings including demons (Hiranyaksha and Hiranyakashyipu were considered
demons) has always been adversarial, with the asuras always causing harm or
killing good beings including sages and devotees of Vishnu, with the sages and
'devas' (celestial beings including Indra – not considered a God in Vaishnava
canon) doing penance and calling out to Lord Vishnu for protection. In response
to the call of devotees and being described as the one and only saviour of the
world, Sreeman Narayana or Vishnu, being the Protector God, always obliges by
taking avatarams (incarnations as Narasimha, Rama etc.) to finally vanquish and
eliminate the asuras. In the Vaishnava canon, Narayana or Lord Vishnu is
clearly defined as one who has never given or granted any boons to the asuras
(to clearly distinguish him from other gods like Shiva and Brahma, who granted
boons to demons or evil beings), but he is the only God called upon to save
good beings by defeating or killing the very evil beings who became powerful or
even invincible after being granted boons by the destroyer Shiva and the
creator Brahma. In any case Lord Vishnu himself is not a Brahmana. He belongs
to Satriyan group. Sayana writes that Aitareya Brahmana 1-1-1 "agnir vai
devānām avamo viṣṇuḥ paramas,tadantareṇa sarvā anyā devatā" does
not indicate any hierarchy among gods. Even in Rigveda Samhita, where avama and
parama are not applied to denote rank and dignity, but only to mark place and
locality. In Rigveda 1:108:9,: "yadindrāghnī avamasyāṃ pṛthivyāṃ
madhyamasyāṃ paramasyāmuta sthaḥ |" i.e., in the lowest place, the middle
(place), and the highest (place). Agni, the fire, has, among the gods, the
lowest place; for he resides with man on the earth ; while the other gods are
either in the air, or in the sky. Vishnu occupies the highest place ; for he
represents (in the Rigveda) the sun in its daily and yearly course. The words
"avama" and "parama" is to be understood as 'First' and 'Last' respectively. To
prove this meaning to be the true one, Sayana adduces the mantra (1,4. As'val.
Sr. S. 4, 2), "agnir mukham prathamo devatanam samgathanam uttamo vishnur
asit", i.e., Agni was the first of the deities assembled, (and) Vishnu the
last. In the Kausitaki-Brahmana (7.1) Agni is called avarardhya (instead of
avama), and Visnu parardhya(instead of parama),i.e., belonging to the lower and
higher halves (or forming the lower and higher halves). The Vishnu Purana gives
tremendous importance to the worship of Vishnu, but mentions that sacrifices to
Sreeman Narayana are to begin only with both the lighting of fire or 'Agni',
pouring of sacrificial offerings to Narayana or Vishnu in 'Agni' so that those
offerings reach the Supreme God Vishnu and are accepted by him. Worship of Lord
Vishnu through Yagnyas (or Homams) and other rituals, will not bear fruit or
the desired result in case 'Agni' is not given any role in the process. Muller
says "Although the gods are sometimes distinctly invoked as the great and the
small, the young and the old (RV. i. 27. 13), this is only an attempt to find
the most comprehensive expression for the divine powers, and nowhere is any of
the gods represented as the slave of others. It would be easy to find, in the
numerous hymns of the Veda, passages in which almost every single god is
represented as supreme and absolute." However this notion is not completely
correct as per the following verses, which shows Rig Veda does recognize one or
more gods being subject to other god(s). Him whose high law not Varuna nor
Indra, not Mitra, Aryaman, nor Rudra breaketh, Nor evil-hearted fiends, here
for my welfare him I invoke, God Savitar, with worship.(Rigveda 2.038.09) I
invite to this place, with reverential salutations, for my good, that divine
Savita, whose functions neither Indra, nor Varun.a, nor Mitra nor Aryaman nor
Rudra nor the enemies (of the gods), impede. (Rigveda 2.038.09) The following
verse suggests Rudra gaining his strength from worship of Viṣṇu. With
offerings I propitiate the branches of this swift-moving God, the bounteous
Visnu. Hence Rudra gained his Rudra-strength: O Asvins, ye sought the house
that hath celestial viands.(Rigveda 7.040.05) Viṣṇu Smṛti. The Viṣṇu
Smṛti (700-1000AD) is one of the latest books of the Dharmaśāstra tradition
of Hinduism and also the only one which does not deal directly with the means
of knowing dharma, focusing instead on the bhakti tradition and requiring daily
puja to the god Viṣṇu. It is also known for its handling of the
controversial subject of the practice of sati (the burning of a widow on her
husband’s funeral pyre). The text was not actually composed by the sage
Viṣṇu himself, but rather by an individual or group writing much after his
death. This group brought together a collection of all of the commonly known
legal maxims which were attributed to the sage Viṣṇu into one book as the
Indian oral culture began to be recorded more formally. Theological attributes.
Vishnu is the only Bhagavan as declared in the Bhagavata 1.2.11 in the verse:
"vadanti tat tattva-vidas tattvam yaj jnanam advayam brahmeti paramatmeti
bhagavan iti sabdyate". The meaning of the verse is as follows: "Learned
transcendentalists who know the Absolute Truth call this nondual substance
Brahman, Paramātma, and Bhagavan." Vishnu possesses six such divine glories,
namely, However, the actual number of auspicious qualities of Vishnu is
countless, with the above-mentioned six qualities being the most important.
Other important qualities attributed to Vishnu are Gambhirya (inestimatable
grandeur), Audarya (generosity), and Karunya (compassion). Natya Shastra lists
Vishnu as the presiding deity of the Sringara rasa. The Rigveda says: Vishnu
can travel in three strides. The first stride is the Earth. The second stride
is the visible sky. The third stride cannot be seen by men and is the heaven
where the gods and the righteous dead live. (This feature of three strides also
appears in the story of his avatar Vamana called Trivikrama.) The Sanskrit for
"to stride" is the root "kram"; its reduplicated perfect is "chakram" ( grade)
or "chakra" (zero-grade), and in the Rigveda he is called by epithets such as
"" = "he who has made 3 strides". The Sanskrit word "chakra" also means
"wheel". That may have suggested the idea of Vishnu carrying a chakra. Five
forms. See also Pañcaratra Relation with Shiva. The Trimurthis are inseparable
and in complete harmony in view of their common vision and universal good. They
complement each other. Lord Vishnu is widely seen as the brother of Shiva's
consort Parvati. In fact Vishnu formalized the wedding of Shiva and Parvati and
acted as Parvati's brother in all the ceremonies and performed 'Kanya Daan',
while the creator-god Brahma acted as the priest of the wedding. The mother
goddess Parvati is referred to as his sister in sacred hymns – 'Narayani' in
Devi Stotram, 'Vaishnavi' in Ambashtakam and as 'Padmanabha Sahodari' in Lalita
Sahasranama Stotram. In fact it should be remembered that Goddess Durga
(Parvati) and Vishnu (as his avatar Krishna) were actually born as brother and
sister in Krishnavatar in Dwapara Yuga – Durga takes Yasoda's womb as
'Yogamaya' and Krishna takes Devaki's womb, both are interchanged. When Kansa
tries to kill the baby skips out of his hans and transforms into Yogamaya who
laughts aloud and informs him, "You fool! your nemesis is born elsewhere. Your
end is near" and vanishes. It should be noted that there is no concept of
disagreement among the gods and they are ideal in all respects. However,
ordinary men and sectarian groups not knowing this equilibrium and the sacred
relationship among them, have in later ages woven several stories in vernacular
presenting their preferred deity as Supreme and as 'sthala puranas' for the
multitude of temples. These have nothing to do with the recognised original
Puranas and other ancient Scriptures. However their equilibrium is best
manifested in Gajasura Samharam followed by Battle against Vinayaka. Similarly
Samudra manthan episode and Hanuman's part in the entire Ramayana are also a
superlative examples of synergy between the two gods. The rakshasa called
Gajasura was an ardent devotee of Lord Siva. He underwent penance for many
years to receive special boons. Siva, who was moved by Gajasura's devotion,
offered a boon. Gajasura asked Siva to reside in his belly and Siva instantly
agreed. Meanwhile on Mount Kailash, Parvati was anxious to know her husband's
whereabouts and finally approached her brother Lord Vishnu for help. Vishnu and
Brahma disguised themselves as street players and along with Shiva's Bull
carrier Nandi, they set out in search of Shiva. Then Vishnu, the omniscient
director of the cosmic game, staged a small play. He transformed Nandi into a
dancing bull and conducted him in front of Gajasura, with himself and Brahma
playing musical instruments. The enchanting performance of the bull sent the
demon into ecstasies, and he asked the flutist to tell him what he desired. The
flutist asks for Shiva to be liberated. Hearing this, the demon king realised
that the entertainer is none but Lord Vishnu himself and that his end is near.
He also realises that Shiva cannot be made to live in his stomach forever
because the whole world would become pell mell. Gajasura then prayed to Lord
Shiva that he should be allowed to be immortal in the memories of people which
Shiva agreed. Nandi made a dent in Gajasura's stomach and amid pitched chanting
and prayers, Shiva emerged ripping apart the skin. To fulfill his wish, Lord
Siva severed Gajasura's head and freed him from the cycle of births and deaths.
Gajasura's head was subsequently used for Vinayaka and thus he became immortal
with the world adoring Ganesha. Although their names were mentioned in the
Vedas, during the pure Vedic period, both Vishnu and Shiva (as identified with
Rudra) played relatively minor roles, but by the time of the Brahmanas (c.
1000–700 BCE), both were gaining ascendance. By the Puranic period, both
deities had major sects of devotees, creating a schism in the society. Of
significance is both the creator Brahma and Shiva the destroyer also played
supportive roles by keeping company of Lord Vishnu in his incarnated forms.
Hanuman the 'Vanara' completely dedicated to Ram, who gives him company and
obeys his command while playing an important part in Ram's life is regarded in
Vaishnava canon as being none other than Shiva the destroyer only, because it
is through the blessings of Shiva that Hanuman is born to his mother Anjani for
he also bears the name Anjaniputra. Thus, Hanuman the constant consort of
Vishnu, with his idol being present in not just temples of Rama, but also in
temples of Krishna, Narasimha i.e. all the avatarams of Vishnu is considered by
Vaishnavas as being none other than Lord Shiva. Syncretic forces produced
stories in which the two deities were shown in cooperative relationships and
combined forms. Harihara is the name of a combined deity form of both Vishnu
(Hari) and Shiva (Hara). This dual form, which is also called Harirudra, is
mentioned in the Mahabharata. Relations with other deities. Vishnu's consort is
Lakshmi, the goddess of wealth. Maya is the samvit (the primary
intelligence)dark matter of the universe is Vishnu, while the other five
attributes emerge from this samvit and hence Maya or dark energy of the
universe is Lakshmi is his ahamata, activity, or Vishnu's Power. This power of
God, Maya or Shakti, is personified and is called Shree or Lakshmi, Maya,
Vishnumaya, or Mahamaya, and She is said to manifest Herself in, 1)
kriyāshakti, (Creative Activity) and 2) bhütishakti (Creation) of Universe.
Hence this world cannot part with his creativity i.e., dark energy of universe,
which is a feminine form which in its feminine form is called Shree or Lakshmi
or Maya. He therefore needs consort Goddess Lakshmi to be with Him always. Thus
goddess Lakshmi has to accompany Vishnu in all His incarnations. Her various
avatars as Lord Vishnu's consort are – Varahavataram – Bhudevi Ramavataram
– Vedavati & Sita Krishnavataram – Radha & Rukmini Venkateswara –
Padmavathi Vishnu's vehicle is Garuda, the eagle, and he is commonly depicted
as riding on his shoulders. Another name of him is "Veda-Atma" or The Soul of
the Vedas and Vedic truth. Iconography. To this may be added, conventionally,
the vanamaala flower garland and Vishnu's bow, the Shaarnga, and his sword
Nandaka. A verse of the Vishnu Sahasranama stotram states;""vanamālī gadhī
shārngī shanki chakri cha nandaki / shrīmān nārāyaņo vişņo vāsudevo
abhirakşatu//""; translation: Protect us Oh Lord Narayana who wears the forest
garland,who has the mace, conch, sword and the wheel. And who is called Vishnu
and the Vasudeva. Avatars. Some versions of the above list include Hayagriva
amongst the Dasavataras. Apart from the above mentioned ten principal avatars,
another 22 avatars are also given in Chapter 3, Canto 1 of the Bhagavata
Purana. Following this list the Bhagavatam states that as well as these avatars
"the incarnations of the Lord are innumerable, like rivulets flowing from
inexhaustible sources of water". Thousand names of Vishnu. Vishnu has a very
large number of names and followers that are collected in the Vishnu
sahasranama ("Vishnu's thousand names") from within the larger work
"Mahabharata". The character Bhishma recites the names before Krishna on the
battlefield of Kurukshetra, praising him (Vishnu) as the supreme god. These
Sahasranama are regarded as the essence of all Vedas by followers of
Vaishnavism, who believe sincere chanting of Vishnu Sahasranama results in
spiritual well-being and a greater awareness of God. According to the
Siddhartha-samhita there are twenty-four forms of Lord Vishnu. The twenty-four
forms are Sourish comes from the Indian word which means, "Lord Vishnu
