Vulgate The Vulgate is a late 4th-century Latin translation of the Bible. It
was largely the work of St. Jerome, who was commissioned by Pope Damasus I in
382 to make a revision of the old Latin translations. By the 13th century this
revision had come to be called the "versio vulgata", that is, the "commonly
used translation", and ultimately it became the definitive and officially
promulgated Latin version of the Bible in the Roman Catholic Church. Its
widespread adoption led to the eclipse of earlier Latin translations, which are
collectively referred to as the Vetus Latina. Authorship. Translation. Jerome
did not embark on the work with the intention of creating a new version of the
whole Bible, but the changing nature of his program can be tracked in his
voluminous correspondence. He had been commissioned by Damasus I in 382 to
revise the Old Latin text of the four Gospels from the best Greek texts, and by
the time of Damasus' death in 384 he had thoroughly completed this task,
together with a more cursory revision from the Greek Septuagint of the Old
Latin text of the Psalms in the Roman Psalter which is now lost. How much of
the rest of the New Testament he then revised is difficult to judge today, but
little of his work survived in the Vulgate text. In 385, Jerome was forced out
of Rome, and eventually settled in Bethlehem, where he was able to use a
surviving manuscript of the Hexapla, likely from the nearby Theological Library
of Caesarea Maritima, a columnar comparison of the variant versions of the Old
Testament undertaken 150 years before by Origen. Jerome first embarked on a
revision of the Psalms, translated from the revised Septuagint Greek column of
the Hexapla, which later came to be called the Gallican version. He also
appears to have undertaken further new translations into Latin from the
Hexaplar Septuagint column for other books. But from 390 to 405, Jerome
translated anew from the Hebrew all 39 books in the Hebrew Bible, including a
further version of the Psalms. This new translation of the Psalms was labelled
by him as ""iuxta Hebraeos"" (i.e. "close to the Hebrews", "immediately
following the Hebrews"), and was commonly found in the Vulgate, until it was
widely replaced by his Gallican psalms beginning in the 9th century. The
Vulgate is usually credited as being the first translation of the Old Testament
into Latin directly from the Hebrew Tanakh, rather than the Greek Septuagint.
Jerome's extensive use of exegetical material written in Greek, on the other
hand, as well as his use of the Aquiline and Theodotiontic columns of the
Hexapla, along with the somewhat paraphrastic style in which he translated
makes it difficult to determine exactly how direct the conversion of Hebrew to
Latin was. As Jerome completed his translations of each book of the Bible, he
recorded his observations and comments in an extensive correspondence with
other scholars; and these letters were subsequently collected and appended as
prologues to the Vulgate text for those books where they survived. In these
letters, Jerome described those books or portions of books in the Septuagint
that were not found in the Hebrew as being non-canonical: he called them
"apocrypha". Jerome's views did not, however, prevail; and all complete
manuscripts and editions of the Vulgate include some or all these books. Of the
Old Testament texts not found in the Hebrew, Jerome translated Tobit and Judith
anew from the Aramaic; and from the Greek, the additions to Esther from the
Septuagint, and the additions to Daniel from Theodotion. Other books; Baruch,
Letter of Jeremiah, Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, 1 and 2 Maccabees are variously
found in Vulgate manuscripts with texts derived from the Old Latin; sometimes
together with Latin versions of other texts found neither in the Hebrew Bible,
nor in the Septuagint, 4 Esdras, the Prayer of Manasses and Laodiceans. Their
style is still markedly distinguishable from Jerome's. In the Vulgate text,
Jerome's translations from the Greek of the additions to Esther and Daniel are
combined with his separate translations of these books from the Hebrew.
Critical value. In translating the 39 books of the Hebrew Bible, Jerome was
relatively free in rendering their text into Latin, but it is possible to
determine that the oldest surviving complete manuscripts of the Masoretic Text,
which date from nearly 600 years after Jerome, nevertheless transmit a
consonantal Hebrew text very close to that used by Jerome. Consequently, these
books of the Vulgate – though of high literary quality – have little
independent interest in text critical debate. Jerome translated the books of
Judith and Tobit under sufferance, engaging a Jewish intermediary to render the
Aramaic into oral Hebrew, for him then to paraphrase into Latin. Their textual
value is small. The Vulgate Old Testament texts that were translated from the
Greek – whether by Jerome himself, or preserving revised or unrevised Old
Latin versions – are however early and important secondary witnesses to the
Septuagint. Damasus had instructed Jerome to be conservative in his revision of
the Old Latin Gospels, and it is possible to see Jerome's obedience to this
injunction in the preservation in the Vulgate of variant Latin vocabulary for
the same Greek terms. Hence, "high priest" is rendered "princeps sacerdotum" in
Vulgate Matthew; as "summus sacerdos" in Vulgate Mark; and as "pontifex" in
Vulgate John. Comparison of Jerome's Gospel texts with those in Old Latin
witnesses, suggests that his revision was substantially concerned with
redacting the expanded phraseology characteristic of the Western text-type, in
accordance with Alexandrian, or possibly early Byzantine, witnesses. Given
Jerome's conservative methods, and that manuscript evidence from outside Egypt
at this early date is very rare; these Vulgate readings have considerable
critical interest. More interesting still – because effectively untouched by
Jerome – are the Vulgate books of the rest of the New Testament; which
demonstrate rather more of supposed "Western" expansions, and otherwise
transmit a very early Old Latin text. Most valuable of all from a text-critical
perspective is the Vulgate text of the Apocalypse, a book where there is no
clear majority text in the surviving Greek witnesses. Prologues. In addition to
the biblical text the Vulgate contains 17 prologues, 16 of which were written
by Jerome. Jerome's prologues are in a sense misnamed, as they were written not
so much as prologues than as cover letters to specific individuals to accompany
copies of his translations. Because they were not intended for a general
audience, some of his comments in them are quite cryptic. These prologues are
to the Pentateuch, to "Joshua", and to "Kings", which is also called the
"Prologus Galeatus". Following these are prologues to "Chronicles", "Esdras",
"Tobias", "Judith", "Esther", "Job", "The Gallican Psalms", "Solomon",
"Isaias", "Jeremias", "Ezechiel", "Daniel", "Minor prophets", the "Gospels",
and the final prologue which is to the "Pauline Epistles" and is better known
as "Primum quaeritur". Related to these are Jerome's "Notes on the Rest of
Esther" and his "Prologue to the Hebrew Psalms". In addition to the Jerome's
prologue to the Gallican version of the Psalms, which is commonly found in
Vulgate manuscripts, his prologues also survive for the translations from the
Hexaplar Septuagint of the books of Job, Ecclesiastes, Song of Songs and
Chronicles. A recurring theme of the Old Testament prologues is Jerome's
preference for the "Hebraica veritas" (i.e., Hebrew truth) to the Septuagint, a
preference which he defended from his detractors. He stated that the Hebrew
text more clearly prefigures Christ than the Greek. Among the most remarkable
of these prologues is the "Prologus Galeatus", in which Jerome described an Old
Testament canon of 22 books, which he found represented in the 22-letter Hebrew
alphabet. Alternatively, he numbered the books as 24, which he described as the
24 elders in the Book of Revelation casting their crowns before the Lamb. Also
of note is the "Primum quaeritur", which defended the Pauline authorship of the
Epistle to the Hebrews, and compared Paul's ten letters to the churches with
the ten commandments. The author of the "Primum quaeritur" is unknown. The
editors of the Stuttgart Vulgate remark that this version of the epistles first
became popular among the Pelagians. In addition to "Primum quaeritur", many
manuscripts contain brief notes to each of the epistles indicating where they
were written, with notes about where the recipients dwelt. Adolf von Harnack,
citing De Bruyne, argued that these notes were written by Marcion of Sinope or
one of his followers. Relation with the Old Latin Bible. The Latin Biblical
texts in use before the Latin Vulgate are usually referred to collectively as
the "Vetus Latina", or "Old Latin Bible", or occasionally the "Old Latin
Vulgate". (Here "Old Latin" means that they are older than the Vulgate and
written in Latin, not that they are written in Old Latin. Likewise the Latin
Vulgate was so named because it was the Latin counterpart to the Greek Vulgate;
it was not written in Vulgar Latin.) The translations in the Vetus Latina had
accumulated piecemeal over a century or more; they were not translated by a
single person or institution, nor uniformly edited. The individual books varied
in quality of translation and style, and different manuscripts witness wide
variations in readings. Jerome, in his preface to the Vulgate gospels,
commented that there were "as many as there are manuscripts". The Old Testament
books of the Vetus Latina were translated from the Greek Septuagint, not from
the Hebrew. Jerome's earliest efforts in translation, his revision of the four
Gospels, was dedicated to Damasus; but his version had little or no official
recognition. Jerome's translated texts had to make their way on their own
merits. The Old Latin versions continued to be copied and used alongside the
Vulgate versions. Bede, writing in 8th century Northumbria, records Abbot
Ceolfrid quoting Genesis 1:16 according to both the Vulgate and the Old Latin
text, as the new and former editions. Nevertheless, the superior quality of the
Vulgate texts led to their increasingly superseding the Old Latin; although the
loss of familiar phrases and expressions still aroused hostility in
congregations; and, especially in North Africa and Spain, favourite Old Latin
readings were often re-introduced by copyists, while individual books within
Spanish Vulgate Bibles are sometimes found to retain the Old Latin text.
Spanish biblical traditions, with many Old Latin borrowings, were influential
in Ireland; while both Irish and Spanish influences are found in Vulgate texts
in northern France. In Italy and southern France, by contrast, a much purer
Vulgate text predominated; and this is the version of the Bible that became
established in England following the mission of Augustine of Canterbury. As
late as the 13th century, the Codex Gigas retained an Old Latin text for the
Apocalypse and the Acts of the Apostles. Throughout Late Antiquity and most of
the Middle Ages, the name "Vulgata" was applied to the Greek Vulgate and the
Vetus Latina, but as the acceptance of Jerome's version overtook that of the
Vetus Latina in the Western church, it too began to be called an "editio
vulgata", a Latin analogue to the older Greek "editio vulgata". The earliest
known use of the term "Vulgata" to describe the new Latin translation was made
by Roger Bacon in the 13th century. Wordsworth and White suggested that Jerome
used Old Latin text close to Codex Brixianus as the basis for his New Testament
and corrected it with the Alexandrian manuscripts. Influence on Western
culture. For over a thousand years (c. AD 400–1530), the Vulgate was the
definitive edition of the most influential text in Western European society.
Indeed, for most Western Christians, it was the only version of the Bible ever
encountered. The Vulgate's influence throughout the Middle Ages and the
Renaissance into the Early Modern Period is even greater than that of the King
James Version in English; for Christians during these times the phraseology and
wording of the Vulgate permeated all areas of the culture. Aside from its use
in prayer, liturgy and private study, the Vulgate served as inspiration for
ecclesiastical art and architecture, hymns, countless paintings, and popular
mystery plays. Reformation. While the Genevan Reformed tradition sought to
introduce vernacular versions translated from the original languages, it
nevertheless retained and extended the use of the Vulgate in theological
debate. In both the published Latin sermons of John Calvin, and the Greek New
Testament editions of Theodore Beza, the accompanying Latin reference text is
the Vulgate; and where Protestant churches took their lead from the Genevan
example – as in England and Scotland – the result was a broadening
appreciation of Jerome's translation in its dignified style and flowing prose.
The closest equivalent in English, the King James Version or Authorized
Version, shows a marked influence from the Vulgate, especially by comparison
with the earlier vernacular version of Tyndale, in respect of Jerome's
demonstration of how a technically exact Latinate religious vocabulary may be
combined with dignified prose and vigorous poetic rhythms. The Vulgate
continued to be regarded as the standard scholarly Bible throughout most of the
17th Century. Walton's London Polyglot of 1657 disregards the English Language
entirely. Walton's reference text throughout is the Vulgate. The Vulgate Latin
is also found as the standard text of scripture in Thomas Hobbes "Leviathan" of
1651, indeed Hobbes gives Vulgate chapter and verse numbers (i.e. Job 41:24;
not Job 41:33) for his head text. In Chapter 35: " 'The Signification in
Scripture of Kingdom of God'", Hobbes discusses Exodus 19:5, first in his own
translation of the " 'Vulgar Latin'", and then subsequently as found in the
versions he terms ""...the English translation made in the beginning of the
reign of King James"", and ""The Geneva French"" (i.e. Olivetan). Hobbes
advances detailed critical arguments why the Vulgate rendering is to be
preferred. It remained the assumption of Protestant scholars that, while it had
been of vital importance to provide the scriptures in the vernacular for
ordinary people, nevertheless for those with sufficient education to do so,
biblical study was best undertaken within the international common medium of
the Latin Vulgate. Council of Trent. The Vulgate was given an official capacity
by the Council of Trent (1545–1563) as the touchstone of the Biblical canon
concerning which parts of books are canonical. When the council listed the
books included in the canon, it qualified the books as being "entire with all
their parts, as they have been used to be read in the Catholic Church, and as
they are contained in the old Latin vulgate edition". There are 76 books in the
edition authorized by the council: 46 in the Old Testament, 27 in the New
Testament, and three in the Apocrypha. This decree was clarified somewhat by
Pope Pius XI on June 2, 1927, who allowed that the Comma Johanneum was open to
dispute, and it was further explicated by Pope Pius XII's encyclical Divino
Afflante Spiritu. Translations. Before the publication of Pius XII's Divino
Afflante Spiritu, the Vulgate was the source text used for many translations of
the Bible into vernacular languages. In English, the interlinear translation of
the Lindisfarne Gospels as well as other Old English Bible translations, the
translation of John Wycliffe, the Douay-Rheims Bible, the Confraternity Bible,
and Ronald Knox's translation were all made from the Vulgate. Influence on the
English language. The Vulgate had a large influence on the development of the
English language, especially in matters of religion. Many Latin words were
taken from the Vulgate into English nearly unchanged in meaning or spelling: '
(e.g. Genesis 1:1, Heb 9:11), ' (e.g. Is 37:32, Eph 2:5), ' (e.g. Rom 4:25, Heb
9:1), ' (e.g. Mt 26:28), ' (1 Ptr 1:2, 1 Cor 1:30), ' (Mt 19:28), and ' (from a
noun form of the verb "rapiemur" in 1 Thes 4:17). The word "publican" comes
from the Latin "publicanus" (e.g., Mt 10:3), and the phrase "far be it" is a
translation of the Latin expression "absit" (e.g., Mt 16:22 in the King James
Bible). Other examples include ', ', ', ', and '. Texts. Manuscripts and early
editions. A number of early manuscripts containing or reflecting the Vulgate
survive today. Dating from the 8th century, the Codex Amiatinus is the earliest
surviving manuscript of the complete Vulgate Bible. The Codex Fuldensis, dating
from around 545, contains most of the New Testament in the Vulgate version, but
the four Vulgate gospels are harmonized into a continuous narrative derived
from the Diatessaron. Over the course of the Middle Ages, the Vulgate had
succumbed to the inevitable changes wrought by human error in the countless
copies made of the text in monasteries across Europe. From its earliest days,
readings from the Old Latin were introduced. Marginal notes were erroneously
interpolated into the text. No one copy was the same as any other as scribes
added, removed, misspelled, or miscorrected verses in the Latin Bible. Alcuin
of York oversaw efforts to make an improved Vulgate, which he presented to
Charlemagne in 801; although he concentrated mainly on correcting
inconsistencies of grammar and orthography, many of which were in the original
text. More scholarly attempts were made by Theodulphus, Bishop of Orléans
(787?–821); Lanfranc, Archbishop of Canterbury (1070–1089); Stephen
Harding, Abbot of Cîteaux (1109–1134); and Deacon Nicolaus Maniacoria (about
the beginning of the 13th century). The University of Paris, the Dominicans,
and the Franciscans following Roger Bacon assembled lists of "correctoria";
approved readings where variants had been noted. Many of the readings that were
recommended were later found to be interpolations, or survivals of the Old
Latin text, since medieval correctors commonly sought to adjust the Vulgate
text into consistency with Bible quotations found in Early Church Fathers.
Though the advent of printing greatly reduced the potential of human error and
increased the consistency and uniformity of the text, the earliest editions of
the Vulgate merely reproduced the manuscripts that were readily available to
the publishers. Of the hundreds of early editions, the most notable today is
Mazarin edition published by Johann Gutenberg and Johann Fust in 1455, famous
for its beauty and antiquity. In 1504 the first Vulgate with variant readings
was published in Paris. One of the texts of the Complutensian Polyglot was an
edition of the Vulgate made from ancient manuscripts and corrected to agree
with the Greek. Erasmus published an edition corrected to agree better with the
Greek and Hebrew in 1516. Other corrected editions were published by Xanthus
Pagninus in 1518, Cardinal Cajetan, Augustinus Steuchius in 1529, Abbot
Isidorus Clarius (Venice, 1542), and others. In 1528, Robertus Stephanus
published the first of a series of critical editions, which formed the basis of
the later Sistine and Clementine editions. The critical edition of John
Hentenius of Louvain followed in 1547. In 1550, Stephanus fled to Geneva where
in 1555 he issued his final critical edition of the Vulgate, which was the
first complete Bible with full chapter and verse divisions, and which became
the standard Biblical reference text for late 16th century Reformed theology.
Clementine Vulgate. The Clementine Vulgate ("Biblia Sacra Vulgatæ Editionis
Sixti Quinti Pontificis Maximi iussu recognita atque edita") is the edition
most familiar to Catholics who have lived prior to the liturgical reforms
following Vatican II. After the Reformation, when the Catholic Church strove to
counter the attacks and refute the doctrines of Protestantism, the Vulgate was
reaffirmed in the Council of Trent as the sole, authorized Latin text of the
Bible. To fulfill this declaration, the council commissioned the pope to make a
standard text of the Vulgate out of the countless editions produced during the
Renaissance and manuscripts produced during the Middle Ages. The actual first
manifestation of this authorized text did not appear until 1590. It was
sponsored by Pope Sixtus V (1585–90) and known as the Sistine Vulgate. It was
based on the edition of Robertus Stephanus corrected to agree with the Greek,
but it was hurried into print and suffered from many printing errors. The
Sixtine edition was soon replaced by Clement VIII (1592–1605) who had ordered
Franciscus Toletus, Augustinus Valerius, Fredericus Borromaeus, Robertus
Bellarmino, Antonius Agellius, and Petrus Morinus to make corrections and a
revision. This new revised version was based more on the Hentenian edition. It
is called today the Sixto-Clementine Vulgate, or simply the Clementine,
although it is Sixtus' name which appears on the title page. Clement published
three printings of this edition, in 1592, 1593 and 1598. The Clementine
differed from the manuscripts on which it was ultimately based in that it
grouped the various prefaces of St. Jerome together at the beginning, and it
removed 3 and 4 Esdras and the Prayer of Manasses from the Old Testament and
placed them as Apocrypha into an appendix following the New Testament. The
Psalter of the Clementine Vulgate, like that of almost all earlier printed
editions, is the Gallicanum, omitting Psalm 151. It follows the Greek numbering
of the Psalms, which differs from that in versions translated directly from the
Hebrew. The Clementine Vulgate of 1592 became the standard Bible text of the
Roman Rite of the Roman Catholic Church until 1979, when the Nova Vulgata was
promulgated. Later printings. After Clement's 1598 printing of the Vulgate, the
Vatican issued no other official printings, leaving the task to other printers.
Although the other printers of the Clementine Vulgate faithfully reproduced the
words of the official edition, they were often quite free in matters of
spelling, punctuation, capitalization, and paragraph boundaries. In 1906,
Capuchin friar Fr. Michael Hetzenauer produced an edition restoring the
original Clementine text while taking into account variations in Clement's
three printings as well as correctoria officially issued by the Vatican. In
1982, Biblioteca de Autores Cristianos issued a printing of the Clementine
Vulgate (ISBN 84-7914-021-6) omitting the Clementine Apocrypha, but containing
excerpts from various magisterial documents and the "Piana" version of the
psalms in addition to the vulgate version. Newer critical editions. After the
publication of the Clementine Vulgate, few critical editions were published. In
1734 Vallarsi published a corrected edition of the Vulgate. Most other later
editions limited themselves to the New Testament, most notably Fleck's edition
of 1840, Constantin von Tischendorf's edition of 1864, and the Oxford edition
of Bishop John Wordsworth and Henry Julian White in 1889. In 1906 Eberhard
Nestle published "Novum Testamentum Latine", which presented the Clementine
Vulgate text with a critical apparatus comparing it to the editions of Sixtus V
(1590), Wordsworth and White (1889), Lachman (1842), and Tischendorf (1854), as
well as the manuscripts Codex Amiatinus and Codex Fuldensis. In 1907 Pope Pius
X commissioned the monks of the Benedictine Abbey of St. Jerome in Rome to
prepare a critical edition of Jerome's Vulgate as a basis for a revision of the
Clementine. Only the Old Testament was ever completed, which however
complemented the New Testament edition of Wordsworth and White; the fruit of
this labour led to the creation of the "Nova Vulgata". The Benedictine critical
edition was used as a basis for much of the Old Testament of the Stuttgart
Vulgate. Stuttgart edition. This Vulgate was first published in 1969 (5th
edition, 2007) by the German Bible Society (Deutsche Bibelgesellschaft), based
in Stuttgart. This edition, alternatively titled "Biblia Sacra Vulgata" or
"Biblia Sacra iuxta vulgatam versionem" (ISBN 3-438-05303-9 and ISBN 1-59856-
178-2 for North America), is a "manual edition" in that it reduces much of the
information in the big multi-volume critical editions that preceded it into a
single compact volume. It is based on earlier critical editions of the Vulgate,
including the Benedictine edition and the Latin New Testament produced by
Wordsworth and White, which provided variant readings from the diverse
manuscripts and printed editions of the Vulgate and comparison of different
wordings in their footnotes. The Stuttgart Vulgate attempts, through critical
comparison of important, historical manuscripts of the Vulgate, to recreate an
early text, cleansed of the scribal errors of a millennium. An important
feature in the Stuttgart edition for those studying the Vulgate is the
inclusion of all of Jerome's prologues to the Bible, the Testaments, and the
major books and sections (Pentateuch, Gospels, Minor Prophets, etc.) of the
Bible. This adheres to the style of medieval editions of the Vulgate, which
were never without Jerome's prologues. In its spelling, the Stuttgart also
retains a more medieval Latin orthography than the Clementine, sometimes using
"oe" rather than "ae", and having more proper nouns beginning with "H" (i.e.,
"Helimelech" instead of "Elimelech"), but the spelling is inconsistent
throughout, as in the manuscripts. The Stuttgart Vulgate also follows the
medieval manuscripts in using line breaks, rather than the modern system of
punctuation marks, to indicate the structure of each verse. Because of these
features, it initially presents an unfamiliar appearance to readers accustomed
to the Clementine text. It contains two Psalters, both the traditional
"Gallicanum" and the "juxta Hebraicum", which are printed on facing pages to
allow easy comparison and contrast between the two versions. It has an expanded
Apocrypha, containing Psalm 151 and the Epistle to the Laodiceans in addition
to 3 and 4 Esdras and the Prayer of Manasses. In addition, its modern prefaces
are a source of valuable information about the history of the Vulgate. One
reason for the Stuttgart edition's importance rests in the fact that it is the
one most disseminated on the Internet. However, this electronic version is
commonly mutilated, lacking all formatting, notes, prefaces and apparatus, and
often lacking the Gallican Psalter, Apocrypha, and Deuterocanonical books and
sections. Moreover, the protocanonical part of Daniel following chapter 3 is
commonly missing. Nova Vulgata. The Nova Vulgata ("Bibliorum Sacrorum nova
vulgata editio", ISBN 88-209-2163-4), also called the Neo-Vulgate, is currently
the typical Latin edition published by the Holy See for use in the Roman rite.
The Second Vatican Council in "Sacrosanctum Concilium" mandated a revision of
the Latin Psalter in accord with modern textual and linguistic studies, while
preserving or refining its Christian Latin style. In 1965 Pope Paul VI
appointed a commission to revise the rest of the Vulgate following the same
principles. The Commission published its work in eight annotated sections,
inviting criticism from Catholic scholars as the sections were published. The
Latin Psalter was published in 1969; the New Testament was completed by 1971
and the entire Nova Vulgata was published as a single volume edition for the
first time in 1979. The foundational text of most of the "Nova Vulgata"'s Old
Testament is the critical edition done by the monks of the Benedictine Abbey of
St. Jerome under Pope St. Pius X. The foundational text of the books of Tobit
and Judith are from manuscripts of the Vetus Latina rather than the Vulgate.
The New Testament was based on the 1969 edition of the Stuttgart Vulgate. All
of these base texts were revised to accord with the modern critical editions in
Greek, Hebrew, and Aramaic. There are also a number of changes where the modern
scholars felt that Jerome had failed to grasp the meaning of the original
languages, or had rendered it obscurely. The "Nova Vulgata" does not contain
some books found in the earlier editions but omitted by the Canon promulgated
by the Council of Trent, namely the Prayer of Manasses, the 3rd & 4th Book of
Esdras (sometimes known by different names: see naming conventions of Esdras)
and the Epistle to the Laodiceans. In 1979, after decades of preparation, the
"Nova Vulgata" was published and promulgated as the Catholic Church's current
official Latin version in the Apostolic constitution "Scripturarum Thesaurus"
promulgated by the Pope John Paul II. The "Nova Vulgata" is the translation
used in the latest editions of the Roman Lectionary, Liturgy of the Hours, and
Roman Ritual. A second edition was published in 1986; this second edition added
a Preface to the reader, an Introduction to the principles used in producing
the Nova Vulgata as well as an appendix containing 3 historical documents from
the Council of Trent and the Clementine Vulgate. In addition, the second
edition included the footnotes to the Latin text found in the 8 annotated
sections published before 1979; it also replaced the few occurrences of the
form "Iahveh", when translating the Tetragrammaton, with "Dominus", in keeping
with an ancient tradition. The "Nova Vulgata" has not been widely embraced by
conservative Catholics, many of whom see it as being in some verses of the Old
Testament a new translation rather than a revision of Jerome's work. Also, some
of its readings sound unfamiliar to those who are accustomed to the Clementine.
In 2001, the Vatican released the instruction "Liturgiam Authenticam",
establishing the Nova Vulgata as a point of reference for all translations of
the liturgy of the Roman rite into the vernacular from the original languages,
"in order to maintain the tradition of interpretation that is proper to the
Latin Liturgy". Novum Testamentum Latine. In 1984 and 1992 Kurt and Barbara
Aland updated and entirely revised Nestle's edition of 1906 and republished it
under the same name, "Novum Testamentum Latine" (ISBN 1-59856-175-8). The new
text is a reprint of the New Testament of the "Nova Vulgata" to which has been
added a critical apparatus giving the variant readings of earlier editions. The
editions described in the apparatus are the Stuttgart edition, the Gutenberg
Bible (1452), the Latin text of the Complutensian Polyglot (1514), the edition
from Wittenberg, which was favored by Luther (1529), the editions of Desiderius
Erasmus (1527), Robertus Stephanus (1540), Hentenius of Louvain (1547),
Christophorus Plantinus (1583), Pope Sixtus V (1590), Pope Clement VIII (1592),
and Wordsworth and White (1954). Electronic editions. The title "Vulgate" is
currently applied to three distinct online texts which can be found from
various sources on the Internet. Which text is used can be ascertained from the
spelling of Eve's name in Genesis 3:20. Contents. By the end of the 4th century
the New Testament had been established in both Greek and Latin Bibles as
containing the 27 books familiar to this day; and these are the books found in
all Vulgate New Testaments. Over 100 late antique and medieval Vulgate texts
also include the concocted "Epistle to the Laodiceans" (accepted as a genuine
letter of Paul by many Latin commentators), although often with a note to the
effect that it was not counted as canonical. The Vulgate Old Testament from the
first comprised the 39 books (as counted in Christian tradition) of the Hebrew
Bible, but always also including books from the Septuagint tradition, which by
this date had ceased to be used by Jews, but which was copied in Greek Bibles
as the Old Testament. The Septuagint, however, was not then definitively fixed;
no two surviving Greek Old Testaments of this period agree. Consequently
Vulgate Old Testaments continued to vary in their content throughout the
medieval period. Although Jerome preferred the books of the Hebrew Bible, he
deferred to church authority in accepting as scripture not only the Greek
additions to Esther and Daniel, but also an extra five 'apocryphal' books in
Judith, Tobit, Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus and the two books of Maccabees, which in
his listing of the Old Testament in the "prologus galeatus" he placed after the
Hebrew canon. But, as Jerome explained in the prologue to Jeremias, he
continued to exclude altogether the Book of Baruch (and with it the letter of
Jeremiah); and indeed these two books are not found in the Vulgate before the
9th century, and only in a minority of manuscripts before the 13th century. The
71 biblical books as listed by Jerome, although not in his order, formed the
standard text of the Vulgate as it became established in Italy in the 5th and
6th centuries. No Italian manuscript of the whole Vulgate Bible survives, and
such pandect Bibles were always rare in this period; but the Codex Amiatinus
written in Northumbria from Italian exemplars around 700 and intended to be
presented to the Pope, represents the complete Bible according to the Italian
Vulgate tradition. It contains the standard 71 books; with the Psalms according
to Jerome's translation from the Hebrew, except for Psalm 151 which is
translated from the Greek. The early Vulgate text in Spain tended to vary much
further from Jerome's original, specifically in the retention of many Old Latin
readings, in the expansion of the text of the Book of Proverbs, and in the
incorporation into the first epistle of John of the "Comma Johanneum". Spanish
Bibles, on occasion, also included additional apocryphal texts, including the
Book of Baruch, the Letter of Jeremiah, 3 Esdras and 4 Esdras. Spanish, Italian
and Irish Vulgate traditions were all reflected in Bibles created in northern
France, which by the end of the 8th century featured a wide variety of highly
variable texts. Under prompting from the emperor Charlemegne, several scholars
attempted in the 9th century to reform the French Vulgate. The English scholar
Alcuin produced a text substantially based on Italian exemplars (although also
including the Comma Johanneum), but with the major change of substituting
Jerome's Gallican version of the psalms for his third version from the Hebrew
that had previously predominated in Bible texts. In the 50 years after Alcuin's
death, the abbey of Tours reproduced his text in standardised pandect Bibles,
of which over 40 survive. Alcuin's contemporary Theodulf of Orleans produced a
second independent reformed recension of the Vulgate, also based largely on
Italian exemplars, but with variant readings, from Spanish texts and patristic
citations, indicated in the margin. Theodulf kept Jerome's Hebraic version of
the Psalms, and also incorporated the Book of Baruch and the Letter of Jeremiah
within the book of Jeremiah. However, otherwise Theodulf adopted Jerome's
proposed order of the Old Testament, with the five books from the Septuagint at
the end. Theodulf's text was widely influential. A Vulgate revision was also
undertaken in the early 9th century by scholars in the Abbey of Corbie, and
Bibles from this abbey are the first in France to include the books of 3 Esdras
and 4 Esdras, though this practice remained rare. Although a large number of
Bible manuscripts resulted from all this work, no standard Vulgate text was to
be established for another three centuries. Marsden points out, in discussing
the process by which the Gallican version from the Psalter came to become
established as the text of the psalms in the Vulgate Bible; "Its dominant
position was in fact not assured before the early 13th century, and even then
was not universal". However, the explosive growth of medieval universities,
especially the University of Paris during the 12th century created a demand for
a new sort of Vulgate. University scholars needed the entire Bible in a single,
portable and comprehensive volume; which they could rely on to include all
biblical texts which they might encounter in partristic references. The result
was the Paris Bible, which reached its final form around 1230. The text of the
Paris Bible owed most to Alcuin's revision and always presented the psalms in
the Gallican version; but readings throughout were in many places adjusted to
be more consistent with patristic citations (which would very frequently have
been based on Old Latin or Greek texts). The book of Baruch and Letter of
Jeremiah were now always included, as too were 3 Esdras, and usually (appended
to the book of Chronicles) the Prayer of Manasses. Less commonly included was 4
Esdras. The early printings of the Latin Bible took examples of the Paris Bible
as their base text, culminating in the successive critical Vulgate editions of
Robert Estienne (Stephanus). Estienne's Geneva Vulgate of 1555, the first Bible
to be subdivided throughout into chapters and verses, remained the standard
Latin Bible for Reformed Protestantism; and established the content of the
Vulgate as 76 books; 27 New Testament, 39 Hebrew Bible, plus Tobit, Judith,
Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, Baruch, I & II Maccabees, 3 Esdras, 4 Esdras and the
Prayer of Manasses. At the Council of Trent it was agreed that seven of these
books: all except 3 Esdras, 4 Esdras and the Prayer of Manasses, should be
considered inspired scripture; and the term "deuterocanonical", first applied
by Sixtus of Siena, was adopted to categorise them. The Council also requested
that the Pope should undertake the production of definitive editions of the
Latin, Greek and Hebrew scriptures conforming to their definition of the
Biblical Canon; and this resulted, after several false starts, in the
publication of the Clementine Vulgate of 1592. The Clementine Vulgate
incorporates the books of Trent's Deuterocanon in the main Bible text; but also
introduces, following the New Testament, a section of Apocrypha, containing the
Prayer of Manasses, 3 Esdras, and 4 Esdras of which only the first two are
found in the Septuagint.
