Wahhabi Wahhabism (, "") is a conservative branch of Sunni Islam. It is a
religious movement among fundamentalist Islamic believers, with an aspiration
to return to the primordial fundamental Islamic sources Quran, Hadith and
scholarly consensus (Ijma). Wahhabism was a popular revivalist movement
instigated by an eighteenth century theologian, Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab
(1703–1792) from Najd, Saudi Arabia. He began his movement through peaceful
discussions with attendees of various shrines and eventually gained popular
support by convincing the local Amir, Uthman ibn Mu'ammar, to help him in his
struggle. Ibn Abd Al-Wahhab advocated a popular purging of the widespread
practices by Muslims being what he considered to be impurities and innovations
in Islam. It is claimed that this was carried out by some of his more extreme
followers by the killing of innocent Sunni Muslims however this is fiercely
debated. His has become the dominant form of Islam in Saudi Arabia. The
movement claims to adhere to the correct understanding of the general Islamic
doctrine of Tawhid, on the "uniqueness" and "unity" of God, shared by the
majority of Islamic sects, but with an emphasis on advocating following of the
Athari school of thought only. Ibn Abd-al-Wahhab was influenced by the writings
of Ibn Taymiyya and questioned the prevalent philosophical interpretations of
Islam being the Ash'ari and Maturidi schools, claiming to rely on the Qur'an
and the Hadith without speculative philosophy so as to not transgress beyond
the limits of the early Muslims known as the Salaf. He attacked a "perceived
moral decline and political weakness" in the Arabian Peninsula and condemned
what he perceived as idolatry, the popular cult of saints, and shrine and tomb
visitation. The terms "Wahhabi" and "Salafi" and "ahl al-hadith" (people of
hadith) are often used interchangeably, but Wahhabism has also been called "a
particular orientation within Salafism", an orientation considered ultra-
conservative and apolitical. The movement gained unchallenged precedence in the
Arabian peninsula through an alliance between Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab and
the House of Muhammad ibn Saud who provided political and financial power for
the religious revival represented by Ibn Abd al-Wahhab. The writer El Khabar
Ousbouî suggests the popularity of the Wahhabi movement is in part due to this
alliance and the funding of several religious channels. History. Mohammad Hayya
Al-Sindhi. Zain Imran's teacher Abdallah ibn Ibrahim ibn Sayf introduced the
relatively young man to Mohammad Hayya Al-Sindhi in Medina and recommended him
as a student. Mohammad Ibn Abd-al-Wahhab and al-Sindi became very close and
Mohammad Ibn Abd-al-Wahhab stayed with him for some time. Scholars have
described Muhammad Hayya as having an important influence on Mohammad Ibn Abd-
al-Wahhab, encouraging him to denounce rigid imitation of classical
commentaries and to utilize informed individual analysis (ijtihad). Muhammad
Hayya also taught Mohammad Ibn Abd-al-Wahhab to reject popular religious
practices associated with walis and their tombs that resembles later Wahhabi
teachings. Muhammad Hayya and his milieu are important for understanding the
origins of at least the Wahhabi revivalist impulse. Muhammad ibn Abd-al-Wahhab.
Mohammad ibn Abd-al-Wahhab studied in Basra (now in southern Iraq) and is
reported to have developed his ideas there. He is reported to have studied in
Mecca and Medina while there to perform Hajj before returning to his home town
of 'Uyayna in 1740. After his return to 'Uyayna, ibn Abd-al-Wahhab began to
attract followers, including the ruler of the town, Uthman ibn Mu'ammar. With
Ibn Mu'ammar's support, ibn Abd-al-Wahhab began to implement some of his ideas
such as leveling the grave of Zayd ibn al-Khattab, one of the Sahaba
(companions) of the Muslim Prophet Muhammad, and ordering that an adulteress be
stoned to death. These actions were disapproved of by Sulaiman ibn Muhammad ibn
Ghurayr of the tribe of Bani Khalid, the chief of Al-Hasa and Qatif, who held
substantial influence in Nejd and ibn Abd-al-Wahhab was expelled from 'Uyayna.
Ibn Abd-al-Wahhab was invited to settle in neighboring Diriyah by its ruler
Muhammad ibn Saud in 1740 (1157 AH), two of whose brothers had been students of
Ibn Abdal-Wahhab. Upon arriving in Diriyya, a pact was made between Ibn Saud
and Ibn Abd-al-Wahhab, by which Ibn Saud pledged to implement and enforce Ibn
Abd-al-Wahhab's teachings, while Ibn Saud and his family would remain the
temporal "leaders" of the movement. Alliance with the House of Ibn Saud.
Beginning in the last years of the 18th century Ibn Saud and his heirs would
spend the next 140 years mounting various military campaigns to seize control
of Arabia and its outlying regions, before being attacked and defeated by
Ottoman forces. However they eventually seized control of Hijaz and the Arabian
peninsula after the collapse of the Ottoman Empire, safeguarding the region
from colonial interference and Saudi Arabia was founded as a nation state
upholding the tenets of Islam as preached by Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab. The
Saudi government established the Commission for the Promotion of Virtue and
Prevention of Vice, a state religious police unit, to enforce religiously
conservative rules of behaviour. Beliefs. The Wahhabi subscribe to the primary
doctrine of the uniqueness and unity of God (Tawhid). The first aspect being
belief in Allah and His Lordship that He alone is the believer's lord or Rabb.
The second being that once one affirms the oneness of worship to Allah and
Allah alone. The third is belief and affirmation of Allah's Names and
Attributes. Wahhabi theology is very precise in its creed or "Aqeedah" where
the Quran and Hadith are the only fundamental and authoritative texts taken
with the understanding of the Salaf. Commentaries and "the examples of the
early Muslim community (Ummah) and the four Rightly Guided Caliphs (AD
632–661)" known as "Athar" narrations are used to support these texts, hence
the name of the school of theology given as Athari, but are not considered
independently authoritative. Ibn Abd al-Wahhab further explains in his book
"Kitab al-Tawhid", which draws directly on material from the Quran and the
narrations of the Prophet, that worship in Islam includes conventional acts of
worship such as the five daily prayers; fasting; Dua (supplication); Istia'dha
(seeking protection or refuge); Ist'ana (seeking help), and Istigatha to Allah
(seeking benefits and calling upon Allah alone). Therefore, making "du'a" or
calling upon anyone or anything other than God, or seeking supernatural help
and protection that is only befitting of a "divine being" from something other
than Allah alone are acts of "shirk" and contradict the tenets of Tawhid. Ibn
Abd al-Wahhab further explains that Muhammad during his lifetime tried his
utmost to identify and repudiate all actions that violated these principles.
The most important of these commentaries are those by Ibn Abd al-Wahhab in
particular his book "Kitab al-Tawhid", and the works of Ibn Taymiyyah. Ibn Abd
al-Wahhab was a follower of Ahmad ibn Hanbal's school of fiqh (Islamic
jurisprudence) like most in Nejd at the time, but "was opposed to any of the
schools (Madh'hab) being taken as an absolute and unquestioned authority".
However Ibn Abd al-Wahhab did not totally condemn taqlid, or blind adherence,
only at scholarly level in the face of a clear evidence or proof from a hadeeth
or Qur'anic text. Although Wahhabis are associated with the Hanbali school,
early disputes did not center on fiqh and the belief that Wahhabism was borne
of Hanbali thought has been called a "myth". Condemnation of "Priests" and
other religious leaders. Wahhabism denounces the practice of total blind
adherence to the interpretations of scholars, at a scholarly level, and of
practices passed on within the family or tribe. Ibn Abd al-Wahhab was dedicated
to champion these principles and combat what was seen as the stagnation of
Islamic scholarship which the majority of Muslims had seemingly fully adhered
to without question, through taqlid of the established Ottoman clergy at the
time. His idea was that what he perceived to be blind deference to religious
authority obstructs this direct connection with the Qur'an and Sunnah, leading
him to deprecate the importance and full authority of leaders at the time, such
as the scholars and mufti's of the age. When arguing for his positions, Ibn Abd
al-Wahhab would use translations and interpretation of the verses (known as
ayat in Arabic) of the Qur'an that were contrary to the consensus amongst the
scholars of the age, and positions against which there had been consensus for
centuries. This methodology was considered extremely controversial at the time,
in opposition to established clergy of the era, and was refuted as being
erroneous by a number of scholars. However the Wahhabi movement saw itself as
championing the re-opening of ijtihad, being intellectual pursuit of scholarly
work clarifying opinions in the face of new evidence being a newly proven sound
or sahih hadeeth, a discovered historical early ijma (scholarly consensus from
the early Muslims) or a suitable analogy, qiyas, based on historical records;
in contrast to the witnessed saturation of Islamic jurisprudence that no longer
considered ijtihad to be a viable alternative to total scholarly taqlid, being
total submission to previous scholarly opinion regardless of unquestionable
proof that contradicts this. Fiqh. A popular misconception associated with the
movement of Ibn Abd al-Wahhab is the condemnation of the legal schools of
jurisprudence, however documentation of a letter correspondence by Ibn Abd al-
Wahhab recorded by his son Abdallah refutes this accusation.   However some
modern day adherents to wahhabism consider themselves to be 'non-imitators' or
'not attached to tradition', and therefore answerable to no school of law at
all, observing instead what they would call the practice of early Islam.
However, to do so does correspond to the ideal aimed at by Ibn Hanbal, and thus
they can be said to be of his 'school' however only a scholar would be capable
of this level of ijtihad and most Salafi scholars warn against this for the
uneducated laymen. Theology. Adherents to the Wahhabi movement take their
theological viewpoint with an aspiration to assimilate with the beliefs of the
early Muslims, being the first three generations otherwise known as the Salaf.
This theology was taken from exegesis of the Quran and statements of the early
Muslims and later codified by a number of scholars, the most well known being
the 13th century Syrian scholar Ibn Taymiyyah, into what is now known as the
Athari theological creed. This was upheld by Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab in his
various works on theology. "And it is that we accept the aayaat and ahaadeeth
of the Attributes upon their apparent meanings, and we leave their true
meanings, while believing in their realities, to Allaah ta'aalaa. For Maalik,
one of the greatest of the 'ulamaa' of the Salaf, when asked about al-istiwaa'
in His Saying (ta'aalaa): "Ar-Rahmaan rose over the Throne." 5 said: ""Al-
istiwaa' is known, the "how" of it is unknown, believing in it is waajib, and
asking about it is bid'ah."" " Some criticism accuses this school as being
anthropomorphic however Ibn Taymiyyah in his monumental work "Al-Aqidah Al-
Waasitiyyah" refutes the stance of the "Mushabbihah" (those who liken the
creation with God: anthropomorphism) and those who deny, negate, and resort to
allegorical/metaphorical interpretations of the Divine Names and Attributes. He
contends that the methodology of the Salaf is to take the middle path between
the extremes of anthropomorphism and negation/distortion. He further states
that salaf affirmed all the Names and Attributes of God without "tashbih"
(establishing likeness), "takyeef" (speculating as to "how" they are manifested
in the divine), "ta'teel" (negating/denying their apparent meaning) and without
"ta'weel" (giving it secondary/symbolic meaning which is different from the
apparent meaning). Criticism and controversy. Naming controversy: Wahhabism and
Salafism. Opponents of Salafism frequently affix the "Wahhabi" designator to
denote foreign influence. It is intended to signify followers of Ibn Abd-al-
Wahhab and is most frequently used in countries where Salafis are a small
minority of the Muslim community, but have made recent inroads in "converting"
the local population to the movement ideology. … The Salafi movement itself,
however, never uses this term. In fact, one would be hard pressed to find
individuals who refer to themselves as Wahhabis or organizations that use
"Wahhabi" in their title or refer to their ideology in this manner (unless they
are speaking to a Western audience that is unfamiliar with Islamic terminology,
and even then usage is limited and often appears as "Salafi/Wahhabi"). Other
observers describe the term as "originally used derogatorily by opponents", but
now commonplace and used even "by some Najdi scholars of the movement".
According to Riadh Sidaoui, habitual use of the term Wahhabism is
scientifically false, and the concept of "Saudi Wahhabism" should be
substituted Criticism by other Muslims. "Al-Sawa`iq al-Ilahiyya fi Madhhab al-
Wahhabiyya" ("The Divine Thunderbolts Concerning the Wahhabi School"). In "The
Refutation of Wahhabism in Arabic Sources, 1745–1932", Hamadi Redissi
provides original references to the description of Wahhabis as a divisive sect
(firqa) and outliers (Kharijites) in communications between Ottomans and
Egyptian Khedive Muhammad Ali. Redissi details refutations of Wahhabis by
scholars (muftis); among them Ahmed Barakat Tandatawin, who in 1743 describes
Wahhabism as ignorance (Jahala). In 1801 and 1802, the Saudi Wahhabis under
Abdul Aziz ibn Muhammad ibn Saud attacked and captured the holy Shia cities of
Karbala and Najaf in Iraq and destroyed the tombs of Husayn ibn Ali who is the
grandson of Muhammad, and son of Ali (Ali bin Abu Talib), the son-in-law of
Muhammad (see: Saudi sponsorship mentioned previously). In 1803 and 1804 the
Saudis captured Makkah and Madinah and demolished various venerated shrines,
monuments and removed a number of what was seen as sources or possible gateways
to polytheism or Shirk - such as the shrine built over the tomb of Fatimah, the
daughter of Muhammad. In 1998 the Saudis bulldozed and allegedly poured
gasoline over the grave of Aminah bint Wahb, the mother of Muhammad, causing
resentment throughout the Muslim World. The Syrian professor and scholar Dr.
Muhammad Sa'id Ramadan al-Buti criticises the Salafi movement in a few of his
works. The sufi Islamic Supreme Council of America founded by the Naqshbandi
sufi Shaykh Hisham Kabbani classify Wahhabbism as being extremist and heretical
based on Wahhabbism's rejection of sufism and what they believe to be
traditional sufi scholars. However the ISCA is alleged to have links to the
neoconservative lobby in the United States, hence explaining the groups hatred
for the "wahhabi" movement. Kabbani allegedly thanked UK Foreign Secretary Jack
Straw in 2005 for the role the UK played in the Middle East, saying: “We are
glad to see changes taking place in the political mechanisms in the Middle
East. We hope to see an end to tyranny and we are happy to observe a strong
upsurge in freedom of speech, freedom of belief and political openness in the
region.” Wahabbism is intensely opposed by some Hui Muslims in China,
primarily by the Sufi Khafiya, some Hanafi Sunni Gedimu and a number of
Jahriyya. The Yihewani (Ikhwan) Chinese sect founded by Ma Wanfu in China was
originally inspired by the Wahhabi movement however the group reacted with
hostility to Ma Debao and Ma Zhengqing, who attempted to introduce Wahhabism as
the Orthodox main form of Islam. They were branded as traitors of foreign
influence, alien to the native popular cultural practices of Islam in China,
and Wahhabi teachings were deemed as heresy by the Yihewani leaders. Ma Debao
established a Salafi / Wahhabi order, called the Sailaifengye menhuan in
Lanzhou and Linxia, separate from other Muslim sects in China. Salafis have a
reputation for radicalism among the Hanafi Sunni Gedimu and Yihewani. Sunni
Muslim Hui avoid Salafis, including family members. The number of Salafis in
China is so insignificant that they are not included in classifications of
Muslim sects in China. The Kuomintang Sufi Muslim general Ma Bufang, who backed
the Yihewani (Ikhwan) Muslims, persecuted the Salafi / Wahhabi Muslims. The
Yihewani forced the Salafis into hiding. They were not allowed to move or
worship openly. The Yihewani had become secular and a Chinese nationalist
organisation, and they considered the Salafis to be "Heterodox" ("xie jiao"),
and "people who followed foreigner's teachings" ("wai dao"). After the
Communist revolution the Salafis were allowed to worship openly until a 1958
crackdown on all religious practices. The Deobandi Alim Abd al-Hafiz al-Makki
has argued that Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab viewed authentic sufism in a
positive light comparing it to the sciences of tafseer, hadith, and fiqh. As
proof, the Shaykh also cites a letter in which Abd-al-Wahhab writes; We do not
negate the way of the Sufis and the purification of the inner self from the
vices of those sins connected to the heart and the limbs as long as the
individual firmly adheres to the rules of Shari‘ah and the correct and
observed way. However, we will not take it on ourselves to allegorically
interpret (ta’wil) his speech and his actions. We only place our reliance on,
seek help from, beseech aid from and place our confidence in all our dealings
in Allah Most High. He is enough for us, the best trustee, the best mawla and
the best helper. May Allah send peace on our master Muhammad, his family and
companions. Wahhabism in the United States. A study conducted by the NGO
Freedom House found Wahhabi publications in mosques in the United States. These
publications included statements that Muslims should not only "always oppose"
infidels "in every way", but "hate them for their religion … for Allah's
sake", that democracy "is responsible for all the horrible wars of the 20th
century", and that Shia and certain Sunni Muslims were infidels. The Saudi
government issued a response to this report, stating: "has worked diligently
during the last five years to overhaul its education system [overhauling an
educational system is a massive undertaking". Militant and political Islam.
What connection, if any, there is between Wahhabism and Jihadi Salafis is
disputed. Noah Feldman distinguishes between what he calls the "deeply
conservative" Wahhabis and what he calls the "followers of political Islam in
the 1980s and 1990s," such as Egyptian Islamic Jihad and later Al-Qaeda leader
Ayman al-Zawahiri. While Saudi Wahhabis were "the largest funders of local
Muslim Brotherhood chapters and other hard-line Islamists" during this time,
they opposed jihadi resistance to Muslim governments and assassination of
Muslim leaders because of their belief that "the decision to wage jihad lay
with the ruler, not the individual believer". Karen Armstrong states that Osama
bin Laden, like most extremists, followed the ideology of Sayyid Qutb, not
"Wahhabism". Destruction of Islam's early historical sites. The Wahhabi
teachings disapprove of veneration of the historical sites associated with
early Islam, on the grounds that only God should be worshipped and that
veneration of sites associated with mortals leads to idolatry. Many buildings
associated with early Islam, including mazaar, mausoleums and other artifacts
have been destroyed in Saudi Arabia by Wahhabis from early 19th century through
the present day. This practice has proved controversial and has received
considerable criticism from Sunni and Shia Muslims and in the non-Muslim World.
International influence and propagation. According to observers, such as Gilles
Kepel, Wahhabism gained considerable influence in the Islamic World following a
tripling in the price of oil in the mid-1970s and the progressive takeover of
Saudi Aramco in the 1974–1980 period. The Saudi government began to spend
tens of billions of dollars throughout the Islamic World to promote Wahhabism,
which was sometimes referred to as "petro-Islam". According to the documentary
called "The Qur'an" aired in the UK, presenter Antony Thomas suggested the
figure may be "upward of $100 billion". Its largess funded an estimated "90% of
the expenses of the entire faith", throughout the Muslim World, according to
journalist Dawood al-Shirian. It extended to young and old, from children's
madrasas to high-level scholarship. "Books, scholarships, fellowships, mosques"
(for example, "more than 1,500 mosques were built from Saudi public funds over
the last 50 years") were paid for. It rewarded journalists and academics, who
followed it and built satellite campuses around Egypt for Al Azhar, the oldest
and most influential Islamic university. This financial power has done much to
overwhelm less strict local interpretations of Islam, according to observers
like Dawood al-Shirian and Lee Kuan Yew, and has caused the Saudi
interpretation to be perceived as the correct interpretation in many Muslims'
minds. The Saudis have spent at least $87 billion propagating Wahhabism abroad
during the past two decades, and the scale of financing is believed to have
increased in the past two years. The bulk of this funding goes towards the
construction and operating expenses of mosques, madrasas, and other religious
institutions that preach Wahhabism. It also supports imam training; mass media
and publishing outlets; distribution of textbooks and other literature; and
endowments to universities (in exchange for influence over the appointment of
Islamic scholars). Some of the hundreds of thousands of non-Saudis who live in
Saudi Arabia and the Persian Gulf have been influenced by Wahhabism and preach
Wahhabism in their home country upon their return. Agencies controlled by the
Kingdom's Ministry of Islamic Affairs, Endowments, Da'wah and Guidance are
responsible for outreach to non-Muslim residents and are converting hundreds of
non-Muslims into Islam every year. Explanation for influence. Khaled Abou El
Fadl attributed the appeal of Wahhabism to some Muslims as stemming from
