Western Schism The Western Schism or Papal Schism was a split within the
Catholic Church from 1378 to 1417. Two men simultaneously claimed to be the
true pope. Driven by politics rather than any theological disagreement, the
schism was ended by the Council of Constance (1414–1418). The simultaneous
claims to the papal chair of two different men hurt the reputation of the
office. The Western Schism is sometimes called the Great Schism, although this
term is also applied to the East–West Schism of 1054. Origin. The schism in
the western Roman Church resulted from the return of the papacy to Rome under
Gregory XI in 1378, ending the Avignon Papacy, which had developed a reputation
of corruption that estranged major parts of Western Christendom. This
reputation can be attributed to perceptions of predominant French influence and
to the papal curia's efforts to extend its powers of patronage and increase its
revenues. After Pope Gregory XI died, the Romans rioted to ensure the election
of a Roman for pope. In 1378 the cardinals elected a Neapolitan when no viable
Roman candidates presented themselves. Pope Urban VI, born Bartolomeo Prignano,
the Archbishop of Bari, was elected. Urban had been a respected administrator
in the papal chancery at Avignon, but as pope he proved suspicious, reformist,
and prone to violent outbursts of temper. Many of the cardinals who had elected
him soon regretted their decision: the majority removed themselves from Rome to
Anagni, where, even though Urban was still reigning, they elected Robert of
Geneva as a rival pope on September 20 of the same year. Robert took the name
Pope Clement VII and reestablished a papal court in Avignon. The second
election threw the Church into turmoil. There had been antipopes—rival
claimants to the papacy—before, but most of them had been appointed by
various rival factions; in this case, a single group of leaders of the Church
had created both the pope and the antipope. In the Iberian Peninsula there were
the Ferdinand Wars ("Guerras fernandinas") and the 1383–1385 Crisis in
Portugal, during which dynastic opponents supported rival claimants to the
papal office. Consequences. Sustained by such national and factional rivalries
throughout Catholic Christianity, the schism continued after the deaths of both
initial claimants; Pope Boniface IX, crowned at Rome in 1389, and antipope
Benedict XIII, who reigned in Avignon from 1394, maintained their rival courts.
When Boniface died in 1404, the eight cardinals of the Roman conclave offered
to refrain from electing a new pope if Benedict would resign; but when his
legates refused on his behalf, the Roman party then proceeded to elect Pope
Innocent VII. In the intense partisanship characteristic of the Middle Ages,
the schism engendered a fanatical hatred noted by Johan Huizinga: when the town
of Bruges went over to the "obedience" of Avignon, a great number of people
left to follow their trade in a city of Urbanist allegiance; "in 1382, the
oriflamme, which might only be unfurled in a holy cause, was taken up against
the Flemings, because they were Urbanists, that is, infidels". Efforts were
made to end the Schism through force or diplomacy. The French crown even tried
to coerce Benedict XIII, whom it nominally supported, into resigning. None of
these remedies worked. The suggestion that a church council should resolve the
Schism, first made in 1378, was not adopted at first because canon law required
that a pope call a council. Eventually theologians like Pierre d'Ailly and Jean
Gerson, as well as canon lawyers like Francesco Zabarella, adopted arguments
that equity permitted the Church to act for its own welfare in defiance of the
letter of the law. Eventually the cardinals of both factions secured an
agreement that Benedict and Pope Gregory XII would meet at Savona. They balked
at the last moment, and both colleges of cardinals abandoned their popes. A
church council was held at Pisa in 1409 under the auspices of the cardinals to
try solving the dispute, but it added to the problem by electing another
antipope, Alexander V. He reigned briefly from June 26, 1409, to his death in
1410, when he was succeeded by antipope John XXIII, who won some but not
universal support. Resolution. Finally, the Council of Constance in 1414,
advised by the theologian Jean Gerson, secured the resignations of antipope
John XXIII and the successor in Rome of Innocent VII, Pope Gregory XII (who
resigned in 1415, but not before formally empowering the Council of Constance
to elect the new pope, thus ensuring the legitimacy of the election), and
excommunicated the claimant who refused to step down, Avignon Pope Benedict
XIII. The Council then elected Pope Martin V, essentially ending the schism.
Nonetheless, the Kingdom of Aragon did not recognize Martin V and continued to
recognize Benedict XIII. Archbishops loyal to Benedict XIII subsequently
elected Antipope Benedict XIV (Bernard Garnier) and three followers
simultaneously elected Antipope Clement VIII, but the Western Schism was by
then practically over. (Clement VIII resigned in 1429 and apparently recognized
Martin V.) The line of Roman popes is now recognized as the legitimate line,
but confusion on this point continued until the 19th century. Pope Pius II
decreed that no appeal could be made from pope to council; this left no way to
undo a papal election by anyone but the elected pope. No such crisis has arisen
since the 15th century, and so there has been no need to revisit this decision.
The alternate papal claimants have become known in history as antipopes. Those
of Avignon were dismissed by Rome early on, but the Pisan popes were included
in the "Annuario Pontificio" as popes well into the 20th century. Thus the
Borgia pope Alexander VI took his regnal name in sequence after the Pisan
Alexander V.
