Westminster Confession of Faith The Westminster Confession of Faith is a
Reformed confession of faith, in the Calvinist theological tradition. Although
drawn up by the 1646 Westminster Assembly, largely of the Church of England, it
became and remains the 'subordinate standard' of doctrine in the Church of
Scotland, and has been influential within Presbyterian churches worldwide. In
1643, the English Parliament called upon "learned, godly and judicious
Divines", to meet at Westminster Abbey in order to provide advice on issues of
worship, doctrine, government and discipline of the Church of England. Their
meetings, over a period of five years, produced the confession of faith, as
well as a Larger Catechism and a Shorter Catechism. For more than three
centuries, various churches around the world have adopted the confession and
the catechisms as their standards of doctrine, subordinate to the Bible. The
Westminster Confession of Faith was modified and adopted by Congregationalists
in England in the form of the Savoy Declaration (1658). Likewise, the Baptists
of England modified the Savoy Declaration to produce the Second London Baptist
Confession (1689). English Presbyterians, Congregationalists, and Baptists
would together (with others) come to be known as Nonconformists, because they
did not conform to the Act of Uniformity (1662) establishing the Church of
England as the only legally approved church, though they were in many ways
united by their common confessions, built on the Westminster Confession.
Historical situation. During the English Civil War (1642–1649), the English
Parliament raised armies in an alliance with the Covenanters who by then were
the de facto government of Scotland, against the forces of the king, Charles I
of England and Ireland, King of Scots. The purpose of the Westminster Assembly,
in which 121 Puritan clergymen participated, was to provide official documents
for the reformation of the Church of England. The Church of Scotland had
recently overthrown its bishops and adopted presbyterianism (see Bishops'
Wars). For this reason, as a condition for entering into the alliance with the
English Parliament, the Scottish Parliament formed the Solemn League and
Covenant with the English Parliament, which meant that the Church of England
would abandon episcopalianism and consistently adhere to Calvinistic standards
of doctrine and worship. The Confession and Catechisms were produced in order
to secure the help of the Scots against the king. The Scottish Commissioners
who were present at the Assembly were satisfied with the Confession of Faith,
and in 1646, the document was sent to the English parliament to be ratified,
and submitted to the General Assembly of the Scottish Kirk. The Church of
Scotland adopted the document, without amendment, in 1647. In England, the
House of Commons returned the document to the Assembly with the requirement to
compile a list of proof texts from Scripture. After vigorous debate, the
Confession was then in part adopted as the Articles of Christian Religion in
1648, by act of the English parliament, omitting some sections and chapters.
The next year, the Scottish parliament ratified the Confession without
amendment. In 1660, restoration of the British monarchy and Anglican episcopacy
resulted in the nullification of these acts of the two parliaments. However,
when William of Orange replaced the Roman Catholic King James VII of Scotland
on the thrones of Scotland, England and Ireland, he gave royal assent to the
Scottish parliament's ratification of the Confession, again without change, in
1690. Contents. The confession is a systematic exposition of Calvinist
orthodoxy (which neo-orthodox scholars refer to as "scholastic Calvinism"),
influenced by Puritan and covenant theology. It includes doctrines common to
most of Christendom such as the Trinity and Jesus' sacrificial death and
resurrection, and it contains doctrines specific to Protestantism such as "sola
scriptura" and "sola fide". Its more controversial features include double
predestination (held alongside freedom of choice), the covenant of works with
Adam, the Puritan doctrine that assurance of salvation is not a necessary
consequence of faith, a minimalist conception of worship, and a strict
sabbatarianism. Even more controversially, it states that the Pope is the
Antichrist, that the Roman Catholic mass is a form of idolatry, that the civil
magistrates have divine authority to punish heresy, and rules out marriage with
non-Christians. These formulations were repudiated by the various bodies which
adopted the confession (for instance, the Church of Scotland, though its
ministers are still free to adhere to the full confession and some do), but the
confession remains part of the official doctrine of some other Presbyterian
churches. For example, the Presbyterian Church of Australia holds to the
Westminster Confession of Faith as its standard, subordinate to the Word of
God, and read in the light of a declaratory statement. American Presbyterian
adoption and revisions. The first American Presbyterian ministers were New
England Congregationalists, whose congregations originated with the migration
from England to the Dutch colony in America as early as the 1640s, and
Presbyterian immigrants from Scotland, Ireland and Wales. The first American
presbytery, uniting some of these independent congregations and those of the
British immigrants, was formed in 1706. This body grew large enough to form the
first synod in Philadelphia in 1716. Prior to 1729, some presbyteries required
candidates for the ministry to profess adherence to the Westminster Confession.
When the Synod of Philadelphia met in 1729 to adopt the Westminster Confession
as the doctrinal standard, it required all ministers to declare their approval
of the Westminster Confession of Faith and catechisms. At the same time, the
Adopting Act allowed candidates and ministers to scruple articles within the
Confession. Whether or not the article scrupled was essential or nonessential
was judged by the presbytery with jurisdiction over the candidate's
examination. This allowance implied a difference, "within the standards
themselves", between things that are essential and necessary to the Christian
faith, and things that are not. This compromise left a permanent legacy to
following generations of Presbyterians in America, to decide what is meant by
"essential and necessary", resulting in permanent controversies over the manner
in which a minister is bound to accept the document; and it has left the
American versions of the Westminster Confession more amenable to the will of
the church to amend it. The 1789 American Revision. The American revision of
1787–1789 removes from the Confession and the Catechisms mention of certain
duties of the civil government in relationship to the church. The revision also
removes explicit identification of the Pope as the Antichrist. References. See
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Footnotes for an explanation of how to
generate footnotes using the tags, and the template below.
