Western Rite Orthodoxy Western Rite Orthodoxy or Western Orthodoxy or Orthodox
Western Rite are terms used to describe congregations and groups which are in
communion with Eastern Orthodox Churches or Oriental Orthodox Churches using
traditional Western liturgies rather than adopting Eastern liturgies such as
the Divine Liturgy of St. John Chrysostom. While there are some ancient
examples of Western Rite churches in areas predominantly using the Byzantine
Rite (the Monastery of Saint Mary of the Latins, often referred to as Amalfi,
is a common example), the history of the movement is often considered to begin
in the nineteenth century with the life and work of Julius Joseph Overbeck.
Less commonly, Western Orthodoxy refers to the Western Church before the Great
Schism. Currently, there are Western Rite parishes within the Russian Orthodox
Church Outside Russia (ROCOR) as part of the ROCOR Western Rite Vicariate and
the Antiochian Orthodox Christian Archdiocese of North America as a part of the
Antiochian Western Rite Vicariate (AWRV). Western Rite parishes are found
almost exclusively in countries with large Roman Catholic or Protestant
majorities. Among the Old Calendarists, there is currently only one
jurisdiction using Western Rites. There are also numerous devotional societies
and publishing ventures related to the Western Rite. Despite having a place
within many Orthodox jurisdictions, the Western Rite remains a contentious
issue for some. Origins. Western Orthodox Christians look back to times before
the Great Schism when the Eastern Orthodox and Western Churches were united. At
that time a variety of different liturgies were used in the West, with no
specific move towards ritual uniformity, although the Roman Rite was most
influential. In the East, the Byzantine Rite was the most prominent of a
variety of different local rites. When the Latin-speaking Western Church and
the Greek-speaking Eastern Church parted, many of the Churches in communion
with Constantinople used the Byzantine Rite, though there were still places
where other liturgies (including the Roman Rite) were used. The Byzantine Rite,
especially after the thirteenth century, came to dominate the Orthodox world
almost to the point of exclusion of any other liturgy. This began to change
slowly in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries as western Christians
converting to Orthodoxy retained their familiar forms of worship. Nineteenth
century. During the 1840s, the Reverend William Palmer corresponded with
Metropolitan (Saint) Philaret of Moscow, and Alexei Stephanovich Khomiakov. The
initial reason for the correspondence was to consider establishing a Western
Orthodox Church in England. The project was not carried out due to lack of
funds. The modern reemergence of an Orthodox Western Rite bore its first fruits
in 1864 with the work of former Catholic priest Julius Joseph Overbeck.
Overbeck had left the priesthood, converted to Lutheranism and married, though
it is uncertain whether he ever functioned as a Lutheran pastor. He immigrated
to England in 1863 to become professor of German at the Royal Military Academy.
There he studied the Church of England and Orthodoxy. Concluding that both the
Papacy and Anglicanism were on the verge of collapse, Overbeck was received
into the Orthodox Church at the Russian Embassy in London by Father Eugene
Poppoff, the embassy chaplain, in 1865. Overbeck was received as a layman
because he had married following his ordination. As a part of his conversion to
the Orthodox Church, Overbeck had requested permission from the Synod of the
Russian Orthodox Church to begin a Western Orthodox Church in England.
Initially, Metropolitan Philaret was hesitant about Overbeck’s request, but
did not rule out the idea entirely. Overbeck outlined his rationale for a
Western Orthodox Church in his 1866 book "Catholic Orthodoxy and Anglo-
Catholicism," a largely polemical work describing why the established Western
churches should be rejected. In 1867 Overbeck also began to publish "The
Orthodox Catholic Review" a journal for the advancement of Western Orthodoxy.
Overbeck had also begun to convince others of the feasibility of a Western
Orthodox Church and was ultimately able to submit a petition of 122 signatures,
many of them Tractarians, to the Holy Synod in 1869 asking for the creation of
a Western Rite. A synodical commission was established to investigate the
question, and Overbeck was invited to state his case before the commission in
St. Petersburg in 1870. Overbeck’s idea received the approval of the
commission and he was instructed to present a revised Western Liturgy for
evaluation by the commission, which he did in December of that year which was
subsequently approved for use – specifically in the British Isles. At the
same time as Overbeck was making his overtures to the Russian Church, another
anonymous individual was making a similar plea to high church elements within
the Anglican Church. The next several years were spent with further developing
the Western liturgies for administration of the other sacraments as well as the
praying of the Divine Office. Overbeck also attempted to woo Old Catholics to
his scheme since they had just recently gone into schism from the Roman
Catholic Church over Vatican I’s definition of Papal infallibility, though to
little avail. During this time, he continued to criticize Roman Catholics and
Anglicans as well as those Western converts to Orthodoxy who utilized the
Byzantine Rite. By 1876, Overbeck began to make appeals to other Orthodox
Churches for their recognition of his plan. In 1879 he was received in audience
by the Patriarch of Constantinople Joachim III, who recognized the theoretical
right of Western Christians to have a Western Orthodox Church. Three years
later, the Ecumenical Patriarch and Synod gave conditional approval to the
Western rite and Benedictine offices. However, Overbeck’s efforts ultimately
did not result in the establishment of a Western Orthodoxy. He was especially
suspicious of the role which the Greeks in London (and the Church of Greece
generally) played in the stagnation of his ambitions, directly blaming the
Greek Church’s protest against the plan in 1892. The "Orthodox Catholic
Review" published its final issue in 1885 and Overbeck died in 1905 without
seeing the implementation of the Western Orthodox Church. Georges Florovsky
summed up Overbeck’s experience in this way: "it was not just a fantastic
dream. The question raised by Overbeck was pertinent, even if his own answer to
it was confusedly conceived. And probably the vision of Overbeck was greater
than his personal interpretation." In 1898, the Holy Synod of Russia organized
a diocese in Czechoslovakia using the Western rite. Twentieth century. While
Overbeck did not live to see his dream successful, the idea of a Western
Orthodox Church did not disappear. The early part of the twentieth century was
characterized by a series of false starts. In 1911, Arnold Harris Matthew (an
Old Catholic bishop), entered into union with the Patriarchate of Antioch,
under Metropolitan Gerasimos (Messarah) of Beirut and Pope Photios of
Alexandria. Both unions were contracted within quick succession and only lasted
for an effective period of a few months. Though the union was protested by the
Archbishop of Canterbury to Photios and the Patriarch of Antioch, Matthew’s
group claimed that communion was never formally broken off. In 1890, the very
first North American Western Rite Orthodox community, an Episcopal parish in
Green Bay, Wisconsin, pastored by Fr. Joseph Vilatte, was received by Bishop
Vladimir (Sokolovsky). However, Vilatte was soon ordained a bishop in the
Jacobite Church, which is not in communion with the Eastern Orthodox Church.
Other small groups following the Western Rite have been received, but usually
have either had little impact, or have declared their independence soon after
their reception. Western rite parishes were established in Poland in 1926 when
a half-dozen congregations were received into Eastern Orthodoxy; however, the
movement dwindled during World War II. Orthodox Church of France. In 1936, the
Church of Russia received a small group led by a former Liberal Catholic
bishop, Louis-Charles Winnaert (1880–1937), as "l'Église Orthodoxe
Occidentale", or Western Orthodox Church. Winnaert, who was received as
Archimandrite Irénée, died shortly after. Winnaert's work was continued, with
occasional conflict, by one of his priests, Eugraph Kovalevsky (1905–1970)
and Denis (Chambault), the latter of which oversaw a small Orthodox Benedictine
community in the rue d'Alleray in Paris. After 1946, Kovalevsky began to
restore the Gallican usage based on the letters of Saint Germanus, a sixth
century bishop of Paris, as well as numerous early Western missals, and
sacramentaries and with a few Byzantine modifications, developing what would
become the Divine Liturgy according to St Germanus of Paris. Archimandrite
Alexis van der Mensbrugghe, who taught at the Western Church's St. Denys
Theological Institute but who remained in the Eastern rite, attempted to
restore of the ancient Roman rite, replacing medieval accretions with Gallican
and Byzantine forms. Eventually, Alexis was consecrated as a bishop of the
Church of Russia in 1960, continuing his Western Rite work under the auspices
of the Moscow Patriarchate. In 1953, pressured by Moscow to change to the
Eastern rite, the Western Orthodox Church went its own way, changing its name
to the Orthodox Church of France. After some years of isolation, the Church was
recognized as an autonomous Church by Metropolitan Anastassy of ROCOR and was
in communion with ROCOR between 1959 and 1966. Archbishop John (Maximovitch)
(the ROCOR’s representative in Western Europe at the time), became the
archpastor of the Church of France. At this time, Archbishop John had the
Church change its name to "l'Église Orthodox Catholique de France" (ECOF), or
"The Orthodox Catholic Church of France." He was also the principal consecrator
when Kovalevsky was ordained in 1964 as Bishop Jean-Nectaire of Saint-Denis.
Archbishop John's death in 1966 was a serious blow to the Western Orthodox
Christians in France. While Moscow's Western Rite mission withered and ended,
Bishop Jean's church continued to thrive; however, after John's death, Bishop
Jean was left without canonical protection until his death in 1970. In 1972,
the Church found a new canonical superior in the Church of Romania. Gilles
Bertrand-Hardy was then consecrated as Bishop Germain of Saint-Denis. In 1993,
after long conflict with the Romanian Synod regarding alleged canonical
irregularities within ECOF, the latter withdrew its blessing of the French
Church and broke off communion. The Romanian Orthodox Church made the decision,
which is contested by ECOF, to depose bishop Germain from all sacerdotal
functions. This decision (which was never accepted by ECOF) is applied by the
canonical dioceses of the AEOF (Assemblée des Evêques Orthodoxes de France).
The sanction was confirmed and explained in 2001 by another document, "Avis
d'expertise canonique" from the Secretary of the Romanian Synod (a document
which the ECOF considers to have no value). The Romanian patriarchate
established a deanery under Bishop Germain's brother Archpriest Gregoire
Bertrand-Hardy to minister to those parishes which chose to stay with the
Romanian Patriarchate. In 2001, after the scandal caused by the revelation
inside the Church of the marriage of Bishop Germain in 1995, which was then
annulled, ten parishes left ECOF and formed the "Union des Associations
Cultuelles Orthodoxes de Rite Occidental" (UACORO – the Union of Western Rite
Orthodox Worship Associations), and began negotiations in 2004 with the Church
of Serbia to be canonically recognized, with the intention of the UACORO
entering the Diocese of France and Western Europe. The UACORO was received
individually, laity and clergy, into the French diocese of Serbian Patriarcate
in 2006. Although the name of the Church legally remains the Orthodox Catholic
Church of France, it usually goes by its previous name, the Orthodox Church of
France. North America. Saint Tikhon of Moscow's contribution to the Western
Rite has been more enduring. While he was head of the Russian mission in
America, some Episcopalians were interested in the possibility of joining
Orthodoxy while retaining Anglican liturgies. Tikhon, sent the 1892 Book of
Common Prayer, enquired as to the viability of such an idea. In 1904, the Holy
Synod concluded the idea was a possibility and provided including many notes on
how the Book of Common Prayer could be used in an Orthodox manner. Tikhon did
not receive any Episcopalians as none approached him for reception into the
Orthodox Church, but his efforts laid the groundwork for the later reception of
Episcopalians into the AWRV following the revision of the Book of Common Prayer
in 1975. The most successful and stable group of Western Rite parishes
originated within the Orthodox Church under Bishop Aftimios (Ofiesh) in the
1930s as part of the American Orthodox Catholic Church. In 1932, Bishop
Aftimios consecrated an Episcopal priest, Ignatius Nichols, as auxiliary Bishop
of Washington and assigned him to the Western Rite parishes. However, due to
complaints from Episcopalians that the Episcopal Church was the "American"
Orthodox Church, the American Orthodox Church that Aftimios and Nicholas were a
part of became estranged from what would become the Russian Orthodox Church
Outside Russia and the Orthodox Church in America (OCA). The subsequent
marriages of Aftimoios and Nichols, both in violation of Orthodox canon law,
left the church and its subsidiaries without canonical recognition. Through
Father Paul Schneirla, he began unofficial dialogue with Metropolitan Antony
Bashir. Even before this, Turner had been promoting Western Rite Orthodoxy
through his periodical "Orthodoxy". In 1961, the Society (consisting of three
parishes at the time) was received into the Syrian Antiochian Archdiocese on
the basis of Metropolitan Antony's 1958 edict. Upon reception, Bishop Alexander
Turner became a canonical priest of the Antiochian Orthodox Church, guiding the
group as Vicar-General until his death in 1971, thereafter he was succeeded by
Schneirla. However, after Turner’s death, the sole surviving Basilian,
William Francis Forbes, returned to the American Orthodox Catholic Church and
was consecrated a bishop in October 1974. Besides the original communities
associated with the Society, a number of other parishes have been received into
the Western Rite Vicariate of the Antiochian Archdiocese, particularly as
elements within the Episcopal Church became dissatisfied with liturgical change
and the ordination of women. The first Episcopal parish to be received into the
AWRV was the Episcopal Church of the Incarnation in Detroit, Michigan.
Additionally, several Western Rite missions have been founded within the AWRV,
some growing into full parish status. Furthermore, when parishes of the
Evangelical Orthodox Church joined the Antiochian Archdiocese in 1987, a few
parishes joined as Western Rite congregations. However, many of these former
EOC congregations subsequently switched to the Byzantine Rite. Among Old
Calendarist groups, the sole jurisdiction utilizing a Western Rite is the
Autonomous Orthodox Metropolia of North and South America and the British
Isles, with approximately two dozen parishes. Due to their generally stricter
stance, only older rites such as the Sarum are permitted. Elsewhere. In 1995,
the Church of Antioch also established a British Deanery to absorb converts
from the Church of England, though none of these congregations are now Western
Rite. Western Rite Orthodoxy, in Australia and New Zealand, has arisen mostly
from Anglican and Continuing Anglican communities. Archbishop Hilarion (Kapral)
of Sydney of the Russian Orthodox Church Outside of Russia (now Metropolitan
Hilarion, primate of the ROCOR), received some communities into communion (both
from outside Orthodoxy and from other Orthodox jurisdictions) while others have
been received by Bishop Gibran and Metropolitan Archbishop Paul, both under the
Church of Antioch. Metropolitan Paul has recently received some thirty Western
Rite Parishes in the Philippines. Some Western Rite parishes are also a part of
the Oriental Orthodox churches. The Syrian patriarchate of Antioch consecrated
Antonio Francisco Xavier Alvarez as Archbishop of Ceylon, Goa and India in
1889, authorizing a Roman rite diocese under his supervision. Additionally, in
1891 the Syrians consecrated the aforementioned Vilatte as archbishop for the
American Old Catholics. Current status. At present, the Western Rite within the
canonical Orthodox Church remains uncertain. While a number of congregations
have been founded as Western Rite congregations in the past several years,
still other parishes have begun to voluntarily convert to the Byzantine rite.
Ultimately, the Western Rite remains a small proportion of the Orthodox Church,
even in Antiochian Archdiocese of North America which has by far the largest
number of Western Rite congregations. However, within North America the Western
Rite has been growing, especially in the Antiochian Archdiocese, largely from
formerly Continuing Anglican parishes. It remains to be seen what effect, if
any, there will be on the Western Rite from the election of Archbishop Hilarion
as primate of the Russian Orthodox Church Outside Russia and the selection of
Jerome (Shaw) for the episcopate. Talk about the Western Rite has often
occurred in the Orthodox Church in America, the most prominent being in a
speech by its primate, Metropolitan Jonah (Paffhausen) during an April 2009
speech in Dallas, TX. Liturgy. The derivative use of Christminster (Usus
Providentiae) which includes an epiclesis from the Gothic Missal. Liturgical
development. Most of the present Western Rite liturgies have been developed
along the guidelines given to Saint Tikhon by the Holy Synod in 1904/07. As
noted above, Saint Tikhon’s request to the Holy Synod concerned accepting
Episcopal parishes into the Orthodox Church while permitting them to retain the
liturgies of the Book of Common Prayer. While Saint Tikhon’s request was
specifically concerned with Anglicans converting, its recommendations came to
be implemented for those parishes who did not have a specifically Anglican
background. The two most important required changes included the removal of the
"filioque" from the Nicene Creed and the addition of an epiclesis which
specifically invokes the Holy Spirit and a petition for the Spirit to change
the bread and wine into the Body and Blood of Christ. When the Antiochian
Western Rite Edict was issued, it became necessary to determine what additions
or corrections to western liturgies would need to be made to bring those rites
into conformity with the 1904 Russian Synodal decree as well as the Ukase of
1936. To that end, the Antiochian Western Rite Commission was convened in 1958
composed of Fr Paul Schneirla, Stephen Upson, Alexander Schmemann and John
Meyendorff for the purpose of determining “the mode of reception of groups
desiring to employ the Western Rite, and the character of the rites to be used,
as well as the authorization of official liturgical texts.” Meyendorff,
Schmemann, and Schneirla were already familiar with the Western Rite both from
having been in contact with members of the ECOF while teaching at Saint Sergius
Theological Institute. Schmemann actively followed the Liturgical Movement in
the Roman Catholic and Anglican Church and was an advocate for renewal of the
Orthodox liturgy. In January 1962, the official Western Rite Directory was
issued, "establishing liturgical usages and customs and discipline," drawing on
principles of the 1904 Moscow Synodal response to Saint Tikhon, the
authorization of Western Rite offices by Metropolitan Gerassimos (Messarah) of
Beirut, and the 1932 Russian Ukase of Metropolitan Sergius. Liturgical books.
Officially, the AWRV provides one liturgical book, "The Orthodox Missal"
through its official publishing arm, St. Luke’s Priory Press. This volume
contains both the Liturgy of Saint Tikhon and the Liturgy of Saint Gregory,
with appropriate propers for seasons, feasts, saints, and prayers before and
after Mass. The Antiochian Archdiocese publishes the "Saint Andrew Service
Book" (SASB), which was developed by Saint Michael’s Church in California
under the leadership of the late Father Michael Trigg; the SASB also has
received official sanction from Metropolitan Philip for the 1996 and 2005
editions, with the latter containing explicit reference to the authorized
nature of all previous editions of the SASB. In addition to duplicating the
contents of "The Orthodox Missal", the SASB also includes forms for Matins and
Vespers, the Benediction of the Blessed Sacrament, and the threefold Amen
common to the Byzantine epiclesis but absent in "The Orthodox Missal". The SASB
was produced by the Antiochian Archdiocese without the participation of the
AWRV."The Orthodox Missal" is an official publication of the AWRV and is the
Vicariate's standard and approved text with the SASB authorized by the
Archdiocese as an approved text. Parishes within the AWRV are permitted to use
either the Liturgy of Saint Tikhon or that of Saint Gregory. While most
parishes use the Tikhonite liturgy, several use the Gregorian liturgy on
weekdays or on specific Sundays of the year. Presently, there is no breviary
specifically designed for the Orthodox Western Rite, though priests of the AWRV
who celebrate the Liturgy of Saint Gregory are expected to pray as much of the
"Breviarium Monasticum" as possible. The entire breviary in English is
available in two volumes from Lancelot Andrewes Press. The same hours, in
English or Latin, are approved for Christ the Savior Monastery under the ROCOR.
However, priests who celebrate the Liturgy of Saint Tikhon pray a form of
Morning Prayer and Evensong approved by the AWRV. Also in common use within the
AWRV, though not officially approved, are "St. Dunstans’s Plainsong Psalter"
and the "St. Ambrose Hymnal". The Plainsong Psalter, a publication of Lancelot
Andrewes Press, sets the Psalter and selected canticles to Gregorian and
British Chant and includes orders for Morning Prayer, Evensong, and Compline.
The "St. Ambrose Hymnal", which is currently out of print, provides musical
settings of classic Western hymns as well as post-schism and modern hymns which
are judged “not to contradict the Orthodox faith.” Despite being out of
print, parts of the hymnal are available on-line in pdf format. Within ROCOR,
the Saint Colman Prayer Book has been authorised by Metropolitan Hilarion for
use within Australia and New Zealand. It has since received permission in other
dioceses. The Book includes the Sarum, English and Gregorian Liturgies,
together with a simplified version of the monastic hours. Most of the
occasional services required by a Parish Priest through the course of the year
are there, as well as the Rites of Holy Week and a Lectionary. In September
2008, Metropolitan Hilarion blessed the St. Hilarion Press series of Sarum
books, originally published under the auspices of the Holy Synod of Milan and
edited by Hieromonk Aidan (Keller), for liturgical use. The Holy Synod of Milan
also published approximately 30 volumes of texts of pre-schism services. They
contain complete forms for celebration of the Liturgy or Mass, the Divine
Office, the Mysteries or Sacraments, and many other services, with full chant
notation. In December 2008, the St. Gregory's Press edition was also blessed
for actual usage; these contains full forms, with complete chant notation, for
the celebration of the Liturgy or Mass and of the Divine Office, i.e., the
Canonical Hours. Vestments. Priests of the Western Rite utilize standard
Western vestments as a part of their liturgy, whether celebrating one of the
Western liturgies or (as far as Antiochians are concerned) when concelebrating
a Byzantine liturgy, with some exceptions (See Criticisms below). Antiochian
Byzantine Rite Orthodox priests who concelebrate Antiochian Western Rite
liturgies wear Byzantine style vestments and hierarchs wear Byzantine vestments
when participating in Western liturgies. Those clergy using the Sarum or
English liturgies use the vestments commonly known as "Sarum" but which were
actually used throughout north-western Europe and the British Isles. These are
typified by "apparels' of the seasonal colour, added to the alb and amice for
Priest, Deacon, Sub Deacon, Clerk and Servers. Organizations. Unlike Eastern
Catholic Churches which have an independent hierarchy and separate Code of
Canon law, Western Rite Orthodox congregations of the Antiochian jurisdiction
fall under the jurisdiction of their local Orthodox bishop. In North America,
the Antiochian Church has established the Western Rite Vicariate and the
Western Rite Commission for the purpose of coordinating the activities of
Western Rite congregations and to provide a single point of contact for persons
and groups concerning Western Rite Orthodoxy. However, all the Western Rite
congregations remain under the direct supervision of their normal diocesan
bishop, with Bishop Basil (Essey) of Wichita being the "hierarch of reference"
and advocate for Western Rite issues within the synod of Bishops. In the ROCOR,
as of November 2009, all Western Rite Orthodox congregations and monastic
houses fall under the jurisdiction of the Metropolitan. The Old Calendarists
have two hierarchies which consider themselves "Western" jurisdictions and
therefore have no liaison, citing the canonical responsibility of Bishops to
their local territories, opting to simply treat all parishes of Western and
Eastern Rite equally. Of these, the larger Western Rite Presence is the that of
the Autonomous Orthodox Metropolia of the Americas, with the presiding
hierarch, Metropolitan John (LoBue) of New York and New Jersey, the only
Orthodox Bishop in North America who regularly employs Western usage in his
monastery. Publishing houses. The official publishing arm of the AWRV is St.
Luke’s Priory Press, located in Stanton, NJ. Among their publications are
"The Orthodox Missal", the official service book of the AWRV; "The Orthodox
Ritual", the official source for the administration of all the sacraments in
the Vicariate; and the annual "Ordo Kalendar". They also publish several
apologetic works concerning the Western Rite. Lancelot Andrewes Press is the
publishing arm of the Fellowship of Saint Dunstan and publishes material which
is utilized by congregations and individuals in the Western Rite. The primary
mission of Lancelot Andrewes Press is to publish material for the
“advancement of historic Christian orthodoxy, as expressed by the liturgical
and devotional usages of traditional English Christianity.” Among their
publications are the "Monastic Diurnal" and "St. Dunstan’s Plainsong
Psalter". While not official publishing houses, St. Petroc Monastery,
Christminster, and St. John Cassian Press have published copies of liturgies
for the use of Western Rite congregations within the ROCOR. St. John Cassian
Press distributes former St. Hilarion Press publications (see "Organizations"
above) blessed for ROCOR usage, including "Orthodox Prayers of Old England,"
(omnibus service book), "The Holy Psalter" (core of the divine office), "Old
Sarum Rite Missal," "The Companion" (epistle and gospel book), "Chant
Ordinarium" (a kyriale), and "Westminster Benedictional" (a book of blessings),
in all some 2,500 pages of approved texts, with chant. This body of work
includes several apologetic works concerning the Western Rite and Orthodoxy in
general. The most voluminous texts of the Western Rite in English, however,
have been produced by Old Calendarists: recently 10,000 pages of text of the
Western monastic psalter in traditional English were placed online for free
download and use. Parishes and missions. The largest numbers of Western Rite
parishes are located in North America as a part of the AWRV, though there are
Western Rite congregations to be found in Australia, New Zealand, Brazil, and
England. Monasteries and hermitages. There are a few monasteries and hermitages
which utilize the Western Rite, all associated within the ROCOR and with very
few professed monastics. In addition to the established monasteries, some
parishes also have among their members Benedictine “oblates”. Some are
associated with Christminster Monastery, while others are not associated with
any particular monastery and thus are not oblates in the traditional (17th c.
Roman Catholic) sense. These latter oblates are individuals who utilize the
Benedictine rule as a means of fostering spiritual development. "Non-canonical"
Western Rite churches. "Western Orthodox" is a description taken by several
Church bodies that follow claim to be Orthodox or have the word "Orthodox" in
their names, but are unconnected to the worldwide Eastern Orthodox Church. Many
have not arisen out of contacts with Eastern Orthodoxy and are likened to those
bodies known as Independent Catholic Churches or to Continuing Anglicanism.
Some have had relationships with bodies that broke away from Eastern Orthodoxy,
or were cut off by Eastern Orthodox hierarchs for irregularities. The praxis
and ecclesiology of "non-canonical" Orthodox churches are not acceptable to the
Eastern Orthodox Churches in that often they have a married episcopate, ordain
women to the priesthood or diaconate, or otherwise have a theology divergent
from canonical Orthodoxy. Canonical missionary societies. These groups are
Canonical missionary societies with a core of canonical Orthdox laity served by
canonical Orthodox clergy within the Orthodox Church with the goal of future
reception of converts into the Western Rite of Orthodoxy. The societies
themselves were formed inside the Orthodox Church for reception of converts,
and not for the reception of the societies themselves. The Orthodox Church they
are currently under the guidance of is also listed alongside it. Criticisms.
Despite the fact that the Western Rite is an established part of the Orthodoxy
in North America, it does not exist without the presence of some vocal critics.
These criticisms run the gamut from objections of a liturgical or historical
nature to direct claims that members of the Western Rite are not actually
Orthodox in their praxis. Byzantine Rite only. Many commentators argue that the
only rite which is and can be acceptable to Orthodoxy is the Byzantine Rite,
whether in its Greek or Slavic usages. Many Orthodox Christians currently boast
of the Church's liturgical homogeneity, claiming that, no matter where one
might go in the Orthodox world, the liturgy will be familiar, even if it's in
another language. Of course, as Paul Meyendorff points out that despite the
fact that the majority of Orthodox Churches use the Byzantine Rite, they often
use it in very different ways, particularly in North America with the presence
of items such as pews, organs, weekly communion of all the laity, and a much
shorter liturgy. In addition, even if the claim of the homogenous celebration
of the Byzantine Rite could be claimed for the modern period, this has
historically not been the case. During the period of separation of the Eastern
and Western Churches, it would have been impossible to speak of the Byzantine
Rite as being the only liturgy in use, even in the Eastern Church. The Rite of
Constantinople only acquired dominance in the Eastern Church through a slow
process that was not complete until at least the thirteenth century. Lack of
liturgical continuity. In continuation of the above criticism, many
commentators argue that while the Western Rite was at one time Orthodox, its
Orthodoxy ceased after the Great Schism. This argument essentially states that,
because the Western Rite died out in the Church, and because a continuous
living tradition is a necessary element of liturgical practice, the Western
Rite ought to be abandoned and only the Byzantine Rite should be utilized.
Western Rite advocates have pointed out that there is nothing inherently
unorthodox about creating a new rite for the Church provided that the Orthodoxy
of the rite is sound. The Byzantine Rite has grown in ways which have caused
liturgies and devotions to develop in one location without subsequent universal
practice. Such services would have been invented from scratch based on pastoral
need at some point, yet few Western Rite critics would say that such services
or devotions should be abandoned, thus perceiving to lend to the legitimacy of
restoring an ancient rite of the undivided Church. Western Rite supporters say
that Western Rite never actually lost continuity of use in Orthodoxy, since on
Mount Ahtos, during history, on special occasions the Liturgy of St. Peter the
Apostle was served. It was used even in Russia prior to reformations of
patriarch Nikon, and later by "old believers". Furthermore, it is also argued
that the Divine Liturgy of St. James, once nearly extinct except in Jerusalem
and the island of Kephalonia, has in the present time enjoyed resurgence
outside of its traditional strongholds for use on October 23 to celebrate the
Feast of St. James. Western Rite is reverse uniatism. The situation of Western
Orthodox parishes has been compared with the status of the autonomous Eastern
Catholic Churches (often called "Uniate" by Orthodox Christians) in communion
with the Roman Catholic Church. For centuries, there have been hierarchical
churches in full communion with Rome. Eastern Catholics, despite usages in
continuity with, and closely resembling, those of the Orthodox, largely share a
common dogma with Latin Catholics, a situation that is called "uniatism".
Analogously, the Western Rite Orthodox share the same faith as their Byzantine
Rite Orthodox brethren despite a different liturgical rite. However, unlike
most Eastern Catholic churches, Western Rite Orthodox congregations are not the
result of historically complex political and ecclesiastical developments, but
rather of small-scale conversion to Orthodoxy by individuals and congregations.
Also, Western Rite congregations all adhere to the same bishops as their
Byzantine counterparts; they do not constitute a separate church of their own,
nor do they maintain their own seminaries or observe their own canons, as do
the Eastern Catholic churches. Furthermore, many Eastern Catholic churches
represent communities grafted directly from Orthodoxy, often as a result of
internal schisms in a local Orthodox church. These churches were (at least
theoretically) permitted to retain their ancient liturgical traditions, and
retained some of their ecclesiastical structures (e.g., diocesan sees and
claims, such as the Melkite Patriarchate of Antioch and Ukrainian eparchy of
Kyiv, prior to its suppression). By contrast, most modern Western Rite
communities rarely emerge directly from the jurisdictional structures of the
Catholic, Orthodox, or Anglican communions, and celebrate reconstructed
liturgies with ahistorical additions (e.g., supplementary prayers grafted from
the Byzantine, Celtic, Mozarabic rites, etc.), often new to the community
entering Orthodoxy. Western Rite is divisive. Another criticism is that the
Western Rite is inherently divisive. Following different liturgical traditions
than their neighboring Byzantine Rite Orthodox Christians, those using the
Western Rite do not share liturgical unity with them and present an unfamiliar
face to the majority of Orthodox Christians. This sentiment is expressed most
famously by Metropolitan Kallistos (Ware), who was particularly concerned about
the further fragmentation of Orthodoxy in non-Orthodox countries, in this case
in Britain. Whether the Western Rite survives in the Orthodox Church and will
be accepted by the majority who follow the Byzantine Rite remains yet to be
seen. In the meantime, the Byzantine Rite bishops who oversee Western Rite
parishes and many who oversee no Western Rite parishes continue to declare the
Western Orthodox to be Orthodox Christians and regard them as fully in
communion with the rest of the Church. Though there have been negative
appraisals on both sides of the Western Rite issue, supporters of the Western
Rite claim that there is nothing inherently divisive about having a separate
liturgical practice, particularly since these churches remain under the
pastoral care of their diocesan bishop rather than a Western Rite bishop. As
yet, there are no schisms within the episcopacy of the Orthodox Church
regarding the issue of Western Rite parishes. Conversion without conversion.
Another criticism often leveled against the Western Rite is based on the fact
that the majority of the members of Western Rite parishes are converts to
Orthodoxy. The argument states that Christians want to be Orthodox but "not too
Orthodox" so they keep their familiar rites under a new bishop. The unstated
assumption behind this argument, however, is similar to the argument against
all non-Byzantine liturgical traditions: that the Orthodox Church includes only
the Byzantine Rite and if people want to be truly Orthodox theye must also be
Byzantine.
