West African Vodun Vodun or Vudun ("spirit" in the Fon and Ewe languages, with
a nasal high-tone "u"; also spelled Vodon, Vodoun, Voudou, Voodoo etc.) is an
indigenous organized religion of coastal West Africa from Togo to Nigeria.
Vodun is practised by the Ewe people, Kabye people, Mina people and Fon people
of southern and central Togo, southern and central Benin and (under a different
name) the Yoruba of southwestern Nigeria. It is distinct from the various
traditional animistic religions in the interiors of these same countries and is
the main origin for religions of similar name found among the African Diaspora
in the New World such as Haitian Vodou, the "Vudu" of Puerto Rico, Candomblé
Jejé in Brazil (which uses the term "Vodum"), Louisiana Voodoo and Santería
in Cuba and the Dominican Republic. All these are syncretized with Christianity
and the traditional religions of the Kongo people of Congo and Angola. Theology
and practice. Vodun cosmology centers around the "vodun" spirits and other
elements of divine essence that govern the Earth, a hierarchy that range in
power from major deities governing the forces of nature and human society to
the spirits of individual streams, trees, and rocks, as well as dozens of
ethnic vodun, defenders of a certain clan, tribe, or nation. The "vodun" are
the centre of religious life, similarly in many ways to doctrines such as the
intercession of saints and angels that made Vodun appear compatible with
Christianity, especially Catholicism, and produced syncretic religions such as
Haitian Vodou. Adherents also emphasise ancestor worship and hold that the
spirits of the dead live side by side with the world of the living, each family
of spirits having its own female priesthood, sometimes hereditary when is from
mother to blood daughter. Patterns of worship follow various dialects, gods,
practices, songs and rituals. Vodun recognises one God with many helpers called
"Orishas". A single divine Creator, called variously "Mawu" or "Nana Buluku" is
an androgynous being who in one tradition bore seven children and gave each
rule over a realm of nature - animals, earth, and sea - or else these children
are inter-ethnic and related to natural phenomena or to historical or mythical
individuals. The creator embodies a dual cosmogonic principle of which "Mawu"
the moon and "Lisa" the sun are respectively the female and male aspects, often
portrayed as the twin children of the Creator. Mawu's youngest child, Legba,
was to remain with her and act as a go-between with her other children: in some
clans he is young and virile while in Haiti he takes the form of an old man.
Other deities might include Mami Wata, god/desses of the waters, Gu, ruling
iron and smithcraft, Sakpata, who rules diseases and many others. Eshu, a
messenger deity who relays messages between the human world and the world of
the Orishas, is depicted as a dark, short man with a large staff and often a
pipe, candy or his fingers in his mouth. As the mediator between the gods and
the living he maintains balance, order, peace and communication. All creation
is considered divine and therefore contains the power of the divine. This is
how medicines such as herbal remedies are understood, and explains the
ubiquitous use of mundane objects in religious ritual. Voodoo talismans, called
"fetishes", are objects such as statues or dried animal parts that are sold for
their healing and spiritually rejuvenating properties. Priests. Often described
as queen mother is the first daughter of a patriarchal lineage of a family
collective. She holds the right to lead the ceremonies incumbent to the clan:
marriages, baptisms and funerals. She is considered the one of the most
important members of community. She will lead the women of a village when her
family collective is the ruling one. Her dominant role has often been confused
or associated to that of a high priestess which she is not. They take part in
the organisation and the running of markets and are also responsible for their
upkeep, which is vitally important because marketplaces are the focal points
for gatherings and social centres in their communities. In the past when the
men of the villages would go to war, the Queen Mothers would lead prayer
ceremonies in which all the women attended every morning to ensure the safe
return of their menfolk. The High priestess is on the other hand, the woman
chosen by the oracle to care for the convent. Priestesses like priests receive
a calling from an oracle at any moment of their lives. They will then join
clan's convent to pursue a spiritual instruction. It is also, an oracle that
will designate the future High priest and high priestess among the new recruits
establishing an order of succession within the convent. Only blood relatives
were allowed in the family convent strangers are forbidden. In modern, days
however some of the rules have been changed enabling non family members to
enter what is describe as the first circle of worship. Strangers are allowed to
worship only the spirits of the standard pantheon Relationship to Bò.
Confusion and an amalgam are often made between vodun and Bò also called O bò
or Juju in Yoruba. Bò is an occult science whose priest are called Bòkônon
or Bòkôtônon in opposition to vodunsi (vodun female priestess) and vodunon
(vodun male priest). Contrary to popular beliefs, in West African vodun, spells
are not cast upon someone. Vodun is only a spiritual cult in which an important
part is devoted to the cult of the ancestors. Even if the origin of humanity
and the world are explained in vodun mythology, it is not a centered question
of the faith. The followers believe that the answer to such question is beyond
human reach. Priority is given to the ancestors with them interceding on behalf
of their families and descendant towards the Almighty. If an Almighty creator
is recognized in vodun pantheon, the believers do not address themselves to
that particular deity. Only the Loas, the messengers with the help of the dead
have that access. In order to communicate and pray every clan and sometimes
each family root have their own vodun sometimes called Assanyì as vodun can
also be translated as “The spirit of those who have passed before us”. The
family vodun is often associated with a known higher spirit of the standard
pantheon, but is distinctive to each family (clan). This distinctiveness is the
Clan vodun is also an assertion of identity and origin with cult and worshiping
process specific to a family collective. The occult science of Bô is not
vodun, although it often summons spirits issued from the vodun pantheon in its
process. The amalgam probably occurred through foreign observation and
explanation of the rituals of vodun. It is due to the fact that vodun elements
can be seen in the rituals of Bò. The general perception of west African vodun
today is actually more a perception of Bò (Juju in Youruba) than West African
vodun. Demographics. About 23% of the population of Benin, some 1 million
people, follow Vodun. (This does not count other traditional religions in
Benin.) In addition, many of the 41.5% of the population that refer to
themselves as "Christian" practice a syncretized religion, not dissimilar from
Haitian Vodou or Brazilian Cadomblé; indeed, many of them are descended from
freed Brazilian slaves who settled on the coast near Ouidah. In Togo, about
half the population practices indigenous religions, of which Vodun is by far
the largest, with some 2.5 million followers; 13% of the population of
Vodunists, 20 million are Ewe people. According to census data, about 14
million people practise traditional religion in Nigeria, most of whom are
Yoruba practising Vodun, but no specific breakdown is available. European
colonialism, followed by some of the totalitarian regimes in West Africa, have
tried to suppress Vodun as well as other African indigenous religions. However,
because the vodun deities are born to each clan, tribe, and nation, and their
clergy are central to maintaining the moral, social and political order and
ancestral foundation of its village, these efforts have not been successful.
Recently there have been moves to restore the place of Vodun in national
society, such as an annual International Vodun Conference held in the city of
Ouidah in Benin that has been held since 1991.
