Western Wall The Western Wall, Wailing Wall or Kotel (Hebrew: , translit.: "";
Ashkenazic pronunciation: "Kosel"; , translit.: "·∏§ƒÅ'i·π≠ Al-BurƒÅq",
translat.: The Buraq Wall) is located in the Old City of Jerusalem at the foot
of the western side of the Temple Mount. It is a remnant of the ancient wall
that surrounded the Jewish Temple's courtyard, and is arguably the most sacred
site recognized by the Jewish faith outside of the Temple Mount itself. Just
over half the wall, including its 17 courses located below street level, dates
from the end of the Second Temple period, commonly believed to have been
constructed around 19 BCE by Herod the Great, but recent excavations indicate
that the works were not finished during Herod's lifetime. The remaining layers
were added from the 7th century onwards. The Western Wall refers not only to
the exposed section facing a large plaza in the Jewish Quarter, but also to the
sections concealed behind structures running along the whole length of the
Temple Mount, such as the Little Western Wall‚Äìa 25¬ ft (8¬ m) section in the
Muslim Quarter. It has been a site for Jewish prayer and pilgrimage for
centuries; the earliest source mentioning Jewish attachment to the site dates
back to the 4th century. From the mid-19th century onwards, attempts to
purchase rights to the wall and its immediate area were made by various Jews,
but none were successful. With the rise of the Zionist movement in the early
20th century, the wall became a source of friction between the Jewish community
and the Muslim religious leadership, who were worried that the wall was being
used to further Jewish nationalistic claims to the Temple Mount and Jerusalem.
Outbreaks of violence at the foot of the wall became commonplace and an
international commission was convened in 1930 to determine the rights and
claims of Muslims and Jews in connection with the wall. After the 1948 Arab-
Israeli War the wall came under Jordanian control and Jews were barred from the
site for 19 years until Israel captured the Old City in 1967. Etymology. Early
Jewish texts referred to a ‚Äúwestern wall of the Temple‚Äù, but there is doubt
whether the texts were referring to today‚Äôs Western Wall or to another wall
which stood within the Temple complex. The earliest clear Jewish use of the
term Western Wall as referring to the wall visible today was by the 11th-
century Ahimaaz ben Paltiel. The name ‚ÄúWailing Wall‚Äù, and descriptions such
as "wailing place" appeared regularly in English literature during the 19th
century. The name "Mur des Lamentations" was used in French and "Klagemauer" in
German. This term itself was a translation of the Arabic "el-Mabka", or "Place
of Weeping," the traditional Arabic term for the wall. This description stemmed
from the Jewish practice of coming to the site to mourn and bemoan the
destruction of the Temple. During the 1920s with the growing Arab-Jewish
tensions over rights at the wall, the Arabs began referring to the wall as al-
Buraq. This was based on the tradition that the wall was the place where
Muhammad tethered his miraculous winged steed, Buraq. Location and dimensions.
The Western Wall commonly refers to a 187 foot (57 m) exposed section of
ancient wall situated on the western flank of the Temple Mount. This section
faces a large plaza and is set aside for prayer. In its entirety, however, the
above ground portion of the Western Wall stretches for , most of which is
hidden behind residential structures built along its length. Other revealed
sections include the southern part of the Wall which measures approximately and
another much shorter section known as the Little Western Wall which is located
close to the Iron Gate. The wall functions as a retaining wall, built to
support the extensive renovations that Herod the Great carried out around 19
BCE. Herod expanded the small quasi-natural plateau on which the First and
Second Temples stood into the wide expanse of the Temple Mount visible today.
At the Western Wall Plaza, the total height of the Wall from its foundation is
estimated at , with the exposed section standing approximately high. The Wall
consists of 45 stone courses, 28 of them above ground and 17 underground. The
first seven visible layers are from the Herodian period. This section of wall
is built from enormous meleke limestone stones, possibly quarried at either
Zedekiah's Cave situated under the Muslim Quarter of the Old City or at Ramat
Shlomo four kilometers northwest of the Old City. Most of them weigh between
two and eight tons each, but others weigh even more, with one extraordinary
stone located in the northern section of Wilson's Arch measuring 13 metres and
weighing approximately 570 tons. Each of these stones is surrounded by fine-
chiseled borders. The margins themselves measure between wide, with their depth
measuring . In the Herodian period, the upper of wall were thick and served as
the other wall of the double colonnade of the plateau. This upper section was
decorated with pilasters, the remainder of which were destroyed at the
beginning of the 7th century when the Byzantines reconquered Jerusalem from the
Persians and their Jewish allies in 628. The next four layers were added by
Umayyads in the 7th century. The next fourteen layers are from the Ottoman
period and their addition is (most likely mistakenly) attributed to Sir Moses
Montefiore who in 1866 arranged that further layers be added ‚Äúfor shade and
protection from the rain for all who come to pray by the holy remnant of our
Temple‚Äù. The top three layers were placed by the Mufti of Jerusalem before
1967. History. Construction 19 BCE. According to the Tanakh, Solomon's Temple
was built atop the Temple Mount in the 10th century BCE and destroyed by the
Babylonians in 586 BCE, and the Second Temple completed and dedicated in 516
BCE. Around 19 BCE Herod the Great began a massive expansion project on the
Temple Mount. In addition to renovating and enlarging the Temple, he
artificially expanded the platform on which it stood, resulting in an enlarged
enclosure. Today's Western Wall formed part of the retaining perimeter wall of
this platform. In 2011, Israeli archaeologists announced the discovery of Roman
coins minted well after Herod's death found under the massive Meleke foundation
stones in the southern section of the wall inside a ritual bath which predates
the construction of the renovated Temple Mount complex and was filled in to
support the new walls. This indicates that Herod did not build the entire wall
and that construction was not close to being complete when he died. The finds
confirms the description by historian Josephus Flavius, which state that
constructions were finished only during the reign of King Agrippa II, Herod‚Äôs
great-grandson. Roman Empire and rise of Christianity 100‚Äì500 CE. In the
early centuries of the Common Era, after the Roman defeat of the Bar Kokhba
revolt in 135 CE, Jews were banned from Jerusalem. There is some evidence that
Roman emperors in the 2nd and 3rd centuries did permit them to visit the city
to worship on the Mount of Olives and sometimes on the Temple Mount itself.
When the empire became Christian under Constantine I, they were given
permission to enter the city once a year, on the ninth day of the month of Av,
to lament the loss of the Temple at the wall. The Bordeaux Pilgrim, written in
333 CE, suggests that it was probably to the perforated stone or the Rock of
Moriah, "to which the Jews come every year and anoint it, bewail themselves
with groans, rend their garments, and so depart". This was because an Imperial
decree from Rome barred Jews from living in Jerusalem. Just once per year they
were permitted to return and bitterly grieve about the fate of their people.
Comparable accounts survive, including those by the Church Father, Gregory of
Nazianzus and by Jerome in his commentary to Zephaniah written in 392 CE. In
the 4th century, Christian sources reveal that the Jews encountered great
difficulty in buying the right to pray near the Western Wall, at least on the
9th of Av. In 425 CE, the Jews of the Galilee wrote to Byzantine empress Aelia
Eudocia seeking permission to pray by the ruins of the Temple. Permission was
granted and they were officially permitted to resettle in Jerusalem. Middle
Ages 500‚Äì1500. There are several Jewish authors of the 10th and 11th
centuries, e.g., Aaron ben Me√Ør, Samuel ben Paltiel, Solomon ben Judah and
others, who write about the Jews resorting to the Western Wall for devotional
purposes. The Scroll of Ahimaaz, written in 1050 CE, distinctly describes the
Western Wall as a place of prayer for the Jews. Shortly before the Crusader
period a synagogue stood at the site. Jewish pilgrim Isaac Chelo (1334), writes
of an Arab king who conquered Palestine from the Christians. (He possibly
refers to the capture of Jerusalem by Umar in 637.) The king had made an oath
that should he succeed in conquering Jerusalem, he would restore the ruins of
the Temple. After his victory, he sought out the ruins, but they had been
hidden beneath heaps of rubbish. An old man approached the king saying "I will
tell you where the Temple lies, but I want you to swear that you will leave us
the Western Wall." After promising, the king was shown where the ruins lay
buried. The king ordered the place be cleared and "built a magnificent mosque
and left the Western Wall for the Jews, who resorted there to pray." Chelo also
noted that "It is this Western Wall which stands before the temple of Omar ibn
al Khattab, and which is called the Gate of Mercy. The Jews resort thither to
say their prayers, as Rabbi Benjamin has already related. Today, this wall is
one of the seven wonders of the Holy City." He refers to Benjamin of Tudela
who, during the late Crusader Period in around 1167 CE, wrote that "In front of
this place is the Western Wall, which is one of the walls of the Holy of
Holies. This is called the Gate of Mercy, and hither come all the Jews to pray
before the Wall in the open court". Shortly after the Siege of Jerusalem, in
1193, Saladin‚Äôs son and successor al-Afdal established the land adjacent to
the wall as a charitable trust. It was named after an important mystic Abu
Madyan Shu'aib and dedicated to Moroccan settlers who had taken up residence
there. Houses were built only four metres away from the wall. The first mention
of the Islamic tradition that Buraq was tethered at the site is from the 14th
century. A manuscript by Ibn Furkah, (d. 1328), refers to Bab al-Nab, an old
name for a gate along the southwestern wall of the Haram al-Sharif. Rabbi
Obadiah of Bertinoro writing in 1488, states "the Westen Wall, part of which is
still standing, is made of great, thick stones, larger than any I have seen in
buildings of antiquity in Rome or in other lands." Ottoman period 1517‚Äì1917.
In 1517, the Turkish Ottoman Empire under Selim I conquered Jerusalem from the
Mamluks who had held it since 1250. The Ottomans had a benevolent attitude
towards the Jews, having welcomed thousands of Jewish refugees who had recently
been expelled from Spain by Ferdinand II of Aragon and Isabella I of Castile in
1492. Sultan Suleiman the Magnificent was so taken with Jerusalem and its
plight that he ordered a magnificent fortress-wall built around the entire
city, today's Old City wall. ‚ÄúRubbish.‚Äù ‚ÄúAnd to where are you carrying
it?‚Äù ‚ÄúTo such and such a place.‚Äù ‚ÄúWhere do you live?‚Äù ‚ÄúIn
Bethlehem.‚Äù ‚ÄúIs there no dunghill between Bethlehem and this place?‚Äù
‚ÄúIt is a tradition among us that whoever takes a little rubbish to that place
performs a meritorious act.‚Äù The curiosity of the officer was aroused and he
commanded a great number of men to remove the rubbish from that place...and the
holy site was revealed. When the Sultan learned of this, he rejoiced greatly
and ordered the place to be swept and sprinkled and the Western Wall washed
with rosewater...‚Äù In the second half of the 16th century, Suleiman the
Magnificent gave the Jews rights to worship at the Western Wall and had his
court architect Mimar Sinan build an oratory for them there. In 1625 arranged
prayers at the Wall are mentioned for the first time by a scholar whose name
has not been preserved. Rabbi Gedaliah of Semitizi, who went to Jerusalem in
1699, writes that scrolls of the Law were brought to the Wall on occasions of
public distress and calamity. Over the centuries, land close to the Wall became
built up. Public access to the Wall was through the Moroccan Quarter, a
labyrinth of narrow alleyways. In May 1840 a firman issued by Ibrahim Pasha
forbade the Jews to pave the passageway in front of the Wall. It also cautioned
them against ‚Äúraising their voices and displaying their books there.‚Äù They
were, however, allowed ‚Äúto pay visits to it as of old.‚Äù  Over time the
increased numbers of people gathering at the site resulted in tensions between
the Jewish visitors who wanted easier access and more space, and the residents,
who complained of the noise. This gave rise to Jewish attempts at gaining
ownership of the land adjacent to the Wall. In the late 1830s a wealthy Jew
named Shemarya Luria attempted to purchase houses near the Wall, but was
unsuccessful, as was Jewish sage Abdullah of Bombay who tried to purchase the
Western Wall in the 1850s. In 1869 Rabbi Hillel Moshe Gelbstein settled in
Jerusalem. He arranged that benches and tables be brought to the Wall on a
daily basis for the study groups he organised and the minyan which he led there
for years. He also formulated a plan whereby some of the courtyards facing the
Wall would be acquired, with the intention of establishing three synagogues ‚Äì
one each for the Sephardim, the Hasidim and the Perushim. He also endeavoured
to re-establish an ancient practice of ‚Äúguards of honour‚Äù, which according
to the mishnah in Middot, were positioned around the Temple Mount. He rented a
house near the Wall and paid men to stand guard there and at various other
gateways around the mount. However this set-up lasted only for a short time due
to lack of funds or because of Arab resentment. In 1874, Mordechai Rosanes paid
for the repaving of the alleyway adjacent to the wall. In 1877 the Mufti of
Jerusalem accepted a Jewish offer to buy the Moroccan Quarter, but a dispute
within the Jewish community prevented the agreement from going ahead. In 1887 a
promising attempt was made by Baron Rothschild who conceived a plan to purchase
and demolish the Moroccan Quarter as "a merit and honor to the Jewish People."
The proposed purchase was considered and approved by the Ottoman Governor of
Jerusalem, Rauf Pasha, and by the Mufti of Jerusalem, Mohammed Tahir Husseini.
Even after permission was obtained from the highest secular and Muslim
religious authority to proceed, the transaction was shelved after the
authorities insisted that after demolishing the quarter no construction of any
type could take place there, only trees could be planted to beautify the area.
Additionally the Jews would not have full control over the area. This meant
that they would have no power to stop people from using the plaza for various
activities, including the driving of mules, which would cause a disturbance to
worshippers. Other reports place the scheme's failure on Jewish infighting as
to whether the plan would foster a detrimental Arab reaction. In 1895 Hebrew
linguist and publisher Rabbi Chaim Hirschensohn became entangled in a failed
effort to purchase the Western Wall and lost all his assets. Even the attempts
of the Palestine Land Development Company to purchase the environs of the
Western Wall for the Jews just before the outbreak of World War I never came to
fruition. In the first two months following the Ottoman Empire‚Äôs entry into
the First World War, the Turkish governor of Jerusalem, Zakey Bey, offered to
sell the Moroccan Quarter, which consisted of about 25 houses, to the Jews in
order to enlarge the area available to them for prayer. He requested a sum of
¬£20,000 which would be used to both rehouse the Muslim families and to create
a public garden in front of the Wall. However, the Jews of the city lacked the
necessary funds. A few months later, under Muslim Arab pressure on the Turkish
authorities in Jerusalem, Jews became forbidden by official decree to place
benches and light candles at the Wall. This sour turn in relations was taken up
by the Chacham Bashi who managed to get the ban overturned. In 1915 it was
reported that Djemal Pasha closed off the wall to visitation as a sanitary
measure. British rule 1917‚Äì48. In December 1917, British forces under Edmund
Allenby captured Jerusalem from the Turks. Allenby pledged "that every sacred
building, monument, holy spot, shrine, traditional site, endowment, pious
bequest, or customary place of prayer of whatsoever form of the three religions
will be maintained and protected according to the existing customs and beliefs
of those to whose faith they are sacred". "The acceptance of the proposals, had
it been practicable, would have obviated years of wretched humiliations,
including the befouling of the Wall and pavement and the unmannerly braying of
the tragi-comic Arab band during Jewish prayer, and culminating in the horrible
outrages of 1929" In early 1920, the first Jewish-Arab dispute over the Wall
occurred when the Muslim authorities were carrying out minor repair works to
the Wall‚Äôs upper courses. The Jews, while agreeing that the works were
necessary, appealed to the British that they be made under supervision of the
newly formed Department of Antiquities, because the Wall was an ancient relic.
In 1926 another abortive effort was made by Palestine Zionist Executive,
Colonel F. H. Kisch, who envisaged buying the whole area adjacent to the Wall
in order to create an open space with seats for aged worshippers to sit on. In
1928 the Zionist Organisation reported that John Chancellor, High Commissioner
of Palestine, believed that the Western Wall should come under Jewish control
and wondered ‚Äúwhy no great Jewish philanthropist had not bought it yet‚Äù.
September 1928 disturbances. In 1922, a status quo agreement issued by the
mandatory authority forbade the placing of benches or chairs near the Wall. The
last occurrence of such a ban was in 1915, but the Ottoman decree was soon
retracted after intervention of the Chacham Bashi. In 1928 the District
Commissioner of Jerusalem, Edward Keith-Roach, acceded to an Arab request to
implement the ban. This led to a British officer being stationed at the Wall
making sure that Jews were prevented from sitting. Nor were Jews permitted to
separate the sexes with a screen. In practice, a flexible modus vivendi had
emerged and such screens had been put up from time to time when large numbers
of people gathered to pray. On September 24, 1928, the Day of Atonement,
British police resorted to forcefully removing a screen used to separate men
and women at prayer. Women who tried to prevent the screen being dismantled
were beaten by the police, who used pieces of the broken wooden frame as clubs.
Chairs were then pulled out from under elderly worshipers. The episode made
international news and Jews the world over objected to the British action. The
Chief Rabbi of the ultraorthodox Jews in Jerusalem issued a protest letter on
behalf of his community, the Edah HaChareidis, and Agudas Yisroel strongly
condemning the desecration of the holy site. Various communal leaders called
for a general strike. A large rally was held in the Etz Chaim Yeshiva,
following which an angry crowd attacked the local police station in which they
believed the British officer involved in the fiasco was sheltering.
Commissioner Edward Keith-Roach described the screen as violating the Ottoman
status quo that forbade Jews from making any construction in the Western Wall
area. He informed the Jewish community that the removal had been carried out
under his orders after receiving a complaint from the Supreme Muslim Council.
The Arabs were concerned that the Jews were trying to extend their rights at
the wall and with this move, ultimately intended to take possession of the Al-
Aqsa Mosque. The British government issued an announcement explaining the
incident and blaming the Jewish beadle at the Wall. It stressed that the
removal of the screen was necessary, but expressed regret over the ensuing
events. A widespread Arab campaign to protest against presumed Jewish
intentions and designs to take possession of the Al Aqsa Mosque swept the
country and a "Society for the Protection of the Muslim Holy Places‚Äù was
established. The Vaad Leumi responding to these Arab fears declared in a
statement that "We herewith declare emphatically and sincerely that no Jew has
ever thought of encroaching upon the rights of Moslems over their own Holy
places, but our Arab brethren should also recognise the rights of Jews in
regard to the places in Palestine which are holy to them." The committee also
demanded that the British administration expropriate the wall for the Jews.
From October 1928 onward, Mufti Amin al-Husayni organised a series of measures
to demonstrate the Arabs' exclusive claims to the Temple Mount and its
environs. He ordered new construction next to and above the Western Wall. The
British granted the Arabs permission to convert a building adjoining the Wall
into a mosque and to add a minaret. A muezzin was appointed to perform the
Islamic call to prayer and Sufi rites directly next to the Wall. These were
seen as a provocation by the Jews who prayed at the Wall. The Jews protested
and tensions increased. A British inquiry into the disturbances and
investigation regarding the principle issue in the Western Wall dispute, namely
the rights of the Jewish worshipers to bring appurtenances to the wall, was
convened. The Supreme Muslim Council provided documents dating from the Turkish
regime supporting their claims. However, repeated reminders to the Chief
Rabbinate to verify which apparatus had been permitted failed to elicit any
response. They refused to do so, arguing that Jews had the right to pray at the
Wall without restrictions. Subsequently, in November 1928, the Government
issued a White Paper entitled "The Western or Wailing Wall in Jerusalem:
Memorandum by the Secretary of State for the Colonies", which emphasised the
maintenance of the "status quo" and instructed that Jews could only bring
‚Äúthose accessories which had been permitted in Turkish times.‚Äù A few months
later, Haj Amin complained to Chancellor that ‚ÄúJews were bringing benches and
tables in increased numbers to the wall and driving nails into the wall and
hanging lamps on them.‚Äù 1929 Palestine riots. In the summer of 1929, the
Mufti ordered an opening be made at the southern end of the alleyway which
straddled the Wall. The former cul-de-sac became a thoroughfare which led from
the Temple Mount into the prayer area at the Wall. Mules were herded through
the narrow alley, often dropping excrement. This, together with other
construction projects in the vicinity, and restricted access to the Wall,
resulted in Jewish protests to the British, who remained indifferent. On August
14, 1929, after attacks on individual Jews praying at the Wall, 6,000 Jews
demonstrated in Tel Aviv, shouting ‚ÄúThe Wall is ours.‚Äù The next day, the
Jewish fast of Tisha B'Av, 300 youths raised the Zionist flag and sang the
Zionist anthem at the Wall. The day after, on August 16, an organized mob of
2,000 Muslim Arabs descended on the Western Wall, injuring the beadle and
burning prayer books, liturgical fixtures and notes of supplication. The
rioting spread to the Jewish commercial area of town, and was followed a few
days later by the Hebron massacre. 1930 international commission. In 1930, in
response to the 1929 riots, the British Government appointed a commission "to
determine the rights and claims of Muslims and Jews in connection with the
Western or Wailing Wall". The League of Nations approved the commission on
condition that the members were not British. The Commission noted that 'the
Jews do not claim any proprietorship to the Wall or to the Pavement in front of
it (concluding speech of Jewish Counsel, Minutes, page 908).' ‚ÄùBeing judged
before you today stands a nation that has been deprived of everything that is
dear and sacred to it from its emergence in its own land ‚Äì the graves of its
patriarchs, the graves of its great kings, the graves of its holy prophets and,
above all, the site of its glorious Temple. Everything has been taken from it
and of all the witnesses to its sanctity, only one vestige remains ‚Äì one side
of a tiny portion of a wall, which, on one side, borders the place of its
former Temple. In front of this bare stone wall, that nation stands under the
open sky, in the heat of summer and in the rains of winter, and pours out its
heart to its God in heaven.‚Äù The Commission concluded that the wall, and the
adjacent pavement and Moroccan Quarter, were solely owned by the Muslim "waqf".
However, Jews had the right to "free access to the Western Wall for the purpose
of devotions at all times", subject to some stipulations that limited which
objects could be brought to the Wall and forbade the blowing of the shofar,
which was made illegal. Muslims were forbidden to disrupt Jewish devotions by
driving animals or other means. Yitzchak Orenstein, who held the position of
Rabbi of the Kotel, recorded in April 1930 that ‚ÄúOur master, Rabbi Yosef
Chaim Sonnenfeld came to pray this morning by the "Kosel" and one of those
present produced a small chair for the "Rav" to rest on for a few moments.
However, no sooner had the "Rav" sat down did an Arab officer appear and pull
the chair away from under him.‚Äù During the 1930s, at the conclusion of Yom
Kippur, young Jews persistently flouted the shofar ban each year and blew the
shofar resulting in their arrest and prosecution. They were usually fined or
sentenced to imprisonment for three to six months. Jordanian rule 1948‚Äì67.
During the 1948 Arab-Israeli War the Old City together with the Wall was
occupied by Jordan. Article VIII of the 1949 Armistice Agreement provided for
Israeli Jewish access to the Western Wall. However for the following nineteen
years, despite numerous requests by Israeli officials and Jewish groups to the
United Nations and other international bodies to attempt to enforce the
armistice agreement, Jordan refused to abide by this clause. Neither Israeli
Arabs nor Israeli Jews could visit their holy places in the Jordanian
territories. An exception was made for Christians to participate in Christmas
ceremonies in Bethlehem. Some sources claim Jews could only visit the wall if
they traveled through Jordan (which was not an option for Israelis) and did not
have an Israeli visa stamped in their passports. Only Jordanian soldiers and
tourists were to be found there. A vantage point on Mount Zion, from which the
Wall could be viewed, became the place where Jews gathered to pray. For
thousands of pilgrims, the mount, being the closest location to the Wall under
Israeli control, became a substitute site for the traditional priestly blessing
ceremony which takes place on the Three Pilgrimage Festivals. "Al Buraq
(Wailing Wall) Rd" sign. During the Jordanian occupation of the Old City, a
ceramic street sign in Arabic and English was affixed to the stones of the
ancient wall. Attached three metres up, it was made up of eight separate
ceramic tiles and said "Al Buraq" in Arabic at the top with the English "Al-
Buraq (Wailing Wall) Rd" below. When Israeli soldiers arrived at the wall in
June 1967, one attempted to scrawl Hebrew lettering on it. The "Jerusalem Post"
reported that on June 8, Ben-Gurion went to the wall and "looked with distaste"
at the road sign; "this is not right, it should come down‚Äù and he proceeded
to dismantle it. This act signaled the climax of the capture of the Old City
and the ability of Jews to once again access their holiest sites. Emotional
recollections of this event are related by David ben Gurion and Shimon Peres.
Israeli rule 1967‚Äìpresent.  Forty-eight hours after capturing the wall, the
military, without explicit government order, hastily proceeded to demolish the
entire Moroccan Quarter which stood four metres from the Wall. The Sheikh Eid
Mosque, which was built over one of Jerusalem's oldest Islamic schools, the
Afdiliyeh, named after one of Saladin's sons, was pulled down to make way for
the plaza. It was one of three or four that survived from Saladin's time.650
people consisting of 106 Arab families were ordered to leave their homes at
night. When they refused, bulldozers began to demolish the structures, causing
casualties. One old woman was buried under the houses as the bulldozer razed
the area.  The narrow pavement, which could accommodate a maximum of 12,000 per
day, was transformed into an enormous plaza which could hold in excess of
400,000. The dusty plaza stretched from the wall to the Jewish Quarter. The
section of the Wall dedicated to prayers was extended southwards to double its
original length from 30 to 60 metres, while the 4 metre space facing the Wall
grew to 40 metres. Thus the small pre-1967 120 square metre area in front of
the wall became the vast Western Wall Plaza, covering 20,000 square metres. The
new plaza created in 1967 is used for worship and public gatherings, including
Bar mitzvah celebrations and the swearing-in ceremonies of newly full-fledged
soldiers in the Israel Defense Forces. Tens of thousands of Jews flock to the
wall on the Jewish holidays, and particularly on the fast of Tisha B'Av, which
marks the destruction of the Temple and on Jerusalem Day, which commemorates
the reunification of Jerusalem in 1967 and the delivery of the Wall into Jewish
hands. Robinson's Arch. At the southern end of the Western Wall, Robinson's
Arch along with a row of vaults once supported stairs ascending from the street
to the Temple Mount. Because it does not come under the direct control of the
Rabbi of the Wall or the Ministry of Religious Affairs, the site has been
opened to religious groups that hold worship services that would not be
approved by the Rabbi or the Ministry in the major men's and women's prayer
areas against the Wall. The need for such an area became apparent when in in
1989, after repeated attacks by haredim, activists belonging to a group called
Women Of The Wall petitioned to secure the right of women to pray at the wall
without restrictions. Ultimately, in 2003 Israel's Supreme Court disallowed any
women from reading publicly from the Torah or wearing traditional prayer shawls
at the plaza itself, but instructed the Israeli government to prepare the site
of Robinson's Arch to host such events. The site was inaugurated in August 2004
and has since hosted services by Reform and Conservative groups, as well as
services by the Women of the Wall. In November 2010, the government approved a
NIS 85m ($23m) scheme to improve access and infrastructure at the site. The
Isaiah Stone, located under Robinson's Arch, has a carved inscription in Hebrew
from Isaiah 66:14: ◊ï◊®◊ê◊ô◊™◊ù ◊ï◊©◊© ◊ú◊ë◊õ◊ù ◊ï◊¢◊¶◊û◊ï◊™◊ô◊õ◊ù ◊õ◊ì◊©◊ê
◊™◊§◊®◊ó◊ ◊î ("And when ye see this your heart shall rejoice and your bones
shall flourish like an herb"). Wilson's Arch. In 2005, the Western Wall
Heritage Foundation initiated a major renovation effort under Rabbi-of-the-Wall
Shmuel Rabinovitch. Its goal was to renovate and restore the area within
Wilson's Arch, the covered area to the left of worshipers facing the Wall in
the open prayer plaza, in order to increase access for visitors and for prayer.
The restoration to the men's section included a Torah ark that can house over
100 Torah scrolls, in addition to new bookshelves, a library, heating for the
winter, and air conditioning for the summer. A new room was also built for the
scribes who maintain and preserve the Torah scrolls used at the Wall. New
construction also included a women's section, overlooking the men's prayer
area, so that women could use this separate area to "take part in the services
held inside under the Arch" for the first time. On July 25, 2010, a Ner Tamid,
an oil-burning "eternal light," was installed within the prayer hall within
Wilson's Arch, the first eternal light installed in the area of the Western
Wall. According to the Western Wall Heritage Foundation, requests had been made
for many years that "an olive oil lamp be placed in the prayer hall of the
Western Wall Plaza, as is the custom in Jewish synagogues, to represent the
menorah of the Temple in Jerusalem as well as the continuously burning fire on
the altar of burnt offerings in front of the Temple," especially in the closest
place to those ancient flames. A number of special worship events have been
held since the renovation. They have taken advantage of the cover, temperature
control, and enhanced security. However, in addition to the more recent
programs, one early event occurred in September 1983, even before the modern
renovation. At that time U.S. Sixth Fleet Chaplain Rabbi Arnold Resnicoff was
allowed to hold an unusual interfaith service‚Äîthe first interfaith service
ever conducted at the Wall during the time it was under Israeli control‚Äîthat
included men and women sitting together. The ten-minute service included the
Priestly Blessing, recited by Resnicoff, who is a Kohen. A Ministry of
Religions representative was present, responding to press queries that the
service was authorized as part of a special welcome for the U.S. Sixth Fleet.
Rabbis of the wall. After the 1967 Arab-Israeli war, Rabbi Yehuda Meir Getz was
named the overseer of proceedings at the wall. After Rabbi Getz's death in
1995, Rabbi Shmuel Rabinowitz was given the position. Theology and ritual.
Judaism. In Judaism, the Western Wall is venerated as the sole remnant of the
Holy Temple. It has become a place of pilgrimage for Jews, as it is the closest
permitted accessible site to the holiest spot in Judaism, namely the "Even ha-
shetiya" or Foundation Stone, which lies on the Temple Mount. According to one
rabbinic opinion, Jews may not set foot upon the Temple Mount and doing so is a
sin punishable by Kareth. While almost all historians and archaeologists and
some rabbinical authorities believe that the rocky outcrop in the Dome of the
Rock is the Foundation Stone, some rabbis say it is located directly opposite
the exposed section of the Western Wall, near the El-kas fountain. This spot
was the site of the Holy of Holies when the Temple stood. Jewish tradition
teaches that the Western Wall was built by King Solomon and that the wall we
see today is built upon his foundations, which date from the time of the First
Temple. Jewish midrashic texts compiled in Late Antiquity refer to a western
wall of the Temple which ‚Äúwould never be destroyed.‚Äù Some scholars were of
the opinion that this referred to a wall of the Temple itself which has long
since vanished. Others believed that the wall still stood and was actually a
surviving wall of the Temple courtyard. However, today there is no doubt that
the wall is the western retaining wall of the Temple Mount and the Midrash
refers to the Temple in its broader sense, that is, the Temple Mount. Jewish
sources teach that when Roman Emperor Vespasian ordered the destruction of the
Temple, he ordered Pangar, Duke of Arabia, to destroy the Western Wall. Pangar
however could not destroy the wall because of God's promise that the Wall will
never be destroyed. When asked by Titus why he did not destroy it, Pangar
replied that it would stand as a reminder of what Titus had conquered. He was
duly executed. There is a tradition that states that when water starts
trickling through the stones of the Wall, it is a signal of the advent of the
Messiah. Rabbi Zvi Hirsch Kaindenover discusses the mystical aspect of the
Hebrew word "kotel" when discussing the significance of praying against a wall.
He cites the Zohar which writes that the word "kotel", meaning wall, is made up
of two parts: "Ko", which has the numerical value of God‚Äôs name, and "Tel",
meaning mount, which refers to the Temple and its Western Wall. Jewish sources,
including the Zohar, write that the Divine Presence rests upon the Western
Wall. The Midrash quotes a 4th century scholar: ‚ÄúRav Acha said that the
Divine Presence has never moved away from the Western Wall‚Äù. 18th century
scholar Jonathan Eybeschutz writes that ‚Äúafter the destruction of the Temple,
God removed His Presence from His sanctuary and placed it upon the Western Wall
where it remains in its holiness and honour‚Äù. It is told that great Jewish
sages, including Isaac Luria and the Radvaz, experienced a revelation of the
Divine Presence at the wall. Prayer at the Wall. The sages state that anyone
who prays in the Temple in Jerusalem, ‚Äúit is as if he has prayed before the
throne of glory because the gate of heaven is situated there and it is open to
hear prayer‚Äù. Jewish Law dictates that when Jews pray the Silent Prayer, they
should face towards Jerusalem, the Temple and ultimately the Holy of Holies, as
all of God‚Äôs bounty and blessing emanates from that spot. According to the
Mishna, of all the four walls of the Temple Mount, the Western Wall was the
closest to the Holy of Holies, and therefore that to pray by the Wall is
particularly beneficial. Rabbi Jacob Ettlinger writes "since the gate of heaven
is near the Western Wall, it is understandable that all Israel's prayers ascend
on high there...as one of the great ancient kabbalists Rabbi Joseph Gikatilla
said, when the Jews send their prayers from the Diaspora in the direction of
Jerusalem, from there they ascend by way of the Western Wall." A well-known
"segula" (efficacious remedy) for finding one's mate is to pray for 40
consecutive days at the Western Wall. This practice was apparently conceived by
Rabbi Yisroel Yaakov Fisher. According to some, by Late Antiquity the
privileged site of Jewish prayer in Jerusalem was located on the Mount of
Olives and only towards the end of the Middle Ages did Jews gradually begin to
congregate instead at the Western Wall for their prayers, authorized to do so
by the waqf authorities. Indeed, most historians believe that the Western Wall
became a popular prayer area only after the Ottoman conquest of Jerusalem in
1517. There are, however, recorded instances of the wall being used as a place
of prayer before the Ottoman period. The Scroll of Ahimaaz, a historical
document written in 1050 CE, distinctly describes the Western Wall as a place
of prayer for the Jews. In around 1167 CE during the late Crusader Period,
Benjamin of Tudela wrote that "In front of this place is the Western Wall,
which is one of the walls of the Holy of Holies. This is called the Gate of
Mercy, and hither come all the Jews to pray before the Wall in the open court".
In 1334, Jewish traveller Isaac Chelo wrote: "It is this Western Wall which
stands before the temple of Omar ibn al Khattab, and which is called the Gate
of Mercy. The Jews resort thither to say their prayers, as Rabbi Benjamin has
already related. Today, this wall is one of the seven wonders of the Holy
City." In 1625 "arranged prayers" at the Wall are mentioned for the first time
by a scholar whose name has not been preserved. Scrolls of the Law were brought
to the Wall on occasions of public distress and calamity, as testified to in a
narrative written by Rabbi Gedaliah of Semitizi who went to Jerusalem in 1699.
Throughout the ages, the Wall is where Jews have gathered to express gratitude
to God or to pray for divine mercy. On news of the Normandy landings on June 6,
1944 thousands of Jews went to the Wall to offer prayers for the ‚Äúsuccess of
His Majesty‚Äôs and Allied Forces in the liberation of all enemy-occupied
territory.‚Äù On October 13, 1994, 50,000 gathered to pray for the safe return
of kidnapped soldier Nachshon Wachsman. August 10, 2005 saw a massive prayer
rally at the Wall. Estimates of people protesting Israel's unilateral
disengagement plan ranged from 50,000 to 250,000 people. Every year on Tisha
B'Av large crowds congregate at the Wall to commemorate the destruction of the
Temple. In 2007 over 100,000 gathered. During the month of Tishrei 2009, a
record 1.5 million people visited the site. Mourning the Temple's Destruction.
Epstein, Donneal. Halachos for the Traveler, Feldheim 2000, Pg. 70. ISBN 1-
58330-439-8. Book of Lamentations 2:9 Prayer notes. There is a much publicised
practice of placing slips of paper containing written prayers into the crevices
of the Wall. The earliest account of this practice is recorded in "Sefer Tamei
Ha-minhagim U‚Äômekorei Ha-dinim" and involves Rabbi Chaim ibn Attar, (d.
1743). More than a million notes are placed each year and the opportunity to e-
mail notes is offered by a number of organisations. It has become customary for
visiting dignitaries to place notes too. Sanctity of the Wall. There is much
debate among Jewish codifiers about whether it is permitted to place one's
fingers inside the cracks of the Wall. Those who warn against such action hold
that the breadth of the Wall constitutes part of the Temple Mount itself and
therefore retains holiness. Others hold that the Wall stands outside the given
measurements of the Temple area and therefore there is no concern about
inserting one's fingers into the crevices. In the past, visitors, based upon
various scriptural verses, would drive nails into the cracks and paint their
Hebrew names on the Wall. These practices stopped after rabbinic consensus
determined that such actions compromised the sanctity of the Wall. Another
practice also existed whereby pilgrims or those intending to travel abroad
would hack off a chip from the Wall or take some of the sand from between its
cracks as a good luck charm or memento. In the late 19th century the question
was raised as to whether this was permitted and a long responsa appeared in the
Jerusalem newspaper "Havatzelet" in 1898. It concluded that even if according
to Jewish Law it was permitted, the practices should be stopped as it
constituted a desecration. More recently the "Yalkut Yosef" rules that it is
forbidden to remove small chips of stone or dust from the Wall, although it is
permissible to take twigs from the vegetation which grows in the Wall for an
amulet, as they contain no holiness. Cleaning the stones is also problematic
from a halachic point of view. Blasphemous graffiti once sprayed by a tourist
was left visible for months until it began to peel away. Many contemporary
"poskim" rule that the area in front of the Wall has the status of a synagogue
and must be treated with due respect. As such, men and married women are
expected to cover their heads upon approaching the Wall, and to dress
appropriately. When departing, the custom is walk backwards away from the Wall.
On Saturdays, it is forbidden to enter the area with electronic devices,
including cameras, which infringe on the sanctity of the Sabbath. There was
once an old custom of removing one's shoes upon approaching the Wall. A 17th
century collection of special prayers to be said at holy places mentions that
‚Äúupon coming to the Western Wall one should remove his shoes, bow and
recite...‚Äù. Rabbi Moses Reicher wrote that ‚Äúit is a good and praiseworthy
custom to approach the Western Wall in white garments after ablution, kneel and
prostrate oneself in submission and recite ‚ÄúThis is nothing other than the
House of God and here is the gate of Heaven.‚Äù When within four cubits of the
Wall, one should remove their footwear.‚Äù Over the years the custom of
standing barefoot at the Wall has ceased, as there is no need to remove one's
shoes when standing by the Wall, because the plaza area is outside the
sanctified precinct of the Temple Mount. In the past women could be found
sitting at the entrance to the Wall every Sabbath holding fragrant herbs and
spices in order to enable worshipers to make additional blessings. In the hot
weather they would provide cool water. The women also used to cast lots for the
privilege of sweeping and washing the alleyway at the foot of the Wall. Islam.
Until the 1920s, Muslims referred to the Wall as El-Mabka ‚Äúthe place of
wailing". They then began calling it the Al-Buraq Wall. Muslims maintain that
the Wall is an Islamic endowment site based on two factors: The first is the
association of the Wall in the Isra and Mi'raj; some sources identify the
Western Wall as the place where the Islamic prophet Muhammad tethered his
winged steed, Buraq. The tradition is first referred to in a manuscript by Ibn
Furkah (d. 1328) stating that Buraq was tethered outside Bab al-Nab, an old
name for a gate along the southwestern wall of the Haram al-Sharif at the very
spot presently known as Al-Buraq. Other sources which referred to this
tradition date from the 19th century and include the 1840 deliberation refusing
the Jews the right to pave the area in front of the wall and the map of
Jerusalem by Wilson (1865) that names the area around the Wailing Wall Hosh al-
Buraq. The second factor is the claim that it is waqf property and a part of
the Noble Sanctuary. Shmuel Berkowitz, in his book "The Wars over the Holy
Places", suggests that Muslim attribution of holiness to the Western Wall began
only in the last 100 years. He suggests this from the fact that official guides
published by the Waqf in 1914, 1965, and 1990 do not attribute holiness to the
wall and the entry "al-Buraq" in the "Encyclopedia of Islam" does not make the
connection either. Christianity. Some scholars believe that when Jerusalem came
under Christian rule in the 4th century, there was a purposeful "transference"
of respect for the Temple Mount and the Western Wall in terms of sanctity to
the Church of the Holy Sepulchre, while the sites around the Temple Mount
became a place to dump garbage for Christians. However, the actions of many
modern Christian leaders, including Pope John Paul II and Pope Benedict XVI,
who visited the Wall and actually left prayer messages in its crevices, has
symbolized for many Christians a restoration of respect and even veneration for
this ancient religious site. Some Christian Zionists go further, claiming that
the Third Temple must be rebuilt as part of the groundwork for the Second
Coming. A small group of extremists even advocate the destruction of the Muslim
Dome of the Rock to hasten the new Temple construction. Views. Jewish. Most
Jews, religious and secular, consider the wall to be important to Judaism since
it was originally built to hold the Second Temple. They consider the capture of
the wall by Israel in 1967 as a historic event since it restored Jewish access
to the site after a 19 year gap. There are, however, some haredi Jews who hold
opposing views. Most notable are the adherents of the Satmar hasidic sect who
retain the views espoused by rabbi Joel Teitelbaum who would not approach the
Wall. Israeli. A poll carried out in 2007 by the Jerusalem Institute for Israel
Studies indicated that 96% of Israeli Jews were against Israel relinquishing
sovereignty of the Western Wall. During a speech at Israel's Mercaz HaRav
yeshivah on Jerusalem Day in 2009, Israeli Prime Minister Benyamin Netanyahu
declared:  Muslim.  Palestinian. In 2006, Dr. Hassan Khader, founder of the Al
Quds Encyclopedia, told PA television that the first connection of the Jews to
the Wall is "a recent one which began in the 16th century...not ancient...like
the roots of the Islamic connection". In November 2010, an official paper
published by the PA Ministry of Information denied Jewish rights to the Wall.
It stated that "Al-Buraq Wall is in fact the western wall of Al-Aksa Mosque"
and that Jews had only started using the site for worship after the 1917
Balfour Declaration. Yitzhak Reiter writes that "the Islamization and de-
Judaization of the Western Wall are a recurrent motif in publications and
public statements by the heads of the Islamic Movement in Israel." Egyptian.
Egyptian Minister of Waqfs, Mahmoud Hamdi Zakzouk, has asserted that the
Western Wall is not a Jewish holy site. Another high ranking Egyptian Muslim
authority, Mufti Nasr Fradid Wassel, has decreed that the Western Wall remain
an Islamic endowment forever, explaining that it is a part of the western wall
of the Al-Aqsa Mosque. He added that the Wall would belong to Muslims all over
the world "until the end of earth" and that it is religiously forbidden for
Muslims to refer to Buraq Wall as the Wailing Wall. American. While recognizing
the difficulties inherent in any ultimate peace agreement that involves the
status of Jerusalem, the official position of the United States includes a
recognition of the importance of the Wall to the Jewish people, and has
condemned statements that seek to "delegitimize" the relationship between Jews
and the area in general, and the Western Wall in particular. For example, in
November 2010, the Obama administration "strongly condemned a Palestinian
official's claim that the Western Wall in the Old City has no religious
significance for Jews and is actually Muslim property." The U.S. State
Department noted that the United States rejects such a claim as "factually
incorrect, insensitive and highly provocative."
