Wheel of the Year The Wheel of the Year is an annual cycle of seasonal
festivals in contemporary Paganism. It consists primarily of eight festivals
based around the solstices and equinoxes, known as the "quarter days", and the
midpoints between, known as the "cross quarter days". Within Paganism, many
festivals are celebrated. They can vary considerably in name and date amongst
specific traditions, however the eight festivals of the Wheel comprise the most
adhered and important annual celebrations. They are a unifying feature of
modern Paganism. The Wheel has been important to many people, both ancient and
modern, and its festivals are based to varying degrees on folk tradition. In
the context of Witchcraft, the festivals have also commonly been referred to as
"sabbats" since the Middle ages, when the terminology for Jewish Shabbats was
commingled with that of other 'heretical' celebrations. See Witches' sabbath.
The festivals. In Pagan cosmology, all things are cyclical. The year is no
different. It is understood to be a perpetual cycle of growth and retreat tied
to the Sun's annual death and rebirth. This cycle is also viewed as a micro-
and macrocosm of other life cycles in an immeasurable series of cycles
composing the Universe. The days that fall on the landmarks of the yearly cycle
traditionally mark the beginnings and middles of the four seasons. They are
regarded with significance and host to major communal festivals. These eight
festivals are the most common times for community celebrations. While the major
festivals are determined by quarter and cross-quarter days, many minor
festivals are also celebrated throughout the year amongst various traditions.
Additionally, festivals (major or minor) may not enjoy the same level of
significance from one tradition to another. The festivals, being tied to solar
movements, have always been steeped in solar mythology and symbolism, centred
around the life cycles of the sun. Similarly, the esbats are traditionally tied
to the lunar cycles. Together, they represent the most common and important
celebrations in modern Paganism, especially in Witchcraft. Midwinter. Midwinter
has been a significant time in the annual cycle since at least the neolithic.
The ancient megalithic sites of Newgrange and Stonehenge, carefully aligned
with the Midwinter sunrise and sunset (respectively), exemplify this. The
reversal of the Sun's ebbing presence in the sky was an important turning point
weathering the harsh and in infertile time of the year, known for famine. In
most traditions, Midwinter is celebrated as the rebirth of the solar god, who
is the Sun newly reborn from the solstice. The method of gathering for
Midwinter vary by group or individual practitioner. Some have private
ceremonies at home and within covens, while others do so publicly with the
community. The celebration of Christmas on 25 December marks the choice by
leaders of the early Catholic Church to adapt popular pre-Christian festivals
concerning the Winter solstice . Imbolc. Imbolc ( ), or Candlemas, is one of
four "fire festivals" of the Wheel of the Year. Among Dianic Wiccans, Imbolc is
the traditional time for initiations. Imbolc is strongly associated with the
goddess Brighid. Traditions celebrating this day survive in west as Groundhog's
Day. Among Reclaiming-style Witches, Imbolc is considered a traditional time
for rededication and pledges for the coming year. Vernal Equinox. The vernal
equinox, often called Ostara, is celebrated in the Northern hemisphere around
March 21 and in the Southern hemisphere around September 23, depending upon the
specific timing of the equinox. Among the Wiccan sabbats, it is preceded by
Imbolc and followed by Beltane. The name Ostara may be related to the word for
"east". It has been connected to the Anglo-Saxon goddess Eostre by Jacob Grimm
in his "Deutsche Mythologie". In terms of Wiccan ditheism, this festival is
characterized by the rejoining of the Mother Goddess and her lover-consort-son,
who spent the winter months in death. Other variations include the young God
regaining strength in his youth after being born at Yule, and the Goddess
returning to her Maiden aspect. Beltane. Beltane is one of the four "fire
festivals" or "greater sabbats". Although the holiday may use features of the
Gaelic Bealtaine, such as the bonfire, it bears more relation to the Germanic
May Day festival, both in its significance (focusing on fertility) and its
rituals (such as maypole dancing). Some Wiccans celebrate 'High Beltaine' by
enacting a ritual union of the May Lord and Lady. Midsummer. Midsummer is one
of the four solar holidays, and is considered the turning point at which summer
reaches its height and the sun shines longest. Among the Wiccan sabbats,
Midsummer is preceded by Beltane, and followed by Lammas or Lughnasadh. Some
traditions call the festival "Litha", a name occurring in Bede's "Reckoning of
Time" ("De Temporum Ratione", 7th century), which preserves a list of the
(then-obsolete) Anglo-Saxon names for the twelve months. "Ærra Liða" ('first'
or 'preceding' "Liða") roughly corresponds to June in the Gregorian calendar,
and "Æfterra Liða" ('following' "Liða") to July. Bede writes that "Litha
means 'gentle' or 'navigable', because in both these months the calm breezes
are gentle and they were wont to sail upon the smooth sea." Lammas. Lammas or
Lughnasadh ( ) is the first of the three pagan autumn harvest festivals, the
other two being the Autumn equinox (or Mabon) and Samhain. Wiccans mark the
holiday by baking a figure of the god in bread and eating it, to symbolize the
sanctity and importance of the harvest. Lamas/ Lughnasadh celebrations vary, as
not all pagans are Wiccans. The Celtic name Lughnasadh. is used in some
traditions to designated this holiday. Wiccan celebrations of this holiday are
not generally based on Celtic culture nor centered on the Celtic deity Lugh,
however. This name seems to have been a late adoption among Wiccans. In early
versions of Wiccan literature the festival is referred to as "August Eve". The
name "Lammas" (contraction of Loaf-mass) implies it is an agrarian-based
festival and feast of thanksgiving for grain and bread, which symbolizes the
first fruits of the harvest. Pagan / Eclectic Neopagan rituals may incorporate
elements from either festival. Autumnal Equinox. The holiday of Autumn Equinox,
"Harvest Home", "Mabon", the "Feast of the Ingathering", "Meán Fómhair" or
"Alban Elfed" (in Neo-Druidic traditions), is a pagan ritual of thanksgiving
for the fruits of the earth and a recognition of the need to share them to
secure the blessings of the Goddess and the God during the coming winter
months. The name "Mabon" was coined by Aidan Kelly around 1970 as a reference
to Mabon ap Modron, a character from Welsh mythology. In the northern
hemisphere this equinox occurs anywhere from September 21 to 24. In the
southern hemisphere, the autumn equinox occurs anywhere from March 20–23.
Among the sabbats, it is the second of the three pagan harvest festivals,
preceded by Lammas / Lughnasadh and followed by Samhain. Samhain. Samhain ( )
is considered by Wiccans to be one of the four "greater Sabbats". It is
generally observed on October 31 in the Northern Hemisphere, starting at
sundown. Samhain is considered by some as a time to celebrate the lives of
those who have passed on, and it often involves paying respect to ancestors,
family members, elders of the faith, friends, pets and other loved ones who
have died. In some rituals the spirits of the departed are invited to attend
the festivities. It is seen as a festival of darkness, which is balanced at the
opposite point of the wheel by the spring festival of Beltane, which is
celebrated as a festival of light and fertility. The Wiccan Samhain doesn't
attempt to reconstruct a historical Celtic festival . In actuality it was also
believed that on October 31, the veil between this world and the afterlife is
at its thinnest point of the whole year; however this is not just a Wiccan
belief. Minor festivals. In addition to the major eight holidays common to most
modern pagans, there are a number of minor holidays set along the along the
year to commemorate various events. Dates of celebration. While the Wheel of
the Year is based upon predictable, recurring solar events, the precise dates
festivals are celebrated are often flexible, varying by tradition and location.
Dates may be on the days of the quarter and cross-quarter days proper, the
nearest full moon, the nearest new moon, or the nearest weekend for secular
convenience. Hemispheres. The Wheel originates from peoples in the middle
latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere. Consequently, the traditional times for
celebrations - e.g. harvest festivals - do not agree with the seasons in the
Southern Hemisphere. Many Pagans in the South advance these dates six months to
coincide with the cycles of the local hemisphere. The current system is still
problematic for Pagans near the Equator and Arctic. Practice. Celebration
commonly takes place outdoors in the form of a communal gathering. Sacrifice.
