Whore of Babylon The Whore of Babylon or "Babylon the Great" is a Christian
allegorical figure of evil mentioned in the Book of Revelation in the Bible.
Her full title is given as "Babylon the Great, the Mother of Prostitutes and
Abominations of the Earth." (; transliterated "Babylōn ē Megalē, ē mētēr
tōn pornōn kai tōn bdelygmatōn tēs Gēs".) Symbolism. The Whore is
associated with the Antichrist and the Beast of Revelation by connection with
an equally evil kingdom. "(The word "Whore" can also be translated as
"Idolatress".)" The Whore's apocalyptic downfall is prophesied to take place in
the hands of the beast with seven heads and ten horns. There is much
speculation within Christian eschatology on what the Whore and Beast symbolize
as well as the possible implications for contemporary interpretations. The
“great whore”, of the biblical book of Revelation is featured in chapters
17 and 18. Many passages define symbolic meanings inherent in the text.
Interpretations. Rome and the Roman Empire. Many Biblical scholars believe that
"Babylon" is an allegory of the pagan Roman Empire at the time it persecuted
Christians, before the Edict of Milan in 313: perhaps specifically, at the
time, referencing some aspect of Rome's rule (brutality, greed, paganism). Some
exegetes interpret the passage as a scathing critique of a servant people of
Rome who do the Empire's bidding, interpreting that the author of Revelation
was speaking of the Herodians - a party of Jews friendly to Rome and open to
her influence, like the Hellenizers of centuries past - and later, corrupt
Hasmoneans, where the ruler of Jerusalem or Roman Judaea exercised his power at
the pleasure of the Emperor, and was dependent on Roman influence, like Herod
the Great in the Gospel according to Luke. In 4 Ezra (2 Esdras/4 Esdras; see
the article on the naming conventions of the Books of Ezra), 2 Baruch and the
Sibylline oracles, "Babylon" is a cryptic name for Rome. Elsewhere in the New
Testament, in 1 Peter 5:13; some speculate that "Babylon" is used to refer to
Rome. In Revelation 17:9 it is said that she sits on "seven mountains" (the
King James Version Bible—the New International Version Bible uses the words
"seven hills"), typically understood as the seven hills of Rome. A Roman coin
minted under the Emperor Vespasian (ca. 70 AD) depicts Rome as a woman sitting
on seven hills. According to the "International Standard Bible Encyclopedia",
""The characteristics ascribed to this Babylon apply to Rome rather than to any
other city of that age: (a) as ruling over the kings of the earth (Revelation
17:18); (b) as sitting on seven mountains (Revelation 17:9); (c) as the center
of the world's merchandise (Revelation 18:3, 11–13); (d) as the corrupter of
the nations (Revelation 17:2; 18:3; 19:2); (e) as the persecutor of the saints
(Revelation 17:6)."" Roman Catholic Church. Reformational view. Historicist
interpreters commonly used the phrase "Whore of Babylon" to refer to the Roman
Catholic Church. Reformation writers from Martin Luther (1483–1546) (who
wrote "On the Babylonian Captivity of the Church"), John Calvin (1509–1564),
and John Knox (1510–1572) (who wrote "The First Blast of the Trumpet Against
the Monstrous Regiment of Women") taught this association. The Roman Catholic
Church denies the claim that it is being referred to by the Book of Revelation
as the Whore of Babylon. They also believed that the primary location of this
unfaithful church is stated in the same chapter. The connection noted above on
the seven hills of Rome is argued to locate the church. Identification of the
Pope as the Antichrist was written into Protestant creeds such as the
Westminster Confession of 1646. The identification of the Roman Catholic Church
with the Whore of Babylon is kept in the "Scofield Reference Bible" (whose 1917
edition identified "ecclesiastical Babylon" with "apostate Christendom headed
by the Papacy"). Traditionalist Catholic view. Some traditionalist Catholics
who hold the position of Sedevacantism, most notably the Most Holy Family
Monastery, believe that a counterfeit bride – a Counter-Catholic Church –
will arise in the end times in order to deceive faithful Catholics; they teach
that this counterfeit Church is the Roman Catholic Church after the Second
Vatican Council. Seventh-Day Adventist view. Because Ellen Gould White, founder
of the Seventh-Day Adventists, concluded that "Spiritual Babylon" would have
worldwide influence, affecting "all nations", she wrote, in a book called "The
Great Controversy" (often reprinted as "American in Prophecy": one of the large
corpus of Ms White's writings), that Imperial Rome could not meet the criteria,
as she wrote that it only had influence in the Old World (the New World had not
yet been discovered at the time of Jesus). Thus, Ellen Gould White concluded
that the true "Whore of Babylon" must be the "Roman" Catholic Church
(disregarding the other 22 "sui iuris" Eastern Catholic Churches), giving
lasting impetus and inspiration to the strong anti-Catholicism present
throughout much of Adventism through its history. Jehovah's Witnesses view.
Jehovah's Witnesses believe that the Whore of Babylon represents "the world
empire of false religion", referring to all elements of worldly religions that
do not adhere to biblical truth as published by the Watchtower Bible and Tract
Society (WTS) and as interpreted and defined by the Governing Body of Jehovah's
Witnesses (the institutional and leadership organizations of Jehovah's
Witnesses). This includes, but is not limited to, Christendom, a term they use
to refer to "professed Christianity" (Nominal Christianity) as opposed to "true
Christianity". Jehovah's Witnesses literature often mentions the Catholic
religion when discussing The Great Harlot of Babylon, and the subsequent attack
on her by the political powers, signaling the beginning of the "great
tribulation". They believe that the harlot—the empire of false religion and
an enemy of God—has persecuted God's prophets and people, and that 'false
religion'—all religion except for Jehovah's Witnesses—commits and has
committed "fornication" with the world's political and commercial elements.
Earthly Jerusalem. Many Biblical scholars and theologians point out that
although Rome was the prevailing pagan power in the 1st century when the Book
of Revelation was written, the symbolism of the whore of Babylon refers not to
an invading infidel of foreign power, but to an apostate false queen, a former
"bride" who has been unfaithful and who, even though she has been divorced and
cast out because of unfaithfulness, continues to falsely claim to be the
"queen" of the spiritual realm. This symbolism did not fit the case of Rome at
the time. Proponents of this view suggest that the "seven mountains" in Rev 17:
9 are the seven hills on which Jerusalem stands and the "fall of Babylon" in
Rev 18 is the fall and destruction of Jerusalem in 70 AD The dress of the whore
of Babylon is similar to the Jerusalem High Priest (Exodus 28:6). Several Old
Testament prophets referred to Jerusalem as being a spiritual harlot and a
mother of such harlotry (Isaiah 1:21; Jeremiah 2:20; Jeremiah 3:1–11; Ezekiel
16:1–43; Ezekiel 23, Galatians 4:25). Some of the these Old Testament
prophecies as well as the warnings in the New Testament concerning Jerusalem
are in fact very close to the text concerning Babylon in Revelation, suggesting
that John may well have actually been citing those prophecies in his
description of Babylon. For example, in Matthew 23:34–37 and Luke 11:47–51,
Jesus himself assigned all of the bloodguilt for the killing of the prophets
and of the saints (of all time) to the Pharisees of Jerusalem, and, in
Revelation 17:6 and 18:20,24, almost identical phrasing is used in charging
that very same bloodguilt to Babylon. This is also bolstered by Jesus'
statement that "it's not possible for a prophet to be killed outside of
Jerusalem." (Luke 13:33).
