Witches' Sabbath The Witches' Sabbath or Sabbat is a meeting of those who
practice witchcraft and other rites. European records indicate cases of persons
being accused or tried for taking part in Sabbat gatherings, from the Middle
Ages to the 17th century or later. Etymology. The English word “sabbat”
came indirectly from Hebrew (שַׁבָּת). In Hebrew it means “to cease”
or “to rest”. In Judaism Shabbat is the rest day celebrated on Friday
evening into Saturday. In connection with the Medieval popularity of the belief
that Jews worship the Devil, satanic gatherings of witches were called
“sabbats” or “synagogues”. The latter is a Jewish places of worship,
much like a church. Alternately, some Christians were accused of Judaizing.
Christian Sabbathkeepers, who never accepted Emperor Constantine's edict in 321
A.D., the first enforcing Christian worship on Sunday rather than on Sabbath,
were demonized and accused of witchcraft; hence, the accusatory nomenclature,
"witches' sabbath." The Sabbat in history. Although allusions to Sabbats were
made by the Catholic Canon law since about 905, the first book that mentions
the Sabbat is, theoretically, "Canon Episcopi", included in Burchard of Worms's
collection in the 11th century. The "Canon Episcopi" alleged that "Diana's
rides," (by the name of the Roman goddess of the hunt) were false, and that
these spirit travels did not occur in reality. "Errores Gazariorum" later
evoked the Sabbat, in 1452. In the 13th century the accusation of participation
in a Sabbat was considered very serious. Helping to publicize belief in and the
threat of the Witches' Sabbath was the extensive preaching of the popular
Franciscan reformer, Saint Bernardino of Siena (1380–1444), whose widely
circulating sermons contain various references to the sabbath as it was then
conceived and hence represent valuable early sources into the history of this
phenomenon. Some allusions to meetings of witches with demons are also made in
the Inquistors' manual of witch-hunting, the "Malleus Maleficarum" (1486).
Nevertheless, it was during the Renaissance when Sabbat folklore was most
popular, more books on them were published, and more people lost their lives
when accused of participating. "Commentarius de Maleficius" (1622), by Peter
Binsfeld, cites accusation of participation in Sabbats as a proof of guiltiness
in an accusation for the practice of witchcraft. A Sabbat is also shown in
Nathaniel Hawthorne's short story "Young Goodman Brown" where Brown finds a
meeting of Devil worshipers from Salem village. It is important to note,
however, that in spite of the number of times that authorities retold stories
of the sabbat, modern researchers have been unable to find any corroboration
that any such event ever occurred. The historian Scott E. Hendrix presents a
two-fold explanation for why these stories were so commonly told in spite of
the fact that sabbats likely never actually occurred in his study "The Pursuit
of Witches and the Sexual Discourse of the Sabbat." First, belief in the
existence of witches was widespread in late medieval and early-modern Europe.
Many religious authorities believed there was a vast underground conspiracy of
witches who were responsible for the horrific famines, plague, warfare, and
problems in the Catholic Church that became endemic in the fourteenth century.
By blaming witches, religious authorities provided a handy scapegoat for those
who might otherwise question God's goodness. Second, stories of the sabbat,
with its prurient orgiastic elements, caused these stories to be told and
retold. In effect, the sabbat acted as an effective 'advertising' gimmick,
causing knowledge of what these authorities believed to be the very real threat
of witchcraft to be spread more rapidly across the continent. Unfortunately
that also meant that stories of the sabbat promoted the hunting, prosecution,
and execution of supposed witches. What has been said about the Sabbat by the
Catholic Church. Ritual elements. The "Compendium Maleficarum" (1608), by
Francesco Maria Guazzo, aka Guaccio, Guaccius is a book published by an Italian
priest with some illustrations of what he imagined could be a Sabbat, and gives
a description of it; a brief summary can be cited as an example: "the
attendants go riding flying goats, trample the cross, are made to be re-
baptised in the name of the Devil, give their clothes to him, kiss the Devil's
behind, and dance back to back forming a round". According to Hans Baldung
Grien (ca 1484-1545) and Pierre de Rostegny, aka De Lancre (1553–1631) human
flesh was eaten during Sabbats, preferably children, and also human bones
stewed in a special way. It was also said by some authors that salt, bread and
oil were prohibited because the Devil hated them; while other testimonies told
about delicious dishes. Other descriptions add that human fat, especially of
non-baptised children, was used to make an unguent that enabled the witches to
fly; such an ointment is referred to in "Young Goodman Brown" by Nathaniel
Hawthorne in a conversation between Goody Cloyse and the dark stranger. It was
also believed that witches could fly by themselves, ride a broom, or be carried
by demons to the place of the meeting. The most common belief on which authors
agreed is that Satan was present at the Sabbat, often as a goat or satyr, and
many agreed that more demons were present. Another belief said that sometimes a
person could offer his/her own body to be possessed by some demon serving as a
medium (see demon possession). It was believed that the Sabbat commenced at
midnight and ended at dawn, beginning with a procession, continuing with a
banquet, then a Black Mass, and culminating with an orgy in which uninhibited
sexual intercourse with demons in male or female form was practiced.
Consumption of hallucinogens and sometimes alcohol was often reported.
Location. According to folklore, the Sabbat was most often celebrated in
isolated places, preferably forests or mountains. Some famous places where
these events were said to have been celebrated are Briany, Carignano,
Benevento, Puy-de-Dôme (France), Blocksberg, Melibäus, the Black Forest,
(Germany), the Bald Mount (Poland), Vaspaku, Zabern, Kopastatö (Hungary), San
Colombano al Lambro (Italy) and more, but it was also said that Stonehenge
(England) was a place for Sabbats. In the Basque country the Sabbat (there
called Akelarre, or 'field of the goat') was said to be celebrated in isolated
fields. Dates. There is no agreement among authors concerning the dates on
which the Sabbats were to be celebrated. Some hypothosized they would take
place during the night of the Sunday before the time the Christian mass was
celebrated, some authors disagreed telling that Satan was less powerful on holy
days. Some commonly mentioned dates were February 1 (to some February 2), May 1
(Great Sabbat, Walpurgis Night), August 1 (lammas), November 1 (Halloween,
commencing on October 30's eve), Easter, and Christmas. Other less frequently
mentioned dates were Good Friday, January 1 (day of Jesus' circumcision), June
23 (St. John's Day), December 21 (St. Thomas), and Corpus Christi. and others.
The modern Sabbats that many Wiccans and Neo-Pagans now follow are: Imbolc
(February 2), Ostara (Spring Equinox), Beltane (May 1), Litha (Summer
Solstice), Lammas (August 1), Mabon (Autumn Equinox), Samhain (October 31) and
Yule (Winter Solstice). (See also Wheel of the Year) According to the
testimonies of "benandanti" and similar European groups (see below), common
dates for gatherings are during the weeks of the Ember days, during the twelve
days of Christmas or at Pentecost. Depictions of witches' sabbaths in various
art forms. As referenced earlier, Hawthorne seems to have been describing a
witches' sabbath and the surrounding activity in his short story, "Young
Goodman Brown." Musically, the supposed ritual has been used as inspiration for
such works as Night on Bald Mountain by Modest Mussorgsky and the fifth
movement of Hector Berlioz's Symphonie Fantastique. Disputed accuracy of the
accounts. The descriptions of Sabbats were made or published by priests,
jurists and judges who never took part in these gatherings, or were transcribed
during the process of the witchcraft trials. That these testimonies reflect
actual events is for most of the accounts considered doubtful. Norman Cohn
argued that they were determined largely by the expectations of the
interrogators and free association on the part of the accused, and reflect only
popular imagination of the times, influenced by ignorance, fear, and religious
intolerance towards minority groups. Some of the existing accounts of the
Sabbat were given when the person recounting them was being tortured. and so
motivated to agree with suggestions put to them. Many of the diabolical
elements of the Witches' Sabbath stereotype, such as the eating of babies,
poisoning of wells, desecration of hosts or kissing of the devil's anus, were
also made about heretical Christian sects, lepers, Muslims, and Jews (see blood
libel). The term is the same as the normal English word "Sabbath" (itself a
transliteration of Hebrew "Shabbat", the seventh day, on which the Creator
rested after creation of the world), referring to the witches' equivalent to
the Christian day of rest; a more common term was "synagogue" or "synagogue of
Satan", possibly reflecting anti-Jewish sentiment, although the acts attributed
to witches bear little resemblance to the Sabbath in Christianity or Jewish
Shabbat customs. The "Errores Gazariorum" ("Errors of the Cathars"), which
mentions the Sabbat, while not discussing the actual behavior of the Cathars,
is named after them, in an attempt to link these stories to a heretical
Christian group. Christian missionaries' attitude to African cults was not much
different in principle to their attitude to the Witches' Sabbath in Europe;
some accounts viewed them as a kind of Witches' Sabbath, but they are not. Some
African communities believe in witchcraft, but as in the European witch trials,
people they believe to be "witches" are condemned rather than embraced.
Possible connections to real groups. Other historians, including Carlo
Ginzburg, Éva Pócs, Bengt Ankarloo and Gustav Henningsen hold that these
testimonies can give insights into the belief systems of the accused. Ginzburg
famously discovered records of a group of individuals in northern Italy,
calling themselves "benandanti", who believed that they went out of their
bodies in spirit and fought amongst the clouds against evil spirits to secure
prosperity for their villages, or congregated at large feasts presided over by
a goddess, where she taught them magic and performed divinations. Ginzburg
links these beliefs with similar testimonies recorded across Europe, from the
"armiers" of the Pyrenees, from the followers of Signora Oriente in fourteenth
century Milan and the followers of Richella and 'the wise Sibillia' in
fifteenth century northern Italy, and much further afield, from Livonian
werewolves, Dalmatian "kresniki", Hungarian "táltos", Romanian "căluşari"
and Ossetian "burkudzauta". In many testimonies these meetings were described
as out-of-body, rather than physical, occurrences.
