Witch of Endor The Witch of Endor, sometimes called the medium of Endor, was a
woman who apparently called up the ghost of the recently deceased prophet
Samuel, at the demand of King Saul of the Kingdom of Israel in the First Book
of Samuel, chapter . The witch is absent from the version of that event
recounted in the deuterocanonical Book of Sirach (47:19–20). Story. After
Samuel had died, he was buried in Ramah. After Samuel's death Saul received no
answer from God from dreams, prophets, or the Urim and Thummim as to his best
course of action against the assembled forces of the Philistines. Consequently
Saul, who has earlier driven out all necromancers and magicians from Israel,
seeks out a medium, anonymously and in disguise. Following the instruction of
her visitor, the woman claims that she sees the ghost of Samuel rising from the
abode of the dead. The voice of the prophet's ghost, after complaining of being
disturbed, berates Saul for disobeying God, and predicts Saul's downfall, with
his whole army, in battle the next day, then adds that Saul and his sons will
join him, then, in the abode of the dead. Saul is shocked and afraid, and
following the encounter his army is defeated and Saul commits suicide after
being wounded. The woman is described as "a woman with an ob" (אוֹב, a
talisman or perhaps wineskin) in Hebrew, which may be a reference to
ventriloquism, and claims to see "elohim arising" (plural verb) from the
ground. Interpretations. Judaism. In the Septuagint (2nd century BCE) the woman
is described as a "ventriloquist", possibly reflecting the consistent view of
the Alexandrian translators concerning "demons... which exist not". However
Josephus (1st century) appears to find the story completely credible
("Antiquities of the Jews" 6,14). The Yalkut Shimoni (11th century) identifies
the anonymous witch as the mother of Abner. Based upon the witch's claim to
have seen something, and Saul having heard a disembodied voice, the Yalkut
suggests that necromancers are able to see the spirits of the dead but are
unable to hear their speech, while the person for whom the person was summoned
hears the voice but fails to see anything. Christianity. The Church Fathers and
some modern Christian writers have debated the theological issues raised by
this text. The story of King Saul and the Witch of Endor would appear at first
sight to affirm that it is possible for humans to summon the spirits of the
dead by magic. Medieval glosses to the Bible suggested that what the witch
actually summoned was not the ghost of Samuel, but a demon taking his shape or
an illusion crafted by the witch. Martin Luther, who believed that the dead
were unconscious, read that it was "the Devil's ghost", whereas John Calvin,
who did believe in the immortal soul, read that "it was not the real Samuel,
but a spectre." The modern Christian author Hank Hanegraaff argues that
although it is impossible for humans to summon the dead, Samuel did appear
before Saul and the witch by a sovereign act of God. Hanegraaff interprets the
passage to mean that the witch was surprised by these events. Mortalist
denominations such as Seventh-day Adventists generally teach that the story is
but one example of ancient witchcraft or sorcery in the bible, which is founded
on an unholy belief that people can communicate with the dead. Adventists
believe that the bible teaches repeatedly, but most specifically in
Ecclessiastes 9:5,6, "For the living know that they shall die: but the dead
know not any thing, neither have they any more a reward; for the memory of them
is forgotten. Also their love, and their hatred, and their envy, is now
perished; neither have they any more a portion for ever in any thing that is
done under the sun." Seventh-day Adventists believe that communication with the
dead is a form of magic, divination, sorcery, necromancy, and spiritualism
which are all condemned in scripture. Adventists assert that since the
scriptures teach that the dead know not anything, Saul was not communicating
with the prophet Samuel, but with Satan. In popular culture. The witch appears
as a character in oratorios (including "Mors Saulis et Jonathae" (c.1682) by
Charpentier, "In Guilty Night: Saul and the Witch of Endor" (1691) by Henry
Purcell, and "Saul" (1738) by Handel on the death of Saul) and operas ("David
et Jonathas" (1688) by the afore-mentioned Charpentier and "Saul og David"
(1902) by Carl Nielsen). A year after the death of his son at Loos, Rudyard
Kipling wrote a poem called (1916), about communicating with the dead. It
concludes, A British cutter with the name The Witch of Endor is commandeered by
Captain Horatio Hornblower during his escape from France in "Flying Colours"
(1938), a novel by C.S. Forester set in the Napoleonic Wars. The poet Howard
Nemerov wrote a one act drama entitled "Endor" (1961) in which Saul visits the
Witch of Endor. The mother of the witch Samantha on the TV sitcom Bewitched was
named Endora. In the book series The Secrets of the Immortal Nicholas Flamel,
the Witch of Endor is a secondary character. ""In Endor"" by Shaul
Tchernichovsky, describing King Saul's encounter with the Witch of Endor, is
considered a major work of modern Hebrew poetry. Tchernichovsky particularly
identified with the character of Saul, perhaps due to his own name, and the
poem expresses considerable empathy to this King's tragic fate. The Israeli
Kibbutz Ein Dor derives its name from the Biblical witch's place of residence.
Endor is a fictional planet in the Star Wars universe, and is referenced in the
sixth film "The Return of the Jedi" The Witch of Endor is the title of a song
by artist "Moondog"
