Woman A woman (), pl: women () is a female human. The term "woman" is usually
reserved for an adult, with the term girl being the usual term for a female
child or adolescent. However, the term "woman" is also sometimes used to
identify a female human, regardless of age, as in phrases such as "Women's
rights". Unlike men, women are typically capable of giving birth. Etymology. In
Old English, wīfmann meant "female human", whereas "wēr" meant "male human".
"Mann" or "monn" had a gender-neutral meaning of "human", corresponding to
Modern English "person" or "someone", however subsequent to the Norman
Conquest, "man" began to be used more in reference to "male human", and by the
late 1200s had begun to eclipse usage of the older term "wēr". The medial
labial consonants f and m in "wīfmann" coalesced into the modern form "woman",
while the initial element, which meant "female," underwent semantic narrowing
to the sense of a married woman ("wife"). A very common Indo-European root for
woman, *"gwen"-, is the source of modern English "queen" (Old English "cwēn"
had primarily meant "woman", highborn or not; this is still the case in Danish,
with the modern spelling "kvinde", as well as in Swedish "kvinna"). The word
"gynaecology" is also derived from the Ancient Greek cognate γυνή "gynē",
woman. Other English words traceable to the same Indo-European root include
"banshee" "fairy woman" (from Irish "bean" "woman" and "sí" "fairy") and
"zenana" (from Persian زن "zan"). The Latin "fēmina", whence "female", is
likely from the root in "fellāre" (to suck), in reference to breastfeeding.
Biological symbol. The symbol for the planet Venus is the sign also used in
biology for the female sex. It is a stylized representation of the goddess
Venus's hand-mirror or an abstract symbol for the goddess: a circle with a
small equilateral cross underneath (Unicode: ♀). The Venus symbol also
represented femininity, and in ancient alchemy stood for copper. Alchemists
constructed the symbol from a circle (representing spirit) above an equilateral
cross (representing matter). Terminology. Womanhood is the period in a female's
life after she has passed through childhood and adolescence, generally around
the age 18. Puberty generally begins at about age 10, followed by menarche at
age 12 to 13. Many cultures have rites of passage to symbolize a girl's coming
of age, such as confirmation in some branches of Christianity, bat mitzvah in
Judaism, or even just the custom of a special celebration for a certain
birthday (generally between 12 and 21), like the Quinceañera of Latin America.
The word "woman" can be used generally, to mean any female human, or
specifically, to mean an adult female human as contrasted with "girl". The word
"girl" originally meant "young person of either sex" in English; it was only
around the beginning of the 16th century that it came to mean specifically a
"female" child. The term "girl" is sometimes used colloquially to refer to a
young or unmarried woman, however during the early 1970s feminists challenged
such use because the use of the word to refer to a fully grown woman may cause
offence. In particular, previously common terms such as "office girl" are no
longer widely used. Conversely, in certain cultures which link family honor
with female virginity, the word "girl" is still used to refer to a never-
married woman; in this sense it is used in a fashion roughly analogous to the
obsolete English "maid" or "maiden". Referring to an unmarried female human as
a "woman" may, in such a culture, imply that she is sexually experienced, which
would be an insult to her family. There are various words used to refer to the
quality of being a woman. The term "womanhood" merely means the state of being
a woman, having passed the menarche; "femininity" is used to refer to a set of
typical female qualities associated with a certain attitude to gender roles;
"womanliness" is like "femininity", but is usually associated with a different
view of gender roles; "femaleness" is a general term, but is often used as
shorthand for "human femaleness"; "distaff" is an archaic adjective derived
from women's conventional role as a spinner, now used only as a deliberate
archaism; "muliebrity" is a neologism (derived from the Latin) meant to provide
a female counterpart of "virility", but used very loosely, sometimes to mean
merely "womanhood", sometimes "femininity" and sometimes even as a collective
term for women. Biology and gender. In terms of biology, the female sex organs
are involved in the reproductive system, whereas the secondary sex
characteristics are involved in nurturing children or, in some cultures,
attracting a mate. The ovaries, in addition to their regulatory function
producing hormones, produce female gametes called eggs which, when fertilized
by male gametes (sperm), form new genetic individuals. The uterus is an organ
with tissue to protect and nurture the developing fetus and muscle to expel it
when giving birth. The vagina is used in copulation and birthing (although the
word vagina is often colloquially and incorrectly used for the vulva or
external female genitalia, which also includes the labia, the clitoris, and the
female urethra). The breast evolved from the sweat gland to produce milk, a
nutritious secretion that is the most distinctive characteristic of mammals,
along with live birth. In mature women, the breast is generally more prominent
than in most other mammals; this prominence, not necessary for milk production,
is probably at least partially the result of sexual selection. (For other ways
in which men commonly differ physically from women, see Man.) An imbalance of
maternal hormonal levels and some chemicals (or drugs) may alter the secondary
sexual characteristics of fetuses. Most women have the karyotype 46,XX, but
around one in a thousand will be 47,XXX, and one in 2500 will be 45,X. This
contrasts with the typical male karotype of 46,XY; thus, the X and Y
chromosomes are known as female and male, respectively. Because humans inherit
mitochondrial DNA only from the mother's ovum, genetic studies of the female
line tend to focus on mitochondrial DNA. Biological factors are not sufficient
determinants of whether a person considers herself a woman or is considered a
woman. Intersex individuals, who have mixed physical and/or genetic features,
may use other criteria in making a clear determination. There are also
transgender or transsexual women, who were born or physically assigned as male
at birth, but identify as women; there are varying social, legal and individual
definitions with regard to these issues. (See trans woman.) Although fewer
females than males are born (the ratio is around 1:1.05), due to a longer life
expectancy there are only 81 men aged 60 or over for every 100 women of the
same age. Women typically have a longer life expectancy than men. This is due
to a combination of factors: genetics (redundant and varied genes present on
sex chromosomes in women); sociology (such as not being expected in most
countries to perform military service); health-impacting choices (such as
suicide or the use of cigarettes, and alcohol); the presence of the female
hormone estrogen, which has a cardioprotective effect in premenopausal women;
and the effect of high levels of androgens in men. Out of the total human
population, there are 101.3 men for every 100 women (source: 2001 World
Almanac). Most women go through menarche and are then able to become pregnant
and bear children. This generally requires internal fertilization of her eggs
with the sperm of a man through sexual intercourse, though artificial
insemination or the surgical implantation of an existing embryo is also
possible (see reproductive technology). The study of female reproduction and
reproductive organs is called gynaecology. There are some diseases that
primarily affect women, such as lupus. Also, there are some sex-related
illnesses that are found more frequently or exclusively in women, e.g., breast
cancer, cervical cancer, or ovarian cancer. Women and men may have different
symptoms of an illness and may also respond differently to medical treatment.
This area of medical research is studied by gender-based medicine. During early
fetal development, embryos of both sexes appear gender-neutral; the release of
hormones is what changes physical appearance male or female. As in cases
without two sexes, such as species that reproduce asexually, the gender-neutral
appearance is closer to female than to male. Culture and gender roles. In many
prehistoric cultures, women assumed a particular cultural role. In gatherer-
hunter societies, women were generally the gatherers of plant foods, small
animal foods and fish, while men hunted meat from large animals. In more recent
history, the gender roles of women have changed greatly. Traditionally, middle
class women were involved in domestic tasks emphasizing child care. For poorer
women, especially working class women, although this often remained an ideal,
economic necessity compelled them to seek employment outside the home. The
occupations that were available to them were, however, lower in pay than those
available to men. As changes in the labor market for women came about,
availability of employment changed from only "dirty", long hour factory jobs to
"cleaner", more respectable office jobs where more education was demanded,
women's participation in the U.S. labor force rose from 6% in 1900 to 23% in
1923. These shifts in the labor force led to changes in the attitudes of women
at work, allowing for the revolution which resulted in women becoming career
and education oriented. Movements advocate equality of opportunity for both
sexes and equal rights irrespective of gender. Through a combination of
economic changes and the efforts of the feminist movement, in recent decades
women in most societies now have access to careers beyond the traditional
homemaker. Although a greater number of women are seeking higher education,
salaries are often less than those of men. CBS News claims that in the United
States women who are ages 30 to 44 and hold a university degree make only 62
percent of what similarly qualified men do, a lower rate than in all but three
of the 19 countries for which numbers are available. Some Western nations with
greater inequity in pay are Germany, New Zealand and Switzerland. Education.
OECD countries. Education. The educational gender gap in Organisation for
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) countries has been reduced over the
last 30 years. Younger women today are far more likely to have completed a
tertiary qualification: in 19 of the 30 OECD countries, more than twice as many
women aged 25 to 34 have completed tertiary education than have women aged 55
to 64. In 21 of 27 OECD countries with comparable data, the number of women
graduating from university-level programmes is equal to or exceeds that of men.
15-year-old girls tend to show much higher expectations for their careers than
boys of the same age. While women account for more than half of university
graduates in several OECD countries, they receive only 30% of tertiary degrees
granted in science and engineering fields, and women account for only 25% to
35% of researchers in most OECD countries.
