Worship Worship is an act of religious devotion usually directed towards a
deity. The word is derived from the Old English "worthscipe", meaning
"worthiness" or "worth-ship" — to give, at its simplest, worth to something.
Evelyn Underhill (2001) defines worship thus: "The absolute acknowledgment of
all that lies beyond us—the glory that fills heaven and earth. It is the
response that conscious beings make to their Creator, to the Eternal Reality
from which they came forth; to God, however they may think of Him or recognize
Him, and whether He be realized through religion, through nature, through
history, through science, art, or human life and character." Worship asserts
the reality of its object and defines its meaning by reference to it. An act of
worship may be performed individually, in an informal or formal group, or by a
designated leader. Worship in various religions. Worship in Buddhism. Worship
in Buddha Dharma may take innumerable forms given the doctrine of skillful
means. Worship is evident in Buddhism in such forms as: guru yoga, mandala,
thanka, yantra yoga, the discipline of the fighting monks of Shaolin,
panchamrita, mantra recitation, tea ceremony, ganacakra, amongst others.
Worship in Christianity. Adoration versus veneration. In the New Testament
various words are used for worship. The word "proskuneo" "to worship" means to
bow down to Gods or kings. Roman Catholicism, Anglicanism, Oriental Orthodoxy,
and Eastern Orthodoxy make a technical distinction between "adoration" or
"latria" (Latin "adoratio", Greek "latreia", "[λατρεια]"), which is due
to God alone, and "veneration" or "dulia" (Latin "veneratio", Greek "douleia" "
[δουλεια]"), which may be lawfully offered to the saints. The external
acts of veneration resemble those of worship, but differ in their object and
intent. Protestant Christians, who reject the veneration of saints, question
whether such a distinction is always maintained in actual devotional practice,
especially at the level of folk religion. According to Mark Miravalle the
English word "worship" is equivocal, in that it has been used in Catholic
writing, at any rate, to denote both adoration/"latria" and veneration/"dulia",
and in some cases even as a synonym for veneration as distinct from adoration:
Mark Miravalle, S.T.D, What is Devotion to Mary? Orthodox Judaism and orthodox
Sunni Islam hold that for all practical purposes veneration should be
considered the same as prayer; Orthodox Judaism (arguably with the exception of
some Chasidic practices), orthodox Sunni Islam, and most kinds of Protestantism
forbid veneration of saints or angels, classifying these actions as akin to
idolatry. Similarly, Jehovah's Witnesses assert that many actions classified as
patriotic by Protestant groups, such as saluting a flag, are equivalent to
worship and are therefore considered idolatrous as well. Worship in Islam. In
Islam, worship refers to ritualistic devotion which is ordained by and pleasing
to Allah (God). Worship is included in the Five Pillars of Islam, primarily
that of "salat", which is the practice of ritual prayer five times daily.
According to Muhammad Asad, on his notes in The Message of the Qur'an
translation on 51:26,  Worship in Hinduism. Worship in Hinduism involves
invoking higher forces to assist in spiritual and material progress and is
simultaneously both a science and an art. A sense of "bhakti" or devotional
love is generally invoked. This term is probably a central one in Hinduism. A
direct translation from the Sanskrit to English is problematic. Worship takes a
multitude of forms depending on community groups, geography and language. There
is a flavour of loving and being in love with whatever object or focus of
devotion. Worship is not confined to any place of worship, it also incorporates
personal reflection, art forms and group. People usually perform worship to
achieve some specific end or to integrate the body, the mind and the spirit in
order to help the performer evolve into a higher being. Worship in Sikhism. In
Sikhism, worship takes place after the Guru Granth Sahib, which is the work of
the 10 Sikh Gurus all in one. Sikhs worship God and only one God, known as "One
Creator", "The Wonderful Teacher" (Waheguru), or "Destroyer of Darkness".
Worship in Wicca. Wiccan worship commonly takes place during a full moon or a
new moon. Such rituals are called an Esbat and may involve a magic circle which
practitioners believe will contain energy and form a sacred space, or will
provide them a form of magical protection.
