Worship dance Worship dance is any kind of dance that is undertaken for the
specific purpose of religious worship. As a basic element of human expression,
dance is found within many of the world's religions, and is frequently
associated with worship. However, use of the term worship dance appears to be
restricted to Christianity and Messianic Judaism. Christianity. Dance has had a
chequered history within Christianity. Many records exist of prohibitions by
leaders within most branches of the Christian Church, for such reasons as the
association of dance with paganism, fears relating to sexuality, and a Greek-
influenced belief in the separation of soul and body. However, beginning in the
latter half of the 20th century there was a significant growth in the use of
dance within christian worship. This received a boost within the framework of
the charismatic movement of the 1970s, which initiated a transition to
contemporary worship in many churches. During this time, the International
Christian Dance Fellowship was formed in Australia by Mary Jones and it now has
branches in many other countries. Hinduism. From a Hindu point of view, the
whole Universe is being brought into existence as the manifestation of the
dance of the Supreme Dancer, Nataraja. In the Hindu scriptures every god has
his or her own style (lasya and tandava respectively represent two aspects of
dance). We read about 23 celestial beings called Apsaras who dance to please
the gods and express the supreme truths in the magic of movement. The dance in
Hinduism used to be a part of a sacred temple ritual, especially in South and
Eastern India, where the female priestesses devadasi's worshipped different
aspects of the Divine through the elaborate language of mime and gestures.
Natyashastra is the most ancient and the most elaborate scripture describing
every element and aspect of this sacred art-worship. The temple dance gradually
evolved into what is known today as the South Indian Classical Dance that still
preserves many ritualistic elements of Hinduism. Some of the classical Indian
dancers are believed to be incarnations of apsaras. Messianic Judaism. A
distinctive style of worship dance has developed within Messianic Judaism.
Known as "messianic dance" or "davidic dance" (named after King David, who
famously danced before the Ark of the Covenant), it takes a similar form to
Israeli Folk Dancing. References. Christian
