Xmas Xmas is a common abbreviation of the word "Christmas". It is sometimes
pronounced , but it, and variants such as "Xtemass", originated as handwriting
abbreviations for the typical pronunciation . The "-mas" part is from the
Latin-derived Old English word for "Mass", while the "X" comes from the Greek
letter "Chi", which is the first letter of the Greek word "Χριστός",
translated as "Christ". There is a common misconception that the word "Xmas" is
a secular attempt to remove the religious tradition from Christmas by taking
the "Christ" out of "Christmas". Style guides and etiquette. "Xmas" is
deprecated by some modern style guides, including those at the "New York
Times", "The Times", "The Guardian", and the BBC. Millicent Fenwick, in the
1948 "Vogue's Book of Etiquette" states that "'Xmas' should never be used" in
greeting cards. "The Cambridge Guide to Australian English Usage" states that
the spelling should be considered informal and restricted to contexts where
concision is valued, such as headlines and greeting cards. "The Christian
Writer's Manual of Style", while acknowledging the ancient and respectful use
of "Xmas" in the past, states that the spelling should never be used in formal
writing. History. Use in English. Early use of "Xmas" includes Bernard Ward's
"History of St. Edmund's college, Old Hall" (originally published circa 1755).
An earlier version, "X'temmas", dates to 1551. Around 1100 the term was written
as "Xp̄es mæsse" in the "Anglo-Saxon Chronicle". "Xmas" is found in a letter
from George Woodward in 1753. Lord Byron used the term in 1811, as did Samuel
Coleridge (1801) and Lewis Carroll (1864). In the United States, Oliver Wendell
Holmes, Jr. used the term in a letter dated 1923. Since at least the late 19th
century, "Xmas" has been in use in various other English-language nations.
Quotations with the word can be found in texts written in Canada, and the word
has been used in Australia, and in the Caribbean. "Merriam-Webster's Dictionary
of English Usage" stated that modern use of the term is largely limited to
advertisements, headlines and banners, where its conciseness is valued. The
association with commerce "has done nothing for its reputation", according to
the dictionary. In the United Kingdom, the former Church of England Bishop of
Blackburn, Alan Chesters, recommended to his clergy that they avoid the
spelling. In the United States, in 1977 New Hampshire Governor Meldrim Thomson
sent out a press release saying that he wanted journalists to keep the "Christ"
in Christmas, and not call it Xmas—which he asserted was a "pagan" spelling
of Christmas. Use of "X" for "Christ". The abbreviation of Christmas as "Xmas"
is the source of disagreement among Christians who observe the holiday. Dennis
Bratcher, writing for a website for Christians, states "there are always those
who loudly decry the use of the abbreviation 'Xmas' as some kind of blasphemy
against Christ and Christianity". Among them are evangelist Franklin Graham and
CNN journalist Roland S. Martin. Graham stated in an interview: American
Morning: A Conversation With Reverend Franklin Graham, CNN (December 16, 2005).
Retrieved on December 29, 2009. Martin likewise relates the use of "Xmas" to
his growing concerns of increasing commercialization and secularization of one
of Christianity's highest holy days. Bratcher posits that those who dislike
abbreviating the word are unfamiliar with a long history of Christians using X
in place of "Christ" for various purposes. The word "Christ" and its compounds,
including "Christmas", have been abbreviated in English for at least the past
1,000 years, long before the modern "Xmas" was commonly used. "Christ" was
often written as "XP" or "Xt"; there are references in the Anglo-Saxon
Chronicle as far back as AD 1021. This X and P arose as the uppercase forms of
the Greek letters χ and ρ used in ancient abbreviations for Χριστος
(Greek for "Christ"), and are still widely seen in many Eastern Orthodox icons
depicting Jesus Christ. The labarum, an amalgamation of the two Greek letters
rendered as ☧, is a symbol often used to represent Christ in Catholic,
Protestant, and Orthodox Christian Churches. The Oxford English Dictionary
(OED) and the OED Supplement have cited usages of "X-" or "Xp-" for "Christ-
" as early as 1485. The terms "Xpian" and "Xtian" have also been used for
"Christian". The dictionary further cites usage of "Xtianity" for
"Christianity" from 1634. According to "Merriam-Webster's Dictionary of English
Usage", most of the evidence for these words comes from "educated Englishmen
who knew their Greek". In ancient Christian art, χ and χρ are abbreviations
for Christ's name. In many manuscripts of the New Testament and icons, Χ is an
abbreviation for Χριστος, as is XC (the first and last letters in Greek,
using the lunate sigma); compare IC for Jesus in Greek. Other uses of "X" for
"Chris-". Other proper names containing the name "Christ" besides those
mentioned above are sometimes abbreviated similarly (e.g., "Xtina" for the name
"Christina"). This usage of "X" to spell the syllable "kris" (rather than the
sounds "ks") has extended to "xtal" for "crystal", and on florists' signs to
"xant" for "chrysanthemum", even though these words are not etymologically
related to "Christ": "crystal" comes from a Greek word meaning "ice" (and not
even using the letter χ), and "chrysanthemum" comes from Greek words meaning
"golden flower" (while "Christ" comes from a Greek word meaning "anointed"). In
the 17th and 18th centuries, "Xene" and "Exene" were common spellings for the
given name Christine. The American singer Christina Aguilera has sometimes gone
by the name "Xtina" (the "t" should not be considered redundant; as is noted
above, "Christ" was historically often shortened to "Xt", not just to X).
