Yahweh Yahweh ( or ; ), is the name of the national god of Israel in the Hebrew
Bible. Despite the bible's story, according to which the Israelites originated
from Mespotamia via slavery in Egypt, the evidence indicates that they were
native to Canaan. Yahweh, however, was not a Canaanite god, and modern scholars
see him originating in Edom, the region south of Judah. The goddess Asherah may
have been Yahweh's consort in the earliest period. Originally the main god of
the Iron Age kingdoms of Israel and Judah, worship of Yahweh alone (monotheism)
became entrenched in Judaism in the exilic and Persian periods. The Bible
describes Yahweh as the god who delivered Israel from Egypt and gave the Ten
Commandments, and says that Yahweh revealed himself to Israel as the who would
not permit his people to make idols or worship other gods "I am Yahweh, that is
My name; I will not give My glory to another, or My praise to idols." Name.
Biblical Hebrew was written with consonants only, meaning that the name was
written יהוה (YHWH). The original pronunciation was lost many centuries
ago, but the available evidence indicates that it was in all likelihood Yahweh.
The components of YHWH are Y, meaning roughly "he", and the consonantal root
HWH, which is connected with acts of creation. There appear to be two main
lines of reasoning to explain the origin of the name. The first suggests that
it is the shortened form of a sentence used in worship, "he causes to be" or
"he creates", from "el du yahwi seba'ot", "el who creates the hosts", meaning
the heavenly army accompanying the god El as he marched out beside the earthly
armies of Israel. The second looks for the origins of Yahweh to the southeast
of Israel, in Edom and Midian or even further, in South Semitic languages like
Arabic. HWY in Arabic is connected with falling or causing to fall, leading to
an interpretation of Yahweh as a storm god whose name means "He who causes to
fall" (meaning rain, lightning, and his enemies) or "He causes storms". This
helps explain Yahweh's attributes as a storm god (he comes to rescue Israel
surrounded by darkness and thick clouds, and the earth trembles, the clouds
drop water, and the mountains quake at his appearance), and the way he
appropriates attributes from the rival storm god Baʿal. History. The Kenite
hypothesis. The Bible tells a story in which the Israelites escaped from Egypt,
met Yahweh on a mountain-top in the wilderness, agreed to become his chosen
people, and conquered Canaan with his help. The archaeological evidence points
to an Israelite community arising peacefully and internally in the highlands of
Canaan. If Yahweh was not a Canaanite god, this raises the question of where he
originated and how he became the national god of Israel and Judah in Iron Age
II (1000-586). The first probable record of his name is in two Egyptian
inscriptions from the 14th and 13th centuries, as a place-name, Yhw in the
region of Edom associated with Shasu Bedouins. According to a widely accepted
theory (the "Kenite hypothesis"), the Edomite god YHW could have been brought
north to the Canaanite hill country and the early Israelites by migratory
Edomite desert tribes, of whom the Kenites were one. National god of Israel. In
Iron Age I the religious life of ordinary Israelites, like that of other
peoples throughout the Ancient Near East, was organised around the family-based
cult of the ancestors and devotion to a local god, the "god of the fathers".
According to the Bible the first king, Saul, was a Gibeonite, a tribe with its
roots in Edom, and in order to unify the new kingdom and cement his own
authority Saul promoted his own god, Yahweh, as god of the kingdom. Previously,
each extended family or clan was the "people" of a particular god, but now the
entire Israelite community became the "people of Yahweh". Yahweh was the god of
the Northern Kingdom of Israel by at least the early 9th century BCE, and this
is confirmed by an inscription from Kuntillet Ajrud which refers to Yahweh of
Samaria, probably meaning the kingdom rather than the city. More than forty
inscriptions mentioning Yahweh, Yahu or Yah have been discovered, all tending
to reinforce the centrality of Yahweh to Israelite religion. The inscriptions
include blessings, oaths, salutations, votive offerings, seals and prayers. No
other gods or goddesses are unambiguously recorded except for contentious
references to Asherah, who might be a goddess and Yahweh's consort, or possibly
some kind of cult object. A fragment from Kuntillet Ajrud (9th/8th centuries)
mentions Baal in association with Yahweh, but in this case the word might
simply mean "Lord" (the literal meaning of "baal"). A 10th century cult stand
from Taanach (a town in Northern Israel, near Megiddo) shows, among other
images, two winged sphinxes with an empty space between them, possibly meant to
represent Yahweh between the cherubim. A horse or bull figure on the same
stand, topped by a solar disk, may represent either Yahweh or Baal, and a
stylised tree and female figures are testimony to the presence of goddesses
(possibly Asherah) in the pantheon. Evidence increasingly suggests that many
Israelites worshipped Asherah as the consort of Yahweh, and various biblical
passages indicate that statues of the goddess were kept in Yahweh's temples in
Jerusalem, Bethel, and Samaria. Other evidence includes, for example, an 8th
century combination of iconography and inscriptions discovered at Kuntillet
Ajrud in the northern Sinai desert where a storage jar shows three
anthropomorphic figures and an inscription that refers to "Yahweh … and his
asherah". Further evidence includes the many female figurines unearthed in
ancient Israel, supporting the view that Asherah functioned as a goddess and
consort of Yahweh and was worshiped as the Queen of Heaven. Yahwism.
Archaeologists and historical scholars use a variety of ways to organize and
interpret the available iconographic and textual information. William G. Dever
contrasts "official religion/state religion/book religion" of the elite with
“folk religion” of the masses. Rainer Albertz contrasts "official religion"
with "family religion", "personal piety", and "internal religious pluralism".
Jacques Berlinerblau analyzes the evidence in terms of "official religion" and
"popular religion" in ancient Israel. Patrick D. Miller has distinguished three
broad categories of Yahwism, orthodox, heterodox, and syncretistic. Orthodox
Yahwism demanded the exclusive worship of Yahweh (although without denying the
existence of other gods). The powers of blessing (health, wealth, continuity,
fertility) and salvation (forgiveness, victory, deliverance from oppression and
threat) resided fully in Yahweh, and his will was communicated via oracle and
prophetic vision or audition. Divination, soothsaying, and necromancy were
prohibited. The individual or community could cry out to Yahweh and would
receive a divine response, mediated by priestly or prophetic figures.
Sanctuaries were erected in various places and were used to express devotion to
Yahweh by means of sacrifice, festival meals and celebrations, prayer, and
praise. Toward the end of the seventh century (BCE) in Judah, worship of Yahweh
was restricted to the temple in Jerusalem, while the major sanctuaries in the
northern kingdom were at Bethel (near the southern border) and Dan (in the
north). Certain times were set for the gathering of the people to celebrate the
gifts of Yahweh and the deity’s acts of deliverance and redemption.
Everything in the moral realm was understood as a part of relation to Yahweh as
a manifestation of holiness. Family relationships and the welfare of the weaker
members of society were protected by divine law, and purity of conduct, dress,
food, etc. were regulated. Religious leadership resided in priests who were
associated with sanctuaries, and also in prophets, who were bearers of divine
oracles. In the political sphere the king was understood as the appointee and
agent of Yahweh. Heterodox Yahwism is described by Miller as a mixture of
elements of orthodox Yahwism with particular practices that conflicted with
orthodox Yahwism or were not customarily a part of it. For example, heterodox
Yahwism included the presence of cult objects rejected in by orthodox
expressions, such as the Asherah, figurines of various sorts (females, horses
and riders, animals and birds, and the calves or bulls of the Northern Kingdom.
The "high places" as centers of worship seems to have moved from an acceptable
place within Yahwism to an increasingly condemned status in official and
orthodox circles. Efforts to know the future or the will of the deity could
also be understood as heterodox if they went outside the boundaries of orthodox
Yahwism, and even commonly accepted revelatory mechanism such as dreams could
be condemned if the resulting message was perceived as false. Consulting
mediums, wizards, and diviners was often employed by heterodox Yahwists.
Syncretism covers the worship of Baal, the heavenly bodies (sun, moon, and
stars), the "Queen of Heaven" and other deities as well as practices such as
child sacrifice: "Other gods were invoked and serviced in time of need or
blessing and provision for life when the worship of Yahweh seemed inadequate
for those purposes." Ancient Israel and Judah. It has traditionally been
believed that monotheism was part of Israel's original covenant with Yahweh on
Mount Sinai, and the idolatry criticized by the prophets was due to Israel's
backsliding. But during the 20th century it became increasingly recognised that
the Bible's presentation raises a number of questions: Why do the Ten
Commandments declare that there should be no other gods "before Me" (Yahweh),
if there are no other gods at all? Why do the Israelites sing at the crossing
of the Red Sea that "there is no god like you, O Yahweh", implying that other
gods exist? These observations eventually overthrew the belief that Israel had
always worshipped no other god but Yahweh. Evidence of Israelite worship of
Canaanite gods appears both in the Bible and the archaeological record.
Respectful references to the goddess Asherah or her symbol, for example, as
part of the worship of Yahweh, are found in the eighth century inscriptions
from Kuntillet Ajrud and Khirbet el-Qom, and references to the Canaanite gods
Resheph and Deber appear without criticism in the original Jewish text of .
While traditionally these words have been understood to be either Jewish words
whose meaning has been derived from characteristics of these Canaanite deities
or references to demons, some interpret these as evidence of Israelite
recognition of these gods as part of the military retinue of Yahweh. The "host
of heaven" is also mentioned without criticism in and . Though the "host of
heaven" has traditionally been interpreted as either the stars/heavenly bodies
or the host of angels/heavenly spirits depending on the context, some again
have interpreted this term to refer to a pantheon of Israelite gods. The god El
is also continually identified with Yahweh. Israel inherited polytheism from
late first-millennium Canaan, and Canaanite religion in turn had its roots in
the religion of second-millennium Ugarit. In the 2nd millennium, polytheism was
expressed through the concepts of the Divine Council and the divine family, a
single entity with four levels: the chief god and his wife (El and Asherah);
the seventy divine children or "stars of El" (including Baal, Astarte, Anat,
probably Resheph, as well as the sun-goddess Shapshu and the moon-god Yerak);
the head helper of the divine household, Kothar wa-Hasis; and the servants of
the divine household, including the messenger-gods who would later appear as
the "angels" of the Hebrew Bible. In the earliest stage Yahweh was one of the
seventy children of El, each of whom was the patron deity of one of the seventy
nations. This is illustrated by the Dead Sea Scrolls and Septuagint texts of
Deuteronomy 32:8–9, in which El, as the head of the divine assembly, gives
each member of the divine family a nation of his own, "according to the number
of the divine sons": Israel is the portion of Yahweh. The later Masoretic text,
evidently uncomfortable with the polytheism expressed by the phrase, altered it
to "according to the number of the children of Israel" Between the eighth to
the sixth centuries El became identified with Yahweh, Yahweh-El became the
husband of the goddess Asherah, and the other gods and the divine messengers
gradually became mere expressions of Yahweh's power. Yahweh is cast in the role
of the Divine King ruling over all the other deities, as in Psalm 29:2, where
the "sons of God" are called upon to worship Yahweh; and as Ezekiel 8-10
suggests, the Temple itself became Yahweh's palace, populated by those in his
retinue. It is in this period that the earliest clear monotheistic statements
appear in the Bible, for example in the apparently seventh-century Deuteronomy
4:35, 39, 1 Samuel 2:2, 2 Samuel 7:22, 2 Kings 19:15, 19 (= Isaiah 37:16, 20),
and Jeremiah 16:19, 20 and the sixth-century portion of Isaiah 43:10–11, 44:
6, 8, 45:5–7, 14, 18, 21, and 46:9. Because many of the passages involved
appear in works associated with either Deuteronomy, the Deuteronomistic History
(Joshua through Kings) or in Jeremiah, most recent scholarly treatments have
suggested that a Deuteronomistic movement of this period developed the idea of
monotheism as a response to the religious issues of the time. The first factor
behind this development involves changes in Israel's social structure. At
Ugarit, social identity was strongest at the level of the family: legal
documents, for example, were often made between the sons of one family and the
sons of another. Ugarit's religion, with its divine family headed by El and
Asherah, mirrored this human reality. The same was true in ancient Israel
through most of the monarchy – for example, the story of Achan in Joshua 8
suggests an extended family as the major social unit. However, the family
lineages went through traumatic changes beginning in the eighth century due to
major social stratification, followed by Assyrian incursions. In the seventh
and sixth centuries, we begin to see expressions of individual identity
(Deuteronomy 26:16; Jeremiah 31:29–30; Ezekiel 18). A culture with a
diminished lineage system, deteriorating over a long period from the ninth or
eighth century onward, less embedded in traditional family patrimonies, might
be more predisposed both to hold the individual accountable for his behavior,
and to see an individual deity accountable for the cosmos. In short, the rise
of the individual as the basic social unit led to the rise of a single god
replacing a divine family. The second major factor was the rise of the neo-
Assyrian and neo-Babylonian empires. As long as Israel was, from its own
perspective, part of a community of similar small nations, it made sense to see
the Israelite pantheon on par with the other nations, each one with its own
patron god – the picture described with Deuteronomy 32:8–9. The assumption
behind this worldview was that each nation was as powerful as its patron god.
However, the neo-Assyrian conquest of the northern kingdom in ca. 722
challenged this, for if the neo-Assyrian empire were so powerful, so must be
its god; and conversely, if Israel could be conquered (and later Judah, c.
586), it implied that Yahweh in turn was a minor divinity. The crisis was met
by separating the heavenly power and earthly kingdoms. Even though Assyria and
Babylon were so powerful, the new monotheistic thinking in Israel reasoned,
this did not mean that the god of Israel and Judah was weak. Assyria had not
succeeded because of the power of its god Marduk; it was Yahweh who was using
Assyria to punish and purify the one nation which Yahweh had chosen. By the
post-Exilic period, full monotheism had emerged: Yahweh was the sole god, not
just of Israel, but of the whole world. If the nations were tools of Yahweh,
then the new king who would come to redeem Israel might not be a Judean as
taught in older literature (e.g. Psalm 2). Now, even a foreigner such as Cyrus
the Persian could serve as the Lord's anointed (Isaiah 44:28, 45:1). One god
stood behind all the world's history. Use in contemporary religion. Modern
Judaism. Jews ceased to pronounce the name in the intertestamental period,
replacing it with the common noun Elohim, “the God”, to demonstrate the
universal sovereignty of Israel's deity over all others. At the same time, the
divine name was increasingly regarded as too sacred to be uttered, and was
replaced in spoken ritual by the word Adonai (“My Lord”), or with haShem
(“the Name”) in everyday speech, see Names of God in Judaism for details.
Christianity. Almost all Bibles (KJV, DRC, RSV, ESV, NASB, NIV, NJPS, NRSV,
NAB, NABRE, CCD, NEB, REB, NKJV, etc.), substitute the titles "Lord" and "God"
in small caps wherever the tetragrammaton appears in the Hebrew; exceptions
include the Jerusalem Bible and New Jerusalem Bible, and a few uncommon
translations such as the Rotherham Emphasized Bible. The liturgical use of
"Yahweh" in vernacular worship was banned by the Vatican in 2008, and the
Vatican Congregation for Divine Worship and the Discipline of the Sacraments
has directed that the word "Lord" and its equivalent in other languages be used
instead. The Sacred Name Movement is a small Christian movement, active since
the 1930s, which propagates the use of the name Yahweh in Bible translations
and in liturgy. The Jehovah's Witnesses New World Translation consistently uses
"Jehovah", even inserting it into the New Testament in place of the Greek
"kurios" (meaning "Lord") in many places.
