Yeshiva Yeshiva (, lit. "sitting"; pl. ישיבות, "yeshivot") is a Jewish
educational institution that focuses on the study of traditional religious
texts, primarily the Talmud and Torah study. Study is usually done through
daily "shiurim" (lectures or classes) and in study pairs called "chavrutas"
(Aramaic for "friendship" or "companionship"). "Chavruta"-style learning is one
of the unique features of the yeshiva. In the United States and Israel, the
different levels of yeshiva education have different names. In the United
States, elementary-school students are enrolled in a "yeshiva", post-bar
mitzvah-age students learn in a "mesivta", and undergraduate-level students
learn in a "beis medrash" or "yeshiva gedola" (, lit. "large yeshiva"). In
Israel, elementary-school students are enrolled in a "Talmud Torah" or
"cheder", post-bar mitzvah-age students learn in a "yeshiva ketana" (, lit.
"small yeshiva"), and high-school-age students learn in a "yeshiva gedola". A
kollel is a yeshiva for married men which pays stipends to its students.
Students of Lithuanian and Hasidic yeshiva gedolas usually learn there for at
least a year after marriage. Historically, yeshivas were attended by males
only. Today, all non-Orthodox and many Modern Orthodox yeshivas are open to
girls and women. Etymology. Alternate spellings and names include yeshivah (; ,
"sitting" (noun); metivta and mesivta (Aramaic: מתיבתא "methivta"); Beth
midrash, Talmudical Academy, Rabbinical Academy; and Rabbinical School. The
word "yeshiva", lit. "sitting", is applied to the activity of learning in
class, and hence to a learning "session." The transference in meaning of the
term from the learning session to the institution itself appears to have
occurred by the time of the great Talmudic Academies in Babylonia, Sura and
Pumbedita, which were known as "shte ha-yeshivot", "the two colleges." History.
Origins. The Mishnah tractate Megillah mentions the law that a town can only be
called a "city" if it supports ten men ("batlanim") to make up the required
quorum for communal prayers. Likewise, every beth din ("rabbinical court") was
attended by a number of pupils up to three times the size of the court
(Mishnah, tractate Sanhedrin). These might be indications of the historicity of
the classical yeshiva. As indicated by the Talmud, adults generally took off
two months a year, Elul and Adar, the months preceding the pilgrimage festivals
of Sukkot and Pesach, called "Yarchei Kalla" (Aramaic for "Months of Kallah")
to study. The rest of the year they worked, adults would work. Geonic Period.
The Geonic period is named after the Gaon, the title bestowed on the heads of
the three yeshivas in existence from the third to the thirteenth century. The
Geonim acted as the principals of their individual yeshivot, and as spiritual
leaders and high judges for the wider communities tied to them. All official
business of the yeshiva was conducted in the name of its Gaon, and all
correspondence to or from the yeshiva was addressed directly to the Gaon.
Throughout the Geonic Period there were three yeshivot. These were named for
the cities in which they were located: Jerusalem, Sura, and Pumbedita; the
yeshiva of Jerusalem would later relocate to Cairo, and the yeshivot of Sura
and Pumbedita to Baghdad, but retain their original names. Each Jewish
community would associate itself with one of the three yeshivot; Jews living
around the Mediterranean typically followed the yeshiva in Jerusalem, while
those living in the Arabian Peninsula and modern-day Iraq and Iran typically
followed one of the two yeshivot in Baghdad. There was however, no requirement
for this, and each community could choose to associate with any of the
yeshivot. The yeshiva served as the highest educational institution for the
Rabbis of this period. In addition to this, the yeshiva wielded immense power
as the principal body for interpreting Jewish law. In this regard, the Gaon of
a yeshiva was seen as the highest judge on all matters of Jewish law. Each
yeshiva ruled differently on matters of ritual and law, these divisions were
accepted by the other yeshivot, and all three were considered equally orthodox.
The yeshiva also served as an administrative authority; in conjunction with
local communities, the yeshiva would appoint members to serve as the head of
local congregations. These would serve as a go-between for the local
congregation, and the larger yeshiva it was attached to. These local leaders
would submit questions to the yeshiva to obtain final rulings on issues of
dogma, ritual, or law. Each congregation was expected to follow only one
yeshiva to prevent conflict with different rulings issued by different
yeshivot. The yeshivot were financially supported through a number of means.
First, there were fixed, but voluntary, yearly contributions made to the
yeshivas, these were collected and handled by the local leaders appointed by
the yeshiva. Private gifts from individuals were also common and could consist
of money or goods. Private donations were also regularly submitted on holidays.
Finally, fines were assigned for the maintenance of the yeshivas. The yeshiva
of Jerusalem was finally forced into exile in Cairo in 1127, and eventually
dispersed entirely. Likewise, the yeshivot of Sura and Pumbedita were dispersed
following the Mongol invasions of the 13th century. After the yeshiva were
scattered, education in Jewish religious studies became the responsibility of
individual synagogues. No organization ever came to replace the three great
yeshivot of Jerusalem, Sura and Pumbedita. Post-Geonic Period to 19th Century.
Traditionally, every town rabbi had the right to maintain a number of full-time
or part-time pupils in the town's beth midrash (study hall, usually adjacent to
the synagogue). Their cost of living was covered by community taxation. After a
number of years, these young people would either take up a vacant rabbinical
position elsewhere (after obtaining semicha, rabbinical ordination) or join the
workforce. Lithuanian yeshivas. Organised Torah study was revolutionised by
Rabbi Chaim Volozhin, a disciple of the Vilna Gaon (an influential 18th century
leader of Judaism). In his view, the traditional arrangement did not cater for
those who were looking for more intensive study. With the support of his
teacher, Rabbi Volozhin gathered a large number of interested students and
started a yeshiva in the (now Belarusian) town of Volozhin. Although the
Volozhin yeshiva was closed some 60 years later due to the Russian government's
demands for the introduction of certain secular studies, a number of yeshivot
opened in other towns and cities, most notably Slabodka, Ponevezh, Mir, Brisk,
and Telz. Many prominent contemporary "yeshivot" in the United States and
Israel are continuations of these institutions and often bear the same name. In
the 19th century, Rabbi Israel Salanter initiated the Mussar movement in non-
Hasidic Lithuanian Jewry, which sought to encourage yeshiva students and the
wider community to spend regular times devoted to the study of Jewish ethical
works. Concerned by the new social and religious changes of the Haskalah
(secularising movement), and emerging political ideologies such as Zionism,
that often opposed traditional Judaism, the masters of Mussar saw a need to
augment Talmudic study with more personal works. These comprised earlier
classic Jewish ethical texts (mussar literature), as well as a new literature
for the movement. By focusing the student on self-understanding and
introspection, often with profound psychological insight, the spiritual aims of
Judaism could be internalized. After early opposition, the Lithuanian yeshivah
world saw the need for this new component in their curriculum, and set aside
times for individual mussar study and mussar talks ("mussar shmues"). A
spiritual mentor (mashgiach ruchani) encouraged the personal development of
each student. To some degree also, this Lithuanian movement arose in response,
and as an alternative, to the separate mystical study of the Hasidic Judaism
world. Hasidism began previously, in the 18th Century, within traditional
Jewish life in the Ukraine, and spread to Hungary, Poland and Russia. As the
19th Century brought upheavals and threats to traditional Judaism, the Mussar
teachers saw the benefit of the new spiritual focus in Hasidism, and developed
their alternative ethical approach to spirituality. Some variety developed
within Lithuanian yeshivas to methods of studying Talmud and "mussar", for
example the contrast between breadth ("beki'ut") and depth ("'iyyun"), or the
place given to pilpul (the type of casuistic argumentation popular from the
16th to 18th centuries). The new analytical approach of the Brisker method,
developed by Rabbi Chaim Soloveitchik of Brisk, has become widely popular,
though there are other approaches such as those of Mir, Chofetz Chaim, and
Telz. In "mussar" different schools developed, such as Slabodka and Novhardok,
though today a decline in devoted spiritual self-development from its earlier
intensity has to some extent levelled out the differences. Hasidic yeshivas.
With the success of the yeshiva institution in Lithuanian Jewry, the Hasidic
world developed their own yeshivas, in their areas of Eastern Europe. These
comprised the traditional Jewish focus on Talmudic literature that is central
to Rabbinic Judaism, augmented by study of Hasidic philosophy (Hasidism).
Examples of these Hasidic yeshivas are the Chabad Lubavitch yeshiva system of
Tomchei Temimim, founded by Sholom Dovber Schneersohn in Russia in 1897, and
the Chachmei Lublin Yeshiva established in Poland in 1930 by Meir Shapiro, who
is renowned in both Hasidic and Lithuanian Jewish circles for initiating the
Daf Yomi daily cycle of Talmud study. In many Hasidic yeshivas, study of
Hasidic texts is a secondary activity, similar to the additional mussar
curriculum in Lithuanian yeshivas. These paths see Hasidism as a means to the
end of inspiring emotional "devekut" (spiritual attachment to God) and mystical
enthusiasm. In this context, the personal pilgrimage of a Hasid to his Rebbe is
a central feature of spiritual life, in order to awaken spiritual fervour.
Often, such paths will reserve the Shabbat in the yeshiva for the sweeter
teachings of the classic texts of Hasidism. In contrast, Chabad and Breslov, in
their different ways, place daily study of their dynasties' Hasidic texts in
central focus. Illustrative of this is Sholom Dovber Schneersohn's wish in
establishing the Chabad yeshiva system, that the students should spend a part
of the daily curriculum learning Chabad Hasidic texts "with pilpul". Pilpul is
the in-depth analytical investigation of a topic, traditionally reserved for
the profound nuances of Talmudic study. The idea to learn Hasidic mystical
texts with similar logical profundity, derives from the unique approach in the
works of the Rebbes of Chabad, initiated by its founder Schneur Zalman of
Liadi, to systematically investigate and articulate the "Torah of the Baal Shem
Tov" in intellectual forms. Further illustrative of this is the differentiation
in Chabad thought (such as the "Tract on Ecstasy" by Dovber Schneuri) between
general Hasidism's emphasis on emotional enthusiasm and the Chabad ideal of
intellectually reserved ecstasy. In the Breslov movement, in contrast, the
daily study of works from the imaginative, creative radicalism of Rabbi Nachman
of Breslov awakens the necessary soulfulness with which to approach other
Jewish study and observance. Sephardi yeshivas. Although the yeshiva as an
institution is in some ways a continuation of the Talmudic Academies in
Babylonia, large scale educational institutions of this kind were not
characteristic of the North African and Middle Eastern Sephardi Jewish world in
pre-modern times: education typically took place in a more informal setting in
the synagogue or in the entourage of a famous rabbi. In medieval Spain and
immediately following the expulsion in 1492 there were some schools which
combined Jewish studies with sciences such as logic and astronomy, similar to
the contemporary Islamic madrasas. In 19th-century Jerusalem a college was
typically an endowment for supporting ten adult scholars rather than an
educational institution in the modern sense; towards the end of the century a
school for orphans was founded providing for some rabbinic studies. Early
educational institutions on the European model were "Beth Zilkha" founded in
1870s Iraq and Porat Yosef Yeshiva founded in Jerusalem in 1914. Also notable
is the Bet El yeshiva founded in 1737 in Jerusalem for advanced Kabbalistic
studies. Later Sephardic yeshivot are usually on the model either of Porat
Yosef or of the Ashkenazi institutions. The Sephardic world has traditionally
placed the study of esoteric Jewish mysticism (Kabbalah) in a more mainstream
position that in the European Ashkenazi world. This difference of emphasis
arose in reaction to the historical events of the Sabbatean heresy in the 17th
Century, that suppressed widespead study of Kabbalah in Europe in favour of the
strength of Rabbinic Talmudic study. In Eastern European Lithuanian life,
Kabbalah was reserved for an intellectual elite, while the mystical revival of
Hasidism articulated Kabbalistic theology through Hasidic thought. These
factors did not affect the Sephardi Jewish world, which retained a wider
connection to Kabbalah in its traditionally observant communities. With the
establishment of Sephardi yeshivas in Israel, after the immigration of the
Arabic Jewish communities there, some Sephardi yeshivas incorporated study of
more accessible Kabbalistic texts into their curriculum. Nonetheless, the
European prescriptions to reserve advanced Kabbalistic study to mature and
elite students also influence the choice of texts in such yeshivas.
Conservative movement yeshivas. In 1854, the Jewish Theological Seminary of
Breslau was founded. It was headed by Zecharias Frankel, and was eventually
viewed as the first yeshiva associated with Conservative Judaism. In subsequent
years, Conservative Judaism established a number of other institutions of
higher learning (such as the Jewish Theological Seminary of America in New York
City) that emulate the style of traditional yeshivas in significant ways.
However, many do not officially refer to themselves as "yeshivas" (one
exception is the Conservative Yeshiva in Jerusalem), and all are open to both
women and men, who study in the same classrooms and follow the same curriculum.
Students may study part-time, as in a kollel, or full-time, and they may study
"lishmah" (for the sake of studying itself) or towards earning rabbinic
ordination. Nondenominational or mixed yeshivas. Non-denominational yeshivas
and kollels with connections to Conservative Judaism include Yeshivat Hadar in
New York, the leaders of whom include Rabbinical Assembly members Eli Kaunfer
and Shai Held. The rabbinical school of the Academy for Jewish Religion in
California (AJR-CA) is led by Conservative rabbi Mel Gottlieb. The faculty of
the Academy for Jewish Religion in New York and of the Rabbinical School of
Hebrew College in Newton Centre, Massachusetts also includes a large number of
Conservative rabbis. Reform and Reconstructionist seminaries. Hebrew Union
College (HUC), affiliated with Reform Judaism, was founded in 1875 under the
leadership of Rabbi Isaac Mayer Wise in Cincinnati, Ohio. HUC later opened
additional locations in New York, Los Angeles, and Jerusalem. It is a
rabbinical seminary or college mostly geared for the training of rabbis and
clergy specifically. Similarly, the Reconstructionist Rabbinical College of
Reconstructionist Judaism, founded in Pennsylvania in 1968, functions to train
its future clergy. Some Reform and Reconstructionist teachers also teach at
non-denominational seminaries like the Academy for Jewish Religion in New York,
the Academy for Jewish Religion in California, and the Rabbinical School of
Hebrew College. None of these institutions describes itself as a "yeshiva".
Contemporary Orthodox yeshivas. See: List of yeshivas Types of yeshivot.
Traditionally, religious girls' schools are not called "yeshiva." The Beis
Yaakov system was started in 1918 under the guidance of Sarah Schenirer. This
system provided girls with a Torah education, using a curriculum that skewed
more toward practical halakha and the study of Tanakh, rather than Talmud. Beis
Yaakovs are strictly Haredi schools. Non-Haredi girls' schools' curricula often
includes the study of Mishna and sometimes Talmud. They are also sometimes
called "yeshiva" (e.g., Prospect Park Yeshiva). Post-high schools for women are
generally called "seminary" or ""midrasha"". Curriculum. Learning at an
Orthodox yeshiva includes Torah study; the study of Rabbinic literature,
especially the Talmud (Rabbinic Judaism's central work); and the study of
Responsa for Jewish observance, and alternatively ethical (Musar) or mystical
(Hasidic philosophy) texts. In some institutions, classical Jewish philosophy
(Hakira) texts or Kabbalah are studied, or the works of individual thinkers
(such as Abraham Isaac Kook). Non-Orthodox institutions offer a synthesis of
traditional and critical methods, allowing Jewish texts and tradition to
encounter social change and modern scholarship. The curriculum focuses on
classical Jewish subjects, including Talmud, Tanakh, Midrash, Halacha, and
Philosophy, with an openness to modern scholarship. Chavruta-style learning.
Yeshiva students prepare for and review the "shiur" with their "chavruta"
during a study session known as a "seder". In contrast to conventional
classroom learning, in which a teacher lectures to the student and the student
repeats the information back in tests, "chavruta"-style learning challenges the
student to analyze and explain the material, point out the errors in his
partner's reasoning, and question and sharpen each other's ideas, often
arriving at entirely new insights of the meaning of the text. A "chavruta"
helps a student keep his mind focused on the learning, sharpen his reasoning
powers, develop his thoughts into words, organize his thoughts into logical
arguments, and understand another person's viewpoint. Chavruta-style learning
tends to be loud and animated, as the study partners read the Talmudic text and
the commentaries aloud to each other and then analyze, question, debate, and
even argue their points of view to arrive at an understanding of the text. In
the heat of discussion, they may even wave their hands, pound the table, or
shout at each other. Depending on the size of the yeshiva, dozens or even
hundreds of pairs of chavrutas can be heard discussing and debating each
other's viewpoints. One of the skills of chavruta-style learning is the ability
to block out all other discussions in the study hall and focus on one's
"chavruta" alone. Academic year. In most yeshivot, the year is divided into
three periods (terms) called "zmanim". Elul zman starts from the beginning of
the Hebrew month of Elul and extends until the end of Yom Kippur. This is the
shortest (approx. six weeks), but most intense semester as it comes before the
High Holidays of Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur. Winter zman starts after Sukkot
and lasts until just before Passover, a duration of five months (six in a
Jewish leap year). Summer semester starts after Passover and lasts until either
the middle of the month of Tammuz or Tisha B'Av, a duration of about three
months. Typical schedule. This schedule is generally maintained Sunday through
Thursday. On Thursday nights there may be an extra long night seder, known as
"mishmar" sometimes lasting beyond 1:00 am, and in some yeshivot even until the
following sunrise. On Fridays there is usually at least one "seder" in the
morning, with unstructured learning schedules for the afternoon. Saturdays have
a special Shabbat schedule which includes some "sedarim" but usually no shiur.
Talmud study. In the typical Orthodox yeshiva, the main emphasis is on Talmud
study and analysis. Generally, two parallel Talmud streams are covered during a
"zman" (trimester). The first is study in-depth ("iyyun"), often confined to
selected legally focused tractates, with an emphasis on analytical skills and
close reference to the classical commentators; the second seeks to cover ground
more speedily, to build general knowledge ("beki'ut") of the Talmud; see the
Talmud in modern-day Judaism. In the yeshiva system of talmudic study the first
area to be mastered are eight "mesechtohs" (volumes that deal with a given
subject which are divided into chapters that deal with sub-topics relating to
the general subject) that deal with civil jurisprudence. These are the
"mesechtohs" that are studied in undergraduate yeshivohs. These eight volumes
are mastered first because it is with these subjects that a student can best
master the technique of proper analysis of the talmud. Only after this
technique is mastered is a student ready to go on to other areas of the talmud
and develop a scholorship in all areas of the talmud. Works generally studied
to clarify the Talmudic text are the commentary by Rashi and the analyses of
the Tosafists and other "rishonim" (commentators from the 11th to 14th
centuries). There are two schools of "rishonim", one from France and the other
from Spain who will sometimes hold different interpretations and understandings
of the talmud. Various other "mefarshim" (commentators), from later generations
are also used. See Talmud#Commentaries. Jewish law. Generally, a period is
devoted to the study of practical "halacha" (Jewish law). The text most
commonly studied in Ashkenazic Yeshivot is the "Mishnah Berurah" written by
Rabbi Yisrael Meir Kagan, the Chofetz Chaim. The "Mishnah Berurah" is a
compilation of "halachic" opinions rendered after the time of the writing of
the "Shulchan Aruch". In Sephardic Yeshivot, the Shulhan Arukh itself is more
commonly studied. The Bet Yosef is also more widely studied in Sepharadic
Yeshivot. Ethics, mysticism and philosophy. Hasidic yeshivot study the
mystical, spiritual works of Hasidic philosophy ("Chassidus"). This draws on
the earlier esoteric theology of Kabbalah, but articulates it in terms of inner
psychological awareness and personal analogies. This makes Jewish mysticism
accessible and tangible, so that it inspires emotional dveikus (cleaving to
God) and spiritual contribution to daily Jewish life. This serves some similar
purposes to mussar, but through different means and with different
contributions to intellectual and emotional life. Chabad yeshivot, for example,
study the Tanya, the Likutei Torah, and the voluminous works of the Rebbes of
Chabad for an hour and a half each morning, before prayers, and an hour and a
half in the evening. (See Tomchei Temimim.) Many Yeshivot in Israel belonging
to the Religious Zionism study the writings of Rav Kook, who articulated a
unique personal blend of mysticism, creative exegesis and philosophy. Torah and
Bible study. Intensive study of the Torah (Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers
and Deuteronomy with the commentary of Rashi (Rabbi Shlomo Yitzhaqi 1040 -
1105) is stressed and taught in all elementary grades, often with Yiddish
translations and more notes in Haredi yeshivas. The teaching of Tanakh, Hebrew
Bible, is usually only done on the high school level, and students read the
Weekly Torah portion by themselves (known as the obligation of "Shnayim mikra
ve-echad targum", "Hebrew Bible twice and Aramaic Targum once"). Exceptions are
the five Megilloth and Tehillim. Since their inception, Modern Orthodox
yeshivot in Israel, offer courses in many, if not most, of the books of Nevi'im
and Ketuvim. College credit. Some Yeshivas permit students to attend college on
a limited basis, and this is facilitated by arrangements for the above study to
receive credit towards a degree. Languages. In most Lithuanian and Hasidic
yeshivot throughout the world, classes are being taught in Yiddish; Modern
Orthodox, Zionist or "baal teshuvah" yeshivot may use Israeli Hebrew or the
local language. Students learn with each other in whatever language they are
most proficient in, with Hasidic students usually learning in Yiddish, Israeli
Lithuanian students in Hebrew, and American Lithuanian students in English.
Yeshivish. Yeshivish, also "Frumspeak", is a term used somewhat jokingly for
the Yiddish- and Hebrew- influenced English used in Orthodox yeshivas in
America.
