Yeshua (name) Yeshua (, with vowel pointing - "yēšūă‘" in Hebrew) was a
common alternative form of the name ("Yehoshuah" - Joshua) in later books of
the Hebrew Bible and among Jews of the Second Temple period. The name
corresponds to the Greek spelling "Iesous", from which comes the English
spelling Jesus. The Hebrew spelling "Yeshua" (ישוע) appears in some later
books of the Hebrew Bible. Once for Joshua the son of Nun, and 28 times for
Joshua the High Priest and (KJV "Jeshua") and other priests called Jeshua -
although these same priests are also given the spelling Joshua in 11 further
instances in the books of Haggai and Zechariah. It differs from the usual
Hebrew Bible spelling of Joshua (יְהוֹשֻׁעַ "y'hoshuaʿ"), found 218
times in the Hebrew Bible, in the absence of the consonant he ה and placement
of the semivowel vav ו after, not before, the consonant shin ש. It also
differs from the Hebrew spelling "Yeshu" (ישו) which is found in Ben
Yehuda's dictionary and used in most secular contexts in modern Hebrew to refer
to Jesus of Nazareth, though the Hebrew spelling "Yeshua" (ישוע) is
generally used in translations of the New Testament into Hebrew and used by
Hebrew speaking Christians in Israel. The name "Yeshua" is also used in Israeli
Hebrew historical texts to refer to other Joshuas recorded in Greek texts such
as Jesus ben Ananias and Jesus ben Sira. In English the name "Yeshua" is
extensively used by followers of Messianic Judaism as well as other Christian
denominations who wish to use what they consider to be Jesus' Hebrew or Aramaic
name. Etymology. Yeshua in Hebrew is verbal derivative from "to rescue", "to
deliver". Its usage among the Jews of the Second Temple Period, the Biblical
Aramaic/Hebrew name "Yeshua‘" was common: the Hebrew Bible mentions several
individuals with this name - while also using their full name Joshua. This name
is a feature of biblical books written in the post-Exilic period (Ezra,
Nehemiah, and Chronicles) and was found in the Dead Sea Scrolls, though Haggai
and Zechariah prefer the spelling Joshua. Strong's Concordance connects the
name Yeshua`, in the English form Jeshua (as used in multiple instances in
Ezra, Nehemiah, and 1 and 2 Chronicles), with the verb "to deliver" (or, "to
rescue"). It is often translated as "He saves," to conform with Matthew 1:21:
"She will bear a Son; and you shall call His name Jesus, for He will save His
people from their sins" (NASB). The name "Yeshua" (transliterated in the
English Old Testament as Jeshua) is a late form of the Biblical Hebrew name
Yehoshua (Joshua), and spelled with a waw in the second syllable. The Late
Biblical Hebrew spellings for earlier names often contracted the theophoric
element "Yeho-" to "Yo-". Thus Yehochanan contracted to Yochanan. However,
there is no name (aside from Yehoshua`) in which Yeho- became Ye-. The name
ישוע occurs in the Hebrew of the Old Testament at verses Ezra 2:2, 2:6, 2:
36, 2:40, 3:2, 3:8, 3:9, 3:10, 3:18, 4:3, 8:33; Nehemiah 3:19, 7:7, 7:11, 7:39,
7:43, 8:7, 8:17, 9:4, 9:5, 11:26, 12:1, 12:7, 12:8, 12:10, 12:24, 12:26; 1
Chronicles 24:11; and 2 Chronicles 31:15, and also in Aramaic at Ezra 5:2. In
Nehemiah 8:17 this name refers to Joshua son of Nun, the successor of Moses, as
leader of the Israelites. Note that in earlier English (where adaptations of
names of Biblical figures were generally based on the Latin Vulgate forms),
Yeshua was generally transcribed identically to "Jesus" in English. It was only
when the Protestant Bible translators of ca. 1600 went back to the original
languages that a distinction between Jesus and Jeshua appeared in English. The
name Yehoshua has the form of a compound of "Yeho-" and "shua": Yeho- is
another form of "Yahu", a theophoric element standing for the name of God
יהוח (the Tetragrammaton YHWH, sometimes transcribed into English as Yahweh
or Jehovah), and "shua‘" is a noun meaning "a cry for help", "a saving cry",
that is to say, a shout given when in need of rescue. Together, the name would
then literally mean, "God is a saving-cry," that is to say, shout to God when
in need of help. Another explanation for the name Yehoshua is that it comes
from the root yod-shin-‘ayin, meaning "to deliver, save, or rescue".
According to the Book of Numbers verse 13:16, the name of Joshua son of Nun was
originally "Hoshea`" , and the name "Yehoshua`" is usually spelled the same but
with a yod added at the beginning. "Hoshea`" certainly comes from the root ,
"yasha", yod-shin-`ayin (in the Hif'il form the yod becomes a waw), and not
from the word shua` (Jewish Encyclopedia) although ultimately both roots appear
to be related. In the 1st century, Philo of Alexandria, in a Greek exposition,
offered this understanding of Moses’s reason for the name change of the
biblical hero Jehoshua/Joshua son of Nun from Hoshea to hoshia` meaning "He
rescued" to Yehoshua in commemoration of his salvation: "And Ιησους
refers to salvation of the Lord" [Ιησους or Iesous being the Greek form
of the name] () ("On the Change of Names" 21.121). Similarly, the Septuagint
renders Ben Sira as saying (in the Greek form of the name): "Ιησους the
son of Naue Ben Nun who "according to his name" became great unto salvation/
deliverance of his chosen ones" () (Ben Sira 46:1-2). However, Ben Sira
originally wrote in Hebrew in the 2nd century BC, and the only extant Hebrew
manuscript for this passage has "in his days" (), not "according to his name"
(which would be in Hebrew), and thus does not comment on the name Yehoshua as
connoting "deliverance": "Yehoshua Ben Nun, who was formed to be "in his days"
a great deliverer for his chosen ones" (). Possibly, the translators understood
the phrase "was formed in his days" to refer to being transformed by his name
change, and thus has "according to his name" as a paraphrastic translation, or
else they were working from a different text. The distinction between the
longer "Yehoshua" and shorter "Yeshua" forms does not exist in Greek.
Archaeological evidence. Tal Ilan's lexicon of Second Temple period names on
inscriptions in Palestine (2002) includes for "Joshua" 85 examples of Hebrew
"Yeshua," 15 of "Yehoshua," and 48 examples of "Iesous" in Greek inscriptions,"
with only one Greek variant as "Iesoua." One ossuary of the around twenty known
with the name Yeshua, Rahmani No.9, discovered by Ezra Sukenik in 1931, has
"Yeshu... Yeshua ben Yosef." The "Yeshu..." may have been scratched out. Two
Jewish magical incantation bowls have been discovered both bearing variant
spellings of Yeshua. Apart from the "Yesh.. Yeshua ben Yosef" ossuary, the only
other known evidence for the existence of a Yeshu form prior to the material
related to Jesus in the Talmud, is a graffito which Joachim Jeremias identified
in Bethesda in 1966, but which is now filled in. Pronunciation. Yeshua
יֵשוּעַ . The Hebrew letter Yod י is vocalized with the Hebrew vowel
"tsere" (a 'long' "e" like the first syllable of "neighbor" but not
diphthongized) rather than with a "shva" (as Y'shua) or "segol" (Yesh-shua).
The final letter Ayin ע is (a rough, guttural sound not found in Greek or
English), sometimes transcribed " ` " ("Yeshua`"). The final represents the
"patach genuvah" ("furtive" "patach"), indicating that the consonant `"ayin" is
pronounced after the "a" vowel, and the word's stress is moved to the middle
syllable (the characteristics of the furtive patach can be seen in other words,
such as רוח 'spirit'). Thus it is pronounced in Modern Hebrew, approximately
. The Hebrew name of the historical Jesus is probably pronounced 'Yeshua',
although this is uncertain and depends on the reconstruction of several ancient
Hebrew dialects. Talshir suggests, even though Galileans tended to keep the
traditional spelling for 'Yehoshua' יהושוע with the letter Vav for , they
still pronounced the name similarly to the Judeans, as 'Yeshua' , who tended to
spell the name phonetically as ישוע, perhaps reducing the name thus: > > ,
with the palatizing (via 'dissimilation') before the . Qimron describes the
general linguistic environment of Hebrew dialects by the time of the Dead Sea
Scrolls. The articulation of the (along with other guttural phonemes , , and ,
as well as approximants and ) weakened significantly. Thus Hebrew
pronunciations became less stable when two successive vowels were no longer
separated by a consonant . The speakers optionally either reduced the two
vowels to a single vowel or oppositely expanded them to emphasize each vowel
separately, sometimes forming a furtive glide in between, or . For example, the
Dead Sea Scrolls spell the Hebrew word ראוי ('seen') variously, recording
both pronunciations: reduced ראו and expanded ראואי . The Hebrew name
'Yehoshua' generally reduced to 'Yeshua', but an expanded 'Yehoshua' is
possible, especially in Galilee whose traditional orthography possibly reflects
this. Original name for Jesus. The English name "Jesus" derives from the Late
Latin name ', which transliterates the Koine Greek name '. In the Septuagint
and other Greek-language Jewish texts, such as the writings of Josephus and
Philo of Alexandria, "" is the standard Koine Greek form used to translate both
of the Hebrew names: "Yehoshua" and "Yeshua". Greek or Iēsoûs is also used to
represent the name of Joshua son of Nun in the New Testament passages Acts 7:45
and Hebrews 4:8. (It was even used in the Septuagint to translate the name
"Hoshea" in one of the three verses where this referred to Joshua the son of
Nun—Deut. 32:44.) During the second Temple period (beginning 538 BC – 70
AD), "Yeshua" first became a known form of the name "Yehoshua". All occurrences
of "Yeshua" in the Hebrew Bible are in I Chron. 24:11, II Chron. 31:15, Ezra,
and Nehemiah where it is transliterated into English as Jeshua. Two of these
men (Joshua the son of Nun and Joshua the High Priest) are mentioned in other
books of the Hebrew Bible where they are instead called "Yehoshua"
(transliterated into English as Joshua). The earlier form "Yehoshua" did not
disappear, however, and remained in use as well. In the post-exilic books,
Joshua the son of Nun is called both Yeshua bin-Nun (Nehemiah 8:17) and
Yehoshua (I Chronicles 7:27). The short form "Yeshua" was used for Jesus ben
Sirach in Hebrew fragments of the Wisdom of Sirach. (Some concern remains over
whether these fragments faithfully represent the original Hebrew text or are
instead a later translation back into Hebrew.) The earlier form "Yehoshua" saw
revived usage from the Hasmonean period onwards, although the name "Yeshua" is
still found in letters from the time of the Bar Kokhba Revolt (132-135 AD). In
the documentary "The Lost Tomb of Jesus", archeologist Amos Kloner stated that
the name Yeshua was then a popular form of the name Yehoshua and was "one of
the common names in the time of the Second Temple." In discussing whether it
was remarkable to find a tomb with the name of Jesus (the particular ossuary in
question bears the inscription "Yehuda bar Yeshua"), he pointed out that the
name had been found 71 times in burial caves from that time period. Thus, both
the full form "Yehoshua" and the abbreviated form "Yeshua", were in use during
the Gospel period - and in relation to the same person, as in the Hebrew Bible
references to Yehoshua/Yeshua son of Nun, and Yehoshua/Yeshua the high priest
in the days of Ezra. Clement of Alexandria and St. Cyril of Jerusalem
considered the Greek form "Iesous" to be the original, even going so far as to
interpret it as a true Greek name and not simply a transliteration of Hebrew.
(A similar situation is seen in the use of the true Greek name Simon as a
translation of the Hebrew name Shim'on in texts such as Sirach.) Eusebius
related it to the Greek root meaning "to heal" thus making it a variant of
"Jason" meaning "healer". However, the New Testament describes Jesus as being a
part of a Jewish milieu, reading the Hebrew Bible and debating with Pharisees
over interpretations of the Jewish legal tradition. The Gospels record several
Hebrew and Aramaic words or expressions spoken by him. Moreover, Eusebius
reports that Jesus's student Matthew wrote a gospel "in the Hebrew language".
(Note, scholars typically argue the word "Hebrew" in the New Testament refers
to Aramaic.) An argument in favor of the Hebrew reduced form "Yeshua", as
opposed to "Yehoshua", is the Old Syriac Bible (c. 200 AD) and the Peshitta
preserve this same spelling but using the equivalent Aramaic letters . "Yeshu"
(Syriac does not use a 'furtive' pathach so extra is not used) is still the
pronunciation used in the West Syriac dialect, whereas East Syriac has rendered
the pronunciation of these same letters as "Išô‘" . These texts were
translated from the Greek, but the name is not a simple transliteration of the
Greek form because Greek did not have an "sh" sound, and substituted ; and
likewise lacked and therefore omitted the final "‘ayin" sound . It can be
argued that the Aramaic speakers who used this name had a continual connection
to the Aramaic-speakers in communities founded by the apostles and other
students of Jesus, thus independently preserved his historical name.
Alternatively, Talshir (1998) suggests that Aramaic references to the Hebrew
Bible had long used "Yeshua" for Hebrew names such as Yehoshua Ben Nun. So the
possibility of Jesus having been "Yehoshua" remains. Syriac. The Aramaic of the
Peshitta does not distinguish between "Joshua" and "Jesus", and the Lexicon of
William Jennings gives the same form "" for both names. The Hebrew final letter
ayin ' is equivalent to final ' in Syriac. Yeshua, Yehoshua and Yeshu in the
Talmud. In the Talmud, only one reference is made to the spelling "Yeshua", in
verbatim quotation from the Hebrew Bible regarding Jeshua son of Jozadak
(elsewhere called Joshua son of Josedech). The Talmud does refer to several
people named Yehoshua from before (e.g. Joshua ben Perachyah) and after Jesus
(e.g. Joshua ben Hananiah). However in references to Jesus in the Talmud, where
the name occurs, it is rendered Yeshu, which is a name reserved in Aramaic and
Hebrew literature from the early medieval period until today, solely for Jesus
of Nazareth, not for other Joshuas. However some scholars, such as Maier (1978)
regard the two named "Yeshu" texts in the Talmud (Sanhedrin 43a and 107b) to be
later amendments, and not original. Rabbinical commentary on the difference
Yeshu/Yeshua. "Yeshua" was used as the name for Jesus in late additions to the
Yosippon; however, its usage here is a translation back into the Hebrew
"Yeshua" from the Greek. In general rabbinical sources use Yeshu, and this is
the form to which some named references to Jesus in the Talmud as "Yeshu" occur
in some manuscripts of the Babylonian Talmud, though some scholars, such as
Maier (1978) have argued that the presence of the name Yeshu in these texts is
a late interpolation. Other Hebrew sources referencing Yeshu include the
"Toledot Yeshu", Sefer Nestor ha-Komer, Jacob ben Reuben's Milhamoth ha-Shem,
Sefer Nizzahon Yashan, Sefer Joseph Hamekane, the works of Ibn Shaprut, Moses
ha-Kohen de Tordesillas, and Hasdai Crescas, etc. The name Yeshu is unknown in
archeological sources and inscriptions, except for one ossuary found in
Palestine which has an inscription where someone has started to write first
"Yeshu.." (incorrectly?) and then written "Yeshua bar Yehosef" beneath it.
There are 24 other ossuaries to various Yeshuas and Yehoshuas. None of the
others have "Yeshu". All other "Joshuas" in the Talmud, rabbinical writings,
modern Hebrew, are always "Yeshua" or "Yehoshua". There are no undisputed
examples of any Aramaic or Hebrew text where Yeshu refers to anyone else than
Jesus. Some of rabbinical sources comment on the reasons for the missing ayin
from Yeshu, as opposed to the Hebrew Bible Yeshua and Yehoshuah. Leon Modena
argues that it was Jesus himself who made his disciples remove the ayin, and
that therefore they cannot now restore it. A tradition states that the
shortening to Yeshu relates to the Y-SH-U of the yimach shemo "may his name be
obliterated." Against this David Flusser suggested that the name "Yeshu" itself
was "in no way abusive," but "almost certainly" a Galilean dialect form of
Yeshua.
