Yeshu Yeshu ( in Hebrew and Aramaic) is the name of an individual or
individuals mentioned in Rabbinic literature. The oldest works in which
references to Yeshu occur are the Tosefta and the Talmud, although some
scholars consider the references to Yeshu to be post-Talmudic additions. During
the Middle Ages, Christian authorities forced Ashkenazic Jewish authorities to
interpret these passages in relation to their beliefs about Jesus of Nazareth.
As historian David Berger observed, In 1240 Nicholas Donin, with the support of
Pope Gregory IX, referred to Yeshu narratives to support his accusation that
the Jewish community had attacked the Virginity of Mary and the divinity of
Jesus. In the Disputation of Paris, Yechiel of Paris conceded that one of the
Yeshu stories in the Talmud referred to Jesus of Nazareth, but that the other
passages referred to other people. In 1372, John of Valladolid, with the
support of the Archbishop of Toledo, made a similar accusation against the
Jewish community; Moses ha-Kohen de Tordesillas argued that the Yeshu
narratives referred to different people and could not have referred to Jesus of
Nazareth. Asher ben Jehiel also asserted that the Yeshu of the Talmud is
unrelated to the Christian Jesus. There are some modern scholars who understand
these passages to be references to Christianity and the Christian figure of
Jesus, and others who see references to Jesus only in later rabbinic
literature. Johann Maier argued that neither the Mishnah nor the two Talmuds
refer to Jesus. Talmud and Tosefta. The earliest undisputed occurrences of the
term Yeshu are found in five anecdotes in the Tosefta ("c" 200 CE) and
Babylonian Talmud ("c" 500 CE). The anecdotes appear in the Babylonian Talmud
during the course of broader discussions on various religious or legal topics.
The Venice edition of the Jerusalem Talmud contains the name Yeshu, but the
Leiden manuscript has a name deleted, and "Yeshu" added in a marginal gloss.
writes that due to this, Neusner treats the name as a gloss and omitted it from
his translation of the Jerusalem Talmud. Occurrences. The name Yeshu has also
been found on the 1st century CE ossuary of a "Yeshua bar Yehoseph", published
by E.L. Sukenik in 1931, and catalogued by L.Y. Rahmani in 1994. Although
Sukenik considered this the same as the term in the Talmud, he also entertained
the possibility that the final letter "ayin" was left out due to lack of space
between the decorations between which it was inscribed. The fully spelled out
name "Yeshua" and the patronymic are also found on the ossuary. Richard
Bauckham considers this a legitimate, if rare, form of the name in use at the
time, and writes that this ossuary shows that the name Yeshu "was not in
invented by the rabbis as a way of avoiding pronouncing the real name of Jesus
of Nazareth…." The name Yeshu has also been found in a fragment of the
Jerusalem Talmud from the Cairo Genizah, a depository for holy texts which are
not usable due to age, damage or errors. Flusser takes this as evidence of the
term being a name; however, the standard text of the Jerusalem Talmud refers to
one of the numerous Rabbi "Yehoshua"s of the Talmud and moreover the fragment
has the latter name at other points in the text. Etymology and interpretations
of the term. Etymology.  Another explanation given is that the name "Yeshu" is
actually an acronym for the formula ("") meaning "may his name and memory be
obliterated". The earliest known example of this theory comes from medieval
"Toldoth Yeshu" narratives. This has led to the accusation, first voiced by the
anti-Semitic writer Johann Andreas Eisenmenger in his "Entdecktes Judenthum",
that "Yeshu" was always such a deliberately insulting term for Jesus.
Eisenmenger claimed that Jews believed that they were forbidden to mention
names of false gods and instead were commanded to change and defame them and
did so with Jesus' name as they considered him a false god. He argued that
Jesus' original name was "Yeshua" and as Jews did not recognize him as saviour
("moshia`") or that he had even saved ("hoshia`") himself, they left out the
"ayin" from the root meaning "to save". Eisenmenger's book against Judaism was
denounced by the Jews as malicious libel, and was the subject of a number of
refutations. Early 20th century writers such as and Klausner assume that
references to "Yeshu" and "Yeshu ha Notzri" in the Talmud relate to Jesus.
Indeed in the Septuagint and Greek language Jewish texts such as the writings
of Josephus and Philo of Alexandria, "Jesus" is the standard Greek translation
of the common Hebrew name "Yehoshua" (Joshua), Greek having lost the "h" sound,
as well as of the shortened form "Yeshua" which originated in the Second Temple
period. "Jesus" was also used for the name "Hoshea" in the Septuagint in one of
the three places where it referred to Joshua son of Nun.) The term "Yeshu" is
not undisputedly attested prior to the Talmud and Tosefta, let alone as a
Hebrew original for "Jesus". (In the case of the Jesus of Christianity, Clement
of Alexandria and St. Cyril of Jerusalem claimed that the Greek form itself was
his original name and that it was not a transliteration of a Hebrew form.)
Adolf Neubauer (19th century), aware of the problem but believing the term to
be a reference to Jesus, argued that it was a shortened form of "Yeshua"
resulting from the final letter "ayin" no longer being pronounced. Hugh J.
Schonfield argued in a similar fashion that it was the northern pronunciation
resulting from a silent "ayin". This view was shared by Joachim Jeremias and
who argue that it was the Galilean pronunciation. The views of these
theological scholars however are contradicted by the studies of Hebrew and
Aramaic philologist E. Y. Kutscher, Professor of Hebrew Philology at the Hebrew
University of Jerusalem, and member of the Hebrew Language Academy, who noted
that the although the "ayin" became a silent letter it is never dropped from
written forms nor is its effect on the preceding vowel lost (the change of the
"u" to the diphthong "ua") as would have had to occur if "Yeshu" were derived
from "Yeshua" in such a manner. Kutscher noted moreover that the guttural
"ayin" was still pronounced in most parts of Galilee. History of
interpretation. Tannaim and Amoraim. The Tannaim and Amoraim who recorded the
accounts in the Talmud and Tosefta use the term "Yeshu" as a designation in
"Sanhedrin" 103a and "Berakhot" 17b in place of King Manasseh's real name.
"Sanhedrin" 107b uses it for a Hasmonean era individual who in an earlier
account (Jerusalem Talmud "Chagigah" 2:2) is anonymous. In "Gittin" 56b, 57a it
is used for one of three foreign enemies of Israel, the other two being from
past and present with "Yeshu" representing a third not identified with any past
or present event. Early Jewish commentators (Rishonim). These accounts of
Celsus and the "Toldoth Yeshu" do not form part of Orthodox Jewish
interpretation. The only classical Jewish commentator to equate Yeshu with
Jesus was the Rishon (early commentator) Abraham Ibn Daud who held the view
that the Jesus of Christianity had been derived from the figure of Yeshu the
student of ben Perachiah. Ibn Daud was nevertheless aware that such an equation
contradicted known chronology but argued that the Gospel accounts were in
error. Other Rishonim, namely Rabbi Jacob ben Meir (Rabbeinu Tam), Nahmanides,
and Jehiel ben Joseph of Paris explicitly repudiated the equation of the Yeshu
of the Talmud and Jesus. Menachem Meiri observed that the epithet "Ha-Notzri"
attached to Yeshu in many instances was a late gloss. The Church. Friar Raymond
Martini, in his anti-Jewish polemical treatise "Pugio Fidei", began the
accusation echoed in numerous subsequent anti-Jewish pamphlets that the "Yeshu"
passages were derogatory accounts of Jesus. In 1554 a papal bull ordered the
removal of all references from the Talmud and other Jewish texts deemed
offensive and blasphemous to Christians. Thus the "Yeshu" passages were removed
from subsequently published editions of the Talmud and Tosefta. Nevertheless
several church writers would refer to the passages as evidence of Jesus outside
the Gospels. Later Jewish commentators (Acharonim). Jehiel Heilprin held that
Yeshu the student of Yehoshua ben Perachiah was not Jesus. Jacob Emden's
writings also show an understanding that the Yeshu of the Talmud was not Jesus.
Contemporary Orthodox scholars. Rabbi Adin Steinsaltz translates "Yeshu" as
"Jesus" in his translation of the Talmud. Elsewhere he has pointed out that
Talmudic passages referring to Jesus had been deleted by the Christian censor.
Theosophists and esotericists. The interpretation of "Yeshu" as a proto-Jesus
first seen in Abraham ibn Daud's work would be revisited by Egyptologist Gerald
Massey in his essay "The historical Jesus and Mythical Christ", and by G.R.S.
Mead in his work "Did Jesus Live 100 B.C.?". The same view was reiterated by
Rabbi Avraham Korman. These views reflect the theosophical stance and criticism
of tradition popular at the time but was rejected by later scholars. It has
been revived in recent times by Alvar Ellegård. Critical scholarship. Modern
critical scholars debate whether Yeshu does or does not refer to the historical
Jesus, a view seen in several 20th century encyclopedia articles including "The
Jewish Encyclopedia", Joseph Dan in the "Encyclopaedia Judaica" (1972, 1997).
and the "Encyclopedia Hebraica" (Israel). R. Travers based his work on the
understanding that the term refers to Jesus, and it was also the understanding
of Joseph Klausner. They agree that the accounts offer little independent or
accurate historical evidence about Jesus. Herford argues that writers of the
Talmud and Tosefta had only vague knowledge of Jesus and embellished the
accounts to discredit him while disregarding chronology. Klausner distinguishes
between core material in the accounts which he argues are not about Jesus and
the references to "Yeshu" which he sees as additions spuriously associating the
accounts with Jesus. Recent scholars in the same vein include Peter Schäfer,
Recently, some scholars have argued that Yeshu is a literary device, and that
the Yeshu stories provide a more complex view of early Rabbinic-Christian
interactions. Whereas the Pharisees were one sect among several others in the
Second Temple era, the Amoraim and Tannaim sought to establish Rabbinic Judaism
as the normative form of Judaism. Like the Rabbis, early Christians claimed to
be working within Biblical traditions to provide new interpretations of Jewish
laws and values. The sometimes blurry boundary between the Rabbis and early
Christians provided an important site for distinguishing between legitimate
debate and heresy. Scholars like Jeffrey Rubenstein and Daniel Boyarin argue
that it was through the Yeshu narratives that Rabbis confronted this blurry
boundary. Jeffrey Rubenstein has argued that the accounts in "Chullin" and
"Avodah Zarah" reveal an ambivalent relationship between rabbis and
Christianity. In his view the tosefta account reveals that at least some Jews
believed Christians were true healers, but that the rabbis saw this belief as a
major threat. Concerning the Babylonian Talmud account in "Avoda Zarah", Dr.
Boyarin views Jacob of Sechania as a Christian preacher and understands Rabbi
Eliezer's arrest for minuth as an arrest by the Romans for practising
Christianity (the text uses the word for heretic). Although Rabbi Eliezer was
referring to God, the Governor interpreted him to be referring to the Governor
himself, and freed the Rabbi. According to them the account also reveals that
there was greater contact between Christians and Jews in the 2nd century than
commonly believed. They view the account of the teaching of Yeshu as an attempt
to mock Christianity. According to Dr. Rubenstein, the structure of this
teaching, in which a Biblical prooftext is used to answer a question about
Biblical law, is common to both the Rabbis and early Christians. The vulgar
content, however, may have been used to parody Christian values. Dr. Boyarin
considers the text to be an acknowledgment that Rabbis often interacted with
Christians, despite their doctrinal antipathy. According to Dr. Rubenstein, the
account in "Sanhedrin" 107b recognizes the kinship between Christians and Jews,
since Jesus is presented as a disciple of a prominent Rabbi. But it also
reflects and speaks to an anxiety fundamental to Rabbinic Judaism. Prior to the
destruction of the Temple in 70, Jews were divided into different sects, each
promoting different interpretations of the law. Rabbinic Judaism domesticated
and internalized conflicts over the law, while vigorously condemning any
sectarianism. In other words, rabbis are encouraged to disagree and argue with
one another, but these activities must be carefully contained, or else they
could lead to a schism. Although this story may not present a historically
accurate account of Jesus' life, it does use a fiction about Jesus to
communicate an important truth about the Rabbis (see Jeffrey Rubenstein,
"Rabbinic Stories"). Moreover, Rubenstein sees this story as a rebuke to overly
harsh Rabbis. Boyarin suggests that the Rabbis were well aware of Christian
views of the Pharisees and that this story acknowledges the Christian belief
that Jesus was forgiving and the Pharisees were not (see Mark 2), while
emphasizing forgiveness as a necessary Rabbinic value. An intermediate view is
that of Hyam Maccoby, who argues that most of these stories were not originally
about Jesus, but were incorporated into the Talmud in the belief that they
were, as a response to Christian missionary activity. Skeptical writers.
Skeptical science writer Dennis McKinsey has challenged the view that the term
refers to Jesus at all and argues that Jewish tradition knew of no historical
Jesus. Similar views have been expressed by skepical science writer Frank R.
Zindler in his polemical work "The Jesus the Jews Never Knew: Sepher Toldoth
Yeshu and the Quest of the Historical Jesus in Jewish Sources" deliberately
published outside the realm of Christian and Jewish scholarship. The Toldoth
Yeshu narratives. The "Toldoth Yeshu" are not part of rabbinic literature and
are considered neither canonical nor normative. There is no one authoritative
"Toldoth Yeshu" story; rather, various medieval versions existed that differ in
attitudes towards the central characters and in story details. It is considered
unlikely that any one person wrote it, and each version seems to be from a
different set of storytellers. In these manuscripts, the name "Yeshu" is used
as designation of the central character. Due to the Gospel parallels, the story
of Toldoth Yeshu narratives is typically viewed as a derogatory account of the
life of Jesus resulting from Jewish reaction to persecution by Christians. Use
in modern Hebrew as a name for Jesus. The term "Yeshu" was used in Hebrew texts
in the Middle Ages then through Rahabi Ezekiel (1750) and Elias Soloweyczyk
(1869) who identified Jesus with the character of the Toledoth Yeshu
narratives. Likewise "Yeshu Ha-Notzri" is the modern Hebrew equivalent for
"Jesus the Nazarene" though in Christian texts the spellings "Yeshua" and
"Yeshua Ha-Notzri" are preferred, as per the Hebrew New Testaments of Franz
Delitzsch (BFBS 1875) and Isaac Salkinsohn (TBS 1886). Danish missionary Kjaer-
Hansen argues that this modern Israeli usage of Yeshu resulted from the
influence of Klausner who used the term for Jesus in his Hebrew works believing
it to be a correct Hebrew equivalent. Eliezer Ben-Yehuda, the "father of modern
Hebrew", had instead used "Yeshua" for Jesus (the name used in Maimonides and
the expanded Josippon) but, Kjaer-Hansen argues, this choice lost out to
"Yeshu" as a result of Klausner's influential Hebrew work on Jesus titled
"Yeshu HaNotzri" published in 1922. Kjaer-Hansen, notes that many Jewish
writers have assumed that "Yeshu" is a correct Hebrew name for Jesus and have
used it without intending any disparagement, but advises against its usage due
to its probable origin as a derogatory term. The Talmudic accounts in detail.
Yeshu ben Pandera. Tosefta and Talmud references. In the Tosefta, "Chullin" 2:
22-24 there are two anecdotes about the "min" (heretic) named Jacob naming his
mentor "Yeshu ben Pandera" (Yeshu son of Pandera). The account is also
mentioned in corresponding passages of the Jerusalem Talmud ("Avodah Zarah" 2:
2 IV.I) and Babylonian Talmud ("Avodah Zarah" 27b) The name Yeshu is not
mentioned in the Hebrew manuscripts of these passages but reference to "Jeshu
ben Pandira" is interpolated by Herford's in his English paraphrasing of the
Jerusalem Talmud text. Similarly the Rodkinson translation of the Babylonian
Talmud account interpolates "with the name of Jesus". The surname ben Pandera
is not found in the Talmud account. (Rodkinson's translation drawing on the
Tosefta account paraphrases the reference to Yeshu having taught Jacob by "so
taught Jeshu b. Panthyra", in this case not translating "Yeshu" as "Jesus".)
The name is found again in the Midrashic text "Kohelet Rabba" 10:5 where a
healer of the grandson of Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi is described as being of ben
Pandera. The source of this account is "Shabbat" 14:4-8 and "Avodah Zarah" 40
in the Jerusalem Talmud, but there ben Pandera is not mentioned. The word
"Yeshu" is however found as a secondary marginal gloss to the first passage in
the Leiden manuscript which together with the Midrashic version show that the
account was understood to be about a follower of Yeshu ben Pandera. (Herford
again takes liberty and adds "in the name of Jeshu Pandera" to his translation
of the Talmud passages despite these words not being in the original text.
Schäfer similarly provides a paraphrased translation mentioning "Jesus son of
Pandera" which he admittedly has constructed himself by combining the Talmudic
and Midrashic texts and the marginal glosses.) "Kohelet Rabba" also relates the
account of Rabbi Eliezer ("Kohelet Rabba" 1:24) in this case some copies
mention "Yeshu ben Pandera" as in the Tosefta passage but others instead read
"peloni" a placeholder name equivalent to English "so-and-so". Jeffrey
Rubenstein has argued that the accounts in "Chullin" and "Avodah Zarah" reveal
an ambivalent relationship between rabbis and Christianity. In his view the
tosefta account reveals that at least some Jews believed Christians were true
healers, but that the rabbis saw this belief as a major threat. Concerning the
Babylonian Talmud account in "Avoda Zarah", Dr. Boyarin views Jacob of Sechania
as a Christian preacher and understands Rabbi Eliezer's arrest for minuth as an
arrest by the Romans for practising Christianity (the text uses the word for
heretic). When the Governor (the text uses the word for chief judge)
interrogated him, the Rabbi answered that he "trusted the judge." Boyarin has
suggested that this was the Jewish version of the Br'er Rabbit approach to
domination, which he contrasts to the strategy of many early Christians, who
proclaim their beliefs in spite of the consequences (i.e. martyrdom). Although
Rabbi Eliezer was referring to God, the Governor interpreted him to be
referring to the Governor himself, and freed the Rabbi. According to them the
account also reveals that there was greater contact between Christians and Jews
in the 2nd century than commonly believed. They view the account of the
teaching of Yeshu as an attempt to mock Christianity. According to Dr.
Rubenstein, the structure of this teaching, in which a Biblical prooftext is
used to answer a question about Biblical law, is common to both the Rabbis and
early Christians. The vulgar content, however, may have been used to parody
Christian values. Dr. Boyarin considers the text to be an acknowledgment that
Rabbis often interacted with Christians, despite their doctrinal antipathy.
Meaning and etymology of Pandera. Besides the form Pandera, variations have
been found in different Tosefta manuscripts for example "Pantiri" and
"Pantera". Saul Lieberman's investigation of Tosefta variations revealed
Pandera to be the original form. (Some authors such as Herford spell it
"Pandira" in English.) Celsus in his discourse "The True Word" gives the name
as "Panthera" in Greek. This name is not known from any graves or inscriptions,
but the surname Pantera (a Latin rendering) is known from the 1st century
tombstone of Tiberius Iulius Abdes Pantera. Origen (c. 248 CE) responded to
Celsus' claim by saying that "Pantheras" was the patronymic of Joseph the
husband of Mary on account of his father, Jacob, being called Panther. An
alternative claim was made in the "Teaching of Jacob" (634 CE) where Panther is
said to be the grandfather of Mary. Friedrich August Nitzsch (1840) suggested
that the name may refer to a panther being a lustful animal and thus have the
meaning of "whore", additionally being a pun on "parthenos" meaning virgin.
Herford also considered the Greek "pentheros" meaning son-in-law, however he
dismissed all of these forms including Celsus' "Panthera" as spurious
explanations of the Hebrew Pandera as they do not match phonetically. He noted
that Hebrew would have represented the sounds correctly if any of these were
the origin. The interpolated form "Panthyra" appearing in the Rodkinson
translation of the Talmud suffers the same problem. Neubauer understand the
name to be Pandareus. The "Toldoth Yeshu" narratives contain elements
resembling the story of Pandareus in Greek mythology, namely stealing from a
temple and the presence of a bronze animal. Robert Eisler considered the name
to be derived from Pandaros. He also argued that it may not have been a real
name but instead as a generic name for a betrayer. He notes that in the
"Iliad", Pandaros betrays the Greeks and breaks a truce confirmed by solemn
oath. He argues that the name came to be used as a generic term for a betrayer
and was borrowed by Hebrew. The name is indeed found in "Genesis Rabba 50" in
the expression "qol Pandar" (literally "voice of Pandaros" denoting false
promises of a betrayer) used as a derogatory placeholder name for a judge of
Sodom. The "-a" at the end of the form Pandera can be understood to be the
Aramaic definite article. Yeshu Ha-Notzri. In the surviving pre-censorship
Talmud manuscripts, "Yeshu" is followed by the epithet "Ha-Notzri" in most
occurrences. R. Travers Herford, Joseph Klausner and others translated it as
"the Nazarene." The term does not appear consistently in the manuscripts and
Menachem Meiri (1249 – c. 1310) in his commentary on the Talmud "Beit
HaBechirah" regarded it as a late interpolation. Klausner noted objections by
other scholars on grammatical and phonetic grounds to the translation of
"Notzri" as "Nazarene" meaning a person from Nazareth (Hebrew "Natzrat"),
however the etymology of "Nazarene" is itself uncertain and one possibility is
that it is derived from "Notzri" and did not mean a person from Nazareth. In
1180 CE Maimonides in his "Mishneh Torah", "Hilchos Melachim" 11:4 briefly
discusses Jesus in a passage later censored by the Church. He uses the name
"Yeshua" for Jesus (an attested equivalent of the name unlike "Yeshu") and
follows it with "HaNotzri" showing that regardless of what meaning had been
intended in the Talmudic occurrences of this term, Maimonides understood it as
an equivalent of Nazarene. Late additions to the Josippon also refer to Jesus
as "Yeshua HaNotzri" but not "Yeshu HaNotzri". Yeshu the sorcerer. "Sanhedrin
43a" relates the trial and execution of Yeshu and his five disciples. Here,
Yeshu is a sorcerer who has enticed other Jews to apostasy. A herald is sent to
call for witnesses in his favour for forty days before his execution. No one
comes forth and in the end he is stoned and hanged on the Eve of Passover. His
five disciples, named Matai, Nekai, Netzer, Buni, and Todah are then tried.
Word play is made on each of their names, and they are executed. It is
mentioned that leniency could not be applied because of Yeshu's influence with
the royal government ("malkhut"). In the Florence manuscript of the Talmud
(1177 CE) an addition is made to "Sanhedrin 43a" saying that Yeshu was hanged
on the eve of the Sabbath. Yeshu summoned by Onkelos. In "Gittin 56b, 57a" a
story is mentioned in which Onkelos summons up the spirit of a Yeshu who sought
to harm Israel. He describes his punishment in the afterlife as boiling in
excrement. Yeshu the son who burns his food in public. "Sanhedrin 103a" and
"Berachot 17b" talk about a Yeshu who burns his food in public, possibly a
reference to pagan sacrifices. The account is discussing Manasseh the king of
Judah infamous for having turned to idolatry and having persecuted the Jews (2
"Kings" 21). It is part of a larger discussion about three kings and four
commoners excluded from paradise. These are also discussed in the Shulkhan
Arukh where the son who burns his food is explicitly stated to be Manasseh.
Yeshu the student of Joshua ben Perachiah. In "Sanhedrin 107b" and "Sotah 47a"
a Yeshu is mentioned as a student of Joshua ben Perachiah who was sent away for
misinterpreting a word that in context should have been understood as referring
to the Inn, he instead understood it to mean the inkeeper's wife. His teacher
said "Here is a nice Inn", to which he replied "Her eyes are crooked", to which
his teacher responded "Is this what your are occupied in?" (This happened
during their period of refuge in Egypt during the persecutions of Pharisees 88-
76 BCE ordered by Alexander Jannæus. The incident is also mentioned in the
Jerusalem Talmud in "Chagigah 2:2" but there the person in question is not
given any name.) After several returns for forgiveness he mistook Perachiah's
signal to wait a moment as a signal of final rejection, and so he turned to
idolatry (described by the euphemism "worshipping a brick"). The story ends by
invoking a Mishnaic era teaching that Yeshu practised black magic, deceived and
led Israel astray. This quote is seen by some as an explanation in general for
the designation "Yeshu". According to Dr. Rubenstein, the account in
"Sanhedrin" 107b recognizes the kinship between Christians and Jews, since
Jesus is presented as a disciple of a prominent Rabbi. But it also reflects and
speaks to an anxiety fundamental to Rabbinic Judaism. Prior to the destruction
of the Temple in 70, Jews were divided into different sects, each promoting
different interpretations of the law. Rabbinic Judaism domesticated and
internalized conflicts over the law, while vigorously condemning any
sectarianism. In other words, rabbis are encouraged to disagree and argue with
one another, but these activities must be carefully contained, or else they
could lead to a schism. Although this story may not present a historically
accurate account of Jesus' life, it does use a fiction about Jesus to
communicate an important truth about the Rabbis. Moreover, Rubenstein sees this
story as a rebuke to overly harsh Rabbis. Boyarin suggests that the Rabbis were
well aware of Christian views of the Pharisees and that this story acknowledges
the Christian belief that Jesus was forgiving and the Pharisees were not (see
Mark 2:1-2), while emphasizing forgiveness as a necessary Rabbinic value. Ben
Pandera and ben Stada. Another title found in the Tosefta and Talmud is "ben
Stada" (son of Stada). However in "Shabbat 104b" and "Sanhedrin 67a" in the
Babylonian Talmud, a passage is found that some have interpreted as equating
ben Pandera with ben Stada. The passage is in the form a Talmudic debate in
which various voices make statements, each refuting the previous statement. In
such debates the various statements and their refutations are often of a
Midrashic nature, sometimes incorporating subtle humour and should not always
be taken at face value. The purpose of the passage is to arrive at a Midrashic
meaning for the term Stada. "Shabbat 104b" relates that a ben Stada brought
magic from Egypt in incisions in his flesh. "Sanhedrin 67a" relates that a ben-
Stada was caught by hidden observers and hanged in the town of Lod on the Eve
of Passover. The debate then follows. It begins by asking if this was not ben
Pandera rather than ben Stada. This is refuted by the claim that it is both,
his mother's husband was Stada but her lover was Pandera. This is countered
with the claim the husband was Pappos ben Yehuda (a 2nd century figure
elsewhere remembered as having locked up his unfaithful wife and visiting R.
Akiva in jail after the Bar-Kokhba revolt) and that the mother was named Stada.
This is then refuted by the claim that the mother was named Miriam, the dresser
of women's hair, but that she had gone astray from her husband (a Miriam the
daughter of Bilgah, is mentioned elsewhere as having had an affair with a Roman
soldier). In Aramaic, "gone astray" is "satat da", thus a Midrashic meaning for
the term Stada is obtained. Real historical relationships between the figures
mentioned cannot be inferred due to the Midrashic nature of the debate. Pappos
and Miriam might have been introduced simply as a result of their being
remembered in connection with a theme of a woman having gone astray. Ben-Stada
is also mentioned in the Jerusalem Talmud. In "Shabbat 12:4 III" he is
mentioned as having learnt by cutting marks in his flesh. In "Sanhedrin 7:12 I"
he is mentioned as an example of someone caught by hidden observers and
subsequently stoned. This information is paralleled in the Tosefta in "Shabbat
11:15" and "Sanhedrin 10:11" respectively.
