Yeshiva University Yeshiva University is a private university in New York City,
with six campuses in New York and one in Israel. Founded in 1886, it is a
research university ranked as 45th in the US among national universities by
U.S. News & World Report in 2012. It also ranked as 68th in the world by The
Times Higher Education in 2011 and among 400 in world by THES‚ÄîQS World
University Rankings. Yeshiva University‚Äôs undergraduate schools‚ÄîYeshiva
College, Stern College for Women, and Syms School of Business "offer a unique
dual curriculum inspired by Modern-Centrist-Orthodox Judaism's "hashkafa"
(philosophy) of Torah Umadda" ("Torah and secular knowledge")" combining the
finest, contemporary academic education with the timeless teachings of
Torah.‚Äù Yeshiva University‚Äôs Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Benjamin
N. Cardozo School of Law, and other graduate and professional schools promote a
‚Äúdual emphasis on professional excellence and personal ethics.‚Äù Yeshiva
University is an independent institution chartered by New York State. It is
accredited by the Commission on Higher Education of the Middle States
Association of Colleges and Schools and by several professional agencies.
History. Yeshiva University is the oldest institution of higher learning in the
United States that combines Jewish scholarship with studies in the liberal
arts, sciences, medicine, law, business, social work, Jewish studies and
education, and psychology. Yeshiva University has its roots in the Etz Chaim
Yeshiva founded in 1886 on the Lower East Side of Manhattan, a cheder-style
elementary school founded by Eastern European immigrants that offered study of
Talmud along with some secular education, including instruction in English. As
of August 2012, Yeshiva University enrolls approximately 6,400 undergraduate
students, 3,500 graduate students, and 1,000 students at its affiliated high
schools and Rabbi Isaac Elchanan Theological Seminary. It conferred 1,822
degrees in 2007 and offers community service projects serving New York, Jewish
communities, the United States and Canada. Richard M. Joel is Yeshiva
University's president, while Rabbi Dr. Norman Lamm serves as chancellor.
President Joel's nomination as president was unprecedented and considered by
some to be controversial, because he is the first president of YU who is not a
rabbi. The university's past leaders include Dr. Bernard Revel, Dr. Samuel
Belkin, and "The Rav," Rabbi Joseph B. Soloveitchik. Campus. The University's
main campus, Wilf Campus, is located in Washington Heights. A 1928 plan to
build a spacious Moorish Revival campus around several gardens and courtyards
was cancelled by the Great Depression of 1929 after only one building had been
erected. Building continued after the Depression in modern style and by the
acquisition of existing neighborhood buildings. In the past 122 years, Yeshiva
University has expanded to comprise some twenty colleges, schools, affiliates,
centers, and institutions, with several affiliated hospitals and health care
institutions. It has campuses and facilities in Manhattan (Washington Heights,
Murray Hill, Greenwich Village), the Bronx, Queens, and Israel. Student life.
The high school for girls is located in New York City as well, in the
Holliswood neighborhood of eastern Queens. S. Daniel Abraham Israel Program.
The campus in Jerusalem, in the Bayit VeGan neighborhood, contains a branch of
the rabbinical seminary and an office coordinating the S. Daniel Abraham Israel
Program, a formal arrangement between Yeshiva University and 42 men's and
women's yeshivot in Israel that enables students to incorporate study in Israel
into their college years. While studying in Israel, students are exposed to
intense, concentrated study of Jewish subjects with top teachers while learning
firsthand about Israel's land, people, history, and culture. Yeshiva University
Israel advisers visit each school regularly to offer academic guidance, career
planning, and personal counseling. In addition, the program sponsors lectures
and activities where students can gather under the auspices of Yeshiva
University, and a guidance center to provide support to help ease the
occasionally challenging adjustment to a year's study in Israel. Yeshiva
University also cosponsors major events for American students in Israel, such
as the Battle of the Bands and Inter-Seminary Choir Competition, and an annual
career fair. The program is headquartered at the Student Center at Yeshiva
University's Israel Campus in the Bayit Vegan neighborhood of Jerusalem. Rabbi
Ari Solomont serves as director of the program. Student government. Numerous
clubs and activities are maintained by the students in each school, generally
under the auspices of a student government. Activities are funded by a student
activities fee collected by the school but freely distributed by the elected
council. (Athletics are usually an academic department.) Each graduate school
maintains a student council, such as the Student Bar Association at Cardozo,
which, in turn, supports the many clubs and publications in each school. At the
undergraduate level, there are separate student governments on the two
campuses. Although the two student governments are separate, they work closely
in coordinating joint events. The men's schools are represented overall by the
Yeshiva Student Union, and specifically by the Yeshiva College Student
Association, the Syms Student Council, the Student Organization of Yeshiva
(SOY, which represents both undergraduate MYP students as well as RIETS
students), and student councils for SBMP, IBC, and JSS. The latter four run
most Jewish-related activities on campus, including holiday celebrations and
the famed SOY Seforim (Jewish book) sale annually around February, which is
open to the general public and attracts large crowds from near and far. There
are also individual councils for each class, council committees, a Student
Court, and clubs. The women's schools are represented by the Stern College and
Syms Student Councils; there are also a Torah Activities Council, which
coordinates Jewish-related events, and individual class councils, along with
various clubs. The various positions on all councils are chosen by elections
open to all students (both as voters and candidates) generally held in the
Spring (for the following year's councils), although Freshman and Sophomore
class councils are elected in the Fall, the latter owing to the large number of
students spending the freshman year abroad in Israel. The undergraduate men's
newspaper is The Commentator, and the undergraduate women's The Observer, as
well as a co-ed satirical news site The Quipster; there is also a student
newspaper (in addition to a number of law journals) at Cardozo. There are
numerous other publications on a wide range of topics, both secular and
religious, produced by the various councils and academic clubs, along with many
official university publications and the university press. The call letters of
the student radio station are WYUR, currently an Internet-only station,
available at codice_1. Dormitories and student housing. There are dormitory and
dining facilities on each campus. Cardozo has a single dormitory building a
block south of the classroom building, while Einstein has a number of student
housing buildings on campus for single and married students. Approximately 80%
of the undergraduate student populations live on campus. The Wilf Campus
includes three main dormitory buildings: Morgenstern (nicknamed "Morg") Rubin,
and Muss Halls. Many upperclassmen and some graduate students live in the
surrounding independent housing that is run by the university or in other
nearby buildings; there is also a small high school dormitory on campus,
Strenger Hall, which houses some older students as well who serve as
counselors. The Beren campus includes four dormitory buildings: Brookdale,
Schottenstein, the 36th Street and 35th Street Residence Halls. Many students
live in university-administered independent housing nearby. Athletics. Yeshiva
University is home to a variety of NCAA-level sports teams. The teams,
nicknamed "The Maccabees", include: men's baseball, basketball, golf,
volleyball, wrestling, women's basketball, Cross Country, Fencing, soccer,
tennis, and volleyball. One of the most successful teams in Yeshiva University
sports history is the fencing team, known as the "Taubermen", named after the
coach of the team, Professor Arthur Tauber, who served as the head coach of the
team from 1949 through 1985. Because of Yeshiva's dual curriculum, most of the
sports teams practice at night, sometimes even as late as 11:00¬ pm. A few of
the sports teams have been known to get in an early morning practice or workout
before classes begin at 9:00¬ am. One of the unique aspects of Yeshiva
athletics is the way it connects with communities around the country. It is not
rare for a team to participate in a weekend tournament outside of New York City
and for the athletes to stay with local families in the area. Most recently
this has taken place in Boston with the basketball and fencing teams, and in
Hollywood, Florida with the baseball team in 2008. Yeshiva even maintains an
international connection through the many international students who
participate in NCAA sports. While some teams may only have one or two
nationalities, others have as many as nine different nationalities representing
the school on the sports field. Yeshiva has seen a few of its student-athletes
go on to professional-level competition. Two members of the Yeshiva Maccabees
Baseball team were drafted out of college by professional teams of the Israeli
Baseball League. One of them, pitcher Aryeh Rosenbaum, even celebrated a
championship with his team in the IBL's first year. Olympic gold medalist Henry
Wittenberg was at one time the coach of the wrestling team. Yeshiva's Men's
Basketball team is an annual playoff contender. The best era for Yeshiva
basketball in recent history has been the first few years and last few years of
the 1990s. Banners hang in the Max Stern Athletic Center commemorating seasons
from both eras. The 2007‚Äì2008 season had particular note as Yeshiva was home
to the NCAA Skyline Conference's Rookie of the Year. The 2008‚Äì2009 season saw
the men's NCAA volleyball team have its best season ever. Other teams that are
quickly becoming contenders are the men's soccer, baseball, and tennis teams.
In the 2009‚Äì2010 season, the men's NCAA volleyball team won the HVMAC (Hudson
Valley Men's Athletic Conference) Championship. In 2010, the Men's Cross
Country team won the HVMAC Championship by a huge landslide. The team repeated
as champions in 2011. YU Maccabee Sam Cohen won the individual championship.
Student groups and organizations. A wide variety of student clubs, groups, and
organizations are available to the student body to join. These groups range
from groups like the Commentator (a student newspaper) to the University Drama
society that puts on the occasional performance. In 2010 students gathered
together to create a "Tolerance Club", the purpose of which was to promote the
idea of there being a diversity of people within the Yeshiva University
community. During the first meeting a panel was assembled that included a few
openly Gay Jewish Orthodox men who discussed their experience growing up in the
Orthodox community. Soon after the club had begun it was promptly shut down by
the university Faculty for allegedly promoting values that were not in
agreement with orthodox Judiasm. Rankings. The U.S. News and World Report's
2011 "America's Best Colleges" ranked Yeshiva University as the 45th best
national University. In 2009 "America's Best Colleges" ranked Yeshiva
University as the 50th best national university rising from the 2008 rank of
52nd. YU was also ranked 41st "Best Value" Colleges, and 5th in percentage of
students studying abroad (90% of the class of 2007). Yeshiva University's
Albert Einstein School of Medicine was ranked 41st in the nation. The
Washington Monthly 2007 College Rankings placed Yeshiva University 94th
nationally. In a similar list, The Center for Measuring University Performance
found Yeshiva University 45th nationally among the Top American Research
Universities. YU has also received worldwide recognition. "The Times Higher
Education Supplement" of the UK ranked it as 68th in the world in 2011, a
substantial jump from the 172nd top world university ranking it received in
2006 and the 254th ranking the school received in 2005. According to Shanghai
Jiao Tong University, the university is ranked in the 151‚Äì200 category among
world universities and 76‚Äì98 among universities in the Americas. The
university's national research impact has also been evaluated. The university's
rank of research impact in Biology & Biochemistry placed 5th in the US by
Thomson Reuters, surpassing Washington University, Stanford, Duke, and UCSF.
