Yom Kippur Yom Kippur (, , or ), also known as Day of Atonement, is the holiest
day of the year for the Jewish people. Its central themes are atonement and
repentance. Jewish people traditionally observe this holy day with a 25-hour
period of fasting and intensive prayer, often spending most of the day in
synagogue services. Yom Kippur completes the annual period known in Judaism as
the High Holy Days or Yamim Nora'im ("Days of Awe"). Yom Kippur is the tenth
day of the month of Tishrei and also regarded as the ‚ÄúSabbath of Sabbaths‚Äù.
According to Jewish tradition, God inscribes each person's fate for the coming
year into a book, the Book of Life, on Rosh Hashanah, and waits until Yom
Kippur to "seal" the verdict. During the Days of Awe, a Jewish person tries to
amend his or her behavior and seek forgiveness for wrongs done against God
("bein adam leMakom") and against other human beings ("bein adam lechavero").
The evening and day of Yom Kippur are set aside for public and private
petitions and confessions of guilt ("Vidui"). At the end of Yom Kippur, one
hopes that they have been forgiven by God. The Yom Kippur prayer service
includes several unique aspects. One is the actual number of prayer services.
Unlike a regular day, which has three prayer services ("Ma'ariv", the evening
prayer; "Shacharit", the morning prayer; and "Mincha", the afternoon prayer),
or a Shabbat or Yom Tov, which have four prayer services ("Ma'ariv";
"Shacharit"; "Mussaf", the additional prayer; and "Mincha"), Yom Kippur has
five prayer services ("Ma'ariv"; "Shacharit"; "Musaf"; "Mincha"; and "Ne'ilah",
the closing prayer). The prayer services also include private and public
confessions of sins ("Vidui") and a unique prayer dedicated to the special Yom
Kippur "avodah" (service) of the Kohen Gadol in the Holy Temple in Jerusalem.
As one of the most culturally significant Jewish holidays, Yom Kippur is
observed by many secular Jews who may not observe other holidays. Many secular
Jews attend synagogue on Yom Kippur‚Äîfor many secular Jews the High Holy Days
are the only recurring times of the year in which they attend
synagogue‚Äîcausing synagogue attendance to soar. Etymology. "Yom" means "day"
in Hebrew and "Kippur" comes from a root that means "to atone". Thus Yom Kippur
has come to mean "day of atonement". Some say there is a link to "kapporet",
the ‚Äúmercy seat‚Äù or covering of the Ark of the Covenant. Abraham Ibn Ezra
states that the word indicates the task and not just the shape of the ark
cover; since the blood of the Yom Kippur sacrifice was sprinkled in its
direction, it was the symbol of propitiation. Observances. Preceding day. "Erev
Yom Kippur" (lit. "eve day [of atonement") is the day preceding Yom Kippur,
corresponding to the ninth day of the Hebrew month of Tishrei. This day is
commemorated with two festive meals, the giving of charity, and asking others
for forgiveness. General observances. Five additional prohibitions are
traditionally observed, as detailed in the Jewish oral tradition ("Mishnah"
tractate "Yoma" 8:1) A parallel has been drawn between these activities and the
human condition according to the Biblical account of the expulsion from the
garden of Eden. Refraining from these symbolically represents a return to a
pristine state, which is the theme of the day. By refraining from these
activities, the body is uncomfortable but can still survive. The soul is
considered to be the life force in a body. Therefore, by making one‚Äôs body
uncomfortable, one‚Äôs soul is uncomfortable. By feeling pain one can feel how
others feel when they are in pain. This is the purpose of the prohibitions.
Total abstention from food and drink usually begins 20 minutes before sundown
(called "tosefet Yom Kippur", lit. "Addition to Yom Kippur"), and ends after
nightfall the following day. Although the fast is required of all healthy
adults over 12 or 13, it is waived in the case of certain medical conditions.
Virtually all Jewish holidays involve a ritual feast, but since Yom Kippur
involves fasting, Jewish law requires one to eat a large and festive meal on
the afternoon before Yom Kippur, after the "Mincha" (afternoon) prayer. Wearing
white clothing (or a 'kittel' for Ashkenazi Jews), is traditional to symbolize
one‚Äôs purity on this day. Many Orthodox men immerse themselves in a "mikveh"
on the day before Yom Kippur. In order to apologize to God, one must: Eve. "In
the tribunal of Heaven and the tribunal of earth, by the permission of
God‚Äîpraised be He‚Äîand by the permission of this holy congregation, we hold
it lawful to pray with transgressors." Translation of Philip Birnbaum, from
"High Holyday Prayer Book", Hebrew Publishing Company, NY, 1951 The leader and
the congregation then say together three times "May all the people of Israel be
forgiven, including all the strangers who live in their midst, for all the
people are in fault." The Torah scrolls are then replaced, and the Yom Kippur
evening service begins. Prayer services. Many married men wear a "kittel", a
white robe-like garment for evening prayers on Yom Kippur, otherwise used by
males on their wedding day. They also wear a tallit (prayer shawl), which is
typically worn only during morning services. Prayer services begin with the Kol
Nidrei prayer, which must be recited before sunset, and continue with the
evening prayers ("Ma'ariv" or "Arvith"), which includes an extended Selichot
service. The morning prayer service is preceded by litanies and petitions of
forgiveness called "selichot"; on Yom Kippur, many "selichot" are woven into
the liturgy of the mahzor (prayer book). The morning prayers are followed by an
added prayer ("Mussaf") as on all other holidays. This is followed by "Mincha"
(the afternoon prayer) which includes a reading (Haftarah) of the entire Book
of Jonah, which has as its theme the story of God's willingness to forgive
those who repent. The service concludes with the "Ne'ila" ("closing") prayer,
which begins shortly before sunset, when the "gates of prayer" will be closed.
Yom Kippur comes to an end with a recitation of "Shema Yisrael" and the blowing
of the "shofar", which marks the conclusion of the fast. Repentance ("Teshuva")
and Confessional ("Vidui"). The Talmud states, "Yom Kippur atones for those who
repent and does not atone for those who do not repent". Repentance in Judaism
is done through a process called Teshuva, which in its most basic form consists
of regretting having committed the sin, resolving not to commit that sin in the
future and to confess that sin before God. Confession in Judaism is called
"Vidui" (Hebrew ◊ï◊ô◊ì◊ï◊ô). There is also a commandment to repent on Yom
Kippur. Accordingly Yom Kippur is unique for the confessional, or "Vidui", that
is part of the prayer services. In keeping with the requirement to repent on
Yom Kippur, Jews recite the full "Vidui" a total of 10 times: 2 times during
Mincha on Yom Kippur eve, and on Yom Kippur itself during Ma'ariv (2 times),
Shacharit (2 times), Musaf (2 times), and Mincha (2 times); at Ne‚Äôeilah, only
the short confessional is said. The first time in each service takes place
during the personal recitation of the Amidah (standing, silent prayer), and the
second time during the cantor's repetition of the Amidah, in a public
recitation. The Yom Kippur confessional consists of two parts: a short
confession beginning with the word "Ashamnu" (◊ê◊©◊û◊ ◊ï, "we have sinned"),
which is a series of words describing sin arranged according to the aleph-bet,
and a long confession, beginning with the words "Al Cheyt" (◊¢◊ú ◊ó◊ò◊ê, "for
the sin"), which is a set of 26 double acrostics, also arranged according to
the aleph-bet, enumerating a range of sins. It is notable that during the
public recitation of "Ashamnu" together with the cantor, the entire
congregation sings these words to a tune, representing the joy of being
cleansed from one's sins. Avodah: remembering the Temple service. A recitation
of the sacrificial service of the Temple in Jerusalem traditionally features
prominently in both the liturgy and the religious thought of the holiday.
Specifically, the "Avodah" ("service") in the Musaf prayer recounts in great
detail the sacrificial ceremonies of the Yom Kippur Korbanot (sacrificial
offerings) that are recited in the prayers but have not been performed for
2,000 years, since the destruction of the Second Temple in Jerusalem by the
Romans. This traditional prominence is rooted in the Babylonian Talmud‚Äôs
description of how to attain atonement following the destruction of the Temple.
According to Talmud tractate Yoma, in the absence of a Temple, Jews are
obligated to study the High Priest‚Äôs ritual on Yom Kippur, and this study
helps achieve atonement for those who are unable to benefit from its actual
performance. In Orthodox Judaism, accordingly, studying the Temple ritual on
Yom Kippur represents a positive rabbinically ordained obligation which Jews
seeking atonement are required to fulfill. In Orthodox synagogues, most
Conservative, and some progressive a detailed description of the Temple ritual
is recited on the day. In most Orthodox and some Conservative synagogues, the
entire congregation prostrates themselves at each point in the recitation where
the Kohen Gadol (High Priest) would pronounce the Tetragrammaton (God‚Äôs
holiest name, according to Judaism). The main section of the Avodah is a
threefold recitation of the High Priest‚Äôs actions regarding expiation in the
Holy of Holies. Performing the sacrificial acts and reciting , (‚ÄúYour upright
children‚Äù). (These three times, plus in some congregations the "Aleinu"
prayer during the Musaf Amidah on Yom Kippur and Rosh Hashanah, are the only
times in Jewish services when Jews engage in prostration, with the exception of
some Yemenite Jews and "talmedhei haRambam" (disciples of Maimonides) who may
prostrate themselves on other occasions during the year). A variety of
liturgical poems are added, including a poem recounting the radiance of the
countenance of the Kohen Gadol after exiting the Holy of Holies, traditionally
believed to emit palpable light in a manner echoing the Torah's account of the
countenance of Moses after descending from Mount Sinai, as well as prayers for
the speedy rebuilding of the Temple and the restoration of sacrificial worship.
There are a variety of other customs, such as hand gestures to mime the
sprinkling of blood (one sprinkling upwards and seven downwards per set of
eight). Orthodox liturgies include prayers lamenting the inability to perform
the Temple service and petitioning for its restoration, which Conservative
synagogues generally omit. In some Conservative synagogues, only the "Hazzan"
(cantor) engages in full prostration. Some Conservative synagogues abridge the
recitation of the Avodah service to varying degrees, and some omit it entirely.
Many Reform and Reconstructionist services omit the entire service as
inconsistent with modern sensibilities. Date of Yom Kippur. "Note: Yom Kippur
begins at sundown of the previous day in the Gregorian calendar (e.g. 25
September 2012)." In the Torah. Midrashic interpretation. Traditionally, Yom
Kippur is considered the date on which Moses received the second set of Ten
Commandments. It occurred following the completion of the second 40 days of
instructions from God. At this same time, the Israelites were granted atonement
for the sin of the Golden Calf; hence, its designation as the Day of Atonement.
Mishnaic and Talmudic literature. Temple service. The following summary of the
Temple service is based on the traditional Jewish religious account described
in Mishnah tractate Yoma, appearing in contemporary traditional Jewish prayer
books for Yom Kippur, and studied as part of a traditional Jewish Yom Kippur
worship service. While the Temple in Jerusalem was standing (from Biblical
times through 70 C.E.), the Kohen Gadol (High Priest) was mandated by the Torah
to perform a complex set of special services and sacrifices for Yom Kippur to
attain Divine atonement, the word "kippur" meaning "atone" in Hebrew. These
services were considered to be the most important parts of Yom Kippur because
through them the Kohen Gadol made atonement for all Jews and the world. During
the service, the Kohen Gadol entered the Holy of Holies in the center of the
Temple, the only time of the year that anyone went inside. Doing so required
special purification and preparation, including five immersions in a "mikvah"
(ritual bath), and four changes of clothing. Seven days prior to Yom Kippur,
the Kohen Gadol was sequestered in the Palhedrin chamber in the Temple, where
he reviewed (studied) the service with the sages familiar with the Temple, and
was sprinkled with spring water containing ashes of the Red Heifer as
purification. The Talmud (Tractate Yoma) also reports that he practiced the
incense offering ritual in the Avitnas chamber. The Kohen Gadol wore five sets
of garments (three golden and two white linen), immersed in the "mikvah" five
times, and washed his hands and feet ten times. Sacrifices included two (daily)
lambs, one bull, two goats, and two rams, with accompanying "mincha" (meal)
offerings, wine libations, and three incense offerings (the regular two daily
and an additional one for Yom Kippur). The Kohen Gadol entered the Holy of
Holies three times. The Tetragrammaton was pronounced three times, once for
each confession. Observance in Israel. Yom Kippur is a legal holiday in the
modern state of Israel. There are no radio or television broadcasts, airports
are shut down, there is no public transportation, and all shops and businesses
are closed. In 1973, an air raid siren was sounded on the afternoon of Yom
Kippur and radio broadcasts were resumed to alert the public to the surprise
attack on Israel by Egypt and Syria that launched the Yom Kippur War. In 2008,
63% of the Jewish people of Israel said that they were intending to fast on Yom
Kippur. This is the reason that it is very common in Israel to wish "Tsom Kal"
(easy fast) or "Tsom Mo'iil" ([a benefiting fast) to everyone before Yom
Kippur, even if one does not know whether they will fast or not. It is
considered impolite to eat in public on Yom Kippur or to sound music or to
drive a motor vehicle. There is no legal prohibition on any of these, but in
practice such actions are universally avoided in Israel during Yom Kippur. The
exception being emergency services. Over the last few decades, bicycle-riding
and inline skating on the empty streets have become common among secular
Israeli youngsters, especially on the eve of Yom Kippur. Observance by
athletes. Some notable athletes have observed Yom Kippur, even when it
conflicted with their playing their sport. In baseball, Sandy Koufax, the Hall
of Fame pitcher, decided not to pitch Game 1 of the 1965 World Series because
it fell on Yom Kippur. Koufax garnered national attention for his decision, as
an example of the conflict between social pressures and personal beliefs. When
pitcher Don Drysdale took Koufax's place and fared poorly, giving up seven runs
in 2-2/3 innings, he told his manager as he was pulled from the game: "I bet
right now you wish I was Jewish, too." Hall of Fame first baseman Hank
Greenberg attracted national attention in 1934, nearly three decades earlier,
when he refused to play baseball on Yom Kippur, even though the Tigers were in
the middle of a pennant race and Greenberg was not a religious Jew. The
"Detroit Free Press" columnist and poet Edgar A. Guest wrote a poem titled
"Speaking of Greenberg," which ended with the lines ""We shall miss him on the
infield and shall miss him at the bat / But he's true to his religion‚Äîand I
honor him for that."" When Greenberg arrived in synagogue on Yom Kippur, the
service stopped suddenly, and the congregation gave an embarrassed Greenberg a
standing ovation. Former Los Angeles Dodgers outfielder Shawn Green, similarly,
made headlines in 2001 for sitting out a game for the first time in 415 games,
to honor Yom Kippur, even though his team was in the middle of a playoff race.
Other baseball players who have similarly sat out games on Yom Kippur include
Chicago White Sox third baseman Kevin Youkilis, former Houston Astros catcher
Brad Ausmus and outfielder Art Shamsky. Gabe Carimi, the Consensus All-American
left tackle in American football who won the 2010 Outland Trophy as the
nation's top collegiate interior lineman faced a conflict in his freshman year
of college in 2007. That year Yom Kippur fell on a Saturday, and he fasted
until an hour before his football game against Iowa started that night. Carimi
said, "Religion is a part of me, and I don't want to just say I'm Jewish. I
actually do make sacrifices that I know are hard choices.‚Äù In 2004, Matt
Bernstein, standout fullback at University of Wisconsin‚ÄìMadison, fasted on
Yom Kippur, then broke his fast on the sidelines before rushing for 123 yards
in a game against Penn State. Boris Gelfand, Israel's top chess player, played
his game in the prestigious London Grand Prix Chess Tournament on Tuesday 25
September 2012 (eve of Yom Kippur) earlier, to avoid playing on the holiday.
Contemporary scholarship. On the basis of their assumptions, these scholars
believe that the original ceremony was simply the ritual purification of the
sanctuary from any accidental ritual impurity, at the start of each new year,
as seen in the Book of Ezekiel, which textual scholars date to before the
priestly source, but after JE. According to the Book of Ezekiel, the sanctuary
was to be cleansed by the sprinkling of bullock's blood, on the first day of
the first and of the seventh months ‚Äî near the start of the Civil year and of
the Ecclesiastical year, respectively; although the masoretic text of the Book
of Ezekiel has the second of these cleansings on the seventh of the first
month, biblical scholars regard the Septuagint, which has the second cleaning
as being the first of the seventh month, as being more accurate here. It
appears that during the period that the Holiness Code and the Book of Ezekiel
were written, the new year began on the tenth day of the seventh month, and
thus liberal biblical scholars believe that by the time the Priestly Code was
compiled, the date of the new year and of the day of atonement had swapped
around.
