American Civil Liberties Union The American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) is a
nonpartisan non-profit organization whose stated mission is "to defend and
preserve the individual rights and liberties guaranteed to every person in this
country by the Constitution and laws of the United States." It works through
litigation, lobbying, and community education. Founded in 1920 by Crystal
Eastman, Roger Baldwin and Walter Nelles, the ACLU has over 500,000 members and
has an annual budget over $100 million. Local affiliates of the ACLU are active
in all 50 states and Puerto Rico. The ACLU provides legal assistance in cases
in which it considers civil liberties to be at risk. Legal support from the
ACLU can take the form of direct legal representation, or preparation of
"amicus curiae" briefs expressing legal arguments (when another law firm is
already providing representation). When the ACLU was founded in 1920, its focus
was on freedom of speech, primarily for anti-war protesters. During the 1920s,
the ACLU expanded its scope to also include protecting the free speech rights
of artists and striking workers, and working with the National Association for
the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) to combat racism. During the 1930s,
the ACLU started to engage in work combating police misconduct and Native
American rights. Most of the ACLU's cases came from the Communist party and
Jehovah's Witnesses. In 1940, ACLU leadership was caught up in the Red Scare,
and voted to exclude Communists from its leadership positions. During World War
II, the ACLU defended Japanese American citizens who were forcibly relocated to
internment camps. During the Cold War, the ACLU headquarters was dominated by
anti-communists, but many local affiliates defended members of the Communist
Party. By 1964, membership had risen to 80,000, and the ACLU was directly
involved in a major expansion of civil liberties. In the 1960s, the ACLU
continued its decades-long effort to enforce separation of church and state,
and it also defended several anti-war activists during the Vietnam War who
burnt draft cards or wore armbands. The ACLU was involved in the "Miranda"
case, which addressed misconduct by police during interrogations; and in the
"New York Times" case which established new protections for newspapers
reporting on government activities. In the 1970s and 1980s, the ACLU ventured
into new legal areas, defending homosexuals, students, prisoners, and the poor.
In the twenty-first century, the ACLU has fought the teaching of creationism in
public schools and challenged some provisions of anti-terrorism legislation as
infringing on civil liberties. In addition to representing persons and
organizations in lawsuits, the ACLU lobbies for policies that have been
established by its board of directors. Current positions of the ACLU include:
opposing the death penalty; supporting gay marriage and the right of gays to
adopt; supporting birth control and abortion rights; eliminating discrimination
against women, minorities, and gays; supporting the rights of prisoners and
opposing torture; supporting the right of religious persons to practice their
faiths without government interference; and opposing any government preference
for religion over non-religion, or for particular faiths over others.
Organization. Leadership. The ACLU is led by an executive officer and a
president (Anthony Romero and Susan Herman, respectively, in 2011). The
executive officer acts as chairman of the ACLU's board of directors, and is
responsible for fundraising and facilitating policy-setting. The president
manages the day-to-day operations of the organization. The board of directors
consists of 80 persons, including representatives from each state affiliate, as
well as at-large delegates. The leadership of the ACLU does not always agree on
policy decisions: Differences of opinion within the ACLU leadership have
sometimes grown into major debates. In 1937, an internal debate erupted over
whether to defend Henry Ford's right to distribute anti-union literature. In
1939, a heated debate took place over whether to prohibit communists from
serving in ACLU leadership roles. During the early 1950s the board was divided
on whether to defend communists persecuted under McCarthyism. In 1968, a schism
formed over whether to represent Dr. Spock's anti-war activism. In 1973, there
was internal conflict over whether to call for the impeachment of Richard
Nixon. In 2005, there was internal conflict about whether or not a gag rule
should be imposed on ACLU employees to prevent publication of internal
disputes. Funding. The ACLU consists of two separate non-profit organizations:
the ACLU, and the ACLU Foundation. Both organizations engage in litigation,
advocacy of civil rights, and education. The ACLU is a 501(c)(4) corporation
which also engages in political lobbying, and donations to that component of
the ACLU are not tax deductible. The ACLU Foundation is a 501(c)(3) non-profit
corporation, which does not engage in lobbying, and donations to it are tax
deductible. In 2011, the ACLU and the ACLU Foundation had a combined income of
$109 million, originating from grants (60%), membership donations (23%), and
bequests (17%). Membership dues account for $25 million per year and are
treated as donations; members choose the amount they pay annually, averaging
$50 per member per year. In 2011, the combined expenses of the ACLU and ACLU
Foundation were $106 million, spent on Programs (88%), management (7%), and
fundraising (5%). The ACLU Foundation accounts for about 75% of the combined
budget, and the ACLU about 25%. The ACLU solicits donations to its charitable
foundation. The ACLU is accredited by the Better Business Bureau, and the
Charity Navigator has ranked the ACLU with a four-star rating. The local
affiliates also solicit their own funding, and some receive funds from the
national ACLU. The distribution and amount of funding for state affiliates
varies from state to state. Smaller affiliates with fewer resources, such as
that in Nebraska, receive subsidies from the national ACLU. In October 2004,
the ACLU rejected $1.5 million from both the Ford Foundation and Rockefeller
Foundation because the Foundations had adopted language from the USA PATRIOT
Act in their donation agreements, including a clause stipulating that none of
the money would go to "underwriting terrorism or other unacceptable
activities." The ACLU views this clause, both in Federal law and in the donors'
agreements, as a threat to civil liberties, saying it is overly broad and
ambiguous. Due to the nature of its legal work, the ACLU is often involved in
litigation against governmental bodies, which are generally protected from
adverse monetary judgments: a town, state or federal agency may be required to
change its laws or behave differently, but not to pay monetary damages except
by an explicit statutory waiver. In some cases, the law permits plaintiffs who
successfully sue government agencies to collect money damages or other monetary
relief. In particular, the Civil Rights Attorney's Fees Award Act of 1976
leaves the government liable in some civil rights cases. Fee awards under this
civil rights statute are considered "equitable relief" rather than damages, and
government entities are not immune from equitable relief. Under laws such as
this, the ACLU and its state affiliates sometimes share in monetary judgments
against government agencies. In 2006, the Public Expressions of Religion
Protection Act sought to prevent monetary judgments in the particular case of
violations of church-state separation. The ACLU has received court awarded fees
from opponents, for example, the Georgia affiliate was awarded $150,000 in fees
after suing a county demanding the removal of a Ten Commandments display from
its courthouse; a second Ten Commandments case in the State, in a different
county, led to a $74,462 judgment. The State of Tennessee was required to pay
$50,000, the State of Alabama $175,000, and the State of Kentucky $121,500, in
similar Ten Commandments cases. State affiliates. Most of the organization’s
workload is performed by the 53 local affiliates. There is an affiliate in each
state and in Puerto Rico. California has three affiliates. The affiliates
operate autonomously from the national organization: each affiliate has its own
staff, executive director, board of directors, and budget. Each affiliate
consists of two non-profit corporations: a 501(c)(3) corporation that does not
perform lobbying, and a 501(c)(4) corporation which is entitled to lobby. ACLU
affiliates are the basic unit of the ACLU's organization and engage in
litigation, lobbying, and public education. For example, in a twenty-month
period beginning January 2004, the ACLU's New Jersey chapter was involved in
fifty-one cases according to their annual report—thirty-five cases in state
courts, and sixteen in federal court. They provided legal representation in
thirty-three of those cases, and served as amicus in the remaining eighteen.
They listed forty-four volunteer attorneys who assisted them in those cases.
Support and opposition. The ACLU is supported by a variety of persons and
organizations. There were over 500,000 members in 2011, and the ACLU annually
receives thousands of grants from hundreds of charitable foundations. Allies of
the ACLU in legal actions include the National Association for the Advancement
of Colored People, the American Jewish Congress, People For the American Way,
the Electronic Frontier Foundation, Americans United for Separation of Church
and State, and the National Organization for Women. The ACLU has been
criticized by liberals, such as when it excluded communists from its leadership
ranks, when it defended Neo-Nazis, when it declined to defend Paul Robeson, or
when it opposed the passage of the National Labor Relations Act. Conversely, it
has been criticized by conservatives, such as when it argued against prayer in
schools, or when it opposed the Patriot Act. The ACLU has supported
conservative figures such as Rush Limbaugh, George Wallace, Henry Ford, and
Oliver North; and it has supported liberal figures such as Dick Gregory, H. L.
Mencken, Rockwell Kent, and Dr. Benjamin Spock. A major source of criticism are
legal cases in which the ACLU represents an individual or organization that
promotes offensive or unpopular viewpoints, such as the Ku Klux Klan, Neo-
Nazis, Nation of Islam, North American Man/Boy Love Association, or Westboro
Baptist Church. The ACLU responded to these criticisms by stating "It is easy
to defend freedom of speech when the message is something many people find at
least reasonable. But the defense of freedom of speech is most critical when
the message is one most people find repulsive." Early years. CLB era. The
predecessor to the ACLU was the National Civil Liberties Bureau (CLB). The CLB
was founded by Crystal Eastman and Roger Baldwin in 1917. Supporters of the CLB
generally fell into one of three groups: social reformers, Protestant clergy,
and conservative lawyers. In 1918, Baldwin became the primary leader of the
CLB, as Eastman succumbed to ill health. The focus of the CLB was on freedom of
speech, primarily anti-war speech, and on supporting conscientious objectors
who wished to avoid serving in World War I. Three Supreme Court decisions in
1919 each upheld convictions outlawing certain kinds of anti-war speech. In
1919, Socialist party leader Charles Schenck's conviction for publishing anti-
war literature was upheld by the Supreme Court. Then, in "Debs v. United
States," the court upheld the conviction of Eugene Debs. But five months later,
justice Oliver Wendell Holmes wrote an important dissent in "Abrams v. United
States", in which he urged the court to treat freedom of speech as a
fundamental right, which should only rarely be outlawed. After taking over
leadership of the CLB, Baldwin insisted that the organization be reorganized,
and change its focus from litigation to direct action and public education. The
CLB directors concurred, and on January 19, 1920, the ACLU was formed. Although
there were a handful of other organizations in the United States at that time
that focused on civil rights, such as the NAACP and Anti-Defamation League, the
ACLU was the first that did not limit itself to a particular group of persons,
or to a single theme. During its first decades of its existence, Baldwin
continued to be the leader of the ACLU. His charisma and energy attracted many
supporters to ACLU leadership ranks. Baldwin was a very ascetic individual, who
wore hand-me-down clothes, pinched pennies, and lived on a very small salary.
The ACLU was directed by an executive committee, but the committee was not
particularly democratic or egalitarian: since the ACLU was headquartered in New
York, the executive committee was dominated by New Yorkers. Most ACLU funding
came from philanthropies, such as the Garland Fund. Free speech era. In the
1920s, government censorship was commonplace. Magazines were routinely
confiscated under the anti-obscenity Comstock laws; permits for labor rallies
were often denied; and virtually all anti-war or anti-government literature was
outlawed. Right-wing conservatives wielded vast amounts of power, and activists
that promoted unionization, socialism, or government reform were often
denounced as un-American or unpatriotic. In one typical instance in 1923,
author Upton Sinclair was arrested for trying to read the First Amendment
during an Industrial Workers of the World rally. ACLU leadership was divided on
how to challenge the civil rights violations. One faction, including Baldwin,
Arthur Garfield Hays and Norman Thomas, believed that direct, militant action
was the best path. Hays was the first of many successful attorneys that
relinquished their private practices to work for the ACLU. Another group,
including Walter Nelles and Walter Pollak felt that lawsuits taken to the
Supreme Court were the best way to achieve change. Both groups worked in
tandem, but equally worshipped the Bill of Rights and the US Constitution.
During the 1920s, the ACLU's primary focus was on freedom of speech in general,
and speech within the labor movement particularly. Because most of the ACLU's
efforts were associated with the labor movement, the ACLU itself came under
heavy attack from conservative groups, such as the American Legion, the
National Civic Federation, and Industrial Defense Association and the Allied
Patriotic Societies. In addition to labor, the ACLU also led efforts in non-
labor arenas, for example, promoting free speech in public schools. The ACLU
itself was banned from speaking in New York public schools in 1921. The ACLU,
working with the NAACP, also supported racial discrimination cases. The ACLU
defended free speech regardless of the opinions being espoused. For example,
the reactionary, anti-Catholic, anti-black Ku Klux Klan (KKK) was a frequent
target of ACLU efforts, but the ACLU defended the KKK's right to hold meetings
in 1923. There were some civil rights that the ACLU did not make an effort to
defend in the 1920s, including censorship of the arts, government search and
seizure issues, right to privacy, or wiretapping. The Communist party of the
United States was routinely harassed and oppressed by government officials,
leading it to be the primary client of the ACLU. The Communists were very
aggressive in their tactics, often engaging in illegal or unethical conduct,
and this led to frequent conflicts between the Communists and ACLU. Communist
leaders often attacked the ACLU, particularly when the ACLU defended the free
speech rights of conservatives. This uneasy relationship between the two groups
continued for decades. Scopes trial. When 1925 arrived – five years after the
ACLU was formed – the organization had virtually no success to show for its
efforts. That changed in 1925, when the ACLU persuaded John T. Scopes to defy
Tennessee's anti-evolution law in a court test. Clarence Darrow, a member of
the ACLU National Committee, headed Scopes' legal team. The prosecution, led by
William Jennings Bryan, contended that the Bible should be interpreted
literally in teaching creationism in school. The ACLU lost the case and Scopes
was fined $100. The Tennessee Supreme Court later upheld the law but overturned
the conviction on a technicality. The Scopes trial was a phenomenal public
relations success for the ACLU. The ACLU became well known across America, and
the case led to the first endorsement of the ACLU by a major U.S. newspaper.
The ACLU continued to fight for the separation of church and state in
schoolrooms, decade after decade, including the 1982 case "McLean v. Arkansas"
and the 2005 case "Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District". Baldwin himself
was involved in an important free speech victory of the 1920s, after he was
arrested for attempting to speak at a rally of striking mill workers in New
Jersey. Although the decision was limited to the state of New Jersey, the
appeals court's judgement in 1928 declared that constitutional guarantees of
free speech must be given "liberal and comprehensive construction", and it
marked a major turning point in the civil rights movement, signaling the shift
of judicial opinion in favor of civil rights. The most important ACLU case of
the 1920s was "Gitlow v. New York", in which Benjamin Gitlow was arrested for
violating a state law against inciting anarchy and violence, when he
distributed literature promoting communism. Although the Supreme Court did not
overturn Gitlow's conviction, it adopted the ACLU's stance (later termed the
incorporation doctrine) that the First Amendment freedom of speech applied to
state laws, as well as federal laws. First Victories. Leaders of the ACLU were
divided on the best tactics to use to promote civil liberties. Felix
Frankfurter felt that legislation was the best long-term solution, because the
Supreme Court could not (andin his opinionshould not) mandate liberal
interpretations of the Bill of Rights. But Walter Pollack, Morris Ernst, and
other leaders felt that Supreme Court decisions were the best path to guarantee
civil liberties. A series of Supreme Court decisions in the 1920s foretold of a
changing national atmosphere: anti-radical emotions were diminishing, and there
was a growing willingness to protect freedom of speech and assembly via court
decisions. Free speech. Censorship was commonplace in the early 20th century.
State laws and city ordinances routinely outlawed speech deemed to be obscene
or offensive, and prohibited meetings or literature that promoted unions or
labor organization. Starting in 1926, the ACLU began to expand its free speech
activities to encompass censorship of art and literature. In that year, H. L.
Mencken deliberately broke Boston law by distributing copies of his banned
"American Mercury" magazine; the ACLU defended him and won an acquittal. The
ACLU went on to win additional victories, including the landmark case "United
States v. One Book Called Ulysses" in 1933, which reversed a ban by the Customs
Department against the book "Ulysses" by James Joyce. The ACLU only achieved
mixed results in the early years, and it was not until 1966 that the Supreme
Court finally clarified the obscenity laws in the "Roth v. United States" and
"Memoirs v. Massachusetts" cases. The Comstock laws banned distribution of sex
education information, based on the premise that it was obscene and led to
promiscuous behavior Mary Ware Dennett was fined $300 in 1928, for distributing
a pamphlet containing sex education material. The ACLU, led by Morris Ernst,
appealed her conviction and won a reversal, in which judge Learned Hand ruled
that the pamphlet's main purpose was to "promote understanding". The success
prompted the ACLU to broaden their freedom of speech efforts beyond labor and
political speech, to encompass movies, press, radio and literature. The ACLU
formed the National Committee on Freedom from Censorship in 1931 to coordinate
this effort. By the early 1930s, censorship in the United States was
diminishing. Two major victories in the 1930s cemented the ACLUs campaign to
promote free speech. In "Stromberg v. California", decided in 1931, the Supreme
Court sided with the ACLU and affirmed the right of a communist party member to
salute a communist flag. The result was the first time the Supreme Court used
the Due Process Clause of the 14th amendment to subject states to the
requirements of the First Amendment. In "Near v. Minnesota", also decided in
1931, the Supreme Court ruled that states may not exercise prior restraint and
prevent a newspaper from publishing, simply because the newspaper had a
reputation for being scandalous. 1930s. The late 1930s saw the emergence of a
new era of tolerance in the United States. National leaders hailed the Bill of
Rights, particularly as it protected minorities, as the essence of democracy.
The 1939 Supreme Court decision in "Hague v. Committee for Industrial
Organization" affirmed the right of communists to promote their cause. Even
conservative elements, such as the American Bar Association began to campaign
for civil liberties, which were long considered to be the domain of left-
leaning organizations. By 1940, the ACLU had achieved many of the goals it set
in the 1920s, and many of its policies were the law of the land. Expansion. In
1929, after the Scopes and Dennett victories, Baldwin perceived that there was
vast, untapped support for civil liberties in the United States. Baldwin
proposed an expansion program for the ACLU, focusing on police brutality,
Native American rights, African American rights, censorship in the arts, and
international civil liberties. The board of directors approved Baldwin's
expansion plan, except for the international efforts. The ACLU played a major
role in passing the 1932 Norris – La Guardia Act, a federal law which
prohibited employers from preventing employees from joining unions, and stopped
the practice of outlawing strikes, unions, and labor organizing activities with
the use of injunctions. The ACLU also played a key role in initiating a
nationwide effort to reduce misconduct (such as extracting false confessions)
within police departments, by publishing the report "Lawlessness in Law
Enforcement" in 1931, under the auspices of Herbert Hoover's Wickersham
Commission. In 1934, the ACLU lobbied for the passage of the Indian
Reorganization Act, which restored some autonomy to Native American tribes, and
established penalties for kidnapping native American children. Although the
ACLU deferred to the NAACP for litigation promoting civil liberties for African
Americans, the ACLU did engage in educational efforts, and published "Black
Justice" in 1931, a report which documented institutional racism throughout the
South, including lack of voting rights, segregation, and discrimination in the
justice system. Funded by the Garland Fund, the ACLU also participated in
producing the influential Margold Report, which outlined a strategy to fight
for civil rights for blacks. The ACLU's plan was to demonstrate that the
"separate but equal" policies governing the Southern discrimination were
illegal because blacks were never, in fact, treated equally. Depression era and
the New Deal. In 1932twelve years after the ACLU was foundedit had achieved
significant success: the Supreme Court had embraced the free speech principles
espoused by the ACLU, and the general public was becoming more supportive of
civil rights in general. But the Great Depression brought new assaults on civil
liberties: the year 1930 saw a large increase in the number of free speech
prosecutions, a doubling of the number of lynchings, and all meetings of
unemployed persons were banned in Philadelphia. The Franklin D. Roosevelt
administration proposed the New Deal to combat the depression. ACLU leaders
were of mixed opinions about the New Deal, since many felt that it represented
an increase in government intervention into personal affairs, and because the
National Recovery Administration suspended anti-trust legislation. Roosevelt
was not personally interested in civil rights, but did appoint many civil
libertarians to key positions, including Interior Secretary Harold Ickes, a
member of the ACLU. The economic policies of the New Deal leaders were often
aligned with ACLU goals, but social goals were not. In particular, movies were
subject to a barrage of local ordinances banning screenings that were deemed
immoral or obscene. Even public health films portraying pregnancy and birth
were banned; as was "Life" magazine's April 11, 1938 issue which included
photos of the birth process. The ACLU fought these bans, but did not prevail.
The Catholic Church attained increasing political influence in the 1930s, and
used its influence to promote censorship of movies, and to discourage
publication of birth control information. This conflict between the ACLU and
the Catholic Church led to the resignation of the last Catholic priest from
ACLU leadership in 1934; a Catholic priest would not be represented there again
until the 1970s. The ACLU took no official position on president Franklin
Delano Roosevelt's 1937 court-packing plan, which threatened to increase the
number of Supreme Court justices, unless the Supreme Court reversed its course
and began approving New Deal legislation. The Supreme Court responded by making
a major shift in policy, and no longer applied strict constitutional limits to
government programs, and also began to take a more active role in protecting
civil liberties. The first decision that marked the court's new direction was
"De Jonge v. Oregon", in which a communist labor organizer was arrested for
calling a meeting to discuss unionization. The ACLU attorney Osmond Fraenkel,
working with International Labor Defense, defended De Jonge in 1937, and won a
major victory when the Supreme Court ruled that "peaceable assembly for lawful
discussion cannot be made a crime." The De Jong case marked the start of an era
lasting for a dozen years, during which Roosevelt appointees (led by Hugo
Black, William O. Douglas, and Frank Murphy) established a body of civil
liberties law. In 1938, Justice Harlan F. Stone wrote the famous "footnote
four" in "United States v. Carolene Products Co." in which he suggested that
state laws which impede civil liberties wouldhenceforthrequire compelling
justification. Senator Robert F. Wagner proposed the National Labor Relations
Act in 1935, which empowered workers to unionize. Ironically, the ACLU, after
15 years of fighting for workers rights, initially opposed the act (it later
took no stand on the legislation) because some ACLU leaders feared the
increased power the bill gave to the government. The newly formed National
Labor Relations Board (NLRB) posed a dilemma for the ACLU, because in 1937 it
issued an order to Henry Ford, prohibiting Ford from disseminating anti-union
literature. Part of the ACLU leadership habitually took the side of labor, and
that faction supported the NLRB's action. But part of the ACLU supported Ford's
right to free speech. ACLU leader Arthur Garfield Hays proposed a compromise
(supporting the auto workers union, yet also endorsing Ford's right to express
personal opinions), but the schism highlighted a deeper divide that would
become more prominent in the years to come. The ACLU's support of the NRLB was
a major development for the ACLU, because it marked the first time it accepted
that a government agency could be responsible for upholding civil liberties.
Until 1937, the ACLU felt that civil rights were best upheld by citizens and
private organizations. Some factions in the ACLU proposed new directions for
the organization. In the late 1930s, some local affiliates proposed shifting
their emphasis from civil liberties appellate actions, to becoming a legal aid
society, centered on store front offices in low income neighborhoods. The ACLU
directors rejected that proposal. Other ACLU members wanted the ACLU to shift
focus into the political arena, and to be more willing to compromise their
ideals in order to strike deals with politicians. This initiative was also
rejected by the ACLU leadership. Jehovah's Witnesses. The ACLU's support of
defendants with unpopular, sometimes extreme, viewpoints have produced many
landmark court cases and established new civil liberties. One such defendant
was the Jehovah's Witnesses, who were involved in a large number of Supreme
Court cases. Cases that the ACLU supported included "Lovell v. Griffin" (which
struck down a city ordinance required a permit before a person could distribute
"literature of any kind"); "Martin v. Struthers" (struck down an ordinance
prohibiting door-to-door canvassing); and "Cantwell v. Connecticut" (which
reversed the conviction of a Witness that was reciting offensive speech on a
street corner). The most important cases involved statutes requiring flag
salutes. The Jehovah's Witnesses felt that saluting a flag was contrary to
their religious beliefs. Two children were convicted in 1938 of not saluting
the flag. The ACLU supported their appeal to the Supreme Court, but the court
affirmed the conviction, in 1940. But three years later, in "West Virginia
State Board of Education v. Barnette", the Supreme court reversed itself and
wrote "If there is any fixed star in our constitutional constellation, it is
that no official, high or petty, can prescribe what shall be orthodox in
politics, nationalism, religion, or other matters of opinion or force citizens
to confess by word or act their faith therein." To underscore its decision, the
Supreme Court announced it on Flag Day. Communism and totalitarianism. The rise
of totalitarianism in Germany, Russia, and Italy during World War II had a
tremendous impact on the civil liberties movement. On the one hand, the
oppression of the totalitarian states put into sharp relief the virtue of
freedom of speech and association in the United States; on the other hand, they
prompted an anti-communist hysteria in America which eroded many civil
liberties. The ACLU leadership was divided over whether or not to defend pro-
Nazi speech in the United States: pro-labor elements within the ACLU were
hostile towards Nazism and fascism, and objected when the ACLU defended Nazis.
Several states passed laws outlawing the hate speech directed at ethnic groups.
The first person arrested under New Jersey's 1935 hate speech law was a
Jehovah's Witness who was charged with disseminating anti-Catholic literature.
The ACLU defended the Jehovah's Witnesses, and the charges were dropped. The
ACLU proceeded to defend numerous pro-Nazi groups, defending their rights to
free speech and free association. In the late 1930s, the ACLU allied itself
with the Popular Front, a coalition of liberal organizations coordinated by the
United States Communist Party. The ACLU benefited because affiliates from the
Popular Front could often fight local civil rights battles much more
effectively than the New York-based ACLU. The association with the Communist
Party led to accusations that the ACLU was a "communist front", particularly
because Harry F. Ward was both chairman of the ACLU and chairman of the
American League Against War and Fascism, a communist organization. The House
Unamerican Activities Committee (HUAC) was created in 1938 to uncover sedition
and treason within the United States. When witnesses testified at its hearings,
the ACLU was mentioned several times, leading the HUAC to mention the ACLU
prominently in its 1939 report. This damaged the ACLU's reputation severely,
even though the report said that it could not "definitely state whether or not"
the ACLU was a communist organization. While the ACLU rushed to defend its
image against allegations of being a communist front, it also worked to protect
witnesses who were being harassed by the HUAC. The ACLU was one of the few
organizations to protest (unsuccessfully) against passage of the Smith Act in
1940, which would later be used to imprison many persons who supported
Communism. The ACLU defended many persons who were prosecuted under the Smith
Act, including labor leader Harry Bridges. ACLU leadership was split on whether
to purge its leadership of communists. Norman Thomas, John Haynes Holmes, and
Morris Ernst were anti-communists who wanted to distance the ACLU from
communism; opposing them were Harry Ward, Corliss Lamont and Elizabeth Flynn
who rejected any political test for ACLU leadership. A bitter struggle ensued
throughout 1939, and the anti-communists prevailed in February 1940, when the
board voted to prohibit anyone who supported totalitarianism from ACLU
leadership roles. Chairman Harry Ward immediately resigned, andfollowing a
contentious six hour debatelegendary activist Elizabeth Flynn was voted off the
ACLU's board. The 1940 resolution was a disaster for the ACLU, and considered
by many to be a betrayal of its fundamental principles. The resolution was
rescinded in 1968, and Flynn was posthumously reinstated to the ACLU in 1970.
Mid-century. World War II. When World War II engulfed the United States, the
Bill of Rights was enshrined as a hallowed document, and numerous organizations
defended civil liberties. Chicago and New York proclaimed "Civil Rights" weeks,
and President Franklin Delano Roosevelt announced a national Bill of Rights
day. Eleanor Roosevelt was the keynote speaker at the 1939 ACLU convention. In
spite of this newfound respect for civil rights, Americans were becoming
adamantly anti-communist, and believed that excluding communists from American
society was an essential step to preserve democracy. Contrasted with World War
I, there was relatively little violation of civil liberties during World War
II. President Roosevelt was a strong supporter of civil liberties, butmore
importantlythere were few anti-war activists during World War II. The most
significant civil rights issue during the war was the internment of Japanese-
Americans. Two months after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, Roosevelt
authorized the detention of all Japanese Americans in internment camps. In
addition to encompassing Japanese citizens, it also swept up American citizens
of Japanese ancestry. The ACLU immediately protested to Roosevelt, comparing
the evacuations to Nazi concentration camps. Not all ACLU leaders wanted to
defend the Japanese Americans: Roosevelt loyalists such as Morris Ernst wanted
to support Roosevelt's war effort, but pacifists such as Baldwin and Norman
Thomas felt that the Japanese-Americans needed individual due process hearings
before they were imprisoned. The ACLU was the only major organization that
objected to the internment plan, and their position was very unpopular. ACLU
attorney A. L. Wirin lost private clients because of his defense of Japanese-
Americans. The ACLU wanted a test case to take to court, but they had a
difficult time finding a Japanese-American who would violate the internment
order: of the 120,000 Japanese-Americans affected by the order, only 12
disobeyed; the cases of four of those resisters eventually made it to the
Supreme Court. The ACLU managed two of those cases. In early 1943, the Supreme
court, in "Hirabayashi v. United States", upheld the government's right to
intern the Japanese-Americans. In late 1944, the second case, "Korematsu v.
United States", also upheld the government's right to relocate the Japanese-
Americans. Their convictions were later overturned in the 1980s. Although the
ACLU defended the Japanese-Americans, it was more reluctant to defend anti-war
protesters. A majority of the board passed a resolution in 1942 which declared
the ACLU unwilling to defend anyone who interfered with the United States' war
effort. When the war ended in 1945, the ACLU was 25 years old, and had
accumulated an impressive set of legal victories. President Harry S. Truman
sent a congratulatory telegram to the ACLU on the occasion of their 25th
anniversary. American attitudes had changed since World War I, and dissent by
minorities was tolerated with more willingness. The Bill of Rights was more
respected, and minority rights were becoming more commonly championed. During
their 1945 annual conference, the ACLU leaders composed a list of important
civil rights issues to focus on in the future, and the list included racial
discrimination and separation of church and state. The ACLU supported the
African-American defendants in "Shelley v. Kraemer", when they tried to occupy
a house they had purchased in a neighborhood which had racially restrictive
housing covenants. The African-American purchasers won the case in 1945. Cold
war era. Anti-communist sentiment gripped the United States during the Cold War
beginning in 1946. Federal investigations caused many persons with communist or
left-leaning affiliations to lose their jobs, become blacklisted, or be jailed.
During the Cold War, although the United States collectively ignored the civil
rights of communists, other civil liberties—such as due process in law and
separation of church and state—continued to be reinforced and even expanded.
The ACLU was internally divided when it purged communists from its leadership
in 1940, and that ambivalence continued as it decided whether to defend alleged
communists during the late 1940s. Some ACLU leaders were anti-communist, and
felt that the ACLU should not defend any victims. Some ACLU leaders felt that
communists were entitled to free speech protections, and the ACLU should defend
them. Other ACLU leaders were uncertain about the threat posed by communists,
and tried to establish a compromise between the two extremes. This ambivalent
state of affairs would last until 1954, when the civil liberties faction
prevailed, leading to the resignation of most of the anti-communist leaders. In
1947, president Truman issued Executive Order 9835, which created the Federal
Loyalty Program. This program authorized the Attorney General to create a list
of organizations which were deemed to be subversive. Any association with these
programs was ground for barring the person from employment. Listed
organizations were not notified that they were being considered for the list,
nor did they have an opportunity to present counterarguments; nor did the
government divulge any factual basis for inclusion in the list. Although ACLU
leadership was divided on whether to challenge the Federal Loyalty Program,
some challenges were successfully made. Also in 1947, the House Unamerican
Activities Committee (HUAC) subpoenaed ten Hollywood directors and writers, the
"Hollywood Ten", intending to ask them to identify Communists, but the
witnesses refused to testify. All were imprisoned for contempt of Congress. The
ACLU supported the appeals of several of the artists, but lost on appeal. The
Hollywood establishment panicked after the HUAC hearings, and created a
blacklist which prohibited anyone with leftist associations from working. The
ACLU supported legal challenges to the blacklist, but those challenges failed.
The ACLU was more successful with an education effort: the 1952 report "The
Judges and the Judged", prepared at the ACLU's direction in response to the
blacklisting of actress Jean Muir, described the unfair and unethical actions
behind the blacklisting process, and it helped gradually turn public opinion
against McCarthyism. The federal government took direct aim at the U. S.
communist party in 1948 when it indicted its top twelve leaders in the Foley
Square trial. The case hinged on whether or not mere membership in a
totalitarian political party was sufficient to conclude that members advocated
the overthrow of the United States government. The ACLU chose to not represent
any of the defendants, and they were all found guilty and sentenced to three to
five years in prison. Their defense attorneys were all cited for contempt, went
to prison and were disbarred. When the government indicted additional party
members, the defendants could not find attorneys to represent them. Communists
protested outside the courthouse, and a bill to outlaw picketing of courthouses
was introduced in Congress, and the ACLU supported the anti-picketing law. The
ACLU, in a change of heart, supported the party leaders during their appeal
process. The Supreme Court upheld the convictions in the Dennis v. United
States decision by softening the free speech requirements from a "clear and
present danger" test, to a "grave and probable" test. The ACLU issued a public
condemnation of the "Dennis" decision, and resolved to fight it. One reason for
the Supreme Court's support of cold war legislation was the 1949 deaths of
Supreme Court justices Frank Murphy and Wiley Rutledge, leaving Hugo Black and
William O. Douglas as the only remaining civil libertarians on the Court. The
"Dennis" decision paved the way for the prosecution of hundreds of other
communist party members. The ACLU supported many of the communists during their
appeals (although most of the initiative originated with local ACLU affiliates,
not the national headquarters) but most convictions were upheld. The two
California affiliates, in particular, felt the national ACLU headquarters was
not supporting civil liberties strongly enough, and they initiated more cold
war cases than the national headquarters did. The ACLU also challenged many
loyalty oath requirements across the country, but the courts upheld most of the
loyalty oath laws. California ACLU affiliates successfully challenged the
California state loyalty oath. The Supreme Court, until 1957, upheld nearly
every law which restricted the liberties of communists. The ACLU, even though
it scaled back its defense of communists during the Cold War, still came under
heavy criticism as a "front" for communism. Critics included the American
Legion, senator Joseph McCarthy, the HUAC, and the FBI. Several ACLU leaders
were sympathetic to the FBI, and as a consequence, the ACLU rarely investigated
any of the many complaints about the FBI's abuse of power during the Cold War.
Organizational change. In 1950, the ACLU board of directors asked executive
director Baldwin to resign, feeling that he lacked the organizational skills to
lead the 9,000 (and growing) member organization. Baldwin objected, but a
majority of the board elected to remove him from the position, and he was
replaced by Patrick Murphy Malin. Under Malin’s guidance, membership tripled
to 30,000 by 1955the start of a 24 year period of continual growth leading to
275,000 members in 1974. Malin also presided over an expansion of local ACLU
affiliates. The ACLU, which had been controlled by an elite of a few dozen New
Yorkers, became more democratic in the 1950s. In 1951, the ACLU amended its
bylaws to permit the local affiliates to participate directly in voting on ACLU
policy decisions. A bi-annual conference, open to the entire membership, was
instituted in the same year, and in later decades it became a pulpit for
activist members, who suggested new directions for the ACLU, including abortion
rights, death penalty, and rights of the poor. McCarthyism era. During the
early 1950s, the ACLU continued to steer a moderate course through the Cold
War. When leftist singer Paul Robeson was denied a passport in 1950, even
though he was not a communist and not accused of any illegal acts, the ACLU
chose to not defend him. The ACLU later reversed their stance, and supported
William Worthy and Rockwell Kent in their passport confiscation cases, which
resulted in legal victories in the late 1950s. In response to communist witch-
hunts, many witnesses and employees chose to use the fifth amendment protection
against self-incrimination to avoid divulging information about their political
beliefs. Government agencies and private organizations, in response,
established polices which inferred communist party membership for anyone who
invoked the fifth amendment. The national ACLU was divided on whether to defend
employees who had been fired merely for pleading the fifth amendment, but the
New York affiliate successfully assisted teacher Harry Slochower in his Supreme
Court case which reversed his termination. The fifth amendment issue became the
catalyst for a watershed event in 1954, which finally resolved the ACLU’s
ambivalence by ousting the anti-communists from ACLU leadership. In 1953, the
anti-communists, led by Norman Thomas and James Fly, proposed a set of
resolutions that inferred guilt of persons that invoked the fifth amendment.
These resolutions were the first that fell under the ACLU’s new
organizational rules permitting local affiliates to participate in the vote;
the affiliates outvoted the national headquarters, and rejected the anti-
communist resolutions. Anti-communists leaders refused to accept the results of
the vote, and brought the issue up for discussion again at the 1954 bi-annual
convention. ACLU member Frank Graham, president of the University of North
Carolina, attacked the anti-communists with a counter-proposal, which stated
that the ACLU “stand against guilt by association, judgment by accusation,
the invasion of privacy of personal opinions and beliefs, and the confusion of
dissent with disloyalty.” The anti-communists continued to battle Graham’s
proposal, but were outnumbered by the affiliates. The anti-communists finally
gave up and departed the board of directors in late 1954 and 1955, ending an
eight-year reign of ambivalence within the ACLU leadership ranks. Thereafter,
the ACLU proceeded with firmer resolve against Cold War anti-communist
legislation. The period from the 1940 resolution (and the purge of Elizabeth
Flynn) to the 1954 resignation of the anti-communist leaders is considered by
many to be an era in which the ACLU abandoned its core principles. McCarthyism
declined in late 1954 after television journalist Edward R. Murrow and others
publicly chastised McCarthy. The controversies over the Bill of Rights that
were generated by the Cold War ushered in a new era in American Civil
liberties. In 1954 in ‘’Brown v. Board of Education’’, the Supreme
Court unanimously overturned state-sanctioned school segregation, and
thereafter a flood of civil rights victories dominated the legal landscape. The
supreme court handed the ACLU two key victories in 1957, in "Watkins v. United
States" and "Yates v. United States", both of which undermined the Smith Act
and marked the beginning of the end of communist party membership inquiries. In
1965, the Supreme Court produced some decisions, including "Lamont v.
Postmaster General" (in which the plaintiff was Corliss Lamont, a former ACLU
board member), which upheld fifth amendment protections and brought an end to
restrictions on political activity. 1960s. The decade from 1954 to 1964 was the
most successful period in the ACLU’s history. Membership rose from 30,000 to
80,000, and by 1965 it had affiliates in seventeen states. During the ACLU’s
bi-annual conference in Colorado in 1964, the Supreme Court issued rulings on
eight cases in which the ACLU was involved; the ACLU prevailed on seven of the
eight. The ACLU played a role in Supreme Court decisions reducing censorship of
literature and arts, protecting freedom of association, prohibiting racial
segregation, excluding religion from public schools, and providing due process
protection to criminal suspects. The ACLU’s success arose from changing
public attitudes: the American populous was more educated, more tolerant, and
more willing to accept unorthodox behavior. Separation of church and state.
Legal battles concerning the separation of church and state originated in laws
dating to 1938 which required religious instruction in school, or provided
state funding for religious schools. The Catholic church was a leading
proponent of such laws; and the primary opponents (the “separationists”)
were the ACLU, Americans United for Separation of Church and State, and the
American Jewish Congress. The ACLU led the challenge in the 1947 "Everson v.
Board of Education" case, in which Justice Hugo Black wrote “he First
Amendment has erected a wall between church and state…. That wall must be
kept high and impregnable.” It was not clear that the Bill of Rights forbid
state governments from supporting religious education, and strong legal
arguments were made by religious proponents, arguing that the Supreme Court
should not act as a “national school board”, and that the Constitution did
not govern social issues. However, the ACLU and other advocates of church/state
separation persuaded the Court to declare such activities unconstitutional.
Historian Samuel Walker writes that the ACLU’s “greatest impact on American
life” was its role in persuading the Supreme Court to “constitutionalize"
so many public controversies. In 1948, the ACLU prevailed in the "McCollum v.
Board of Education" case, which challenged public school religious classes
taught by clergy paid for from private funds. The ACLU also won cases
challenging schools in New Mexico which were taught by clergy and had
crucifixes hanging in the classrooms. In the 1960s, the ACLU, in response to
member insistence, turned its attention to in-class promotion of religion. In
1960, 42 percent of American schools included Bible reading. In 1962, the ACLU
published a policy statement condemning in-school prayers, observation of
religious holidays, and Bible reading. The Supreme Court concurred with the
ACLU’s position, when it prohibited New York’s in-school prayers in the
1962 "Engel v. Vitale" decision. Religious factions across the country rebelled
against the anti-prayer decisions, leading them to propose the School Prayer
Constitutional Amendment, which declared in-school prayer legal. The ACLU
participated in a lobbying effort against the amendment, and the 1966
congressional vote on the amendment failed to obtain the required two-thirds
majority. Not all cases were victories: ACLU lost cases in 1949 and 1961 which
challenged state laws requiring commercial businesses to close on Sunday, the
Christian Sabbath. The Supreme court has never overturned such laws, although
some states subsequently revoked many of the laws under pressure from
commercial interests. Freedom of expression. During the 1940s and 1950s, the
ACLU continued its battle against censorship of art and literature. In 1948,
the New York affiliate of the ACLU received mixed results from the Supreme
Court, winning the appeal of Carl Jacob Kunz, who was convicted for speaking
without a police permit, but losing the appeal of Irving Feiner who was
arrested to prevent a breach of the peace, based on his oration denouncing
president Truman and the American Legion. The ACLU lost the case of Joseph
Beahharnais, who was arrested for group libel when he distributed literature
impugning the character of African Americans. Cities across America routinely
banned movies because they were deemed to be “harmful”, “offensive”, or
“immoral”censorship which was validated by the 1915 "Mutual v. Ohio"
Supreme Court decision which held movies to be mere commerce, undeserving of
first amendment protection. The film "The Miracle" was banned in New York in
1951, at the behest of the Catholic Church, but the ACLU supported the film’s
distributor in an appeal of the ban, and won a major victory in the 1952
decision "Joseph Burstyn, Inc v. Wilson". The Catholic Church led efforts
throughout the 1950s attempting to persuade local prosecutors to ban various
books and movies, leading to conflict with the ACLU when the ACLU published it
statement condemning the church’s tactics. Further legal actions by the ACLU
successfully defended films such as "M" and "la Ronde", leading the eventual
dismantling of movie censorship. Hollywood continued employing self-censorship
with its own Production Code, but in 1956 the ACLU called on Hollywood to
abolish the Code. The ACLU defended beat generation artists, including Allen
Ginsburg who was prosecuted for his poem "Howl"; andin an unorthodox case the
ACLU helped a coffee house regain its restaurant license which was revoked
because its Beat customers were allegedly disturbing the peace and quiet of the
neighborhood. The ACLU lost an important press censorship case when, in 1957,
the Supreme Court upheld the obscenity conviction of publisher Samuel Roth for
distributing adult magazines. As late as 1953, books such as "Tropic of Cancer"
and "From Here to Eternity" were still banned. But public standards rapidly
became more liberal though the 1960s, and obscenity was notoriously difficult
to define, so by 1971 prosecutions for obscenity had halted. Racial
discrimination. A major aspect of civil liberties progress after World War II
was the undoing centuries of racism in federal, state, and local governments an
effort generally known as the Civil Rights Movement. Several civil liberties
organizations worked together for progress, including the National Association
for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), the ACLU, and the American
Jewish Congress. The NAACP took primary responsibility for Supreme Court cases
(often led by lead NAACP attorney Thurgood Marshall), with the ACLU focusing on
police misconduct, and supporting the NAACP with amicus briefs. The NAACP
achieved a key victory in 1950 with the "Henderson v. United States" decision
that ended segregation in interstate bus and rail transportation. In 1954, the
ACLU filed an amicus brief in the case of "Brown v. Board of Education", which
led to the ban on racial segregation in U.S. public schools. Southern states
instituted a McCarthyism-style witch-hunt against the NAACP, attempting it to
disclose membership lists. The ACLU's fight against racism was not limited to
segregation: in 1964 the ACLU provided key support to plaintiffs, primarily
lower income urban residents, in "Reynolds v. Sims", which required states to
establish the voting districts in accordance with the "one person, one vote"
principle. Police misconduct. The ACLU regularly tackled police misconduct
issues, starting with the 1932 case "Powell v. Alabama" (right to an attorney),
and including 1942's "Betts v. Brady" (right to an attorney), and 1951's
"Rochin v. California" (involuntary stomach pumping). In the late 1940s,
several ACLU local affiliates established permanent committees to address
policing issues. During the 1950s and 1960s, the ACLU was responsible for
substantially advancing the legal protections against police misconduct. The
Philadelphia affiliate was responsible for causing the City of Philadelphia, in
1958, to create the nation's first civilian police review board. In 1959, the
Illinois affiliate published the first report in the nation, "Secret Detention
by the Chicago Police", which documented unlawful detention by police. Some of
the most well known ACLU successes came in the 1960s, when the ACLU prevailed
in a string of cases limiting the power of police to gather evidence: In 1961's
"Mapp v. Ohio", the Supreme court required states to obtain a warrant before
searching a person's home. The " Gideon v. Wainwright" decision in 1963
provided legal representation to indigents. In 1964, the ACLU persuaded the
Court, in Escobedo v. Illinois, to permit suspects to have an attorney present
during questioning. And, in 1966, the "Miranda v. Arizona" decision required
police to notify suspects of their constitutional rights. Although many law
enforcement officials criticized the ACLU for expanding the rights of suspects,
police officers themselves took advantage of the ACLU. For example when the
ACLU represented New York policemen in their lawsuit which objected to searches
of their workplace lockers. In the late 1960s, civilian review boards in New
York and Philadelphia were abolished, over the ACLU’s objection. Civil
liberties revolution of the 1960s. The 1960s was a tumultuous era in the United
States, and public interest in civil liberties underwent an explosive growth.
Civil liberties actions in the 1960s were often led by young people, and often
employed tactics such as sit ins and marches. Protests were often peaceful, but
sometimes employed militant tactics. The ACLU played a central role in all
major civil liberties debates of the 1960s, including new fields such as gay
rights, prisoner's rights, abortion, rights of the poor, and the death penalty.
Membership in the ACLU increased from 52,000 at the beginning of the decade, to
104,000 in 1970. In 1960, there were affiliates in seven states, and by 1974
there were affiliates in 46 states. During the 1960s, the ACLU underwent a
major transformation tactics: it shifted emphasis from legal appeals (generally
involving amicus briefs submitted to the Supreme Court) to direct
representation of defendants when they were initially arrested. At the same
time, the ACLU transformed its style from "disengaged and elitist" to
"emotionally engaged". The ACLU published a breakthrough document in 1963,
titled "How Americans Protest", which was borne of frustration with the slow
progress in battling racism, and which endorsed aggressive, even militant
protest techniques. African-American protests in the South accelerated in the
early 1960s, and the ACLU assisted at every step. After four African-American
college students staged a sit-in in a segregated North Carolina department
store, the sit-in movement gained momentum across the United States. During
1960-61, the ACLU defended black students arrested for demonstrating in North
Carolina, Florida, and Louisiana. The ACLU also provided legal help for the
Freedom Rides in 1961, the integration of the University of Mississippi, the
1963 protests in Birmingham, Alabama, and the 1964 Freedom Summer. The NAACP
was responsible for managing most sit-in related cases that made it to the
Supreme Court, winning nearly every decision. But it fell to the ACLU and other
legal volunteer efforts to provide legal representation to hundreds of
protestorswhite and blackwho were arrested while protesting in the South. The
ACLU joined with other civil liberties groups to form the Lawyers
Constitutional Defense Committee (LCDC) which subsequently provided legal
representation to many of the protesters. The ACLU provided the majority of the
funding for the LCDC. In 1964, the ACLU opened up a major office in Atlanta,
Georgia, dedicated to serving Southern issues. Much of the ACLU's progress in
the South was due to Charles Morgan, Jr., the charismatic leader of the Atlanta
office. He was responsible for desegregating juries (Whitus v. Georgia),
desegregating prisons ("Lee v. Washington"), and reforming election laws. The
ACLU's southern office also defended African-American congressman Julian Bond
in "Bond v. Floyd", when the Georgia congress refused to formally induct Bond
into the legislature. Another widely publicized case defended by Morgan was
that of Army doctor Howard Levy, who was convicted of refusing to train Green
Berets. Despite raising the defense that the Green Berets were committing war
crimes in Vietnam, Levy lost on appeal in "Parker v. Levy", 417 U.S. 733
(1974). In 1969, the ACLU won a major victory for free speech, when it defended
Dick Gregory after he was arrested for peacefully protesting against the mayor
of Chicago. The court ruled in "Gregory v. Chicago" that a speaker cannot be
arrested for disturbing the peace when the hostility is initiated by someone in
the audience, as that would amount to a "heckler's veto". Vietnam war. The ACLU
was at the center of several legal aspects of the Vietnam war: defending draft
resisters, challenging the constitutionality of the war, the potential
impeachment of Richard Nixon, and the use of national security concerns to
preemptively censor newspapers. David J. Miller was the first person prosecuted
for burning his draft card. The New York affiliate of the ACLU appealed his
1965 conviction (367 F.2d 72: "United States of America v. David J. Miller",
1966), but the Supreme Court refused to hear the appeal. Two years later, the
Massachusetts affiliate took the card-burning case of David O’Brien to the
Supreme court, arguing that the act of burning was a form of symbolic speech,
but the Supreme Court upheld the conviction in "United States v. O'Brien", 391
US 367 (1968). Thirteen year old Junior High student Mary Tinker wore a black
armband to school in 1965 to object to the war, and was suspended from school.
The ACLU appealed her case to the supreme court and won a victory in "Tinker v.
Des Moines". This critical case established that the government may not
establish “enclaves” such as schools or prisons where all rights are
forfeit. The ACLU defended Sydney Street, who was arrested for burning an
American flag to protest the reported assassination of civil rights leader
James Meredith. In the "Street v. New York" decision, the court agreed with the
ACLU that encouraging the country to abandon one of its national symbols was
constitutionally protected form of expression. The ACLU successfully defended
Paul Cohen, who was arrested for wearing a jacket with the words “fuck the
draft” on its back, while he walked through the Los Angeles courthouse. The
Supreme Court, in "Cohen v. California", held that the vulgarity of the wording
was essential to convey the intensity of the message. Non-war related free
speech rights were also advanced during the Vietnam war era: in 1969, the ACLU
defended a Ku Klux Klan member who advocated long-term violence against the
government, and the Supreme Court concurred with the ACLU's argument in the
landmark decision "Brandenburg v. Ohio", which held that only speech which
advocated "imminent" violence could be outlawed. A major crisis gripped the
ACLU in 1968 when a debate erupted over whether to defend Benjamin Spock and
the Boston Five against federal charges that they encouraged draftees to avoid
the draft. The ACLU board was deeply split over whether to defend the
activists: half the board harbored anti-war sentiments, and felt that the ACLU
should lend its resources to the cause of the Boston Five. The other half of
the board believed that civil liberties were not at stake, and the ACLU would
be taking a political stance. Behind the debate was the longstanding ACLU
tradition that it was politically impartial, and provided legal advice without
regard to the political views of the defendants. The board finally agreed to a
compromise solution that permitted the ACLU to defend the anti-war activists,
without endorsing the activist's political views. Some critics of the ACLU
suggest that the ACLU became a partisan political organization following the
Spock case. After the Kent State shootings in 1970, ACLU leaders took another
step towards politics by passing a resolution condemning the Vietnam war. The
resolution was based in a variety of legal arguments, including civil liberties
violations and a claim that the war was illegal. Also in 1968, the ACLU held an
internal symposium to discuss its dual roles: providing "direct" legal support
(defense for accused in their initial trial, benefiting only the individual
defendant), and appellate support (providing amicus briefs during the appeal
process, to establish widespread legal precedent). Historically, the ACLU was
known for its appellate work which led to landmark Supreme Court decisions, but
by 1968, 90% of the ACLU's legal activities involved direct representation. The
symposium concluded that both roles were valid for the ACLU. 1970s and 1980s.
Watergate era. The ACLU supported "The New York Times" in its 1971 suit against
the government, requesting permission to publish the Pentagon papers. The court
upheld the "Times" and ACLU in the "New York Times Co. v. United States"
ruling, which held that the government could not preemptively prohibit the
publication of classified information: the government had to wait until after
it was published to take action. As the Watergate saga unfolded, the ACLU
became the first national organization to call for Nixon's impeachment. This,
following the resolution opposing the Vietnam war, was a second major decision
that caused critics of the ACLU, particularly conservatives, to claim that the
ACLU had evolved into a liberal political organization. Enclaves and new civil
liberties. The decade from 1965 to 1975 saw an expansion of the field of civil
liberties. Administratively, the ACLU responded by appointing Aryeh Neier to
take over from Pemberton as Executive Director in 1970. Neier embarked on an
ambitious program to expand the ACLU: he created the ACLU Foundation to raise
funds, and he created several new programs to focus the ACLU's legal efforts.
By 1974, ACLU membership had reached 275,000. During those years, the ACLU led
the way in expanding legal rights in three directions: new rights for persons
within government-run "enclaves", new rights for victim groups, and privacy
rights for mainstream citizens. At the same time, the organization grew
substantially. The ACLU helped develop the field of constitutional law that
governs "enclaves", which are groups of persons that live in conditions under
government control. Enclaves include mental hospital patients, members of the
military, and prisoners, and students (while at school). The term enclave
originated with Supreme Court justice Abe Fortas's use of the phrase "schools
may not be enclaves of totalitarianism" in the "Tinker v. Des Moines" decision.
The ACLU initiated the legal field of student's rights with the "Tinker v. Des
Moines" case, and expanded it with cases such as "Goss v. Lopez" which required
schools to provide students an opportunity to appeal suspensions. As early as
1945, the ACLU had taken a stand to protect the rights of the mentally ill,
when it drafted a model statute governing mental commitments. In the 1960s, the
ACLU opposed involuntary commitments, unless it could be demonstrated that the
person was a danger to himself or the community. In the landmark 1975 "O'Connor
v. Donaldson" decision the ACLU represented a non-violent mental health patient
who had been confined against his will for 15 years, and persuaded the Supreme
Court to rule such involuntary confinements illegal. Prior to 1960, prisoners
had virtually no recourse to the court system, because courts considered
prisoners to have no civil rights. That changed in the late 1950s, when the
ACLU began representing prisoners that were subject to police brutality, or
deprived of religious reading material. In 1968, the ACLU successfully sued to
desegregate the Alabama prison system; and in 1969, the New York affiliate
adopted a project to represent prisoners in New York prisons. Private attorney
Phil Hirschkop discovered degrading conditions in Virginia prisons following
the Virginia State Penitentiary strike, and won an important victory in 1971's
"Landman v. Royster" which prohibited Virginia from treating prisoners in
inhumane ways. In 1972, the ACLU consolidated several prison rights efforts
across the nation and created the National Prison Project. The ACLU's efforts
led to landmark cases such as "Ruiz v. Estelle" (requiring reform of the Texas
prison system) and in 1996 U.S. Congress enacted the Prison Litigation Reform
Act (PLRA) which codified prisoners' rights. Victim groups. The ACLU, during
the 1960s and 1970s, expanded its scope to include what it referred to as
"victim groups", namely women, the poor, and homosexuals. Heeding the call of
female members, the ACLU endorsed the Equal Rights Amendment in 1970 and
created the Women's Rights Project in 1971. The Women's Rights Project
dominated the legal field, handling more than twice as many cases as the
National Organization for Women, including breakthrough cases such as "Reed v.
Reed", "Frontiero v. Richardson", and " Taylor v. Louisiana". ACLU leader
Harriet Pilpel raised the issue of the rights of homosexuals in 1964, and two
years later the ACLU formally endorsed gay rights. In 1973 the ACLU created the
Sexual Privacy Project (later the Gay and Lesbian Rights Project) which
combated discrimination against homosexuals. Rights of the poor was another
area that was expanded by the ACLU. In 1966 and again in 1968, activists within
the ACLU encouraged the organization to adopt a policy overhauling the welfare
system, and guaranteeing low-income families a baseline income; but the ACLU
board did not approve the proposals. The ACLU played a key role in the 1968
"King v. Smith" decision, where the Supreme Court ruled that welfare benefits
for children could not be denied by a state simply because the mother cohabited
with a boyfriend. Privacy. The right to privacy is not explicitly identified in
the U.S. Constitution, but the ACLU led the charge to establish such rights in
the indecisive 1961 "Poe v. Ullman" case, which addressed a state statute
outlawing contraception. The issue arose again in "Griswold v. Connecticut"
(1965), and this time the Supreme Court adopted the ACLUs position, and
formally declared a right to privacy. The New York affiliate of the ACLU pushed
to eliminate anti-abortion laws starting in 1964, a year before "Griswold" was
decided, and in 1967 the ACLU itself formally adopted the right to abortion as
a policy. The ACLU led the defense in "United States v. Vuitch" which expanded
the right of physicians to determine when abortions were necessary. These
efforts culminated in one of the most controversial Supreme Court decisions of
all time: "Roe v. Wade", which legalized abortion in the first three months of
pregnancy. The ACLU successfully argued against state bans on interracial
marriage, in the case of "Loving v. Virginia" (1967). Related to privacy, the
ACLU engaged in several battles to ensure that government records about
individuals were kept private, and to give individuals the right to review
their records. The ACLU supported several measures, including the 1970 Fair
Credit Reporting Act required credit agencies to divulge credit information to
individuals; the 1973 Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act, which provided
students the right to access their records; and the 1974 Privacy Act which
prevented the federal government from disclosing personal information without
good cause. Allegations of bias. In the early 1970s, conservatives and
libertarians began to criticize the ACLU for being too political and too
liberal. Legal scholar Joseph W. Bishop wrote that the ACLU's trend to
partisanship started with its defense of Dr. Spock's anti-war protests. Critics
also blamed the ACLU for encouraging the Supreme Court to embrace judicial
activism. Critics claimed that the ACLU's support of controversial decisions
like "Roe v. Wade" and "Griswold v. Connecticut" violated the intention of the
authors of the Bill of Rights. The ACLU became an issue in the 1988
presidential campaign, when Republican candidate George H. W. Bush accused
Democratic candidate Michael Dukakis (a member of the ACLU) of being a "card
carrying member of the ACLU". The Skokie case. It is the policy of the ACLU to
support the civil liberties of defendants regardless of their ideological
stance. The ACLU takes pride in defending individuals with unpopular or bigoted
viewpoints, such as George Wallace, George Lincoln Rockwell, and KKK members.
The ACLU has defended American Nazis many times, and their actions often
brought protests, particularly from American Jews. In 1977, a small group of
American Nazis, led by Frank Collin, applied to the town of Skokie, Illinois
for permission to hold a demonstration in the town park. Skokie at the time had
a majority population of Jews, totaling 40,000 of 70,000 citizens, some of whom
were survivors of Nazi concentration camps. Skokie refused to grant permission,
and an Illinois judge supported Skokie and prohibited the demonstration. Skokie
immediately passed three ordinances aimed at preventing the group from meeting
in Skokie. The ACLU assisted Collins and appealed to federal court. The appeal
dragged on for a year, and the ACLU eventually prevailed in "Smith v. Collin",
447 F.Supp. 676.The federal appeal case was "Smith v. Collin" 447 F.Supp. 676.
See also Supreme Court: "Smith v. Collin", 439 U.S. 916 (1978), and The Skokie
case was heavily publicized across America, partially because Jewish groups
such as the Jewish Defense League and Anti Defamation League strenuously
objected to the demonstration, leading many members of the ACLU to cancel their
memberships. The Illinois affiliate of the ACLU lost about 25% of its
membership and nearly one-third of its budget. The financial strain from the
controversy led to layoffs at local chapters. After the membership crisis died
down, the ACLU sent out a fund-raising appeal which explained their rationale
for the Skokie case, and raised over $500,000 ($ in dollars). Reagan era. The
election of Ronald Reagan as president in 1981 ushered in an eight-year period
of conservative leadership in the U.S. government. Under his leadership, the
government pushed a conservative social agenda, including outlawing abortion,
inserting prayer in schools, banning pornography, and resisting gay rights.
Fifty years after the Scopes trial, the ACLU found itself fighting another
classroom case: the Arkansas 1981 creationism statute, which required schools
to teach the biblical account of creation as a scientific alternative to
evolution. The ACLU won the case in the "McLean v. Arkansas" decision."McLean
v. Arkansas Board of Education", 529 F. Supp. 1255 (E.D. Ark. 1982)
("transcription" by Clark Dorman, Jan. 30, 1996, at TalkOrigins). In 1982, the
ACLU became involved in a case involving the distribution of child pornography
("New York v. Ferber"). In an amicus brief, the ACLU argued that child
pornography that violates the three prong obscenity test should be outlawed,
but that the law in question was overly restrictive because it outlawed
artistic displays and otherwise non-obscene material. The court did not adopt
the ACLU's position. During the 1988 presidential election: then-Vice President
George H. W. Bush noted that his opponent Michael Dukakis had described himself
as a "card-carrying member of the ACLU" and used that as evidence that Dukakis
was "a strong, passionate liberal" and "out of the mainstream." The phrase
subsequently was used by the organization in an advertising campaign. In 1990
the ACLU defended Lieutenant Colonel Oliver North, whose conviction was tainted
by coerced testimonya violation of his fifth amendment rightsduring the
Iran–Contra affair, where Oliver North was involved in illegal weapons sales
to Iran in order to illegally fund the Contra guerillas . Modern era. 1990 to
2000. In 1997, ruling unanimously in the case of "Reno v. American Civil
Liberties Union", the Supreme Court voted down anti-indecency provisions of the
Communications Decency Act (the CDA), finding they violated the freedom of
speech provisions of the First Amendment. In their decision, the Supreme Court
held that the CDA's "use of the undefined terms 'indecent' and 'patently
offensive' will provoke uncertainty among speakers about how the two standards
relate to each other and just what they mean." The ACLU's position on spam is
considered controversial by a broad cross-section of political points of view.
In 2000, Marvin Johnson, a legislative counsel for the ACLU, stated that
proposed anti-spam legislation infringed on free speech by denying anonymity
and by forcing spam to be labeled as such: "Standardized labeling is compelled
speech." He also stated, "It's relatively simple to click and delete." The
debate found the ACLU joining with the Direct Marketing Association and the
Center for Democracy and Technology in criticizing a bipartisan bill in the
House of Representatives in 2000. As early as 1997 the ACLU had taken a strong
position that nearly all spam legislation was improper, although it has
supported "opt-out" requirements in some cases. The ACLU opposed the 2003 CAN-
SPAM act suggesting that it could have a chilling effect on speech in
cyberspace. In November 2000, 15 African-American residents of Hearne, Texas,
were indicted on drug charges after being arrested in a series of "drug
sweeps". The ACLU filed a class action lawsuit, "Kelly v. Paschall", on their
behalf, alleging that the arrests were unlawful. The ACLU contended that 15
percent of Hearne's male African American population aged 18 to 34 were
arrested based on the "uncorroborated word of a single unreliable confidential
informant coerced by police to make cases." On May 11, 2005, the ACLU and
Robertson County announced a confidential settlement of the lawsuit, an outcome
which "both sides stated that they were satisfied with." The District Attorney
dismissed the charges against the plaintiffs of the suit. The 2009 film
American Violet depicts this case. In the 2000, the ACLU's Massachusetts
affiliate represented the North American Man Boy Love Association (NAMBLA), on
first amendment grounds, in the "Curley v. NAMBLA" wrongful death civil suit
that was based solely on the fact that a man who raped and murdered a child had
visited the NAMBLA website. Also In 2000, the ACLU lost the "Boy Scouts of
America v. Dale" case, which had asked the Supreme Court to require the Boy
Scouts of America to drop their policy of prohibiting homosexuals from becoming
Boy Scout leaders. Twenty first century. In March 2004, the ACLU, along with
Lambda Legal and the National Center for Lesbian Rights, sued the state of
California on behalf of 6 same-sex couples who were denied marriage licenses.
That case, "Woo v. Lockyer", was eventually consolidated into "In re Marriage
Cases", the California Supreme Court case which led to same-sex marriage being
available in that state from June 16, 2008 until Proposition 8 was passed on
November 4, 2008. During the 2004 trial regarding allegations of Rush
Limbaugh's drug abuse, the ACLU argued that his privacy should not have been
compromised by allowing law enforcement examination of his medical records. In
June 2004, the school district in Dover, Pennsylvania required that its high
school biology students listen to a statement which asserted that the theory of
evolution is not fact and mentioning intelligent design as an alternative
theory. Several parents called the ACLU to complain, because they believed that
the school was promoting a religious idea in the classroom and violating the
Establishment Clause of the First Amendment. The ACLU, joined by Americans
United for Separation of Church and State, represented the parents in a lawsuit
against the school district. After a lengthy trial, Judge John E. Jones III
ruled in favor of the parents in the Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District
decision, finding that intelligent design is not science and permanently
forbidding the Dover school system from teaching intelligent design in science
classes. In April, 2006, Edward Jones and the ACLU sued the City of Los
Angeles, on behalf of Robert Lee Purrie and five other homeless, for the city's
violation of the 8th and 14th Amendments to the U.S. Constitution, and Article
I, sections 7 and 17 of the California Constitution (supporting due process and
equal protection, and prohibiting cruel and unusual punishment). The Court
rules in favor of the ACLU, stating that, "the LAPD cannot arrest people for
sitting, lying, or sleeping on public sidewalks in Skid Row." Enforcement of
section 41.18(d) 24 hours a day against persons who have nowhere else to sit,
lie, or sleep, other than on public streets and sidewalks, is breaking these
Amendments. The Court said that the anti-camping ordinance is "one of the most
restrictive municipal laws regulating public spaces in the United States."
Jones and the ACLU wanted a compromise in which the L.A.P.D. is barred from
enforcing section 41.18(d) (arrest, seizure, and imprisonment) in Skid Row
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:30 a.m. The compromise plan permits the
homeless to sleep on the sidewalk, provided they are not "within 10 feet of any
business or residential entrance" and only between these hours. One of the
motivations for the compromise is the shortage of space in the prison system.
Downtown development business interests and the Central City Association (CCA)
were against the compromise. Police Chief William Bratton said the case had
slowed the police effort to fight crime and clean up skid row, and that when he
was allowed to clean up skid row, real estate profitted. On Sep 20, 2006, Los
Angeles City Council voted to reject the compromise. On October 3, 2006, police
arrest skid row's transients for sleeping on the streets for the first time in
months. In 2006, the ACLU of Washington State joined with a pro-gun rights
organization, the Second Amendment Foundation, and prevailed in a lawsuit
against the North Central Regional Library District (NCRL) in Washington for
its policy of refusing to disable restrictions upon an adult patron's request.
Library patrons attempting to access pro-gun web sites were blocked, and the
library refused to remove the blocks. In 2012, the ACLU sued the same library
system for refusing to temporarily, at the request of an adult patron, disable
internet filters which blocked access to Google Images. In 2006 the ACLU
challenged a Missouri state law that prohibited picketing outside of veterans'
funerals. The suit was filed in support of the Westboro Baptist Church and
Shirley Phelps-Roper, who were threatened for arrest. The Westboro Baptist
Church is infamous for their picket signs that contain messages such as, "God
Hates Fags," "Thank God for Dead Soldiers" and "Thank God for 9/11." The ACLU
issued a statement calling the legislation a "law that infringes on Shirley
Phelps-Roper's rights to religious liberty and free speech." The ACLU prevailed
in the lawsuit. In 2008, the ACLU was part of a consortium of legal advocates,
including Lambda Legal and the National Center for Lesbian Rights, that
challenged California's Proposition 8, which declared same-sex marriages
illegal. The ACLU and its allies prevailed. In light of the Supreme Court's
decision recognizing that the Constitution protects an individual Right to Bear
Arms, ACLU of Nevada took a position of supporting "the individual's right to
bear arms subject to constitutionally permissible regulations" and pledged to
"defend this right as it defends other constitutional rights." Since 2008, The
ACLU has increasingly assisted gun owners recover firearms that have been
seized illegally by law enforcement. In 2009, the ACLU filed an amicus brief in
"Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission", arguing that the Bipartisan
Campaign Reform Act of 2002 violated the First Amendment right to free speech
by curtailing political speech. This stance on the landmark "Citizens United"
case caused considerable disagreement within the organization, resulting in a
discussion about its future stance during a quarterly board meeting in 2010. On
March 27, 2012, the ACLU reaffirmed its stance in support of the Supreme
Court's "Citizens United" ruling, at the same time voicing support for expanded
public financing of election campaigns and stating the organization would
firmly oppose any future constitutional amendment limiting free speech. Anti-
terrorism issues. After the September 11, 2001 attacks, the federal government
instituted a broad range of new measures to combat terrorism, including the
passage of the USA PATRIOT Act. The ACLU challenged many of the measures,
claiming that they violated rights regarding due process, privacy, illegal
searches, and cruel and unusual punishment. An ACLU policy statement states:
During the ensuing debate regarding the proper balance of civil liberties and
security, the membership of the ACLU increased by 20%, bringing the group's
total enrollment to 330,000. The growth continued, and by August 2008 ACLU
membership was greater than 500,000. It remained at that level through 2011.
The ACLU has been a vocal opponent of the USA PATRIOT Act of 2001, the PATRIOT
2 Act of 2003, and associated legislation made in response to the threat of
domestic terrorism. In response to a requirement of the USA PATRIOT Act, the
ACLU withdrew from the Combined Federal Campaign charity drive. The campaign
imposed a requirement that ACLU employees must be checked against a federal
anti-terrorism watch list. The ACLU has stated that it would "reject $500,000
in contributions from private individuals rather than submit to a government
'blacklist' policy." In 2004, the ACLU sued the federal government in "American
Civil Liberties Union v. Ashcroft (2004)" on behalf of Nicholas Merrill, owner
of an Internet Service Provider. Under the provisions of the PATRIOT act, the
government had issued National Security Letters to Merrill to compel him to
provide private internet access information from some of his customers. In
addition, the government placed a gag order on Merrill, forbidding him from
discussing the matter with anyone. In January 2006, the ACLU filed a lawsuit,
"ACLU v. NSA", in a federal district court in Michigan, challenging government
spying in the NSA warrantless surveillance controversy. On August 17, 2006,
that court ruled that the warrantless wiretapping program is unconstitutional
and ordered it ended immediately. However, the order was stayed pending an
appeal. The Bush administration did suspend the program while the appeal was
being heard. In February 2008, the U.S. Supreme Court turned down an appeal
from the ACLU to let it pursue a lawsuit against the program that began shortly
after the Sept. 11 terror attacks. The ACLU and other organizations also filed
separate lawsuits around the country against telecommunications companies. The
ACLU filed a lawsuit in Illinois ("Terkel v. AT&T") which was dismissed because
of the State Secrets Privilege and two others in California requesting
injunctions against AT&T and Verizon. On August 10, 2006, the lawsuits against
the telecommunications companies were transferred to a federal judge in San
Francisco. The ACLU represents a Muslim-American who was detained but never
accused of a crime in "Al-Kidd v Ashcroft", a civil suit against former
Attorney General John Ashcroft. In January 2010, the American military released
the names of 645 detainees held at the Bagram Theater Internment Facility in
Afghanistan, modifying its long-held position against publicizing such
information. This list was prompted by a Freedom of Information Act lawsuit
filed in September 2009 by the ACLU, whose lawyers had also requested detailed
information about conditions, rules and regulations.
