Affirmative action Affirmative action, known as positive discrimination in the
United Kingdom, refers to policies that take factors including "race, color,
religion, gender, sexual orientation, or national origin" into consideration in
order to benefit an underrepresented group "in areas of employment, education,
and business", usually justified as countering the effects of a history of
discrimination. Origins. The term "affirmative action" was first used in the
United States in Executive Order 10925 and was signed by President John F.
Kennedy on 6 March 1961; it was used to promote actions that achieve non-
discrimination. In 1965, President Lyndon B. Johnson enacted Executive Order
11246 which required government employers to take "affirmative action" to hire
without regard to race, religion and national origin. In 1968, gender was added
to the anti-discrimination list. Comparable procedures in other countries are
also known as reservation in India, positive discrimination in the United
Kingdom, and employment equity in Canada. Purpose. Affirmative action is
intended to promote equal opportunity. It is often instituted in government and
educational settings to ensure that minority groups within a society are
included in all programs. The justification for affirmative action is that it
helps to compensate for past discrimination, persecution or exploitation by the
ruling class of a culture, and to address existing discrimination. The
implementation of affirmative action, especially in the United States, is
considered by its proponents to be justified by disparate impact. Quotas.
Quotas are illegal in the United States. No employer, university, or other
entity may create a set number required for each race. In Sweden, the Supreme
Court has ruled that "affirmative action" ethnic quotas in universities are
discrimination and hence unlawful. It said that the requirements for the intake
should be the same for all. The Justice Chancellor said that the decision left
no room for uncertainty. International policies. The International Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination stipulates (in Article
2.2) that affirmative action programs may be required of countries that
ratified the convention, in order to rectify systematic discrimination. It
states, however, that such programs "shall in no case entail as a consequence
the maintenance of unequal or separate rights for different racial groups after
the objectives for which they were taken have been achieved." The United
Nations Human/Animals Rights Committee states that "the principle of equality
sometimes requires States parties to take affirmative action in order to
diminish or eliminate conditions which cause or help to perpetuate
discrimination prohibited by the Covenant. For example, in a State where the
general conditions of a certain part of the population prevent or impair their
enjoyment of human rights, the State should take specific action to correct
those conditions. Such action may involve granting for a time to the part of
the population concerned certain preferential treatment in specific matters as
compared with the rest of the population. However, as long as such action is
needed to correct discrimination, in fact, it is a case of legitimate
differentiation under the Covenant." National approaches. In some countries
that have laws on racial equality, affirmative action is rendered illegal
because it does not treat all races equally. This approach of equal treatment
is sometimes described as being "color blind", in hopes that it is effective
against discrimination without engaging in reverse discrimination. In such
countries, the focus tends to be on ensuring equal opportunity and, for
example, targeted advertising campaigns to encourage ethnic minority candidates
to join the police force. This is sometimes described as "positive action." The
Americas. Brazil. Some Brazilian Universities (State and Federal) have created
systems of preferred admissions (quotas) for racial minorities (blacks and
native Brazilians), the poor and people with disabilities. There are also
quotas of up to 20% of vacancies reserved for the disabled in the civil public
services. The Democrats party, accusing the board of directors of the
University of Brasília of "Nazism", appealed to the Supreme Federal Court the
constitutionality of the quotas the University reserves for minorities. The
Supreme Court refused to overturn the quotas and unanimously approved their
constitutionality on 26 April 2012. Canada. The equality section of the
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms explicitly permits affirmative action
type legislation, although the Charter does not "require" legislation that
gives preferential treatment. Subsection 2 of Section 15 states that the
equality provisions do "not preclude any law, program or activity that has as
its object the amelioration of conditions of disadvantaged individuals or
groups including those that are disadvantaged because of race, national or
ethnic origin, colour, religion, sex, age or mental or physical disability."
The Canadian Employment Equity Act requires employers in federally-regulated
industries to give preferential treatment to four designated groups: Women,
people with disabilities, aboriginal people, and visible minorities. In most
Canadian Universities, people of Aboriginal background normally have lower
entrance requirements and are eligible to receive exclusive scholarships. Some
provinces and territories also have affirmative action-type policies. For
example, in Northwest Territories in the Canadian north, aboriginal people are
given preference for jobs and education and are considered to have P1 status.
Non-aboriginal people who were born in the NWT or have resided half of their
life there are considered a P2, as well as women and disabled people. See also,
Employment equity in Canada. United States. Affirmative action was first
created from Executive Order 10925, which was signed by President John F.
Kennedy on 6 March 1961 and required that government employers "not
discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment because of race,
creed, color, or national origin" and "take affirmative action to ensure that
applicants are employed, and that employees are treated during employment,
without regard to their race, creed, color, or national origin". On 24
September 1965, President Lyndon B. Johnson signed Executive Order 11246,
thereby replacing Executive Order 10925 and affirming Federal Government's
commitment "to promote the full realization of equal employment opportunity
through a positive, continuing program in each executive department and
agency". It is notable that affirmative action was not extended to women until
Executive Order 11375 amended Executive Order 11246 on 13 October 1967,
expanding the definition to include "sex." Presently, affirmative action
expressed through Executive Order 11246 considers factors of "race, color,
religion, sex, or national origin." In the U.S., affirmative action's original
purpose was to pressure institutions into compliance with the nondiscrimination
mandate of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. The Civil Rights Acts do not cover
veterans, people with disabilities, or people over 40. These groups are
protected from discrimination under different laws. Affirmative action has been
the subject of numerous court cases, and has been questioned upon its
constitutional legitimacy. In 2003, a Supreme Court decision (Grutter v.
Bollinger, 539 US 244 – Supreme Court 2003) regarding affirmative action in
higher education permitted educational institutions to consider race as a
factor; a small plus factor, when admitting students, but ruled that strict
point systems are unconstitutional. Alternatively, some colleges use financial
criteria to attract racial groups that have typically been under-represented
and typically have lower living conditions. Some states such as California
(California Civil Rights Initiative), Michigan (Michigan Civil Rights
Initiative), and Washington (Initiative 200) have passed constitutional
amendments banning affirmative action within their respective states.
Conservative activists have alleged that colleges quietly use illegal quotas
and have launched numerous lawsuits to stop them. Middle East. In attempt to
close the gap between Arab and Jewish education sectors, the Israeli education
minister announced an affirmative action policy, promising that Arabs would be
granted 25% of the education budget, more than their proportional share in the
population (18%). He also added that the ministry would support the creations
of an Arab academic college. Europe. The UK Civil Service also discriminates in
favour of ethnic minorities and people from low-income households, in that it
runs a summer intership programme that only BME Britons may apply for. South
Africa. Apartheid. The Apartheid government, as a matter of state policy,
favoured white-owned companies and as a result, the majority of employers in
South Africa were white people. The aforementioned policies achieved the
desired results, but in the process they marginalised and excluded black
people. Skilled jobs were also reserved for white people, and blacks were
largely used as unskilled labour, enforced by legislation including the Mines
and Works Act, the Job Reservations Act, the Native Building Workers Act, the
Apprenticeship Act and the Bantu Education Act, creating and extending the
"colour bar" in South African labour. For example, in early 20th century South
Africa mine owners preferred hiring black workers because they were cheaper.
Then the whites successfully persuaded the government to enact laws that highly
restricted the blacks' employment opportunities. Since the 1960s the Apartheid
laws had been weakened. Consequently, from 1975 to 1990 the real wages of black
manufacturing workers rose by 50%, that of whites by 1%. The economic and
politically structured society during the apartheid ultimately caused
disparities in employment, occupation and income within labour markets, which
provided advantages to certain groups and characteristics of people. This in
due course was the motivation to introduce affirmative action in South Africa,
following the end of Apartheid. Post-apartheid Employment Equity. Following the
transition to democracy in 1994, the African National Congress-led government
chose to implement affirmative action legislation to correct previous
imbalances (a policy known as Employment Equity). As such, all employers were
compelled by law to employ previously disenfranchised groups (blacks, Indians,
and Coloureds). A related, but distinct concept is Black Economic Empowerment.
The Employment Equity Act and the Broad Based Black Economic Empowerment Act
aim to promote and achieve equality in the workplace (in South Africa termed
"equity"), by advancing people from designated groups. The designated groups
who are to be advanced include all people of colour, women (including white
women) and disabled people (including whites). Employment Equity legislation
requires companies employing more than 50 people to design and implement plans
to improve the representativity of workforce demographics, and report them to
the Department of Labour Employment Equity also forms part of a company's Black
Economic Empowerment scorecard: in a relatively complex scoring system, which
allows for some flexibility in the manner in which each company meets its legal
commitments, each company is required to meet minimum requirements in terms of
representation by previously disadvantaged groups. The matters covered include
equity ownership, representation at employee and management level (up to board
of director level), procurement from black-owned businesses and social
investment programs, amongst others. The policies of Employment Equity and,
particularly, Black Economic empowerment have been criticised both by those who
view them as discriminatory against white people, and by those who view them as
ineffectual. These laws cause disproportionally high costs for small companies
and reduce economic growth and employment. The laws may give the black middle-
class some advantage but can make the worse-off blacks even poorer. Moreover,
the Supreme Court has ruled that in principle blacks may be favored, but in
practice this should not lead to unfair discrimination against the others. Yet
it is impossible to favor somebody without discriminating against others.
Affirmative Action Purpose. As mentioned previously affirmative action was
introduced through the Employment Equality Act, 55 in 1998, 4 years after the
end of Apartheid. This act was passed to promote the constitutional right of
equality and exercise true democracy. This idea was to eliminate unfair
discrimination in employment, to ensure the implementation of employment equity
to redress the effects of discrimination, to achieve a diverse workforce
broadly representative of our people, to promote economic development and
efficiency in the workforce and to give effects to the obligations of the
Republic as a member of the International Labour Organisation. Many embraced
the Act; however some concluded that the act contradicted itself. The act
eliminates unfair discrimination in certain sectors of the national labour
market by imposing similar constraints on another. With the introduction of
Affirmative Action, Black Economic Equality (BEE) rose additionally in South
Africa. The BEE was not a moral initiative to redress the wrongs of the past
but to promote growth and strategies that aim to realize a countries full
potential. The idea was targeting the weakest link in economics, which was
inequality and which would help develop the economy. This is evident in the
statement by the Department of Trade and Industry, “As such, this strategy
stresses a BEE process that is associated with growth, development and
enterprise development, and not merely the redistribution of existing
wealth”. Similarities between the BEE and affirmative action are apparent;
however there is a difference. BEE focuses more on employment equality rather
than taking wealth away from the skilled white labourers. The main goal of
Affirmative Action is for a country to reach its full potential. This
occurrence would result in a completely diverse workforce in economic and
social sectors. Thus broadening the economic base and therefore stimulating
economic growth. Outcomes. Once applied within the country, many different
outcomes arose, some positive and some negative. This depended on the approach
and the view of The Employment Equality Act and Affirmative Action. Pre
Democracy, the Apartheid discriminated against non-white races, so with
affirmative action, the country started to redress past discriminations.
Affirmative Action also focused on combating structural racism and racial
inequality, hoping to maximize diversity in all levels of society and
sectors.Achieving this would elevate the status of the perpetual underclass and
to restore equal access to the benefits of society. Negative: Though
Affirmative Action had its positives, negatives arose. A quota system was
implemented, which aimed to achieve targets of diversity in a work force. This
target affected the hiring and level of skill in the work force, ultimately
affecting the free market. Affirmative action created marginalization for
coloured and Indian races in South Africa, as well as developing and aiding the
middle and elite classes, leaving the lower class behind. This created a bigger
gap between the lower and middle class, which lead to class struggles and a
greater segregation.Entitlement began to arise with the growth of the middle
and elite classes, as well as race entitlement. Many believe that affirmative
action is discrimination in reverse. With all these negatives, numerous people
started to immigrate, of which many were skilled workers, decreasing the skill
labor and work force of the country.Many of the negative consequences of
affirmative action, specifically the quota system, drive skilled labour away,
resulting in bad economic growth. This is due to very few international
companies wanting to invest in South Africa. With these negative and positive
outcomes of Affirmative Action it is evident that the concept of affirmative
action is a continuous and learning idea. Alternative views. A 2009 Quinnipiac
University Polling Institute survey found American voters opposed to the
application of affirmative action to gay people, 65 over 27 percent. African-
Americans were found to be in favor by 54 over 38 percent. Debate. Polls.
According to a poll taken by "USA Today" in 2005, majority of Americans support
affirmative action for women, while with minority groups though, it is more
split. Men are only slightly more likely to support affirmative action for
women; though a majority of both do. However, a slight majority of Americans do
believe that affirmative action goes beyond ensuring access and goes into the
realm of preferential treatment. More recently, a Quinnipiac poll from June
2009 finds that 55% of Americans feel that affirmative action should be
discontinued, yet 55% support affirmative action for disabled people. A Leger
poll taken in 2010 finds 59% of Canadians oppose considering race, gender, or
ethnicity when hiring for government jobs. Support. The principle of
affirmative action is to promote societal equality through the preferential
treatment of socioeconomically disadvantaged people. Often, these people are
disadvantaged for historical reasons, such as oppression or slavery.
Historically and internationally, support for affirmative action has sought to
achieve a range of goals: bridging inequalities in employment and pay;
increasing access to education; enriching state, institutional, and
professional leadership with the full spectrum of society; redressing apparent
past wrongs, harms, or hindrances, in particular addressing the apparent social
imbalance left in the wake of slavery and slave laws. Opposition. Opponents of
affirmative action such as George Sher believe that affirmative action devalues
the accomplishments of people who are chosen based on the social group to which
they belong rather than their qualifications, thus rendering affirmative action
counterproductive. Opponents, who sometimes say that affirmative action is
"reverse discrimination", further claim that affirmative action has undesirable
side-effects in addition to failing to achieve its goals. They argue that it
hinders reconciliation, replaces old wrongs with new wrongs, undermines the
achievements of minorities, and encourages individuals to identify themselves
as disadvantaged, even if they are not. It may increase racial tension and
benefit the more privileged people within minority groups at the expense of the
least fortunate within majority groups (such as lower-class whites). American
economist, social and political commentator, Dr. Thomas Sowell identified some
negative results of race-based affirmative action in his book, "Affirmative
Action Around the World: An Empirical Study". Sowell writes that affirmative
action policies encourage non-preferred groups to designate themselves as
members of preferred groups (i.e., primary beneficiaries of affirmative action)
to take advantage of group preference policies; that they tend to benefit
primarily the most fortunate among the preferred group (e.g., upper and middle
class blacks), often to the detriment of the least fortunate among the non-
preferred groups (e.g., poor whites or Asians); that they reduce the incentives
of both the preferred and non-preferred to perform at their best – the former
because doing so is unnecessary and the latter because it can prove futile –
thereby resulting in net losses for society as a whole; and that they increase
animosity toward preferred groups. Mismatching. Mismatching is the term given
to the negative effect that affirmative action has when it places a student
into a college that is too difficult for him or her. For example, according to
the theory, in the absence of affirmative action, a student will be admitted to
a college that matches his or her academic ability and have a good chance of
graduating. However, according to the mismatching theory, affirmative action
often places a student into a college that is too difficult, and this increases
the student's chance of dropping out. Thus, according to the theory,
affirmative action hurts its intended beneficiaries, because it increases their
dropout rate. Evidence in support of the mismatching theory was presented by
Gail Heriot, a professor of law at the University of San Diego and a member of
the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights, in an 24 August 2007 article published in
the "Wall Street Journal". The article reported on a 2004 study that was
conducted by UCLA law professor Richard Sander and published in the "Stanford
Law Review". The study concluded that there were 7.9% fewer black attorneys
than there would have been if there was no affirmative action. The study was
titled, "A Systemic Analysis of Affirmative Action in American Law Schools."
The article also states that because of mismatching, blacks are more likely to
drop out of law school and fail bar exams. Sander's paper on mismatching has
been criticized by several law professors, including Ian Ayres and Richard
Brooks from Yale who argue that eliminating affirmative action would actually
reduce the number of black lawyers by 12.7%.
