American Hunters and Shooters Association The American Hunters and Shooters
Association (AHSA), founded in 2005, was a small United States-based group,
which has set itself apart from the much larger gun owner organization, the
National Rifle Association, founded in 1871, by advocating further restrictions
on 2nd Amendment rights. Critics questioned the legitimacy of the group,
including whether the membership was composed of or representative of gun
owners, or was merely a front organization for misleading political
endorsements. Description. The AHSA described itself as "... a national
grassroots organization committed to safe and responsible gun ownership" and
"... a mainstream group of hunters who are looking to belong to a gun owners
association that doesn't have a radical agenda." According to information from
a 2005 deposition, the group had fewer than 150 dues-paying individual members.
The AHSA billed itself as a moderate, common-sense advocacy organization. It
favored most restrictions on firearms, but believed that little progress will
be made until gun owners are allowed to bring their common-sense perspective to
the table. In March 2008, Brady Campaign President Paul Helmke stated that he
saw his organization's issues "as complementary to" those of the AHSA. The
National Rifle Association (NRA) and other pro-gun organizations criticized the
AHSA for its members' associations with other gun-control organizations and
gun-control legislation. NRA-ILA Executive Director Chris Cox characterized the
AHSA as "the latest front group for the anti-gun movement." Despite the
similarity in name, AHSA had no ties to the field marksmanship promoting
organization, the Hunter's Shooting Association(HSA). History. In June 2006,
Executive Director Bob Ricker formally introduced AHSA at a press conference at
the annual conference of the Outdoor Writers Association of America. Mr. Ricker
proclaimed at this conference that the NRA and other 2nd Amendment rights
organizations did not address the specific concerns of hunters - protecting
hunting lands and wildlife habitats - which led to the creation of AHSA. In
2007, President Ray Schoenke addressed the Mayors Against Illegal Guns
Coalition. As of October 19, 2010 The AHSA website has been taken down.
Endorsement of political candidates. AHSA endorsed Obama based mainly on
Obama's vote for the Disaster Recovery Personal Protection Act. Position in
D.C. v Heller (2008). AHSA joined in the amicus curiae brief of Maj. Gen. John
D. Altenburg, Jr., et al., in the Supreme Court case of D.C. v Heller, arguing
that the individual right of the people to keep and bear arms enhances the
collective goal of supporting national defense, and that the dichotomy between
individual right argued by Heller and collective militia right argued by D.C.
is false: the Second Amendment protects both.
