Anti-Irish sentiment Anti-Irish sentiment may refer to or include persecution,
discrimination, hatred or fear of the Irish as an ethnic or national group,
whether directed against Ireland in general or against Irish immigrants and
their descendants in the Irish diaspora. It is traditionally rooted in the
medieval period, and is also evidenced in Irish immigration to other countries
like the United States, Canada and the United Kingdom. Anti-Irish feeling can
include both social and cultural discrimination within the island of Ireland
itself, such as sectarianism or ethno-political conflicts in The Troubles of
Northern Ireland. Discrimination and racism towards Irish Travellers, an Irish
minority group, is evident in both the Republic of Ireland and the United
Kingdom. Such racism is open and can be compared to that experienced by the
Irish diaspora in the 19th century, with the hanging of signs in private
establishments in Ireland stating "No Travellers" in the same style as "No
Irish Need Apply". The European Parliament Committee of Enquiry on racism and
xenophobia found them to be amongst the most discriminated-against ethnic
groups in Ireland. Perspective. Distrust of Irish people (especially Catholics)
grew stronger in some areas after the republican movement became violent.
Examples include the Fenian Raids in Canada or in England, the Manchester
Martyrs, and in more recent times during The Troubles and various paramilitary
attacks by the Provisional Irish Republican Army. To fully grasp the
relationship between Ireland and England, one must consider the long and
complex history shared by both countries. In earlier decades England adopted a
paternal attitude towards Ireland, a perspective grounded in elitism. For Irish
immigrants in England, sectarianism based on religious differences was less of
an issue amongst the general population (Anglicanism regards itself as a "via
media", thus celebration of saints is not taboo), but economic disparities and
competition for limited resources caused prejudice and discrimination based on
social class--most incoming Irish were impoverished, especially following the
Great Famine. Anti-Irish sentiment contrasts with Hibernophilia. Middle Ages to
Early Modern Era. do hereby declare our will and pleasure, that, for the
purpose of enlarging the borders of the Church, setting bounds to the progress
of wickedness, reforming evil manners, planting virtue, and increasing the
Christian religion. Gerald of Wales, Giraldus, John Joseph O'Meara. "The
History and Topography of Ireland". Penguin Classics, 1982. Page 102. Gerald
was not atypical, and similar views may be found in the writings of William of
Malmesbury and William of Newburgh. When it comes to Irish marital and sexual
customs Gerald is even more biting, "This is a filthy people, wallowing in
vice. They indulge in incest, for example in marrying – or rather debauching
– the wives of their dead brothers." Even earlier than this Archbishop Anselm
accused the Irish of "wife swapping", "...exchanging their wives as freely as
other men exchange their horses." One will find these views echoed centuries
later in the words of Sir Henry Sidney, twice Lord Deputy during the reign of
Elizabeth I, and in those of Edmund Tremayne, his secretary. In Tremayne's view
the Irish "commit whoredom, hold no wedlock, ravish, steal and commit all
abomination without scruple of conscience." In "A View of the Present State of
Ireland", circulated in 1596 but not published until 1633, the English official
and renowned poet Edmund Spenser wrote "They are all papists by profession but
in the same so blindingly and brutishly informed that you would rather think
them atheists or infidels." In a "Brief Note on Ireland," Spenser argued that
"Great force must be the instrument but famine must be the means, for till
Ireland be famished it cannot be subdued. . . There can be no conformitie of
government whereis no conformitie of religion. . . There can be no sounde
agreement betwene twoe equall contraries viz: the English and Irish." This
vision of the barbarous Irish, largely born out of a form of imperialist
condescension, made its way into Laudabiliter, one of the most infamous
documents in all of Irish history, by which Adrian IV, the only English Pope,
granted Ireland to Henry II, "to the end that the foul customs of that country
may be abolished and the barbarous nation, Christian in name only, may through
your care assume the beauty of good morals." This "civilising mission" embraced
any manner of cruel and barbaric methods to accomplish its end goal. For
instance, in 1305 when Piers Bermingham received a financial bonus and
accolades in verse after cutting off the heads of thirty members of the
O'Connor clan and sending them to Dublin. In 1317 one Irish chronicler opined
that it was just as easy for an Englishman to kill an Irishman as he would a
dog. The Irish were thought of as the most barbarous people in Europe, and such
ideas were modified to compare the lands in Scotland where Scottish Gaelic was
spoken to Ireland. 19th century. Anti-Irish racism in Victorian Britain and
19th century United States included the stereotyping of the Irish as
alcoholics, and implications that they monopolised certain (usually low-paying)
job markets. They were often called “white Negroes." Throughout Britain and
the U.S., newspaper illustrations and hand drawings depicted a prehistoric
"ape-like image" of Irish faces to bolster evolutionary racist claims that the
Irish people were an "inferior race" as compared to Anglo-Saxons. Similar to
other immigrant populations, they were sometimes accused of cronyism and
subjected to misrepresentations of their religious and cultural beliefs. The
Irish were labelled as practising Pagans and in that time (19th century),
anyone not being a "Christian" in a traditional British sense was deemed
"immoral" and "demonic". Irish Catholics were particularly singled out, and
Irish mythology, folklore, and customs were ridiculed. Nineteenth-century
Protestant American "Nativist" prejudice against Irish Catholics reached a peak
in the mid-1850s when the Know Nothing Movement tried to oust Catholics from
public office. Much of the opposition came from Irish Protestants, as in the
1831 riots in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. During the 1830s, riots broke out in
rural areas among rival labour teams from different parts of Ireland, and
between Irish and "native" American work teams competing for construction jobs.
Irish Catholics were isolated and marginalised by society. Both ministers and
priests discouraged intermarriage between Catholics and Protestants. In
addition, the creation of a parochial school system and numerous colleges
affiliated with the Church tended to compound rather than alleviate anti-
Catholic discrimination. After 1860 many Irish sang songs about signs reading
"HELP WANTED – NO IRISH NEED APPLY"; these signs came to be known as "NINA
signs." (This is sometimes written as "IRISH NEED NOT APPLY" and referred to as
"INNA signs"). The 1862 song, "No Irish Need Apply", was inspired by NINA signs
in London. Later Irish Americans adapted the lyrics, and the songs perpetuated
the belief among Irish Americans that they were discriminated against.
Historians have hotly debated the issue of anti-Irish job discrimination in the
United States. Some insist that the "No Irish need apply" signs were common,
but others such as Richard Jensen argue that anti-Irish job discrimination was
not a significant factor in the United States, these signs and print
advertisements being most commonly posted by the limited number of early 19th-
century English immigrants to the United States who shared the prejudices of
their homeland. Modern period. In the Early Modern period following the advent
of Protestantism in Great Britain, the Irish people suffered both social and
political discrimination for refusing to renounce Catholicism. This prejudice
sometimes manifested itself in areas with large Puritan or Presbyterian
populations such as Northern Ireland, the Central Belt of Scotland, parts of
Canada Thinly-veiled nationalism under the guise of religious conflict has
occurred in both the UK and the Republic of Ireland. 21st century. In 2012,
"The Irish Times" did a report on anti-Irish prejudice in Britain. In the run-
up to the 2012 Olympics, the British athlete Daly Thompson made an anti-Irish
statement on live television. When Thompson was shown an image of a torch
runner with the words "Oylmpic torch bearer", tattooed on her arm, he asserted
that the person responsible for the misspelling must have been Irish. The BBC
subsequently issued an apology. An Australian newspaper group, Fairfax Media,
issued an apology on 8 August 2012, for an article, originally titled “Punch
Drunk: Ireland intoxicated as Taylor swings towards boxing gold” which had
been published on "The Age", "Sydney Morning Herald" and the "Brisbane Times"
websites that morning. The article in question claimed that Taylor was not
“what you’d expect in a fighting Irishwoman, nor is she surrounded by
people who’d prefer a punch to a potato”. The journalist who wrote the
piece also apologised for “indulging racial sterotypes”. Another article
published on 8 August by Jon Saraceno in USA TODAY was amended to omit comments
depicting intoxicated Irish fans celebrating Katie Taylor’s success: “Back
home on the emerald-green isle, pints of Guinness flowed freely, perhaps enough
to replenish the Irish Sea. The 'punters' inside betting parlors wagered pounds
as if they were bits of candy”. The international sports network ESPN issued
an apology on 9 August 2012 after one of its presenters, Russell Barwick,
asserted that athletes from Ireland should compete for the British Olympic team
saying “It’s like an Hawaiian surfer not surfing for the USA,” he said.
“It’s not like Tasmanians say they don’t want to represent Australia”.
When fellow-presenter Mark Chapman tried to explain that the Republic of
Ireland was actually a different country, Barwick remarked: “It’s nothing
but an Irish joke”. Irish Traveller discrimination. Irish Travellers, an
indigenous minority present for centuries in Ireland, suffer overt
discrimination throughout the British Isles. Similar in nature to antiziganism
(prejudice against gypsies) in the United Kingdom and Europe. Anti-Traveller
racism is similar to that experienced by the Irish during the diaspora of the
19th century, with media attack campaigns in the United Kingdom, and in Ireland
using both national/local newspapers and radio. Irish Travellers in the Irish
media have stated they are living in Ireland under an apartheid regime. While
there is a willingness to acknowledge that there is widespread prejudice
towards Travellers in Irish society, and a recognition of discrimination
against Travellers, there is still strong resistance among the Irish public to
calling the treatment of Travellers racist. While some discrimination may occur
to Travellers in employment and secondary school place allocation, it is
limited. Abuses of social systems like the housing scheme and resource teachers
for Travellers in primary schools perpetuate the social conflict between
Travellers and "the settle community" examples being burning down of houses
allocated to the Travellers by the state due to feuds and as a tradition when
someone dies in an abode.
