Anti-Polish sentiment The terms Polonophobia, anti-Polonism, antipolonism and
anti-Polish sentiment refer to a spectrum of hostile attitudes toward Polish
people and culture. These terms apply to racial prejudice against Poles and
people of Polish descent, including ethnicity-based discrimination and state-
sponsored mistreatment of Poles and Polish citizens (including Polish Jews).
This prejudice led to mass killings and genocide during World War II, notably
by the German Nazis, Ukrainian nationalists and Soviet forces. Anti-Polish
sentiment often entails modern-day derogatory stereotyping and discrimination.
Use of the term in scientific writing. The term "anti-Polonism" (a loanword
from the ) was coined in Poland before 1919. It was used by progressive Polish
thinkers such as Jan Józef Lipski during the Solidarity years in connection
with allegations of Polish antisemitism. It reappeared in Polish nationalist
circles in the 1990s and eventually entered mainstream use, reflected in
leading Polish newspapers such as "Gazeta Wyborcza." In recent years, anti-
Polonism, or Polonophobia, has been studied at length in scholarly works by
Polish, German, American and Russian researchers. Features. A historic example
of Polonophobia was "polakożerstwo" (in English, "the devouring of Poles") —
a Polish term introduced during the 19th century in relation to the annexed
areas of Poland. It described the forcible suppression of Polish culture,
education and religion, and the elimination of Poles from public life and from
landed property in east Germany under Otto von Bismarck, especially during the
"Kulturkampf" and up to the end of World War I. Similar policies were
implemented, mainly under Tsar Nicholas II, in the Polish territories that had
been annexed by the Russian Empire. Historic actions inspired by anti-Polonism
ranged from felonious acts motivated by hatred, to physical extermination of
the Polish nation, the goal of which was to eradicate the Polish state. During
World War II, when most of Polish society became the object of Nazi genocidal
policies, German anti-Polonism led to a campaign of mass murder. At present,
among those who often express their hostile attitude towards the Polish people
are some Russian politicians and their far-right political parties who search
for a new imperial identity. Polonophobic stereotypes. In Russian language, the
term "mazurik" (мазурик), a synonym for "pickpocket", "petty thief",
literally means "a person from Masuria", a geographical area in Poland. The
word is an example how Vladimir Putin's liberal use of colloquialisms has been
catching attention of the media. The "Polish plumber" cliché may symbolize the
threat of cheap East European labor to take jobs of West Europeans. On the
other hand, others associate it with affordability and dependability of East
European migrant workers. History. Persecution of Poles (to 1918). Anti-Polish
rhetoric combined with the condemnation of Polish culture was most prominent in
the 18th century Prussia during the partitions of Poland. For instance, David
Blackbourn of Harvard University speaks of scandalized writings of German
intelectual Johann Georg Forster, who was granted a tenure at Vilnius
University by the Polish Commission of National Education in 1784. Forster
wrote of Poland's "backwardness" in a similar vein to "ignorance and barbarism"
of Southeast Asia. Such views were later repeated in the German ideas of
Lebensraum and exploited by the Nazis. German academics in the 18th – 20th
century attempted to project, in the difference between Germany and Poland, a
"boundary between civilization and barbarism; high German Kultur and "primitive
Slavdom"" (1793 racist diatribe by J.C. Schulz republished by the Nazis in
1941). Prussian officials, eager to secure Polish partition, encouraged the
view that the Poles were culturally inferior and in need of Prussian tutelage.
Such racist texts, originally published from the 18th century on, were
republished by the German Reich prior to and after its Invasion of Poland.
Frederick the Great nourished a particular hatred and contempt for Polish
people. Following his conquest of Poland, he compared the Poles to "Iroquois"
of Canada. In his all-encompassing anti-Polish campaign, even the nobility of
Polish background living in Prussia were obliged to pay higher taxes than that
of German heritage. Polish monasteries were viewed as "lairs of idleness" and
their property often seized by Prussian authorities. The prevalent Catholicism
among Poles was stigmatized. The Polish language was persecuted on all levels.
When Poland lost the last vestiges of its independence in 1795 and remained
partitioned for 123 years, ethnic Poles were subjected to discrimination in two
areas: the Germanization under Prussian and later German rule, and
Russification in the territories annexed by the Imperial Russia. Being a Polish
person under the Russian occupation was in itself almost culpable – wrote
Russian historian Liudmila Gatagova. – "Practically all of the Russian
government, bureaucracy, and society were united in one outburst against the
Poles." – "Rumor mongers informed the population about an order that had
supposedly been given to kill [...] and take away their land." Polish culture
and religion were seen as threats to Russian imperial ambitions. Tsarist
Namestniks suppressed them on Polish lands by force. Russian anti-Polish
campaign, which included confiscation of Polish nobles' property, was being
waged in the arenas of education, religion as well as language. Polish schools
and universities were being closed in a stepped up campaign of russification.
In addition to executions and mass deportations of Poles to Katorga camps, Tsar
Nicholas I established an occupation army at Poland's expense. The fact that
Poles – unlike the Russians – were overwhelmingly of Catholic faith, gave
impetus to their religious persecution. At the same time, with the emergence of
Panslavist ideology, Russian writers accused the Polish nation of betraying
their "Slavic family" because of their armed efforts aimed at winning
independence. Hostility toward Poles was present in many of Russia's literary
works and media of the time. Pushkin, together with three other poets,
published a pamphlet called "On the Taking of Warsaw" to celebrate the crushing
of the revolt. His contribution to the frenzy of anti-Polish writing was
composed of poems in which he hailed the capitulation of Warsaw as a new
"triumph" of imperial Russia. In Prussia, and later in Germany, Poles were
forbidden to build homes, and their properties were targeted for forced buy-
outs financed by the Prussian and German governments. Otto von Bismarck
described Poles, as animals (wolves), that "one shoots if one can" and
implemented several harsh laws aiming at their expulsion from traditionally
Polish lands. The Polish language was banned from public, and ethnically Polish
children tortured at schools for speaking Polish. Poles were subjected to a
wave of forceful evictions ("Rugi Pruskie"). The German government financed and
encouraged settlement of ethnic Germans into those areas aiming at their
geopolitical Germanisation. The Prussian Landtag passed laws against Catholics.
Toward the end of World War I during Poland's fight for independence, Imperial
Germany made further attempts at taking control over the territories of
Congress Poland, aiming at a "population transfer" of Polish and Jewish people
which was meant to be followed by a new wave of settlement by ethnic Germans.
In August 1914 the German imperial army destroyed the city of Kalisz, chasing
out tens of thousands of its Polish citizens. Persecution of Poles (1918–39).
After Poland regained its independence as the Second Republic at the end of
World War I, the question of new Polish borders could not have been easily
settled against the will of her former long-term occupiers. Poles continued to
be persecuted in the disputed territories, especially in Silesia. The German
campaign of discrimination contributed to the Silesian Uprisings, where Polish
workers were openly threatened with losing their jobs and pensions if they
voted for Poland in the Upper Silesia plebiscite. In inter-war Germany, anti-
Polish feelings ran high. The American historian Gerhard Weinberg observed that
for many Germans in the Weimar Republic, Poland was an abomination, whose
people were seen as "an East European species of cockroach". Poland was usually
described as a "Saisonstaat" (a state for a season). In inter-war Germany,
Germans used the phrase "Polish economy" ("polnische Wirtschaft") to describe
any situation that was a hopeless muddle. Weinberg noted that in the
1920s–30s, every leading German politician refused to accept Poland as a
legitimate nation, and hoped instead to partition Poland with the Soviet Union.
The British historian A. J. P. Taylor wrote in 1945 that National Socialism was
inevitable because the Germans wanted "to repudiate the equality with the
peoples of (central and) eastern Europe which had then been forced upon them"
after 1918. Taylor wrote that:"During the preceding eighty years the Germans
had sacrificed to the "Reich" all their liberties; they demanded as a reward
the enslavement of others. No German recognized the Czechs or Poles as equals.
Therefore, every German desired the achievement which only total war could
give. By no other means could the "Reich" be held together. It had been made by
conquest and for conquest; if it ever gave up its career of conquest, it would
dissolve." The largest ethnic shooting and deportation action during the Great
Terror in the Soviet Russia, known as the Polish Genocide in the Soviet Union,
occurred approximately from August 25, 1937 till November 15, 1938. According
to archives of the Soviet NKVD, 111,091 Poles, and people accused of ties with
Poland, were executed, and 28,744 sentenced to death-ridden labor camps;
amounting to 139,835 Polish victims in total. This number constitutes 10% of
the officially persecuted persons during the entire Yezhovshchina period, with
confirming NKVD documents. The coordinated actions of the Soviet NKVD and the
Communist Party in 1937-1938 against Polish minority living in the Soviet
Union, representing only 0.4 percent of Soviet citizens, amounted to an ethnic
genocide as defined by the UN convention, concluded historian Michael Ellman.
His opinion is shared by Simon Sebag Montefiore, Prof. Marek Jan Chodakiewicz,
and Dr Tomasz Sommer among others. In a typical Stalinist fashion, the murdered
Polish families were accused of "anti-Soviet" activities and state terrorism.
World War II. Hostility toward Polish people reached a particular peak during
World War II, when Poles became the subject of ethnic cleansing on an
unprecedented scale, including: Nazi German genocide in General Government,
Soviet executions and mass deportations to Siberia from Kresy, as well as
massacres of Poles in Volhynia, a campaign of ethnic cleansing carried out in
today's western Ukraine by Ukrainian nationalists. Millions of citizens of
Poland, both ethnic Poles and Jews, died in German concentration camps such as
Auschwitz. Unknown numbers perished in Soviet "gulags" and political prisons.
Soviet policy following their 1939 invasion of Poland in World War II was
ruthless, and sometimes coordinated with the Nazis (see: Gestapo-NKVD
Conferences). Elements of ethnic cleansing included Soviet mass executions of
Polish prisoners of war in the Katyn Massacre and at other sites, and the exile
of up to 1.5 million Polish citizens, including the intelligentsia, academics
and priests, to forced-labor camps in Siberia. In German and Soviet war
propaganda, Poles were mocked as inept for their military techniques in
fighting the war. Nazi fake newsreels and forged pseudo-documentaries claimed
that the Polish cavalry "bravely but futilely" charged German tanks in 1939,
and that the Polish Air Force was wiped out on the ground on the opening day of
the war. Neither tale was true (see: Myths of the Polish September Campaign).
German propaganda staged a Polish cavalry charge in their 1941 reel called
"Geschwader Lützow". Poland's relationship with the USSR during WWII was
tricky. The main Western Powers, the US and UK, understood the importance of
the USSR in defeating Germany, to the point of allowing Soviet propaganda to
vilify their Polish ally. During World War II, E. H. Carr, the assistant editor
of "The Times", was well known for his leaders (editorials) taking the Soviet
side in Polish-Soviet disputes. In a leader of February 10, 1945, Carr
questioned whether the Polish government in exile even had the right to speak
on behalf of Poland. Carr wrote that it was extremely doubtful to him whether
the Polish government had “an exclusive title to speak for the people of
Poland, and a "liberum veto" on any move towards a settlement of Polish
affairs” as well as that the “legal credentials of this Government are
certainly not beyond challenge if it were relevant to examine them: the obscure
and tenuous thread of continuity leads back at best to a constitution deriving
from a quasi-Fascist "coup de Etat"”. Carr ended his leader with the claim
that “What Marshal Stalin desires to see in Warsaw is not a puppet government
acting under Russian orders, but a friendly government which fully conscious of
the supreme impotence of Russo-Polish concord, will frame its independent
policies in that context”. The western Allies were even willing to help cover
up the Soviet massacre at Katyn. Even today Katyn is not accepted in the West
as a war crime. Postwar era. With the conclusion of the Second World War, Nazi
atrocities perforce ended. However, Soviet oppression of the Poles continued.
Under Joseph Stalin, thousands of soldiers of Poland's Home Army ("Armia
Krajowa") and returning veterans of the Polish Armed Forces that had served
with the Western Allies were imprisoned, tortured by NKWD agents (see: W.
Pilecki, Ł. Ciepliński) and murdered following staged trials like the
infamous Trial of the Sixteen in Moscow. A similar fate awaited the Cursed
soldiers. At least 40,000 members of Poland’s Home Army were deported to
Russia. In Britain after 1945, the British people initially accepted those
Polish servicemen who chose not to return to a Poland ruled by the Communists.
The Poles resident in Britain served under British command during the Battle of
Britain, but as soon as the Soviets began to make gains on the Eastern Front
both public opinion and the Government of the UK turned pro-Soviet and against
the Poles. Supporters of the socialists made the Poles out to be "warmongers",
"anti-Semites" and "fascists". After the war, the trade unions and Labour party
played on the fears of there not being enough jobs, food and housing. There
were even anti-Polish rallies. In 1961, a book was published in Germany
entitled "Der Erzwungene Krieg" (The Forced War) by the American historical
writer and Holocaust denier David Hoggan, which argued that Germany did not
commit aggression against Poland in 1939, but was instead the victim of an
Anglo-Polish conspiracy against the "Reich". Reviewers have often noted that
Hoggan seems to have an obsessive hostility towards the Poles. His claims
included that the Polish government treated Poland's German minority far worse
than the German government under Adolf Hitler treated its Jewish minority. In
1964, much controversy was created when two German right-wing extremist groups
awarded Hoggan prizes. In the 1980s, the German philosopher and historian Ernst
Nolte claimed that in 1939 Poland was engaged in a campaign of genocide against
its ethnic German minority, and has strongly implied that the German invasion
in 1939, and all of the subsequent German atrocities in Poland during World War
II were in essence justified acts of retaliation. Critics, such as the British
historian Richard J. Evans, have accused Nolte of distorting the facts, and
have argued that in no way was Poland committing genocide against its German
minority. During the political transformation of the Soviet-controlled Eastern
bloc in the 1980s, the traditional German anti-Polish feeling was again openly
exploited in the East Germany against Solidarność. This tactic had become
especially apparent in the "rejuvenation of 'Polish jokes,' some of which
reminded listeners of the spread of such jokes under the Nazis." References to
Nazi German death camps in occupied Poland by Western media. The expressions
offensive to Poles are attributed to a number of non-Polish media in relation
to . The most prominent is a continued reference by Western news media to
"Polish death camps" and "Polish concentration camps". These phrases refer to
the network of concentration camps operated by Nazi Germany in occupied Poland
in order to facilitate the "Final Solution", but the wording suggests that the
Polish people might have been involved. The Polish Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
as well as Polish organizations around the world and all Polish governments
since 1989, condemned the usage of such expressions, arguing that they suggest
Polish responsibility for the camps. The American Jewish Committee stated in
its January 30, 2005, press release: "This is not a mere semantic matter.
Historical integrity and accuracy hang in the balance... Any misrepresentation
of Poland's role in the Second World War, whether intentional or accidental,
would be most regrettable and therefore should not be left unchallenged." On
April 30, 2004, a CTV News report made reference to "the Polish camp in
Treblinka". The Polish embassy in Canada lodged a complaint with CTV. Robert
Hurst of CTV, however, argued that the expression, "Polish death camp", is
common usage in news organizations including those in the United States, and
declined to issue a correction. The Polish Ambassador to Ottawa then complained
to the National Specialty Services Panel of the Canadian Broadcast Standards
Council. The Council did not accept Hurst's argument and ruled against CTV
stating that the word ""Polish"—similarly to such adjectives as "English",
"French" and "German"—had connotations that clearly extended beyond
geographic context. Its use with reference to Nazi extermination camps was
misleading and improper". CTV broadcast the decision during prime time. The
Polish Ministry of Foreign affairs has stated. "That example of a successful
campaign against the distortion of historic truth by the media – and in
defense of the good name of Poland – will hopefully reduce the number of
similar incidents in the future." Also cited as a similar example of anti-
Polish sentiment is the phrase "Polish Nazis" used in relation to non-Polish
paramilitary groups operating on Polish soil during World War II, disseminated
by Norwegian State Broadcasting Corporation, NRK. The Yad Vashem Institute in
Jerusalem officially considered this claim by NRK a falsification "offensive to
historical truth". Hostility today. Russia. In 2005, continued violent crimes
against Poles in Moscow prompted the then Polish President Aleksander
Kwaśniewski to call on the Russian government to stop them. "In my capacity as
president of the Polish Republic – Kwaśniewski said in an official statement
– I address, to the President of the Russian Federation Vladimir Putin, an
appeal calling on the Russian authorities to undertake energetic action to
identify and punish the organizers and perpetrators of the assaults." An
employee with the Polish embassy in Moscow was hospitalized in serious
condition after being beaten in broad daylight near the embassy by unidentified
men. Three days later, another Polish diplomat was beaten up near the embassy.
The following day the Moscow correspondent for the Polish daily
"Rzeczpospolita" was attacked and beaten by a group of Russians. United
Kingdom. Since EU enlargement in 2004, the UK has experienced mass immigration
from Poland (see Poles in the United Kingdom). It is estimated that the Polish
British community has doubled in size since 2004. The process has been
remarkably friendly and successful. However, there have been some instances of
anti-Polish sentiment and hostility towards Polish immigrants. The far right
British National Party argued for immigration from (Central and) Eastern Europe
to be stopped and for Poles to be deported. In 2007 Polish people living in
London reported 42 ethnically motivated attacks against them, compared with 28
in 2004. The Conservative MP Daniel Kawczynski said that the increase in
violence towards Poles is in part "a result of the media coverage by the BBC"
whose reporters "won't dare refer to controversial immigration from other
countries." Kawczynski voiced his criticism of the BBC in the House of Commons
for "using the Polish community as a cat's paw to try to tackle the thorny
issue of mass, unchecked immigration" only because against Poles "it's
politically correct to do so." In 2009 the Federation of Poles in Great Britain
and the Polish Embassy in London with Barbara Tuge-Erecinska, raised a number
of formal complaints – including with the Press Complaints Commission –
about news articles that defamed Poles. The PCC arranged a deal between the
Federation and the "Daily Mail", which ran the articles. The Embassy also
questioned the veracity of "The Guardian" report by Kate Connolly about an
alleged "storm of protest in Poland" in response to a film about a Jewish
underground resistance movement. The Polish Embassy stated on March 11, 2009,
disproving the claim: "This embassy has been in touch with film's only
distributor in Poland, Monolith Plus, and we have been told that this film has
not experienced any form of booing, let alone been banned by any cinemas." "The
Guardian" was also forced by PCC to publish an admission that another article
by Simon Jenkins, from September 1 – which accused Poles of wartime suicide
– "repeated a myth fostered by Nazi propagandists, when it said that Polish
lancers turned their horses to face Hitler's panzers. There is no evidence that
this occurred." "The Guardian" has been noted for a number of other
controversies. On October 14, 2009, Nazi-hunter Efraim Zuroff alleged that:
"the second world war narrative [...] has been distorted since independence and
the transition to democracy to make it more palatable to their electorate and
to minimize the role of local collaborators in Holocaust crimes." On October
20, 2009, "The Guardian's" Jonathan Freedland said: "We are meant to be
friendly towards the newest members of the European Union. But the truth is
that several of these "emerging democracies" have reverted to a brand of ultra-
nationalistic politics that would repel most voters in western Europe. It
exists in Poland". In response to the above attacks Timothy Garton Ash wrote in
the same paper on 23 December: "In my experience, the automatic equation of
Poland with Catholicism, nationalism and antisemitism – and thence a slide to
guilt by association with the Holocaust – is still widespread. This
collective stereotyping does no justice to the historical record." Writing in
"The Guardian", British Foreign Secretary David Miliband described Poland's
conservative Law and Justice party as "far right". His language sparked a
protest by Daniel Hannan of "The Daily Telegraph", who said on October 29,
2009, that the British Foreign Secretary David Miliband should apologize to the
people of Poland. Hannan wrote that Miliband's "increasingly unhinged
allegations have been greeted with horror in Poland." However, more diatribes
reminiscent of wartime propaganda included also "The Daily Telegraph's" own
article by Julian Kossoff who wrote on November 13, 2009, about the alleged
"anti-Semitism embedded in Polish history," an "episode of Polish bloodlust and
nightmarish slaughter" and "the unspeakable guilt of the Polish collaborators."
"The Daily Telegraph's" Gerald Warner complained about Kossoff's "insulting
attack on Catholics and Poles which grotesquely misrepresents historical fact
and which, if leveled at almost any other targets, would probably be
characterized as a 'hate crime'." There is, however, over millennium-long
record of positive relations between Poles and Jews. In addition to that, the
largest contingent of Righteous among the Nations who saved the Jews during the
World War II is the Polish contingent Also in 2008 the Polish ambassador sent
an official protest to the Press Complaints Commission about "The Times". On
July 26, 2008, columnist Giles Coren had a comment piece published there with
the ethnic slur 'Polack' used to describe Polish immigrants. He accused Poland
of complicity in the six million Jewish deaths of The Holocaust, prompting not
only an official letter of complaint to "The Times", but also an early day
motion in the UK parliament, followed by an editorial in "The Economist." The
ambassador, Tuge-Erecinska, explained that the article was "unsupported by any
basic historic or geographic knowledge," and that "the issue of Polish-Jewish
relations has been unfairly and deeply falsified" by Coren's "aggressive
remarks" and "contempt". Coren reacted by telling The Jewish Chronicle: ""Fuck
the Poles"". The case has been referred to the European Court of Human Rights.
The editor of "The Jewish Chronicle", Stephen Pollard, commented on August 6,
2009: "There are few things more despicable than anti-Semitism, but here's one
of them: using a false charge of anti-Semitism for political gain." On October
6, 2009, Stephen Fry was interviewed by Jon Snow on "Channel 4 News" as a
signatory of a letter to British Conservative Party leader David Cameron
expressing concern about the party's relationship with the right-wing Polish
Law and Justice Party in the European Parliament. During the interview, Fry
stated: "There has been a history, let's face it, in Poland of a right-wing
Catholicism which has been deeply disturbing for those of us who know a little
history, and remember which side of the border Auschwitz was on..." The remark
prompted a complaint from the Polish Embassy in London, as well as an editorial
in "The Economist" and criticism from British Jewish historian David Cesarani.
Fry has since posted an apology on his personal weblog, in which he stated: "It
was a rubbishy, cheap and offensive remark that I have been regretting ever
since... I take this opportunity to apologize now." On October 30, 2009, the
Chief Rabbi of Poland, Michael Schudrich, complained about this new British
political row playing on a "'false and painful stereotype that all Poles are
antisemitic', whereas the truth was that the problem was around the same there
as elsewhere in Europe." United States. On November 14, 2007, Fox aired the
episode of "Back to You", "Something's Up There", which contained a
controversial Polish slur. The slur involved Marsh trying to convince the
show's lone Polish-American character, Gary, to go bowling after work by
saying: "Come on, it's in your blood, like kielbasa and collaborating with the
Nazis." Fox later apologized on November 20, 2007. They vowed never to air the
line of dialogue again in repeats and/or syndicated broadcasts. Fox stated
that, "The line was delivered by a character known for being ignorant,
clueless, and for saying outlandish things. Allowing the line to remain in the
show, however, demonstrated poor judgment, and we apologize to anyone who was
offended." "Polish jokes". "Polish jokes" belong to a category of conditional
jokes, meaning that their understanding requires knowledge of "what a Polish
joke is." Conditional jokes depend on the audience's "affective"
preference—on their likes and dislikes. Though these jokes might be
understood by many, their success depends entirely on the negative disposition
of the listener. Presumably the first Polish jokes by German displaced persons
fleeing war-torn Europe were brought to America in the late 1940s. These jokes
were fueled by ethnic slurs disseminated by German National Socialist
propaganda, which attempted to justify the Nazis' murdering of Poles by
presenting them as ""dreck""—dirty, stupid and inferior. It is also possible
that some early American "Polack" jokes from Germany were originally told
before World War II in disputed border regions such as Silesia. There is debate
as to whether the early "Polish jokes" brought to states such as Wisconsin by
German immigrants relate directly to the wave of American jokes of the early
1960s. A "provocative critique of previous scholarship on the subject" has been
made by British writer Christie Davies in "The Mirth of Nations", which
suggests that "Polish jokes" did not originate in Nazi Germany but much
earlier, as an outgrowth of regional jokes rooted in "social class differences
reaching back to the nineteenth century." According to Davies, American
versions of Polish jokes are an unrelated "purely American phenomenon" and do
not express the "historical Old World hatreds of the Germans for the Poles.
However Hollywood in the 1960s and 1970s imported the subhuman-intelligence
jokes about Poles from old Nazi propaganda." For decades, Polish Americans have
been the subject of derogatory jokes originating in anti-immigrant stereotypes
that had developed in the U.S. before the 1920s. During the Partitions of
Poland, Polish immigrants came to America in considerable numbers, fleeing mass
persecution at home. They were taking the only jobs available to them, usually
requiring physical labor. The same ethnic and job-related stereotypes persisted
even as Polish Americans joined the middle class in the mid-20th century. "The
constant derision, often publicly disseminated through the mass media, caused
serious identity crises, feeling of inadequacy, and low self-esteem for many
Polish Americans." In spite of the plight of Polish people under Cold War
communism, negative stereotypes about Polish Americans endured. Since the late
1960s, Polish American organizations have made continuous effort to challenge
the negative stereotyping of the Polish people once prevalent in American
media. The Polish American Guardian Society has argued that NBC-TV used the
tremendous power of TV to introduce and push subhuman intelligence jokes about
Poles (that were worse than prior simple anti-immigrant jokes) using the
repetitive big lie technique to degrade Poles. The play called “Polish
Joke” by David Ives has resulted in a number of complaints by the Polonia in
the US. The "Polish jokes" heard in the 1970s were particularly offensive, so
much so that the Polish Ministry of Foreign Affairs approached the U.S. State
Department about that, however unsuccessfully. The syndrome receded only after
Cardinal Karol Wojtyła was elected pope, and Polish jokes became passé.
Gradually, Americans have developed a more positive image of their Polish
neighbors in the following decades. Use of the term in a modern political
context. The term "anti-Polonism" is said to have been used for campaign
purposes by political parties such as the League of Polish Families () or Self-
Defense of the Republic of Poland () as well as by Polish far-right
organizations such as Association against Anti-Polonism led by former
presidential candidate and leader of extremist Polish National Party Leszek
Bubel. Bubel was taken to court by a group of ten well-known Polish
intellectuals who filed a lawsuit against him for "violating the public good".
Among the signatories were: former Foreign Minister Władysław Bartoszewski
and filmmaker Kazimierz Kutz. According to writer Joanna Michlic the term is
used in Poland also as an argument against the self-critical intellectuals who
discuss Polish-Jewish relations, accusing them of "anti-Polish positions and
interests." For example, historian Jan T. Gross has been accused of being anti-
Polish when he wrote about crimes such as the Jedwabne pogrom. In her view, the
charge is "not limited to arguments that can objectively be classified as anti-
Polish—such as equating the Poles with the Nazis—but rather applied to any
critical inquiry into the collective past. Moreover, anti-Polonism is equated
with anti-Semitism." Publisher Adam Michnik wrote for the New York Times that
"almost all Poles react very sharply when confronted with the charge that Poles
get their anti-Semitism 'with their mothers' milk'." (see: Yitzhak Shamir's
outburst in an interview with "Jerusalem Post", 1989-9-08.) Such verbal attacks
– according to Michnik – are interpreted by anti-Semites as "proof of the
international anti-Polish Jewish conspiracy". For the 1994 anniversary of the
Warsaw Uprising, a Polish "Gazeta Wyborcza" journalist, Michał Cichy, wrote a
review of a collection of 1943 memoirs entitled "Czy ja jestem mordercą?" ("Am
I a murderer?") by Calel Perechodnik, a Jewish ghetto policeman from Otwock and
member of the "Chrobry II Battalion", alleging (as hearsay) that about 40 Jews
were killed by a group of Polish insurgents during the 1944 Uprising. Unlike
the book (later reprinted with factual corrections), the actual review by Cichy
elicited a fury of protests, while selected fragments of his article were
confirmed by three Polish historians. Prof. Tomasz Strzembosz accused Cichy of
practicing a 'distinct type of racism,' and charged "Gazeta Wyborcza" editor
Adam Michnik with 'cultivating a species of tolerance that is absolutely
intolerant of antisemitism yet regards anti-Polonism and as something
altogether natural'." Michnik responded to the controversy by praising the
heroism of the AK, while asking "Is it an attack on Polish people when the past
is being explored to seek the truth?" Cichy later apologized for the tone of
his article, but not for the erroneous facts. The notion of anti-Polonism has
been used in some instances as a justification for Polish antisemitism.
Cardinal Józef Glemp in his controversial and widely criticized speech
delivered on August 26, 1989 (and retracted in 1991) argued that the outbursts
of antisemitism are a "legitimate form of national self-defence against Jewish
'Anti-Polonism'." He "asked Jews who 'have great power over the mass media in
many countries' to rein in their anti-Polonism because 'if there won't be anti-
Polonism, there won't be such antisemitism among us'." Similar concerns, but
with less display, were echoed in "Rethinking Poles and Jews" by Robert Cherry
and Annamaria Orla-Bukowska who noted that anti-Polonism and anti-Semitism
remain "grotesquely twinned into our own time. We cannot combat the one without
combating the other." In 2001 PhD Andrzej Leszek Szcześniak published
"Judeopolonia - the Jewish state in Poland", explaining the origins of pre-war
Jewish saying 'our tenements, your streets'. In 2002 Stanisław Wysocki
published "Antypolonizm Żydów polskich" (English: "Antipolishness of the
Polish Jews") naming incidents in Polish-Jewish relations, criticised by Prof
Jerzy Tomaszewski as selective, unrepresentative and ignorant.
