Anti-clericalism Anti-clericalism is a historical movement that opposes the
clergy for reasons including their actual or alleged power and influence in all
aspects of public and political life and their involvement in the everyday life
of the citizen, their privileges, or their enforcement of orthodoxy. Not all
anti-clericals are irreligious or anti-religious, some anti-clericals have been
religious and have opposed clergy on the basis of institutional issues and/or
disagreements in religious interpretation, such as during the Protestant
Reformation. Anti-clericalism in one form or another has existed through most
of Christian history. Some philosophers of the Enlightenment, including
Voltaire, attacked the Catholic Church, its leadership and priests claiming
moral corruption of many of its clergy. France. Revolution. The French
Revolution, particularly in its Jacobin period, initiated one of the most
violent episodes of anti-clericalism in pre-modern Europe; the new
revolutionary authorities suppressed the church; destroyed, desecrated and
expropriated monasteries; exiled 30,000 priests and killed hundreds more. As
part of a campaign to de-Christianize France in October 1793 the Christian
calendar was outlawed, replaced with one reckoning from the date of the
Revolution, and then an atheist Cult of Reason was inaugurated, all churches
not devoted to that cult being closed. In 1794, the atheistic cult was replaced
with a deistic Cult of the Supreme Being. When anticlericalism became a clear
goal of French revolutionaries, counter-revolutionaries seeking to restore
tradition and the Ancien Régime took up arms, particularly in the War in the
Vendée (1793 to 1796). When Pope Pius VI took sides against the revolution in
the First Coalition (1792–1797), Napoleon Bonaparte invaded Italy (1796).
French troops imprisoned the Pope in 1797, and he died after six weeks of
captivity. After a change of heart, Napoleon then re-established the Catholic
Church in France with the signing of the Concordat of 1801. Many anti-clerical
policies continued. When Napoleonic armies entered a territory, monasteries
were often sacked and church property secularized. The Third Republic. A
further phase of anti-clericalism occurred in the context of the French Third
Republic and its dissensions with the Catholic Church. Prior to the 1905 French
law on the Separation of the Churches and the State, the Catholic Church
enjoyed preferential treatment from the French state (formally along with the
Jewish, Lutheran and Calvinist minority religions, but in practice with much
more influence than those). During the 19th century, public schools employed
priests as teachers, and religion was taught in schools (teachers were also
obliged to lead the class to Mass). In 1881–1882 Jules Ferry's government
passed the Jules Ferry laws, establishing free education (1881) and mandatory
and lay education (1882), giving the basis of French public education. The
Third Republic (1871–1940), dominated the nation until the 16 May 1877 crisis
by the Catholic Legitimists who dreamed of a return to the "Ancien Régime". In
1880 and 1882 Benedictine teaching monks were effectively exiled. This was not
completed until 1901. The 1905 law on separation of state and church was
enacted with strength and vigor by the government of Radical-Socialist Émile
Combes. Most Catholic schools and educational foundations were closed —
except in Alsace-Lorraine which belonged at that time to Germany. In the
Affaire Des Fiches in France in 1904–1905, it was discovered that the
anticlerical War Minister under Émile Combes, General Louis André, was
determining promotions based on the French Masonic Grand Orient's huge card
index on public officials, detailing which were Catholic and who attended Mass,
with a view to preventing their promotions. Republicans' anti-clericalism
softened after the First World War as the Catholic right-wing began to accept
secularism. However, the theme of subsidized private schools in France, which
are overwhelmingly Catholic but whose teachers draw pay from the state, remains
a sensitive issue in French politics. Austria (Austro-Hungarian Empire).
Emperor Joseph II opposed what he called “contemplative” religious
institutions — reclusive Catholic institutions that he perceived as doing
nothing positive for the community. His policy towards them are included in
what is called Josephinism. Joseph decreed that Austrian bishops could not
communicate directly with the Curia. More than 500 of 1,188 monasteries in
Austro-Slav lands (and a hundred more in Hungary) were dissolved, and 60
million florins taken by the state. This wealth was used to create 1,700 new
parishes and welfare institutions. The education of priests was taken from the
Church as well. Joseph established six state-run “General Seminaries.” In
1783, a Marriage Patent treated marriage as a civil contract rather than a
religious institution. Catholic Historians have claimed that there was an
alliance between Joseph and anti-clerical Freemasons. Italy. Anti-clericalism
in Italy is connected with reaction against the absolutism of the Papal States,
overthrown in 1870. For a long time, the Pope required Catholics not to
participate in the public life of the Kingdom of Italy that had invaded the
Papal States to complete the unification of Italy, leaving the pope confined in
the Vatican. Some politicians that had played important roles in this process,
such as Camillo Benso, conte di Cavour, were known to be hostile to the
temporal and political power of the Church. The hostility between the Holy See
and the kingdom was finally settled by fascist dictator Benito Mussolini, who
sought an agreement with the Church to gain its support: the Lateran Treaty was
finalised in 1929. After World War II, anti-clericalism was embodied by the
Italian Communist and Italian Socialist parties, in opposition to the Vatican-
endorsed party Christian Democracy. The revision of the Lateran treaties during
the 1980s by the Socialist Prime Minister of Italy Bettino Craxi, removed the
status of "official religion" of the Catholic Church, but still granted a
series of provisions in favour of the Church, such as the eight per thousand
law, the teaching of religion in schools, and other privileges. Recently, the
Catholic Church has been taking a more aggressive stance in Italian politics,
in particular through Cardinal Camillo Ruini, who often makes his voice heard
commenting the political debate and indicating the official line of the Church
on various matters. This interventionism has increased with the papacy of
Benedict XVI. Anti-clericalism, however, is not the official stance of most
parties (with the exception of the Italian Radicals, who, however identify as
laicist), as most party leaders consider it an electoral disadvantage to openly
contradict the Church: since the demise of the Christian Democracy as a single
party, Catholic votes are often swinging between the right and the left wing,
and are considered to be decisive to win an election. Poland. Palikot's
Movement, is an anti-clerical party founded in 2011 by politician Janusz
Palikot. Palikot's Movement won 10% of the national vote at the Polish
parliamentary election, 2011. This was an unprecedented result for an anti-
church party in Poland, where Catholicism is believed to be deeply rooted.
Latin America. Of the population of Latin America, about 71% acknowledge
allegiance to the Roman Catholic Church. Consequently, about 43% of the world's
Catholics inhabit the ‘Latin’ countries of South, Central and North
America. The slowness to embrace religious freedom in Latin America is related
to its colonial heritage and to its post-colonial history. The Aztec and the
Inca both made substantial use of religion to support their authority and
power. This pre-existing role of religion in pre-Columbian culture made it
relatively easy for the Spanish conquistadors to replace native religious
structures with those of a Catholicism that was closely linked to the Spanish
throne. Anti-clericalism was a common feature of 19th-century liberalism in
Latin America. This anti-clericalism was often purportedly based on the idea
that the clergy (especially the prelates who ran the administrative offices of
the Church) were hindering social progress in areas such as public education
and economic development. Beginning in the 1820s, a succession of liberal
regimes came to power in Latin America. Some members of these liberal regimes
sought to imitate the Spain of the 1830s (and revolutionary France of a half-
century earlier) in expropriating the wealth of the Catholic Church, and in
imitating the eighteenth-century benevolent despots in restricting or
prohibiting the religious orders. As a result, a number of these liberal
regimes expropriated Church property and tried to bring education, marriage and
burial under secular authority. The confiscation of Church properties and
changes in the scope of religious liberties (in general, increasing the rights
of non-Catholics and non-observant Catholics, while licensing or prohibiting
the orders) generally accompanied secularist, and later, Marxist-leaning,
governmental reforms. Mexico. The Mexican Constitution of 1824 had required the
Republic to prohibit the exercise of any religion other than the Roman Catholic
and Apostolic faith. Reform War. Starting in 1855, President Benito Juárez
issued decrees nationalizing church property, separating church and state, and
suppressing religious orders. Church properties were confiscated and basic
civil and political rights were denied to religious orders and the clergy.
Cristero War. More severe laws called Calles Law during the rule of atheist
Plutarco Elías Calles eventually led to the Cristero War. Following the
Mexican Revolution of 1910, the new Mexican Constitution of 1917 contained
further anti-clerical provisions. Article 3 called for secular education in the
schools and prohibited the Church from engaging in primary education; Article 5
outlawed monastic orders; Article 24 forbade public worship outside the
confines of churches; and Article 27 placed restrictions on the right of
religious organizations to hold property. Most offensively to Catholics,
Article 130 deprived clergy members of basic political rights. Many of these
laws were resisted, leading to the Cristero Rebellion of 1927–1929. The
suppression of the Church included the closing of many churches and the killing
of priests. The persecution was most severe in Tabasco under the atheist"
governor Tomás Garrido Canabal. The war had a profound effect on the Church.
Between 1926 and 1934 at least 40 priests were killed. Between 1926 and 1934,
over 3,000 priests were exiled or assassinated. Where 4,500 priests served the
people before the rebellion, in 1934 there were only 334 priests licensed by
the government to serve fifteen million people, the rest having been eliminated
by emigration, expulsion and assassination. It appears that ten states were
left without any priests. Ecuador. This issue was one of the bases for the
lasting dispute between Conservatives, who represented primarily the interests
of the Sierra and the church, and the Liberals, who represented those of the
Costa and anticlericalism. Tensions came to a head in 1875 when the
conservative President Gabriel García Moreno, after being elected to his third
term, was allegedly assassinated by anticlerical Freemasons. Colombia. Colombia
enacted anticlerical legislation and its enforcement during more than three
decades (1849–84). La Violencia refers to an era of civil conflict in various
areas of the Colombian countryside between supporters of the Colombian Liberal
Party and the Colombian Conservative Party, a conflict which took place roughly
from 1948 to 1958.* "Azcarate quotes a figure of 300,000 dead between
1948–1959"*"Political violence is not new to that South American nation of 38
million people. In the past 100 years, more than 500,000 Colombians have died
in it. From the "War of the Thousand Days," a civil war at the turn of the
century that left 100,000 dead, to a partisan clash between 1948 and 1966 that
claimed nearly 300,000..." Across the country, militants attacked churches,
convents, and monasteries, killing priests and looking for arms, since the
conspiracy theory maintained that the religious had guns, and this despite the
fact that not a single serviceable weapon was located in the raids. When their
party came to power in 1930, anticlerical Liberals pushed for legislation to
end Church influence in public schools. These Liberals held that the Church and
its intellectual backwardness were responsible for a lack of spiritual and
material progress in Colombia. Liberal-controlled local, departmental and
national governments ended contracts with religious communities who operated
schools in government-owned buildings, and set up secular schools in their
place. These actions were sometimes violent, and were met by a strong
opposition from clerics, Conservatives, and even a good number of more moderate
Liberals. Argentina. The original Argentine Constitution of 1853 provided that
all Argentine presidents must be Catholic and stated that the duty of the
Argentine congress was to convert the Indians to Catholicism. All of these
provisions have been eliminated with the exception of the mandate to "sustain"
Catholicism. Liberal anti-clericalists of the 1880s established a new pattern
of church-state relations in which the official constitutional status of the
Church was preserved while the state assumed control of many functions formerly
the province of the Church. Conservative Catholics, asserting their role as
definers of national values and morality, responded in part by joining in the
rightist religio-political movement known as Catholic Nationalism which formed
successive opposition parties. This began a prolonged period of conflict
between church and state that persisted until the 1940s when the Church enjoyed
a restoration of its former status under the presidency of Colonel Juan Perón.
Perón claimed that Peronism was the "true embodiment of Catholic social
teaching" – indeed, more the embodiment of Catholicism than the Catholic
Church itself. In 1954, Argentina saw extensive destruction of churches,
denunciations of clergy and confiscation of Catholic schools as Perón
attempted to extend state control over national institutions. The renewed
rupture in church-state relations was completed when Perón was excommunicated.
However, in 1955, he was overthrown by a military general who was a leading
member of the Catholic Nationalist movement. In 1983, the civilian president,
Raúl Alfonsín, attempted to restore a liberal democratic state. Alfonsín's
opposition to the church-military alliance, conjoined with his strongly secular
emphasis contravening traditional Catholic positions, incited opposition that
served to curtail his agenda. Venezuela. In Venezuela, the government of
Antonio Guzmán Blanco virtually crushed the institutional life of the church,
even attempting to legalize the marriage of priests. These anticlerical
policies remained in force for decades afterward. Cuba. Cuba, under atheist
Fidel Castro, succeeded in reducing the Church's ability to work by deporting
the archbishop and 150 Spanish priests, discriminating against Catholics in
public life and education and refusing to accept them as members of the
Communist Party. The subsequent flight of 300,000 people from the island also
helped to diminish the Church there. Portugal. A first wave of anti-clericalism
occurred in 1834 when under the government of Dom Pedro all convents and
monasteries in Portugal were abolished, simultaneously closing some of
Portugal's primary educational establishments. The fall of the Monarchy in the
Republican revolution of 1910 led to another wave of anti-clerical activity.
Most church property was put under State control, and the church was not
allowed to inherit property. The revolution and the republic which took a
"hostile" approach to the issue of church and state separation, like that of
the French Revolution, the Spanish Constitution of 1931 and the Mexican
Constitution of 1917. As part of the anticlerical revolution, the bishops were
driven from their dioceses, the property of clerics was seized by the state,
wearing of the cassock was banned, all minor seminaries were closed and all but
five major seminaries. A law of February 22, 1918 permitted only two seminaries
in the country, but they had not been given their property back. Religious
orders were expelled from the country, including 31 orders comprising members
in 164 houses (in 1917 some orders were permitted to form agaain). Religious
education was prohibited in both primary and secondary school. Religious oaths
and church taxes were also abolished. Spain. The first instance of anti-
clerical violence due to political conflict in 19th century Spain occurred
during the Trienio Liberal (Spanish Civil War of 1820–1823). During riots in
Catalonia, 20 clergymen were killed by members of the liberal movement in
retaliation for the Church's siding with absolutist supporters of Ferdinand
VII. In 1836 following the First Carlist War, the Ecclesiastical Confiscations
of Mendizábal () promulgated by Juan Álvarez Mendizábal, prime minister of
the new regime abolished the major Spanish Convents and Monasteries. Many years
later the Radical Republican Party leader Alejandro Lerroux would distinguish
himself by his inflammatory pieces of opinion. Second Republic and Civil War
(1931-1939). The Republican government which came to power in Spain in 1931 was
based on secular principles. In the first years some laws were passed
secularising education, prohibiting religious education in the schools, and
expelling the Jesuits from the country. On Pentecost 1932, Pope Pius XI
protested against these measures and demanded restitution. He asked the
Catholics of Spain to fight with all legal means against the injustices. June
3, 1933 he issued the encyclical Dilectissima Nobis, in which he described the
expropriation of all Church buildings, episcopal residences, parish houses,
seminaries and monasteries. By law, they were now property of the Spanish
State, to which the Church had to pay rent and taxes in order to continuously
use these properties. "Thus the Catholic Church is compelled to pay taxes on
what was violently taken from her" Religious vestments, liturgical instruments,
statues, pictures, vases, gems and other valuable objects were expropriated as
well. The Civil War in Spain started in 1936, during which thousands of
churches were destroyed, thirteen bishops and some 7,000 clergy and religious
Spaniards were assassinated. Catholics largely supported Franco and the
Nationalist forces in the Spanish Civil War of 1936–1939. Anti-clerical
assaults during what has been termed by the Nationalists Red Terror included
sacking and burning monasteries and churches and killing 6,832 priests,
including 13 bishops, 4,184 diocesan priests, 2,365 members of male religious
orders, among them 259 Claretians, 226 Franciscans, 204 Piarists, 176 Brothers
of Mary, 165 Christian Brothers, 155 Augustinians, 132 Dominicans, and 114
Jesuits. One source records that 283 nuns were killed, some of whom were badly
tortured. There are accounts of Catholic faithful being forced to swallow
rosary beads, thrown down mine shafts and priests being forced to dig their own
graves before being buried alive. The Catholic Church has canonized several
martyrs of the Spanish Civil War and beatified hundreds more. Canada. Anti-
clerical waves have been seen in Quebec since 1960. The Quiet Revolution is
characterised essentially by an opening toward socialism. United States.
Although anti-clericalism is more often spoke of regarding the history or
current politics of Latin countries where the Catholic Church was established
and the clergy had privileges, Philip Jenkins in his notes that the U.S.,
despite the lack of Catholic establishment, has always had anti-clericals.
Certain branches of Freemasonry. According to the 1917 Catholic Encyclopedia,
Freemasonry was historically viewed by the Catholic Church as a principal
source of anti-Clericalism, – especially in, but not limited to, historically
Catholic countries. Communism. Most Communist governments have been officially
anti-clerical, abolishing religious holidays, teaching atheism in schools,
closing monasteries, church social and educational institutions and many
churches. In the Soviet Union, anti-clericalism was expressed through the
state; in the first five years alone after the Bolshevik revolution, 28 bishops
and 1,200 priests were executed. Anticlericalism in the Islamic world. Iran. As
of the late 1990s and 2000s anticlericalism was reported to be significant in
the Islamic Republic of Iran. Demonstrators have used slogans such as "The
clerics live like kings while we live in poverty!" One report claims "Working-
class Iranian lamented clerical wealth in the face of their own poverty," and
"stories about Swiss bank accounts of leading clerics circulated on Tehran's
rumor mill." "Economist" 16, January 2003 The sentiment there differs from
Western anticlericalism in that it is/was associated not with irreligious
beliefs but with dissatisfaction with theocratic rule there, the perceived
misrule of Islamic clerics (particularly economic dissatisfaction) who rule
under the principle of .
