Anti-Americanism The term anti-Americanism, or anti-American sentiment, refers
to opposition or hostility to the policies, culture, society, economics or
international role of the United States. Common contemporary negative
stereotypes of Americans include that Americans are: aggressive, arrogant,
ignorant, imperialistic, know-it-alls, loudmouthed, militaristic, obsessed with
making money rather than making friends, too moralistic, obnoxious, and that
many Americans are overweight. Political scientist Brendan O'Connor suggests
that Anti-Americanism cannot be isolated as a consistent phenomenon and that
the term originated as a rough composite of stereotypes, prejudices and
criticisms towards Americans or the United States, evolving to more
politically-based criticism. French scholar Marie-France Toinet says use of the
term "is only fully justified if it implies systematic opposition – a sort of
allergic reaction – to America as a whole." Discussions on anti-Americanism
have in most cases lacked a precise definition of what the sentiment entails
(other than a general disfavor), which has led to the term being used broadly
and in an impressionistic manner, resulting in the inexact impressions of the
many expressions described as anti-American. Etymology. In the first edition of
Webster's American Dictionary of the English Language (1828) the word 'anti-
American' was defined as "opposed to America, or to the true interests or
government of the United States; opposed to the revolution in America." In
France the use of the noun form 'antiaméricanisme' has been catalogued from
1948, entering ordinary political language in the 1950s. Interpretations.
Interpretations of anti-Americanism have often been polarized. Anti-Americanism
has been described by sociologist Paul Hollander as "a relentless critical
impulse toward American social, economic, and political institutions,
traditions, and values." German newspaper publisher and political scientist
Josef Joffe suggests five classic aspects of the phenomenon: reducing Americans
to stereotypes, believing the United States to have an irremediably evil
nature, ascribing to the U.S. establishment a vast conspiratorial power aimed
at utterly dominating the globe, holding the United States responsible for all
the evils in the world, and seeking to limit the influence of the United States
by destroying it or by cutting oneself and one's society off from its polluting
products and practices. Other advocates of the significance of the term argue
that anti-Americanism represents a coherent and dangerous ideological current,
comparable to anti-Semitism. Anti-Americanism has also been described as an
attempt to frame the consequences of U.S. policy choices as evidence of a
specifically American moral failure, as opposed to what may be unavoidable
failures of a complicated foreign policy that comes with superpower status. Its
status as an "-ism" is a greatly contended aspect, however. Brendon O'Connor
notes that studies of the topic have been "patchy and impressionistic," and
often one-sided attacks on anti-Americanism as an irrational position. American
academic Noam Chomsky, a prolific critic of U.S. policy, asserts that the use
of the term within the U.S. has parallels with methods employed by totalitarian
states or military dictatorships; he compares the term to "anti-Sovietism", a
label used by the Kremlin to suppress dissident or critical thought, for
instance.  Some have attempted to recognize both positions. French academic
Pierre Guerlain has argued that the term represents two very different
tendencies: "One systematic or essentialist, which is a form of prejudice
targeting all Americans. The other refers to the way criticisms of the United
States are labeled "anti-American" by supporters of U.S. policies in an
ideological bid to discredit their opponents." Guerlain argues that these two
"ideal types" of anti-Americanism can sometimes merge, thus making discussion
of the phenomenon particularly difficult. Other scholars have suggested that a
plural of anti-Americanisms, specific to country and time period, more
accurately describe the phenomenon than any broad generalization. The widely
used "anti-American sentiment", meanwhile, less explicitly implies an ideology
or belief system. Globally, increases in perceived anti-American attitudes
appear to correlate with particular policies or actions, such as the Vietnam
and Iraq wars. For this reason, critics sometimes argue the label is a
propaganda term that is used to dismiss any censure of the United States as
irrational. 18th and 19th centuries. Degeneracy thesis. In the mid- to late-
eighteenth century, a theory emerged among some European intellectuals that the
New World landmasses were inherently inferior to Europe. The so-called
"degeneracy thesis" held that climatic extremes, humidity and other atmospheric
conditions in America physically weakened both men and animals. Some authors
such as James W. Ceaser and Philippe Roger, have interpreted this theory as "a
kind of prehistory of anti-Americanism." and have (in the words of Philippe
Roger) been a historical “constant” since the 18th century, or again an
endlessly repetitive “semantic block”. Others, like Jean-François Revel,
have examined what lay hidden behind this 'fashionable' ideology. Purported
evidence for the idea included the smallness of American fauna, dogs that
ceased to bark, and venomous plants; one theory put forth was that the New
World had emerged from the Biblical flood later than the Old World. Native
Americans were also held to be feeble, small, and without ardor. The theory
originated with Comte de Buffon, a leading French naturalist, in his "Histoire
Naturelle" (1766). The French writer Voltaire joined Buffon and others in
making the argument. Dutchman Cornelius de Pauw, court philosopher to Frederick
II of Prussia became its leading proponent. While Buffon focused on the
American biological environment, de Pauw attacked people native to the
continent. James Ceaser has noted that the denouncement of America as inferior
to Europe was in part motivated by the German government's fear of mass
emigration; de Pauw called on to convince the Germans that the new world was
inferior. De Pauw is also known to have influenced the philosopher Immanuel
Kant in a similar direction. The theory was extended to argue that the natural
environment of the United States would prevent it from ever producing true
culture. Paraphrasing de Pauw, the French Encyclopedist Abbé Raynal wrote,
"America has not yet produced a good poet, an able mathematician, one man of
genius in a single art or a single science." The theory was debated and
rejected by early American thinkers such as Alexander Hamilton, Benjamin
Franklin, and Thomas Jefferson; Jefferson, in his "Notes on the State of
Virginia" (1781), provided a detailed rebuttal of de Buffon. Hamilton also
vigorously rebuked the idea in Federalist No. 11 (1787). One critic, citing
Raynal's ideas, suggests that it was specifically extended to the English
colonies that would become the United States. Roger suggests that the idea of
degeneracy posited a symbolic, as well as a scientific America, that would
evolve beyond the original thesis. He argues that Buffon's ideas formed the
root of a "stratification of negative discourses" that has recurred throughout
the two countries' relationship (and has been matched by persistent anti-Gallic
sentiment in the United States). Culture. According to Brendan O'Connor, some
Europeans criticized Americans for lacking "taste, grace and civility" and
having a brazen and arrogant character. British author Frances Trollope
observed in her 1832 book "Domestic Manners of the Americans" that the greatest
difference between England and the United States was "want of refinement.",
explaining that "that polish which removes the coarser and rougher parts of our
nature is unknown and undreamed of" in America. According to one source her
account "succeeded in angering Americans more than any book written by a
foreign observer before or since". English writer Captain Marryat's critical
account in his "Diary in America, with Remarks on Its Institutions" (1839) also
proved controversial, especially in Detroit where an effigy of the author,
along with his books, was committed to the flames. Other writers critical of
American culture and manners included the bishop Talleyrand in France and
Charles Dickens in England. Dickens' novel "Martin Chuzzlewit" (1844) is a
ferocious satire on American life. Simon Schama says: "By the end of the
nineteenth century, the stereotype of the ugly American – voracious, preachy,
mercenary, and bombastically chauvinist – was firmly in place in Europe."
O'Connor suggests that such prejudices were rooted in an idealised image of
European refinement and that the notion of high European culture pitted against
American vulgarity has not disappeared. Politics and ideology. The young United
States also faced criticism on political and ideological grounds. Ceaser argues
that the Romantic strain of European thought and literature, hostile to the
Enlightenment view of reason and obsessed with history and national character,
disdained the rationalistic American project. The German poet Nikolaus Lenau
commented: "With the expression "Bodenlosigkeit" (absence of ground), I think I
am able to indicate the general character of all American institutions; what we
call Fatherland is here only a property insurance scheme." Ceaser argues in his
essay that such comments often repurposed the language of degeneracy, and the
prejudice came to focus solely on the United States and not Canada and Mexico.
Lenau had emigrated to the United States in 1833 and found that the country did
not live up to his ideals, leading him to return to Germany the following year.
His experiences in the USA were the subject of a novel entitled "Tired of
America" ("Der Amerika-Müde") (1855) by fellow German Ferdinand Kürnberger.
The nature of American democracy was also questioned. The sentiment was that
the country lacked " monarch, aristocracy, strong traditions, official
religion, or rigid class system," according to Rubin, and its democracy was
attacked by some Europeans in the early nineteenth century as degraded, a
travesty, and a failure. The French Revolution, which was loathed by many
European conservatives, also implicated the United States and the idea of
creating a constitution on abstract and universal principles. That the country
was intended to be a bastion of liberty was also seen as fraudulent given that
it had been established with slavery. "How is it that we hear the loudest yelps
for liberty among the drivers of negroes?" asked Samuel Johnson in 1775. He
famously stated that, "I am willing to love all mankind, except an American."
20th century. Communist critiques. The Soviet Union and other Communist nations
emphasized capitalism as the great enemy of Communism, and identified the U.S.
as the leader of the capitalist nations. They sponsored anti-Americanism of all
kinds among followers and fellow travellers. Berman notes that, "Marx himself
largely admired the dynamism of American capitalism and democracy and did not
participate in the anti-Americanism that came to be the hallmark of Communist
ideology in the twentieth century." O'Connor argues that, "communism
represented the starkest version of anti-Americanism – a coherent worldview
that challenged the free market, private property, limited government, and
individualism." In his "Anti-Americanism" (2003), French writer Jean François
Revel argues that anti-Americanism emerges primarily from anticapitalism, and
this critique also comes from non-Communist totalitarian regimes. Fascist
critiques. Drawing on the ideas of Arthur de Gobineau (1816–1882), European
fascists decried the supposed degenerating effect of immigration on the racial
mix of the American population. The Nazi philosopher Alfred Rosenberg argued
that race mixture in the United States made it inferior to countries like
Germany, which had a supposedly pure-bred racial stock. Anti-Semitism was
another factor in these critiques. The belief that America was ruled by a
Jewish conspiracy was common in countries ruled by fascists before and during
World War II. The Jews, the assumed puppet masters behind American plans for
world domination, were also seen as using jazz in a crafty plan to eliminate
racial distinctions. However, despite this belief, Adolf Hitler did not count
America as a credible adversary of the Third Reich because of its incoherent
racial mix; he saw Americans as a "mongrel race", "half-Judaised" and "half-
Negrified". 21st century. 9/11. In a book called "The Rise of Anti-
Americanism", published in 2006, Brendon O'Connor and Martin Griffiths said
that the September 11, 2001 attacks were "quintessential anti-American acts,
which satisfy all of the competing definitions of Anti-Americanism." They ask,
"If 9/11 can be construed as the exemplar of anti-Americanism at work, does it
make much sense to imply that all anti-Americans are complicit with terrorism?"
Leaders in most Middle Eastern countries, including Afghanistan, condemned the
attacks. Saddam Hussein’s Iraq was a notable exception, with an immediate
official statement that "the American cowboys are reaping the fruit of their
crimes against humanity." A poll conducted by the BBC World Service found
positive views in most countries about the influence of the U.S. for the first
time since tracking began in 2005. 19 countries rated U.S. influence
positively, while six leaned negative and two were divided. 46 per cent of the
27 countries polled viewed US influence positively and 34 per cent viewed it
negatively. Middle East, South Asia and North Africa. After World War I,
admiration was expressed for American President Woodrow Wilson's promulgation
of democracy, freedom and self-determination in the Fourteen Points and, during
World War II, the high ideals of the Atlantic Charter received favorable
notice. Cultural anti-Americanism in the Middle East, however, may have its
origins with Sayyid Qutb. Qutb, an Egyptian who was the leading intellectual of
the Muslim Brotherhood, studied in Greeley, Colorado from 1948 to 1950, and
wrote a book, "The America I Have Seen" (1951) based on his impressions. In it
he decried everything in America from individual freedom and taste in music to
Church socials and haircuts. Wrote Qutb, "They danced to the tunes of the
gramophone, and the dance floor was replete with tapping feet, enticing legs,
arms wrapped around waists, lips pressed to lips, and chests pressed to chests.
The atmosphere was full of desire..." He offered a distorted chronology of
American history and was disturbed by its sexually liberated women: "The
American girl is well acquainted with her body's seductive capacity. She knows
it lies in the face, and in expressive eyes, and thirsty lips. She knows
seductiveness lies in the round breasts, the full buttocks, and in the shapely
thighs, sleek legs – and she shows all this and does not hide it." He was
particularly disturbed by jazz, which he called the American's preferred music,
and which "was created by Negroes to satisfy their love of noise and to whet
their sexual desires ..." Qutb's writings influenced generations of militants
and radicals in the Middle East who viewed America as a cultural temptress bent
on overturning traditional customs and morals, especially with respect to the
relations between the sexes. As Paul Hollander has written: "The most obvious
and clear link between anti-Americanism and modernization is encountered in
Islamic countries and other traditional societies where modernization clashes
head on with entrenched traditional beliefs, institutions, and patterns of
behavior, and where it challenges the very meaning of life, social relations,
and religious verities. What becomes of the world when women can go to work and
show large surfaces of skin to men they are not related to? In a recent case,
the indignant male members of a Kurdish family in Sweden were 'provoked' by the
transgressing female of their family who had the temerity to have a job and a
boyfriend and dress in Western ways. She was finally killed by her father." "In
Arab countries and among Muslim populations, anti-Americanism is not only the
monopoly of intellectuals but also a widespread disposition of the masses. In
these areas, traditional religion, radical politics, and economic backwardness
combine to make anti-Americanism an exceptionally widespread, virulent, and
reflexive response to a wide range of collective and personal frustrations and
grievances-and a welcome alternative to any collective or individual self-
examination or stock-taking. More generally, it is the rise of alternatives,
ushered in by modernization, that threatens traditional societies and generates
anti-American reaction. The stability of traditional society (like that of
modern totalitarian systems) rests on the lack of alternatives, on the lack of
choice. Choice is deeply subversive-culturally, politically, psychologically.
The recent outburst of murderous anti-Americanism has added a new dimension to
the phenomenon, or at any rate, throws into relief the intense hatred it may
encapsulate. The violence of 11 September shows that when anti-Americanism is
nurtured by the kind of indignation and resentment that in is stimulated and
sanctioned by religious convictions, it can become spectacularly destructive."
Qutb's ideas influenced Osama Bin Laden, an anti-American Islamic militant from
Saudi Arabia, who was believed to be the founder of the Jihadist organization
Al-Qaeda. In conjunction with several other Islamic militant leaders, bin Laden
issued two fatawa – in 1996 and then again in 1998 – that Muslims should
kill military personnel from the United States until they withdraw military
forces from Islamic countries and withdraw support for Israel. After the 1996
fatwa, entitled "Declaration of War against the Americans Occupying the Land of
the Two Holy Places", bin Laden was put on a criminal file by the U.S. Federal
Bureau of Investigation (FBI) under an American Civil War statute which forbids
instigating violence and attempting to overthrow the U.S. government. He has
also been indicted in United States federal court for his alleged involvement
in the 1998 U.S. embassy bombings in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania and Nairobi,
Kenya, and was on the FBI's Ten Most Wanted Fugitives list. Bin Laden, on
behalf of Al-Qaeda, has allegedly claimed responsibility for the September 11,
2001 attacks in videos released to the public. On 14 January 2009, bin Laden
vowed to continue the fight and open up new fronts against the U.S. on behalf
of the Islamic world. In 2002 and in mid-2004 Zogby International polled the
favorable/unfavorable ratings of the U.S. in Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Jordan,
Lebanon, Morocco, and the United Arab Emirates (UAE). In Zogby's 2002 survey,
76% of Egyptians had a negative attitude toward the United States, compared
with 98% in 2004. In Morocco, 61% viewed the country unfavorably in 2002, but
in two years, that number had jumped to 88 percent. In Saudi Arabia, such
responses rose from 87% in 2002 to 94% in 2004. Attitudes were virtually
unchanged in Lebanon but improved slightly in the UAE, from 87% who said in
2002 that they disliked the United States to 73% in 2004. However, most of
these countries mainly objected to foreign policies that they considered
unfair. According to Tamim Ansary, in "Destiny Disrupted: A History of the
World Through Islamic Eyes" (2009) early views of America in the Middle East
and the Muslim World were mostly positive. Iran. The chant "Death to America"
has been in use in Iran since at least the Iranian revolution in 1979, along
with other phrases often represented as anti-American. A 1953 coup which
involved the CIA was cited as a grievance. State-sponsored murals characterised
as anti-American dot the streets of Tehran. It has been suggested that under
Ayatollah Khomeini anti-Americanism was little more than a way to distinguish
between domestic supporters and detractors, and even the phrase "Great Satan"
which has previously been associated with anti-Americanism, appears to now
signify either the United States or the United Kingdom. Pakistan. Negative
attitudes towards the USA's influence on the world has risen in Pakistan as a
result of U.S. drone attacks on the country introduced by George W. Bush and
continued by Barack Obama. In a poll surveying opinions towards the United
States, Pakistan scored as the most negatively aligned nation, jointly
alongside Serbia. Europe. He went on to say that expressions of the phenomenon
in the last 60 years have contained ever-changing combinations of these
elements, the configurations depending on internal crises within the groups or
societies articulating them as much as anything done by American society in all
its forms. In 2004, Sergio Fabbrini wrote that the perceived post-9/11
unilateralism of the 2003 invasion of Iraq fed deep rooted anti-American
feeling in Europe, bringing it to the surface. In his article, he highlighted
European fears surrounding the Americanization of the economy, culture and
political process of Europe. Fabbrini in 2011 identified a cycle in anti-
Americanism: modest in the 1990s, it grew explosively between 2003 and 2008,
then declined after 2008. He sees the current version as related to images of
American foreign policy-making as unrestrained by international institutions or
world opinion. This it is the unilateral policy process and the arrogance of
policy makers, not the specific policy decisions, that are decisive. In her
contribution to the seminal book "Anti-Americanisms in World Politics" edited
by Peter Katzenstein and Robert Keohane in 2006, Sophie Meunier writes about
French anti-Americanism. She contends that although it has a long history
(older than the U.S. itself) and is the most easily recognizable anti-
Americanism in Europe, it may not have had real policy consequences on the
United States and thus may have been less damaging than more pernicious and
invisible anti-Americanism in other countries. During the George W. Bush
administration, public opinion of America declined in most European countries.
A Pew Global Attitudes Project poll showed "favourable opinions" of America
between 2000 and 2006 dropping from 83% to 56% in the United Kingdom, from 62%
to 39% in France, from 78% to 37% in Germany and from 50% to 23% in Spain. In
Europe in 2002, vandalism of American companies was reported in Athens,
Zürich, Tbilisi, Moscow and elsewhere. In Venice, 8 to 10 masked individuals
claiming to be anti-globalists attacked a McDonald's restaurant. In Athens, at
the demonstrations commemorating the 17th of November Uprising there is a march
towards the US embassy to emphasize the US backing of the Greek military junta
of 1967–1974 attended by many people each year. Hatlapa and Markovits portray
President Obama as an angel – or more exactly, like a rock star – in
contrast to the devilish image of Bush. Hence his early Nobel Peace Prize. But
they argue that "Obamamania" masks a deep-seated distrust and disdain of
America. France. In the 1950s the Suez Crisis of 1956 caused dismay among the
French right, which already was angry at the lack of American support during
Dien Bien Phu in 1954. For the Socialists and Communists of the French left, it
was the Vietnam War and U.S. "imperialism" that were the sources of resentment.
Much later, the alleged weapons of mass destruction affair certainly dirtied
the previously favourable image. In 2008, 85% of the French people considered
the American government and banks to be most liable for the Financial crisis of
2007–2010. Russia. Following the 2008 South Ossetia War, anti-Americanism was
said to have grown amongst the intellectual-political class in Russia too. In
response to the conflict with Georgia, Boris Kagarlitsky said: "Ironically, one
of the dominant trends here is that we are anti-American because we want to be
exactly like America. We are angry that Americans are allowed to invade minor
nations and we are not." Turkey. In Turkey, anti-American protestors held signs
saying “Obama, new president of the American imperialism that is the enemy of
the world’s people, your hands are also bloody. Get out of our country.”
when Barack Obama visited Turkey. Protestors also shouted phrases such as
"Yankee go home" and "Obama go home". J. Ceaser has claimed that anti-
Americanism in Europe has been an influence on Islamic terrorists, though his
views have been described as 'combative'. Ozgur Taskaya states that the root of
secular anti-Americanism in Turkey lies within the so-called conspiracy
theories about the USA. East Asia and Australia. China. In China, there has
been a history of anti-Americanism, beginning with the general disdain for
foreigners in the early 19th century that culminated in the Boxer Rebellion of
1900. When Mao Zedong and the Communists came to power in 1948, he launched an
anti-American campaign that intensified as China and the U.S. fought a major
proxy war in Korea, 1950–53. One of Mao's goals was to identify and destroy
factions inside China that might be favorable to capitalism. Mao never intended
on friendly relations with the U.S., Sheng argues. Mao ridiculed the U.S. as a
"paper tiger," occupiers of Taiwan, "the enemy of the people of the world and
has increasingly isolated itself" and "monopoly capitalist groups." After Mao's
death and the Chinese economic reforms of the 1980s，hostility diminished
sharply, and large-scale trade and investments, as well as cultural exchanges
became major factors. The Taiwanese Strait Crisis has led China to blame the
U.S. for any issues that arise in the bilateral relationship between China and
Taiwan, as they believe that American support of Taiwan is an effort to weaken
their country. Recently, in 2009, Luo Ping criticized America's laissez-faire
capitalism and said that he hated America when the United States Treasury would
start to print money and depreciate the value of the US dollar, thus cheapening
the value of China's purchase of U.S. bonds. Chinese hackers have also
conducted extensive cyberwarfare against American institutions and citizens
targeting the U.S. and its Western allies. Furthermore, China's leaders present
their country as an alternative to the meddling power of the West. Japan. In
Japan, objections to the behavior and presence of American military personnel
are sometimes reported as anti-Americanism, such as the 1995 Okinawan rape
incident. The ongoing U.S. military presence in Okinawa remains a contentious
issue in Japan. While protests have arisen over specific incidents, they are
often reflective of deeper historical resentments. Robert Hathaway, director of
the Wilson Center's Asia program, suggests: "The growth of anti-American
sentiment in both Japan and South Korea must be seen not simply as a response
to American policies and actions, but as reflective of deeper domestic trends
and developments within these Asian countries." In Japan, a variety of threads
have contributed to anti-Americanism in the post-war era, including pacifism on
the left, nationalism on the right, and opportunistic worries over American
influence in Japanese economic life. South Korea. Speaking to the Wilson
Center, Katherine Moon notes that while the majority of South Koreans support
the American alliance "anti-Americanism also represents the collective venting
of accumulated grievances that in many instances have lain hidden for decades."
In the 1990s, scholars, policy makers, and the media noted that anti-
Americanism was motivated by the rejection of authoritarianism and a resurgent
nationalism, this nationalist Anti-Americanism continued into the 2000s fuelled
by a number of incidents such as the ‘IMF’ crisis. "Fucking USA" is an
anti-American protest song written by South Korean singer and activist Yoon
Min-suk. Strongly anti-US foreign policy and anti-Bush, the song was written in
2002 at a time when, following the Apolo Ohno Olympic controversy and an
incident in which two Korean middle school students were killed under the
wheels of a U.S. Army vehicle, anti-American sentiment in South Korea reached
high levels. However, by 2009, a majority of South Koreans were reported as
having a favorable view of the United States. Australia. The Australian Anti-
Bases Campaign Coalition (AABCC) was formed on the basis of lobbying and
protests that developed over the years from the 1960s when the majority of U.S.
bases in Australia were established. It was founded by the New South Wales
branch of the PND (People For Nuclear Disarmament). In 1974, several hundred
people travelled to North West Cape from around Australia to protest and occupy
the base. Anti-Americanism is known to exist among school teachers in
Australia, which has been condemned by government officials. In August 2005,
Treasurer Peter Costello condemned anti-American sentiment by teachers and
criticised the teaching of history in Australian schools. John Kilcullen,
professor and senior research fellow in the department of Politics and
International Relations – Macquarie University, says that the Middle Eastern
conflict foments anti-American sentiments in Australia, due to a perception of
U.S. favoritism for Israel. According to an article published by The Monthly
magazine, Australian people muttered stories about George W. Bush over glasses
of beer and despaired of neoconservatism in coffee shops, lamenting the so-
called Ugly American activities. Rupert Murdoch, during his visit to Australia,
said that he was worried about a regrettable anti-American sentiment in the
country. In a poll taken by US magazine "Reader's Digest" with 1000
Australians, 15 percent of Australians described themselves as "anti-American".
Another 67 per cent held neutral views of America, and 17 per cent said they
were "pro-American". In the survey, 71 per cent of Australians said they would
not like to live in the US. ^ "The Global Presidential Poll: Australia",
"Reader's Digest Online", Retrieved on 3 December 2008. The Americas. Latin
America. In Latin America, anti-American sentiment has deep roots dating back
to the 1830s and the 1836 Texas Revolution, in which the province seceded from
Mexico. Nine years later, encouraged by the Monroe Doctrine and "Manifest
Destiny", the United States annexed the Republic of Texas – at its request,
but against vehement opposition by Mexico, which refused to recognize Texas'
independence – and began its aggressive expansion into Western North America.
Mexican anti-American sentiment was further inflamed by the resulting
1846–1848 Mexican-American War, in which Mexico lost more than half of its
territory to the U.S. The Chilean writer Francisco Bilbao predicted in "America
in Danger" (1856) that the loss of Texas and northern Mexico to "the talons of
the eagle" was just a foretaste of an American bid for world domination. Such
interventions from the USA prompted a later ruler of Mexico, Porfirio Diaz, to
lament "Poor Mexico, so far from God, and so close to the United States".
Mexico's National Museum of Interventions, opened in 1981, is a testament to
Mexico's sense of grievance with the United States. The 1855 American
intervention in Nicaragua and the Spanish-American War of 1898, which turned
Cuba into a virtual dependency of the United States, in the context of the Big
Stick ideology espoused by Theodore Roosevelt's corollary to the Monroe
Doctrine that led to numerous interventions in Central America and the
Caribbean, also prompted hatred of the US in other regions of the Americas. A
very influential formulation of Latin-American anti-Americanism, engendered by
the 1898 war, was the Uruguayan journalist José Enrique Rodó's essay "Ariel"
(1900) in which the spiritual values of the South American Ariel are contrasted
to the brutish mass-culture of the American Caliban. This essay had enormous
influence throughout Spanish America in the 1910s and 1920s, and prompted
resistance to what was seen as American cultural imperialism. Perceived racist
attitudes of the white Anglo-Saxon Protestants of the North towards the
populations of Latin America also caused resentment. In the twentieth century,
American support for the 1954 Guatemalan coup d'état against the
democratically-elected President Jacobo Arbenz Guzmán fueled anti-Americanism
in the region. This CIA-sponsored coup prompted a former president of that
country, Juan José Arévalo to write a fable entitled "The Shark and the
Sardines" (1961) in which a predatory shark (representing the USA) overawes the
sardines of Latin America. Vice-President Richard Nixon's tour of South America
in 1958 prompted a spectacular eruption of anti-Americanism. The tour became
the focus of violent protests which climaxed in Caracas, Venezuela where Nixon
was almost killed by a raging mob as his motorcade drove from the airport to
the city. In response, President Dwight D. Eisenhower assembled troops at
Guantanamo Bay and a fleet of battleships in the Caribbean to intervene to save
Nixon if necessary. Fidel Castro, the revolutionary leader of Cuba, has
throughout his career tried to co-ordinate long-standing Latin American
resentments against the USA through military and propagandist means. He was
aided in this goal by the failed Bay of Pigs Invasion of Cuba in 1961, planned
and implemented by the American government against his regime. This disaster
ruined American credibility in the Americas and gave a boost to her critics
worldwide. According to Rubin and Rubin, Castro's Second Declaration of Havana,
in February 1962, "constituted a declaration of war on the United States and
the enshrinement of a new theory of anti-Americanism". Castro called America "a
vulture...feeding on humanity" The United States embargo against Cuba
maintained resentment and Castro's colleague, the famed revolutionary Che
Guevara, expressed his hopes during the Vietnam War of "creating a Second or a
Third Vietnam" in the Latin American region against the designs of what he
believed to be US imperialism. The 1964 Brazilian coup d'état, the invasion of
the Dominican Republic in 1965, US involvement in Operation Condor, the 1973
Chilean and 1976 Argentine Coup d'états, and the Salvadoran Civil War, the
support of the Contras, the training of terrorists and war criminals in the
School of the Americas and the refusal to extradite a terrorist, U.S. support
for dictators such as Augusto Pinochet, Anastasio Somoza, Alfredo Stroessner
and pre-1989 Manuel Noriega have continued to influence regional attitudes in a
negative way. The perceived failures of the neo-liberal reforms of the 1980s
and the 1990s intensified opposition to the Washington consensus, leading to a
resurgence in support for Pan-Americanism, support for popular movements in the
region, the nationalization of key industries and centralization of government.
America's tightening of the economic embargo on Cuba in 1996 and 2004 also
caused resentment among Latin American leaders and has prompted them to use the
Rio Group and the Madrid-based Ibero-American Summits as meeting places rather
than the American dominated OAS. This trend has been reinforced through the
creation of a series of regional political bodies such as Unasur and the
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States, and a strong opposition to
the materialization of the Washington-sponsored Free Trade Area of the Americas
at the 2005 4th Summit of the Americas. Furthermore, the renewal of the
concession for the U.S. military base in Manta, Ecuador was met by considerable
criticism, derision, and even doubt by the supporters of such an expansion. The
near-war sparked by the 2008 Andean diplomatic crisis was expressed by a high-
level Ecuadorean military officer as being carried under American auspices. The
officer said "a large proportion of senior officers," share "the conviction
that the United States was an accomplice in the attack" (launched on by the
Colombian military on a FARC camp in Ecuador, near the Colombian border). The
Ecuadorean military retaliated by stating the 10-year lease on the base, which
expired in November 2009, would not be renewed and that the U.S. military
presence was expected to be scaled down starting three months before the
expiration date. Canada. Anti-Americanism in Canada has unique historic roots.
When the Continental Congress was called in 1774, an invitation was sent to
Quebec (then known as Canada) and Nova Scotia. However Canadians expressed
little interest in joining the Congress, and the following year the American
army invaded Canada, but was defeated at the Battle of Quebec. Although the
American Articles of Confederation later pre-approved Canada as a U.S. state,
public opinion had turned against them. Soon 40,000 loyalist refugees arrived
from the United States, including 2,000 Black Loyalists, many of whom had
fought for the Crown against the American Revolution. To them, the republic
they left behind was violent and anarchic, ruled by money and mob rule. Pro-
British imperialists repeatedly warned against American-style republicanism and
democracy as little more than mob rule. Anti-Americanism, as a political
tactic, was sometimes used by the Conservatives to attack the supposed Liberal
Party affinity for Americans, as in the 1911 elections. Anti-Americanism thus
remained a fixture in Canadian partisan politics, as employed by such leaders
as prime minister John G. Diefenbaker in the 1950s. Canadian intellectuals, who
wrote about the U.S. in the first half of the 20th century, identified America
as the world center of modernity, and deplored it. Imperialists (who admired
the British Empire) explained that Canadians had narrowly escaped American
conquest with its rejection of tradition, its worship of "progress" and
technology, and its mass culture; they explained that Canada was much better
because of its commitment to orderly government and societal harmony. There
were a few ardent defenders of the nation to the south, notably liberal and
socialist intellectuals such as F. R. Scott and Jean-Charles Harvey
(1891–1967). Brendon O'Connor & Martin Griffiths state in their book "Anti-
Americanism" that they would at first glance think that Canadians seem as
likely as others to embrace characteristics that are characterised as anti-
American. O'Conner and Griffiths include such actions as criticising Americans
as a people, or the US as a country as being anti-American often demonising,
denigrating and resorting to stereotypes. They have also written that the Anti-
Americanism found in Canada had unique qualities, nowhere else has it been so
entrenched for so long, nor so central to the political culture as in Canada.
Canadian historian Kim Richard Nossal thinks that a low level attenuated form
of anti-Americanism permeates Canadian political culture, though "designed
primarily as a means to differentiate Canadians from Americans."
