Ariel Sharon Ariel Sharon (, , "Ar'il Sharoon", also known by his diminutive
Arik, ◊ê÷∑◊®◊ô◊ß, born Ariel Scheinermann, ◊ê◊®◊ô◊ê◊ú ◊©◊ô◊ô◊ ◊®◊û◊ü on 26
February 1928) is an Israeli statesman and retired general, who served as
Israel‚Äôs 11th Prime Minister. He has been in a persistent vegetative state
since suffering a stroke on 4 January 2006. Sharon was a commander in the
Israeli Army since its inception in 1948. As a paratrooper and then officer he
participated prominently in the 1948 War of Independence, becoming platoon
commander of the Alexandroni Brigade and taking part in many battles, including
Operation Ben Nun Alef. He was an instrumental figure in the creation of Unit
101, the Retribution operations, the 1956 Suez War, the Six-Day War of 1967,
the War of Attrition and the Yom-Kippur War of 1973. As Minister of Defense, he
directed the 1982 Lebanon War. During his military career, he was considered
the greatest field commander in Israel's history, and one of the country's
greatest ever military strategists. After his assault of the Sinai in the Six-
Day War and his encirclement of the Egyptian Third Army in the Yom Kippur War,
the Israeli public nicknamed him "The King of Israel" and "The Lion of God".
After retiring from the army, Sharon had joined the Likud party, and served in
a number of ministerial posts in Likud-led governments in 1977‚Äì1992 and
1996‚Äì1999. He became the leader of the Likud in 2000, and served as
Israel‚Äôs Prime Minister from 2001 to 2006. In 1983 the commission established
by the Israeli Government found that as Minister of Defense during the 1982
Lebanon War Sharon bore "personal responsibility" for the massacre by Lebanese
militias of Palestinian civilians in the refugee camps of Sabra and Shatila,
for his having disregarded the prospect of acts of bloodshed by the Phalangists
against the population of the refugee camps, and not having prevented their
entry. The Kahan Commission recommended Sharon's removal as Defense Minister,
and Sharon did resign after his initial refusal to do so. In the 1970s, 1980s,
and 1990s, Sharon championed construction of Israeli settlements in the West
Bank and Gaza Strip. However, as Prime Minister, in 2004‚Äì2005 Sharon
orchestrated Israel's unilateral disengagement from the Gaza Strip. Facing
stiff opposition to this policy within the Likud, in November 2005 he left
Likud to form a new Kadima party. His stroke occurred a few months before he
had been expected to win a new election on what Matt Rees asserted to be "a
promise of clearing Israel out of most of the West Bank". Early life. Sharon
was born in 1928 in Kfar Malal, then in the British Mandate of Palestine, to a
family of Lithuanian Jews¬ ‚Äî Shmuel Sheinerman (1896‚Äì1956) of Brest-Litovsk
and Dvora Scheinerman (1900‚Äì1988) of Mogilev. His father was studying
agronomy at the University of Tbilisi, Georgia (Georgian SSR) and his mother
had just started her fourth year of medical studies when the couple married.
They immigrated to the British Mandate Palestine from Russia, fleeing the early
Pogroms associated with the Bolshevik Revolution. Apart from Hebrew, Sharon's
father spoke Yiddish and his mother spoke Russian; their son also learned to
speak Russian as a young boy.  Four years after their arrival at Kfar Malal,
the Sheinermans had a daughter, Yehudit (Dita), and Ariel was born two years
later. At age 10, Sharon entered the Zionist youth movement Hassadeh. In 1942
at the age of 14, Sharon joined the Gadna, a paramilitary youth battalion, and
later the Haganah, the underground paramilitary force and the Jewish military
precursor to the Israel Defense Forces (IDF). Military career. From 1948 War to
Suez Crisis. At the creation of Israel (and Haganah's transformation into the
Israel Defense Forces), Sharon became a platoon commander in the Alexandroni
Brigade. He was severely wounded in the groin by the Jordanian Arab Legion in
the first Battle of Latrun, an unsuccessful attempt to relieve the besieged
Jewish community of Jerusalem. In September 1949, Sharon was promoted to
company commander (of the Golani Brigade's reconnaissance unit) and in 1950 to
intelligence officer for Central Command. He then took leave to begin studies
in history and Middle Eastern culture at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem. A
year and a half later, he was asked to return to active service in the rank of
major and as the leader of the new Unit 101, Israel's first special forces
unit. Unit 101 undertook a series of military raids against Jordan which then
held the West Bank in retaliation for Palestinian peoplefedayeen attacks on
Israel. The raids also helped bolster Israeli morale and fortify its deterrent
image. The unit was known for raids against Arab civilians and military
targets, most notably the widely condemned Qibya massacre in the fall of 1953,
in which 69 Palestinian civilians, some of them children, were killed when
Sharon's troops attacked the village and dynamited buildings there in a
reprisal for a fedayeen attack in Yehud. A few months after its founding, Unit
101 was merged with the 890 Paratroopers Battalion to create the Paratroopers
Brigade (Sharon eventually became the latter's commander). It continued its
raids into Arab territory, culminating with the attack on the Qalqilyah police
station in the autumn of 1956. In 1952‚Äì1953, Sharon attended the Hebrew
University of Jerusalem, taking History and Oriental studies. Sharon was
widowed twice. Shortly after becoming a military instructor, he married
Margalit, with whom he had a son, Gur. Margalit died in a car accident in May
1962. Their son, Gur, died in October 1967 after a friend accidentally shot him
while they were playing with a rifle. After Margalit's death, Sharon married
her younger sister, Lily. They had two sons, Omri and Gilad. Lily Sharon died
of cancer in 2000. From 1958 to 1962, Sharon served as commander of an infantry
brigade and studied law at Tel Aviv University. 1956 Suez War. In the 1956 Suez
War (the British "Operation Musketeer"), Sharon commanded Unit 202 (the
Paratroopers Brigade), and was responsible for taking ground east of the
Sinai's Mitla Pass and eventually taking the pass itself. Having successfully
carried out the first part of his mission (joining a battalion parachuted near
Mitla with the rest of the brigade moving on ground), Sharon's unit was
deployed near the pass. Neither reconnaissance aircraft nor scouts reported
enemy forces inside the Mitla Pass. Sharon, whose forces were initially heading
east, away from the pass, reported to his superiors that he was increasingly
concerned with the possibility of an enemy thrust through the pass, which could
attack his brigade from the flank or the rear. Sharon asked for permission to
attack the pass several times, but his requests were denied, though he was
allowed to check its status so that if the pass was empty, he could receive
permission to take it later. Sharon sent a small scout force, which was met
with heavy fire and became bogged down due to vehicle malfunction in the middle
of the pass. Sharon ordered the rest of his troops to attack in order to aid
their comrades.Sharon was criticized by his superiors and he was damaged by
allegations several years later made by several former subordinates, who
claimed that Sharon tried to provoke the Egyptians and sent out the scouts in
bad faith, ensuring that a battle would ensue. Sharon had assaulted Themed in a
dawn attack, and had stormed the town with his armor through the Themed Gap.
Sharon routed the Sudanese police company, and captured the settlement. On his
way to the Nakla, Sharon's men came under attack from Egyptian MIG-15s. On the
30th, Sharon linked up with Eytan near Nakla. Dayan had no more plans for
further advances beyond the passes, but Sharon nonetheless decided to attack
the Egyptian positions at Jebel Heitan. Sharon sent his lightly armed
paratroopers against dug-in Egyptians supported by aircraft, tanks and heavy
artillery. Sharon's actions were in response to reports of the arrival of the
1st and 2nd Brigades of the 4th Egyptian Armored Division in the area, which
Sharon believed would annihilate his forces if he did not seize the high
ground. Sharon sent two infantry companies, a mortar battery and some AMX-13
tanks under the command of Mordechai Gur into the Heitan Defile on the
afternoon of 31 October 1956. The Egyptian forces occupied strong defensive
positions and brought down heavy anti-tank, mortar and machine gun fire on the
IDF force. Gur's men were forced to retreat into the "Saucer", where they were
surrounded and came under heavy fire. Hearing of this, Sharon sent in another
task force while Gur's men used the cover of night to scale the walls of the
Heitan Defile.During the ensuing action, the Egyptians were defeated and forced
to retreat. A total of 260 Egyptian and 38 Israeli soldiers were killed during
the battle at Mitla. Sharon's actions were surrounded in controversy due to
these deaths, which many within the IDF criticised as being the result of an
act of unnecessary and unauthorised aggression. Six-Day War and Yom Kippur War.
The Mitla incident hindered Sharon's military career for several years. In the
meantime, he occupied the position of an infantry brigade commander and
received a law degree from Tel Aviv University. However, when Yitzhak Rabin
became Chief of Staff in 1964, Sharon began again to rise rapidly in the ranks,
occupying the positions of Infantry School Commander and Head of Army Training
Branch, eventually achieving the rank of Aluf (Major General). In the 1967 Six-
Day War, Sharon commanded the most powerful armored division on the Sinai front
which made a breakthrough in the Kusseima-Abu-Ageila fortified area (see Battle
of Abu-Ageila). In 1969, he was appointed the Head of IDF's Southern Command.
He had no further promotions before retiring in August 1973. Soon after, he
joined the Likud ("Unity") political party. At the start of the Yom Kippur War
on 6 October 1973, Sharon was called back to active duty along with his
assigned reserve armored division. On his farm, before he left for the front
line, the Reserve Commander, Zeev Amit, said to him, "How are we going to get
out of this?" Sharon replied. "You don't know? We will cross the Suez Canal and
the war will end over there." Sharon arrived at the front, to his fourth war,
in a civilian car. His forces did not engage the Egyptian Army immediately,
despite his requests. Under cover of darkness Sharon's forces moved to a point
on the Suez Canal that had been prepared before the war. Bridging equipment was
thrown across the canal on 17 October. The bridgehead was between two Egyptian
Armies. He then headed north towards Ismailia, intent on cutting the Egyptian
second army's supply lines, but his division was halted south of the Fresh
Water Canal. Abraham (Bren) Adan's division passed over the bridgehead into
Africa advancing to within 101 kilometers of Cairo. His division managed to
encircle Suez, cutting off and encircling the Third Army. Tensions between the
two generals followed Sharon's decision, but a military tribunal later found
his action was militarily effective. This move was regarded by many Israelis as
the turning point of the war in the Sinai front. Thus, Sharon is widely viewed
as responsible for Israel's ground victory in the Sinai in 1973. A photo of
Sharon wearing a head bandage on the Suez Canal became a famous symbol of
Israeli military prowess. Sharon's political positions were controversial and
he was relieved of duty in February 1974. Early political career. Beginnings of
political career. In the 1940s and 1950s, Sharon seemed to be personally
devoted to the ideals of Mapai, the predecessor of the modern Labor Party.
However, after retiring from military service, he was instrumental in
establishing Likud in July 1973 by a merger of Herut, the Liberal Party and
independent elements. Sharon became chairman of the campaign staff for that
year's elections, which were scheduled for November. Two and a half weeks after
the start of the election campaign, the Yom Kippur War erupted and Sharon was
called back to reserve service. In the elections Sharon won a seat, but a year
later he resigned. From June 1975 to March 1976, Sharon was a special aide to
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin. He planned his return to politics for the 1977
elections; first he tried to return to the Likud and replace Menachem Begin at
the head of the party. He suggested to Simha Erlich, who headed the Liberal
Party bloc in the Likud, that he was more fitting than Begin to win an election
victory; he was rejected, however. He then tried to join the Labor Party and
the centrist Democratic Movement for Change, but was rejected by those parties
too. Only then did he form his own list, Shlomtzion, which won two Knesset
seats in the subsequent elections. Immediately after the elections he merged
Shlomtzion with the Likud and became Minister of Agriculture. When Sharon
joined Begin's government he had relatively little political experience. During
this period, Sharon supported the Gush Emunim settlements movement and was
viewed as the patron of the settlers' movement. He used his position to
encourage the establishment of a network of Israeli settlements in the occupied
territories to prevent the possibility of Palestinian Arabs' return of these
territories. Sharon doubled the number of Jewish settlements on the West Bank
and Gaza Strip during his tenure. On his settlement policy, Sharon said while
addressing a meeting of the Tzomet party: "Everybody has to move, run and grab
as many (Judean) hilltops as they can to enlarge the (Jewish) settlements
because everything we take now will stay ours... Everything we don't grab will
go to them." After the 1981 elections, Begin rewarded Sharon for his important
contribution to Likud's narrow win, by appointing him Minister of Defense. 1982
Lebanon War and Sabra and Shatila massacre. During the 1982 Lebanon War, while
Sharon was Defense Minister, the Sabra and Shatila massacre occurred between 16
September and 18. Between 800 and 3,500 Palestinian civilians in the Sabra and
Shatila refugee camps were killed by the Phalanges‚ÄîLebanese Maronite
Christian militias. The Security Chief of the Phalange militia, Elie Hobeika,
was the ground commander of the militiamen who entered the Palestinian camps
and killed the Palestinians. The Phalange had been sent into the camps to clear
out PLO fighters while Israeli forces surrounded the camps, blocking camp exits
and providing logistical support. The killings led some to label Sharon "the
Butcher of Beirut". Robert Maroun Hatem, Elie Hobeika's bodyguard, stated in
his book "From Israel to Damascus" that Hobeika ordered the massacre of
civilians in defiance of Israeli instructions to behave like a "dignified"
army. Kahan Commission finds Sharon shared responsibility for massacre. The
investigative Kahan Commission found the Israeli Defence Forces indirectly
responsible for the massacre and that no Israeli was directly responsible for
the events which occurred in the camps. The commission also asserted that
Israel had indirect responsibility for the massacre since the I.D.F. held the
area. The Commission determined that the massacre at Sabra and Shatilla was
carried out by a Phalangist unit, acting on its own but its entry was known to
Israel and approved by Sharon. Prime Minister Begin was found responsible for
not exercising greater involvement and awareness in the matter of introducing
the Phalangists into the camps. Sharon initially refused to resign as Defense
Minister and Prime Minister Menachem Begin refused to fire him. After a grenade
was tossed into a dispersing crowd of an Israeli Peace Now march, killing Emil
Grunzweig and injuring 10 others, a compromise was reached: Sharon agreed to
forfeit the post of Defense Minister but stayed in the cabinet as a Minister
without Portfolio. Sharon's resignation as Defense Minister is listed as one of
the important events of the Tenth Knesset. In its 21 February 1983 issue,
"Time" published a story implying Sharon was directly responsible for the
massacres. Sharon sued "Time" for libel in American and Israeli courts.
Although the jury concluded that the "Time" story included false allegations,
they found that "Time" had not acted with "actual malice" and so was not guilty
of libel. On 18 June 2001 relatives of the victims of the Sabra massacre began
proceedings in Belgium to have Sharon indicted on war crimes charges. Elie
Hobeika, the leader of the Phalange militia who carried out the massacres, was
assassinated in January 2001, several months before he was scheduled to testify
against Sharon for the trial. The Arab Press have widely speculated that
Hobeika's assassination was ordered by Israel. In June 2002, a Brussels Appeals
Court rejected the lawsuit because the law was subsequently changed to disallow
such lawsuits unless a Belgian citizen is involved. Political downturn and
recovery. After his dismissal from the Defense Ministry post, Sharon remained
in successive governments as a Minister without Portfolio (1983‚Äì1984),
Minister for Trade and Industry (1984‚Äì1990), and Minister of Housing
Construction (1990‚Äì1992). In the Knesset, he was member of the Foreign
Affairs and Defense committee from (1990‚Äì1992) and Chairman of the committee
overseeing Jewish immigration from the Soviet Union. During this period he was
a rival to then prime minister Yitzhak Shamir, but failed in various bids to
replace him as chairman of Likud. Their rivalry reached a head in February
1990, when Sharon grabbed the microphone from Shamir, who was addressing the
Likud central committee, and famously exclaimed: "Who's for wiping out
terrorism?" The incident was widely viewed as an apparent coup attempt against
Shamir's leadership of the party. In Benjamin Netanyahu's 1996‚Äì1999
government, Sharon was Minister of National Infrastructure (1996‚Äì98), and
Foreign Minister (1998‚Äì99). Upon the election of the Barak Labor government,
Sharon became leader of the Likud party. Campaign for Prime Minister,
2000‚Äì2001. On 28 September 2000, Sharon and an escort of over 1,000 Israeli
police officers visited the Temple Mount complex, site of the Dome of the Rock
and al-Aqsa Mosque, the holiest place in the world to Jews (observant Jews will
not actually walk inside the enclosure but they pray at the outside wall) and
the third holiest site in Islam. Sharon declared that the complex would remain
under perpetual Israeli control. Palestinian commentators accused Sharon of
purposely inflaming emotions with the event to provoke a violent response and
obstruct success of delicate ongoing peace talks. On the following day, a large
number of Palestinian demonstrators and an Israeli police contingent confronted
each other at the site. According to the U.S. State Department, ‚ÄúPalestinians
held large demonstrations and threw stones at police in the vicinity of the
Western Wall. Police used rubber-coated metal bullets and live ammunition to
disperse the demonstrators, killing 4 persons and injuring about 200.‚Äù
According to the GOI, 14 policemen were injured. Sharon's visit, a few months
before his election as Prime Minister, came after archeologists claimed that
extensive building operations at the site were destroying priceless
antiquities. Sharon's supporters claim that that Yasser Arafat and the
Palestinian National Authority planned the intifada months prior to Sharon's
visit. They state that Palestinian security chief Jabril Rajoub provided
assurances that if Sharon did not enter the mosques, no problems would arise.
They also often quote statements by Palestinian Authority officials,
particularly Imad Falouji, the P.A. Communications Minister, who admitted
months after Sharon's visit that the violence had been planned in July, far in
advance of Sharon's visit, stating the intifada "was carefully planned since
the return of (Palestinian President) Yasser Arafat from Camp David
negotiations rejecting the U.S. conditions". According to the Mitchell Report,
The Mitchell Report found that In addition, the report stated, The Or
Commission, an Israeli panel of inquiry appointed to investigate the October
2000 events, Palestinians doubt the existence of popular support for Sharon's
actions. Polls published in the media, as well as the 140% call-up of
reservists (as opposed to the 60% in regular periods) seem to indicate that the
Israeli public is quite supportive of Sharon's policies. A survey conducted by
Tel Aviv University's Jaffe Center in May 2004 found that 80% of Jewish
Israelis believe that the Israel Defense Forces have succeeded in militarily
countering the Al-Aqsa Intifada. Prime minister. After the collapse of Barak's
government, Sharon was elected Prime Minister in February 2001. On 20 July
2004, Sharon called on French Jews to emigrate from France to Israel
immediately, in light of an increase in French anti-Semitism (94 anti-Semitic
assaults reported in the first six months of 2004 compared to 47 in 2003).
France has the third largest Jewish population in the world (about 600,000
people). Sharon observed that an "unfettered anti-Semitism" reigned in France.
The French government responded by describing his comments as "unacceptable",
as did the French representative Jewish organization CRIF, which denied
Sharon's claim of intense anti-Semitism in French society. An Israeli
spokesperson later claimed that Sharon had been misunderstood. France then
postponed a visit by Sharon. Upon his visit, both Sharon and French President
Jacques Chirac were described as showing a willingness to put the issue behind
them. Unilateral disengagement. In May 2003, Sharon endorsed the Road Map for
Peace put forth by the United States, European Union, and Russia, which opened
a dialogue with Mahmud Abbas, and announced his commitment to the creation of a
Palestinian state in the future. He embarked on a course of unilateral
withdrawal from the Gaza Strip, while maintaining control of its coastline and
airspace. Sharon's plan has been welcomed by both the Palestinian Authority and
Israel's left wing as a step towards a final peace settlement. However, it has
been greeted with opposition from within his own Likud party and from other
right wing Israelis, on national security, military, and religious grounds.
Disengagement from Gaza. On 1 December 2004, Sharon dismissed five ministers
from the Shinui party for voting against the government's 2005 budget. In
January 2005 Sharon formed a national unity government that included
representatives of Likud, Labor, and Meimad and Degel HaTorah as "out-of-
government" supporters without any seats in the government (United Torah
Judaism parties usually reject having ministerial offices as a policy). Between
16 and 30 August 2005, Sharon controversially expelled 9,480 Jewish settlers
from 21 settlements in Gaza and four settlements in the northern West Bank.
Once it became clear that the evictions were definitely going ahead a group of
conservative Rabbis, led by Rabbi Yosef Dayan, placed an ancient curse on him
known as the Pulsa diNura, calling on the Angel of Death to intervene and kill
him. After Israeli soldiers bulldozed every settlement structure except for
several former synagogues, Israeli soldiers formally left Gaza on 11 September
2005 and closed the border fence at Kissufim. While his decision to withdraw
from Gaza sparked bitter protests from members of the Likud party and the
settler movement, opinion polls showed that it was a popular move among most of
the Israeli electorate with more than 80% of Israelis backing the plans. On 27
September 2005, Sharon narrowly defeated a leadership challenge by a 52‚Äì48
percent vote. The move was initiated within the central committee of the
governing Likud party by Sharon's main rival, Benjamin Netanyahu, who had left
the cabinet to protest Sharon's withdrawal from Gaza. The measure was an
attempt by Netanyahu to call an early primary in November 2005 to choose the
party's leader. Founding of Kadima. On 21 November 2005, Sharon resigned as
head of Likud, and dissolved parliament to form a new centrist party called
Kadima ("Forward"). November polls indicated that Sharon was likely to be
returned to the prime ministership. On 20 December 2005, Sharon's longtime
rival Benjamin Netanyahu was elected his successor as leader of Likud.
Following Sharon's incapacitation, Ehud Olmert replaced Sharon as Kadima's
leader, for the nearing general elections. Netanyahu, along with Labor's Amir
Peretz, were "Kadima"'s chief rivals in the March 2006 elections. In the
elections, which saw Israel's lowest-ever voter turnout of 64% (the number
usually averages on the high 70%), Kadima, headed by Olmert, received the most
Knesset seats, followed by Labor. The new governing coalition installed in May
2006 included Kadima, with Olmert as Prime Minister, Labor (including Peretz as
Defense Minister), the Gil (Pensioner's) Party, the Shas religious party, and
Yisrael Beiteinu. Alleged fundraising irregularities and the Greek island
affair. During the latter part of his career Sharon was investigated for
alleged involvement in a number of financial scandals, in particular, the Greek
Island Affair and irregularities of fundraising during 1999 election campaign.
In the Greek Island Affair, Sharon was accused of promising (during his term as
Foreign Minister) to help an Israeli businessman David Appel in his development
project on a Greek island in exchange for large consultancy payments to
Sharon's son Gilad. The charges were later dropped due to lack of evidence. In
the 1999 election fundraising scandal, Sharon was not charged with any
wrongdoing, but his son Omri, a Knesset member at the time, was charged and
sentenced in 2006 to nine months in prison. To avoid a potential conflict of
interest in relation to these investigations, Sharon in his role as Prime
Minister was not involved in the confirmation of the appointment of a new
Attorney General Menahem Mazuz in 2005. On 10 December 2005 Israeli police
raided Martin Schlaff's apartment in Jerusalem. Another suspect in the case was
Robert Nowikovsky, an Austrian involved in Russian state-owned company
Gazprom's business activities in Europe. According to Hareetz, "The $3¬ million
that parachuted into Gilad and Omri Sharon's bank account toward the end of
2002 was transferred there in the context of a consultancy contract for
development of kolkhozes (collective farms ) in Russia. Gilad Sharon was
brought into the campaign to make the wilderness bloom in Russia by Getex, a
large Russian-based exporter of seeds (peas, millet, wheat ) from Eastern
Europe. Getex also has ties with Israeli firms involved in exporting wheat from
Ukraine, for example. The company owns farms in Eastern Europe and is
considered large and prominent in its field. It has its Vienna offices in the
same building as Jurimex, which was behind the $1-million guarantee to the
Yisrael Beiteinu party." On 17 December police announced that they had found
evidence of a 3 million dollar bribe paid to Sharon's sons. Just 24 hours after
the announcement, Sharon suffered a stroke, went into a coma, and has never
recovered. Health problems and incapacitation. Since the 1980s, Sharon had
suffered from obesity, and suspected chronic high blood pressure and high
cholesterol - he was reputed to be tall and to weigh . His staff car would
reportedly be stocked with snacks, vodka and caviar. Stories of Ariel Sharon's
appetite and obesity were legendary in Israel. He would often joke about his
love of food and expansive girth. He was a daily consumer of cigars and luxury
foods. Numerous attempts were made by doctors, friends and staff to impose a
balanced diet on Sharon, but they never succeeded. First stroke. On 18 December
2005, Sharon suffered a mild stroke, specifically a relatively unusual type
called a paradoxical embolism, in which a clot from the venous circulation
crosses over into the arterial circulation through a hole between the right and
left atria called an atrial septal defect (or a patent foramen ovale) and goes
to the brain, causing a transient speech and motor disturbance. At the time,
Sharon was heading in a convoy to Havat Shikmim, his ranch in the Negev. His
staff had noticed his confusion and impaired speech, and had contacted his son
Gilad to ask him to speak to his father and judge for himself. Gilad then
called Professor Bolek Goldman, one of Sharon's personal physicians, and
described his condition. Goldman instantly understood that the Prime Minister
was having a stroke. On Goldman's advice, the convoy turned around and rushed
Sharon to Hadassah Ein Kerem Hospital in Jerusalem. On his way to the hospital,
he lost consciousness but regained it shortly thereafter. In the hospital he
underwent a battery of tests, including an MRI. During the night, an analysis
of the MRI showed that Sharon was suffering from cerebral amyloid angiopathy
(CAA), a disease common in the elderly that weakens the blood vessels in the
brain and increases the risk of hemorrhage. Doctors continued to try to find
out how the blood clot got to the brain, and an echocardiogram revealed a small
hole in his heart, which doctors judged was probably a birth defect. To prevent
another clot from traveling to the brain from this hole, Sharon was treated
with enoxaparin, an anticoagulant drug. Sharon's treatment with enoxaparin
received criticism, as anticoagulation could heavily increase the risk of brain
hemorrhage, particularly given his diagnosis of CAA. Sharon had reportedly
wanted to leave the hospital the evening after his arrival but the hospital
wanted him to stay another day. He was released from the hospital after two
days. He continued to take two shots of enoxaparin daily, and a cardiac
catheterization procedure to repair the hole in his heart was scheduled for 5
January 2006. Second stroke. On 4 January 2006, in the evening before his
catheterization, Sharon suffered a second, different and far more serious
stroke at Havat Shikmim: a massive cerebral hemorrhage (bleeding in his brain).
His relatives noticed that he was unwell, and asked the paramedic accompanying
Sharon regularly to inspect him. When the paramedic inspected him, he realized
that Sharon was having a stroke, and suggested that he be immediately evacuated
to the nearest hospital: Soroka Medical Center in Beersheba. However, Sharon's
son Gilad contacted one of Sharon's personal physicians, Shlomo Segev, and
Segev told the paramedic to not do anything, and that he was on his way. He
then immediately left for Havat Shikmim from his home in Tel Aviv. Half an hour
later, Sharon collapsed in the bathroom, and the paramedic decided not to wait
any longer and immediately arranged for emergency medical transportation for
him. Sharon was carried to the ambulance on the scene by his security staff,
but the stretcher did not fit the ambulance, and it took twenty minutes to get
him in. Just as the ambulance was leaving, Segev arrived at the scene and
climbed into the ambulance. Despite earlier instructions that in case of an
emergency, Sharon was to be rushed to Soroka Medical Center, the ambulance
instead headed for Hadassah Ein Kerem Hospital, almost an hour's drive away.
Ten minutes into the journey, a Shin Bet officer contacted the ambulance and
suggested airlifting Sharon to hospital by helicopter. Segev and Gilad claimed
it was unnecessary, and Segev and the accompanying paramedic feared that
carrying him to a helicopter would worsen his condition. On Harel Interchange
in Mevaseret Zion, ten minutes away from the hospital, Sharon's condition
suddenly began to deteriorate. Segev called Chaim Lotan, chief of cardiology at
Hadassah, and reported that Sharon had vomited and seemed withdrawn. Sharon
reportedly became apathetic. Following his arrival at the hospital, Sharon
underwent a complex operation lasting around seven hours to drain the blood
from his skull and seal off the blood vessels in his brain. Following the
operation, hospital director Shlomo Mor-Yosef reported Sharon's bleeding had
stopped, his brain was functioning without artificial support, and that he was
receiving medication to prevent further bleeding. Sharon was placed in the
neurological intensive care unit, and was put on a ventilator. He subsequently
underwent a 14-hour-long operation. Some reports suggested that he was
suffering from paralysis in his lower body, while others said he was still
fighting for his life. Sharon was kept heavily sedated in an induced coma to
reduce pressure on his brain and keep his blood pressure down, in order to
allow his brain to recover from the trauma of the stroke and subsequent
surgery. On the night of Sharon's stroke, in the wake of his serious illness
and following consultations between Government Secretary Israel Maimon and
Attorney-General Menachem Mazuz, Sharon was declared "temporarily incapable of
discharging his powers." As a result, Sharon's deputy, Ehud Olmert, the Deputy
Prime Minister, was officially confirmed as the Acting Prime Minister of
Israel. Olmert and the Cabinet announced that the legislative elections would
take place on 28 March as scheduled. On 6 January, after doctors reviewed the
results of a brain scan, Sharon underwent a five-hour operation to halt
bleeding in his brain and relieve pressure that had built up on his skull.
Following the operation, Sharon was returned to the hospital's neurological
intensive care unit. According to his son Gilad, doctors urged his family to
allow Sharon to die in peace given the poor prognosis based on the CT scan, but
his sons insisted on an operation and other active efforts to keep him alive.
On 13 January, doctors began weaning Sharon off sedatives to wake him and
assess the damage caused to his brain. His condition had slightly improved in
the past several days, centering on small movements in the limbs in response to
pain. Sharon failed to waken even after he stopped receiving sedatives. On 15
January, Sharon underwent a tracheotomy to help wean him off a ventilator, and
three days later, a breathing tube had to be replaced due to technical
problems. On 1 February, a feeding tube was inserted into his stomach,
indicating that doctors were preparing him for long-term care. On 11 February
2006, doctors performed emergency surgery to remove 50¬ cm of Sharon's large
intestine that had become necrotic, probably due a blood clot and the
subsequent lack of blood flow. On 22 February, he underwent an additional
procedure to drain excess fluid from his stomach, discovered during a CT scan.
Replacement by Ehud Olmert. According to Israeli law, an Acting Prime Minister
can perform the duties of prime minister for up to 100 days after the Prime
Minister has become incapacitated. After 100 days, the Israeli President must
appoint a new Prime Minister. At the time of his stroke, Sharon enjoyed
considerable support from the general public in Israel. The new centrist
political party he had founded, Kadima, had won the largest number of seats in
the Knesset elections held on 28 March 2006. (Since Sharon was unable to sign a
nomination form, he was not a candidate and therefore ceased to be a Knesset
member.) On 6 April, President of Israel Moshe Katsav formally asked Ehud
Olmert to form a government, making him Prime Minister-Designate. Olmert had an
initial period of 28 days to form a governing coalition, with a possible two-
week extension. On 11 April 2006, the Israeli Cabinet deemed that Sharon was
incapacitated. Although Sharon's replacement was to be named within 100 days of
his becoming incapacitated, the replacement deadline was extended due to the
Jewish festival of Passover. A provision was made that, should Sharon's
condition improve between 11 and 14 April, the declaration would not take
effect. Therefore, the official declaration took effect on 14 April, formally
ending Sharon's term as Prime Minister and making Ehud Olmert the country's new
Prime Minister. Subsequent care. On 28 May 2006, Sharon was transferred from
Hadassah Ein Kerem Hospital to a long-term care unit at Sheba Medical Center, a
large civilian and military hospital in Tel HaShomer near Ramat Gan. "Haaretz"
reported that this move was an indication that Sharon's doctors did not expect
him to emerge from his coma in the foreseeable future. Yuli Krieger, Deputy
Head of the Levinstein House, another long-term care facility, told Israel
Radio that the chances of waking up after such a lengthy coma were small.
"Every day that passes after this kind of event with the patient still
unconscious the chances that he will gain consciousness get smaller". On 23
July 2006, a hospital spokesman announced that Sharon's condition was
deteriorating, with a change in his brain tissue, his kidney function
worsening, and fluid accumulating in his body. Doctors subsequently performed
tests to determine a course of treatment. A bacterial infection was discovered
in Sharon's blood. On 26 July 2006, doctors moved him to the intensive care
unit, where he underwent hemofiltration. Antibiotics were administered
intravenously into his blood to treat the infection. On 14 August 2006, doctors
reported that Sharon's condition had worsened significantly and that he was
suffering from pneumonia in both lungs. On 29 August 2006, doctors reported
that he had been successfully treated for his pneumonia and moved out of
intensive care back to the long-term care unit. On 3 November 2006, Sharon was
admitted to intensive care after contracting a heart infection. He was moved
out of the intensive care unit on 6 November 2006. Doctors stated that "his
heart function has improved after being treated for an infection and his
overall condition has stabilised." Sharon remained in the long-term care center
following 6 November 2006. Medical experts indicated that his cognitive
abilities were destroyed by the stroke, and that he is in a persistent
vegetative state with slim chances of regaining consciousness. In 2010, a
hospital manager involved in Sharon's care said that he had no chance of
recovery, adding that the instinct was to "provide hope and say that because he
is alive there is a chance he will wake up, but this is never going to happen."
The doctor stated that his brain was "the size of a grapefruit", and that "the
part of the brain that keeps his body functioning, his vital organs, is intact,
but beyond that, there is nothing, just fluid". On 13 April 2007, it was
reported that Sharon's condition had slightly improved and that according to
his son, Omri, he was marginally responsive, capable of following things with
his eyes and firming his hands. Omri said that his father watched television in
bed, mainly National Geographic and other nature programs. On 27 October 2009,
his doctor reported that he was still comatose but in a stable condition. On 21
October 2010 artist Noam Braslavsky unveiled a life-sized sculpture of Sharon
in a hospital bed with an IV drip at the Kishon Gallery in Tel Aviv. The
exhibition caused some controversy, with Knesset member Yoel Hasson describing
the work as "sickening voyeurism" and saying, "I think it's a cheap way for the
artist to get attention for his exhibition." On 12 November 2010 Ariel Sharon
was moved from the long-term care facility to his home in Havat Shikmim for a
48-hour period, the first of five planned "visits" home. The visit was to
ensure that the medical equipment installed there was working properly. The
ultimate plan is to return him home permanently, once it is established that he
has the appropriate medical facilities and care, after which he will receive
round-the-clock treatment from medical caregivers. In October 2011, Sharon's
son Gilad said that he was responsive, though still incapable of significant
movement. ‚ÄúWhen he is awake, he looks at me and moves fingers when I ask him
to.‚Äù ‚ÄúHe lies in bed, looking like the lord of the manor, sleeping
tranquilly. Large, strong, self assured. His cheeks are a healthy shade of red.
When he‚Äôs awake, he looks out with a penetrating stare. He hasn‚Äôt lost a
single pound; on the contrary, he‚Äôs gained some.‚Äù Recognition. In 2005, he
was voted the 8th-greatest Israeli of all time, in a poll by the Israeli news
website "Ynet" to determine whom the general public considered the 200 Greatest
Israelis. To commemorate him, Ariel Sharon Park, by far the most ambitious and
expensive park project in Israel's history, is currently being developed
outside Tel Aviv. Overseen by the state, the development of Ariel Sharon Park,
in which $250 million will be invested before opening, when finished will be
three times the size of New York's Central Park, and will introduce many new
ecological technologies. A 50,000-seat Ariel Sharon amphitheatre is currently
being proposed, to become the national concert venue.
