Black supremacy The term black supremacy is a blanket term for various racist
ideologies which hold that black people are superior to people of other races.
Active organizations. Nation of Islam. In the 1930s the Nation of Islam
emerged, coming to prominence during the 1960s, when charismatic minister
Malcolm X became a spokesman for the movement. The group's founders, "Master
Fard" Muhammad and Elijah Muhammad, preached the Doctrine of Yakub, which held
that the Original Man was an "Asiatic black man". White people, it contended,
were "grafted" from black people 6,000 years ago by an ancient black scientist
named Yakub.  This teaching also culminated in the creation of the Death
Angels, a small splinter group of the Nation of Islam. Between 1972 and 1974,
the Death Angels murdered 14 white people in the San Francisco Bay area. These
murders later would become known as the Zebra murders because the police used
Radio Z to communicate about the case. Elijah Muhammad also preached black
self-reliance, black separatism, cooperative economics, strict moral and
physical discipline, and opposition to black-white miscegenation. Since its
founding, the NOI has gone through reorganizations and internal conflicts, but
even as it moves closer to the mainstream of Islamic belief and practice, NOI
leadership has not rejected formally any of Fard's doctrines. It opposes any
changes in the major beliefs and programs that were instituted by Fard Muhammad
and Elijah Muhammad, including the annual "Savior's Day". Members of the NOI
have been publicly criticized by the leadership for making anti-Semitic, anti-
Catholic anti-white and anti-homosexual statements, and for urging the murder
of such people. Farrakhan has been banned from entering the UK since 1986
because of his "racist and anti-Semitic views". Most historians and social
scientists classify the Nation of Islam as a black nationalist, or black
separatist, organization. Recently, the Southern Poverty Law Center headed by
Morris Dees placed the Nation of Islam on its list of hate groups. New Black
Panther Party. The New Black Panther Party (NBPP), whose formal name is the New
Black Panther Party for Self-Defense, is a U.S.-based black supremacist
organization founded in Dallas, Texas in 1989. United Nuwaubian Nation of
Moors. The United Nuwaubian Nation of Moors was founded by Dwight York. The
Nuwaubians believe in black people's superiority to white people, that white
people are "devils," devoid of both heart and soul, that the color of white
people is the result of leprosy and genetic inferiority, and that the ancestors
of white people are the sexual partners of dogs and jackals. In 2004, York was
sentenced to 135 years in prison for child molestation and racketeering-related
charges. White people are said in one myth to have been originally created as a
race of killers to serve black people as a slave army. Tribu Ka. Tribu Ka was
founded in 2004 by Stellio Capo Chichi ("Kémi Séba"), dubbed as "the French
Farrakhan", in Paris. The group identified itself as following Louis
Farrakhan's ideology but their thinking was also described as a mix of
antisemitic Kemetism and Guénonian Islam. After an investigation of racist
incitement, Interior Minister Nicolas Sarkozy dissolved Tribu Ka on July 26,
2006 but it reformed under the name Génération Kémi Séba. In April 2008, a
Parisian court verdict judged Génération Kémi Séba was the refoundation of
the dissolved group Tribu Ka. In June 2009, Interior Minister Brice Hortefeux
ordered the dissolution of the group Jeunesse Kémi Séba, founded to replace
Génération Kémi Séba. Other groups. Nation of Yahweh. The Nation of Yahweh
is a black supremacist religious group that is an offshoot of the Black Hebrew
Israelites line of thought, and was founded by Yahweh ben Yahweh, meaning "God
the Son of God" in Hebrew, formerly known as Hulon Mitchell Jr. At its height,
the Nation of Yahweh controlled an $8 million empire of properties, including a
Miami headquarters known as the "Temple of Love" and temples in 22 states.
Followers of the Nation of Yahweh view black people as the only "true Jews" and
believe that White Jews are the spawn of Satan. According to the Crime Library,
followers of the Nation of Yahweh formed a secret group called "The
Brotherhood". To become a member of The Brotherhood, applicants had to kill a
"white devil" and bring Mitchell a body part - an ear, nose or finger - as
proof of the kill. Several Nation of Yahweh members were convicted of
conspiracy in more than a dozen anti-white murders, among them Robert Rozier, a
former pro football player and member of the secret Brotherhood, who admitted
the killing of seven white people. Mitchell started a private school for his
followers and held sex classes for boys and men in which he showed them movies
of white women having sex with animals to dissuade them from lusting after
white females. Bobo Shanti. The Bobo Shanti are a mansion within the Rastafari
movement and led by the late Charles Edwards preach a form of black supremacy
based on the original teachings of Leonard Howell and on the teachings of
Marcus Garvey. The Bobo say they are not racist, arguing instead that the
concepts of "white" and "black" are symbolic, and that a Caucasian could be
morally "black", or righteous, and that a man of African descent could be
morally "white", or wicked. Black supremacist theories. Many of these theories
espouse an ideology of a past Black Supremacy in the world that has been lost.
Some focus on claiming this supremacy by claiming they are the chosen people in
one religion or another as seen in the Nation of Islam or the Black Israelites.
Others even claim extra terrestrial intervention, such as the Nuwaubians or the
Nation of Islam. Two trends have acquired a veneer of respectability in many
places of Black Academia and Black Studies departments; the Melanin Theory, and
Afrocentrism/Global Pan Africanism. Melanin theory. Some black supremacists
justify supremacist assertions by assigning dubious properties to melanin based
on pseudo-science and distortions of scientific fact or speculation. This body
of belief is known generally as "Melanin theory". The central idea of the
Melanin theory is that the levels of melanin in dark skin naturally enhance
intelligence and emotional, psychic and spiritual sensitivity. Such claims have
made inroads among some African Americans within academia. Alliances with white
supremacist groups. Due to some commonly held separatist ideologies, some black
supremacist organizations have found limited common cause with white
supremacist or extremist organizations. In 1961 and 1962 George Lincoln
Rockwell, the leader of the American Nazi Party, was invited to speak by Elijah
Muhammad at a Nation of Islam rally. In 1965, after breaking with the Nation of
Islam and denouncing its separatist doctrine, Malcolm X told his followers that
the Nation of Islam under Elijah Muhammad had made agreements with the American
Nazi Party and the Ku Klux Klan that "were not in the interests of Negros." In
1985 Louis Farrakhan invited white supremacist Tom Metzger, leader of the White
Aryan Resistance (a neo-Nazi white power group), to attend a NOI gathering. The
Washington Times reports Metzger's words of praise: "They speak out against the
Jews and the oppressors in Washington. ... They are the black counterpart to
us."
