British National Party The British National Party (BNP) is a far-right
political party formed as a splinter group from the National Front by John
Tyndall in 1982. It restricted membership to "indigenous British" people until
a 2010 legal challenge to its constitution. The BNP advocates "firm but
voluntary incentives for immigrants and their descendants to return home", as
well as the repeal of anti-discrimination legislation. The BNP finished fifth
in the 2008 London mayoral election with 5.2% of the vote, winning a seat in
the London Assembly. In 2009 it won its first county council seats and two
seats in the European Parliament, with leader Nick Griffin and Andrew Brons
being elected as MEPs. Since Brons' defection, Griffin is the BNP's only MEP.
During the 2010 General Election, the BNP received 1.9% of the vote and failed
to win any seats. The party's current leader, Nick Griffin, is a former
national organiser of the National Front. History. National Front. The British
National Party was founded in 1982 following a split within the National Front
(NF) two years before. After a poor showing at the 1979 general election,
internal factional division heightened within the National Front. This
culminated in chairman John Tyndall leaving the party in 1980, founding the New
National Front, which became the BNP two years later. According to "Spearhead",
a magazine produced by Tyndall, the split within the NNF was not initially
intended to be permanent. The National Front had organised marches in an
attempt to further raise its profile. These sometimes led to violent clashes
with political opponents such as the Anti-Nazi League. Members of Tyndall's New
National Front, wished to modernise and move away from fascist ideology,
blaming the old National Front for its lack of popular appeal. Tyndall's newly
formed British National Party therefore absorbed the membership of the British
Democratic Party, a small British nationalist party led by Anthony Reed Herbert
which attempted to distance itself from neo-nazism. The British Democratic
Party had itself earlier split from the National Front. Members of the
Constitutional Movement, another splinter group, who had distanced themselves
from fascism and violent subcultures such as football hooliganism, also joined.
These smaller nationalist parties attempting to modernise their image, joined
Tyndall's New National Front through the Committee for Nationalist Unity
(1981), which acted as a front to draw members from similar modernising
nationalist organizations. However despite Tyndall's attempt to distance the
newly formed British National Party from fascism, several individuals of the
disintegrating British Movement were allowed to join. Tyndall leadership, early
years. At its formation in 1982, the British National Party had 2500 members,
most of whom had joined from the Constitutional Movement through the Committee
for Nationalist Unity. Eddy Morrison and his minor Leeds based nationalist
party, merged with the British National Party later that year. In 1983, Tyndall
sought to make an electoral impact by fielding 53 candidates in the 1983
general election, which guaranteed a free party broadcast. This broadcast
featured Tyndall, flanked by two British flags, and footage of the Brixton
riot, a violent riot between predominantly black local residents and the
police. All candidates combined, which included Tyndall himself and his wife
Valerie, the British National Party achieved only 14,621 votes and lost all its
deposits. It was revealed afterwards that the BNP Deputy Chairman Ray Hill had
been working as a mole on behalf of the anti-fascist magazine "Searchlight".
During the mid-1980s, the British National Party under Tyndall absorbed
numerous existing National Front Flag Group branches including Liverpool,
Manchester, Leeds and Glasgow. The party also began to develop friendly
relations with the Federation of Conservative Students. The British National
Party also made contacts on the continent, particularly with Flemish
nationalists of the radical Odal Group, which succeeded the Order of Flemish
Militants. John Peacock, a regional organiser for the British National Party
was the British representative of the Odal Ring. Tyndall claimed after the 1983
general election, that the parties more moderate image had been sufficiently
attractive to invite 3,000 enquiries in joining the party. He also attempted to
distance the party from neo-nazism and skinheads. Despite however an increase
in membership, and increase in media exposure, the British National Party
continued to poll very low in council elections, ranging from 1 - 3%, the sole
exception being a council by-election in Sunderland in 1984, where the party
polled 11.7%. In 1986, Tyndall and John Morse were imprisoned for inciting
racial hatred. While in prison, Tyndall wrote the part-autobiographical, part-
political "The Eleventh Hour", making Richard Edmonds the "de facto" leader of
the BNP during this time. While Tyndall was imprisoned, the British National
Party ceased in electoral activity - only one candidate stood in the London
Borough council elections. While Tyndall and Morse served short 4 month prison
sentences, membership of the party had shrunk, and with little financial
income, Tyndall decided not to stand candidates in the 1987 general election.
However two party regional organisers, Alf Waite in Bromley and Michael Easter
from the BNP‚Äôs West Kent branch, defied his wishes and declared their
intention to stand as BNP candidates. Both stood in the 1987 general election
polling poorly. Both were subsequently expelled by Tyndall. The party was
further damaged, by the fact a 1988 "Sunday Times" report revealed that BNP
Deputy Chairman Richard Edmonds was once involved with a newspaper called the
""Holocaust" News", published by the Centre for Historical Review. The
publication claimed that the Holocaust, as presented in state-sponsored
accounts, was an elaborate, politically motivated hoax. It promoted instead the
"Leuchter Report", the "Ball Report" and the "Rudolf Expertise". In 1989, the
BNP had 800 members. Gains at local level, 1990s. The British National Party in
the early 1990's picked up in its membership and support through the decline of
the National Front, which had split into further factions. It had also
mobilised 200 people for a "Rights for Whites" demonstration resulting in the
1989 Dewsbury race riot. The BNP claimed the demonstration was in support of
white parents who withdrew their children from predominantly Muslim schools.
Writing about Dewsbury, Tyndall made the claim that "the name of our party, for
long languishing in obscurity, is now on thousands of lips". Around this time,
the party also saw a popularity growth in east London and relocated its
bookshop to a heavily fortified headquarters at Welling. At the 1992 general
election, Tyndall and Lady Birdwood were noted candidates who unsuccessfully
stood for election. Following this, BNP candidate Derek Beackon‚Äîa last minute
replacement for Eddy Butler‚Äîwon the party its first local council seat in
1993 from Labour, during a local-by election for the Isle of Dogs, Tower
Hamlets. The seat was fought on a "Rights for Whites" platform, in which it was
alleged black families were being favoured in local housing initiatives. In May
1994, as local elections approached, the BNP hoped to hold its seat, but was
defeated by Labour. However the BNP polled well elsewhere in London,
particularly in the neighbouring borough of Newham where a BNP candidate came
within 65 votes of being elected. Eddy Butler remarked on the results at the
time: "Compared with results achieved by nationalist candidates in the recent
past, our votes were nothing short of phenomenal.". John Tyndall also succeeded
in retaining his deposit at a parliamentary by-election at Dagenham in June
1994, a first ever for the BNP. In the aftermath of Beackon‚Äôs electoral
victory and losing his seat the following year, the British National Party
clashed with paramilitary organisation, Combat 18, which had evolved in 1991
from a 'security force' made up of nationalists drawn from football casual
firms was created to defend far-right activists, allegedly in response to a
hammer attack at Kensington Library. The force firebombed the headquarters of
the communist newspaper, the "Morning Star", and by 1993 had transformed into
the Neo-Nazi paramilitary organisation Combat 18. That same year, the BNP
proscribed membership of the group and claimed it had been infiltrated by MI5.
In September 1995, Tyndall maintained that in response to the BNP‚Äôs victory
in Millwall, C18 had been ‚Äòcreated‚Äô by the State security services in order
to wreck the BNP and its electoral support. Nick Griffin, who later became
British National Party chairman, stated in "Spearhead" during 1999 that members
of Combat 18 had been a faction of the British Movement some years earlier,
from which they were expelled, but never part of the BNP. He claimed that it
had "been known for some years that MI5 encouraged or even ordered the setting
up of C18 in order to disrupt and discredit the BNP after historic electoral
success in Millwall in 1993", and also that "The Observer" had confirmed that
Combat 18 was a state-sponsored "honeytrap" right from the start. It was
revealed around this time that another "Searchlight" mole, Tim Hepple, had
infiltrated the BNP, proving controversial in far-left circles, since he was
the primary organiser of the Dewsbury incident in 1989. However, Hepple also
worked as a "Searchlight" mole amongst the radical left as an "agent
provocateur". According to author Larry O'Hara, Hepple attempted to get Green
Anarchist to publish works by radical nationalists, with the intention of
publishing an expose in "Searchlight" that they were "working with
fascists"‚Äîthus leaving them open to attack from all sides. This happened to
Class War. Political opponents claimed that "racist incidents" occurred around
the BNP's headquarters and instigated a "close down the BNP" march in October
1993. In 1995, Bexley Council shut down the BNP headquarters. The same year,
relations were built up with William Luther Pierce's US-based National
Alliance. In August 1995 Tyndall committed the party to contesting 50 seats at
the next general election. However the party was in a poor state, as the
membership had dropped to 700 and there was an on-going conflict with Combat
18. The party attempted to further modernise its image for the upcoming 1997
general election as Michael Newland, the party‚Äôs press officer looked towards
the example Austrian Freedom Party as a model for a ‚Äònew‚Äô, modern and
respectable British nationalism. Newland however briefly resigned from the
party in early 1996 convinced that it needed a new leader. Nick Griffin joined
the party in 1995, having led a faction of the National Front and Tyndall
employed him to edit "Spearhead". Griffin believed the British National Party
needed to be further modernised, with no fascist connections, but through a
forthright commitment to what he regarded as historical revisionism. A booklet,
"Who are the Mind-benders?" co-authered by Griffin was unveiled by the BNP in
early 1997, arguing that Britain and its media was mass-controlled by a
"liberal-elite". Furthermore, Griffin flirted with Holocaust Denial writing in
"The Rune" that the Holocaust was a "mixture of Allied wartime propaganda,
extremely profitable lie, and latter-day witch-hysteria". He was consequently
prosecuted under the Public Order Act at the instigation of Alex Carlile MP.
These claims some British National Party members believed were losing the
appeal and ideology of the party, Newland considered them to be the views of
"Nazi cranks". However according to Tyndall in his "July Members‚Äô Bulletin",
the BNP's support was increasing with between 2,500 and 3,000 membership
enquiries just prior to the 1997 general election. The party managed to save
two deposits in this election, Tyndall with 7.26 per cent and Dave King with
7.5 per cent, in the East End of London and Canning Town. However it has been
alleged that Dave King benefited from voter confusion since he shared the same
surname as Oona King, the winning Labour candidate. Following the 1997 general
election, the BNP once again suffered a set back. At local elections in May
1998, the BNP fielded five more candidates than in 1994 but its average vote
fell from just over 13% to a derisory 3.28%. In Tower Hamlets, its average
share of the poll slumped by almost half. At the end of 1998, membership stood
at 1,100. Within four years, the BNP had gone from thinking it was on the verge
of a major electoral breakthrough to the point of stagnation, this led to the
party's first leadership election. Griffin leadership, identity nationalism. In
October 1999, Nick Griffin, supported by Tony Lecomber, stood against Tyndall
for leadership of the BNP. John Tyndall, only received 411 (30%) of the votes,
while Griffin the majority. After Griffin won he began modernising the party's
image, though the crucial policy change from compulsory to voluntary
repatriation had already been accomplished under Tyndall's leadership. Griffin
moved the party from a focus on the status of Jews in Britain, to allowing Jews
to stand for the party. A new monthly newspaper, "The Voice of Freedom", was
initiated, as well as a journal, "Identity". During the 2001 general election,
following the milltown riots, Oldham and Burnley polled highest for the BNP.
Following 9/11 the BNP made further political capital. At local level, the BNP
continued to improve on its electoral results in 2002‚Äî03, gaining council
seats in Blackburn, Calderdale and Burnley, despite an extensive opposition
campaign. This success led to a large number of the National Democrats party,
including Simon Darby and Martin Wingfield defecting to the British National
Party from 1999-2003. After the 2004 elections, the BBC and "Searchlight"
created a documentary called "The Secret Agent", featuring Jason Gwynne
infiltrating the BNP. In it, Griffin and Mark Collett made comments critical of
Islam. Following the documentary, Barclays Bank froze the party's accounts.
Collett and Griffin were acquitted on charges of incitement to racial hatred in
2006. The BNP branded the BBC "cockroaches". In Burnley, the BNP lost one of
its councillors, Maureen Stowe, who left the party after claiming it was
racist. She told "The Guardian", "I became a BNP councillor, like most people
who voted for me, by believing their lies". Following the 7/7 bombings in
London, the BNP released fliers with the slogan; "maybe now it's time to start
listening to the BNP". Griffin claimed that this was the "cost of voting
Labour", attacking the government for bringing the United Kingdom into an
"illegal" Iraq War and for its immigration policies. YouGov claimed in 2006,
that support for the party stood at up to 7%. Large gains were made in the 2006
local elections, where the BNP more than doubled its number of councillors and
became the second party on the Barking and Dagenham council. In February 2005,
the party provoked controversy in denouncing a charity appeal following the
Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami two months earlier, calling it a "devious
way to flood Britain with immigrants" and comparing the catastrophe to flooding
in Cumbria at the beginning of 2005, which claimed three lives ‚Äì whereas the
tsunami death toll was in six figures. In December 2006, it was revealed that a
"The Guardian" journalist, Ian Cobain, had worked undercover in the BNP for
seven months, becoming the party's central London organiser. Among the
accusations made by the paper was that the BNP used "techniques of secrecy and
deception¬ ... in its attempt to conceal its activities and intentions from the
public". It asserted that the BNP operated with a "network of false identities"
and organised rendezvous points to allow members to be directed to "clandestine
meetings". Party members were directed to avoid "any racist or anti-semitic
language in public". Cobain also claimed that the membership in central London
had expanded beyond the party's traditional range, now including "dozens of
company directors, computing entrepreneurs, bankers and estate agents, and a
handful of teachers". Following the report, the campaign group Unite Against
Fascism called for ballerina Simone Clarke to be dismissed from the English
National Ballet, because her views on immigration were "incompatible with a
leading arts institution such as the English National Ballet" and because she
had "used her position to support a party which fosters division". Clarke said:
"the BNP is the only party to take a stand against immigration". The BNP was
investigated by the Electoral Commission in 2007, after "The Guardian" revealed
that it had set up a front organisation to raise money from sympathisers in the
United States. Later in 2007, three BNP councillors resigned. In Epping, Terry
Farr resigned after suspension for writing abusive letters to Trevor Phillips.
In Sandwell, James Lloyd was disqualified for not attending any meetings. In
Blackburn, Robin Evans left the party and wrote a letter to his former
colleagues denouncing it as a party of drug-dealers and football hooligans.
Evans remains a councillor, describing himself as a "national socialist". In
late 2007, several BNP officials, including councillor Sadie Graham and head of
administration Kenny Smith, had pressed for the expulsion of three senior
officials‚Äîtreasurer John Walker, his deputy Dave Hannam and director of
publicity Mark Collett‚Äîwho they accused of bringing the BNP into disrepute.
The BNP later accused Graham and Smith of being "far left" infiltrators. In
December Graham and Smith launched a blog detailing their complaints against
the trio. They were dismissed from their positions by Nick Griffin. During the
ensuing dispute, members of BNP security seized a computer from Graham's home.
Griffin claimed that they were recovering party property, while Graham claimed
that it was her own. A number of BNP councillors later resigned the whip after
Councillor Nina Brown claimed that BNP Security had misled her into giving them
the key to Sadie Graham's home. A number of BNP officials resigned in support
of Smith and Graham, or were expelled. These included the head of the Young
BNP. The BNP leadership said that the significance of the dispute was
exaggerated and that it would quickly blow over. In late December 2007, the
dissidents began to refer to themselves as the "Real BNP". They said that they
would stay within the BNP and campaign for a change of leaders. In January
2008, the group launched a new website called "Voice of Change", "an umbrella
group to assist candidates who wish to stand as independent nationalists in the
local elections in May 2008, and in any local by-elections throughout the
year". They aimed to challenge Nick Griffin's leadership, calling him
"tyrannical", "arrogant" and surrounded by "yes men". The internal democracy of
the BNP has been criticised by members for giving too much power to the
chairman and for not being widely available for the membership to consult. In
2007, a leadership challenge to Griffin by Colin Auty and Colin Jackson
resulted in resignations and expulsions among their supporters and 67 senior
activists. BNP candidate Richard Barnbrook won a seat in the London Assembly in
2008, after the party gained 5.3% of the London-wide vote. Electoral
breakthrough, European Parliament. In May 2009, The "Sunday Mirror" revealed
that the BNP had used stock photos on its leaflets to represent people
supposedly in agreement with its policies. Plaid Cymru MP Adam Price alleged
misrepresentation and called on the Royal Mail to halt distribution. The BNP
claimed this was standard practice by political parties. At the end of 2009,
the party's membership was 12,632, its highest. It also had set up "BNPtv", its
own online video outlet, a student wing (Student BNP) and the Young BNP
(British Nationalist Youth Movement). The party's financial resources had also
increased from ¬£726,455 (in 2006) to ¬£1,983,947. Question Time appearance. In
2009, Nick Griffin appeared on the BBC's "Question Time", amid significant
public controversy. 2010 General Election, leadership challenge. The British
National Party in the 2010 General Election fielded a record 338 candidates,
polling 563,743 votes, but won no seats. Nick Griffin came third in the Barking
constituency, where the party the same year in the local elections lost all of
its 12 councillors it held on the borough. In total, 26 BNP councillors lost
their seats, leaving the party with 28 seats overall. In aftermath of the
elections, the party further suffered from infighting over concerns over the
finances and leadership of the party. However the British National Party's
campaign during the 2010 General Election already had been beset by problems
before the results, as publicity director Mark Collett was arrested on
suspicion of threatening to kill Nick Griffin. A day prior to the General
Election, the BNP official website was also closed and replaced with a posting
from its Simon Bennett, the party's website manager, accusing Griffin and James
Dowson, the BNP election fundraiser, of being "pathetic, desperate and
incompetent". Membership of the party also declined after the General Election.
Nick Griffin announced that he would step down as leader in 2013. Three senior
BNP members subsequently challenged Griffin for the leadership of the party.
Having failed to secure enough support to trigger a leadership ballot, both
Eddy Butler and Richard Barnbrook were expelled from the party some months
later. 2011 Leadership election. Following disappointing election results in
2011, and a General Members Meeting which did away with the virtually
insurmountable nominations' requirement for a leadership election, a leadership
election took place in 2011. Griffin was challenged by fellow MEP Andrew Brons.
Griffin secured a narrow controversial victory, beating Brons by nine votes out
of a total of 2,316 votes cast in a bitter contest. Structure. The chairman of
the BNP has final say in all policy matters. 15 further members of the party
leadership have responsibility for various areas of its operations. These
executive positions work alongside an Advisory Council, the party's senior
policy body, which meets at least three times a year. Its role is to "inspect
the party's accounts, ensuring proper conduct of the party's finances, and to
act as a forum for the party's leadership to discuss vital issues and carve out
the party's agenda". The "Trafalgar Club" is the party's fundraising arm.
Policies. Political tendency. It has been claimed that the BNP has, since its
foundation, been fascist. The party's predecessor, the NF, was overtly fascist,
incorporating British nationalism, racism, and antisemitism into its core
ideology. This ideology was taken up by the newly formed BNP, whose founder,
John Tyndall, proclaimed: ""Mein Kampf" is my bible". Piero Ignazi has said
that the "proto-Nazi" mould of the NF, and the "generalised nostalgia for all
sorts of fascist tendencies" and association with "foreign ideologies", which
continued under the BNP, accounted for the lack of success for both parties in
comparison to successful far-right parties in Europe, which disavowed
traditional fascism. The "Daily Mirror" has described the party's MEPs as "vile
prophets who preach a Nazi-style doctrine of racial hatred". An editorial in
"The Guardian" characterises the BNP as "a racist organisation with a fascist
pedigree". Liberal Democrats leader Nick Clegg has described the BNP as "a
party of thugs, fascists". According to David Cameron: "If you vote for the BNP
you are voting for a bunch of fascists... They dress up in a suit and knock on
your door in a nice way but they are still Nazi thugs." Former Home Secretary
Alan Johnson said: "These people believe in the things that the fascists
believed in the second world war, they believe in what the National Front
believe in. They believe in the purity of the Aryan race. It is a foul and
despicable party and however they change their constitution they will remain
foul and despicable." Peter Hain describes the BNP as "a racist organisation
with known fascist roots and values" and wrote about its "racist and fascist
agenda". The BNP denies that it is fascist and claims that opposition parties
are trying to "prevent freedom of speech". Griffin has said that such
accusations are "a smear that comes from the far left." He has also said that
"he actually 'detested' fascism". Political scientists see the party as fascist
and say that it has attempted to hide its true nature in order to attract
popular support. Nigel Copsey examined the party's 2005 General Election
manifesto "Rebuilding British Democracy" and concluded that it was a
recalibration of fascism rather than a fundamental break with it. Historian
Richard Overy has said that "Fascism with a capital F" was strictly a movement
of the past. According to David Stevenson, "the BNP is different in style and
structure from fascism in the 1930s" saying that although they do not wear
uniforms they still count "bully boys" among their membership. It has also been
suggested that the BNP represents a hybrid movement containing elements of Neo-
fascism and anti-immigrant themes. Economic policy. The economic policy of the
party has developed over time. In the 1990s, the party reflected protectionism
and economic nationalism, although in comparison with other radical nationalist
parties, the BNP focuses less on corporatism. It has called for British
ownership of its own industries and resources and the "subordination of the
power of the City to the power of the government". It has promoted the
regeneration of farming in the United Kingdom, with the object of achieving
maximum self-sufficiency in food production. It has advocated ending overseas
aid in order to provide aid within the UK and to finance the repatriation of
immigrants. In 2002, the party criticised corporatism as a "mixture of big
capitalism and state control", saying it favoured a "distributionist tradition
established by home-grown thinkers" favouring small business. In its 2005
manifesto, the BNP opposed "globalism, international socialism, laissez-faire
capitalism and economic liberalism". The BNP rejects the notion of Thatcherism
and "submitting to the dictates of the international marketplace" which "has no
loyalty to this country". The BNP has claimed that it is possible for a
national economy to thrive outside of the laissez-faire model, pointing to 21st
century examples such as Japan, South Korea and Singapore. The BNP claims that,
while immigration increases the aggregate GNP by providing cheap labour, it
decreases the per-capita GNP, which the BNP claims is most representative of
the economic well-being of British people. The party says that "old-style
socialist methods" of tax and spend "turned out to have harmful effects" and it
would instead seek "non-destructive means to reduce income inequality". Central
to the BNP's economic policies are greater share ownership and the
establishment of worker co-operatives. The party advocates the provision of
extra resources for "especially gifted children" and the reversal of closures
of special needs schools. European Union. The British National Party are
Eurosceptics, who wish to move towards a greater national self-sufficiency.
According to the BNP 2010 Manifesto (p.¬ 27): "The BNP demands an immediate
withdrawal from the European Union, which is an organisation dedicated to
usurping British sovereignty and to destroying our nationhood and national
identity". Social and cultural policy. In 2005 the BNP proposed to reintroduce
compulsory National Service for the young and proposed that men should keep a
rifle and ammunition in their homes. In their 2010 Manifesto, the BNP have
expanded on their policy of National Service, claiming the youths who take
National Service will subsequently be funded for their University or further
education: "On satisfactory completion of their period of National Service, all
suitably qualified youngsters will become eligible to receive a fully funded
university education. The less academically qualified will be entitled to paid
apprenticeships or training." A further BNP policy is "to end the conflict in
Ireland by welcoming Eire as well as Ulster as equal partners in a federation
of the nations of the British Isles". Immigration. In their 2010 Manifesto
(p.¬ 30) the BNP argues that Islamic immigration must be "halted and reversed
as it presents one of the most deadly threats yet to the survival of our
nation". Furthermore their policy is also to "deport all foreigners convicted
of crimes in Britain, regardless of their immigration status" as well as deport
illegal immigrants and "reject all asylum seekers who passed safe countries on
their way to Britain". British Army immigrant issue. It has been claimed that
the BNP is opposed to allowing British Army Gurkhas the right of settlement in
the United Kingdom. In 2009, Nick Griffin said: "We don't think the most
overcrowded country in Europe, can realistically say, 'Look, you can all come
and all your relatives'...When the Gurkhas signed up‚Äîfrankly as
mercenaries‚Äîthey expected a pension which would allow them to live well in
their own country". Later, he said that if he could swap "100,000 members of
the Muslim community, who say that they support al Qaeda" for the Gurkhas it
"would be a good exchange". Nick Griffin has described the commentary about his
party's polices on the Gurkhas as "lies", stating the party has ‚Äúnever before
even debated this issue‚Äù. He added, ‚Äú...A BNP government would look far
more sympathetically on the plight of the Gurkhas than the current Labour
government.‚Äù Joanna Lumley, a campaigner for the Gurkhas' right of
settlement, spoke to "The Sun" condemning a leaflet allegedly distributed by
BNP candidate Adam Walker attacking her campaign and with a picture of a dead
Gurkha soldier crossed out. "The Sun" later retracted the allegation, saying
that neither the BNP nor Walker were responsible for the leaflet. On 17 May
2009, "The Daily Telegraph" wrote that the BNP's leader, Nick Griffin, had
branded Lance Corporal Johnson Beharry, a black recipient of the Victoria
Cross, an "immigrant" whose bravery was simply "routine". The "Telegraph"
quoted the BNP website as calling Beharry's award of the Victoria Cross
"positive discrimination by the PC-mad government". Beharry was awarded the
Victoria Cross in 2005 for action in Iraq, when he returned to his burning
armoured personnel carrier three times, under sustained enemy fire, to lift his
wounded comrades from the vehicle. The BNP claimed: "All he did was drive away
very fast from a combat zone." Race. The BNP under Griffin espouses "ethno-
nationalism" based on "concern for the well-being of the English, Scottish,
Welsh and Irish ethnic nations that compose the United Kingdom". According to
Griffin, regarding the BNP's racial views in 2004: "we don't hate black people,
we don't hate asians, we don't oppose any ethnic group for what God made them,
they have a right to their own identity as such as we do, all we want to do is
to preserve the ethnic and cultural identity of the British people." Scholars
of political science have noted this change in racial ideology and consider it
to be ethnopluralism or 'differentialism' (racial realism), influenced by the
European New Right. Speaking on the BBC's "Andrew Marr Show" in 2009, Nick
Griffin declared that the BNP "does not want all-white UK" because "Nobody out
there wants it or would pay for it" and that the claims he was a fascist were
smears. In 2010, the party changed its constitution which had restricted
membership to "indigenous British" people. The BNP is opposed to mixed-race
relationships because "when whites take partners from other ethnic groups, a
white family line that stretches back into deep pre-history is destroyed." Nick
Griffin has also stated: "...while the BNP is not racist, it must not become
multi-racist either. Our fundamental determination to secure a future for white
children is restated, and an area of uncertainty is addressed and a position
which is both principled and politically realistic is firmly established. We
don't hate anyone, especially the mixed race children who are the most tragic
victims of enforced multi-racism, but that does not mean that we accept
miscegenation as moral or normal. We do not and we never will." However despite
this, the BNP has a minority of members who are involved in mixed-marriages.
The BNP supported University of Leeds lecturer Dr. Frank Ellis, who was
suspended after stating that the Bell Curve theory "has demonstrated to me
beyond any reasonable doubt there is a persistent gap in average black and
white average intelligence". Ellis called the BNP "a bit too socialist" for his
liking and described himself as "an unrepentant Powellite" who would support
"humane" repatriation. In 2006, Sky News confronted the party's national press
officer, Phil Edwards (real name Stuart Russell), with a tape of a telephone
conversation in which he said that "the black kids are going to grow up
dysfunctional, low IQ, low achievers that drain our welfare benefits and the
prison system and probably go and mug you." He responded: "If I thought I was
going to be recorded¬ ... I would not have used such intemperate language, but
let‚Äôs be honest about it, the facts are there." In recent years the BNP has
established connections to nationalists in Japan, and in 2010 BNP staff manager
Adam Walker attended an international far-right conference. Support from ethnic
minorities. The BNP under Griffin's leadership has worked with extremists from
the Sikh and Hindu communities on anti-Muslim campaigns from 2001 and has also
actively tried to win Jewish votes. When the party changed its constitution on
membership which allowed ethnic minorities to join, a 78 year old Sikh,
Rajinder Singh, became the first Asian member. In 2010, Reverend James Gitau
joined the BNP and became its first black member claiming he only joined
because it "was the only party that boldly speaks against sodomy in public";
however, he left the party a week later when he was not nominated to stand for
Croydon Central and instead joined and stood as a Christian Party candidate.
The BNP has also fielded a small number of ethnic minority candidates and
claims it has an elected "Jewish" councillor, Patricia Richardson. Formerly,
the party also had a half-Turkish Cypriot, half-English councillor, Lawrence
Rustem. In 2006, Sharif Abdel Gawad, partly Armenian and Greek, was chosen as a
council candidate in Bradford. Sharon Ebanks, the BNP's first councillor in
Birmingham, has denied claims made by her stepmother that she is of mixed race.
Criticism of Islam. The party states that it "has moved on in recent years,
casting off the leg-irons of conspiracy theories and the thinly veiled anti-
semitism which has held this party back for two decades. The real enemies of
the British people are home grown Anglo-Saxon Celtic liberal-leftists¬ ... and
the Crescent Horde‚Äîthe endless wave of Islamics who are flocking to our
shores to bring our island nations into the embrace of their barbaric desert
religion". Consequently, the party has shifted allegiance in conflicts
involving Israel. Its head of legal affairs, Lee Barnes, wrote on the party's
website about the 2006 Lebanon War: "As a Nationalist I can say that I support
Israel 100% in their dispute with Hezbollah. In fact, I hope they wipe
Hezbollah off the Lebanese map and bomb them until they leave large greasy
craters in the cities where their Islamic extremist cantons of terror once
stood." In 2009, Griffin stated: "I have brought the British National party
from the frankly an anti-semitic and racist organisation, into the only party
which in the clashes between Israel and Gaza supported Israel's right to deal
with Hamas terrorists." Suggested policies to deal with the threat from Islam
include a ban on Muslims flying in and out of the UK. The BNP erected a plaque
in Oldham in memory of a 19-year-old white man who was killed by Asian Muslims
in February 2002. The plaque was later removed by the local council. Family.
The British National Party promotes familialism and supports the nuclear family
of Western tradition, as well as favouring traditional roles for women and men.
The 1992 BNP Manifesto thus asserts their belief that although women and men
should be treated equal, women should "regard home-and family-making as the
highest vocation for their sex" before their jobs or career. In September 2011,
scholar Matthew Goodwin, an expert in electoral behaviour at the University of
Nottingham has claimed in an article that: "particular members of the BNP" feel
as though there has been a "substantial decline in family values" under the
leadership of the Labour, Conservative and Liberal Democrat parties. In the
United Kingdom local elections, 2004, the BNP stood 80 female candidates
promoting the BNP's "family values" policy. The BNP 2010 Manifesto also
declares their wish to promote traditional concepts of civility and
courteousness in schools. Opposition to abortion. The BNP wish to "encourage a
responsible approach to family life, and to reverse the dangerous downturn in
the birth rate". The BNP opposes abortion, and in 2007 worked on a campaign
with the UK Life League, an anti-abortion lobby group. Opposition to
homosexuality. The BNP states that homosexuality in private should be tolerated
but believes that it "should not be promoted or encouraged". It is opposed to
civil partnerships and wishes to ban what it perceives as the promotion of
homosexuality in schools and the media. It proposes that homosexuality should
be returned "to the closet". BNP spokesman Phil Edwards stated that
homosexuality "is unnatural" and "does not lead to procreation but does lead to
moral turpitude and disease". Mark Collett, former Director of Publicity for
the party, has described homosexuals as "AIDS Monkeys", "bum bandits" and
"faggots", saying the idea of homosexuality was a "sickening thought". In the
run-up to the 2005 general election, it was reported that Richard Barnbrook,
the BNP candidate for Barking, had produced a homoerotic student art film in
1989. Barnbrook and the BNP claimed that the film was artistic and about
"sexuality, not homosexuality". The BNP was criticised over a web article
titled, "Liars, buggers and thieves", which grouped several gay politicians in
with convicted murderers, rapists and paedophiles. The author, BNP councillor
Julian Leppert, defended it and said that the reason why gay MPs were included
was because, "it fits in with the headline, the bugger part, I guess", and
stated that the BNP are "a family party with family values". It has been
alleged that Nick Griffin had a four year homosexual relationship with Martin
Webster, although Griffin denies this. In 2009, he said: "a lot of people find
the sight of two grown men kissing in public really creepy. I understand that
homosexuals don't understand that but that's how a lot of us feel." BNP holding
local government seats. County and district councillors. The British National
Party once had over 50 elected county and district councillors (55 in 2008, and
58 in 2009) but lost many of these seats in the 2010 and 2011 local elections,
and a few through defections and resignations. In October 2011, the BNP had 8
councillors, one of whom was re-elected during the 2011 local elections. In the
May 2012 elections this number was reduced to three. Parish and town
councillors. The BNP recently has encouraged candidates to stand in parish and
town council elections, since many seats can be won uncontested. In the 2011
local elections the party picked up over a dozen or more uncontested seats at
the parish level. There are currently between 60 and 80 BNP parish or town
councillors. Electoral performance. The BNP has contested seats in England,
Wales and Scotland. In January 2011, the party registered in Northern Ireland.
Research from Robert Ford and Matthew Goodwin shows that the typical BNP
supporter is a middle-aged, working-class male with low levels of educational
attainment from the declining industrial towns of the North and Midlands
regions of England. General election performance. The British National Party
has contested general elections since 1983. 1983‚Äì2005. The BNP achieved no
real success in its first three general elections from 1983 to 1992. No
deposits were saved and it never polled above 3.6% in any constituency. In the
1992 general election the BNP percent of votes overall was 0.1% of the
electorate. In the United Kingdom general election, 1997 the BNP for the first
time saved 3 deposits (out of 56 contested seats). Their highest amount of
votes received was 3350 (7.5%) in the East End seat of Bethnal Green and Bow
(held by Labour). The BNP in the United Kingdom general election, 2001 saved 5
deposits (out of 33 contested seats) and secured its best ever general election
result in Oldham West and Royton (which had recently been the scene of racially
motivated rioting between white and Asian youths) where party leader Nick
Griffin secured 16.4% of the vote ‚Äì more than doubling the party's previous
best performance in any constituency. Its average votes per candidate also
increased from 664 to 1,428, and it secured 47,129 votes in total. The United
Kingdom general election in 2005 was considered a major breakthrough by the
BNP, as they picked up 192,746 votes in the 119 constituencies it contested,
took a 0.7% share of the overall vote, and retained a deposit in 40 of the
seats. 2010. The BNP put forward candidates for 338 out of 650 seats for the
2010 General Election gaining 563,743 votes (1.9%), finishing in fifth place
and failing to win any seats. However, a record of 73 deposits were saved.
Party chairman Nick Griffin came third in the Barking constituency, behind
Margaret Hodge of Labour and Simon Marcus of the Conservatives, who were first
and second respectively. At 14.6%, this was the BNP's best result in any of the
seats it contested that year. Local elections. The BNP's first electoral
success came in 1993, when Derek Beackon was returned as a councillor in
Millwall, London. He lost his seat in elections the following year. The next
BNP success in local elections was not until the 2002 local elections, when
three BNP candidates gained seats on Burnley council. The BNP's success in the
2003 local elections sparked national media publicity. Later the same year, the
BNP won two local by-elections. In the Heckmondwicke ward of Kirklees Council
in August, David Exley polled 1,607 votes (44%). In September, Nick Geri won
the Grays Riverside ward of Thurrock council, polling 552 votes (38%). Later in
Burnley, the number of councillors increased, making the BNP briefly the second
largest party and the official opposition on that council, a position it lost
after the resignation of a BNP councillor who had been disciplined by the
party. The BNP stood in the subsequent by-election. The party's biggest
election success to date was a gain of 52% of the vote in the Goresbrook ward
of Barking in the 2004 local elections. The victorious councillor, Daniel
Kelley, retired just 10 months later, claiming he had been an outcast within
the council. A new election was held in June 2005, in which the seat was
regained by the Labour candidate. The biggest gain in the local elections on 4
May 2006, was in Barking and Dagenham where the BNP won 12 of the 13 seats it
contested, gaining 17% of the vote. The BNP also won three seats in Epping
Forest, three in Stoke-on-Trent, three in Sandwell, two in Burnley, two in
Kirklees, and single seats in Bradford, Havering, Solihull, Redditch,
Redbridge, Pendle and Leeds. In 2006, the BNP also gained its first parish
councillor in Wales when Mike Howard of Rhewl Mostyn, Flintshire, previously an
Independent, joined the BNP. In summary of BNP councillors from 2000‚Äì2007:
from 2000 to 2001 the BNP had none, in 2002 it had three, by 2003 it had 16
local councillors, this increased to 21 by 2005, in 2006 the biggest gain saw
BNP's councillors rise to 48, and by 2007 to 50. In 2007, the number of BNP
councillors fell slowly due to resignations and expulsions, several of them
associated with a failed leadership challenge in the summer. By the end of the
year, the number was 42. In 2008, however, the BNP increased its councillors to
55. The BNP did not field as many candidates for the 2009 local elections,
because of its focus on the European Parliament election the same year, but for
the first time won representation at county council level, winning three such
seats. A seat in a local by-election in Sevenoaks district, Kent, was also won
by the BNP. About four BNP councillors resigned at the end of 2009, leaving the
party with 54 councillors by 2010. In the May 2010 local elections, 26 BNP
councillors lost their seats, leaving the party with 28 seats overall. In
Barking and Dagenham, the party lost all 12 seats won in 2006. London Assembly
and mayoral elections. 2008. BNP lead candidate Richard Barnbrook won a seat in
the London Assembly in May 2008, after the party gained 5.3% of the London-wide
vote. However, in August 2010, he resigned the party whip and became an
independent. European elections. The BNP has taken part in European Parliament
elections since 1999, when they received 1.13% of the total vote (102,647
votes). In the 2004 elections to the European Parliament, the BNP won 4.9% of
the vote, making it the sixth biggest party overall, but did not win any seats.
The BNP won two seats in the European Parliament in the 2009 elections. Andrew
Brons was elected in the Yorkshire and the Humber regional constituency with
9.8% of the vote. Party chairman Nick Griffin was elected in the North West
region, with 8% of the vote. Nationally, the BNP received 6.26%. Welsh
Assembly. In the National Assembly for Wales election, 2003 the BNP only stood
one candidate, Pauline Gregory, in the South Wales East region, who obtained
3,210 votes (1.89%), losing her deposit. In the 2007 Welsh Assembly elections,
the BNP fielded 20 candidates, four in each of the five regional lists, with
Nick Griffin standing in the South Wales West region. It did not win any seats,
but was the only minor party to have saved deposits in the electoral regions,
one in the North Wales region and the other in the South Wales West region. In
total the BNP polled 42,197 votes (4.3%). In the 2011 Welsh Assembly elections,
the BNP fielded 20 candidates, four in each of the five regional lists and for
the first time 7 candidates were fielded in FPTP constituencies. On the
regional lists, the BNP polled 22,610 votes (2.4%), down 1.9% from 2007. In 2
out of the 7 FPTP constituencies contested the BNP saved desposits: (Swansea
East and Islwyn). Scottish Parliament. In the 2003 Scottish Parliament
election, the BNP only stood one candidate, Peter Appleby, in the Glasgow
electoral region, who obtained 2,344 votes (1.1%), losing his deposit. In the
2007 Scottish Parliament election, the party fielded 32 candidates, entitling
it to public funding and an election broadcast, prompting criticism. The BNP
received 24,616 votes (1.2%), no seats were won, nor were any deposits saved.
In the 2011 Scottish Parliament election, the BNP fielded 32 candidates in the
regional lists. 15,580 votes were polled (0.78%). Northern Ireland Legislative
Assembly. The BNP fielded 3 candidates for the first time in three
constituencies each in the 2011 Northern Ireland Legislative Assembly elections
(Belfast East, East Antrim and South Antrim). 1,252 votes were polled (0.2%).
No seats were won, nor were any deposits saved. Legal issues. Claims of
repression of free speech. The BNP says that NUJ guidelines on reporting 'far
right' organisations forbid unionised journalists from reporting uncritically
on the party. In September 2005, 60,000 copies of "Voice of Freedom", which had
been printed in Slovakia, were seized by British police at Dover. The police
later admitted this was a mistake and released the impounded literature shortly
thereafter. In April 2007, an election broadcast was pulled by BBC Radio Wales'
lawyers, who believed that the broadcast was defamatory of the Chief Constable
of North Wales Police, Richard Brunstrom. The broadcast was made available to
download from the BNP's website. Employment cases and related controversies. In
"ASLEF v. United Kingdom", the European Court of Human Rights overturned an
employment appeal tribunal ruling that awarded BNP train driver Jay Lee,
damages for expulsion from a trade union. It found that the union was entitled
to decide who could be a member, and that the UK was in breach of the European
Convention on Human Rights in the way it had treated ASLEF. Clive Potter, later
an official of Solidarity ‚Äì The Union for British Workers, was expelled from
his union. A court upheld the expulsion and found that it was based on previous
exclusion rather than BNP membership. In another case, Robert Baggs claimed
that he had been discriminated against because of "religion, or similar
philosophical belief" after he was refused a job at a GP surgery. His claimed
that the employer was in violation of the Employment (Religious Discrimination)
Regulations of 2003. The Employment Tribunal found that membership of the BNP
was not a "similar" belief, and the case was rejected. Arthur Redfearn was a
bus driver whose BNP membership was unknown to his employer, Serco, until he
was elected as a councillor. His employer was concerned that he might endanger
its contract with a local authority to transport vulnerable people of various
ethnicities from a day centre and he was dismissed. The Employment Tribunal
held that members of racist organisations could lawfully be dismissed on health
and safety grounds if there was a danger of violence occurring in the
workplace. It had been unsuccessfully argued at the Employment Tribunal that
Redfearn had been racially discriminated against because the BNP was a whites-
only organisation, and he had been treated unfairly in comparison to racist
organisations that were non-white. In November 2012, the European Court of
Human Rights made a majority ruling (4 to 3) that in Redfearn's case against
the UK government, his rights under Article 11 (free association) had been
infringed, but not those under Article 10 (free expression) or Article 14
(discrimnation). In 2002, a BNP candidate and Regional Organiser, Kevin Scott,
was dismissed from the B&Q hardware store in Gateshead. The management said
this was not due to his party membership but due to "low morale" amongst other
staff who did not want to work with him, and also the number of calls from
customers expressing their disapproval. Scott settled out of court for an
undisclosed sum, although the BNP had pledged to support any action. In 2010,
weeks before the general election, the BNP candidate for Sutton Coldfield,
Robert Grierson, resigned as a barrister at St Philips chambers in Birmingham
after various newspapers including the "Birmingham Post", "The Guardian" and
the "Daily Mail" ran articles concerning his political ambitions. Organisations
which ban BNP membership. Police. Membership of the BNP, Combat 18 and the
National Front by police officers and staff was prohibited by then Home
Secretary David Blunkett following an undercover TV exposure of racism in a
police training centre. The Association of Chief Police Officers banned serving
police officers joining the BNP in 2004. Despite this, Simon Darby has claimed
that the BNP still has members who remain covert. Manchester Police Authority
has viewed footage taken at BNP events in order to identify off-duty officers
in attendance at a BNP St George's Day rally, wearing BNP badges and T-shirts,
with the slogan "Love Britain or Fuck Off". A retired police officer, John
Phazey, stood as a BNP European Assembly candidate. He denied that he was a
racist or that the police were institutionally racist, saying: "Of course you
heard words like Paki and nigger, but it didn't mean much more than someone
saying Paddy for an Irishman or Jerry for a German...It was just jokes in the
canteen. You'll get that anywhere when you have men in their 20s and 30s
together". A Police Community Support Officer, Ellis Hammond, was found to be a
BNP member after he was discovered stockpiling weapons at his home, including a
taser. Gary Marsden was sacked from his job within the West Yorkshire Police in
2007, for performing folk music at the BNP's Red, White and Blue Family
Festival, and allowing his CDs to be sold by the Party, although it was
accepted that he was not a member. After BNP membership lists were leaked on
the Internet, a number of police forces investigated officers whose names
appeared on the lists. In March 2009, PC Steve Bettley of Merseyside Police,
whose name appeared on one of the lists, was dismissed. Prison service. A ban
on BNP membership was imposed by Martin Narey, Director of the Prison Service,
in 2002. Narey told the BBC that he received hate mail and a death threat as a
result. Other professions. , only the police and the prison services have an
official prohibition on BNP membership. A ban on BNP membership was considered
in the civil service in 2004 and in the probation service in 2005. In October
2005, a proposal to ban the BNP from Dorset Fire Brigade, proposed by the
management and the Fire Brigades Union, was turned down by the Fire Authority.
The president of the BNP-linked trade union Solidarity, Adam Walker, resigned
from his job at a college for accessing BNP websites and posting comments using
a school laptop during working hours. He was cleared of racism but found guilty
of misconduct by the General Teaching Council. His brother, Mark Walker, was
suspended from another college for allegedly accessing pornography using school
equipment, and was eventually sacked on the basis of his sickness record. His
supporters told the press that he had been suspended for accessing the BNP
website and had been victimised because of his political beliefs. The Hampshire
Fire and Rescue Service declined to act against a BNP council candidate, Ian
Johnson, after he wrote in his election leaflets that he was a retained
firefighter, despite Fire Brigades Union pressure to do so. Liam Birch, a
sociology student standing as a BNP council candidate for Southway was
dismissed as assistant warden at Plymouth University, when he posted in a blog
that "The Jews declared war on Germany, not the other way round". In February
2009, the General Synod of the Church of England voted to ban its clergy from
joining the BNP. Association with violence. John Hagan claims that the BNP has
conducted right-wing extremist violence in order to gain "institutionalized
power". Critics of the BNP, such as Human Rights Watch in a 1997 report, have
asserted that the party recruits from skinhead groups and that it promotes
racist violence. In the past, Nick Griffin has defended the threat of violence
to further the party's aims. In 1986, when Griffin was Deputy Chairman of the
NF, he advised his audience at an anti-IRA rally to use the "traditional
British methods of the brick, the boot and the fist." After the BNP won its
first council seat in 1993, he wrote that the BNP should not be a
"postmodernist rightist party" but "a strong, disciplined organisation with the
ability to back up its slogan 'Defend Rights for Whites' with well-directed
boots and fists. When the crunch comes, power is the product of force and will,
not of rational debate". In 1997 he said: "It is more important to control the
streets of a city than its council chambers." Tony Lecomber cases. Tony
Lecomber was imprisoned for three years for possessing explosives, after a nail
bomb exploded while he was carrying it to the offices of the Workers'
Revolutionary Party in 1985. He was imprisoned for three years in 1991, whilst
the BNP's Director of Propaganda, for assaulting a Jewish teacher. Robert
Cottage case. In 2007, Robert Cottage, a former BNP council candidate, was
sentenced to two and a half years for possession of explosives but a conspiracy
charge against him was withdrawn after two juries had been unable to reach a
verdict. The prosecution claimed that Cottage had plans to assassinate Tony
Blair and Liberal Democrat peer Lord Greaves. The chemicals recovered by police
are believed to be the largest explosives haul ever found at a house in
Britain. 2008 membership list leak. On 18 November 2008, a list of over 10,000
BNP members was published by Wikileaks in breach of a court injunction. This
included names, addresses and other personal details. People on the list
included prison officers (barred from BNP membership), teachers, soldiers,
civil servants and members of the clergy. One of those named disavowed his
membership. Nick Griffin claimed that any party member dismissed from
employment would be able to receive substantial compensation. The BNP advised
those named on the list to deny their membership and said that they would
confirm that in writing if required. The BNP claimed it contained the names of
persons who had never been members of the BNP. The BNP's Lee Barnes claimed
that the list was false. People affected by the disclosure included a DJ, Rod
Lucas, who was dropped by the Talksport radio station. He said: "I am an
investigative radio journalist and am a member of over 20 political parties and
pressure groups...It doesn't necessarily mean I agree with their views." A
drama teacher at a prep school whose name was found on the list had been
dismissed from a previous position as a result of her BNP membership. Following
an investigation by Welsh police and the Information Commissioner's Office, two
people were arrested in December 2008 for breach of the Data Protection Act
concerning the leak. Matthew Single was subsequently found guilty and fined
¬£200. The fine was criticised as an "an absolute disgrace" by a BNP spokesman
and a detective sergeant involved said he was "disappointed" with the outcome.
Equality and Human Rights Commission. The Equality and Human Rights Commission
sent the BNP a letter in 2009, ahead of legal action, setting out concerns
about the BNP's constitution and membership criteria. It alleged that the BNP's
constitution restricting membership to white people was unlawful under the Race
Relations Act. The BNP chose to fight this opinion in the High Court. The
Commission issued county court proceedings against party leader Nick Griffin
and two other officials. The conclusion of the case in October 2009 saw costs
awarded against the BNP. The BNP stated that Griffin was "required in Brussels"
on that day. Griffin had written to BNP members preparing to concede the case
because it would be too expensive to fight and would "strip the party of the
ability to fight the next general election". Griffin subsequently announced
that he would ask BNP members to accept the court's decision and allow non-
whites to join the party, claiming that this action "outflanked" the EHRC. The
BNP anticipated that its members would accept the change on financial grounds.
The BNP agreed to suspend further membership applications until an
Extraordinary General Meeting in January 2010 confirming changes to the
constitution. The case was adjourned in order to ensure compliance. As a result
of the case, the Secretary of State for Wales, Peter Hain protested against the
BBC's inclusion of Griffin on the Question Time programme, claiming the court
case meant the BNP was "an unlawful body". Shami Chakrabarti, director of
Liberty, said: "A shiny new constitution does not a democratic party make. It
would be a pyrrhic victory, to say the least, if anyone thought that giving the
BNP a facelift would make the slightest difference to a body with so much
racism and hatred pumping through its veins." The courts declared that the new
constitution still breached equality laws and was still indirectly
discriminatory. Judge Paul Collins ordered the BNP to pay costs and said its
membership list must remain "closed" until it complied with race relations
laws. The BNP claimed that it had a waiting list of black and Asian people and
wanted more applications from ethnic minorities. In November 2010, the BNP
leadership was accused of lying over the matter by the EHRC who claimed that
the offending passage had not been removed but merely altered. In a subsequent
hearing the BNP leadership was found not guilty of the contempt of court. The
EHRC said: "Eighteen months and seven court hearings later Mr Griffin has
finally amended the constitution to bring it in line with what the Commission
had originally requested." Griffin said: "This is a great day, because the
British National Party has won a spectacular David and Goliath victory".
Accusations of fraud. It was reported on 10 October 2011, that the BNP is under
investigation for fraud regarding the submission of false invoices to the
Electoral Commission. Opposition. The BNP is condemned by many sections of the
media. High-ranking politicians from each of the mainstream parties have, at
various times, called for their own supporters to vote for anyone but the BNP,
In 2008, then Prime Minister Gordon Brown stated: "Londoners and the rest of
the British people know that backing the BNP is totally at odds with what it
really means to be British‚Äîand the great British values the rest of us share,
such as democracy and decency, freedom and fairness, tolerance and equality."
Conservative Party leader David Cameron, Liberal Democrat party leader Nick
Clegg, and former Lib Dem leader Sir Menzies Campbell have all condemned the
BNP. The British Government announced in 2009 that the BNP's two MEPs would be
denied some of the access and information afforded to other MEPs. The BNP would
be subject to the "same general principles governing official impartiality" and
they would receive "standard written briefings as appropriate from time to
time", but diplomats would not be "proactive" in dealing with the BNP MEPs and
that any requests for policy briefings from them would be treated differently
and on a discretionary basis. Amongst the most visible and vocal opponents of
the BNP and other far right-wing groups are Unite Against Fascism and
"Searchlight". Unite Against Fascism, which aims to unite a broad spectrum of
opposition to the far-right, includes the Anti-Nazi League, the National
Assembly Against Racism and the Student Assembly Against Racism. "Searchlight"
has monitored the activities of far-right groups in Britain and abroad,
including the BNP and its members, for many years. Some opponents of fascism
call for no coverage to be given to groups or individuals enunciating what they
describe as "hate speech". The "No Platform" stance is to deny perceived
fascist hate speech any sort of publicity. The policy is most commonly
associated with university student unions and debating societies, but has also
resulted in BNP candidates being banned from speaking at various hustings
meetings around the country. In 2005, the "Leeds Student" newspaper was
criticised after publishing an interview with Nick Griffin. Also in 2005, an
invitation to Nick Griffin by the University of St Andrews Union Debating
Society to participate in a debate on multiculturalism was withdrawn after
protests. Direct action has been taken against the BNP stalls in shopping
centres. The BNP claims that such cases exemplify how political correctness is
being used to silence it and suppress its right to freedom of speech. In May
2007, a presentation by Nick Griffin was to be held at the University of Bath,
but the University withdrew permission due to concerns over the large number of
people opposing the meeting and possible disruption it could cause. In October
2010, a Democratic Unionist Party councillor in Northern Ireland, Bobby McKee,
condemned a BNP leafleting campaign in his home town of Larne opposing a
refugee dentention centre being built there. Veterans and Second World War. In
June 2009, the Royal British Legion wrote to Griffin privately to ask him to
stop wearing their poppy symbol. After he refused and wore the badge at
campaign events and on the party's televised election broadcast, The Legion
said in an open letter: "True valour deserves respect regardless of a person's
ethnic origin, and everyone who serves or has served their country deserves
nothing less¬ ... national chairman appealed to your sense of honour. But you
have responded by continuing to wear the poppy. So now we're no longer asking
you privately. Stop it, Mr Griffin. Just stop it." In September 2009, the
Legion accepted a donation which it had initially rejected from BNP member
Rachel Firth. Firth had spent 24 hours raising the money, half of which was
given to the Legion and the other half to the BNP. The Legion said that Firth
had assured them that the donation would not be exploited politically although
the story was later "splashed across" the BNP's website. BNP spokesman Simon
Darby denied that the party exploited the story. Winston Churchill's family has
criticised the BNP after the party used his image and quotes from one of his
speeches in its campaign. Churchill's grandson, Nicholas Soames, described the
BNP as "monstrous" and said its use of Churchill was "offensive and
disgusting". The BNP was also caught up in a dispute with 1940s singer Vera
Lynn after she objected to the party selling copies of her White Cliffs of
Dover CD on its website to fund its European election campaign. Online
presence. In September 2007, "The Daily Telegraph" newspaper reported that
Hitwise, the online competitive intelligence service, said that the BNP website
had more hits than any other website of a British political party. In 2009, the
party's website came under fire after it was revealed that much of the
merchandise it sold was made in Honduras, contrary to the party's pledge of
"British Jobs for British Workers". Affiliated organisations. International
political contacts. The BNP and the French Front National have co-operated on
numerous occasions. Jean-Marie Le Pen visited the UK in 2004 to assist in
launching the BNP's European Parliament campaign and Nick Griffin repaid the
favour by sending a delegation of BNP officials to the FN's annual 'First of
May Joan of Arc parade' in Paris in 2006. The BNP has links with Germany's
National Democratic Party. Griffin addressed an NPD rally in August 2002,
headed by Udo Voigt, who Gerhard Schroeder accused of trying to remove
immigrants from eastern Germany. In the run-up to the 2004 European Parliament
election campaign, Nick Griffin visited Sweden to give the National Democrat
Party his endorsement. Members of the Swedish National Democrats were present
at the BNP's 2005 "Red White and Blue" rally. In London on 16 May 2008, Nick
Griffin met leaders of the Hungarian far right party Jobbik to discuss co-
operation between the two parties. Griffin spoke at a Jobbik party rally in
August 2008. In April 2009, Simon Darby, deputy chairman of the BNP, was
welcomed with fascist salutes by members of the Italian nationalist Forza Nuova
during a trip to Milan. Darby stated that the BNP would look to form an
alliance with France's Front National in the European Parliament, though this
has not happened. Breakaway parties. The UK Freedom Party formed as a breakaway
from the BNP in 2000, and disbanded in 2008. In 2006, the New Nationalist Party
was formed by Sharon Ebanks but became defunct in 2007. In 2008, the Democratic
Nationalist Party was formed as a breakaway in Bradford and has continued since
by standing in local elections and the 2010 General Election. The British
Freedom Party split from the BNP in 2010, and the Freedom Democrats split from
the British Freedom Party in 2011. Two other breakaways happened in 2011:
Britain First, a campaign group started by the former councillor Paul Golding,
fundraiser Jim Dowson and the former South East organiser Andy Bride, launched
the National People's Party on 20 November 2011. In late August, the Britannica
Party was formed by a former activist in Scotland, Charlie Baillie.
