Catalan people The Catalans are an ethnic group; the people from, or with
origins in, Catalonia who form a historical nationality in northern Spain. The
inhabitants of the adjacent portion of southern France (known in Catalonia
proper as "Catalunya Nord", and in France as the "Pays Catalan") are included
in this definition. Also, Catalan is sometimes used to define people from
Catalan Countries, which include other areas where the Catalan language is
spoken. Extended concept. The other Catalan-speaking people, namely Andorrans,
Valencians, Balearics, some Aragonese, and Alguerese are sometimes identified
as a distinct Catalan ethnic group by certain nationalists. The latter
assertion is especially rooted in Catalan nationalism. In the aforementioned
territories (often designated "Països Catalans", "Catalan Countries", by
Catalan nationalists). This extended concept is controversial in those
territories and eventually brings conflict, most of all in the Valencian
Community where it is a great issue involving discrimination of the language
and mediatic manipulation. Historical background. The earliest reference to
Catalans ("Catalanenses"), treated as an ethnic group, is found in the Latin
"Liber maiolichinus", an Italian epic poem of "c".1120. This also contains the
earliest reference to Catalonia ("Catalania") as the name for their homeland.
The area that now is known primarily as Catalonia, was invaded in 1500 BCE by
Proto-Celtic Urnfield people who brought the rite of burning the dead. These
Indo-European people were absorbed by the Iberians beginning in 600 BCE in a
process that would not complete until the fourth century BCE. These groups came
under the rule of various invading groups starting with the Phoenicians and
Carthaginians, who set up colonies along the coast, including Barcino (present-
day Barcelona) itself. Following the Punic Wars, the Romans replaced the
Carthaginians as the dominant power in Catalonia by 206 BCE. Rome established
Latin as the official language and imparted a distinctly Roman culture upon the
local population, which merged with Roman colonists from the Italian peninsula.
An early precursor to the Catalan language began to develop from a local form
of popular Latin before and during the collapse of the Roman Empire. Various
Germanic tribes arrived following nearly six centuries of Roman rule, which had
completely transformed the area into the Roman province of Tarraconensis. The
Visigoths established themselves in the fifth century and would rule the area
until 718 when Muslim Arabs and Berbers conquered the region and held it for
close to a century. The Franks held back small Muslim raiding parties, which
had penetrated virtually unchallenged as far as central France; Frankish
suzerainty extended over much of present-day Catalonia. Larger wars with the
Muslims began with the Spanish March which led to the beginnings of the
"reconquista" (reconquest) by Catalan forces over most of Catalonia by the year
801. Barcelona became an important center for Christian forces in the Iberian
peninsula. Catalonia emerged from the conflicts in Muslim Spain as a regional
power, as Christian rulers entrenched themselves in the region during the
Carolingian period. Rulers such as Wilfred the Hairy became masters of a larger
territory encompassing Catalonia. The Crown of Aragon included Catalonia,
Aragon, Valencia, and the Balearic Islands. The marriage of Isabella I of
Castile and Ferdinand II of Aragon and the conquest of the last Muslim kingdom
of Granada in 1492 tied Catalonia politically to the fate of the new Spanish
kingdom, while a regional culture continued to survive and thrive. Some
sporadic regional unrest led to conflicts such as the Revolt of the Germanies
in Valencia and Majorca, and the 1640 revolt in Catalonia known as the Reapers'
War. This latter conflict embroiled Spain in a larger war with France as many
Catalan nobles allied themselves with Louis XIII. The war continued until 1659
and ended with the Peace of the Pyrenees, which effectively partitioned
Catalonia as the northern strip of the March came under French rule, while the
rest remained under Spanish hegemony. The Catalan government took sides with
the Habsburg pretender against the Bourbon one during the War of the Spanish
Succession that started in 1705 and ended in 1714. The Catalan failure to
defend the perpetuation of Habsburg dynasty in Spain culminated in the
surrender of Barcelona on September 11, 1714, which came to be commemorated as
Catalonia's national day. During the Napoleonic Wars, much of Catalonia was
seized by French forces by 1808, as France ruled the entire region briefly
until Napoleon's surrender to Allied Armies. In France, strong assimilationist
policies integrated many Catalans into French society, while in Spain a Catalan
identity was increasingly suppressed in favor of a national identity. The
Catalans regained autonomy during the Spanish Second Republic from 1932 until
Francisco Franco's nationalist forces retook Catalonia by 1939. It was not
until 1975 and the death of Franco that the Catalans began to regain their
right to cultural expression, which was restarted by the Spanish Constitution
of 1978. Since this period, a balance between a sense of local identity versus
the broader Spanish one has emerged as the dominant political force in
Catalonia. The former tends to advocate for even greater autonomy and
independence; the latter tends to argue for maintaining the status quo. As a
result, there tends to be much fluctuation depending on regional and national
politics during a given election cycle. Given the stronger centralist
tendencies in France, however, French Catalans display a much less dynamic
sense of uniqueness, having been integrated more consistently into the unitary
French national identity. Geography. The vast majority of Catalans reside in
the autonomous community of Catalonia, within Spain. At least 100,000 Catalan
speakers live in the "pays catalan" in France. An indeterminate number of
Catalans emigrated to other countries during the Spanish colonial period and in
the years following the Spanish Civil War. Culture and society. Described by
author Walter Starkie in "The Road to Santiago" as a subtle people, he sums up
their national character with a local term "seny" meaning "common sense" or a
pragmatic attitude toward life. The "masia" or "mas" is a defining
characteristic of the Catalan countryside and includes a large house, land,
cattle, and an extended family, but this tradition is in decline as the nuclear
family has largely replaced the extended family, as in the rest of western
Europe. Catalans in Spain are recognised as a "nationality" and enjoy a high
degree of political autonomy, leading to reinforcement of a Catalan identity.
Language. The Catalan language is a Romance language of the Gallo-Iberian
group. It is the language closest to Occitan, as well as sharing many features
with other Western Romance languages such as Spanish, French, Portuguese, and
Aragonese. There are a number of linguistic varieties that are considered
dialects of Catalan; among them, the dialect group with the most speakers,
Central Catalan. The number of Catalan speakers is more than 7 million, but
very few Catalan monoglots exist; basically, virtually all of the Catalan
speakers in Spain are bilingual speakers of Catalan and Spanish, with a
sizeable population of Spanish-only speakers of immigrant origin (typically
born outside Catalonia or with both parents born outside Catalonia) existing in
the major Catalan urban areas as well. In the Roussillon, nowadays only a
minority of the French Catalans do speak Catalan, with French being the
majority language for the inhabitants after a continued process of language
shift. The inhabitants of the Aran valley count Aranese –an Occitan
dialect– rather than Catalan as their own language. These Catalans are also
bilingual in Spanish. In September 2005, the .cat TLD, the first Internet
language-based top-level domain, was approved for all web pages intending to
serve the needs of the Catalan linguistic and cultural community on the
Internet. This community is made up of those who use the Catalan language for
their online communications or promote the different aspects of Catalan culture
online. Traditional clothes. The traditional dress (now, practically only used
in folkloric celebrations) included the "barretina" (a sort of woollen, long
cap usually red or purple color) and the "faixa" (a sort of wide belt) among
men, and "ret" (a fine net bag to contain hair) among women. The traditional
footwear was the "espardenya" or espadrille. Cuisine. Traditional diet. The
Catalan diet is part of the Mediterranean diet and includes the use of olive
oil. Catalan people like to eat veal ("vedella") and lamb ("xai"). In Catalan
gastronomy, "embotits" (a wide variety of Catalan sausages and cold meats) are
very important; these are pork sausages such as "botifarra" or "fuet". In the
past, bread (similar to French bread) figured heavily in the Catalan diet; now
it is used mainly in the morning (second breakfast, especially among young
students and some workers) and supplements the noon meal, at home and in
restaurants. Bread is still popular among Catalans; some Catalan fast-food
restaurants don't serve hamburgers, but offer a wide variety of sandwiches. In
the past, the poor ate soup every day and rice on Thursday and Sunday. The
discipline of abstinence, not eating meat during Lent, once was very strong,
but practically disappeared in the twentieth century. Spicy food is rare in the
Catalan diet, but there are quite garlicky sauces such as "allioli" or
"romesco". Traditional dishes. One type of Catalan dish is "escudella", a soup
which contains chick peas, potatoes, and vegetables such as green cabbage,
celery, carrots, turnips, and meats such as "botifarra" (a Catalan sausage),
pork feet, salted ham, chicken, and veal. In Northern Catalonia, it is
sometimes called "ollada". Other Catalan dishes are "calçots" (similar to
leeks and often eaten with a romesco sauce) and "escalivada". Music. Catalan
music has one of the oldest documented musical traditions in Europe. Religion.
The majority of Catalans are of the Roman Catholic tradition. Social
conditions. Catalonia is one of the richest and most well developed regions in
Southern Europe. Barcelona is among the most industrialized metropolises and is
both a regional capital and a magnet for various migrants from other regions in
Spain, as well as from foreign countries. Identity and nationalism. Due to the
continued identification with a distinct identity, many Catalans support
Catalan nationalism or Catalan independentism in Spain. This is only seen to a
much lesser extent in France.
