Plame affair timeline The CIA leak scandal timeline (also known as the CIA leak
case timeline, the Plamegate scandal timeline, and the Plame affair timeline)
pertains to the controversy leading to the CIA leak grand jury investigation
and ensuing criminal trial "United States v. Libby", following Robert Novak's
public disclosure of the then-still classified covert identity of United States
Central Intelligence Agency officer Valerie Plame Wilson (known as the "CIA
leak scandal" and also known as "Plamegate" and the "Plame affair"). Valerie
Plame Wilson is the wife of former U.S. Ambassador Joseph C. Wilson, author of
a controversial op-ed entitled "What I Didn't Find in Africa" published in "The
New York Times" on July 3, 2003, questioning the accuracy of the George W. Bush
administration's rationale for the 2003 invasion of Iraq. Responding to that
op-ed, Robert Novak publicly revealed Wilson's wife to be a CIA "operative"
named "Valerie Plame" in his "Washington Post" column on July 14, 2003. Between
2003 and 2007, the United States Department of Justice directed the U.S.
Department of Justice Office of Special Counsel, headed by Special Counsel
Patrick Fitzgerald, to conduct a special investigation into the original source
for the leak of Plame's then-still classified CIA covert identity and any
possible violations of criminal statutes requiring government officials to use
classified information responsibly and to testify truthfully in such federal
investigations. The CIA leak grand jury investigation resulted in the
indictment and conviction of Lewis Libby in United States v. Libby and the
later commutation of his prison sentence by United States President George W.
Bush. In late August 2006, former U.S. Deputy Secretary of State Richard
Armitage revealed publicly that Novak had based his disclosure of Mrs. Wilson's
CIA identity on then still-classified information that Armitage initially gave
him while Armitage was still serving in the State Department. The "Timeline/
Links" section of "The Joe and Valerie Wilson Legal Support Trust" provides
links to "several timelines assembled by various national publications, which
should help to shed some light on the events as they transpired," including
this timeline, while observing: "Understanding the series of events that
occurred around the exposure of Valerie Wilson's covert CIA status is somewhat
difficult due to the misleading and contradictory statements given by various
officials regarding the leak." Key background events. 2000. DIA agent William
Bultemeier killed in Niamey, Niger. Bultemeier had acted as a liaison between
Nigerien and US defense intelligence agencies in an effort to curtail illicit
uranium mining in Niger. October 2003. He says he was reading Novak's newspaper
column again, on October 1, 2003, and "he [Novak said he was told by a non-
partisan gun slinger." "I almost immediately called Secretary Powell and said,
'I'm sure that was me,'" Armitage says. Armitage immediately met with FBI
agents investigating the leak." "I told them that I was the inadvertent leak",
Armitage says. He didn't get a lawyer, however...Armitage says he didn't come
forward because "the special counsel, once he was appointed, asked me not to
discuss this and I honored his request." July 2004. At least three European
intelligence were aware of potential illegal trade in Nigerien uranium between
1999 and 2001. The second "outing" occurred when the C.I.A. sent confidential
documents to the U.S. Interests Section of the Swiss Embassy in Havana. The
documents were supposed to be sealed from the Cuban government but apparently
not and their contents gleaned by Cuban agents. March 2005. As evidence that it
is likely that no crime had been committed, the news agencies voluntarily filed
a friend of the court brief in which they state on page 5:B. There is Ample
Evidence On The Public Record To Cast Considerable Doubt That a Crime Has Been
Committed. facts and rationale are offered in subsequent pages. According to
the news agencies, there was no need to compel these reporters to divulge their
sources because it was unlikely that a crime had been committed. Disclosure and
scandal. July 2004. CNN Transcript July 5, 2005. Public statements. Further
White House reactions; possible involvement of Bush and Cheney. In the
beginning the White House called the allegation that Rove disclosed classified
information "totally ridiculous" and "simply not true", and stated that "if
anyone in this administration was involved in it, they would no longer be in
this administration." The White House continued to publicly assert that no Bush
administration officials were involved in the leak until after the Supreme
Court decision of 2005, the subsequent release of internal "TIME magazine"
email, and "TIME" reporter Matt Cooper's decision to testify to the grand jury.
Once Karl Rove's involvement was disclosed, the White House refused to comment
on the ongoing investigation and stated that they would fire anyone "convicted"
of criminal activity. Critics find an intent to protect Mr. Rove in the new
specificity, while supporters say this is indicative of was what was meant all
along. September 2003. On September 29, 2003, White House Press Secretary Scott
McClellan stated that "anyone in this administration was involved in it, they
would no longer be in this administration", adding that Karl Rove had
specifically assured McClellan that he was not involved, and that "the
President expects his administration to adhere to the highest standards of
conduct and the highest ethics". White House Press Secretary Scott McClellan
said, regarding any suggested involvement of Karl Rove with the leak, that "The
President knows" that it was not true, adding: "And I said it is simply not
true. So, I mean, it's public knowledge. I've said that it's not true. And I
have spoken with Karl Rove ... He Bush's aware of what I've said, that there is
simply no truth to that suggestion. And I have spoken with Karl about it." On
September 30, 2003, Mr. Bush said: "And if there is a leak out of my
administration, I want to know who it is. And if the person has violated law,
the person will be taken care of." He added: "I don't know of anybody in my
administration who leaked classified information. If somebody did leak
classified information, I'd like to know it, and we'll take the appropriate
action." President George W. Bush, who has repeatedly denied knowing the
identity of the leaker, called the leak a "criminal action" for the first time
on 6 October 2003, stating "anybody has got any information inside our
government or outside our government who leaked, you ought to take it to the
Justice Department so we can find the leaker." Speaking to a crowd of
journalists the following day, Bush said "I have no idea whether we'll find out
who the leaker is ‚Äî partially because, in all due respect to your profession,
you do a very good job of protecting the leakers." October 2003. On 8 October
2003, White House spokesman Scott McClellan said that "no one has more of an
interest in getting to the bottom of this than the White House does, than the
President does." On 10 October 2003, after the Justice Department began its
formal investigation into the leak, McClellan specifically said that neither
Rove nor two other officials whom he had personally questioned ‚Äî Elliott
Abrams, a national security aide, and Lewis Libby, Vice President Dick Cheney's
chief of staff ‚Äî were involved and that anyone who was involved in leaking
classified information would be fired. June 2004. On 10 June 2004, eight months
after the formal outside investigation was begun and five months after the
appointment of a Special Counsel, President Bush was asked by a reporter,
"Given recent developments in the CIA leak case, particularly Vice President
Cheney's discussions with the investigators, do you still stand by what you
said several months ago, suggesting that it might be difficult to identify
anybody who leaked the agent's name? ... And do you stand by your pledge to
fire anyone found to have done so?" The President responded, "Yes. And that's
up to the U.S. Attorney to find the facts." July 2005. On 11 July 2005, White
House spokesman Scott McClellan, who had since become a grand jury witness
himself, refused at a press conference to answer dozens of questions,
repeatedly stating that the Bush Administration had made a decision not to
comment on an "ongoing criminal investigation" involving White House staff.
McClellan declined to answer whether Rove had committed a crime. McClellan also
declined to repeat prior categorical denials of Rove's involvement in the leak,
nor would he state whether Bush would honor his prior promise to fire
individuals involved in the leak. Although Democratic critics called for Rove's
dismissal, or at the very least immediate suspension of Rove's security
clearances and access to meetings in which classified material was under
discussion, Rove remained working in the White House. Neither Rove nor the
President offered immediate public comment on the unfolding scandal.
Congressional Republicans remained silent on the issue of the Valerie Plame
leak and a White House compromise of national security, and as of 18 July 2005,
not a single elected Republican member of Congress had called for Rove to be
disciplined or impeached. Rove was vociferously defended by Republican Party
Chairman Ken Mehlman and by many conservative news outlets and commentators,
some of whom followed cues laid out in a "talking points" memo, circulated
among Republicans on Capitol Hill, which questioned Joseph Wilson's
credibility. Among others, David Brooks, conservative "New York Times"
editorialist and NPR commentator, attacked Wilson on 14 July 2005 by falsely
alleging that he had claimed Cheney sent him on the Niger mission, and that in
speaking to Cooper and others, Rove was merely correcting a reporter's
misconception. The Editorial Board of "The Wall Street Journal" praised Rove on
13 July 2005 for supposedly leaking Plame's identity, referring to him as a
"whistleblower." Fox News's John Gibson said that even if Rove is not being
truthful, he deserves a medal for leaking Plame's CIA identity because Joseph
Wilson opposed the war and "Valerie Plame should have been outed by somebody."
On 18 July 2005, President Bush stated that "f someone committed a crime, they
will no longer work in my administration." This was widely interpreted as a
retraction of multiple earlier promises to fire anyone involved in the leak
itself. Others counter this view by relying on the one previous mention of
illegality, the September 30, 2003 remarks, to suggest that criminality was a
prerequisite all along. Many news outlets speculated that Rove's (future) legal
defense might be built upon testimony that he was ignorant of Plame's protected
status at the time he outed her as a CIA employee; if it could be proven that
he had heard of her CIA covert status before speaking to journalists, however,
Rove could face far more serious charges. A "New York Times" story of 16 July
2005 suggested that the Special Counsel grand jury has questioned whether a
particular top secret State Department report naming Plame may have been the
source of Rove's information. Colin Powell was photographed carrying the report
in Africa in the company of the President in the days following the 6 July 2003
publication of Wilson's op-ed piece. Powell is reported to have testified
before the grand jury. White House Chief of Staff, Andrew Card was informed by
then White House counsel Alberto Gonzales around 8:00¬ p.m. on September 29,
2003, that the Department of Justice was beginning an investigation of the
Plame affair, and that the next morning, Gonzalez would order the White House
staff to preserve all documents that may be related to the case. Gonzalez has
stated that he did not send the order to the staff because of the lateness of
the hour, but speculation has suggested that he notified Card in order to give
him a twelve hour head start before destruction of any incriminating documents
would be prohibited. This was unusual, according to the "Washington Post",
since the White House Staff is usually quickly notified of any investigations
so as to safeguard the integrity of any documents, emails or memoranda that
might be required for the investigation. Congressional reactions. July 2005. On
July 15, 2005, ninety one Democratic members of Congress sign a petition
calling for Karl Rove to explain his role in the Plame affair, or to resign.
Thirteen Democratic Members of the House Judiciary Committee call for hearings
on the matter. A Resolution of Inquiry has been offered by Rush D. Holt, Jr.
(D-NJ) and John Conyers (D-MI), requesting that the Bush Administration release
all documents concerning the exposure of Ms. Plame. Barney Frank (D-MA) and
John Conyers (D-MI) have authorized the Library of Congress to research legal
precedent for the impeachment of White House staffers. A series of nationwide
town hall meetings was scheduled for July 23, 2005 to review the Downing Street
memo, the Plame affair, and the situation in Iraq. Twenty-six Democratic
Senators, including seven members of the Senate Select Committee on
Intelligence, have issued a public statement authored by Senator John Kerry,
calling for Congressional hearings to investigate the Plame leak. November
2005. On November 1, 2005, Senator Harry Reid (D-NV) called for a closed
session, for only the 54th time since 1929, to discuss the Plame affair and the
Bush Administration's role in pre-Iraq War intelligence. On November 5, 2005,
Senator Zell Miller (D-GA) wrote a column describing his view of the Plame
affair as a "sting operation" by the Wilsons designed to pull down a sitting
president. Miller claims that Joseph Wilson played a key role by
"misrepresenting" the intelligence he gathered on his trip to Niger, publishing
his findings in an op-ed piece. After an MSNBC report that asserted Plame was
working on tracking Iranian nuclear proliferation, U.S. Senator Frank
Lautenberg (D-NJ) wrote Director of Central Intelligence Porter Goss requesting
a "national security damage assessment briefing to U.S. Senators regarding the
public disclosure of Valerie Plame's identity as a CIA officer." Reactions of
former CIA officers. July 2005. On 18 July 2005, eleven former CIA officers
backed Valerie Plame in a three page statement presented to a Congressional
hearing and characterized the leak of her identity as damaging "national
security and threatenthe ability of U.S. intelligence gathering":[http://
democrats.senate.gov/dpc/hearings/hearing23/cialetter.pdf as reported by Fox
News. The former CIA officers charge specifically that comments by members of
Congressreveal an astonishing ignorance of the intelligence community and the
role of cover. The fact is that there are thousands of U.S. intelligence
officers who ‚Äúwork at a desk‚Äù in the Washington, D.C. area every day who
are undercover. Some have official cover, and some have non-official cover.
Both classes of cover must and should be protected.While we are pleased that
the U.S. Department of Justice is conducting an investigation and that the U.S.
Attorney General has recused himself, we believe that the partisan attacks
against Valerie Plame are sending a deeply discouraging message to the men and
women who have agreed to work undercover for their nation‚Äôs security. We are
not lawyers and are not qualified to determine whether the leakers technically
violated the 1982 Intelligence Identities Protection Act. However, we are
confident that Valerie Plame was working in a cover status and that our
nation‚Äôs leaders, regardless of political party, have a duty to protect all
intelligence officers. We believe it is appropriate for the President to move
proactively to dismiss from office or administratively punish any official who
participated in any way in revealing Valerie Plame's status. Such an act by the
President would send an unambiguous message that leaks of this nature will not
be tolerated and would be consistent with his duties as the Commander-in-
Chief.We also believe it is important that Congress speak with one non-partisan
voice on this issue. Intelligence officers should not be used as political
footballs. In the case of Valerie Plame, she still works for the CIA and is not
in a position to publicly defend her reputation and honor. We stand in her
stead and ask that Republicans and Democrats honor her service to her country
and stop the campaign of disparagement and innuendo aimed at discrediting Mrs.
Wilson and her husband.Our friends and colleagues have difficult jobs gathering
the intelligence, which helps, for example, to prevent terrorist attacks
against Americans at home and abroad. They sometimes face great personal risk
and must spend long hours away from family and friends. They serve because they
love this country and are committed to protecting it from threats from abroad
and to defending the principles of liberty and freedom. They do not expect
public acknowledgement for their work, but they do expect and deserve their
government‚Äôs protection of their covert status.For the good of our country,
we ask you to please stand up for every man and woman who works for the U.S.
intelligence community and help protect their ability to live their cover.
Former DCI George Tenet told a Senator that he was "furious" with the Bush
Administration about the leak in 2003. Larry C. Johnson, a former CIA colleague
of Plame's in the late 1980s, heavily criticized the Bush Administration's
handling of the leak: "This is wrong and this is shameful. Instead of a
president concerned first and foremost with protecting this country and the
intelligence officers who serve it, we are confronted with a president who is
willing to sit by while political operatives savage the reputations of good
Americans like Valerie and Joe Wilson." On 22 July 2005, Johnson, along with
former CIA case officers David MacMichael and James Marcinkowski, former senior
CIA analyst and senior fellow of the Center for International Policy Melvin A.
Goodman, and retired Army colonel and DIA officer W. Patrick Lang, testified at
a Senate Hearing on the consequences of the leak. Lang emphasized his view that
the Bush Administration's action in leaking Plame's identity had threatened
vital national security interests over the long term, by sending the message to
potential assets around the world that their identity will not be protected if
they work with the CIA. "This says to them that if you decide to cooperate,
someone will give you up, so you don't do it", he said. "They are not going to
trust you in any way." Fred W. Rustmann, "a covert CIA agent from 1966 to
1990", was briefly a supervisor of Valerie Plame Wilson during her early career
at the CIA, although he left the agency before she went undercover: "'She made
no bones about the fact that she was an agency employee and her husband was a
diplomat,' he told "The Washington Times". 'Her neighbors knew this, her
friends knew this, his friends knew this. A lot of blame could be put on to
central cover staff and the agency because they weren't minding the store
here... The agency never changed her cover status.'" It is not clear how Mr.
Rustmann, who left the Agency in 1990, would know this, since Plame is said to
have gone undercover after 1990. And investigations by the FBI and by
journalists revealed Rustmann's comments to be "baseless"; friends and
neighbors of the Wilsons had no idea that Valerie Plame Wilson worked for the
CIA before reading about it in Novak's column. Reuel Marc Gerecht, a former CIA
case officer and Middle East specialist who became the director of the Project
for the New American Century's Middle East Initiative, and a resident fellow at
the American Enterprise Institute, dismissed the damage caused by outing
Valerie Plame: "The revealing of Valerie Plame's true employer", he writes,
"has in all probability hurt no one overseas. You can rest assured that if her
(most recent) outing had actually hurt an agent from her past, we would've
heard about it through a CIA leak. Langley's systemic sloppiness ‚Äî the
flimsiness of cover is but the tip of the iceberg of incompetence ‚Äî has
repeatedly destroyed agent networks and provoked 'flaps' with some of our
closest allies. A serious CIA would never have allowed Mr. Wilson to go on such
an odd, short 'fact finding' mission. It never would have allowed Ms. Plame
potentially to expose herself by recommending such an overt mission for her
mate, not known for his subtlety and discretion. With a CIA where cover really
mattered, Mr. Libby would not now be indicted. But that's not what we have in
the real world." However, Larry C. Johnson noted that Plame's outing probably
did compromise national security through revealing her cover company: "every
time that someone like this is outed, it's not just the person. In this case,
it's the front company. It's other NOCs who may have been exposed... But what I
do know for certain is, we're not just talking about Valerie Plame. We're
talking about an intelligence resource, a United States national security
resource that was destroyed by these White House officials that went out and
started talking to the press about this. Reckless. And they have ‚Äî they have
harmed the security of this country." Public opinion. July 2005. In a poll
conducted July 13, 2005 ‚Äì July 17, 2005 by ABC News, a plurality (47%) of
people surveyed said the White House was not cooperating fully with the ongoing
investigation; the remainder either had no opinion (28%) or thought the White
House was fully cooperating (25%). According to the poll, "75 percent say Rove
should lose his job if the investigation finds he leaked classified
information. That includes sizable majorities of Republicans, independents and
Democrats alike ‚Äî 71, 74 and 83 percent, respectively." A CNN poll dated 22
July ‚Äî 24 July found that 49% of respondents say Rove should resign, 31% said
he should not, and 20% had no opinion. USAToday August 2005. In a poll
commissioned by "Newsweek" and published 8 August 2005, 45% believed Rove
"guilty of a serious offence", 15% "not guilty of a serious offence", and 37%
responded "don't know." Later developments and public reactions to them. April
2006. On 6 April 2006, it was widely reported that George W. Bush authorized
Libby to disclose the prior-to-then classified October 2002 NIE on Iraq's
weapons program to Judith Miller to rebut charges by Joe Wilson, according to
documents filed in federal court detailing Libby's grand jury testimony. White
House Press Secretary Scott McClellan confirmed that the president authorized
the declassification to rebut charges by war critics, but declined to
specifically address Libby's testimony. In a court filing on May 12, 2006,
Fitzgerald included a copy of Wilson's op-ed article in The New York Times
"bearing handwritten notations by the vice president." (See photo.)
Fitzgerald's filing declares that Libby ascertained Plame's name from Cheney
through conferences by the vice president's office about "how to respond to a
June 2003 inquiry from Washington Post reporter Walter Pincus about Wilson's
trip to Niger". In the filing, Fitzgerald states: http://
thenexthurrah.typepad.com/the_next_hurrah/files/news_article_response.pdf May
2006. In a May 24, 2006 court filing, Fitzgerald asserted that "To the best of
government‚Äôs counsel‚Äôs recollection, the government has not commented on
whether it intends to call the Vice President as a witness, and the
representations it has made regarding the identity of potential government
witnesses have been limited to responses to the defense assertions in
defendant‚Äôs Third Motion to Compel." August 2006. At the end of August in
2006, Richard Armitage, a former deputy secretary of state, acknowledged that
he initially disclosed Plame's employment with the CIA to Robert Novak.
According to the report by Fox News Armitage's disclosure "suggests" that the
Bush administration was not involved in leaking Valerie Plame's identity to the
press to discredit Joseph C. Wilson, as the Wilsons and their supporters still
claim. August 2009. On August 18, 2009 journalist Robert Novak died.
