Communist state A Communist state, in popular usage, is a state with a form of
government characterized by single-party rule or dominant-party rule by a
communist party or socialist party and a professed allegiance to a Leninist or
Marxist–Leninist ideology as the guiding principle of the state.
Theoretically, "communist state" is a "contradictio in terminis" as a communist
society as defined by both Marxists and anarcho-communists is in principle
stateless and would not be bound by a single country. From this perspective,
Marxist–Leninist state is more appropriate and applicable. However, these
states constitutionally designate themselves as socialist states. They do this
not to disguise the fact that the ruling party is communist, but rather because
they do not consider themselves to be a communist society at present. Instead,
they constitutionally identify themselves as socialist states or workers'
states. The primary goal of these states, which also explains their official
name, is to guide and lead their respective countries in the process of
constructing socialism, ultimately leading to communism. Historically, a
"communist state" referred to a system where public ownership and centralized
planning of all or most means of production by the Communist party-run state is
deemed necessary to further the interests of the working class; today, a
communist state can also, for instance, refer to contemporary China and
Vietnam, where a Communist Party-run state exists alongside a mixed economy.
According to Marxist–Leninists, the state is a tool in the hands of the
ruling class, which in a socialist society is the working class. According to
Leninists, a workers' state is a state of the working class. Communist states
may have several legal political parties, but the communist party is usually
granted a special or dominant role in government, often by statute or under the
constitution. Consequently, the institutions of the state and of the communist
party become intimately entwined, such as in the development of parallel
institutions. In the 20th century, most communist states adopted planned
economies. However, there were exceptions: The Soviet Union during the 1920s
and late 1980s and Yugoslavia after World War II allowed limited markets and a
degree of worker self-management, while China, Vietnam and Laos introduced far-
reaching market reforms after the 1980s. In the 21st century, China and Vietnam
have allowed a mixed economy to develop. The fundamental concepts of communist
states often diverge from the original socio-economic ideologies from which
they develop. As a result, many adherents of these ideologies often oppose the
political systems commonly associated with these states. For example,
dissenting communists such as Trotskyists were often opposed to the communist
states of the 20th century, claiming either that they had nothing to do with
"real" communism or that the ideology of such states had reached a point of
irrevocable corruption. Types of communist states. While historically almost
all claim lineage to Marxist thought, there are many varieties of communist
states, with indigenous adaptions. These Communist states often do not claim to
have achieved socialism or communism in their countries; rather, they claim to
be "building" and working toward the establishment of socialism in their
countries. For example, the preamble to the Socialist Republic of Vietnam's
constitution states that Vietnam only entered a transition stage between
capitalism and socialism after the country was re-unified under the Communist
party in 1976, and the 1992 Constitution of the Republic of Cuba states that
the role of the Communist Party is to "guide the common effort toward the goals
and construction of socialism". Alternative names that states adhering to an
officially communist ideology may assign themselves is socialist state or
socialist republic. This is because these nations have not yet transcended
capitalism or state capitalism and progressed toward pure communism in the
Marxist sense, which can only be achieved once capitalism exhausts itself of
its historical role. State institutions. Marxist-Leninist states share similar
institutions, which are organized on the premise that the communist party is a
vanguard of the proletariat and represents the long-term interests of the
people. The doctrine of democratic centralism, which was developed by Vladimir
Lenin as a set of principles to be used in the internal affairs of the
communist party, is extended to society at large. According to democratic
centralism, all leaders must be elected by the people and all proposals must be
debated openly, but, once a decision has been reached, all people have a duty
to obey that decision and all debate should end. When used within a political
party, democratic centralism is meant to prevent factionalism and splits. When
applied to an entire state, democratic centralism creates a one-party system.
The constitutions of most socialist states describe their political system as a
form of democracy. Thus, they recognize the sovereignty of the people as
embodied in a series of representative parliamentary institutions. Such states
do not have a separation of powers; instead, they have one national legislative
body (such as the Supreme Soviet in the Soviet Union) which is considered the
highest organ of state power and which is legally superior to the executive and
judicial branches of government. Such national legislative politics in
communist states often have a similar structure to the parliaments that exist
in liberal republics, with two significant differences: first, the deputies
elected to these national legislative bodies are not expected to represent the
interests of any particular constituency, but the long-term interests of the
people as a whole; second, against Marx's advice, the legislative bodies of
communist states are not in permanent session. Rather, they convene once or
several times per year in sessions which usually last only a few days. When the
national legislative body is not in session, its powers are transferred to a
smaller council (often called a presidium) which combines legislative and
executive power, and, in some communist states (such as the Soviet Union before
1990), acts as a collective head of state. In some systems, the presidium is
composed of important communist party members who vote the resolutions of the
communist party into law. State social institutions. Another feature of
communist states is the existence of numerous state-sponsored social
organizations (trade unions, youth organizations, women's organizations,
associations of teachers, writers, journalists and other professionals,
consumer cooperatives, sports clubs, etc.) which are integrated into the
political system. In some communist states, representatives of these
organizations are guaranteed a certain number of seats on the national
legislative bodies. In socialist states, the social organizations are expected
to promote social unity and cohesion, to serve as a link between the government
and society, and to provide a forum for recruitment of new communist party
members. Political power. Historically, the political organization of many
communist states has been dominated by a single-party monopoly. Some communist
regimes, such as North Korea, East Germany or the Czechoslovak Socialist
Republic have or had more than one political party, but all minor parties are
or were required to follow the leadership of the communist party. In socialist
states, the government may not tolerate criticism of policies that have already
been implemented in the past or are being implemented in the present.
Nevertheless, communist parties have won elections and governed in the context
of multi-party democracies, without seeking to establish a one-party state.
Examples include San Marino, Republic of Nicaragua, Moldova, Nepal (presently),
Cyprus (presently), and the Indian states of Kerala, West Bengal and Tripura.
However, for the purposes of this article, these entities do not fall under the
definition of communist state. Objections to use of term. No state led by a
communist party describes itself as a "communist state." In Marxism, communism
is the final phase of history at which time the state would have "withered
away" and therefore "communist state" is a contradiction in terms under
premises of this theory. Current states are either in the capitalist or
socialist phase of historymaking the term "socialist state" preferable to many
communists and Marxist theorists. Criticism. From the liberal or conservative
viewpoint. Totalitarian communist regimes have been criticized for their one-
party dictatorships, totalitarian control of the economy and society and
repression of civil liberties by the Council of Europe, economic focus on heavy
industry at the expense of consumer goods, sometimes resulting in shortages of
vital products or even famine, and militarism and propaganda to cover up the
mistakes of the government . From the communist and socialist viewpoints.
Within the socialist and communist movements themselves, there are a number of
criticisms of using the term "communist states". Left communists, Anarchists
and some Trotskyists contend that the so-called "communist" or "socialist"
states or "people's states" were actually state capitalist and thus cannot be
called "socialist". Modern period. Democratic states with current governing
communist parties in power. These are multi-party states that currently have
communist parties leading the government. Such states are not considered to be
communist "states" as the countries themselves allow for multiple parties, and
do not provide a constitutional role for their communist parties. Communist
parties as part of a ruling coalition. There are also some parties that
participate as junior partners in ruling coalitions, as listed below.
