Copyright infringement of software The copyright infringement of software
(often referred to as software piracy) refers to several practices which
involve the unauthorized copying of computer software. Copyright infringement
of this kind varies globally. Most countries have copyright laws which apply to
software, but the degree of enforcement and compliance varies. Subject to many
exceptions, it is a copyright violation to download, upload or otherwise
distribute copyrighted material through the internet without authorization.
Existing and proposed laws. Most countries extend copyright protections to
software. Even the oldest legacy computer systems used today will not have
their copyright expire until 2030. In the United States, copyright term has
been extended many times over from the original term of 14 years with a single
renewal allowance of 14 years, to the current term of the life of the author
plus 70 years. If the work was produced under corporate authorship it may last
120 years after creation or 95 years after publication, whichever is less.
Punishment of copyright infringement varies case-by-case across countries.
Convictions may include jail time and/or severe fines for each instance of
copyright infringement. In the United States, willful copyright infringement
carries a maximum penalty of $150,000 per instance. Proposed laws such as the
Stop Online Piracy Act broaden the definition of "willful infringement", and
introduce felony charges for unauthorized media streaming. These bills are
aimed towards defeating websites that carry or contain links to infringing
content, but have raised concerns about domestic abuse and internet censorship.
Title I of the US DMCA, the WIPO Copyright and Performances and Phonograms
Treaties Implementation Act has provisions that prevent persons from
"circumvent a technological measure that effectively controls access to a
work". Thus if a software manufacturer has some kind of software, dongle or
password access device installed in the software any attempt to bypass such a
copy protection scheme may be actionable — though the US Copyright Office is
currently reviewing anticircumvention rulemaking under DMCA —
anticircumvention exemptions that have been in place under the DMCA include
those in software designed to filter websites that are generally seen to be
inefficient (child safety and public library website filtering software) and
the circumvention of copy protection mechanisms that have malfunctioned, have
caused the software to become inoperable or which are no longer supported by
their manufacturers. Certain free software licenses, most notably GNU General
Public License (GPL) substantially rely on existing copyright law. It is not
possible to enforce GPL other than within the framework of existing copyright
law. Limitations. Copyright does not protect the technical form nor R&D of an
original work. Copyright contains a Substantial similarity requirement to
determine whether the work falls under the Fair use clause. Evaluation of
alleged software copyright infringement in a court of law may be non-trivial;
if an original work is alleged to have been modified, then tests such as the
Abstraction-Filtration-Comparison test (AFC Test) are used to detect
infringement. The time and costs required to apply this test naturally vary
based on the size and complexity of the copyrighted material. Furthermore,
there is no standard or universally accepted test; some courts have rejected
the AFC Test it in favor of narrower testing criteria. Impact of copyright
infringement. Economic harm. According to a BSA/IDC studies, the highest piracy
rate comes from Armenia, with piracy rate of 93%. China and India are at No. 17
and No. 41 respectively, with 82% and 69% of recorded Software Piracy rates.
The lowest piracy rate, according to survey, is observed in USA, at 20%.
However, the methodology of these studies has been heavily criticized.
Developing countries. Most commercially exploited proprietary software is
developed in the United States and Europe. Critics in developing countries see
this as an indirect technology transfer tax on their country, preventing
technological advancement. This is the leading reason developing countries
refuse to accept or respect copyright laws. This idea is often applied to
patent laws as well. Traian Băsescu, the president of Romania, stated that
"piracy helped the young generation discover computers. It set off the
development of the IT industry in Romania." The debate about software piracy
acceptance in developing countries still continues. In 2011, the Business
Software Alliance announced that 83 percent of software deployed on PCs in
Africa has been pirated (excluding South Africa).
