Criticism of Walmart Wal-Mart has been subject to criticism by various groups
and individuals. Among these are some labor unions, community groups,
grassroots organizations, religious organizations, environmental groups and
Wal-Mart customers. They have protested against Wal-Mart, the company's
policies and business practices, including charges of racial and gender
discrimination. Other areas of criticism include the corporation's foreign
product sourcing, treatment of product suppliers, environmental practices, the
use of public subsidies, and the company's security policies. Wal-Mart denies
doing anything wrong and maintains that low prices are the result of
efficiency. In 2005, labor unions created new organizations and websites to
influence public opinion against Wal-Mart, including Wake Up Wal-Mart (United
Food and Commercial Workers) and Walmart Watch (Service Employees International
Union). By the end of 2005, Wal-Mart had launched Working Families for Wal-Mart
to counter criticisms made by these groups. Additional efforts to counter
criticism include launching a public relations campaign in 2005 through its
public relations website, which included several television commercials. The
company retained the public relations firm Edelman to interact with the press
and respond to negative media reports, and has started interacting directly
with by sending them news, suggesting topics for postings, and sometimes
inviting them to visit Walmart's corporate headquarters. Economists at the Cato
Institute suggest that Wal-Mart is a success because it sells products that
people want to buy at low prices, satisfying customers' wants and needs.
However, Wal-Mart critics argue that Wal-Mart's lower prices draw customers
away from other smaller businesses, hurting the community. Local communities.
When Walmart plans new store locations, activists sometimes oppose the new
store and attempt to block its construction. Opponents cite concerns such as
traffic congestion, environment problems, public safety, absentee landlordism,
bad public relations, low wages and benefits, and predatory pricing. Opposition
sometimes includes protest marches by competitors, informed citizens,
activists, labor unions, and religious groups. In some instances, activists
demonstrated their opposition by causing property damage to store buildings or
by creating bomb scares. Some city councils have denied permits to developers
planning to include a Walmart in their project. Those who defend Walmart cite
consumer choice and overall benefits to the economy, and object to bringing the
issue into the political arena. A Walmart Superstore opened in 2004 in Mexico,
1.9 miles away from the historic Teotihuacan archaeological site and Pyramid of
the Moon. Although Walmart's proposal received protest and media attention, the
location was supported by Mexico's National Anthropology Institute, the United
Nations, and the Paris-based International Council on Monuments and Sites.
Local merchants, helped by environmental groups and anti-globalization groups
opposed the construction, and poet Homero Aridjis joined the protest
characterizing the opening as "supremely symbolic" and "...like planting the
staff of globalization in the heart of ancient Mexico." Archaeologists oversaw
construction and discovered a small clay and stone altar along with some other
artifacts where the store's parking lot is now located. In 1998, Walmart
proposed construction of a store off Charlotte Pike near Nashville, Tennessee.
The building site was home to both Native American burial grounds and a Civil
War battle site. Protests were mounted by Native Americans and Civil War
interest groups, but the Walmart store was eventually constructed after moving
graves and some modifications of the site so as not to interfere with the
battlefield. Civil War relics were also discovered at the site. The project
developers donated land to permit access to the Civil War historic site. The
Indian burials were removed and re-buried. In 2005, developers tore down the
long-closed Dixmont State Hospital in Kilbuck Township, Pennsylvania near
Pittsburgh, with plans to build a shopping complex anchored by a Walmart on the
site. While there were initially no general objections to Walmart itself, many
residents didn't want to see Dixmont torn down, despite the fact that the
Dixmont complex—having been abandoned in 1984—was beyond maintainable
condition and teenagers were dangerously trespassing onto the property on a
regular basis. However, while the land was being excavated after the complex
was torn down in order to create a plateau for the Walmart to sit on, a
landslide covered Pennsylvania Route 65 and the railroad tracks in between PA
65 and the Ohio River, shutting down both routes for weeks. While Walmart did
"stabilize" the landslide, many residents argued that Walmart merely stabilized
the hillside so that it could continue with work to build the store.
Ultimately, in 2007 Walmart decided against developing the site, allowing the
land to return to nature. PA 65 remains restricted to one lane northbound near
the site for safety concerns, though the entire roadway has since been cleared
of debris. Despite this, Walmart is the largest retail chain in the Pittsburgh
metropolitan area, and is the second-largest grocery store to locally based
Giant Eagle. Allegations of predatory pricing and supplier issues. In May 2010,
Walmart's US stores pulled its "Miley Cyrus" line of necklaces and bracelets,
three months after the Associated Press informed the chain that the jewelry
contained harmful amounts of the toxic metal cadmium. Long-term exposure to
cadmium can lead to bone softening and kidney failure. It is also a known
carcinogen, and research suggests that it can affect brain development in the
very young. Cadmium in jewelry is not known to be dangerous if the items are
simply worn, but concerns come when youngsters bite or suck on the jewelry, as
many children do. Walmart said that while the jewelry is not intended for
children, "it is possible that a few younger consumers may seek it out in
stores." "We are removing all of the jewelry from sale while we investigate its
compliance with our children's jewelry standard," Walmart said. The tainted
jewelry was made at a Chinese manufacturer. Walmart has been accused of selling
merchandise at such low costs that competitors have tried to sue it for
predatory pricing (intentionally selling a product at low cost in order to
drive competitors out of the market). In 1995, in the case of "Walmart Stores,
Inc. v. American Drugs, Inc.", pharmacy retailer American Drugs accused Walmart
of selling items at too low a cost for the purpose of injuring competitors and
destroying competition. The Supreme Court of Arkansas ruled in favor of Walmart
saying that its pricing, including the use of loss leaders, was not predatory
pricing. In 2000, the Wisconsin Department of Agriculture, Trade, and Consumer
Protection accused Walmart of selling butter, milk, laundry detergent, and
other staple goods at low cost, with the intention of forcing competitors out
of business and gaining a monopoly in local markets. Crest Foods filed a
similar lawsuit in Oklahoma, accusing Walmart of predatory pricing on several
of its products, in an effort to drive Crest Foods's own company-owned store in
Edmond, Oklahoma out of business. Both cases were settled out of court. In
2003, Mexico's antitrust agency, the Federal Competition Commission,
investigated Walmart for "monopolistic practices" prompted by charges that the
retailer pressured suppliers to sell goods below cost or at prices
significantly less than those available to other stores. Mexican authorities
found no wrongdoing on the part of Walmart. However, in 2003, Germany's High
Court ruled that Walmart's low cost pricing strategy "undermined competition"
and ordered Walmart and two other supermarkets to raise their prices. Walmart
won appeal of the ruling, then the German Supreme Court overturned the appeal.
Walmart has since sold its stores in Germany. Walmart has been accused of using
monopsony power to force its suppliers into self-defeating practices. For
example, Barry C. Lynn, a senior fellow at the New America Foundation (a think
tank), argues that Walmart's constant demand for lower prices caused Kraft
Foods to "shut down thirty-nine plants, to let go 13,500 workers, and to
eliminate a quarter of its products." Kraft was unable to compete with other
suppliers and claims the cost of production had gone up due to higher energy
and raw material costs. Lynn argues that in a free market, Kraft could have
passed those costs on to its distributors and ultimately consumers. For
example, most Walmart store pharmacies fill many generic prescriptions for $4
for a month's supply. However, in California and ten other states, complaints
from other pharmacies have resulted in Walmart being required to charge at
least $9 for a month's supply of certain drugs. The 2010 remodelings of their
smaller stores shifting emphasis away from non-grocery products towards
carrying grocery items carried by their supercenters, has created a small
backlash amongst some customers. The smaller and larger sizes in the adult
clothing were discontinued as well as other available styles, forcing adult
customers to look for clothing in the children's section, or shop with more
expensive specialty "Big and Tall" stores for basic items such as jeans.
Employee and labor relations. With close to 2.2 million employees worldwide,
Walmart has faced a torrent of lawsuits and issues with regards to its
workforce. These issues involve low wages, poor working conditions, inadequate
health care, as well as issues involving the company's strong anti-union
policies. Critics point to Walmart's high turnover rate as evidence of an
unhappy workforce, although other factors may be involved. Approximately 70% of
its employees leave within the first year. Despite the turnover rate the
company still is able to affect unemployment rates. This was found in a study
by Oklahoma State University which states, "Walmart is found to have
substantially lowered the relative unemployment rates of blacks in those
counties where it is present, but to have had only a limited impact on relative
incomes after the influences of other socio-economic variables were taken into
account." Wages. The activist group "Los Angeles Alliance for a New Economy"
(LAANE) said "in 2006 Walmart reports that full-time hourly associates
received, on average, $10.11 an hour." It further calculated that working 34
hours per week an employee earns $17,874 per year and claimed that is about
twenty percent less than the average retail worker. (The number of hours the
"average retail worker" worked was not specified.) The report from LAANE
further opines that this pay is "over $10,000 less than what the average two-
person family needs." By contrast, Walmart insists its wages are generally in
line with the current local market in retail labor, although direct comparisons
are complicated because Walmart employs more part-time workers, and the
company's more extensive training, supervision, and automation provides
opportunity to workers with little or no experience or skills, which may
account for wage differences. Walmart grants "full-time" benefits to those
working as little as 34 hours per week, but does not limit workers to just 34
hours per week. The company does control labor costs by such ways as
discouraging overtime.- Walmart Wage and Hour Settlement Other critics have
noted that in 2001, the average wage for a Walmart Sales Clerk was $8.23 per
hour, or $13,861 a year, while the federal poverty line for a family of three
was $14,630. Walmart founder Sam Walton once said, "I pay low wages. I can take
advantage of that. We're going to be successful, but the basis is a very low-
wage, low-benefit model of employment." In August 2006, Walmart announced that
it would roll out an average pay increase of 6% for all new hires at 1,200 U.S.
Walmart and Sam's Club locations, but the same time would institute pay caps on
veteran workers. While Walmart maintains that the measures are necessary to
stay competitive, critics believe that the salary caps are primarily an effort
to push higher-paid veteran workers out of the company. Because Walmart employs
part-time and relatively low paid workers, some workers may partially qualify
for state welfare programs. This has led critics to claim that Walmart
increases the burden on taxpayer-funded services. A 2002 survey by the state of
Georgia's subsidized healthcare system, PeachCare, found that Walmart was the
largest private employer of parents of children enrolled in its program; one
quarter of the employees of Georgia Walmarts qualified to enroll their children
in the federal subsidized healthcare system Medicaid. A 2004 study at the
University of California, Berkeley charges that Walmart's low wages and
benefits are insufficient, and although decreasing the burden on the social
safety net to some extent, California taxpayers still pay $86 million a year to
Walmart employees. On September 4, 2008, the Mexican Supreme Court of Justice
ruled that Wal-Mart de Mexico, the Mexican subsidiary of Wal-Mart, must cease
paying its employees in part with vouchers redeemable only at Wal-Mart stores.
Working conditions. Walmart has also faced accusations involving poor working
conditions of its employees. For example, a 2005 class action lawsuit in
Missouri asserted approximately 160,000 to 200,000 people who were forced to
work off-the-clock, were denied overtime pay, or were not allowed to take rest
and lunch breaks. In 2000, Walmart paid $50 million to settle a class-action
suit that asserted that 69,000 current and former Walmart employees in Colorado
had been forced to work off-the-clock. The company has also faced similar
lawsuits in other states, including Pennsylvania, Oregon, and Minnesota. Class-
action suits were also filed in 1995 on behalf of full-time Walmart pharmacists
whose base salaries and working hours were reduced as sales declined, resulting
in the pharmacists being treated like hourly employees. Walmart has also been
accused of ethical problems. It is said that the Walmart employees are gender
discriminated when trying to be hired and discriminated against in the work
area. Duke vs. Walmart inc. was a discrimination case on behalf of more than
1.5 million current and former female employees of Walmart’s 3,400 stores
across the United States. (9th circuit 2007) Dr. William Bliebly who evaluated
Walmart’s employment policies "against what social science research shows to
be factors that create and sustain bias and those that minimize bias”
(Bliebly) and he finished by saying, the men and women not being created equal
in the workforce is what Walmart is doing and what they should essentially not
be doing. On October 16, 2006, approximately 200 workers on the morning shift
at a Walmart Super Center in Hialeah Gardens, Florida walked out in protest
against new store policies and rallied outside the store, shouting "We want
justice" and criticizing the company's recent policies as "inhuman." This marks
the first time that Walmart has faced a worker-led revolt of such scale,
according to both employees and the company. Reasons for the revolt included
cutting full-time hours, a new attendance policy, and pay caps that the company
imposed in August 2006, compelling workers to be available to work any shift
(day, swing or night), and that shifts would be assigned by computers at
corporate headquarters and not by local managers. Walmart quickly held talks
with the workers, addressing their concerns. Walmart asserts that its policy
permits associates to air grievances without fear of retaliation. The 2004
report by U.S. Representative George Miller alleged that in ten percent of
Walmart's stores, nighttime employees were locked inside, holding them
prisoner. There has been some concern that Walmart's policy of locking its
nighttime employees in the building has been implicated in a longer response
time to dealing with various employee emergencies, or weather conditions such
as hurricanes in Florida. Walmart said this policy was to protect the workers,
and the store's contents, in high-crime areas and acknowledges that some
employees were inconvenienced in some instances for up to an hour as they had
trouble locating a manager with the key. However, fire officials confirm that
at no time were fire exits locked or employees blocked from escape. Walmart has
advised all stores to ensure the door keys are available on site at all times.
In January 2004, "The New York Times" reported on an internal Walmart audit
conducted in July 2000, which examined one week's time-clock records for
roughly 25,000 employees. According to the Times, the audit, "pointed to
extensive violations of child-labor laws and state regulations requiring time
for breaks and meals," including 1,371 instances of minors working too late,
during school hours, or for too many hours in a day. There were 60,767 missed
breaks and 15,705 lost meal times. Walmart’s vice president for
communications responded that company auditors had determined that the
methodology used was flawed, and the company "did not respond to it in any way
internally." Walmart has been accused of allowing undocumented immigrants to
work in its stores. In one case, federal investigators say Walmart executives
knew that contractors were using undocumented immigrants as they had been
helping the federal government with an investigation for the previous three
years. Some critics said that Walmart directly hired illegal immigrants, while
Walmart claims they were employed by contractors who won bids to work for
Walmart. On October 23, 2003, federal agents raided 61 Walmart stores in 21
U.S. states in a crackdown known as "Operation Rollback," resulting in the
arrests of 250 nightshift janitors who were undocumented. Following the
arrests, a grand jury convened to consider charging Walmart executives with
labor racketeering crimes for knowingly allowing undocumented immigrants to
work at their stores. The workers themselves were employed by agencies Walmart
contracted with for cleaning services. Walmart blamed the contractors, but
federal investigators point to wiretapped conversations showing that executives
knew some workers did not have the right papers. The October 2003 raid was not
the first time Walmart was found using unauthorized workers. Earlier raids in
1998 and 2001 resulted in the arrests of 100 workers without documentation
located at Walmart stores around the country. In November 2005, 125 alleged
undocumented immigrants were arrested while working on construction of a new
Walmart distribution center in eastern Pennsylvania. According to Walmart, the
workers were employees of Walmart's construction subcontractor. Employees using
prescription drugs. In November 2009, Joseph Casias was fired from Walmart in
Battle Creek, Michigan, for using medical marijuana. Joseph Casias was a cancer
patient with a prescription for marijuana. WalMart spokesman Greg Rossiter
claimed that Walmart policy is to terminate employees who take certain
prescription medications, and he believed that this policy complied with the
law. Health insurance. As of October 2005, Walmart's health insurance covered
44% or approximately 572,000 of its 1.6 million U.S. workers. In comparison,
Walmart rival and wholesaler Costco insures approximately 96% of its eligible
workers, although Costco has been criticized by investors for its high labor
costs. Walmart spends an average of $3,500 per employee for health care, 27%
less than the retail-industry average of $4,800. When asked why so many Walmart
workers choose to enroll in state health care plans instead of Walmart's own
plan, Walmart CEO Lee Scott acknowledged that some states' benefits may be more
generous than Walmart's own plan: "In some of our states, the public program
may actually be a better value - with relatively high income limits to qualify,
and low premiums." Critics of Walmart argue in "" that employees are paid so
little they cannot afford health insurance. According to a September 2002
survey by the state of Georgia, one in four children of Walmart employees were
enrolled in PeachCare for Kids, the state's health-insurance program for
uninsured children, compared to the state's second-biggest employer, Publix,
which had one child in the program for every 22 employees. A December 2004
nationwide survey commissioned by Walmart showed that the use of public-
assistance health-care programs by children of Walmart workers was at a similar
rate to other retailers' employees, and at rates similar to the U.S. population
as a whole. On October 26, 2005, a Walmart internal memo sent to the firm's
Board of Directors advised trimming over $1 billion in health care expenses by
2011 through measures such as attracting a younger, implicitly healthier work
force by offering education benefits. The memo also suggested giving sedentary
Walmart staffers, such as cashiers, more physically demanding tasks, such as
"cart-gathering," and eliminating full-time positions in favor of hiring part-
time employees who would be ineligible for the more expensive health insurance
and several policy proposals which may violate the Americans with Disabilities
Act of 1990. The memo also accused Walmart's lower paid employees of abusing
emergency room visits, "possibly due to their prior experience with programs
such as Medicaid," whereas such visits may actually be due to the reduced
ability of uninsured or underinsured people to make timely appointments to see
a regular physician. Critics point to this internal memo as evidence that
Walmart purports to be generous with its employee benefits, while in reality
the company is working to cut such benefits by reducing the number of full-time
and long-term employees and discouraging supposedly unhealthy people from
working at Walmart. On January 12, 2006, the Maryland legislature enacted a law
requiring that all corporations with more than 10,000 employees in the state
spend at least eight percent of their payroll on employee benefits, or pay into
a state fund for the uninsured. Walmart, with about 17,000 employees in
Maryland, was the only known company to not meet this requirement before the
bill passed. On July 7, 2006, the Maryland law was overturned in federal court
by a U.S. District judge who held that a federal law, the Employee Retirement
Income Security Act (ERISA), preempted the Maryland law. In his opinion, the
judge said that the law would "hurt Walmart by imposing the administrative
burden of tracking benefits in Maryland differently than in other states."
Similar legislation in Wisconsin days later was defeated in the state
legislature. On April 17, 2006, Walmart announced it was making a health care
plan available to part-time workers after one year of service, instead of the
prior two-year requirement. One criticism of the new plan is that it provides
benefit only after a $1,000 deductible is paid ($3,000 for a family). These
deductibles may financially be out of reach for eligible part-time workers.
Walmart estimates this change can add 150,000 workers to health coverage plans,
if all who are eligible take part. By January 2007, the number of workers
enrolled in the company's health care plans increased by 8%, which Walmart
attributed to the introduction of less expensive insurance policies. However,
even with this increase, less than half of Walmart's employees, or 47.4%,
received health insurance through the company, with 10%, or 130,000, receiving
no coverage at all. In October 2001, a class action sexual discrimination
lawsuit, "Mauldin v. Wal-Mart Stores, Inc.", was filed against Walmart
challenging the company's denial of health insurance coverage for prescription
contraceptives. The lawsuit was certified for class action status, but later
dropped by the plaintiffs in 2006 once Walmart agreed to change its health
insurance policies. In March 2008, Walmart sued a former Walmart employee,
Deborah Shank, to recover the money it spent for her health care after she was
brain-damaged, restricted to a wheelchair, and nursing home-bound after her
minivan was hit by a truck. Walmart sued the former employee for $470,000 after
she received a settlement from the accident, citing that company policy forbids
employees from receiving coverage if they also win a settlement in a lawsuit.
After a wave of bad publicity, Walmart dropped its suit. New, full-time Walmart
associates must work at least six months before being eligible to purchase the
company's primary health insurance. Labor union opposition. Walmart has been
criticized for its policies against labor unions. Critics blame workers'
reluctance to join the labor union on Walmart anti-union tactics such as
managerial surveillance and pre-emptive closures of stores or departments who
choose to unionize. Walmart states that it is not anti-union but, "pro-
associate," arguing that its employees do not need to pay third parties to
discuss problems with management as the company's open-door policy enables
employees to lodge complaints and submit suggestions all the way up the
corporate ladder. In 1970, company's late founder Sam Walton resisted a
unionization push by the Retail Clerks International Union in two small
Missouri towns by hiring a professional union buster to conduct an anti-union
campaign. On the union buster's advice, Walton also took steps to show his
workers on how the company had their best interests in mind, encouraging them
to air concerns with managers and implementing a profit-sharing program. A few
years later, Walmart hired a consulting firm, Alpha Associates, to develop a
union avoidance program. In 2000, meat cutters in Jacksonville, Texas voted to
unionize and Walmart subsequently eliminated in-house meat-cutting jobs in
favor of prepackaged meats on the claims that it cut costs and was a preventive
measure to lawsuits. Walmart claimed that the nationwide closing of in-store
meat packaging had been planned for many years and was not related to the
unionization. In June 2003, a National Labor Relations Board judge ordered
Walmart to restore the meat department to its prior structure, complete with
meat-cutting, and to recognize and bargain with the union over the effects of
any change to case-ready meat sales. Walmart's anti-union policies also extend
beyond the United States. The documentary "Wal-Mart: The High Cost of Low
Price", shows one successful unionization of a Walmart store in Jonquière,
Quebec (Canada) in 2004, but Walmart closed the store five months later because
the company did not approve of the new "business plan" a union would require.
In September 2005, the Québec Labor Board ruled that the closing of a Walmart
store amounted to a reprisal against unionized workers and has ordered
additional hearings on possible compensation for the employees, though it
offered no details. In March 2005, Walmart executive Tom Coughlin was forced to
resign from its Board of Directors, facing charges of embezzlement. Coughlin
claimed that the money was used for an anti-union project involving cash bribes
paid to employees of the United Food and Commercial Workers Union in exchange
for a list of names of Walmart employees that had signed union cards. He also
claimed that the money was unofficially paid to him, by Walmart, as
compensation for his anti-union efforts. In August 2006, Coughlin pleaded
guilty to stealing money, merchandise, and gift cards from Walmart, but avoided
prison time due to his poor health. He was sentenced to five years probation
and required to pay a $50,000 fine and $411,000 in restitution to Walmart and
the Internal Revenue Service. A U.S. attorney has stated that no evidence was
found to back up Coughlin's initial claims, and Walmart continues to deny the
existence of the anti-union program, though Coughlin himself apparently
restated those claims to reporters after his sentencing. Walmart has also had
some run-ins with the German Ver.di labor union as well. These issues, combined
with cultural differences and low performing stores, led Walmart to pull out of
the German market entirely in 2006. In August 2006, Walmart announced that it
would allow workers at all of its Chinese stores to become members of trade
unions, and that the company would work with the state-sanctioned All-China
Federation of Trade Unions (ACFTU) on representation for its 28,000 staff.
However, the All-China Federation of Trade Unions has been criticized because
it is the only trade union in China and as a tool of the government, ACFTU has
been seen as not acting in the best interest of its members (workers), bowing
to the government pressure on industry growth and not defending workers'
rights. Imports and globalization. As a large customer to most of its vendors,
Walmart openly uses its bargaining power to bring lower prices to attract its
customers. The company negotiates lower prices from vendors. For certain basic
products, Walmart "has a clear policy" that prices go down from year to year.
If a vendor does not keep prices competitive with other suppliers, they risk
having their brand removed from Walmart's shelves in favor of a lower-priced
competitor. Critics argue that this pressures vendors to shift manufacturing
jobs to China and other nations, where the cost of labor is less expensive. In
the mid-1990s, Walmart had a "Buy American" campaign. Yet by 2005, about 60% of
Walmart's merchandise was imported, compared to 6% in 1995. In 2004, Walmart
spent $18 billion on Chinese products alone, and if it were an individual
economy, the company would rank as China's eighth largest trading partner,
ahead of Russia, Australia, and Canada. One group estimates that the growing US
trade deficit with China, heavily influenced by Walmart imports, is estimated
to have moved over 1.5 million jobs that might otherwise be in America to China
between 1989 and 2003. According to the American Federation of Labor and
Congress of Industrial Organizations (AFL-CIO), "Walmart is the single largest
importer of foreign-produced goods in the United States", their biggest trading
partner is China, and their trade with China alone constitutes approximately
10% of the total US trade deficit with China . While the company certainly
imports many products, it points out that it purchases goods from more than
68,000 US vendors, spending $137.5 billion in 2004, and supporting more than
3.5 million supplier jobs in the US. Overseas labor concerns. Walmart has been
criticized for not providing adequate supervision of its foreign suppliers. It
has also been criticized for using sweatshops and prison labor. For example, in
1995, Chinese dissident Harry Wu charged that Walmart was contracting prison
labor in Guangdong Province. However, Walmart says it does not use prison
labor. There have also been reports of teenagers in Bangladesh working in
sweatshops 80 hours per week at $0.14 per hour, for Walmart supplier Beximco.
The documentary film "" shows images of factories that produce goods for
Walmart that appear in poor condition, and factory workers subject to abuse and
conditions the documentary producers consider inhumane. According to Walmart
and many self-described advocates of free trade, comparisons of wage levels
between vastly different countries is not a useful way to assess the fairness
of a trade policy. The company also points out that wages paid to overseas
workers are comparable to or exceed local prevailing wages. In that case, the
company claims that the overseas manufacturing jobs it creates are often an
improvement in the quality of life for its employees. They have also drawn
attention to the fact that factory jobs with its suppliers are often safer and
healthier than local alternatives, which may include prostitution, the drug
trade, or scavenging. Walmart currently uses monitoring which critics say is
inadequate and "leaves outsiders unable to verify" conditions. Since Walmart
will not release its audits or factory names, outside organizations are left to
simply take Walmart's word. Critics suggest an agency such as Social
Accountability International or the Fair Labor Association should do the
monitoring. In 2004, Walmart began working with Business for Social
Responsibility, a San Francisco, California-based nonprofit organization, to
reach out to groups active in monitoring overseas plants. In June 2006, Walmart
was excluded from the investment portfolio of The Government Pension Fund of
Norway, which held stock values of about US$ 430 million in the company, due to
a social audit into alleged labor rights violations in Walmart operations in
the United States, Canada, Latin America, Africa, and Asia. Although Walmart
did not respond to questions from the fund's auditors, it later claimed the
decision "[doesn't] appear to be based on complete information". Allegations of
bribery and coverup in Mexico. In 2012 "The New York Times" reported that
Walmart had been made aware eight years earlier that executives of Walmart
México, its subsidiary in that country, had paid millions of dollars in bribes
to local officials to expedite permits for construction and operation of its
many stores in that country. The company had opened many stores in Mexico in
the late 1990s and early 2000s, attempting to widely establish itself before
competitors could. Sergio Cicero, a lawyer who had been responsible for
obtaining those permits and was bitter about being passed over for the position
of general counsel with Walmart México provided the company's corporate
general counsel's office with evidence showing that the company had made large
payments to "gestores", workers who deal with bureaucracies on behalf of
citizens and businesses, with coded indications that the money was being passed
on to officials to expedite permits. Company officials hired a veteran FBI
agent to conduct a preliminary inquiry, instead of hiring an outside law firm
as it usually did for major inquiries, such as a similar one in 2003 which
found that Walmart México had been helping high-volume customers evade that
country's sales taxes. The special investigative team found evidence
corroborating almost all of Cicero's allegations, and evidence suggesting that
the bribery had been even more extensive, including $16 million in "donations"
to local politicians and their organizations. They recommended opening a full
investigation, and possibly notifying the Justice Department, as it appeared
that both Mexican law and the U.S. Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (FCPA) had
been violated. Executives at Walmart México chafed at the investigation,
reportedly complaining that that was how business was done in the country. They
told their counterparts at corporate headquarters that the investigators were
being too aggressive, and some of the company's top executives apparently
agreed. Feeling Walmart had had enough bad publicity in recent years, they
allowed the investigation to be concluded by a short report from José Luis
Rodríguezmacedo, the head of Walmart México, who had himself been suspected
of involvement. It largely blamed Cicero, claiming he had fabricated the
allegations to conceal his own embezzlement from the company with the help of
the "gestores", one of whom was his wife's law partner. Some Walmart executives
found the report incomplete and contradictory, but the investigation was
closed. None of the Mexican executives investigated were ever disciplined, and
some were even promoted afterwards. In December 2011, several months before the
story broke, Walmart announced it had begun an internal review of its FCPA
compliance procedures. It was unclear how the Justice Department might respond.
While the FCPA's five-year statute of limitations appeared to bar prosecution
under that statute, falsified financial statements in the years since could be
seen as obstruction of justice under the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, and acts taken to
conceal the bribery investigation subsequent to 2007 could constitute
conspiracy. Product selection. Walmart's product selection has been criticized
by some groups in the past, primarily as viewed as a promotion of a particular
ideology or as a response to its original rural, religious and conservative
target market. In 2003, Walmart removed certain men's magazines from its
shelves, such as "Maxim", "FHM", and "Stuff", citing customer complaints
regarding their racy content. Later that year, it decided to partly obscure the
covers of "Cosmopolitan", "Marie Claire", and "Redbook" on store shelves due to
"customer concerns", and refused to stock an issue of Sports Illustrated's
swimsuit special because it took exception to one photograph. It has also
refused to sell the December 2011 issue of WWE Magazine due to its
controversial cover depicting The Rock doused with fire. Since 1991, Walmart
also has not carried music albums marked with the Recording Industry
Association of America's (RIAA's) Parental Advisory Label (contradictory to the
allowance of R-rated movies and video games rated Mature), although it carries
edited versions of such albums, with obscenities removed or overdubbed with
less offensive lyrics. In one example in 2005, Walmart rejected the original
cover of country singer Willie Nelson's reggae album, "Countryman", which
featured marijuana leaves, in an apparent pro-marijuana statement. To satisfy
Walmart, the record label, Lost Highway Records, issued the album with an
alternative cover, without recalling the original cover. Walmart has never
carried Marilyn Manson albums, solely because of the controversy surrounding
the group, but recently began selling Nine Inch Nails albums after rejecting
them for years. In fact, some albums that do not carry "Parental Advisory"
stickers, include profanities and are not edited. Such albums include Pink
Floyd's "The Dark Side of the Moon" and Arctic Monkeys' "Whatever People Say I
Am, That's What I'm Not". In 2009 Green Day refused to make an edited version
of their album 21st Century Breakdown for Walmart, with frontman Billie Joe
Armstrong claiming "You feel like you're in 1953 or something", thus the album
is not carried by Walmart stores. However, Walmart's policy on carrying albums
with the Parental Advisory Label seems to vary by country, as albums containing
the label can be found in Canadian Walmart stores, for example. In 1999,
Walmart announced that it would not stock emergency contraception pills in its
pharmacies, not citing any particular reasons except for a "business decision"
that was made earlier. The move was criticized by family planning advocates,
citing that women in small towns where Walmart pharmacies had little
competition would have greater difficulties in obtaining the drug. The decision
was challenged in 2006, as three Massachusetts women filed suit against the
company after they were unable to purchase emergency contraception at their
local Walmart stores, resulting in a ruling that required Walmart to stock the
drug in all of its pharmacies in Massachusetts. Expecting that other states
would soon do the same, Walmart reversed its policy and announced that it would
begin to stock the drug nationwide, while at the same time maintaining its
conscientious objection policy, allowing any Walmart pharmacy employee who does
not feel comfortable dispensing a prescription to refer customers to another
pharmacy. Walmart has also been criticized for selling some controversial
products. For example, in 2004 Walmart carried the anti-Semitic hoax "The
Protocols of the Elders of Zion" in its online catalogue. The Jewish civil
rights organization Anti-Defamation League wrote to the President of Walmart on
September 2008 noting the text, "has been the major weapon in the arsenals of
anti-Semites around the world," and called on Walmart to, "unequivocally state
the nature of the book and to disassociate itself from any endorsement of it."
Walmart stopped selling the book shortly thereafter. In October 2004, Walmart
canceled its order for "The Daily Show's" "America (The Book)" after
discovering a page that depicts each US Supreme Court judge nude. A week later,
it returned copies of comedian George Carlin's "When Will Jesus Bring the Pork
Chops?", with a cover recreating The Last Supper with Jesus' seat empty and
Carlin (an avowed atheist) seated next to it. The company claimed that the
copies were shipped to it by mistake and a Walmart spokeswoman said she did not
"believe this particular product would appeal" to its customer base. In January
2006, Walmart was criticized for the recommendation system on its website which
suggested that some black-related DVDs, such as "Introducing Dorothy Dandridge"
and documentaries on Baptist minister and civil rights leader Martin Luther
King, Jr. were similar to the "Planet of the Apes" television series DVD box
set. It quickly corrected the page, saying that it was a software glitch, but
ultimately blamed the matter on human error. A December 2007 report published
by the Environmental Investigation Agency (a non-governmental agency), revealed
that some furniture sold at Walmart was made from wood which had been illegally
logged in protected Russian habitats for Siberian tigers and other wildlife.
This led the company to investigate its suppliers and promise to eliminate
products made from illegal wood by 2013. They also joined the Global Forest &
Trade Network, an organization that is dedicated to eliminating illegal
logging. Taxes. Until the mid-1990s, Walmart took out corporate-owned life
insurance policies on its employees including "low-level" employees such as
janitors, cashiers, and stockers. This type of insurance is usually purchased
to cover a company against financial loss when a high-ranking employee (i.e.
management) dies, and is usually known as "Key Man Insurance." Critics derided
Walmart as buying what they called "Dead Peasants Insurance" or "Janitor
Insurance." Critics, as well as the U.S. Internal Revenue Service, charge that
the company was trying to profit from the deaths of its employees, and take
advantage of the tax law which allowed it to deduct the premiums. The practice
was stopped in the mid-1990s when the federal government closed the tax
deduction and began to pursue Walmart for back taxes. Homage to Augusto
Pinochet. On January 3, 2011 it was discovered that the entrance to one of the
holding corporate buildings of Walmart Chile had a plate in homage to Augusto
Pinochet, ex-Chilean dictator responsible of various human rights abuses, only
after much controversy Walmart Chile decided to remove said plate.
