Culture war A culture war (or culture wars) is a struggle between two sets of
conflicting cultural values. Origins. Culture war is a loan translation
(calque) from the German "Kulturkampf." The German term, "Kulturkampf", was
coined to describe the clash between cultural and religious groups in the
campaign from 1871 to 1878 under Chancellor Otto von Bismarck of the German
Empire against the influence of the Roman Catholic Church. The term "cultural
war" has been in English use almost as long as the original "Kulturkampf" and
generalizes the idea of these kinds of struggle. It is related then to the
theory of cultural hegemony. Italian Marxist Antonio Gramsci presented in the
1920s a theory of cultural hegemony to explain the slower advance, compared to
many Marxists' expectations, of proletarian revolution in Europe. He stated
that a culturally diverse society can be dominated by one class who has a
monopoly over the mass media and popular culture, and Gramsci argued for a
culture war in which anti-capitalist elements seek to gain a dominant voice in
the mass media, education, and other mass institutions. United States of
America. In American usage the term "culture war" is used to claim that there
is a conflict between those values considered traditionalist or conservative
and those considered progressive or liberal. It originated in the 1920s when
urban and rural American values came into clear conflict. This followed several
decades of immigration to the cities by people considered alien to earlier
immigrants. It was also a result of the cultural shifts and modernizing trends
of the Roaring 20s, culminating in the presidential campaign of Al Smith.
However, "The Culture War" in United States of America was redefined by James
Davison Hunter's 1991 book "Culture Wars: The Struggle to Define America." In
this work, it is traced to the 1960s. The perceived focus of the American
Culture War and its definition have taken various forms since then. 1980s. In
the 1980s the culture war in America was characterized by the conservative
climate during the Presidency of Ronald Reagan. Members of the religious right
often criticized academics and "artists", and their works, in a struggle
against what they considered indecent, subversive, and blasphemous. They often
accused their political opponents of undermining tradition, Western
civilization and family values. 1990s. The expression was introduced again by
the 1991 publication of "Culture Wars: The Struggle to Define America" by James
Davison Hunter, a sociologist at the University of Virginia. Hunter described
what he saw as a dramatic realignment and polarization that had transformed
American politics and culture. He argued that on an increasing number of "hot-
button" defining issues — abortion, gun politics, separation of church and
state, privacy, recreational drug use, homosexuality, censorship issues —
there existed two definable polarities. Furthermore, not only were there a
number of divisive issues, but society had divided along essentially the same
lines on these issues, so as to constitute two warring groups, defined
primarily not by nominal religion, ethnicity, social class, or even political
affiliation, but rather by ideological world views. Hunter characterized this
polarity as stemming from opposite impulses, toward what he referred to as
"Progressivism" and "Orthodoxy". Others have adopted the dichotomy with varying
labels. For example, Fox News commentator Bill O'Reilly emphasizes differences
between "Secular-Progressives" and "Traditionalists." In 1990 commentator Pat
Buchanan mounted a campaign for the Republican nomination for President of the
United States against incumbent George H. W. Bush in 1992. He received a prime
time speech slot at the 1992 Republican National Convention, which is sometimes
dubbed the "'culture war' speech."  A month later, Buchanan said that the
conflict was about power over society's definition of right and wrong. He named
abortion, sexual orientation and popular culture as major fronts – and
mentioned other controversies, including clashes over the Confederate Flag,
Christmas and taxpayer-funded art. He also said that the negative attention his
"culture war" speech received was itself evidence of America’s polarization.
Culture war disputes are considered by many to have had significant impacts on
national politics in the United States in the 1990s. Some say extreme
conservative rhetoric of the Christian Coalition hurt then-president George
H.W. Bush's chances for reelection in 1992 and helped his successor, Bill
Clinton, win reelection in 1996. On the other hand, conservative “cultural
warriors'” rhetoric helped Republicans gain control of Congress in 1994, and
the subsequent impeachment of Clinton by Congress over a sex scandal is widely
understood as having been a divisive "culture war" battle. The culture wars
influenced the debate over public school history curricula in the United States
in the 1990s. In particular, debates over the development of national
educational standards in 1994 revolved around whether the study of American
history should be a "celebratory" or "critical" undertaking and involved such
prominent public figures as Lynne Cheney, Rush Limbaugh, and historian Gary
Nash. 2000s.  In response, author and writer Rod Dreher stated in a
RealClearPolitics column that the rhetoric of a culture war disguises the fact
that American society truly is deeply divided on some moral issues, which is
not an artificial creation of political parties seeking to drum up support. He
wrote that the economic positions of the Democratic Party are generally popular
enough that, if it chose to drop polarizing social issues, it would become a
majority party in ongoing control. He describes the culture war as
"inevitable." Columnist Ross Douthat, then with "The Atlantic", wrote that he
had "a lot to agree with" Beinart, but he stated that what Obama and his
supporters seem to be doing is "winning" the culture wars for their side rather
than coming to some kind of compromise. In a February 2009 column in "The New
York Times", William Saletan stated that a holistic mix of left-wing and right-
wing ideas would come out of the culture war. He wrote, "morality has to be
practical, and that practicality requires morals." He concluded that
conservatives should embrace family planning as a way to reduce abortion and
government assistance while liberals should embrace personal responsibility,
which means that unprotected sex is criticized "bluntly." He also advocated
same sex marriage as a way to lead LGBT Americans to an "ethic of mutual
support and sacrifice" involving stricter personal responsibility. Canada.
"Culture war" (or "culture wars") in Canada describes the polarization between
the different values of Canadians. This can be West versus East, rural versus
urban, or traditional values versus progressive values. "Culture war" is a
relatively new phrase in Canadian political commentary. It can still be used to
describe historical events in Canada, such as the Rebellions of 1837, Western
Alienation, Quebec sovereignty movement, and any Aboriginal conflicts in
Canada, but is more relevant to current events such as the Caledonia conflict
with Natives and the increasing hostility between conservative and liberal
Canadians. Its use has increased considerably recently on account of
prorogation rallies, abortion, and the gun registry.
