Cyprus dispute The Cyprus dispute is the result of the ongoing conflict between
the Republic of Cyprus and Turkey, over the Turkish occupied northern part of
Cyprus. Initially, with the annexation of the island by the British Empire, the
"Cyprus dispute" was identified as the conflict between the people of Cyprus
and the British Crown regarding the Cypriots' demand for self determination.
The dispute however was finally shifted from a colonial dispute to an ethnic
dispute between the Turkish and the Greek islanders. The international
complications of the dispute stretch far beyond the boundaries of the island of
Cyprus itself and involve the guarantor powers (Turkey, Greece, and the United
Kingdom alike), along with the United States, the United Nations and the
European Union. With Turkey's military action of 1974 (disapproved by UN
Security Council Resolution 1974/360), Turkey occupied the northern part of the
internationally recognised Republic of Cyprus, and later upon those territories
the Turkish Cypriot community unilaterally declared independence forming the
Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus (TRNC), a sovereign entity that lacks
international recognition-with the exception of Turkey with which TRNC enjoys
full diplomatic relations. After the two communities and the guarantor
countries have committed themselves in finding a peaceful solution over the
dispute, the United Nations have since created and maintained a buffer zone
(the "Green Line") to avoid any further intercommunal tensions and hostilities.
This zone separates the Greek Cypriot-controlled south from the Turkish
Cypriot-controlled north. Historical background prior to 1960. The island of
Cyprus was first inhabited in 9000 BC with the arrival of farming societies who
built round houses with floors of terazzo. Cities were first built during the
Bronze Age and the inhabitants had their own Eteocypriot language until around
the 4th century BC. The island was part of the Hittite Empire as part of the
Ugarit Kingdom during the late Bronze Age until the arrival of two waves of
Greek settlement. Cyprus experienced an uninterrupted Greek presence on the
island dating from the arrival of Mycenaeans around 1100 BC, when the burials
began to take the form of long "dromos". The Greek population of Cyprus
survived through multiple conquerors, including Egyptian and Persian rule. In
the 4th century BC, Cyprus was conquered by Alexander the Great and then ruled
by the Ptolemaic Egypt until 58 BC, when it was incorporated into the Roman
Empire. After an interval of Islam Khalifate (643-966), the island returned to
Roman rule until the 12th century. After an occupation by the Knights Templar
and the rule of Isaac Komnenos, the island in 1192 came under the rule of the
Lusignan family, who established the Kingdom of Cyprus. In February 1489 it was
seized by the Republic of Venice. Between September 1570 and August 1571 it was
conquered by the Ottoman Empire, starting three centuries of Turkish rule over
Cyprus. Starting in the early nineteenth century, ethnic Greeks of the island
sought to bring about an end to almost 300 years of Ottoman rule and unite
Cyprus with Greece. The United Kingdom took administrative control of the
island in 1878, to prevent Ottoman positions from falling under Russian control
following the Cyprus Convention, which led to the call for union ("enosis") to
grow louder. Under the terms of the agreement reached between Britain and the
Ottoman Empire, the island remained an Ottoman territory. The Christian Greek-
speaking inhabitants of the island welcomed the arrival of the British as a
chance to voice their demands for union with Greece: "enosis". When the Ottoman
Empire entered World War I on the side of the Central Powers, Britain renounced
the agreement and all Turkish claims over Cyprus and declared the island a
British colony. In 1915, Britain offered Cyprus to Constantine I of Greece on
condition that Greece join the war on the side of the British, which he
declined. 1918 to 1955. Under British rule in the early 20th century, Cyprus
escaped the conflicts and atrocities that went on elsewhere between Greeks and
Turks; notably during the Greco-Turkish War (1919–1922) and the 1923
Population exchange between Greece and Turkey. Turkish Cypriots consistently
opposed the idea of union with Greece. In 1925 Britain declared Cyprus to be a
Crown Colony. In the years that followed, the determination for "enosis"
continued. In 1931 this led to open revolution. A riot resulted in the death of
six civilians, injuries to others and the burning of the British Government
House in Nicosia. In the months that followed, about 2,000 people were
convicted of crimes in connection with the struggle for union with Greece.
Britain reacted by imposing harsh restrictions. Military reinforcements were
dispatched to the island and the constitution suspended. A special
"epicourical" (reserve) police force was formed consisting of only Turkish
Cypriots, press restrictions instituted and political parties banned. Two
bishops and eight other prominent citizens directly implicated in the conflict
were exiled. Municipal elections were suspended, and until 1943 all municipal
officials were appointed by the government. The governor was to be assisted by
an Executive Council, and two years later an Advisory Council was established;
both councils consisted only of appointees and were restricted to advising on
domestic matters only. In addition, the flying of Greek or Turkish flags or the
public display of portraits of Greek or Turkish heroes was forbidden. The
struggle for "enosis" was put on hold during World War II. In 1946, the British
government announced plans to invite Cypriots to form a Consultative Assembly
to discuss a new constitution. The British also allowed the return of the 1931
exiles. Instead of reacting positively, as expected by the British, the Greek
Cypriot military hierarchy reacted angrily because there had been no mention of
"enosis". The Cypriot Orthodox Church had expressed its disapproval, and Greek
Cypriots declined the British invitation, stating that "enosis" was their sole
political aim. The efforts by Greeks to bring about "enosis" now intensified,
helped by active support of the Church of Cyprus, which was the main political
voice of the Greek Cypriots at the time. However, it was not the only
organisation claiming to speak for the Greek Cypriots. The Church's main
opposition came from the Cypriot Communist Party (officially the Progressive
Party of the Working People; "Ανορθωτικό" "Κόμμα"
"Εργαζόμενου" "Λαού"; or AKEL), which also wholeheartedly
supported the Greek national goal of "enosis". However the British military
forces and Colonial administration in Cyprus did not see the pro-Soviet
communist party as a viable partner. By 1954 a number of Turkish mainland
institutions were active in the Cyprus issue such as the National Federation of
Students, the Committee for the Defence of Turkish rights in Cyprus, the
Welfare Organisation of Refugees from Thrace and the Cyprus Turkish
Association. Above all, the Turkish trade unions were to prepare the right
climate for the main Turkish goal, the division of the island ("taksim") into
Greek and Turkish parts, thus keeping the British military presence and
installations on the island intact. By this time a special Turkish Cypriot
paramilitary organisation Turkish Resistance Organisation (TMT) was also
established which was to act as a counterbalance to the Greek Cypriot "enosis"
fighting organisation of EOKA. In 1950, Michael Mouskos, Bishop Makarios of
Kition (Larnaca), was elevated to Archbishop Makarios III of Cyprus. In his
inaugural speech, he vowed not to rest until union with "mother Greece" had
been achieved. In Athens, "enosis" was a common topic of conversation, and a
Cypriot native, Colonel George Grivas, was becoming known for his strong views
on the subject. In anticipation of an armed struggle to achieve "enosis",
Grivas visited Cyprus in July 1951. He discussed his ideas with Makarios but
was disappointed by the archbishop's contrasting opinion as he proposed a
political struggle rather than an armed revolution against the British. From
the beginning, and throughout their relationship, Grivas resented having to
share leadership with the archbishop. Makarios, concerned about Grivas's
extremism from their very first meeting, preferred to continue diplomatic
efforts, particularly efforts to get the United Nations involved. The feelings
of uneasiness that arose between them never dissipated. In the end, the two
became enemies. In the meantime, in August Government 1954, Greece's UN
representative formally requested that self-determination for the people of
Cyprus be included on the agenda of the General Assembly's next session. Turkey
rejected the idea of the union of Cyprus and Greece. Turkish Cypriot community
opposed Greek Cypriot "enosis" movement, as under British rule the Turkish
Cypriot minority status and identity were protected. Turkish Cypriot
identification with Turkey had grown stronger in response to overt Greek
nationalism of Greek Cypriots, and after 1954 the Turkish government had become
increasingly involved. In the late summer and early autumn of 1954, the Cyprus
problem intensified. On Cyprus the colonial government threatened publishers of
seditious literature with up to two years imprisonment. In December the UN
General Assembly announced the decision "not to consider the problem further
for the time being, because it does not appear appropriate to adopt a
resolution on the question of Cyprus." Reaction to the setback at the UN was
immediate and violent, resulting in the worst rioting in Cyprus since 1931.
EOKA campaign and creation of TMT, 1955–59. In January 1955, Grivas founded
the National Organisation of Cypriot Fighters ("Ethniki Organosis" "Kyprion
Agoniston" – EOKA). On April 1, 1955, EOKA opened an armed campaign against
British rule in a well-coordinated series of attacks on police, military, and
other government installations in Nicosia, Famagusta, Larnaca, and Limassol.
This resulted in the deaths of 387 British servicemen and personnel and some
Greek Cypriots suspected of collaboration (in 2009, a memorial for the British
soldiers killed by terrorist Greek Cypriot EOKA during 1955-1959 Cyprus
Emergency was erected in Kyrenia, Northern Cyprus). As a result of this a
number of Greek Cypriots began to leave the police. This however did not affect
the Colonial police force as they had already created the solely Turkish
Cypriot (Epicourical) reserve force to fight EOKA paramilitaries. At the same
time, it led to tensions between the Greek and Turkish Cypriot communities. In
1957 the Turkish Resistance Organisation ("Türk Mukavemet" "Teşkilatı" TMT),
which had already been formed to protect the Turkish Cypriots from EOKA took
action. In response to the growing demand for "enosis", a number of Turkish
Cypriots became convinced that the only way to protect their interests and
identity of the Turkish Cypriot population in the event of "enosis" would be to
divide the island - a policy known as "taksim" ("partition" in Turkish borrowed
from (تقسیم)"Taqsīm" in Arabic) - into a Greek sector in the south and a
Turkish sector in the north only. By now the island was on the verge of civil
war. Several attempts to present a compromise settlement had failed. Therefore,
beginning in December 1958, representatives of Greece and Turkey, the so-called
"mother lands" opened discussions of the Cyprus issue. Participants for the
first time discussed the concept of an independent Cyprus, i.e., neither
"enosis" nor "taksim". Subsequent talks always headed by the British yielded a
so-called compromise agreement supporting independence, laying the foundations
of the Republic of Cyprus. The scene then naturally shifted to London, where
the Greek and Turkish representatives were joined by representatives of the
Greek Cypriots, the Turkish Cypriots (represented by Arch. Makarios and Dr
Fazil Kucuk with no significant decision making power), and the British. The
Zurich-London agreements that became the basis for the Cyprus constitution of
1960 were supplemented with three treaties - the Treaty of Establishment, the
Treaty of Guarantee, and the Treaty of Alliance. The general tone of the
agreements was one of keeping the British sovereign bases and military and
monitoring facilities intact. Some Greek Cypriots, especially members of
organisations such as EOKA, expressed disappointment because "enosis" had not
been attained. In a similar way some Turkish Cypriots especially members of
organisations such as TMT expressed their disappointment as they had to
postpone their target for "taksim", however most Cypriots that were not
influenced by the three so called guarantor powers (Greece, Turkey, and
Britain), welcomed the agreements and set aside their demand for "enosis" and
"taksim". According to the Treaty of Establishment, Britain retained
sovereignty over 256 square kilometres, which became the Dhekelia Sovereign
Base Area, to the northeast of Larnaca, and the Akrotiri Sovereign Base Area to
the southwest of Limassol. Cyprus achieved independence on August 16, 1960.
Constitutional breakdown and intercommunal talks, 1960–74. According to
constitutional arrangements, Cyprus was to become an independent, non-aligned
republic with a Greek Cypriot president and a Turkish Cypriot vice-president.
General executive authority was vested in a council of ministers with a ratio
of seven Greeks to three Turks. (The Greek Cypriots represented 78% of the
population and the Turkish Cypriots 18%. The remaining 4% was made up by the
three minority communities: the Latins, Maronites and Armenians.) A House of
Representatives of fifty members, also with a seven-to-three ratio, were to be
separately elected by communal balloting on a universal suffrage basis. In
addition, separate Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot Communal Chambers were
provided to exercise control in matters of religion, culture, and education.
According to Article 78(2) "any law imposing duties or taxes shall require a
simple majority of the representatives elected by the Greek and Turkish
communities respectively taking part in the vote." Legislation on other
subjects was to take place by simple majority but again the President and the
Vice-President had the same right of veto—absolute on foreign affairs,
defence and internal security, delaying on other matters—as in the Council of
Ministers. The judicial system would be headed by a Supreme Constitutional
Court, composed of one Greek Cypriot and one Turkish Cypriot and presided over
by a contracted judge from a neutral country. The Constitution of Cyprus,
whilst establishing an Independent and sovereign Republic, was, in the words of
de Smith, an authority on Constitutional Law; ""Unique in its tortuous
complexity and in the multiplicity of the safeguards that it provides for the
principal minority; the Constitution of Cyprus stands alone among the
constitutions of the world"" Within a short period of time the first disputes
started to arise between the two communities. Issues of contention included
taxation and the creation of separate municipalities. Because of the
legislative veto system, this resulted in a lockdown in communal and state
politics in many cases. Repeated attempts to solve the disputes failed.
Eventually, on November 30, 1963, Makarios put forward to the three guarantors
a thirteen-point proposal designed, in his view, to eliminate impediments to
the functioning of the government. The thirteen points involved constitutional
revisions, including the abandonment of the veto power by both the president
and the vice president. Turkey initially rejected it (although later in future
discussed the proposal). A few days later, on December 21, 1963 fighting
erupted between the communities in Nicosia. In the days that followed it spread
across the rest of the island. At the same time, the power-sharing government
collapsed. How this happened is one of the most contentious issues in modern
Cypriot history. The Greek Cypriots argue that the Turkish Cypriots withdrew in
order to form their own administration. The Turkish Cypriots maintain that they
were forced out. Many Turkish Cypriots chose to withdraw from the government.
However, in many cases those who wished to stay in their jobs were prevented
from doing so by the Greek Cypriots. Also, many of the Turkish Cypriots refused
to attend because they feared for their lives after the recent violence that
had erupted. There was even some pressure from the TMT as well. In any event,
in the days that followed the fighting a frantic effort was made to calm
tensions. In the end, on December 27, 1963, an interim peacekeeping force, the
Joint Truce Force, was put together by Britain, Greece and Turkey. This held
the line until a United Nations peacekeeping force, UNFICYP, was formed
following United Nations Security Council Resolution 186, passed on March 4,
1964. Peacemaking efforts, 1964–1974. At the same time as it established a
peacekeeping force, the Security Council also recommended that the Secretary-
General, in consultation with the parties and the Guarantor Powers, designate a
mediator to take charge of formal peacemaking efforts. U Thant, then the UN
Secretary-General, appointed Sakari Tuomioja, a Finnish diplomat. While
Tuomioja viewed the problem as essentially international in nature and saw
"enosis" as the most logical course for a settlement, he rejected union on the
grounds that it would be inappropriate for a UN official to propose a solution
that would lead to the dissolution of a UN member state. The United States held
a differing view. In early June, following another Turkish threat to intervene,
Washington launched an independent initiative under Dean Acheson, a former
Secretary of State. In July he presented a plan to unite Cyprus with Greece. In
return for accepting this, Turkey would receive a sovereign military base on
the island. The Turkish Cypriots would also be given minority rights, which
would be overseen by a resident international commissioner. Makarios rejected
the proposal, arguing that giving Turkey territory would be a limitation on
"enosis" and would give Ankara too strong a say in the island’s affairs. A
second version of the plan was presented that offered Turkey a 50-year lease on
a base. This offer was rejected by the Greek Cypriots and by Turkey. After
several further attempts to reach an agreement, the United States was
eventually forced to give up its effort. Following the sudden death of
Ambassador Tuomioja in August, Galo Plaza was appointed Mediator. He viewed the
problem in communal terms. In March 1965 he presented a report criticising both
sides for their lack of commitment to reaching a settlement. While he
understood the Greek Cypriot aspiration of "enosis", he believed that any
attempt at union should be held in voluntary abeyance. Similarly, he considered
that the Turkish Cypriots should refrain from demanding a federal solution to
the problem. Although the Greek Cypriots eventually accepted the report,
despite of its opposition to immediate "enosis", Turkey and the Turkish
Cypriots rejected the plan, calling on Plaza to resign on the grounds that he
had exceeded his mandate by advancing specific proposals. He was simply meant
to broker an agreement. But the Greek Cypriots made it clear that if Galo Plaza
resigned they would refuse to accept a replacement. U Thant was left with no
choice but to abandon the mediation effort. Instead he decided to make his Good
Offices available to the two sides. By resolution 186 of 4 March 1964 and a
Mediator was appointed. In his Report (S/6253, A/6017, 26 March 1965), the
Mediator, Dr Gala Plaza, criticised the 1960 legal framework, and proposed
necessary amendments which were rejected by Turkey, a fact which resulted in
serious deterioration of the situation with constant threats by Turkey against
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Cyprus, necessitating a series of
UN Resolutions calling, inter alia, for respect of the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Cyprus. The Secretary-General of the
United Nations in 1965, described the policy of the Turkish Cypriot leaders in
this way: ""The Turkish Cypriot leaders have adhered to a rigid stand against
any measures which might involve having members of the two communities live and
work together, or which might place Turkish Cypriots in situations where they
would have to acknowledge the authority of Government agents. Indeed, since the
Turkish Cypriot leadership is committed to physical and geographical separation
of the communities as a political goal, it is not likely to encourage
activities by Turkish Cypriots which may be interpreted as demonstrating the
merits of an alternative policy. The result has been a seemingly deliberate
policy of self-segregation by the Turkish Cypriots""Report S/6426 The end of
the mediation effort was effectively confirmed when, at the end of the year,
Plaza resigned and was not replaced. In March 1966, a more modest attempt at
peacemaking was initiated under the auspices of Carlos Bernades, the Secretary-
General’s Special Representative for Cyprus. Instead of trying to develop
formal proposals for the parties to bargain over, he aimed to encourage the two
sides agree to settlement through direct dialogue. However, ongoing political
chaos in Greece prevented any substantive discussions from developing. The
situation changed the following year. On 21 April 1967, a coup d'état in
Greece brought to power a military administration. Just months later, in
November 1967, Cyprus witnessed its most severe bout of intercommunal fighting
since 1964. Responding to a major attack on Turkish Cypriot villages in the
south of the island, which left 27 dead, Turkey bombed Greek Cypriot forces and
appeared to be readying itself for an intervention. Greece was forced to
capitulate. Following international intervention, Greece agreed to recall
General George Grivas, the Commander of the Greek Cypriot National Guard and
former EOKA leader, and reduce its forces on the island. Capitalising on the
weakness of the Greek Cypriots, the Turkish Cypriots proclaimed their own
provisional administration on 28 December 1967. Makarios immediately declared
the new administration illegal. Nevertheless, a major change had occurred. The
Archbishop, along with most other Greek Cypriots, began to accept that the
Turkish Cypriots would have to have some degree of political autonomy. It was
also realised that unification of Greece and Cyprus was unachievable under the
prevailing circumstances. In May 1968, intercommunal talks began between the
two sides under the auspices of the Good Offices of the UN Secretary-General.
Unusually, the talks were not held between President Makarios and Vice-
President Kucuk. Instead they were conducted by the presidents of the communal
chambers, Glafcos Clerides and Rauf Denktaş. Again, little progress was made.
During the first round of talks, which lasted until August 1968, the Turkish
Cypriots were prepared to make several concessions regarding constitutional
matters, but Makarios refused to grant them greater autonomy in return. The
second round of talks, which focused on local government, was equally
unsuccessful. In December 1969 a third round of discussion started. This time
they focused on constitutional issues. Yet again there was little progress and
when they ended in September 1970 the Secretary-General blamed both sides for
the lack of movement. A fourth and final round of intercommunal talks also
focused on constitutional issues, but again failed to make much headway before
they were forced to a halt in 1974. Turkish invasion of 1974. Timeline of the
1974 Invasion of Cyprus After 1967, tensions between the Greek and Turkish
Cypriots subsided. Instead, the main source of tension on the island came from
factions within the Greek Cypriot community. Although Makarios had effectively
abandoned "enosis" in favour of an ‘attainable solution’, many others
continued to believe that the only legitimate political aspirations for Greek
Cypriots was union with Greece. In September 1971 Grivas secretly returned to
the island and formed EOKA-B, a very pro-union organisation. In early 1974
Grivas died and EOKA-B fell under the direct control of Taxiarkhos Dimitrios
Ioannides, the new head of the Junta in Athens. Ioannides was determined to
overthrow Makarios. Fearing the consequences of such a step, in early July 1974
Makarios wrote an open letter to the military dictatorship requesting that all
Greek officers be removed from the island. On July 15, Ioannides replied
through a coup of the Cyprus National Guard which resulted in Makarios being
deposed. After failing to secure British support for a joint intervention under
the Treaty of Guarantee, Bülent Ecevit, the Turkish prime minister, decided to
act unilaterally. On July 20 Turkey ordered a military invasion of the island
(Turkish invasion of Cyprus). Within two days Turkish forces had established a
narrow corridor linking the north coast with Nicosia. The intervention led to
turmoil in Greece. On July 23 the military Junta collapsed. Two days later
formal peace talks were convened in Geneva between Greece, Turkey and Britain.
Over the course of the following five days Turkey agreed to halt its advance on
the condition that it would remain on the island until a political settlement
was reached between the two sides. On August 8 another round of discussion was
held in Geneva, Switzerland. Unlike before, this time the talks involved the
Greek and Turkish Cypriots. During the discussions the Turkish Cypriots,
supported by Turkey, insisted on some form of geographical separation between
the two communities. Makarios refused to accept the demand, insisting that
Cyprus must remain a unitary state. Despite efforts to break the deadlock, the
two sides refused to budge. On August 14, Turkey demanded from Clerides
acceptance of a proposal for a federal state, in which the Turkish Cypriot
community (who, at that time, comprised about 18% of the population and owned
about 10% of the land) would have received 34% of the island. Clerides asked
for 36 to 48 hours to consult with the Cypriot and Greek governments, but
Turkey refused to grant any consultation time, effectively ending the talks.
Within hours, Turkey had resumed its second offensive. By the time a new, and
permanent, ceasefire was called 36 per cent of the island was under the control
of the Turkish military. The partition was marked by the United Nations Buffer
Zone in Cyprus or "green line" running east to west across the island. The
effect of the division was catastrophic for all concerned. Thousands of Greek
and Turkish Cypriots had been killed, wounded or missing. A further two hundred
thousand Greek and Turkish Cypriots had been displaced. In addition to the
entire north coast (Kerynia, Morfou) and the Karpas peninsula, the Greek
Cypriots were also forced to flee the eastern port city of Famagusta. The vast
majority of the Turkish occupied area was predominantly populated and owned by
Greek Cypriots prior to 1974. In the process about 160,000 - 200,000 Greek
Cypriots who made up 82% of the population in the north became refugees; many
of them fleeing at the word of the approaching Turkish army. Since 1974, the
ceasefire line separates the two communities on the island, and is commonly
referred to as the Green Line. The United Nations consented to the transfer of
the remainder of the 51,000 Turkish Cypriots that were trapped in the south to
settle in the north, if they wished to do so. Many of them had previously moved
to the areas under UK sovereign control awaiting permission to be transferred
to the areas under Turkish control. During the operation, EOKA-B committed the
massacres of Tohni and Maratha, Santalaris and Aloda. Peace negotiations,
1974–1994. 1974 Greek Coup d'etat & Turkish Invasion. After 1967 some hopes
arose that a compromise on separate municipalities could be achieved in
negotiations between Glafcos Clerides and Rauf Denktaş and certainly agreement
came close, but the Makarios government could not accept de jure separateness,
which would have denied the principle of the unitary, if bi-communal, state.
Inter-communal strife was also overshadowed during this period by a serious
rift on the Greek side, between Makarios and the enosist National Front
supported by the Greek junta. Makarios had now become an obstacle to enosis. An
attempt was made on his life, and Grivas returned in 1971 to head a new
organisation, EOKA-B, with Makarios, rather than the Turkish-Cypriots, in its
sight. Makarios was told from Athens to dismiss his foreign minister and to
regard Athens as the National Centre. Makarios rallied supporters successfully
against attempts to remove him. He was still popular in Cyprus. Matters became
worse when a new junta came to power in September 1973, and there was less
relief from rightist pressure than might have been expected when Grivas died
suddenly in January 1974. The pressure mounted until a peace operation in July
1974 allegedly led by a 'hammer of the Turks' Nikos Sampson, overthrew
Makarios, who managed to flee the country via a British base. For Turkey this
raised the spectre of Greek control of Cyprus. Turkish Invasion. The Turkish
government therefore now demanded that Greece should dismiss Sampson, withdraw
all Greek officers from the island and respect the island's independence. The
Greek military government refused. For the United States, Kissinger did not
seem to be greatly disturbed by the Sampson coup and looked as if he could
accept enosis. Turkish Prime Minister Ecevit's assertiveness in foreign policy,
reinforced by his junior coalition partner strongly inclined the Turks to
intervene. The British were invited to participate in military operations,
under the Treaty of Guarantee, but declined. The American envoy Joseph Sisco
tried unsuccessfully to persuade the Greek military government to accept
Ecevit's conditions for a Cyprus settlement, which included Turkish-Cypriot
control of a coastal region in the north and negotiations for a federal
solution. The Soviet Union stood aside not wanting to see enosis, which would
strengthen NATO and weaken the left in Cyprus. Turkey intervened on 20 July
1974, having the right to do so unilaterally as concerted action had not proved
possible. Under the 1960 Treaty, Turkey's sole object could be to re-establish
the state of affairs guaranteed by the basic articles of the 1960 Constitution.
The coup d'état was said by Makarios himself to be an attempt to extend Greek
dictatorship to the island. Launched with relatively few troops, the Turkish
landing had limited success at first, and resulted everywhere on the island in
the occupation of Turkish-Cypriot enclaves by the Greek forces. After securing
a more or less satisfactory bridgehead Turkish forces agreed to a cease-fire on
23 July 1974. The same day civilian government under Karamanlis took office in
Athens, the day the Sampson coup collapsed. Glafcos Clerides became the Acting
President in absence still of Makarios. A conference of the guarantor powers,
Greece, Turkey and Britain, met in Geneva on 25 July. Meanwhile Turkish troops
did not refrain from extending their positions, as more Turkish-Cypriot
enclaves were occupied by Greek forces. A new cease-fire line was agreed. On 30
July the powers agreed that the withdrawal of Turkish troops from the island
should be linked to a `just and lasting settlement acceptable to all parties
concerned'. The declaration also spoke of `two autonomous administrations -that
of Greek-Cypriot community and that of the Turkish-Cypriot community'. Division
of the island. At the second Geneva Conference on 9 August, Turkey pressed for
a federal solution to the problem against stiffening Greek resistance. Whilst
Turkish Cypriots wanted a bi-zonal federation, Turkey, under American advice,
submitted a cantonal plan involving separation of Turkish-Cypriot areas from
one another. For security reasons Turkish-Cypriots did not favour cantons. Each
plan embraced about thirty-four per cent of the territory. These plans were
presented to the conference on 13 August by the Turkish Foreign Minister, Turan
Güneş. Clerides wanted thirty-six to forty-eight hours to consider the plans,
but Güneş demanded an immediate response. This was regarded as unreasonable
by the Greeks, the British and the Americans who were in close consultation.
Nevertheless, the next day, the Turkish forces extended their control to some
36 per cent of the island. they were afraid that delay would turn international
opinion strongly against them if Greek spoiling tactics were given a chance and
they were determined to come to the rescue of greatly threatened Turkish
Cypriots whose enclaves were still occupied by Greek forces. After the
hostilities in 1974, population transfers were made in accordance with the
Population Exchange Agreement between Turkish and Greek Cypriots under the
auspices of United Nations on 2 August 1975; the Greek Cypriots in Rizokarpaso
agreed to live under Turkish Cypriot administration and stayed in Northern
Cyprus and Turkish Cypriots in Limassol agreed to live under Greek Cypriot
administration and stayed in the south of the Cyprus island. Other Greek
Cypriots in the North (approximately 160,000) moved to the south, while 50,000
Turkish Cypriots moved to the north. Approximately 1,500 Greek Cypriots and 500
Turkish Cypriots remain missing. Turkey's international reputation suffered as
a result of the precipitate move of the Turkish military to extend control to a
third of the island. The British Prime Minister regarded the Turkish ultimatum
as unreasonable since it was presented without allowing adequate time for
study. In Greek eyes the Turkish proposals were submitted in the full awareness
that the Greek side could not accept them and reflected the Turkish desire for
a military base in Cyprus. The Greek side has gone some way in their proposals
by recognising Turkish `groups' of villages and Turkish administrative `areas'.
But they stressed that the constitutional order of Cyprus should retain its bi-
communal character based on the co-existence of the Greek and Turkish
communities within the framework of a sovereign, independent and integral
republic. Essentially the Turkish side's proposals were for geographic
consolidation and separation and for a much larger measure of autonomy for that
area, or those areas, than the Greek side could envisage. 1975–1979. On April
28, 1975, Kurt Waldheim, the UN Secretary-General, launched a new mission of
Good Offices. Starting in Vienna, over the course of the following ten months
Clerides and Denktaş held discussed a range of humanitarian issues relating to
the events of the previous year. However, attempts to make progress on the
substantive issues – such as territory and the nature of the central
government – failed to produce any results. After five rounds the talks fell
apart in February 1976. In January 1977, the UN managed to organise a meeting
in Nicosia between Makarios and Denktaş. This led to a major breakthrough. On
February 12, the two leaders signed a four point agreement confirming that a
future Cyprus settlement would be based on a federation. The size of the states
would be determined by economic viability and land ownership. The central
government would be given powers to ensure the unity of the state. Various
other issues, such as freedom of movement and freedom of settlement, would be
settled through discussion. Just months later, in August 1977, Makarios died.
He was replaced by Spyros Kyprianou, the foreign minister. In May 1979,
Waldheim visited Cyprus and secured a further ten-point set of proposals 1979
from the two sides. In addition to re-affirming the 1977 High Level Agreement,
these also included provisions for the demilitarisation of the island and a
commitment to refrain from destabilising activities and actions. Shortly
afterwards a new round of discussions began in Nicosia. Again, they were short
lived. For a start, the Turkish Cypriots did not want to discuss Varosha, a
resort quarter of Famagusta that had been vacated by Greek-Cypriots when it was
overrun by Turkish troops. This was a key issue for the Greek Cypriots.
Secondly, the two sides failed to agree on the concept of ‘bicommunality’.
The Turkish Cypriots believed that the Turkish Cypriot federal state would be
exclusively Turkish Cypriot and the Greek Cypriot state would be exclusively
Greek Cypriots. The Greek Cypriots believed that the two states should be
predominantly, but not exclusively, made up of a particular community. Turkish
Cypriots' Unilateral Declaration of Independence. In May 1983, an effort by
Javier Pérez de Cuéllar, the then UN Secretary-General, foundered after the
United Nations General Assembly passed a resolution calling for the withdrawal
of all occupation forces from Cyprus. The Turkish Cypriots were furious at the
resolution. They threatened to declare independence in retaliation. Despite
this, in August, Pérez de Cuéllar gave the two sides a set of proposals for
consideration that called for a rotating presidency, the establishment of a
bicameral assembly along the same lines as previously suggested and 60:40
representation in the central executive. In return for increased representation
in the central government, the Turkish Cypriots would surrender 8–13 per cent
of the land in their possession. Both Kyprianou and Denktaş accepted the
proposals. However, on 15 November 1983, the Turkish Cypriots took advantage of
the post-election political instability in Turkey and unilaterally declared
independence. Within days the Security Council passed a resolution, no.541 (13-
1 vote: only Pakistan opposed) making it clear that it would not accept the new
state and that the decision disrupted efforts to reach a settlement. Denktaş
denied this. In a letter addressed to the Secretary-General informing him of
the decision, he insisted that the move guaranteed that any future settlement
would be truly federal in nature. Although the ‘Turkish Republic of Northern
Cyprus’ (TRNC) was soon recognised by Turkey, the rest of the international
community condemned the move. The Security Council passed another resolution,
no.550 (13-1 vote: again only Pakistan opposed) condemning the "purported
exchange of ambassadors between Turkey and the Turkish Cypriot leadership..."
In September 1984 talks resumed. After three rounds of discussions it was again
agreed that Cyprus would become a bi-zonal, bi-communal, non-aligned
federation. The Turkish Cypriots would retain 29 per cent for their federal
state and all foreign troops would leave the island. In January 1985, the two
leaders met for their first face-to-face talks since the 1979 agreement.
However, while the general belief was that the meeting was being held to agree
to a final settlement, Kyprianou insisted that it was a chance for further
negotiations. The talks collapsed. In the aftermath, the Greek Cypriot leaders
came in for heavy criticism, both at home and abroad. After that Denktaş
announced that he would not make so many concessions again. Undeterred, in
March 1986, de Cuéllar presented the two sides with a Draft Framework
Agreement. Again, the plan envisaged the creation of an independent, non-
aligned, bi-communal, bi-zonal state in Cyprus. However, the Greek Cypriots
were unhappy with the proposals. They argued that the questions of removing
Turkish forces from Cyprus was not addressed, nor was the repatriation of the
increasing number of Turkish settlers on the island. Moreover, there were no
guarantees that the full three freedoms would be respected. Finally, they saw
the proposed state structure as being confederal in nature. Further efforts to
produce an agreement failed as the two sides remained steadfastly attached to
their positions. The "Set of Ideas". In August 1988, Pérez de Cuéllar called
upon the two sides to meet with him in Geneva in August. There the two leaders
- George Vasiliou and Rauf Denktaş - agreed to abandon the Draft Framework
Agreement and return to the 1977 and 1979 High Level Agreements. However, the
talks faltered when the Greek Cypriots announced their intention to apply for
membership within the European Community (EC), a move strongly opposed by the
Turkish Cypriots and Turkey. Nevertheless, in June 1989, de Cuellar presented
the two communities with the 'Set of Ideas'. Denktaş quickly rejected them as
he not only opposed the provisions, he also argued that the UN Secretary-
General had no right to present formal proposals to the two sides. The two
sides met again, in New York, in February 1990. However, the talks were again
short lived. This time Denktaş demanded that the Greek Cypriots recognise the
existence of two peoples in Cyprus and the basic right of the Turkish Cypriots
to self-determination. On 4 July 1990, Cyprus formally applied to join the EC.
The Turkish Cypriots and Turkey, which had applied for membership in 1987, were
outraged. Denktaş claimed that Cyprus could only join the Community at the
same time as Turkey and called off all talks with UN officials. Nevertheless,
in September 1990, the EC member states unanimously agreed to refer the Cypriot
application to the Commission for formal consideration. In retaliation, Turkey
and the TRNC signed a joint declaration abolishing passport controls and
introducing a customs union just weeks later. Undeterred, Javier Pérez de
Cuéllar continued his search for a solution throughout 1991. He made no
progress. In his last report to the Security Council, presented in October 1991
under United Nations Security Council Resolution 716, he blamed the failure of
the talks on Denktaş, noting the Turkish Cypriot leader's demand that the two
communities should have equal sovereignty and a right to secession. On 3 April
1992, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, the new UN Secretary-General, presented the
Security Council with the outline plan for the creation of a bi-zonal, bi-
communal federation that would prohibit any form of partition, secession or
union with another state. While the Greek Cypriots accepted the Set of Ideas as
a basis for negotiation, Denktaş again criticised the UN Secretary-General for
exceeding his authority. When he did eventually return to the table, the
Turkish Cypriot leader complained that the proposals failed to recognise his
community. In November, Ghali brought the talks to a halt. He now decided to
take a different approach and tried to encourage the two sides to show goodwill
by accepting eight confidence building measures (CBMs). These included reducing
military forces on the island, transferring Varosha to direct UN control,
reducing restrictions on contacts between the two sides, undertaking an island-
wide census and conducting feasibility studies regarding a solution. The
Security Council endorsed the approach. On 24 May 1993, the Secretary-General
formally presented the two sides with his CBMs. Denktaş, while accepting some
of the proposals, was not prepared to agree to the package as a whole.
Meanwhile, on June 30, the European Commission returned its opinion on the
Cypriot application for membership. While the decision provided a ringing
endorsement of the case for Cypriot membership, it refrained from opening the
way for immediate negotiations. The Commission stated that it felt that the
issue should be reconsidered in January 1995, taking into account "the
positions adopted by each party in the talks". A few months later, in December
1993, Glafcos Clerides proposed the demilitarisation of Cyprus. Denktaş
dismissed the idea, but the next month he announced that he would be willing to
accept the CBMs in principle. Proximity talks started soon afterwards. In March
1994, the UN presented the two sides with a draft document outlining the
proposed measures in greater detail. Clerides said that he would be willing to
accept the document if Denktaş did, but the Turkish Cypriot leader refused on
the grounds that it would upset the balance of forces on the island. Once
again, Ghali had little choice but to pin the blame for another breakdown of
talks on the Turkish Cypriot side. Denktas would be willing to accept mutually
agreed changes, but Clerides refused to negotiate any further changes to the
March proposals. Further proposals put forward by the Secretary-General in an
attempt to break the deadlock were rejected by both sides. Deadlock and legal
battles, 1994–97. At the Corfu European Council, held on 24–25 June 1994,
the EU officially confirmed that Cyprus would be included in the Union's next
phase of enlargement. Two weeks later, on July 5, the European Court of Justice
imposed restrictions on the export of goods from Northern Cyprus into the
European Union. Soon afterwards, in December, relations between the EU and
Turkey were further damaged when Greece blocked the final implementation of a
customs union. As a result, talks remained completely blocked throughout 1995
and 1996. The situation took another turn for the worse at the start of 1997
when the Greek Cypriots announced that they intended to purchase the Russian-
made S-300 anti-aircraft missile system. Soon afterwards, Turkey announced that
it would match any military build-up. However, Turkey was now starting to come
under increasing pressure from several sides. In December 1996, the European
Court of Human Rights (ECHR) delivered a landmark ruling that declared that
Turkey was an occupying power in Cyprus. The case - Loizidou vs Turkey -
centred on Titina Loizidou, a refugee from Kyrenia, who was judged to have been
unlawfully denied the control of her property by Turkey. In addition to being a
major political embarrassment for Ankara, the case also had severe financial
implications as the Court later ruled that Turkey should pay Mrs Loizidou
US$825,000 in compensation for the loss of use of her property. Ankara rejected
the ruling as politically motivated. EU accession and the settlement process,
1997–present. In 1997 the basic parameters of the Cyprus Dispute changed. A
decision by the European Union to open up accession negotiations with the
Republic of Cyprus created a new catalyst for a settlement. Among those who
supported the move, the argument was made that Turkey could not have a veto on
Cypriot accession and that the negotiations would encourage all sides to be
more moderate. However, opponents of the move argued that the decision would
remove the incentive of the Greek Cypriots to reach a settlement. They would
instead wait until they became a member and then use this strength to push for
a settlement on their terms. In response to the decision, Rauf Denktaş
announced that he would no longer accept federation as a basis for a
settlement. In the future he would only be prepared to negotiate on the basis
of a confederal solution. In December 1999 tensions between Turkey and the
European Union eased somewhat after the EU decided to declare Turkey a
candidate for EU membership, a decision taken at the Helsinki European Council.
At the same time a new round of talks started in New York. These were short
lived. By the following summer they had broken down. Tensions started to rise
again as a showdown between Turkey and the European Union loomed over the
island's accession. Perhaps realising the gravity of the situation, and in a
move that took observers by surprise, Rauf Denktaş wrote to Glafcos Clerides
on 8 November 2001 to propose a face-to-face meeting. The offer was accepted.
Following several informal meetings between the two men in November and
December 2001 a new peace process started under UN auspices on 14 January 2002.
At the outset the stated aim of the two leaders was to try to reach an
agreement by the start of June that year. However, the talks soon became
deadlocked. In an attempt to break the impasse, Kofi Annan, the UN Secretary-
General visited the island in May that year. Despite this no deal was reached.
After a summer break Annan met with the two leaders again that autumn, first in
Paris and then in New York. As a result of the continued failure to reach an
agreement, the Security Council agreed that the Secretary-General should
present the two sides with a blueprint settlement. This would form the basis of
further negotiations. The original version of the UN peace plan was presented
to the two sides by Annan on 11 November 2002. A little under a month later,
and following modifications submitted by the two sides, it was revised (Annan
II). It was hoped that this plan would be agreed by the two sides on the
margins of the European Council, which was held in Copenhagen on December 13.
However, Rauf Denktaş, who was recuperating from major heart surgery, declined
to attend. The EU therefore decided to confirm that Cyprus would join the EU on
1 May 2004, along with Malta and eight other states from Central and Eastern
Europe. Although it had been expected that talks would be unable to continue,
discussions resumed in early January 2003. Thereafter, a further revision
(Annan III) took place in February 2003, when Annan made a second visit to the
island. During his stay he also called on the two sides to meet with him again
the following month in The Hague, where he would expect their answer on whether
they were prepared to put the plan to a referendum. While the Greek Cypriot
side, which was now led by Tassos Papadopoulos, agreed to do so, albeit
reluctantly, Rauf Denktaş refused to allow a popular vote. The peace talks
collapsed. A month later, on 16 April 2003, Cyprus formally signed the EU
Treaty of Accession at a ceremony in Athens. Throughout the rest of the year
there was no effort to restart talks. Instead, attention turned to the Turkish
Cypriot elections, which were widely expected to see a victory by moderate pro-
solution parties. In the end, the assembly was evenly split. A coalition
administration was formed that brought together the pro-solution CTP and the
Democrat Party, which had traditionally taken the line adopted by Rauf
Denktaş. This opened the way for Turkey to press for new discussions. After a
meeting between Recep Tayyip Erdoğan and Kofi Annan in Switzerland, the
leaders of the two sides were called to New York. There they agreed to start a
new negotiation process based on two phases: phase one, which would just
involve the Greek and Turkish Cypriots, being held on the island and phase two,
which would also include Greece and Turkey, being held elsewhere. After a month
of negotiations in Cyprus, the discussions duly moved to Burgenstock,
Switzerland. The Turkish Cypriot leader Rauf Denktaş rejected the plan
outright and refused to attend these talks. Instead, his son Serdar Denktaş
and Mehmet Ali Talat attended in his place. There a fourth version of the plan
was presented. This was short-lived. After final adjustments, a fifth and final
version of the Plan was presented to the two sides on 31 March 2004. The UN
plan for settlement (Annan Plan). Under the final proposals, the Republic of
Cyprus would become the United Cyprus Republic. It would be a loose federation
composed of two component states. The northern Turkish Cypriot constituent
state would encompass about 28.5% of the island, the southern Greek Cypriot
constituent state would be made up of the remaining 71.5%. Each part would have
had its own parliament. There would also be a bicameral parliament on the
federal level. In the Chamber of Deputies, the Turkish Cypriots would have 25%
of the seats. (While no accurate figures are currently available, the split
between the two communities at independence in 1960 was approximately 80:20 in
favour of the Greek Cypriots.) The Senate would consist of equal parts of
members of each ethnic group. Executive power would be vested in a presidential
council. The chairmanship of this council would rotate between the communities.
Each community would also have the right to veto all legislation. One of the
most controversial elements of the plan concerned property. During Turkey's
military intervention/invasion in 1974, many Greek Cypriots (who owned 90% of
the land and property in the north) were forced to abandon their homes. (A
large number of Turkish Cypriots also left their homes.) Since then, the
question of restitution of their property has been a central demand of the
Greek Cypriot side. However, the Turkish Cypriots argue that the complete
return of all Greek Cypriot properties to their original owners would be
incompatible with the functioning of a bi-zonal, bi-communal federal
settlement. To this extent, they have argued compensation should be offered.
The Annan Plan attempted to bridge this divide. In certain areas, such as
Morphou (Güzelyurt) and Famagusta (Gazimağusa), which would be returned to
Greek Cypriot control, Greek Cypriot refugees would have received back all of
their property according to a phased timetable. In other areas, such as Kyrenia
(Girne) and the Karpass Peninsula, which would remain under Turkish Cypriot
control, they would be given back a proportion of their land (usually one third
assuming that it had not been extensively developed) and would receive
compensation for the rest. All land and property (that was not used for
worship) belonging to businesses and institutions, including the Church the
largest property owner on the island, would have been expropriated. While many
Greek Cypriots found these provisions unacceptable in themselves, many others
resented the fact that the Plan envisaged all compensation claims by a
particular community to be met by their own side. This was seen as unfair as
Turkey would not be required to contribute any funds towards the compensation.
Apart from the property issue, there were many other parts of the plan that
sparked controversy. For example, the agreement envisaged the gradual reduction
in the number of Greek and Turkish troops on the island. After six years, the
number of soldiers from each country would be limited to 6,000. This would fall
to 600 after 19 years. Thereafter, the aim would be to try to achieve full
demilitarisation, a process that many hoped would be made possible by Turkish
accession to the European Union. The agreement also kept in place the Treaty of
Guarantee - an integral part of the 1960 constitution that gave Britain, Greece
and Turkey a right to intervene militarily in the island's affairs. Many Greek
Cypriots were concerned that the continuation of the right of intervention
would give Turkey too large a say in the future of the island. However, most
Turkish Cypriots felt that a continued Turkish military presence was necessary
to ensure their security. Another element of the plan the Greek Cypriots
objected to was that it allowed many Turkish citizens who had been brought to
the island to remain. (The exact number of these Turkish 'settlers' is highly
disputed. Some argue that the figure is as high as 150,000 or as low as 40,000.
They are seen as settlers illegally brought to the island in contravention of
international law. However, while many accepted Greek Cypriot concerns on this
matter, there was a widespread feeling that it would be unrealistic to forcibly
remove every one of the these settlers, especially as many of them had been
born and raised on the island.) Referenda, 24 April 2004. Under the terms of
the plan, the Annan plan would only come into force if accepted by the two
communities in simultaneous referendums. These were set for 24 April 2004. In
the weeks that followed there was intense campaigning in both communities.
However, and in spite of opposition from Rauf Denktaş, who had boycotted the
talks in Switzerland, it soon became clear that the Turkish Cypriots would vote
in favour of the agreement. Among Greek Cypriots opinion was heavily weighted
against the plan. Tassos Papadopoulos, the president of Cyprus, in a speech
delivered on 7 April called on Greek Cypriots to reject the plan. His position
was supported by the centrist Diko party and the socialists of EDEK as well as
other smaller parties. His major coalition partner AKEL, one of the largest
parties on the island, chose to reject the plan bowing to the wishes of the
majority of the party base. Support for the plan was voiced by Democratic Rally
(DISY) leadership, the main right-wing party, despite opposition to the plan
from the majority of party followers, and the United Democrats, a small centre-
left party led by George Vasiliou, a former president. Glafcos Clerides, now
retired from politics, also supported the plan. Prominent members of DISY who
did not support the Annan plan split from the party and openly campaigned
against it. The Greek Cypriot Church also opposed the plan in line with the
views of the majority of public opinion. The United Kingdom (a Guarantor Power)
and the United States came out in favour of the plan. Turkey signalled its
support for the plan. The Greek Government decided to remain neutral. However,
Russia was troubled by an attempt by Britain and the US to introduce a
resolution in the UN Security Council supporting the plan and used its veto to
block the move. This was done as they felt that Britain and the US were trying
to put unfair pressure on the Greek Cypriots. In the 24 April referendum the
Turkish Cypriots endorsed the plan by a margin of almost two to one. However,
the Greek Cypriots resoundingly voted against the plan, by a margin of about
three to one. The Cyprus Dispute after the referendum. On 1 May 2004, a week
after the referendum, Cyprus joined the European Union. Under the terms of
accession the whole island is considered to be a member of the European Union.
However, the terms of the "acquis communautaire", the EU's body of laws, have
been suspended in the Northern Cyprus. After the referendum, in June 2004,
Northern Cyprus became an "observer member" country of Organisation of Islamic
Countries under the name Turkish Cypriot State. Despite initial hopes that a
new process to modify the rejected plan would start by autumn, most of the rest
of 2004 was taken up with discussions over a proposal by the European Union to
open up direct trade with the Turkish Cypriots and provide €259,000,000 in
funds to help them upgrade their infrastructure. This has provoked considerable
debate. The Republic of Cyprus has argued that there can be no direct trade via
ports and airports in Northern Cyprus as these are unrecognised. Instead, it
has offered to allow Turkish Cypriots to use Greek Cypriot facilities, which
are internationally recognised. This has been rejected by the Turkish Cypriots.
At the same time, attention turned to the question of the start of Turkey's
future membership of the European Union. At a European Council held on 17
December 2004, and despite earlier Greek Cypriot threats to impose a veto,
Turkey was granted a start date for formal membership talks on condition that
it signed a protocol extending the customs union to the new entrants to the EU,
including Cyprus. Assuming this is done, formal membership talks would begin on
3 October 2005. Following the defeat of the UN plan in the referendum there has
been no attempt to restart negotiations between the two sides. While both sides
have reaffirmed their commitment to continuing efforts to reach an agreement,
the UN Secretary-General has not been willing to restart the process until he
can be sure that any new negotiations will lead to a comprehensive settlement
based on the plan he put forward in 2004. To this end, he has asked the Greek
Cypriots to present a written list of the changes they would like to see made
to the agreement. This was rejected by President Tassos Papadopoulos on the
grounds that no side should be expected to present their demands in advance of
negotiations. However, it appears as though the Greek Cypriots would be
prepared to present their concerns orally. Another Greek Cypriot concern
centres on the procedural process for new talks. Mr. Papadopoulos said that he
will not accept arbitration or timetables for discussions. The UN fears that
this would lead to another open-ended process that could drag on indefinitely.
In October 2012, Northern Cyprus became an "observer member" country of
Economic Cooperation Organization under the name Turkish Cypriot State. Formula
One and the Cyprus Dispute. The podium display after the 2006 Turkish Grand
Prix caused a controversy, when winner Felipe Massa received the trophy from
Mehmet Ali Talat, who was referred to as the "President of the Turkish Republic
of Northern Cyprus." The government of the Republic of Cyprus filed an official
complaint with the FIA. After investigating the incident, the FIA fined the
organisers of the Grand Prix $5 million on 19 September 2006. The Turkish
Motorsports Federation (TOSFED) and the organisers of the Turkish Grand Prix
(MSO) agreed to pay half the fined sum pending an appeal to be heard by the FIA
International Court of Appeal on November 7, 2006. TOSFED insisted the move was
not planned and that Mehmet Ali Talat did fit FIA's criteria for podium
presentations as a figure of world standing. Keen to repair their impartiality
in international politics, FIA stood their ground forcing the appeal to be
withdrawn. 2008 Elections in the Republic of Cyprus. In the 2008 presidential
elections, Papadopoulos was defeated by AKEL candidate Dimitris Christofias,
who pledged to restart talks on reunification immediately. Speaking on the
election result, Mehmet Ali Talat stated that "this forthcoming period will be
a period during which the Cyprus problem can be solved within a reasonable
space of time – despite all difficulties – provided that there is will".
Christofias held his first meeting as president with the Turkish Cypriot leader
on 21 March 2008 in the UN buffer zone in Nicosia. At the meeting, the two
leaders agreed to launch a new round of "substantive" talks on reunification,
and to reopen Ledra Street, which has been cut in two since the intercommunal
violence of the 1960s and has come to symbolise the island's division. On 3
April 2008, after barriers had been removed, the Ledra Street crossing was
reopened in the presence of Greek and Turkish Cypriot officials. New
negotiations. A first meeting of the technical committees was set to take place
on 18 April 2008. Talat and Christofias met socially at a cocktail party on 7
May 2008, and agreed to meet regularly to review the progress of the talks so
far. A second formal summit was held on 23 May 2008 to review the progress made
in the technical committees. At a meeting on 1 July 2008, the two leaders
agreed in principle on the concepts of a single citizenship and a single
sovereignty, and decided to start direct reunification talks very soon; on the
same date, former Australian foreign minister Alexander Downer was appointed as
the new UN envoy for Cyprus. Christofias and Talat agreed to meet again on 25
July 2008 for a final review of the preparatory work before the actual
negotiations would start. Christofias was expected to propose a rotating
presidency for the united Cypriot state. Talat stated he expected they would
set a date to start the talks in September, and reiterated that he would not
agree to abolishing the guarantor roles of Turkey and Greece. After the
conclusion of negotiations, a reunification plan would be put to referendums in
both communities. In December 2008, the Athenian socialist daily newspaper "To
Vima" described a "crisis" in relations between Christofias and Talat, with the
Turkish Cypriots beginning to speak openly of a loose "confederation", an idea
strongly opposed by South Nicosia. Tensions were further exacerbated by
Turkey's harassment of Cypriot vessels engaged in oil exploration in the
island's Exclusive Economic Zone, and by the Turkish Cypriot leadership's
alignment with Ankara's claim that Cyprus has no continental shelf. On 29 April
2009, Talat stated that if the Court of Appeal of England and Wales (that will
put the last point in the Orams' case) makes a decision just like in the same
spirit with the decision of European Court of Justice (ECJ) then the
Negotiation Process in Cyprus will be damaged in such a way that it will never
be repaired once more. The European Commission warned the Republic of Cyprus
not to turn Orams' case legal fight to keep their holiday home into a political
battle over the divided island. On 31 January 2010, United Nations Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon arrived in Cyprus to accelerate talks aimed at reuniting
the country. The election of nationalist Derviş Eroğlu of the National Unity
Party as president in Northern Cyprus on April 18 is expected to complicate
reunification negotiations. Talks were resumed after the elections in late May,
however, and Eroǧlu stated on 27 May 2010 he was now also in favour of a
federal state, a change from his previous positions. In early June 2010, talks
reached an impasse and UN Special Advisor Alexander Downer called on the two
leaders to decide whether they wanted a solution or not. On 18 November 2010,
1st tripartite meeting (Ban, Christofias, Eroglu) occurred in New York, US
without any agreement over the main issues. On 26 January 2011, 2nd tripartite
meeting (Ban, Christofias, Eroglu) occurred in Geneva, Switzerland without any
agreement over the main issues. On March 2011, United Nations Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon reported, "The negotiations cannot be an open-ended process, nor
can we afford interminable talks for the sake of talks". On 18 March 2011,
Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots realised 100th negotiation since April 2008
without any agreement over the main issues. By mid-2011, there was a renewed
push for an end to negotiations by the end of 2011 in order to have a united
Cyprus take over the EU presidency on 1 July 2012. On 7 July 2011, the 3rd
tripartite meeting (Ban, Christofias, Eroglu) occurred in Geneva, Switzerland
without any agreement over the main issues. On 30–31 October 2011, the 4th
tripartite meeting (Ban, Christofias, Eroglu) occurred in New York, US without
any agreement over the main issues. Ban said that the talks are coming to an
end. On 23–24 January 2012, the 5th tripartite meeting (Ban, Christofias,
Eroglu) occurred in New York, US without any agreement over the main issues.
Ban said "I will be providing a report to the Security Council on the status of
the negotiations at the end of February. At the end of March, I will seek a
review of the process from my Special Adviser, Alexander Downer. If his report
is positive, consistent with relevant Security Council resolutions and
following consultations with the two sides, I intend to call a multilateral
conference in late April or early May". On 21 April 2012, United Nations
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon said "there is not enough progress on core issues
of reunification talks for calling an international conference". International
observers qualified the situation as the "collapse of reunification talks",
"last chance for Cyprus reunification lost", "UN-led rounds of talks have
failed" and the "failure of UN Cyprus campaign for reunification". On 27 April
2012, Special Advisor of the Secretary-General Alexander Downer said "If the
Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot Leaders cannot agree with each other on a
model for a united Cyprus, then United Nations cannot make them". At the end of
September 2012, Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus President Dervis Eroglu
said that joint committees with the Greek Cypriot side had been set up to take
confidence-building measures. In 2012, the European Union(EU)-funded project
"Reconciliation and Peace Economics in Cyprus" found that "There was little
hope for a settlement in the island and the UN-sponsored talks again failed".
Opinion on solutions. A number of observers increasingly suggest partition is
the best solution. An international panel of legal experts proposed the
“creation of a Constitutional Convention under European Union auspices and on
the basis of the 1960 Cyprus Constitution to bring together the parties
directly concerned in order to reach a settlement in conformity with the
Fundamental Principles.” Class action. Greek Cypriots, et al. v. TRNC and
HSBC Bank USA is a pending class action suit by Greek Cypriots and others
against the TRNC Representative Offices in the United States and HSBC Bank USA.
The TRNC Representative Offices are a commercial entity because the United
States does not formally recognise the "Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus".
The staff of the Representative Offices do not have diplomatic visas and only
operate within the United States using business visas. Tsimpedes Law in
Washington DC is suing for "the denial of access to and enjoyment of land and
property held in the north". The lawsuit, originally initiated by Cypriots
displaced during the Turkish invasion of Cyprus in 1974, has been joined by
non-Cypriots who paid for but have never been given legal title to properties
that they have purchased. External links. Documentaries
