Deaf American A Deaf American is defined as a member of the American Sign
Language linguistic minority. Though they are typically medically deaf, they
can also include the children of Deaf people and a few hearing people who learn
ASL and become adopted into the community. Inversely, "Deaf American" is not
inclusive to all people with hearing loss but only those who use ASL as their
primary language. History. The history of Deaf Americans, for the most part,
parallels that of American Sign Language (ASL). Although Deaf American identity
is now strongly tied to the use of American Sign Language, its roots can be
found in early Deaf communities on the American East Coast, including those
that communicated using Martha's Vineyard Sign Language. An important event in
the history of "Deaf Americans" was the introduction of French Sign Language to
the Deaf community at the American School for the Deaf in 1817. The many
different cultures met at a confluence and formed one Deaf American Deaf
culture centered around ASL. The culture transferred from student to student
and from alumni to their respective home communities. This tradition continued
until 1880 when oralism began to replace manualism as the dominant approach to
Deaf education, almost obliterating ASL and Deaf culture in America. Oralism
was the main philosophy in Deaf education until 1965 when the linguist William
Stokoe argued that ASL should be regarded as a full language with all of the
expressive power of any oral language. Deaf Pride began to shoot higher than it
had in a century and Deaf education returned to manualism for the most part.
Culture. Rejection of cochlear implants. Within Deaf communities, there is
strong opposition to the use of cochlear implants and sometimes also hearing
aids and similar technologies. This is often justified in terms of a rejection
of the view that deafness, as a condition, is something that needs to be
'fixed'. Others argue that this technology also threatens the continued
existence of Deaf culture, but Kathryn Woodcock argues that it is a greater
threat to Deaf culture "to reject prospective members just because they used to
hear, because their parents chose an implant for them, because they find
environmental sound useful, etc." Cochlear implants may improve the perception
of sound for suitable implantees, but they do not reverse deafness, or create a
normal perception of sounds. Rejection of oralism as a teaching method. There
is strong opposition within Deaf communities to the oralist method of teaching
deaf children to speak and lip read with limited or no use of sign language in
the classroom. The method is intended to make it easier for deaf children to
integrate into hearing communities, but the benefits of learning in such an
environment are disputed. The use of sign language is also central to Deaf
identity and attempts to limit its use are viewed as an attack.
