Economy of Japan The economy of Japan is the third largest national economy in
the world after the United States and the People's Republic of China and is the
world's second largest developed economy According to the International
Monetary Fund, the country's per capita GDP (PPP) was at $34,739 or the 25th
highest in 2011. Japan is a member of Group of Eight. Japanese economy can be
fore-casted by Quarterly Tankan survey of business sentiment by the Bank of
Japan. Japan is the world's 3rd largest automobile manufacturing country, has
the largest electronics goods industry, and is often ranked among the world's
most innovative countries leading several measures of global patent filings.
Facing increasing competition from China and South Korea, manufacturing in
Japan today now focuses primarily on high-tech and precision goods, such as
optical equipment, hybrid cars, and robotics. Japan is the world's largest
creditor nation, generally running an annual trade surplus and having a
considerable net international investment surplus. As of 2010, Japan possesses
13.7% of the world's private financial assets (the 2nd largest in the world) at
an estimated $14.6 trillion. As of 2011, 68 of the Fortune 500 companies are
based in Japan. For three decades from 1960, with US military protection that
Japan could ignore military spending and instead budgeting on the economy that
Japan experienced rapid economic growth, which was referred to as the Japanese
post-war economic miracle. By the guidance of Ministry of Economy, Trade and
Industry , with average growth rates of 10% in the 1960s, 5% in the 1970s, and
4% in the 1980s, Japan was able to establish and maintain itself as the world's
second largest economy from 1968 until 2010, when it was supplanted by the
People's Republic of China. By 1990, income per capita in Japan equalled or
surpassed that in most countries in the West. However, in the second half of
the 1980s, rising stock and real estate prices caused the Japanese economy to
overheat in what was later to be known as the Japanese asset price bubble
caused by the policy of low interest rate by Bank of Japan. The economic bubble
came to an abrupt end as the Tokyo Stock Exchange crashed in 1990‚Äì92 and real
estate prices peaked in 1991. Growth in Japan throughout the 1990s at 1.5% was
slower than growth in other major developed economies, giving rise to the term
Lost Decade. Nonetheless, GDP per capita growth from 2001-2010 has still
managed to outpace Europe and the United States. Japan had recently embraced
the new strategy of economic growth with such goals to be achieved in 2020 as
expected. A mountainous, volcanic island country, Japan has inadequate natural
resources to support its growing economy and large population therefore Japan
has adopted the national strategy to encourage domestic protectionism and to
induce on the effort of international trade to export from maintaining the
competitive edge of science and engineering-oriented, Research and Development-
led industrial products for sustainable economic development and in exchange
for the import goods which Japan does not have (or lack of, such as food, that
causes as one of the imported-factors of inflation in the Japanese economy
other than the domestic housing/property market). Although many kinds of
minerals were extracted throughout the country, most mineral resources had to
be imported in the postwar era. Local deposits of metal-bearing ores were
difficult to process because they were low grade. The nation's large and varied
forest resources, which covered 70 percent of the country in the late 1980s,
were not utilized extensively. Because of political decisions on local,
prefectural, and nation levels, Japan decided not to exploit its forest
resources for economic gain. Domestic sources only supplied between 25 and 30
percent of the nation's timber needs. Agriculture and fishing were the best
developed resources, but only through years of painstaking investment and toil.
The nation therefore built up the manufacturing and processing industries to
convert raw materials imported from abroad. This strategy of economic
development necessitated the establishment of a strong economic infrastructure
to provide the needed energy, transportation, communications, and technological
know-how. Deposits of gold, magnesium, and silver meet current industrial
demands, but Japan is dependent on foreign sources for many of the minerals
essential to modern industry. Iron ore, copper, bauxite, and alumina must be
imported, as well as many forest products. Economic history. The economic
history of Japan is one of the most studied economies for its spectacular
growth in three different periods. First was the foundation of Edo (in 1603) to
whole inland economical developments, second was the Meiji Restoration (in
1868) to be the first non European power, third was after the defeat of World
War II (in 1945) when the island nation rose to become the world's second
largest economy. First contacts with Europe (16th century). Japan was
considered as a country immensely rich in precious metals, mainly owing to
Marco Polo's accounts of gilded temples and palaces, but also due to the
relative abundance of surface ores characteristic of a massive huge volcanic
country, before large-scale deep-mining became possible in Industrial times.
Japan was to become a major exporter of copper and silver during the period.
Renaissance Japan was also perceived as a sophisticated feudal society with a
high culture and a strong pre-industrial technology. It was densely populated
and urbanized. Prominent European observers of the time seemed to agree that
the Japanese ""excel not only all the other Oriental peoples, they surpass the
Europeans as well"" (Alessandro Valignano, 1584, "Historia del Principo y
Progresso de la Compania de Jesus en las Indias Orientales). Early European
visitors were amazed by the quality of Japanese craftsmanship and
metalsmithing. This stems from the fact that Japan itself is rather poor in
natural resources found commonly in Europe, especially iron. Thus, the Japanese
were famously frugal with their consumable resources; what little they had they
used with expert skill. The cargo of the first Portuguese ships (usually about
4 smaller-sized ships every year) arriving in Japan almost entirely consisted
of Chinese goods (silk, porcelain). The Japanese were very much looking forward
to acquiring such goods, but had been prohibited from any contacts with the
Emperor of China, as a punishment for Wak≈ç pirate raids. The Portuguese (who
were called "Nanban", lit. Southern Barbarians) therefore found the opportunity
to act as intermediaries in Asian trade. Edo period (1603‚Äì1868). The
beginning of the Edo period coincides with the last decades of the Nanban trade
period, during which intense interaction with European powers, on the economic
and religious plane, took place. It is at the beginning of the Edo period that
Japan built her first ocean-going Western-style warships, such as the "San Juan
Bautista", a 500-ton galleon-type ship that transported a Japanese embassy
headed by Hasekura Tsunenaga to the Americas, which then continued to Europe.
Also during that period, the "bakufu" commissioned around 350 Red Seal Ships,
three-masted and armed trade ships, for intra-Asian commerce. Japanese
adventurers, such as Yamada Nagamasa, were active throughout Asia. In order to
eradicate the influence of Christianization, Japan entered in a period of
isolation called sakoku, during which its economy enjoyed stability and mild
progress. Economic development during the Edo period included urbanization,
increased shipping of commodities, a significant expansion of domestic and,
initially, foreign commerce, and a diffusion of trade and handicraft
industries. The construction trades flourished, along with banking facilities
and merchant associations. Increasingly, "han" authorities oversaw the rising
agricultural production and the spread of rural handicrafts. By the mid-
eighteenth century, Edo had a population of more than 1 million and Osaka and
Kyoto each had more than 400,000 inhabitants. Many other castle towns grew as
well. Osaka and Kyoto became busy trading and handicraft production centers,
while Edo was the center for the supply of food and essential urban consumer
goods. Rice was the base of the economy, as the daimyo collected the taxes from
the peasants in the form of rice. Taxes were high, about 40% of the harvest.
The rice was sold at the "fudasashi" market in Edo. To raise money, the daimyo
used forward contracts to sell rice that was not even harvested yet. These
contracts were similar to modern futures trading. During the period, Japan
progressively studied Western sciences and techniques (called "rangaku",
literally "Dutch studies") through the information and books received through
the Dutch traders in Dejima. The main areas that were studied included
geography, medicine, natural sciences, astronomy, art, languages, physical
sciences such as the study of electrical phenomena, and mechanical sciences as
exemplified by the development of Japanese clockwatches, or wadokei, inspired
from Western techniques. Prewar period (1868‚Äì1945). Since the mid-19th
century, after the Meiji restoration, the country was opened up to Western
commerce and influence and Japan has gone through two periods of economic
development. The first began in earnest in 1868 and extended through to World
War II; the second began in 1945 and continued into the mid-1980s. Economic
developments of the prewar period began with the ‚ÄúRich State and Strong Army
Policy‚Äù by the Meiji government. During the Meiji period (1868‚Äì1912),
leaders inaugurated a new Western-based education system for all young people,
sent thousands of students to the United States and Europe, and hired more than
3,000 Westerners to teach modern science, mathematics, technology, and foreign
languages in Japan (Oyatoi gaikokujin). The government also built railroads,
improved road, and inaugurated a land reform program to prepare the country for
further development. To promote industrialization, the government decided that,
while it should help private business to allocate resources and to plan, the
public sector was best equipped to stimulate economic growth. The greatest role
of government was to help provide good economic conditions for business. In
short, government was to be the guide and business the producer. In the early
Meiji period, the government built factories and shipyards that were sold to
entrepreneurs at a fraction of their value. Many of these businesses grew
rapidly into the larger conglomerates. Government emerged as chief promoter of
private enterprise, enacting a series of probusiness policies. In the mid
1930s, the Japanese nominal wage rates were 10 times less than the one of the
U.S (based on mid-1930s exchange rates), while the price level is estimated to
have been about 44% the one of the U.S. Postwar period (1945‚Äìpresent). From
the 1960s to the 1980s, overall real economic growth has been called a
"miracle": a 10% average in the 1960s, a 5% average in the 1970s and a 4%
average in the 1980s. By the late Eighties, Japan had moved from being a low-
wage to a high-wage economy. Growth slowed markedly in the late 1990s also
termed the Lost Decade, largely due to the Bank of Japan's failure to cut
interest rates quickly enough to counter after-effects of over-investment
during the late 1980s. Some economists believe that because the Bank of Japan
failed to cut rates quickly enough, Japan entered a liquidity trap. Therefore,
to keep its economy afloat, Japan ran massive budget deficits (added trillions
in Yen to Japanese financial system) to finance large public works programs. By
1998, Japan's public works projects still could not stimulate demand enough to
end the economy's stagnation. In desperation, the Japanese government undertook
"structural reform" policies intended to wring speculative excesses from the
stock and real estate markets. Unfortunately, these policies led Japan into
deflation on numerous occasions between 1999 and 2004. In his 1998 paper,
Japan's Trap, Princeton economics professor Paul Krugman argued that based on a
number of models, Japan had a new option. Krugman's plan called for a rise in
inflation expectations to, in effect, cut long-term interest rates and promote
spending. Japan used another technique, somewhat based on Krugman's, called
Quantitative easing. As opposed to flooding the money supply with newly printed
money, the Bank of Japan expanded the money supply internally to raise
expectations of inflation. Initially, the policy failed to induce any growth,
but it eventually began to affect inflationary expectations. By late 2005, the
economy finally began what seems to be a sustained recovery. GDP growth for
that year was 2.8%, with an annualized fourth quarter expansion of 5.5%,
surpassing the growth rates of the US and European Union during the same
period. Unlike previous recovery trends, domestic consumption has been the
dominant factor of growth. Despite having interest rates down near zero for a
long period of time, the Quantitative easing strategy did not succeed in
stopping price deflation. This led some economists, such as Paul Krugman, and
some Japanese politicians, to speak of deliberately causing hyperinflation. In
July 2006, the zero-rate policy was ended. In 2008, the Japanese Central Bank
still has the lowest interest rates in the developed world, deflation has still
not been eliminated and the Nikkei 225 has fallen over approximately 50%
(between June 2007 and December 2008). The Economist has suggested that
improvements to bankruptcy law, land transfer law, and tax laws will aid
Japan's economy. In recent years, Japan has been the top export market for
almost 15 trading nations worldwide. Infrastructure. As of 2005, one half of
energy in Japan is produced from petroleum, a fifth from coal, and 14% from
natural gas. Nuclear power in Japan makes a quarter of electricity production
but due to Fukushima Nuclear distaster there is large desire to end Japan's
nuclear power program. Japan's road spending has been large. The 1.2 million
kilometers of paved road are the main means of transportation. Japan has left-
hand traffic. A single network of speed, divided, limited-access toll roads
connects major cities and are operated by toll-collecting enterprises. New and
used cars are inexpensive. Car ownership fees and fuel levies are used to
promote energy-efficiency. Dozens of Japanese railway companies compete in
regional and local passenger transportation markets; for instance, 7 JR
enterprises, Kintetsu Corporation, Seibu Railway, and Keio Corporation. Often,
strategies of these enterprises contain real estate or department stores next
to stations. Some 250 high-speed Shinkansen trains connect major cities. All
trains are known for punctuality. There are 176 airports and flying is a
popular way to travel between cities. The largest domestic airport, Tokyo
International Airport, is Asia's second busiest airport. The largest
international gateways are Narita International Airport (Tokyo area), Kansai
International Airport (Osaka/Kobe/Kyoto area), and Ch≈´bu Centrair
International Airport (Nagoya area). The largest ports include Nagoya Port.
Given its heavy dependence on imported energy, Japan has aimed to diversify its
sources. Since the oil shocks of the 1970s, Japan has reduced dependence on
petroleum as a source of energy from more than 75% in 1973 to about 57% at
present. Other important energy sources are coal, liquefied natural gas,
nuclear power, and hydropower. Demand for oil is also dampened by higher
government taxes on automobile engines over 2000 cc, as well as on gasoline
itself, currently 54 yen per liter sold retail. Kerosene is also used
extensively for home heating in portable heaters, especially farther north.
Many taxi companies run their fleets on liquefied gas with tanks in the car
trunks. A recent success towards greater fuel economy was the introduction of
mass-produced Hybrid vehicles. Former Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, who was
working on Japan's economic revival, signed a treaty with Saudi Arabia and UAE
about the rising prices of oil. Macro-economic trend. This is a chart of trend
of gross domestic product of Japan at market prices estimated by the
International Monetary Fund with figures in millions of Japanese Yen. See also
For purchasing power parity comparisons, the US Dollar is exchanged at
Ôø•110.784 in 2010. Services. Japan's service sector accounts for about three-
quarters of its total economic output. Banking, insurance, real estate,
retailing, transportation, and telecommunications are all major industries such
as Mitsubishi UFJ, Mizuho, NTT, TEPCO, Nomura, Mitsubishi Estate, Tokio Marine,
Mitsui Sumitomo, JR East, Seven & I, and Japan Airlines counting as one of the
largest companies in the world. The Koizumi government set Japan Post, one of
the country's largest providers of savings and insurance services for
privatization by 2014. The six major keiretsus are the Mitsubishi, Sumitomo,
Fuyo, Mitsui, Dai-Ichi Kangyo and Sanwa Groups. Japan is home to 326 companies
from the Forbes Global 2000 or 16.3% (as of 2006). Industry. Japanese
manufacturing is very diversified, with a variety of advanced industries that
are highly successful. Industry is concentrated in several regions, in the
following order of importance: the Kant≈ç region surrounding Tokyo, especially
the prefectures of Chiba, Kanagawa, Saitama and Tokyo (the Keihin industrial
region); the T≈çkai region, including Aichi, Gifu, Mie, and Shizuoka
prefectures (the Chukyo-Tokai industrial region); Kinki (Kansai), including
Osaka, Kyoto, Kobe, (the Hanshin industrial region); the southwestern part of
Honsh≈´ and northern Shikoku around the Seto Inland Sea (the Setouchi
industrial region); and the northern part of Ky≈´sh≈´ (Kitaky≈´sh≈´). In
addition, a long narrow belt of industrial centers is found between Tokyo and
Fukuoka, established by particular industries, that have developed as mill
towns. Japan enjoys high technological development in many fields, including
consumer electronics, automobile manufacturing, semiconductor manufacturing,
optical fibers, optoelectronics, optical media, facsimile and copy machines,
and fermentation processes in food and biochemistry. Agriculture. Only 12% of
Japan's land is suitable for cultivation. Due to this lack of arable land, a
system of terraces is used to farm in small areas. This results in one of the
world's highest levels of crop yields per unit area, with an overall
agricultural self-sufficiency rate of about 50% on fewer than 56,000¬ km¬≤ (14
million acres) cultivated. Japan's small agricultural sector, however, is also
highly subsidized and protected, with government regulations that favor small-
scale cultivation instead of large-scale agriculture as practiced in North
America. Imported rice, the most protected crop, is subject to tariffs of 490%
and was restricted to a quota of only 7.2% of average rice consumption from
1968 to 1988. Imports beyond the quota are unrestricted in legal terms, but
subject to a 341 yen per kilogram tariff. This tariff is now estimated at 490%,
but the rate will soar to a massive 778% under new calculation rules to be
introduced as part of the Doha Round. Although Japan is usually self-sufficient
in rice (except for its use in making rice crackers and processed foods) and
wheat, the country must import about 50% of its requirements of other grain and
fodder crops and relies on imports for most of its supply of meat. Japan
imports large quantities of wheat, sorghum, and soybeans, primarily from the
United States. Japan is the largest market for EU agricultural exports. Apples
are also grown, mostly in Tohoku and Hokkaid≈ç; Pears and Oranges are mainly
grown in Shikoku and in Ky≈´sh≈´. Pears and oranges were first introduced by
Dutch traders, in Nagasaki in the late 18th century. Fishery. Japan ranked
fifth in the world in tonnage of fish caught‚Äî11.9 million tons in 1989, up
slightly from 11.1 million tons in 1980. After the 1973 energy crisis, deep-sea
fishing in Japan declined, with the annual catch in the 1980s averaging 2
million tons. Offshore fisheries accounted for an average of 50% of the
nation's total fish catches in the late 1980s although they experienced
repeated ups and downs during that period Coastal fishing by small boats, set
nets, or breeding techniques accounts for about one third of the industry's
total production, while offshore fishing by medium-sized boats makes up for
more than half the total production. Deep-sea fishing from larger vessels makes
up the rest. Among the many species of seafood caught are sardines, skipjack
tuna, crab, shrimp, salmon, pollock, squid, clams, mackerel, sea bream, saury,
tuna and Japanese amberjack. Freshwater fishing takes up about 30% of Japan's
fishing industry. Among the species of fish caught in the rivers of Japan are
many different types and some freshwater crustaceans. Japan maintains one of
the world's largest fishing fleets and accounts for nearly 15% of the global
catch, prompting some claims that Japan's fishing is leading to depletion in
fish stocks such as tuna. Japan has also sparked controversy by supporting
quasi-commercial whaling. Labor force. The claimed unemployment rate for June
2009 is 5.2% (5.4% male (up 0.1% from May 2009), 4.9% female (up 0.3% from May
2009)). [http://www.bloomberg.com/apps/news?pid=20601068&sid=a90dAL94wEos This
is regarded as an underestimate. Even part-time workers with extremely low
hours are classified as employed. In July 2006, the unemployment rate in Japan
was 4.1%, according to the OECD. At the end of February 2009, it stood at 4.4%
This seemingly modest rate however understates the situation. According to The
Economist, the ratio of job offers to number of applicants has declined to just
0.59, from almost 1 at the start of 2008, while average work hours also
declined. Average wages also went down by 2.9% over the 12 months ending in
February. In 2008, Japan's labor force consisted of some 66 million
workers‚Äî40% of whom were women‚Äîand was rapidly shrinking. [http://
www.prcdc.org/summaries/japan/japan.html One major long-term concern for the
Japanese labor force is a low birthrate. In the first half of 2005, the number
of deaths in Japan exceeded the number of births, indicating that the decline
in population, initially predicted to start in 2007, had already started. While
one countermeasure for a declining birthrate would be to remove barriers to
immigration, the Japanese government has been reluctant to do so. In 1989, the
predominantly public sector union confederation, SOHYO (General Council of
Trade Unions of Japan), merged with RENGO (Japanese Private Sector Trade Union
Confederation) to form the Japanese Trade Union Confederation. Labor union
membership is about 12 million. Law and government. Japan ranks 20th of 183
countries in the Ease of Doing Business Index 2012. Japan has one of the
smallest tax rates in the developed world. After deductions, the majority of
workers are free from personal income taxes. Value-added tax rate is only 5%,
while corporate tax rates are high. Shareholder activism is rare despite the
fact that the corporate law gives shareholders strong powers over managers.
Recently, more shareholders have stood up against managers. The government's
liabilities include the second largest public debt of any nation. Former Prime
Minister Naoto Kan has called the situation 'urgent'. Japan's central bank has
the second largest foreign-exchange reserves after People's Republic of China.
Culture. Overview. Nemawashi (Ê πÂõû„Åó) in Japanese culture is an informal
process of quietly laying the foundation for some proposed change or project,
by talking to the people concerned, gathering support and feedback, and so
forth. It is considered an important element in any major change, before any
formal steps are taken, and successful "nemawashi" enables changes to be
carried out with the consent of all sides. Japanese companies are known for
management methods such as "The Toyota Way". Kaizen (, Japanese for
"improvement") is a Japanese philosophy that focuses on continuous improvement
throughout all aspects of life. When applied to the workplace, Kaizen
activities continually improve all functions of a business, from manufacturing
to management and from the CEO to the assembly line workers. By improving
standardized activities and processes, Kaizen aims to eliminate waste (see Lean
manufacturing). Kaizen was first implemented in several Japanese businesses
during the country's recovery after World War II, including Toyota, and has
since spread to businesses throughout the world. Ironically, Japanese workers
work amongst the most hours per day even though kaizen is supposed to improve
all aspects of life. Some companies have powerful enterprise unions and
"shunt≈ç". The Nenko System or Nenko Joretsu as it is called in Japan, is the
Japanese system of promoting an employee in order of his or her proximity to
retirement. The advantage of the system is that it allows older employees to
achieve a higher salary level before retirement and that it usually brings more
experience to the executive ranks. The disadvantage of the system is that it
does not allow new talent to be merged with the experience and those with
specialized skills cannot be promoted to the already crowded executive ranks.
It also does not guarantee or even attempt to bring the "right person for the
right job". Relationships between government bureaucrats and companies are
often cozy. is the institutionalised practice where Japanese senior bureaucrats
retire to high-profile positions in the private and public sectors. The
practice is increasingly viewed as corrupt and a drag on unfastening ties
between private sector and state that prevent economic and political reforms.
Lifetime employment ("shushin koyo") and seniority-based career advancement
have been common in the Japanese work environment. Recently, Japan has begun to
gradually move away from some of these norms. An office lady, often abbreviated
OL (Japanese: „Ç™„Éº„Ç®„É´ "≈åeru"), is a female office worker in Japan who
performs generally pink collar tasks such as serving tea and secretarial or
clerical work. Like many unmarried Japanese, OLs often live with their parents
well into early adulthood. Office ladies are usually full-time permanent staff,
although the jobs they do usually have little opportunity for promotion, and
there is usually the expectation that they leave their jobs once they get
married. , which can be translated quite literally from Japanese as "death from
overwork", is occupational sudden death. The major medical causes of kar≈çshi
deaths are heart attack and stroke due to stress. , (sometimes also translated
as "corporate bouncers", "meeting-men", or "corporate blackmailers") are a form
of specialized racketeer unique to Japan, and often associated with the yakuza
that extort money from or blackmail companies by threatening to publicly
humiliate companies and their management, usually in their . The first
"Western-style" department store in Japan was Mitsukoshi, founded in 1904,
which has its root as a kimono store called Echigoya from 1673. When the roots
are considered, however, Matsuzakaya has an even longer history, dated from
1611. The kimono store changed to a department store in 1910. In 1924,
Matsuzakaya store in Ginza allowed street shoes to be worn indoors, something
innovative at the time. [http://www.matsuzakaya.co.jp/corporate/history/honshi/
index.shtml] These former kimono shop department stores dominated the market in
its earlier history. They sold, or rather displayed, luxurious products, which
contributed for their sophisticated atmospheres. Another origin of Japanese
department store is that from railway company. There have been many private
railway operators in the nation, and from 1920s, they started to build
department stores directly linked to their lines' termini. Seibu and Hankyu are
the typical examples of this type. From the 1980s onwards, Japanese department
stores face fierce competition from supermarkets and convenience stores,
gradually losing their presences. Still, "depƒÅto" are bastions of several
aspects of cultural conservatism in the country. Gift certificates for
prestigious department stores are frequently given as formal presents in Japan.
Department stores in Japan generally offer a wide range of services and can
include foreign exchange, travel reservations, ticket sales for local concerts
and other events. Keiretsu. A is a set of companies with interlocking business
relationships and shareholdings. It is a type of business group. The
prototypical "keiretsu" appeared in Japan during the "economic miracle"
following World War II. Before Japan's surrender, Japanese industry was
controlled by large family-controlled vertical monopolies called "zaibatsu".
The Allies dismantled the "zaibatsu" in the late 1940s, but the companies
formed from the dismantling of the "zaibatsu" were reintegrated. The dispersed
corporations were re-interlinked through share purchases to form horizontally
integrated alliances across many industries. Where possible, "keiretsu"
companies would also supply one another, making the alliances vertically
integrated as well. In this period, official government policy promoted the
creation of robust trade corporations that could withstand pressures from
intensified world trade competition. The major "keiretsu" were each centered
around one bank, which lent money to the "keiretsu's" member companies and held
equity positions in the companies. Each central bank had great control over the
companies in the "keiretsu" and acted as a monitoring entity and as an
emergency bail-out entity. One effect of this structure was to minimize the
presence of hostile takeovers in Japan, because no entities could challenge the
power of the banks. There are two types of "keiretsu": vertical and horizontal.
Vertical "keiretsu" illustrates the organization and relationships within a
company (for example all factors of production of a certain product are
connected), while a horizontal "keiretsu" shows relationships between entities
and industries, normally centered around a bank and trading company. Both are
complexly woven together and self-sustain each other. The Japanese recession in
the 1990s had profound effects on the keiretsu. Many of the largest banks were
hit hard by bad loan portfolios and forced to merge or go out of business. This
had the effect of blurring the lines between the keiretsu: Sumitomo Bank and
Mitsui Bank, for instance, became Sumitomo Mitsui Banking Corporation in 2001,
while Sanwa Bank (the banker for the Hankyu-Toho Group) became part of Bank of
Tokyo-Mitsubishi UFJ. Additionally, many companies from outside the keiretsu
system, such as Sony, began outperforming their counterparts within the system.
Generally, these causes gave rise to a strong notion in the business community
that the old keiretsu system was not an effective business model, and led to an
overall loosening of keiretsu alliances. While the keiretsu still exist, they
are not as centralized or integrated as they were before the 1990s. This, in
turn, has led to a growing corporate acquisition industry in Japan, as
companies are no longer able to be easily "bailed out" by their banks, as well
as rising derivative litigation by more independent shareholders. Current
economic issues. The Koizumi administration, which held office until 2006,
enacted or attempted to pass (sometimes with failure) major privatization and
foreign-investment laws intended to help stimulate Japan's economy. Although
the effectiveness of these laws is still ambiguous, the economy began to
respond, but Japan's aging population was expected to place further strain on
growth in the future (Locke 2004)." Keynesian economists claimed that Japan's
economy was far stronger than generally believed (Locke 2004). Some mainstream
economists acknowledged that Japan, which unlike most developed countries had
maintained its industrial base, and had vast capital reserves, had a strong
economic outlook in 2004. The privatization of Japan Post, the Japanese postal
system, which also runs insurance and deposit-taking businesses, is a major
issue. A political battle over privatization caused a political stalemate in
August 2005, and ultimately led to the dissolution of the Japanese House of
Representatives. The Postal Savings deposits, which have until now been used to
fund public works projects, stands in excess of $1.9 trillion, and could be a
major force in energizing the private sector. The Japanese monetary
authorities' continued desire to depress the price of the Japanese yen relative
to other key specific currencies to protect domestic business from imports may
no longer be feasible. The most recent record intervention in 2003 amounted to
over 17 trillion yen, more than one third of one trillion US dollars at the
time and nearly 3% of Japan's 2003 GDP, being sold in favor of other non-yen
denominated assets. However, since 2005, Japan has not directly intervened to
buy currency, as yen carry trade has effectively carried out the same task.
Interestingly, international trade expanded by 60% from 91.4 trillion yen to
142.6 trillion yen from 2001 to 2006. Taking in account the economic
participation rate, Japan's GDP per worker increased steadily during that
period. The OECD downgraded its economic forecasts on March 20, 2008 for the
Japan for the first half of 2008. Japan does not have room to ease fiscal or
monetary policy, the 30-nation group warned. For Japan, the OECD said the pace
of underlying growth appears to be softening despite support from buoyant
neighboring Asian economies. The organization expects first-quarter GDP to be
up 0.3 percent and predicts a rise of 0.2 in the second quarter (CNN 2008-03).
On November 17, 2008, Japanese government officials announced that the economy
was in a recession. It was reported that Japan's economy contracted at an
annual rate of 1.8% in the third quarter of 2008 and shrank 0.8% through the
fiscal year that ends March 2009. In July 2009 unemployment reached a post-war
high of 5.7 percent, according to the Japan Times. Although the economy
recovered in 2010 levels of public debt remain extremely high, approaching 226%
of GDP (Jackson 2010-04). In 2012 the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development (OECD) Yearbook editorial (Gurr√≠a 2012) stated that Japan's debt
"rose above 200% of GDP partly as a consequence of the tragic earthquake and
the related reconstruction efforts." On March 17, 2010 the Bank of Japan moved
to boost yen reserves for 3-month bank loans to 20 trillion yen, although
economists such as Richard Koo of the Nomura Research Institute see this as a
move merely to please the Democratic Party of Japan because, as no money is
leaving the financial system, there is no impact on long term rates in either
the ordinary market or the Foreign exchange market. As a result of this the
foreign press and the International Monetary Fund believe Japan should be doing
more to help its economy recover (Jackson 2010-04). In August 2010 the yen hit
a 15-year high against the US dollar in nominal terms (BBC 2010-08). In real
exchange rate terms, however, the yen was still valued at less than its average
since 1990. On October 2011, the Japanese Ministry of Finance spent around Y5
trillion-Y7.5 trillion ($60 billion-$80 billion) to buy dollars against the
yen.The intervention came after the dollar touched a record low of 75.31 yen
and pushed the world's main reserve currency up past 79 yen. The dollar,
however, slipped below 78 in European trade (Reuters 2011-10-31). Other
economic indicators. Net international investment position: 266,223 \ billion
(1st) Industrial Production Growth Rate: 7.5% (2010 est.) Investment (gross
fixed): 20.3% of GDP (2010 est.) Agriculture ‚Äì Products: rice, sugar beets,
vegetables, fruit, pork, poultry, dairy products, eggs, fish Exports ‚Äì
Commodities: machinery and equipment, motor vehicles, semiconductors, chemicals
Imports ‚Äì Commodities: machinery and equipment, fuels, foodstuffs, chemicals,
textiles, raw materials (2001) "Japanese Yen per US$1" ‚Äì 88.67 (2010), 93.57
(2009), 103.58 (2008), 117.99 (2007), 116.18 (2006), 109.690016 (2005), 115.933
(2003), 125.388 (2002), 121.529 (2001), 105.16 (January 2000), 113.91 (1999),
130.91 (1998), 120.99 (1997), 108.78 (1996), 94.06 (1995)
