Espionage Espionage or spying involves a government or individual obtaining
information that is considered secret or confidential without the permission of
the holder of the information. Espionage is inherently clandestine, as it is
taken for granted that it is unwelcome and, in many cases illegal and
punishable by law. It is a subset of "intelligence gathering"—which otherwise
may be conducted from public sources and using perfectly legal and ethical
means. It crucial to distinguish espionage from intelligence gathering, as the
latter does not necessarily involve espionage, but often collates open-source
information. When successful, however espionage always produces intelligence.
Espionage is often part of an institutional effort by a government or
commercial concern, however the term is generally associated with state spying
on potential or actual enemies primarily for military purposes. Spying
involving corporations is known as industrial espionage. One of the most
effective ways to gather data and information about an enemy (or potential
enemy) is by infiltrating the enemy's ranks. This is the job of the spy
(espionage agent). Spies can bring back all sorts of information concerning the
size and strength of an enemy army. They can also find dissidents within the
enemy's forces and influence them to defect. In times of crisis, spies can also
be used to steal technology and to sabotage the enemy in various ways.
Counterintelligence operatives can feed false information to enemy spies,
protecting important domestic secrets and preventing attempts at subversion.
Nearly every country has very strict laws concerning espionage, and the penalty
for being caught is often severe. However, the benefits that can be gained
through espionage are generally great enough that most governments and many
large corporations make use of it to varying degrees. Further information on
clandestine HUMINT (human intelligence) information collection techniques is
available, including discussions of operational techniques, asset recruiting
and the tradecraft used to collect this information. History. Events involving
espionage are well documented throughout history. The ancient writings of
Chinese and Indian military strategists such as Sun-Tzu and Chanakya contain
information on deception and subversion. Chanakya's student Chandragupta
Maurya, founder of the Maurya Empire in India, made use of assassinations,
spies and secret agents, which are described in Chanakya's "Arthasastra". The
ancient Egyptians had a thoroughly developed system for the acquisition of
intelligence, and the Hebrews used spies as well, as in the story of Rahab.
Spies were also prevalent in the Greek and Roman empires. During the 13th and
14th centuries, the Mongols relied heavily on espionage in their conquests in
Asia and Europe. Feudal Japan often used ninja to gather intelligence. More
recently, spies played a significant part in Elizabethan England (see Francis
Walsingham). Many modern espionage methods were well established even then.
Aztecs used Pochtecas, people in charge of commerce, as spies and diplomats,
and had diplomatic immunity. The Cold War involved intense espionage activity
between the United States and its allies and the Soviet Union and China and
their allies, particularly related to nuclear weapons secrets. Recently,
espionage agencies have targeted the illegal drug trade and those considered to
be terrorists. Since 2008 the United States has charged at least 57 defendants
for attempting to spy for China. Different intelligence services value certain
intelligence collection techniques over others. The former Soviet Union, for
example, preferred human sources over research in open sources, while the
United States has tended to emphasize technological methods such as SIGINT and
IMINT. Both Soviet political (KGB) and military intelligence (GRU) officers
were judged by the number of agents they recruited. Targets of espionage.
Espionage agents are usually trained experts in a specific targeted field. This
allows them to differentiate mundane information from a target which has
intrinsic value to own organisational development. Correct identification of
the target at its execution is the sole purpose of the espionage operation.
Methods and terminology. While news media may speak of "spy satellites" and the
like, espionage is not a synonym for all intelligence functions. It is a
specific form of human source intelligence (HUMINT). Codebreaking
(cryptanalysis or COMINT), aircraft or satellite photography (IMINT) and
research in open publications (OSINT) are all intelligence gathering
disciplines, but none of them are espionage. Many HUMINT activities, such as
prisoner interrogation, reports from military reconnaissance patrols and from
diplomats, etc., are not espionage. Unlike other forms of intelligence
collection disciplines, espionage usually involves accessing the place where
the desired information is stored, or accessing the people who know the
information and will divulge it through some kind of subterfuge. There are
exceptions to physical meetings, such as the Oslo Report, or the insistence of
Robert Hanssen in never meeting the people to whom he was selling information.
The US defines espionage towards itself as "The act of obtaining, delivering,
transmitting, communicating, or receiving information about the national
defense with an intent, or reason to believe, that the information may be used
to the injury of the United States or to the advantage of any foreign nation.
"Black's Law Dictionary" (1990) defines espionage as: "...gathering,
transmitting, or losing...information related to the national defense".
Espionage is a violation of United States law, and Article 106a of the Uniform
Code of Military Justice". The United States, like most nations, conducts
espionage against other nations, under the control of the National Clandestine
Service. Britain's espionage activities are controlled by the Secret
Intelligence Service. Organization. A spy is a person employed to obtain such
secrets. Within the United States Intelligence Community, "asset" is a more
common usage. A case officer, who may have diplomatic status (i.e. official
cover or non-official cover), supports and directs the human collector. Cutouts
are couriers who do not know the agent or case officer, but transfer messages.
A safe house is a refuge for spies. In larger networks the organization can be
complex with many methods to avoid detection, including clandestine cell
systems. Often the players have never met. Case officers are stationed in
foreign countries to recruit and to supervise intelligence agents, who in turn
spy on targets in their countries where they are assigned. A spy need not be a
citizen of the target country - hence does not automatically commit treason
when operating within it. While the more common practice is to recruit a person
already trusted with access to sensitive information, sometimes a person with a
well-prepared synthetic identity, called a "Legend" in tradecraft, may attempt
to infiltrate a target organization. These agents can be moles (who are
recruited before they get access to secrets), defectors (who are recruited
after they get access to secrets and leave their country) or defectors in place
(who get access but do not leave). Spies may also be used to spread
disinformation in the organization in which they are planted, such as giving
false reports about their country's military movements, or about a competing
company's ability to bring a product to market. Spies may be given other roles
that also require infiltration, such as sabotage. Many governments routinely
spy on their allies as well as their enemies, although they typically maintain
a policy of not commenting on this. Governments also employ private companies
to collect information on their behalf such as SCG International Risk and
others. Many organizations, both national and non-national, conduct espionage
operations. It should not be assumed that espionage is always directed at the
most secret operations of a target country. National and terrorist
organizations and other groups are also targets. Communications both are
necessary to espionage and clandestine operations, and also a great
vulnerability when the adversary has sophisticated SIGINT detection and
interception capability. Agents must also transfer money securely. Industrial
espionage. Reportedly Canada is losing $12 billion and German companies are
estimated to be losing about €50 billion ($87 billion) and 30,000 jobs to
industrial espionage every year. Agents in espionage. In espionage jargon, an
agent refers to the person who does the spying; a citizen of one country who is
recruited by a second country to spy on or work against his own country or a
third country. In popular usage, this term is often erroneously applied to a
member of an intelligence service who recruits and handles agents; in espionage
such a person is referred to as an "intelligence officer", "intelligence
operative" or "case officer". There are several types of agent in use today.
Law. Espionage is a crime under the legal code of many nations. The risks of
espionage vary. A spy breaking the host country's laws may be deported,
imprisoned, or even executed - especially in wartime, a summary execution may
well be the penalty. A spy breaking his/her own country's laws can be
imprisoned for espionage or/and treason, or even executed, as the Rosenbergs
were. For example, when Aldrich Ames handed a stack of dossiers of CIA agents
in the Eastern Bloc to his KGB-officer "handler", the KGB "rolled up" several
networks, and at least ten people were secretly shot. When Ames was arrested by
the FBI, he faced life in prison; his contact, who had diplomatic immunity, was
declared persona non grata and taken to the airport. Ames's wife was threatened
with life imprisonment if her husband did not cooperate; he did, and she was
given a five-year sentence. Hugh Francis Redmond, a CIA officer in China, spent
nineteen years in a Chinese prison for espionage—and died there—as he was
operating without diplomatic cover and immunity. In United States law, treason,
espionage and spying are separate crimes, the former two of which have
graduated punishment levels, the latter for which death is a mandatory
sentence. The United States in World War I passed the Espionage Act of 1917.
Over the years many spies, such as the Soble spy ring, Robert Lee Johnson, the
Rosenberg ring, Aldrich Hazen Ames, Robert Philip Hanssen, Jonathan Pollard,
John Anthony Walker, James Hall III, and others have been prosecuted under this
law. Use against non-spies. However espionage laws are also used to prosecute
non-spies. In the United States the Espionage Act of 1917 was used against
socialist politician Eugene V. Debs (at that time the act had much stricter
guidlines and banned speech against military recruiting amongst other things).
The law was later used to suppress publication of periodicals, for example of
Father Coughlin in WWII. In the early 21st century, the act was used to
prosecute whistleblowers like Thomas Andrews Drake and John Kiriakou, as well
as officials who communicated with journalists for innocuous reasons, like
Stephen Jin-Woo Kim. As of 2012, India and Pakistan were holding several
hundred prisoners of each other's country for minor violations like tresspass
or visa overstay, often with accusations of espionage attached. Some of these
include cases where Pakistan and India both deny citizenship to these people,
leaving them stateless. The BBC reported in 2012 on one such case, that of
Mohammed Idrees, who was held under Indian police control for approximately 13
years for overstaying his 15 day visa by 2-3 days after seeing his ill parents
in 1999. Much of the 13 years was spent in prison waiting for a hearing, and
more time was spent homeless or living with generous families. The Indian
People's Union for Civil Liberties and Human Rights Law Network both decried
his treatment. BBC attributed some of the problems to tensions caused by the
Kashmir conflict. List of famous spies. Espionage in the American Civil War.
One of the innovations in the American Civil War was the use of proprietary
companies for intelligence collection. See Allan Pinkerton. Espionage in the
Aceh War. Dutch professor Snouck Hurgronje world leading authority on Islam was
a proponent of espionage to quell Muslim resistance in Aceh in the Dutch East
Indies. In his role as Colonial Advisor of Oriental affairs he gathered
intelligence under the name "Haji Abdul Ghaffar". His knowledge of Islamic and
Aceh culture enabled him to devise strategies which significantly helped crush
the resistance of the Aceh inhabitants and impose Dutch colonial rule on them,
ending the 40 year Aceh War with varying casualty estimates of between 50,000
and 100,000 inhabitants dead and about a million wounded. Espionage in World
War II. Informants were common in World War II. In November 1939, the German
Hans Ferdinand Mayer sent what is called the Oslo Report to inform the British
of German technology and projects in an effort to undermine the Nazi regime.
The Réseau AGIR was a French network developed after the fall of France that
reported the start of construction of V-weapon installations in Occupied France
to the British. Counterespionage included the use of turned Double Cross agents
to misinform Nazi Germany of impact points during the Blitz and internment of
Japanese in the US against "Japan's wartime spy program". Additional WWII
espionage examples include Soviet spying on the US Manhattan project, the
German Duquesne Spy Ring convicted in the US, and the Soviet Red Orchestra
spying on Nazi Germany. The US lacked a specific agency at the start of the
war, but quickly formed the Office of Strategic Services (OSS). Spying has
sometimes been considered a gentlemanly pursuit, with recruiting focused on
military officers, or at least on persons of the class from whom officers are
recruited. However, the demand for male soldiers, an increase in women's
rights, and the tactical advantages of female spies led the Special Operations
Executive (SOE) to set aside any lingering Victorian Era prejudices and begin
employing them in April 1942. Their task was to transmit information from Nazi
occupied France back to Allied Forces. The main strategic reason was that men
in France faced a high risk of being interrogated by Nazi troops but women were
less likely to arouse suspicion. In this way they made good couriers and proved
equal to, if not more effective than, their male counterparts. Their
participation in Organization and Radio Operation was also vital to the success
of many operations, including the main network between Paris and London.
Espionage post World War II. In the United States, there are several federal
agencies that form the United States Intelligence Community. The Central
Intelligence Agency operates a Clandestine Service (NCS) to collect human
intelligence and perform Covert operations. The National Security Agency
collects Signals Intelligence. Other agencies do similar work. The CIA used to
head the IC but after the September 11 attacks a new agency was formed, the
Director of National Intelligence, to lead the group. Spy fiction. An early
example of espionage literature is "Kim" by the English novelist Rudyard
Kipling, with a description of the training of an intelligence agent in the
Great Game between the UK and Russia in 19th century Central Asia. An even
earlier work was James Fenimore Cooper's classic novel, "The Spy," written in
1821, about an American spy in New York during the Revolutionary War. During
the many 20th century spy scandals, much information became publicly known
about national spy agencies and dozens of real-life secret agents. These
sensational stories piqued public interest in a profession largely off-limits
to human interest news reporting, a natural consequence of the secrecy inherent
to their work. To fill in the blanks, the popular conception of the secret
agent has been formed largely by 20th and 21st century literature and cinema.
Attractive and sociable real-life agents such as Valerie Plame find little
employment in serious fiction, however. The fictional secret agent is more
often a loner, sometimes amoral—an existential hero operating outside the
everyday constraints of society. Loner spy personalities may have been a
stereotype of convenience for authors who already knew how to write loner
private investigator characters that sold well from the 1920s to the present.
Johnny Fedora achieved popularity as a fictional agent of early Cold War
espionage, but James Bond is the most commercially successful of the many spy
characters created by intelligence insiders during that struggle. His less
fantastic rivals include Le Carre's George Smiley and Harry Palmer as played by
Michael Caine. Jumping on the spy bandwagon, other writers also started writing
about spy fiction featuring female spies as protagonists, such as "The
Baroness", which has more graphic action and sex, as compared to other novels
featuring male protagonists.
