Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
(FDIC) is a United States government corporation operating as an independent
agency created by the Glass‚ÄìSteagall Act of 1933. It provides deposit
insurance, which guarantees the safety of deposits in member banks, up to
$250,000 per depositor per bank as of January 2012. , the FDIC insured deposits
at 7,723 institutions. The FDIC also examines and supervises certain financial
institutions for safety and soundness, performs certain consumer-protection
functions, and manages banks in receiverships (failed banks). The FDIC receives
no Congressional appropriations ‚Äì it is funded by premiums that banks and
thrift institutions pay for deposit insurance coverage and from earnings on
investments in U.S. Treasury securities. The FDIC does not provide deposit
insurance for credit unions, which are insured by the National Credit Union
Administration (NCUA). Insured institutions are required to place signs at
their place of business stating that "deposits are backed by the full faith and
credit of the United States Government." Since the start of FDIC insurance on
January 1, 1934, no depositor has lost any insured funds as a result of a
failure. Board of directors. The Board of Directors of the FDIC is the
governing body of the FDIC. The board is composed of five members, three
appointed by the president of the United States with the consent of the United
States Senate and two ex officio members. The three appointed members each
serve six year terms. No more than three members of the board may be of the
same political affiliation. The president, with the consent of the Senate, also
designates one of the appointed members as chairman of the board, to serve a
five-year term, and one of the appointed members as vice chairman of the board,
to also serve a five-year term. History. Inception. During the 1930s, the U.S.
and the rest of the world experienced a severe economic contraction that is now
called the Great Depression. In the U.S. during the height of the Great
Depression, the official unemployment rate was 25% and the stock market had
declined 75% since 1929. Bank runs were common because there was not insurance
on deposits at banks, banks kept only a fraction of deposits in reserve, and
customers ran the risk of losing the money that they had deposited if their
bank failed. Historical insurance limits. The temporary increase in 2008 of the
insurance limit to $250,000 was set to expire on 31 December 2013. However, the
Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (P.L.111-203), which was signed
into law on July 21, 2010, made the $250,000 insurance limit permanent. In
addition, the Federal Deposit Insurance Reform Act of 2005 (P.L.109-171) allows
for the boards of the FDIC and the National Credit Union Administration (NCUA)
to consider inflation and other factors every five years beginning in 2010 and,
if warranted, to adjust the amounts under a specified formula. S&L and bank
crisis of the 1980s. Federal deposit insurance received its first large-scale
test in the late 1980s and early 1990s during the savings and loan crisis
(which also affected commercial banks and savings banks). The brunt of the
crisis fell upon a parallel institution, the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance
Corporation (FSLIC), created to insure savings and loan (S&L) institutions
(S&Ls, also called thrifts). Due to a confluence of events, much of the S&L
industry was insolvent, and many large banks were in trouble as well. The FSLIC
became insolvent and merged into the FDIC. Supervision of thrifts became the
responsibility of a new agency, the Office of Thrift Supervision. (Credit
unions remained insured by the National Credit Union Administration.) The
primary legislative responses to the crisis were the Financial Institutions
Reform, Recovery and Enforcement Act of 1989 (FIRREA), and Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation Improvement Act of 1991 (FDICIA). This crisis cost
taxpayers an estimated $150 billion to resolve. 2008‚Äì2010 Financial crisis.
2008. As a result of the financial crisis in 2008, twenty-five U.S. banks
became insolvent and were taken over by the FDIC. However, during that year,
the largest bank failure in terms of dollar value occurred on September 26,
2008, when Washington Mutual experienced a 10-day bank run on its deposits.
2009. On July 31, 2009, the FDIC launched its Legacy Loans Program (LLP). This
initiative is aimed at helping banks rid their balance sheets of toxic assets
so they can raise new capital and increase lending. On August 14, 2009,
Bloomberg reported that more than 150 publicly traded U.S. lenders had
nonperforming loans above 5% of their total holdings. This is important because
former regulators say that this is the level that can wipe out a bank‚Äôs
equity and threaten its survival. While this ratio does not always lead to bank
failures if the banks in question have raised additional capital and have
properly established reserves for the bad debt, it is an important indicator
for future FDIC activity. On August 21, 2009, the second largest bank, Guaranty
Bank, in Texas, became insolvent and was taken over by BBVA Compass, the U.S.
division of Banco Bilbao Vizcaya Argentaria, the second-largest bank in Spain.
This was the first foreign company to buy a failed bank during the credit
crisis of 2008 and 2009. In, addition, the FDIC agreed to share losses with
BBVA on about $11 billion of Guaranty Bank‚Äôs loans and other assets. This
transaction alone cost the FDIC Deposit Insurance Fund $3 billion. On August
27, 2009, the FDIC increased the number of troubled banks to 416 in the second
quarter. That number compares to 305 just three months earlier. At the end of
the third quarter, that number jumped to 552. At the close of 2009, a total of
140 banks had become insolvent. This is the largest number of bank failures in
a year since 1992, when 179 institutions failed. 2010. On February 23, 2010,
FDIC chairman Sheila Bair warned that the number of failures in 2010 could
surpass the 140 banks that were seized in 2009. Commercial real estate
overexposure was deemed the most serious threat to banks in 2010. On April 30,
2010, the FDIC used emergency powers to seize three banks in Puerto Rico at a
cost of $5.3 billion. In 2010, 157 banks with approximately $92 billion in
total assets failed. Funds. Former funds. Between 1989 and 2006, there were two
separate FDIC funds¬ ‚Äî the Bank Insurance Fund (BIF), and the Savings
Association Insurance Fund (SAIF). The latter was established after the savings
and loans crisis of the 1980s. The existence of two separate funds for the same
purpose led to banks‚Äô attempting to shift from one fund to another, depending
on the benefits each could provide. In the 1990s, SAIF premiums were, at one
point, five times higher than BIF premiums; several banks attempted to qualify
for the BIF, with some merging with institutions qualified for the BIF to avoid
the higher premiums of the SAIF. This drove up the BIF premiums as well,
resulting in a situation where both funds were charging higher premiums than
necessary. Then Chairman of the Federal Reserve Alan Greenspan was a critic of
the system, saying, ‚ÄúWe are, in effect, attempting to use government to
enforce two different prices for the same itemnamely, government-mandated
deposit insurance. Such price differences only create efforts by market
participants to arbitrage the difference.‚Äù Greenspan proposed ‚Äúto end this
game and merge SAIF and BIF‚Äù. Deposit Insurance Fund. In February 2006,
President George W. Bush signed into law the Federal Deposit Insurance Reform
Act of 2005 (FDIRA) and a related conforming amendments act. The FDIRA contains
technical and conforming changes to implement deposit insurance reform, as well
as a number of study and survey requirements. Among the highlights of this law
was merging the Bank Insurance Fund (BIF) and the Savings Association Insurance
Fund (SAIF) into a new fund, the Deposit Insurance Fund (DIF). This change was
made effective March 31, 2006. The FDIC maintains the DIF by assessing
depository institutions an insurance premium. The amount each institution is
assessed is based both on the balance of insured deposits as well as on the
degree of risk the institution poses to the insurance fund. Bank failures
typically represent a cost to the DIF because the FDIC, as receiver of the
failed institution, must liquidate assets that have declined substantially in
value while, at the same time, making good on the institution‚Äôs deposit
obligations. A March 2008 memorandum to the FDIC board of directors shows a
2007 year-end Deposit Insurance Fund balance of about $52.4 billion, which
represented a reserve ratio of 1.22% of its exposure to insured deposits,
totaling about $4.29 trillion. The 2008 year-end insured deposits were
projected to reach about $4.42 trillion with the reserve growing to $55.2
billion, a ratio of 1.25%. As of June 2008, the DIF had a balance of $45.2
billion. However, 9 months later, in March, 2009, the DIF fell to $13 billion.
That was the lowest total since September, 1993 and represented a reserve ratio
of 0.27% of its exposure to insured deposits totaling about $4.83 trillion. In
the second quarter of 2009, the FDIC imposed an emergency fee aimed at raising
$5.6 billion to replenish the DIF. However, Saxo Bank Research reported that,
after Aug 7, further bank failures had reduced the DIF balance to $648.1
million. FDIC-estimated costs of assuming additional failed banks on Aug 14
exceeded that amount. The FDIC announced its intent, on September 29, 2009, to
assess the banks, in advance, for three years‚Äô of premiums in an effort to
avoid DIF insolvency. The FDIC revised its estimated costs of bank failures to
about $100 billion over the next four years, an increase of $30 billion from
the $70 billion estimate of earlier in 2009. The FDIC board voted to require
insured banks to prepay $45 billion in premiums to replenish the fund. News
media reported that the prepayment move would be inadequate to assure the
financial stability of the FDIC insurance fund. The FDIC elected to request the
prepayment so that the banks could recognize the expense over three years,
instead of drawing down banks‚Äô statutory capital abruptly, at the time of the
assessment. The fund is mandated by law to keep a balance equivalent to 1.15
percent of insured deposits. As of June 30, 2008, the insured banks held
approximately $7,025 billion in total deposits, though not all of those are
insured. The DIF's reserves are not the only cash resources available to the
FDIC: in addition to the $18 billion in the DIF as of June, 2010; the FDIC has
$19 billion of cash and U.S. Treasury securities held as of June, 2010 and has
the ability to borrow up to $500 billion from the Treasury. The FDIC can also
demand special assessments from banks as it did in the second quarter of 2009.
"Full Faith and Credit". In light of apparent systemic risks facing the banking
system, the adequacy of FDIC's financial backing has come into question. Beyond
the funds in the Deposit Insurance Fund above and the FDIC's power to charge
insurance premia, FDIC insurance is additionally assured by the Federal
government. According to the FDIC.gov website (as of January 2009), "FDIC
deposit insurance is backed by the full faith and credit of the United States
government". This means that the resources of the United States government
stand behind FDIC-insured depositors." The statutory basis for this claim is
less than clear. Congress, in 1987, passed a non-binding "Sense of Congress" to
that effect, but there appear to be no laws strictly binding the government to
make good on any insurance liabilities unmet by the FDIC. Insurance
requirements. When a bank becomes undercapitalized the FDIC issues a warning to
the bank. When the number drops below 6% the FDIC can change management and
force the bank to take other corrective action. When the bank becomes
critically undercapitalized the FDIC declares the bank insolvent and can take
over management of the bank. At Q4 2010 884 banks had very low capital cushions
against risk and were on the FDIC's "problem list". This was nearly 12 percent
of all federally insured banks, the highest level in 18 years. Insured
products. Accounts at different banks are insured separately. All branches of a
bank are considered to form a single bank. Also, an Internet bank that is part
of a brick and mortar bank is not considered to be a separate bank, even if the
name differs. Non-US citizens are also covered by FDIC insurance. The FDIC
publishes a guide entitled "Your Insured Deposits", which sets forth the
general characteristics of FDIC deposit insurance, and addresses common
questions asked by bank customers about deposit insurance.
