Fox News Channel Fox News Channel (FNC), also known as Fox News, is a cable
news channel owned by the Fox Entertainment Group, a subsidiary of News
Corporation. As of April 2009, the channel was available to 102 million
households in the United States and to viewers internationally, broadcasting
primarily from its New York studios. The channel was created by Australian-
American media mogul Rupert Murdoch, who hired former NBC executive Roger Ailes
as its founding CEO. It launched on October 7, 1996 to 17¬ million cable
subscribers. It grew during the late 1990s and 2000s to become the dominant
cable news network in the United States. In 2010, its programs took the top ten
spots for most-watched cable news programs in the 25‚Äì54 age demographic, and
the top twelve spots among total cable news program viewers. Critics have
stated that Fox News Channel promotes conservative political positions and
biased reporting. Commentators, news anchors, and reporters at Fox News Channel
have responded that news reporting and political commentary operate
independently of each other, and have denied any bias in news reporting.
History. Early years. In May 1985, Australian publisher Rupert Murdoch
announced that he and American industrialist and philanthropist Marvin Davis
intended to develop "a network of independent stations as a fourth marketing
force" to compete directly with CBS, NBC, and ABC through the purchase of six
television stations owned by Metromedia. In July 1985 20th Century Fox
announced that Murdoch had completed his purchase of 50 percent of Fox Filmed
Entertainment, parent company of 20th Century Fox Film Corporation. A year
later 20th Century Fox earned $5.6¬ million in its fiscal third period ended
May 31, 1986, in contrast to a loss of $55.8¬ million in the third period of
the previous year. Prior to founding FNC, Murdoch had gained experience in the
24-hour news business when News Corp.'s BSkyB subsidiary began Europe's first
24-hour news channel (Sky News) in the United Kingdom in 1989. With the success
of his fourth-network efforts in the United States, experience gained from Sky
News and the turnaround of 20th Century Fox, Murdoch announced on January 31,
1996 that News Corp. would launch a 24-hour news channel on cable and satellite
systems in the United States as part of a News Corp. "worldwide platform" for
Fox programming: "The appetite for news‚Äîparticularly news that explains to
people how it affects them‚Äîis expanding enormously". In February 1996, after
former U.S. Republican Party political strategist and NBC executive Roger Ailes
left cable-television channel America's Talking (now MSNBC), Murdoch asked him
to start Fox News Channel. Ailes demanded five months of 14-hour workdays and
several weeks of rehearsal shows before its launch on October 7, 1996. At its
debut 10 million households were able to watch FNC; however, it was absent from
the media markets of New York City and Los Angeles. According to published
reports, many media reviewers had to watch the first day's programming at Fox
News studios because it was not readily available via cable. Rolling news
coverage during the day consisted of 20-minute single-topic shows such as "Fox
on Crime" or "Fox on Politics", surrounded by news headlines. Interviews
featured facts at the bottom of the screen about the topic or the guest. The
flagship newscast at the time was "The Schneider Report", with Mike Schneider's
fast-paced delivery of the news. During the evening, Fox featured opinion
shows: "The O'Reilly Report" (now "The O'Reilly Factor"), "The Crier Report"
(hosted by Catherine Crier) and "Hannity & Colmes". From the beginning, FNC has
placed heavy emphasis on visual presentation. Graphics were designed to be
colorful and attention-getting; this helped the viewer to grasp the main points
of what was being said, even if they could not hear the host (with on-screen
text summarizing the position of the interviewer or speaker, and "bullet
points" when a host was delivering commentary). Fox News also created the "Fox
News Alert," which interrupted its regular programming when a breaking-news
story occurred. To accelerate its adoption by cable companies, Fox News paid
systems up to $11 per subscriber to distribute the channel. This contrasted
with the normal practice, in which cable operators paid stations carriage fees
for programming. When Time Warner bought Ted Turner's Turner Broadcasting, a
federal antitrust consent decree required Time Warner to carry a second all-
news channel in addition to its own CNN. Time Warner selected MSNBC as the
secondary news channel, not Fox News. Fox News claimed that this violated an
agreement (to carry Fox News). Citing its agreement to keep its U.S.
headquarters and a large studio in New York City, News Corporation enlisted the
help of Mayor Rudolph Giuliani's administration to pressure Time Warner (one of
the city's two cable providers) to transmit Fox News on a city-owned channel.
City officials threatened to take action affecting Time Warner's cable
franchises in the city. A lawsuit was filed by Time Warner against the City of
New York, claiming undue interference with (and inappropriate use of) the
city's educational channels for commercial programming. News Corporation
countered with an antitrust lawsuit against Time Warner for unfairly protecting
CNN. This led to an acrimonious battle between Murdoch and Turner, with Turner
publicly comparing Murdoch to Adolf Hitler; Murdoch's "New York Post" ran an
editorial questioning Turner's sanity. Giuliani's motives were also questioned,
since his wife was a producer at Murdoch-owned WNYW-TV. In the end, Time Warner
and News Corporation signed a settlement agreement permitting Fox News to be
carried on New York City cable systems beginning in October 1997, and on all
Time Warner cable systems by 2001 (although Time Warner still does not carry
Fox News in all areas). During the September 11, 2001 attacks, Fox News was the
first news organization to run a news ticker on the bottom of the screen to
keep up with the flow of information that day. The ticker has remained,
informing viewers about additional news which reporters may not mention
onscreen and repeating news mentioned during a broadcast; it has proven popular
with viewers. Recent history. On May 1, 2008 Fox News launched high definition
channel simulcasts of its programming in selected regions of the United States.
Time Warner Cable is carrying this channel in New York, New York, San Antonio,
Texas, and Kansas City, Missouri; Cablevision is making it available in New
York, New York and on Long Island. On Friday, October 17, 2008 at 6¬ am ET,
DirecTV launched the high-definition channel. This was the first national
launch of the channel in HD. On January 9, 2009, Cox Communications added the
HD channel: on February 3, 2009 Dish Network did also. Fox News switched from a
4:3 aspect ratio to a 16:9, letterbox ratio for its standard-definition channel
at 6¬ am ET on September 28, 2009. Outlets. FNC maintains an archive of most of
its programs. This archive also includes Fox Movietone newsreels. Licensing for
the Fox News archive is handled by ITN Source, the archiving division of ITN.
Television. FNC presents a variety of programming, with up to 15 hours of live
broadcasting per day in addition to programming and content for the Fox
Broadcasting Company. Most programs are broadcast from Fox News headquarters in
New York City (at 1211 Avenue of the Americas), in its streetside studio on
Sixth Avenue in the west wing of Rockefeller Center. The remaining programs are
broadcast from Fox News's Washington, D.C. studio, located on Capitol Hill
across from Union Station in a secured building shared by a number of other
television networks (including NBC News and C-SPAN). Audio simulcasts of the
channel are aired on XM Satellite Radio and Sirius Satellite Radio. In an
October 11, 2009 "New York Times" article, Fox articulated that its hard-news
programming runs from "9¬ a.m. to 4¬ p.m. and 6 to 8¬ p.m. on weekdays" and
"objective"; however, it makes no such claims for its other broadcasts, which
primarily consist of editorial journalism and commentary. High-definition. Fox
News Channel HD is a 720p, high-definition simulcast of Fox News Channel which
launched on May 1, 2008. Most of the programs available in HD ("Fox & Friends",
"America's Newsroom", "Happening Now", "America Live with Megyn Kelly", "Studio
B with Shepard Smith", "Your World with Neil Cavuto", "Special Report with Bret
Baier", "Fox Report", "The O'Reilly Factor", "Hannity" and "On the Record with
Greta Van Susteren") are shown in widescreen. Fox News Channel began producing
its standard-definition programs in letterbox format on September 28, 2009;
therefore, high- and standard-definition viewers now both see the same picture
and pillarboxes are no longer needed. TV Studios. FOX News Channel has 7
studios in NYC and 1 in DC. Studio E, NY used fox Fox & Friends, Your World
with Neil Cavuto, Red Eye w/ Greg Gutfeld and America's News HQ.15 Most Popular
News Websites "ebizMBA" (derived from Alexa Internet, Quantcast, and
Compete.com data) 1 September 2010 "Retrieved: 8 September 2010" See also: Top
20 Websites in 2009 In September 2008 FNC joined other channels in introducing
a live streaming segment to its website: "The Strategy Room," designed to
appeal to older viewers. It airs weekdays from 9¬ a.m. to 5¬ p.m. and takes the
form of an informal discussion, with running commentary on the news. Regular
discussion programs include "Business Hour", "News With a View" and "God Talk".
In March 2009 The Fox Nation was launched as a website intended to encourage
readers to post, commenting on the news. Fox News Mobile is the portion of the
FNC website dedicated to streaming news clips formatted for video-enabled
mobile phones. Personalities. Producing a variety of programming, FNC has a
number of program hosts, news anchors, correspondents and contributors who
appear daily on the channel. Hosts include Bill O'Reilly, Sean Hannity, Greta
Van Susteren, Mike Huckabee, Shepard Smith and Neil Cavuto, all of whom host
programs on the top-ten list of the most-watched programs on cable news. In
January 2009, former CNN commentator Glenn Beck was added to Fox's weekday
lineup; his last FNC show was June 30, 2011. Beck was replaced on Fox News by
'‚ÄòThe Five‚Äô' (featuring Greg Gutfeld, Juan Williams, Dana Perino, Andrew
Napolitano, Geraldo Rivera, and Monica Crowley) on July 11, 2011. Ratings and
reception. FNC saw a large ratings jump during the early stages of the Iraq
conflict. According to some reports, at the height of the conflict Fox News had
as much as a 300-percent increase in viewership (averaging 3.3¬ million viewers
daily). In 2004, FNC's ratings for its broadcast of the Republican National
Convention exceeded those of all three broadcast networks. During President
George W. Bush's address, Fox News attracted 7.3¬ million viewers nationally;
NBC, ABC, and CBS had a viewership of 5.9 million, 5.1 million and 5.0 million
respectively. In late 2005 and early 2006, FNC saw a brief decline in ratings.
One decline was in the second quarter of 2006, when Fox News lost viewers for
every prime-time program compared with the previous quarter. The audience for
"Special Report with Brit Hume", for example, dropped 19 percent. Several weeks
later, in the wake of the North Korean missile crisis and the 2006 Lebanon War,
Fox saw a surge in viewership and remained the #1-rated cable news channel. Fox
produced eight of the top ten most-watched nightly cable news shows, with "The
O'Reilly Factor" and "Hannity & Colmes" finishing first and second
respectively. FNC ranked #8 for all cable channels in 2006, and #6 in 2007. The
channel ranked #1 during the week of Barack Obama's election (November 3‚Äì9)
in 2008, and reached the top spot again in January 2010 (during the week of the
special Senate election in Massachusetts). Comparing Fox to its 24-hour-news-
channel competitors, in May 2010 the channel drew an average daily prime-time
audience of 1.8¬ million (versus 747,000 for MSNBC and 595,000 for CNN). In
September 2009, the Pew Research Center published a report on the public view
of national news organizations. The report indicated that 72 percent of
Republican Fox viewers rated the channel as "favorable", while 43 percent of
Democratic viewers and 55 percent of all viewers shared that opinion. However,
Fox had the highest "unfavorable" rating of all national outlets studied (25
percent of all viewers). The report went on to say, "partisan differences in
views of Fox News have increased substantially since 2007". As of January 2011,
Public Policy Polling reported that Fox News Channel was the second-most
trusted television news network in the United States, with 42 percent of
respondents reporting they trusted the network compared to other news channels
(behind PBS at 50 percent and ahead of NBC at 41 percent, CNN at 40 percent,
CBS at 36 percent and ABC at 35 percent). Fox News Channel is also ranked the
most distrusted news channel in the U.S., with 46 percent of respondents
reporting they distrust the network (behind PBS at 30 percent, NBC at 41
percent and CNN, CBS, and ABC each at 43 percent). This represented a combined
16-percent drop among respondents from the year before, and placed the channel
fourth among Americans in trust-distrust (behind PBS, NBC, and CNN and ahead of
CBS and ABC). Most of this drop was the result of an increase in distrust among
moderates and liberals. While conservatives largely held the same view of the
network as they did the year before (dropping from 75 to 72 percent), moderates
and liberals increased their distrust of the network (from 48 to 60 percent
among moderates, and 66 to 82 percent among liberals). Of the poll's
respondents, 18 percent identified as liberal, 41 percent as moderate and 40
percent as conservative; 40 percent identified as Democratic, 37 percent as
Republican and 23 percent as independent or "other". On the night of October
22, 2012, Fox set a record for its highest-rated telecast ever, with 11.5
million viewers for the third U.S. presidential debate. In prime time the week
before, Fox averaged almost 3.7 million viewers with a total day average of
1.66 million viewers. Slogan. "Fair & Balanced" is a trademarked slogan used by
the broadcaster, originally used in conjunction with the phrase "Real
Journalism". Comedian Al Franken used the slogan in the subtitle for his 2003
book "Lies and the Lying Liars Who Tell Them: A Fair and Balanced Look at the
Right". In the book, he cites examples of what he claims to be Fox News' bias.
On August 7, 2003 Fox News sued for copyright infringement. The lawsuit was
dropped three days later, after Judge Denny Chin refused its request for an
injunction. In his decision, Chin ruled that the case ("Fox v. Franken") was
"wholly without merit, both factually and legally". He went on to suggest that
Fox News' trademark on the phrase "fair and balanced" could be invalid. In
December 2003 FNC won a legal battle concerning the slogan, when AlterNet filed
a cancellation petition with the United States Patent and Trademark Office
(USPTO) to have FNC's trademark rescinded as inaccurate. AlterNet included the
documentary film "Outfoxed" as supporting evidence in its case. After losing
early motions, AlterNet withdrew its petition; the USPTO dismissed the case. In
2008 FNC used the slogan "We Report, You Decide", referring to "You Decide
2008" (FNC's original slogan for its coverage of election issues). Controversy.
Neutrality. Some observers and critics of the channel contend that it has a
bias favoring the political right and the Republican Party. Fox News has
publicly denied such statements. Murdoch and Ailes' replies have included
Murdoch's statement that Fox has "given room to both sides, whereas only one
side had it before". In 2004 director Robert Greenwald produced the documentary
film "", which argues that Fox News has a conservative bias. The film includes
clips from Fox News and internal memos from editorial vice president John Moody
directing Fox News staff on how to report certain subjects. A leaked memo from
Fox News vice president Bill Sammon to News staff at the height of the health
care reform in the United States debate has been cited as an example of the
pro-Republican party bias of Fox News. His memo asked the staff to "use the
term ‚Äògovernment-run health insurance,‚Äô or, when brevity is a concern,
‚Äògovernment option,‚Äô whenever possible". The memo was sent shortly after
Republican pollster Frank Luntz advised Sean Hannity on his Fox show that "If
you call it a public option, the American people are split. If you call it the
government option, the public is overwhelmingly against it". A Pew Research
poll released on October 29, 2009 found that Fox News is viewed as the most
ideological channel in America. 47 percent of those surveyed said Fox News is
"mostly conservative", 14 percent said "mostly liberal" and 24 percent said
"neither". In comparison, MSNBC had 36 percent identify it as "mostly liberal",
11 percent as "mostly conservative" and 27 percent as "neither". CNN had 37
percent describe it as "mostly liberal", 11 percent as "mostly conservative"
and 33 percent as "neither". A 2004 Pew Research Center survey showed that FNC
was cited (unprompted) by 69 percent of national journalists as a conservative
news organization. The survey showed that 34 percent of national journalists
describe themselves as liberal, compared with 7 percent who describe themselves
as conservative. A poll by Rasmussen Reports found that 31 percent of Americans
feel Fox News has a conservative bias, and 15 percent that it has a liberal
bias. The poll also reported that 36 percent believed Fox News delivers news
with neither a conservative or liberal bias, compared with 37 percent who said
NPR delivers news with no conservative or liberal bias and 32 percent who said
the same of CNN. A 2007 study looked at the introduction of Fox News into local
U.S. markets between 1996 and 2000, and found that in the 2000 presidential
election "Republicans gained 0.4 to 0.7 percentage points in the towns that
broadcast Fox News". The study's estimates "imply that Fox News convinced 3 to
28 percent of its viewers to vote Republican, depending on the audience
measure". A 2010 study by Sean Aday comparing Fox News Channel's "Special
Report With Brit Humes" and NBC's "Nightly News" coverage of the wars in Iraq
and Afghanistan during 2005 found that both underplayed bad news; it concluded
that "Fox News was much more sympathetic to the administration than NBC",
suggesting that "if scholars continue to find evidence of a partisan or
ideological bias at FNC...they should consider Fox as alternative, rather than
mainstream, media". Aday also stated, however, that the data used in his study
may have come late enough in the war to be consistent with accepted practice.
Misrepresentation of facts. Media watchdog Media Matters for America has
cataloged what it called the ten most "egregious examples" of "distortion" by
both Fox News and its TV personalities. Criticism includes several examples of
cropping quotes from President Obama, Vice President Biden and Vice President
Gore so they appear out of context, using image-manipulation software to edit
the appearance of reporters from "The New York Times" and using footage from
other events during a report on the November 5 Tea Party rally in Washington,
D.C.; Media Matters said the intention of Fox News was to make it appear as if
a larger number of protesters attended the event. The group also called
attention to the December 4 edition of "Fox and Friends", accusing the program
of misleading its viewers with a "questionable graphic" showing the result of a
Rasmussen Reports climate-change poll totaling 120 percent. In November 2009
Fox News anchor Gregg Jarrett told viewers that a Sarah Palin book signing in
Grand Rapids, Michigan had a massive turnout, showing footage of Palin with a
large crowd. Jarrett stated that the former Republican vice-presidential
candidate is "continuing to draw huge crowds while she's promoting her brand-
new book", adding that the images being shown were "some of the pictures just
coming in to us... The lines earlier had formed this morning". The video was
actually taken from a 2008 McCain-Palin campaign rally. Fox senior vice
president for news Michael Clemente issued a statement saying, "This was a
production error in which the copy editor changed a script and didn't alert the
control room to update the video". Fox offered an on-air apology the following
day during the same "Happening Now" segment, expressing regrets for what it
described as a "video error" with no intent to mislead. Fox also apologized for
fabricated quotes attributed to John Kerry in an article on its website during
the 2004 presidential campaign, stating that the piece was a joke which
accidentally appeared on the website. Obama administration conflict with Fox
News. In September 2009, the Obama administration engaged in a verbal conflict
with Fox News Channel. On September 20 President Obama appeared on all major
news programs except Fox News, a snub partially in response to remarks about
the president by commentators Glenn Beck and Sean Hannity and Fox coverage of
Obama's health-care proposal. In late September 2009, Obama senior advisor
David Axelrod and Roger Ailes met in secret to attempt to smooth out tensions
between the two camps. Two weeks later White House officials referred to FNC as
‚Äúnot a news network", communications director Anita Dunn stating that ‚ÄúFox
News often operates as either the research arm or the communications arm of the
Republican Party‚Äù. President Obama observed, "If media is operating basically
as a talk radio format, then that's one thing, and if it's operating as a news
outlet, then that's another". White House chief of staff Rahm Emanuel stated
that it was important "to not have the CNN's and the others in the world
basically be led in following Fox". Within days it was reported that Fox had
been excluded from an interview with administration official Ken Feinberg, with
bureau chiefs from the White House press pool (ABC, CBS, NBC, and CNN) coming
to Fox's defense. A bureau chief stated, "If any member had been excluded it
would have been the same thing, it has nothing to do with Fox or the White
House or the substance of the issues". Shortly after the story broke the White
House admitted to a low-level mistake, saying that Fox had not made a specific
request to interview Feinberg. Fox White House correspondent Major Garrett
responded by stating that he had not made a specific request, but that he had a
"standing request from me as senior White House correspondent on Fox to
interview any newsmaker at the Treasury at any given time news is being made".
On November 8, 2009, the "Los Angeles Times" reported that an unnamed
Democratic consultant was warned by the White House not to appear on Fox News
again. According to the article, Anita Dunn claimed in an e-mail to have
checked with colleagues who "deal with TV issues" and had been told that nobody
had been instructed to avoid Fox. Patrick Caddell, a Fox News contributor and
former pollster for President Jimmy Carter, said he had spoken with other
Democratic consultants who had received similar warnings from the White House.
International transmission. The FNC feed is available internationally via a
number of providers, while "Fox Extra" segments provide alternate programming.
"Fox Extra". Initially, US advertisements were replaced on FNC with viewer e-
mail and profiles of FNC anchors set to music. In 2002, these were replaced
with international weather forecasts. In 2006 the weather forecasts were
replaced with "Fox Extra" (originally "Fox News Extra", prior to the
international launch of Fox Business) segments, narrated reports from Fox on a
variety of topics. These reports generally concern lighter issues unrelated to
current news events, and the segments are repeated. FNC also shows
international weather forecasts when Fox Extra segments run short. In the
United Kingdom, after a period when local commercials were inserted into breaks
"Fox Extra" now fills most breaks. Australia. In Australia, FNC is broadcast on
the three major pay-TV providers: Foxtel, Austar and Optus Television. Foxtel
is 25-percent owned by News Corporation. Sky News Australia is Fox's sister
channel. Brazil. Since 2002, FNC has been broadcast to Brazil; however,
commercials are replaced with "Fox Extra". It is available in digital packages
of NET. Canada. In 2003, the Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications
Commission (CRTC) rejected a Canadian Cable Telecommunications Association
(CCTA) application to bring Fox News to Canada because Fox News U.S. and Global
Television were planning to create Fox News Canada (a combination of U.S. and
Canadian news). In 2004, after a Fox U.S. executive said there were no plans to
create the combined channel, the CRTC approved an application to bring Fox News
to Canada. Fox News Channel is currently offered by Access Communications, Bell
TV, Cogeco, Eastlink, Manitoba Telecom Services, Rogers, SaskTel, Shaw Cable,
Shaw Direct and Telus TV. An exception is Vid√©otron, Canada's third-largest
cable company, which has not added Fox News Channel to its lineup. France. Fox
News is available on cable through French Internet providers Free and Orange.
Ireland. FNC is carried in the Republic of Ireland by the British Sky
Broadcasting (BSkyB) satellite-television network (Sky), which is 40-percent
owned by FNC's parent (News Corporation). It is run as a sister channel to
BSkyB's popular Sky News. FNC is usually broadcast as a VideoGuard-encrypted
channel; during major news stories it may be simulcast on Sky Active, which is
free-to-air. As of September 2006 the channel has carried UK-specific
advertising, headlines and weather provided by Sky News during its breaks.
These run under the brand of Fox News International. Due to the shared
ownership of Fox and Sky, Fox News and Sky News share bureaus and reporters for
breaking news stories worldwide. Israel. In Israel, FNC is broadcast on Channel
105 of the pay-TV cable operator YES digital platform. It is run as a sister
channel to BSkyB's popular Sky News, which is broadcast on Channel 103. Italy.
In Italy, FNC was launched on the now-defunct Italian digital satellite-
television platform Stream TV in 2001. Part of its programming was translated
into Italian and broadcast on the defunct Italian news channel Stream News. In
2003 it moved to SKY Italia, with U.S. commercials replaced by "Fox News Extra"
segments. It is available to 4,600,000 subscribers and 160,000 hotel rooms. SKY
TG 24 is a sister channel to Fox News. Netherlands. In the Netherlands Fox News
has been carried by cable providers UPC and CASEMA and satellite provider
Canaldigitaal; all have dropped the channel in recent years. At this time only
cable provider Caiway (available in a limited number of towns in the center of
the country) is broadcasting the channel. New Zealand. In New Zealand, FNC is
broadcast on Channel 092 of pay satellite operator SKY TV's digital platform.
It was formerly broadcast overnight on free-to-air UHF New Zealand TV channel
Prime (owned by SKY); this was discontinued in January 2010, reportedly due to
an expiring broadcasting license. Fox News parent corporation News Corp has a
stake in both SKY and Prime. Pakistan. In Pakistan, FNC is available on PTCL
Smart TV and a number of cable and IPTV operators. Philippines. In the
Philippines FNC was available on cable operator Global Destiny channel 21.
Scandinavia. Between 2003 and 2006, in Sweden and the other Scandinavian
countries FNC was broadcast 16 hours a day on TV8 (with Fox News Extra segments
replacing U.S. advertising). Fox News was dropped by TV8 and replaced by German
news channel Deutsche Welle in September 2006. Singapore. In Singapore, FNC is
broadcast on Channel 702 of the pay-TV cable operator StarHub TV digital
platform. It also broadcasts its sister channel, Sky News. South Africa. In
South Africa, FNC is broadcast on Channel 405 of pay satellite operator TopTV's
digital platform. United Kingdom. FNC is also carried in the United Kingdom by
the British Sky Broadcasting (BSkyB) satellite-television network (Sky), which
is 40-percent owned by FNC parent News Corporation. It is run as a sister
channel to BSkyB's own Sky News. FNC is usually broadcast as a VideoGuard-
encrypted channel; during major news stories it may be simulcast on Sky Active,
which is free-to-air. As of September 2006 the channel has carried UK-specific
advertising, headlines and weather provided by Sky News during its breaks.
These run under the brand of Fox News International. Beginning in winter 2011,
most breaks resumed "Fox Extra". Due to the shared ownership of Fox and Sky,
Fox News (and Fox Business) and Sky News share bureaus and reporters for
breaking news stories worldwide. Other countries. Fox News Channel is carried
in more than 40 other countries. Although service to Japan ceased in summer
2003, it can still be seen on Americable (distributor for American bases),
Mediatti (Kadena Air Base) and Pan Global TV Japan.
