Free trade Free trade is a policy by which a government does not discriminate
against imports or interfere with exports by applying tariffs (to imports) or
subsidies (to exports) or quotas. According to the law of comparative
advantage, the policy permits trading partners mutual gains from trade of goods
and services. Under a free trade policy, prices emerge from supply and demand,
and are the sole determinant of resource allocation. 'Free' trade differs from
other forms of trade policy where the allocation of goods and services among
trading countries are determined by price strategies that may differ from those
that would emerge under deregulation. These governed prices are the result of
government intervention in the market through price adjustments or supply
restrictions, including protectionist policies. Such government interventions
can increase as well as decrease the cost of goods and services to both
consumers and producers. Since the mid-20th century, nations have increasingly
reduced tariff barriers and currency restrictions on international trade. Other
barriers, however, that may be equally effective in hindering trade include
import quotas, taxes, and diverse means of subsidizing domestic industries.
Interventions include subsidies, taxes and tariffs, non-tariff barriers, such
as regulatory legislation and import quotas, and even inter-government managed
trade agreements such as the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) and
Central America Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA) (contrary to their formal titles)
and any governmental market intervention resulting in artificial prices.
Economics of free trade. Economic models. Two simple ways to understand the
proposed benefits of free trade are through David Ricardo's theory of
comparative advantage and by analyzing the impact of a tariff or import quota.
An economic analysis using the law of supply and demand and the economic
effects of a tax can be used to show the theoretical benefits and disadvantages
of free trade. Advantages of tariffs. This graph demonstrates the benefits of
tariffs to a domestic industry. Assume that Japan wants to protect a domestic
industry that is only able to produce and sell widgets at the price Ptariff.
Since there are other countries that are exporting the same widgets at a price
of Pworld, Japan's industry is threatened to go out of business should widgets
be imported into their country without a tariff. This graph also shows that as
long as Ptariff does not fall above the intersection of the Supply and Demand
lines, then an equilibrium can be reached in which there are no shortages of
demand or excesses of supply, and so Japan's industry can produce and sell
widgets to the same degree as manufacturers in any other country. In this case,
the higher price would not cause domestic production to increase from QS1 to
QS2, since it has already been assumed in our example that Japan cannot afford
to enter the widget market below the price Ptariff as the world economy has for
price Pworld. The effect of the tariff would limit imports and create a higher
demand for domestically produced widgets (QS2 - QS1) but have no effect on
consumer prices, since the graph shows that for all quantities to the left of
the intersection of the Supply and Demand curves, consumers will buy whatever
widgets enter the market. As increasing widget sales allow more widget
producers to enter the market and the quantity of imported + domestic widgets
in Japan approaches QE then the tariff can be phased out since the market will
be at equilibrium (E) and the PE market price will be enough for Japan's widget
manufacturers to stay in business. Currently, the World Bank believes that, at
most, rates of 20% can be allowed by developing nations; but Ha-Joon Chang
believes higher levels may be justified because the productivity gap between
developing and developed nations is much higher than the productivity gap which
industrial countries faced. (A general feature is that the underdeveloped
nations of today are "not" in the same position that the developed nations were
in when they had a similar level of technology, because they are weak players
in a competitive system; the developed nations have always been strong players,
although formerly at an overall lower level. Counter arguments to this point of
view are that the developing countries are able to adopt technologies from
abroad, whereas developed nations had to create new technologies themselves,
and that developing countries have far richer markets to which to export than
was the case in the 19th century.) If the main defense of tariffs is to
stimulate infant industries, a tariff must be high enough to allow domestic
manufactured goods to compete for the tariff to be successful. This theory,
known as import substitution industrialization, is largely considered
ineffective for currently developing nations. Disadvantages of tariffs. The
chart at the right analyzes the effect of the imposition of an import tariff on
some imaginary good. Prior to the tariff, the price of the good in the world
market (and hence in the domestic market) is Pworld. The tariff increases the
domestic price to Ptariff. The higher price causes domestic production to
increase from QS1 to QS2 and causes domestic consumption to decline from QC1 to
QC2. This has three main effects on societal welfare. Consumers are made worse
off because the consumer surplus (green region) becomes smaller. Producers are
better off because the producer surplus (yellow region) is made larger. The
government also has additional tax revenue (blue region). However, the loss to
consumers is greater than the gains by producers and the government. The
magnitude of this societal loss is shown by the two pink triangles. Removing
the tariff and having free trade would be a net gain for society. An almost
identical analysis of this tariff from the perspective of a net producing
country yields parallel results. From that country's perspective, the tariff
leaves producers worse off and consumers better off, but the net loss to
producers is larger than the benefit to consumers (there is no tax revenue in
this case because the country being analyzed is not collecting the tariff).
Under similar analysis, export tariffs, import quotas, and export quotas all
yield nearly identical results. Sometimes consumers are better off and
producers worse off, and sometimes consumers are worse off and producers are
better off, but the imposition of trade restrictions causes a net loss to
society because the losses from trade restrictions are larger than the gains
from trade restrictions. Free trade creates winners and losers, but theory and
empirical evidence show that the size of the winnings from free trade are
larger than the losses. Trade diversion. According to mainstream economic
theory, the selective application of free trade agreements to some countries
and tariffs on others can sometimes lead to economic inefficiency through the
process of trade diversion. It is economically efficient to produce a good in
the country that can make it for the lowest cost, but this does not always take
place if a high cost producer has a free trade agreement while the low cost
producer faces a high tariff. Applying free trade to the high cost producer
(and not the low cost producer as well) can lead to trade diversion and a net
economic loss. This is why many economists place such high importance on
negotiations for global tariff reductions, such as the Doha Round. Opinion of
economists. The literature analysing the economics of free trade is extremely
rich with extensive work having been done on the theoretical and empirical
effects. Though it creates winners and losers, the broad consensus among
members of the economics profession in the U.S. is that free trade is a large
and unambiguous net gain for society. In a 2006 survey of American economists
(83 responders), "87.5% agree that the U.S. should eliminate remaining tariffs
and other barriers to trade" and "90.1% disagree with the suggestion that the
U.S. should restrict employers from outsourcing work to foreign countries."
Quoting Harvard economics professor N. Gregory Mankiw, "Few propositions
command as much consensus among professional economists as that open world
trade increases economic growth and raises living standards." Nonetheless,
quoting Prof. Peter Soderbaum of Malardalen University, Sweden, "This
neoclassical trade theory focuses on one dimension, i.e., the price at which a
commodity can be delivered and is extremely narrow in cutting off a large
number of other considerations about impacts on employment in different parts
of the world, about environmental impacts and on culture." Most economists
would agree that although increasing returns to scale might mean that certain
industry could settle in a geographical area without any strong economic reason
derived from comparative advantage, this is not a reason to argue against free
trade because the absolute level of output enjoyed by both "winner" and "loser"
will increase with the "winner" gaining more than the "loser" but both gaining
more than before in an absolute level. History. Early era. Before the
appearance of free trade doctrine, and continuing in opposition to it to this
day, the policy of mercantilism had developed in Europe in the 16th century.
Two early British economists who were opposed to mercantilism were Adam Smith
and David Ricardo. Economists that advocated free trade believed trade was the
reason why certain civilizations prospered economically. Adam Smith, for
example, pointed to increased trading as being the reason for the flourishing
of not just Mediterranean cultures such as Egypt, Greece, and Rome, but also of
Bengal (East India) and China. The great prosperity of the Netherlands after
throwing off Spanish Imperial rule and pursuing a policy of free trade made the
free trade/mercantilist dispute the most important question in economics for
centuries. Free trade policies have battled with mercantilist, protectionist,
isolationist, communist, populist, and other policies over the centuries. Trade
in colonial America was regulated by the British mercantile system through the
Acts of Trade and Navigation. Until the 1760s, few colonists openly advocated
for free trade, in part because regulations were not strictly enforced—New
England was famous for smuggling—but also because colonial merchants did not
want to compete with foreign goods and shipping. According to historian Oliver
Dickerson, a desire for free trade was not one of the causes of the American
Revolution. "The idea that the basic mercantile practices of the eighteenth
century were wrong," wrote Dickerson, "was not a part of the thinking of the
Revolutionary leaders". Free trade came to what would become the United States
as a result of American Revolutionary War, when the British Parliament issued
the Prohibitory Act, blockading colonial ports. The Continental Congress
responded by effectively declaring economic independence, opening American
ports to foreign trade on April 6, 1776. According to historian John W. Tyler,
"Free trade had been forced on the Americans, like it or not." The 1st U.S.
Secretary of the Treasury, Alexander Hamilton, advocated tariffs to help
protect infant industries in his "Report on Manufactures." This was a minority
position, though the "Jeffersonians" strongly opposed for the most part. Later,
in the 19th century, statesmen such as Senator Henry Clay continued Hamilton's
themes within the Whig Party under the name "American System." The opposition
Democratic Party contested several elections throughout the 1830s, 1840s, and
1850s in part over the issue of the tariff and protection of industry. The
Democratic Party favored moderate tariffs used for government revenue only,
while the Whigs favored higher protective tariffs to protect favored
industries. The economist Henry Charles Carey became a leading proponent of the
"American System" of economics. This mercantilist "American System" was opposed
by the Democratic Party of Andrew Jackson, Martin Van Buren, James K. Polk,
Franklin Pierce, and James Buchanan. The fledgling Republican Party led by
Abraham Lincoln, who called himself a "Henry Clay tariff Whig", strongly
opposed free trade and implemented a 44-percent tariff during the Civil
War—in part to pay for railroad subsidies and for the war effort, and to
protect favored industries. The British economist John Maynard Keynes
(1883–1946) grew up with a belief in free trade; this underpinned his
criticism of the Treaty of Versailles in 1919 for the damage it did to the
interdependent European economy. After a brief flirtation with protectionism in
the early 1930s, he came again to favour free trade so long as it was combined
with internationally coordinated domestic economic policies to promote high
levels of employment, and international economic institutions that meant that
the interests of countries were not pitted against each other. In these
circumstances, "the wisdom of Adam Smith" again applied, he said. In "Kicking
Away the Ladder", development economist Ha-Joon Chang reviews the history of
free trade policies and economic growth, and notes that many of the now-
industrialized countries had significant barriers to trade throughout their
history. The United States and Britain, sometimes considered the homes of free
trade policy, employed protectionism to varying degrees at all times. Britain
abolished the Corn Laws, which restricted import of grain, in 1846 in response
to domestic pressures, and it reduced protectionism for manufactures in the mid
19th century, when its technological advantage was at its height, but tariffs
on manufactured products had returned to 23% by 1950. The United States
maintained weighted average tariffs on manufactured products of approximately
40–50% up until the 1950s, augmented by the natural protectionism of high
transportation costs in the 19th century. The most consistent practitioners of
free trade have been Switzerland, the Netherlands, and to a lesser degree
Belgium. Chang describes the export-oriented industrialization policies of the
Asian Tigers as "far more sophisticated and fine-tuned than their historical
equivalents". Some degree of protectionism is nevertheless the norm throughout
the world. Most developed nations maintain controversial agricultural tariffs.
From 1820 to 1980, the average tariffs on manufactures in twelve industrial
countries ranged from 11 to 32%. In the developing world, average tariffs on
manufactured goods are approximately 34%. Since the end of World War II, in
part due to industrial supremacy and the onset of the Cold War, the U.S.
government has become one of the most consistent proponents of reduced tariff-
barriers and free trade, having helped establish the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade (GATT) and later the World Trade Organization (WTO); although
it had rejected an earlier version in the 1950s (International Trade
Organization or ITO). Since the 1970s U.S. governments have negotiated numerous
managed-trade agreements, such as the North American Free Trade Agreement
(NAFTA) in the 1990s, the Dominican Republic-Central America Free Trade
Agreement (CAFTA) in 2006, and a number of bilateral agreements (such as with
Jordan). Current status. Most countries in the world are members of the World
Trade Organization, which limits in certain ways but does not eliminate tariffs
and other trade barriers. Most countries are also members of regional free
trade areas (see map) that lower trade barriers among participating countries.
The European Union / European Economic Area and the North American Free Trade
Agreement are the world's largest free trade areas. Opposition. The relative
costs, benefits and beneficiaries of free trade are debated by academics,
governments and interest groups. Arguments for protectionism fall into the
economic category (trade hurts the economy) or the moral category (the effects
of trade might help the economy, but have ill effects in other areas); a
general argument against free trade is that it is colonialism or imperialism in
disguise. The moral category is wide, including concerns of destroying infant
industries and undermining long run economic development, income inequality,
environmental degradation, supporting child labor and sweatshops, race to the
bottom, wage slavery, accentuating poverty in poor countries, harming national
defense, and forcing cultural change. Economic arguments against free trade
criticize the assumptions or conclusions of economic theories. Sociopolitical
arguments against free trade cite social and political effects that economic
arguments do not capture, such as political stability, national security, human
rights and environmental protection. Free trade is often opposed by domestic
industries that would have their profits and market share reduced by lower
prices for imported goods. For example, if United States tariffs on imported
sugar were reduced, U.S. sugar producers would receive lower prices and
profits, while U.S. sugar consumers would spend less for the same amount of
sugar because of those same lower prices. The economic theory of David Ricardo
holds that consumers would necessarily gain more than producers would lose.
Since each of those few domestic sugar producers would lose a lot while each of
a great number of consumers would gain only a little, domestic producers are
more likely to mobilize against the lifting of tariffs. More generally,
producers often favor domestic subsidies and tariffs on imports in their home
countries, while objecting to subsidies and tariffs in their export markets.
"Real Wages vs Trade as a Percent of GDP " Socialists frequently oppose free
trade on the ground that it allows maximum exploitation of workers by capital.
For example, Karl Marx wrote in "The Communist Manifesto", "The bourgeoisie...
has set up that single, unconscionable freedom – tree Trade. In one word, for
exploitation, veiled by religious and political illusions, it has substituted
naked, shameless, direct, brutal exploitation." Nonetheless, Marx favored free
trade "solely" because he felt that it would hasten the social revolution. To
those who oppose socialism, this becomes an argument "against" free trade.
"Free trade" is opposed by many anti-globalization groups, based on their
assertion that free trade agreements generally do not increase the economic
freedom of the poor or the working class, and frequently make them poorer.
Where the foreign supplier allows de facto exploitation of labor, domestic
free-labor is unfairly forced to compete with the foreign exploited labor, and
thus the domestic "working class would gradually be forced down to the level of
helotry." To this extent, free trade is seen as nothing more than an end-run
around laws that protect individual liberty, such as the Thirteenth Amendment
to the United States Constitution (outlawing slavery and indentured servitude).
It is important to distinguish between arguments against free trade theory, and
free trade "agreements" as applied. Some opponents of NAFTA see the agreement
as being materially harmful to the common people, but some of the arguments are
actually against the particulars of government-managed trade, rather than
against free trade "per se". For example, it is argued that it would be wrong
to let subsidized corn from the U.S. into Mexico freely under NAFTA at prices
well below production cost (dumping) because of its ruinous effects to Mexican
farmers. Of course, such subsidies violate free trade theory, so this argument
is not actually against the principle of free trade, but rather its selective
implementation. Colonialism. It has long been argued that free trade is a form
of colonialism or imperialism, a position taken by various proponents of
economic nationalism and the school of mercantilism. In the 19th century these
criticized British calls for free trade as cover for British Empire, notably in
the works of American Henry Clay, architect of the American System and by
German American economist Friedrich List. More recently, Ecuadorian President
Rafael Correa has denounced the "sophistry of free trade" in an introduction he
wrote for a book titled "The Hidden Face of Free Trade Accords", written in
part by Correa's current Energy Minister Alberto Acosta. Citing as his source
the book "Kicking Away the Ladder", written by Ha-Joon Chang, Correa identified
the difference between an "American system" opposed to a "British System" of
free trade. The latter, he says, was explicitly viewed by the Americans as
"part of the British imperialist system." According to Correa, Chang showed
that it was Treasury Secretary Alexander Hamilton, and not Friedrich List, who
was the first to present a systematic argument defending industrial
protectionism. Alternatives. The following alternatives for free trade have
been proposed: balanced trade, fair trade, protectionism, and Tobin tax. In
literature. The value of free trade was first observed and documented by Adam
Smith in "The Wealth of Nations", in 1776. He wrote, This statement uses the
concept of absolute advantage to present an argument in opposition to
mercantilism, the dominant view surrounding trade at the time, which held that
a country should aim to export more than it imports, and thus amass wealth.
Instead, Smith argues, countries could gain from each producing exclusively the
good(s) in which they are most suited to, trading between each other as
required for the purposes of consumption. In this vein, it is not the value of
exports relative to that of imports that is important, but the value of the
goods produced by a nation. The concept of absolute advantage however does not
address a situation where a country has no advantage in the production of a
particular good or type of good. This theoretical shortcoming was addressed by
the theory of comparative advantage. Generally attributed to David Ricardo who
expanded on it in his 1817 book "On the Principles of Political Economy and
Taxation", it makes a case for free trade based not on absolute advantage in
production of a good, but on the relative opportunity costs of production. A
country should specialize in whatever good it can produce at the lowest cost,
trading this good to buy other goods it requires for consumption. This allows
for countries to benefit from trade even when they do not have an absolute
advantage in any area of production. While their gains from trade might not be
equal to those of a country more productive in all goods, they will still be
better off economically from trade than they would be under a state of autarky.
