Resistance movement A resistance movement is a group or collection of
individual groups, dedicated to opposing an invader in an occupied country or
the government of a sovereign state. It may seek to achieve its objects through
either the use of nonviolent resistance (sometimes called civil resistance) or
the use of armed force. In many cases, as for example in Norway in the Second
World War, a resistance movement may employ both violent and non-violent
methods, usually operating under different organizations and acting in
different phases or geographical areas within a country. The term resistance is
generally used to designate a movement considered legitimate (from the
speaker's point of view). Organizations and individuals critical of foreign
intervention and supporting forms of organized movement (particularly where
citizens are affected) tend to favor the term. When such a resistance movement
uses violence, those favorably disposed to it may also speak of "freedom
fighters". On the lawfulness of armed resistance movements in international
law, there has been a dispute between states since at least 1899, when the
first major codification of the laws of war in the form of a series of
international treaties took place. In the Preamble to the 1899 Hague Convention
II on Land War, the Martens Clause was introduced as a compromise wording for
the dispute between the Great Powers who considered francs-tireurs to be
unlawful combatants subject to execution on capture and smaller states who
maintained that they should be considered lawful combatants. More recently the
1977 Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and
relating to the Protection of Victims of International Armed Conflicts,
referred in Article 1. Paragraph 4 to armed conflicts "... in which peoples are
fighting against colonial domination and alien occupation and against racist
regimes..." This phraseology contains many ambiguities that cloud the issue of
who is or is not a legitimate combatant. Hence depending on the perspective of
a state's government, a resistance movement may or may not be labelled a
terrorist group based on whether the members of a resistance movement are
considered lawful or unlawful combatants and their right to resist occupation
is recognized. Ultimately, the distinction is a political judgment. Etymology.
The modern usage of the term "Resistance" originates from the self-designation
of many movements during World War II, especially the French Resistance. The
term is still strongly linked to the context of the events of 1939–45, and
particularly to opposition movements in Axis-occupied countries. Using the term
"resistance" to designate a movement meeting the definition prior to World War
II might be considered by some to be an anachronism. However, such movements
existed prior to World War II (albeit often called by different names), and
there have been many subsequent to it – for example in struggles against
colonialism and foreign military occupations. "Resistance" has become a generic
term that has been used to designate underground resistance movements in any
country. Background. Resistance movements can include any irregular armed force
that rises up against an enforced or established authority, government, or
administration. This frequently includes groups that consider themselves to be
resisting tyranny. Some resistance movements are underground organizations
engaged in a struggle for national liberation in a country under military
occupation or totalitarian domination. Tactics of resistance movements against
a constituted authority range from nonviolent resistance and civil
disobedience, to industrial sabotage and guerrilla warfare, or even
conventional warfare if the resistance movement is strong enough. Any
government facing violent acts from a resistance movement usually condemns such
acts as terrorism, even when such attacks target only the military or security
forces. Resistance during World War II was mainly dedicated to fighting the
Axis occupiers. Germany itself also had an anti-Nazi German resistance movement
in this period. Although the United Kingdom did not suffer invasion in World
War II, preparations were made for a British resistance movement in the event
of a German invasion (see Auxiliary Units). Controversy regarding definition.
Some definitions of resistance movement have proved controversial. According to
Joint Publication 1-02, the United States Department of Defense defines a
resistance movement as "an organized effort by some portion of the civil
population of a country to resist the legally established government or an
occupying power and to disrupt civil order and stability". In strict military
terminology, a resistance movement is simply that; it seeks to resist (change)
the policies of a government or occupying power. This may be accomplished
through violent or non-violent means. In this view, a resistance movement is
specifically limited to changing the nature of current power, not to overthrow
it; and the correct military term for removing or overthrowing a government is
an insurgency. However, in reality many resistance movements have aimed to
displace a particular ruler, especially if that ruler has gained or retained
power illegally. Freedom fighter. Freedom fighter is another term for those
engaged in a struggle to achieve political freedom for themselves or obtain
freedom for others. Though the literal meaning of the words could include
"anyone who fights for the cause of freedom", in common use it may be
restricted to those who are actively involved in an armed rebellion, rather
than those who campaign for freedom by peaceful means (though they may use the
title in its literal sense). Generally speaking, freedom fighters are seen as
people who are using physical force in order to cause a change in the political
and or social order. Notable examples include the South African Umkhonto we
Sizwe and the Irish Republican Army (IRA), both of which were considered
freedom fighters by supporters. However, a person who is campaigning for
freedom through peaceful means may still be classed as a freedom fighter,
though in common usage they are called political activists, as in the case of
the Black Consciousness Movement. People who are described as "freedom
fighters" are often also called assassins, rebels, insurgents, or terrorists.
This leads to the aphorism "one man's terrorist is another man's freedom
fighter". The degree to which this occurs depends on a variety of factors
specific to the struggle in which a given freedom fighter group in engaged.
During the Cold War, under Ronald Reagan's Reagan Doctrine, the term "freedom
fighter" was used by the United States and other Western Bloc countries to
describe rebels in countries controlled by communist states or otherwise under
the influence of the Soviet Union, including rebels in Hungary, the anti-
communist Contras in Nicaragua, UNITA in Angola and the multi-factional
mujahideen in Afghanistan. In the media, an effort has been made by the BBC to
avoid the phrases "terrorist" or "freedom fighter", except in attributed
quotes, in favor of neutral terms such as "militant", "guerrilla", "assassin",
"insurgent", "paramilitary" or "militia". Common weapons. Partisans often use
captured weapons taken from their enemies, or weapons that have been stolen or
smuggled in. During the Cold War, partisans often received arms from either the
Western countries or the Communist bloc. Western backed forces would receive
weapons such as the American M-16 assault rifle and the FIM-92 Stinger missile
launcher. Communist backed forces would receive the Soviet AK-47 assault rifle
(and its variants) and RPG-7s. They also may use improvised weapons such as
Molotov cocktails or IEDs and maybe even their own weapons such as the Sten.
Examples of resistance movements. The following examples are of groups that
have been considered or would identify themselves as resistance groups, the
Governments they oppose would more likely define them as terrorists or
criminals. These are mostly, but not exclusively, of armed resistance
movements. For movements and phases of activity involving non-violent methods,
see civil resistance and nonviolent resistance. World War II. Planned
resistance movements
