Hamas Hamas ( ', "enthusiasm", an acronym of ', "Islamic Resistance Movement")
is the Palestinian Sunni Islamic or Islamist political party that governs the
Gaza Strip. Hamas also has a military wing, the Izz ad-Din al-Qassam Brigades.
Since June 2007 Hamas has governed the Gaza portion of the Palestinian
Territories, after it won a majority of seats in the Palestinian Parliament in
the January 2006 Palestinian parliamentary elections and then defeated the
Fatah political organization in a series of violent clashes. The European
Union, the United States, Canada, Israel and Japan classify Hamas as a
terrorist organization, while the Arab nations, as well as some other countries
including Russia and Turkey, do not. Based on the principles of Islamic
fundamentalism gaining momentum throughout the Arab world in the 1980s, Hamas
was founded in 1987 (during the First Intifada) as an offshoot of the Egyptian
Muslim Brotherhood. Co-founder Sheik Ahmed Yassin stated in 1987 and the Hamas
Charter affirmed in 1988 that Hamas was founded to liberate Palestine from
Israeli occupation and to establish an Islamic state in the area that is now
Israel, the West Bank, and the Gaza Strip. In July 2009, Khaled Meshal, Hamas's
Damascus-based political bureau chief, said the organization was willing to
cooperate with "a resolution to the Arab-Israeli conflict which included a
Palestinian state based on 1967 borders," provided that Palestinian refugees
hold the right to return to Israel and that East Jerusalem be the new nation's
capital. The Hamas charter exhibits the influence of antisemitic conspiracy
theories throughout, as evidenced by the explicit mention of the "The Protocols
of the Elder of Zion," or statements labeling "Freemasons, The Rotary and Lions
clubs" as "sabotage groups ... behind the drug trade and alcoholism in all its
kinds." Some experts and advocacy groups believe that statements by some Hamas
leaders display similar conspiratorial influences, though Hamas officials are
clear to describe the conflict with Israel as political and not religious.
Human Rights Watch denounced Hamas for human rights violations against
Palestinians. The Izz ad-Din al-Qassam Brigades, the Hamas affiliated military
wing, has launched attacks with both military and civilian victims. Tactics
have included rocket attacks and, from 1993 to 2008, suicide bombings. Military
targets included Israeli and Egyptian outposts and border crossings and rival
Palestinian militias in the occupied territories. In the January 2006
Palestinian parliamentary elections Hamas won a decisive majority in the
Palestinian Parliament, defeating the PLO-affiliated Fatah party. Following the
elections, the United States and the EU halted financial assistance to the
Hamas-led administration. In March 2007 a national unity government, headed by
Prime Minister Ismail Haniya of Hamas, was briefly formed, but this failed to
restart international financial assistance. Tensions over control of
Palestinian security forces soon erupted into the 2007 Battle of Gaza, after
which Hamas retained control of Gaza while its officials were ousted from
government positions in the West Bank. Israel and Egypt then imposed an
economic blockade on Gaza, on the grounds that Fatah forces were no longer
providing security there. In June 2008, as part of an Egyptian-brokered
ceasefire, Hamas ceased rocket attacks on Israel and made some efforts to
prevent attacks by other organizations. After a four months calm, the conflict
escalated when Israel carried out a military action with the stated aim to
prevent an abduction planned by Hamas, using a tunnel that had been dug under
the border security fence, killing seven Hamas operatives. In retaliation,
Hamas attacked Israel with a barrage of rockets. In late December 2008, Israel
attacked Gaza, withdrawing its forces from the territory in mid-January 2009.
After the Gaza War, Hamas continued to govern the Gaza strip and Israel
maintained its economic blockade. On May 4, 2011, Hamas and Fatah announced a
reconciliation agreement that provides for "creation of a joint caretaker
Palestinian government" prior to national elections scheduled for 2012. As part
of that agreement, Hamas' resistance would be peaceful and not military,
according to Israeli news reports. Etymology. "Hamas" is an acronym of the
Arabic phrase حركة المقاومة الاسلامية, or Harakat al-
Muqāwama al-Islāmiyya or "Islamic Resistance Movement". The Arabic word Hamas
also means devotion and zeal in the path of Allah. The Hamas covenant
interprets its name to mean "strength and bravery." Leadership and structure.
Hamas comprises three interrelated wings. The social welfare and political
wings, which are responsible for the social, administrative, political, and
propaganda activities of Hamas, and the military wing, which is engaged in
covert activities, such as acting against suspected collaborators, gathering
intelligence on potential targets, procuring weapons, and carrying out military
attacks. Consultative councils. The Majlis al-Shura (consultative council) is
the group's overarching political and decision making body. It includes
representatives from Gaza, the West Bank, Israeli prisons, and the exiled
external leadership, the Political Bureau, based in Damascus. Under this Shura
council are committees responsible for supervising Hamas activities, from media
relations to military operations. In the West Bank and Gaza, local Shura
committees answer to the Shura council and carry out its decisions. Hamas's
highest decision-making body is its Political Bureau, which consists of 15
members and operates in exile in Damascus, Syria. The bureau is elected by
members who select their representatives in local Consultative Councils in
specific geographic regions. The councils then nominate representatives to the
General Consultative Council, and the Political Bureau is elected by members of
the General Consultative Council. to commemorate Yahya Ayyash, an early Hamas
bomb-maker killed in 1996. Since its establishment, the military capability of
Hamas has increased markedly, from rifles to Qassam rockets and more. While the
number of members is known only to the Brigades leadership, Israel estimates
the Brigades have a core of several hundred members who receive military style
training, including training in Iran and Syria. Additionally, the brigades have
an estimated 10,000 operatives "of varying degrees of skill and
professionalism" who are members of Hamas or their supporters and the internal
security forces. These operatives can be expected to reinforce the Brigades in
an "emergency situation". Although the Izz al-Din al-Qassam Brigades are an
integral part of Hamas, they also operate independently of Hamas, and at times
contrary to Hamas' stated aims. Most analysts agree that although differences
of opinion between the Hamas military and political wing exist, Hamas's
internal discipline is strong enough to contain them. Political scientists
Ilana Kass and Bard O'Neill liken Hamas's relationship with the Brigades to the
Northern Ireland political party Sinn Féin's relationship to the military arm
of the Irish Republican Army. To further explain the relationship, they quote a
senior Hamas official: "The Izz al-Din al-Qassam Brigade is a separate armed
military wing, which has its own leaders who do not take their orders from and
do not tell us of their plans in advance." However, according to former U.S.
Department of Treasury official and terrorism expert Matthew Levitt, the Hamas
Political Bureau operates as the highest ranking leadership body determining
the policy of the Hamas organization and has responsibility for directing and
coordinating terrorist acts. Hamas' founder, Sheikh Ahmad Yassin, stated in
1998: "We can not separate the wing from the body. If we do so, the body will
not be able to fly. Hamas is one body." Social welfare. Hamas is particularly
popular among Palestinians in the Gaza Strip, though it also has a following in
the West Bank, and to a lesser extent in other Middle Eastern countries. Its
popularity stems in part from its welfare wing providing social services to
Palestinians in the occupied territories. Such services are not generally
provided by the Palestinian Authority. Israeli scholar Reuven Paz estimates
that 90% of Hamas activities revolve around "social, welfare, cultural, and
educational activities." Social services include running relief programs and
funding schools, orphanages, mosques, healthcare clinics, soup kitchens, and
sports leagues. In particular, Hamas funded health services where people could
receive free or inexpensive medical treatment. Hamas greatly contributed to the
health sector, and facilitated hospital and physician services in the
Palestinian territory. On the other hand, Hamas's use of hospitals is sometimes
criticised as purportedly serving the promotion of violence against Israel.
Charities affiliated with Hamas are known to financially support families of
those who have been killed or imprisoned while carrying out militant actions or
supporting such actions. Families typically receive a one time grant of $500 to
$5,000 and for those whose homes had been destroyed by the IDF, have their rent
paid for temporary housing. Families of militants not affiliated with Hamas
sometimes receive less. Hamas has funded education as well as the health
service, and built Islamic charities, libraries, mosques and education centers
for women. They also built nurseries, kindergartens and supervised religious
schools that provide free meals to children. When children attend their schools
and mosques, parents are required to sign oaths of allegiance. Refugees, as
well as those left without homes, are able to claim financial and technical
assistance from Hamas. The work of Hamas in these fields supplements that
provided by the United Nations Relief Works Agency (UNRWA). Hamas is also well
regarded by Palestinians for its efficiency and perceived lack of corruption
compared to Fatah. Since the 2008–2009 Israeli military operation in Gaza,
Palestinian public opinion polls have shown Hamas steadily increasing in
popularity with 52% support compared to 13% for Fatah. All public opinion
surveys conducted recently have supported this trend. Despite building
materials needing to be smuggled into the territory, luxury beach resorts and
tourist facilities operated by the interior ministry have been constructed by
Hamas government linked charities which include gardens, playgrounds, football
fields, a zoo and restaurants aimed to provide employment and low cost
entertainment for citizens. Some Palestinians have complained about the
admission fee, criticizing Hamas for charging them to use "government-owned"
property. Goals. Hamas's 1988 charter calls for the replacement of Israel and
the Palestinian Territories with an Islamic Palestinian state. After the
elections in 2006, Hamas co-founder Mahmoud Al-Zahar did not rule out the
possibility of accepting a "temporary two-state solution", and stated that he
dreamed "of hanging a huge map of the world on the wall at my Gaza home which
does not show Israel on it." Xinhua reports that Al-Zahar "did not rule out the
possibility of having Jews, Muslims and Christians living under the sovereignty
of an Islamic state." In late 2006, Ismail Haniyeh, the political leader of
Hamas, said that if a Palestinian state was formed within the 1967 lines, Hamas
was willing to declare a truce that could last as long as 20 years, and stated
that Hamas will never recognize the "usurper Zionist government" and will
continue "jihad-like movement until the liberation of Jerusalem". In March
2006, Hamas released its official legislative program. The document clearly
signaled that Hamas could refer the issue of recognizing Israel to a national
referendum. Under the heading "Recognition of Israel," it stated simply (AFP,
3/11/06): "The question of recognizing Israel is not the jurisdiction of one
faction, nor the government, but a decision for the Palestinian people." This
was a major shift away from their 1988 charter. A few months later, via
Maryland's Jerome Segal, the group sent a letter to US President George Bush
stating they "we don't mind having a Palestinian state in the 1967 borders",
and asked for direct negotiations: "Segal emphasized that a state within the
1967 borders and a truce for many years could be considered Hamas' "de facto"
recognition of Israel." In an April 2008 meeting between Hamas leader Khaled
Meshal and former US President Jimmy Carter, an understanding was reached in
which Hamas agreed it would respect the creation of a Palestinian state in the
territory seized by Israel in the 1967 Six-Day War, provided this were ratified
by the Palestinian people in a referendum. Hamas later publicly offered a long-
term truce with Israel if Israel agreed to return to its 1967 borders and grant
the "right of return" to all Palestinian refugees. In November 2008, Hamas
leader Ismail Haniyeh re-stated that Hamas was willing to accept a Palestinian
state within the 1967 borders, and offered Israel a long-term truce "if Israel
recognized the Palestinians' national rights." In 2009, in a letter to UN
Secretary General Ban Ki-moon, Haniyeh repeated his group's support for a two-
state settlement based on 1967 borders: "We would never thwart efforts to
create an independent Palestinian state with borders June 4, 1967, with
Jerusalem as its capital." On 1 December 2010, Ismail Haniyeh again repeated
that, "We accept a Palestinian state on the borders of 1967, with Jerusalem as
its capital, the release of Palestinian prisoners, and the resolution of the
issue of refugees", and that "Hamas will respect the results [of a referendum
regardless of whether it differs with its ideology and principles". In February
2012, according to the Palestinian authority, Hamas forswore the use of
violence. Evidence for this was provided by an eruption of violence from
Islamic Jihad in March 2012 after an Israeli assassination of a Jihad leader,
during which Hamas refrained from attacking Israel. "Israel—despite its
mantra that because Hamas is sovereign in Gaza it is responsible for what goes
on there—almost seems to understand," wrote Israeli journalists Avi
Issacharoff and Amos Harel, "and has not bombed Hamas offices or
installations." Israel has rejected some truce offers by Hamas because it
contends the group uses them to prepare for more fighting rather than peace.
"The Atlantic" magazine columnist Jeffrey Goldberg, along with other analysts,
believes Hamas may be incapable of permanent reconciliation with Israel.
Mkhaimer Abusada, a political scientist at Al Azhar University writes that
Hamas talks "of hudna ceasefire, not of peace or reconciliation with Israel.
They believe over time they will be strong enough to liberate all historic
Palestine." Such negative analysis ignores, however, the precedent that when
Hamas' parent organisation, the Muslim Brotherhood, came to power in
neighbouring Egypt, they upheld their country's peace treaty with Israel.
Israeli Prime Minister Benyamin Netanyahu declared he had no problem dealing
with the Muslim Brotherhood so long as the peace treaty was respected. Charter.
The Hamas Charter (or Covenant), issued in 1988, outlined the organization's
position on many issues at the time, identifies Hamas as the Muslim Brotherhood
in Palestine and declares its members to be Muslims who "fear God and raise the
banner of Jihad in the face of the oppressors." The charter states "our
struggle against the Jews is very great and very serious" and calls for the
eventual creation of an Islamic state in Palestine, in place of Israel and the
Palestinian Territories, and the obliteration or dissolution of Israel. The
Charter also asserts that through shrewd manipulation of imperial countries and
secret societies, Zionists were behind a wide range of events and disasters
going as far back in history as the French Revolution. Among the charter's
controversial statements is the following: "The time will not come until
Muslims will fight the Jews kill them; until the Jews hide behind rocks and
trees, which will cry: Oh Muslim! There is a Jew hiding behind me, come on and
kill him!" The document also quotes Islamic religious texts to provide
justification for fighting against and killing the Jews of Israel, presenting
the Arab-Israeli conflict as an inherently irreconcilable struggle between Jews
and Muslims, and Judaism and Islam, adding that the only way to engage in this
struggle between "truth and falsehood" is through Islam and by means of jihad,
until victory or martyrdom. The Charter adds that "renouncing any part of
Palestine means renouncing part of the religion" of Islam. The charter states
that Hamas is humanistic, and tolerant of other religions as long as they do
not block Hamas's efforts. Current status of the Charter. Hamas leader Khaled
Meshaal indicated to Robert Pastor, senior adviser to the Carter Center, that
the Charter is "a piece of history and no longer relevant, but cannot be
changed for internal reasons." Hamas do not use the Charter on their website
and prefer to use their election manifesto to put forth their agenda. Pastor
states that those who quote the charter rather than more recent Hamas
statements may be using the Charter as an excuse to ignore Hamas. British
diplomat and former British ambassador to the UN Sir Jeremy Greenstock stated
in early 2009 that the Hamas charter was "drawn up by a Hamas-linked imam some
years ago and has never been adopted since Hamas was elected as the Palestinian
government in 2006". Mohammed Nimer of American University comments on the
Charter, "It's a tract meant to mobilize support and it should be amended... It
projects anger, not vision." Dr. Ahmed Yousef an adviser to Ismail Haniyeh has
questioned the use of the charter by Israel and its supporters to brand Hamas
as a fundamentalist, terrorist, racist, anti-Semitic organization and claims
that they have taken parts of the charter out of context for propaganda
purposes. He claims that they dwell on the charter and ignore that Hamas has
changed its views with time. History. Early Islamic activism in Gaza. With its
takeover of Gaza after the 1967 war with Egypt, Israel hunted down secular
Palestinian Liberation Organization factions but dropped the previous Egyptian
rulers' harsh restrictions against Islamic activists. In fact, Israel for many
years tolerated and at times encouraged Islamic activists and groups as a
counterweight to the secular nationalists of the PLO and its dominant faction,
Fatah. Among the activists benefited was Sheikh Ahmed Yassin, leader of the
Muslim Brotherhood in Gaza, who had also formed the Islamist group Mujama al-
Islamiya in 1973, a charity recognized by Israel in 1979. Israel allowed the
organization to build mosques, clubs, schools, and a library in Gaza. Yitzhak
Segev, the acting governor of Gaza in 1979, said he had no illusions about
Yassin's intentions, having watched an Islamist movement topple the Shah as
Israel's military attache in Iran. According to Segev, Yassin and his charity
were completely peaceful towards Israel during this time, and Segev and other
Israeli officials feared being viewed as an enemy of Islam. Segev maintained
regular contact with Yassin, met with him around a dozen times, and arranged
for Yassin to be taken to Israel for hospital treatment. Also, Segev said,
Fatah was "our main enemy." Islamists frequently attacked secular and leftist
Palestinian movements, including Fatah, but the Israeli military avoided
getting involved in those quarrels. It stood aside, for example, when Mujama
al-Islamiya activists stormed the Red Crescent charity's headquarters in Gaza,
but Segev did send soldiers to prevent the burning down of the home of the head
of the organization. In 1984 the Israeli army received intelligence that Sheikh
Yassin's followers were collecting arms in Gaza. Israeli troops raided mosques
and found a cache of weapons. Yassin was arrested, but told his interrogators
the weapons were meant to be used against secular Palestinians, not Israel. The
cleric was released a year later and allowed to continue to develop his
movement in Gaza. Around the time of Yassin's arrest, Avner Cohen, an Israeli
religious affairs official, sent a report to senior military officers and
civilian leadership in Gaza advising them of the dangers of the Islamic
movement, but this report and similar ones were ignored. Former military
intelligence officer Shalom Harari said the warnings were ignored out of
neglect, not a desire to fortify the Islamists: "Israel never financed Hamas.
Israel never armed Hamas." Establishment. In 1987, several Palestinians were
killed in a traffic accident involving an Israeli driver, and the events that
followed – a Palestinian uprising (now known as the First Intifada) against
Israel's West Bank and Gaza occupation – led Yassin and six other
Palestinians to found Hamas as an offshoot of the Muslim Brotherhood movement.
The new group was supported by Brotherhood-affiliated charities and social
institutions that had already gained a strong foothold in the occupied
territories. The acronym "Hamas" first appeared in 1987 in a leaflet that
accused the Israeli intelligence services of undermining the moral fiber of
Palestinian youth as part of Mossad's recruitment of what Hamas termed
collaborators. Nonetheless, Israeli military and intelligence was still focused
on Fatah, and continued to maintain contacts with Gaza's Islamic activists.
Numerous Islamist leaders, including senior Hamas founder Mahmoud Zahar, met
with Yitzhak Rabin as part of "regular consultations" between Israeli officials
and Palestinians not linked to the PLO. Hamas carried out its first attack
against Israel in 1989, abducting and killing two soldiers. The Israel Defense
Forces immediately arrested Yassin and sentenced him to life in prison, and
deported 400 Hamas activists, including Zahar, to South Lebanon, which at the
time was occupied by Israel. During this time Hamas built a relationship with
Hezbollah. The 1990s. Hamas's military branch, the Izz ad-Din al-Qassam
Brigades, was created in 1991. During the 1990s the al-Qassam Brigades
conducted numerous attacks on Israel, with both civilian and military victims.
In April 1993, suicide bombings in the West Bank began. After the February 1994
massacre by Baruch Goldstein of 30 Muslim civilians in a Hebron mosque, the al-
Qassam Brigades began suicide attacks inside Israel. In December 1992 Israel
responded to the killing of a border police officer by deporting 415 leading
figures of Hamas and Islamic Jihad to Lebanon, which provoked international
condemnation and a unanimous UN Security Council resolution condemning the
action. Although the suicide attacks by the al-Qassam Brigades and other groups
violated the 1993 Oslo accords (which Hamas opposed), Palestinian Authority
President Yasir Arafat was reluctant to pursue the attackers and may have had
inadequate means to do so. Some analysts state that the Palestinian Authority
could have stopped the suicide and other attacks on civilians but refused to do
so. According to the Congressional Research Service, Hamas admitted to having
executed Palestinians accused of collaborating with Israeli authorities in the
1990s. A transcript of a training film by the al-Qassam Brigades tells how
Hamas operatives kidnapped Palestinians accused of collaboration and then
forced confessions before executing them. In 1996, Yahya Ayash, the chief
bombmaker of Hamas and the leader of the West Bank battalion of the Izz ad-Din
al-Qassam Brigades, was assassinated by the Israeli secret service. In
September 1997, Israeli agents in Jordan attempted but failed to assassinate
Hamas leader Khaled Mashal, leading to chilled relations between the two
countries and release of Sheikh Yassin, Hamas's spiritual leader, from Israeli
prison. Two years later Hamas was banned in Jordan, reportedly in part at the
request of the United States, Israel, and the Palestinian Authority. Jordan's
King Abdullah feared the activities of Hamas and its Jordanian allies would
jeopardize peace negotiations with Israel, and accused Hamas of engaging in
illegitimate activities within Jordan. In mid-September 1999, authorities
arrested Hamas leaders Khaled Mashal and Ibrahim Ghosheh on their return from a
visit to Iran, and charged them with being members of an illegal organization,
storing weapons, conducting military exercises, and using Jordan as a training
base. Hamas leaders denied the charges. Mashal was exiled and eventually
settled in Syria. Second Intifada. Al-Qassam Brigades militants were among the
armed groups that launched both military-style attacks and suicide bombings
against Israeli civilian and military targets during the Second Intifada (also
known as the Al-Aqsa Intifada (, "Intifāat El Aqa"; , "Intifādat El-Aqtzah"),
which began in late September 2000. This Palestinian uprising against Israeli
rule in the occupied territories was much more violent than the First Intifada.
The military and civilian death toll is estimated at 5500 Palestinians and more
than 1100 Israelis, as well as 64 foreigners. A 2007 study of Palestinian
suicide bombings during the second intifada (September 2000 through August
2005) found that about 40 percent were carried out by the al-Qassam Brigades.
The immediate trigger for the uprising is disputed, but a more general cause,
writes U.S. political science professor Jeremy Pressman, was "popular
Palestinian discontent grew during the Oslo peace process because the reality
on the ground did not match the expectations created by the peace agreements."
On January 25, 2004, senior Hamas official Abdel Aziz al-Rantissi offered a 10-
year truce, or "hudna", in return for the establishment of a Palestinian state
and the complete withdrawal by Israel from the territories captured in the 1967
Six Day War. Al-Rantissi stated that Hamas had come to the conclusion that it
was "difficult to liberate all our land at this stage, so we accept a phased
liberation." Israel immediately dismissed al-Rantissi's statements as insincere
and a smokescreen for military preparations. Yassin was assassinated on March
22, 2004, by a targeted Israeli air strike, and al-Rantisi was assassinated by
a similar air strike on April 18, 2004. 2006 presidential and legislative
elections. While Hamas boycotted the 2005 Palestinian presidential election, it
did participate in the 2005 municipal elections organized by Yasser Arafat in
the occupied territories. In those elections it won control of over one third
of Palestinian municipal councils, besting Fatah, which had for long been the
biggest force in Palestinian politics. In its election manifesto for the 2006
Palestinian legislative election, Hamas omitted a call for an end to Israel,
though it did still call for armed struggle against the occupation. Hamas won
the 2006 elections, winning 76 of the 132 seats to Fatah's 43. Seen by many as
primarily a rejection of the Fatah government's corruption and ineffectiveness,
the Hamas victory seemingly had brought to an end 40 years of PLO domination of
Palestinian politics. In early February 2006, Hamas offered Israel a 10-year
truce "in return for a complete Israeli withdrawal from the occupied
Palestinian territories: the West Bank, Gaza Strip and East Jerusalem," and
recognition of Palestinian rights including the "right of return." Mashal added
that Hamas was not calling for a final end to armed operations against Israel,
and it would not impede other Palestinian groups from carrying out such
operations. After the election, the Quartet on the Middle East (the United
States, Russia, the European Union (EU), and the United Nations) stated that
assistance to the Palestinian Authority would only continue if Hamas renounced
violence, recognized Israel, and accepted previous Israeli-Palestinian
agreements, which Hamas refused to do. The Quartet then imposed a freeze on all
international aid to the Palestinian territories. In 2006 after the Gaza
election, Hamas leader sent a letter addressed to George W. Bush where he among
other things declared that Hamas would accept a state on the 1967 borders
including a truce. However, the Bush administration did not reply. Electoral
Platform for Change and Reform 1. True Islam with its civilized achievements
and political, economic, social, and legal aspects is our frame of reference
and our way of life. 2. Historic Palestine is part of the Arab and Islamic land
and its ownership by the Palestinian people is a right that does not diminish
over time. No military or legal measures will change that right. 3. The
Palestinian people, wherever they reside, constitute a single and united people
and form an integral part of the Arab and Muslim nation . . . verse. Our
Palestinian people are still living a phase of national liberation, and thus
they have the right to strive to recover their own rights and end the
occupation using all means, including armed struggle. We have to make all our
resources available to support our people and defeat the occupation and
establish a Palestinian state with Jerusalem as its capital. 4. The right of
return of all Palestinian refugees and displaced persons to their land and
properties, and the right to self-determination and all other national rights,
are inalienable and cannot be bargained away for any political concessions. 5.
We uphold the indigenous and inalienable rights of our people to our land,
Jerusalem, our holy places, our water resources, borders, and a fully sovereign
independent Palestinian state with Jerusalem as its capital. 6. Reinforcing and
protecting Palestinian national unity is one of the priorities of the
Palestinian national action. 7. The issue of the prisoners is at the top of the
Palestinian agenda. Legislative policy and reforming the judiciary. "stress the
separation between the three powers, the legislative, executive and judicial;
activate the role of the Constitutional Court; re-form the Judicial Supreme
Council and choose its members by elections and on the basis of qualifications
rather than partisan, personal, and social considerations . . . ; enact the
necessary laws that guarantee the neutrality of general prosecutor . . . laws
that will stop any transgression by the executive power on the constitution".
Public freedoms and citizen rights. "Achieve equality before the law among
citizens in rights and duties; bring security to all citizens and protect their
properties and assure their safety against arbitrary arrest, torture, or
revenge; stress the culture of dialogue . . . ; support the press and media
institutions and maintain the right of journalists to access and to publish
information; maintain freedom and independence of professional syndicates and
preserve the rights of their membership". Hamas–Fatah conflict. After the
formation of the Hamas-led cabinet on March 20, 2006, tensions between Fatah
and Hamas militants progressively rose in the Gaza strip as Fatah commanders
refused to take orders from the government while the Palestinian Authority
initiated a campaign of demonstrations, assassinations and abductions against
Hamas which led to Hamas responding. Israeli intelligence warned Mahmoud Abbas
that Hamas had planned to kill him at his office in Gaza. According to a
Palestinian source close to Abbas, Hamas considers president Abbas to be a
barrier to its complete control over the Palestinian Authority and decided to
kill him. In a statement to Al Jazeera, Hamas leader Mohammed Nazzal, accused
Abbas of being party to besieging and isolating the Hamas-led government. On
June 9, 2006, during an Israeli artillery operation, an explosion occurred on a
busy Gaza beach, killing eight Palestinian civilians. It was assumed that
Israeli shellings were responsible for the killings, but Israeli government
officials denied this. Hamas formally withdrew from its 16-month ceasefire on
June 10, taking responsibility for the subsequent Qassam rocket attacks
launched from Gaza into Israel. On June 25, two Israeli soldiers were killed
and another, Gilad Shalit, abducted following an incursion by Hamas. In
response, the Israeli military launched Operation Summer Rains three days
later, to secure the release of the kidnapped soldier, arresting 64 Hamas
officials. Among them were 8 Palestinian Authority cabinet ministers and up to
20 members of the Palestinian Legislative Council, The arrests, along with
other events, effectively prevented the Hamas-dominated legislature from
functioning during most of its term. On February 2007 Saudi-sponsored
negotiations in Mecca produced agreement on a signed by Mahmoud Abbas on behalf
of Fatah and Khaled Mashal on behalf of Hamas. The new government was called on
to achieve Palestinian national goals as approved by the Palestine National
Council, the clauses of the Basic Law and the National Reconciliation Document
(the "Prisoners' Document") as well as the decisions of the Arab summit. In
March 2007, the Palestinian Legislative Council established a national unity
government, with 83 representatives voting in favor and three against.
Government ministers were sworn in by Mahmoud Abbas, the chairman on the
Palestinian Authority, in at a ceremony held simultaneously in Gaza and
Ramallah. In June that year, renewed fighting broke out between Hamas and
Fatah. In the course of the June 2007 Battle of Gaza, Hamas exploited the near
total collapse of Palestinian Authority forces in Gaza, to retain control of
Gaza, ousting Fatah officials. President Mahmoud Abbas then dismissed the
Hamas-led Palestinian Authority government. and outlawed the Hamas militia. At
least 600 Palestinians died in fighting between Hamas and Fatah. Human Rights
Watch, a U.S.-based group, accused both sides in the conflict of torture and
war crimes. Human Rights Watch estimates several hundred Gazans were "maimed"
and tortured in the aftermath of the Gaza War. 73 Gazan men accused of
"collaborating" had their arms and legs broken by "unidentified perpetrators"
and 18 Palestinians accused of collaborating with Israel, who had escaped from
Gaza's main prison compound after Israel bombed the facility, were executed by
Hamas security officials in the first days of the conflict. Hamas security
forces reportedly shot and tortured Palestinians who opposed Hamas rule in Gaza
and openly supported Israel's attack. One victim, recovering from multiple
gunshot wounds in the leg, told Human Rights Watch he was "so happy they bombed
that I was giving out sweets." In another case, a Palestinian had criticized
Hamas in a conversation on the street with some friends. Later that day, more
than a dozen armed men with black masks and red kaffiyeh took the man from his
home, and brought him to a solitary area where they shot him three times in the
lower legs and ankles. The man told Human Rights Watch that he was not
politically active. Gaza War. On June 17, 2008, Egyptian mediators announced
that an informal truce had been agreed to between Hamas and Israel. Hamas
agreed to cease rocket attacks on Israel, while Israel agreed to allow limited
commercial shipping across its border with Gaza, barring any breakdown of the
tentative peace deal; Hamas also hinted that it would discuss the release of
Gilad Shalit. Israeli sources state that Hamas also committed itself to enforce
the ceasefire on the other Palestinian organizations. Even before the truce was
agreed to, some on the Israeli side were not optimistic about it, Shin Bet
chief Yuval Diskin stating in May 2008 that a ground incursion into Gaza was
unavoidable and would more effectively quell arms smuggling and pressure Hamas
into relinquishing power. While Hamas was careful to maintain the ceasefire,
the lull was sporadically violated by other groups, sometimes in defiance of
Hamas. For example, on June 24 Islamic Jihad launched rockets at the Israeli
town of Sderot; Israel called the attack a grave violation of the informal
truce, and closed its border crossings with Gaza. On November 4, 2008 Israeli
forces, in an attempt to stop construction of a tunnel, killed six Hamas gunmen
in a raid inside the Gaza Strip. Hamas responded by resuming rocket attacks, a
total of 190 rockets in November according to Israel's military. With the six-
month truce officially expired on December 19, Hamas launched 50 to more than
70 rockets and mortars into Israel over the next three days, though no Israelis
were injured. On December 21, Hamas said it was ready to stop the attacks and
renew the truce if Israel stopped its "aggression" in Gaza and opened up its
border crossings. On December 27 and 28, Israel implemented Operation Cast Lead
against Hamas. Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak said "We warned Hamas
repeatedly that rejecting the truce would push Israel to aggression against
Gaza." According to Palestinian officials, over 280 people were killed and 600
were injured in the first two days of airstrikes. Most were Hamas police and
security officers, though many civilians also died. According to Israel,
militant training camps, rocket-manufacturing facilities and weapons warehouses
that had been pre-identified were hit, and later they attacked rocket and
mortar squads who fired around 180 rockets and mortars at Israeli communities.
Chief of Gaza police force Tawfiq Jabber, head of the General Security Service
Salah Abu Shrakh, senior religious authority and security officer Nizar Rayyan,
and Interior Minister Said Seyam were among those killed during the fighting.
Although Israel sent out thousands of cell-phone messages urging residents of
Gaza to leave houses where weapons may be stored, in an attempt to minimise
civilian casualties, some residents complained there was nowhere to go because
many neighborhoods had received the same message. Israeli bombs landed close to
civilian structures such as schools, and some alleged that Israel was
deliberately targeting Palestinian civilians. Israel declared a unilateral
ceasefire on January 17, 2009. Hamas responded the following day by announcing
a one week ceasefire to give Israel time to withdraw its forces from the Gaza
Strip. Israeli, Palestinian, and third-party sources disagreed on the total
casualty figures from the Gaza war, and the number of Palestinian casualties
who were civilians. In November 2010, a senior Hamas official acknowledged that
up to 300 fighters were killed and "In addition to them, between 200 and 300
fighters from the Al-Qassam Brigades and another 150 security forces were
martyred." These new numbers reconcile the total with those of the Israeli
military, which originally said were 709 "terror operatives" killed. After the
Gaza War. On August 16, 2009, Hamas leader Khaled Mashal stated that the
organization is ready to open dialogue with the Obama administration because
its policies are much better than those of former US president George W. Bush:
"As long as there's a new language, we welcome it, but we want to see not only
a change of language, but also a change of policies on the ground. We have said
that we are prepared to cooperate with the US or any other international party
that would enable the Palestinians to get rid of occupation." Despite this, an
August 30, 2009 speech during a visit to Jordan in which Mashal expressed
support for the Palestinian right of return was interpreted by David Pollock of
the Washington Institute for Near East Policy as a sign that "Hamas has now
clearly opted out of diplomacy." In an interview on May 2010, Mashal said that
if a Palestinian state with real sovereignty was established under the
conditions he set out, on the borders of 1967 with its capital Jerusalem and
with the right of return, that will be the end of the Palestinian resistance,
and then the nature of any subsequent ties with Israel would be decided
democratically by the Palestinians. In July 2009, Khaled Meshal, Hamas's
political bureau chief, stated Hamas's willingness to cooperate with a
resolution to the Arab-Israeli conflict which included a Palestinian state
based on 1967 borders, provided that Palestinian refugees be given the right to
return to Israel and that East Jerusalem be recognized as the new state's
capital. In 2011, the Syrian uprising and "uncertain" future of the Al-Assad
regime has led Hamas to diminish its presence in Damascus, according to
"regional sources" quoted in Reuters News. Where once there were "hundreds of
exiled Palestinian officials and their relatives" in Damascus, that number has
shrunk to "a few dozen." Funding. In the early 2000s the largest backer of
Hamas was Saudi Arabia, with over 50% of its funds coming from that country,
mainly through Islamic charity organizations. An earlier estimate by the
Israeli Ministry of Foreign Affairs estimated a $50 million annual budget,
mostly supplied by private charitable associations but with $12 million
supplied directly by Gulf states, primarily Saudi Arabia, and a further $3
million from Iran. In 2002, a Saudi Arabian charity, the "Saudi Council to
Support the Palestinian Intefada" run by then Saudi Interior Minister Prince
Nayef Bin Abdul Aziz stated the council will give the families of 102 Hamas
militants killed, including eight suicide bombers, $5,340 each. Saudi owned al-
Taqwa Bank has been identified of holding money for Hamas as early as 1997.
Jamie C. Zarate, former Deputy Assistant Secretary of the U.S. Treasury
Department, told Congress that 60 million was moved to Hamas accounts with Al
Taqwa bank. The Al Taqwa bank has also been used to launder funds for Al Qaeda.
The funding by Saudi Arabia continued despite Saudi pledges to stop funding
groups such as Hamas that have used violence, and its recent denouncements of
Hamas' lack of unity with Fatah. According to the US State Department, Hamas is
funded by Iran, Palestinian expatriates, and "private benefactors in Saudi
Arabia and other Arab states." Saudi spokesman Adel Al Jubeir said that "no
Saudi government money goes to Hamas, directly or indirectly." He added that it
"very likely" that "some Saudi individuals" have provided financial support to
Hamas. In 2004, reports citing unidentified U.S. and Israeli intelligence
officials indicated that Saudi funding for Hamas had been curtailed and
replaced by other regional sponsors. In June 2004 testimony before the Senate
Governmental Affairs Committee, former Treasury Department General Counsel
David Aufhauser quoted "informed intelligence sources" as saying that "for
whatever reason, the money going to Hamas from Saudi Arabia has substantially
dried up." Aufhauser indicated that Saudi financial support "has been
supplemented by money from Iran and Syria flowing through even more dangerous
rejectionist groups in the West Bank." Similarly, Israeli daily Maariv quoted
in 2004 an unidentified Israeli military official as saying that "for the first
time in years the Saudis have begun to reduce the flow of funds to Hamas and to
the Gaza Strip." This source attributes this change largely to U.S. pressure on
Saudi Arabia to stem the flow of funding to Hamas and other terrorist
organizations. According to the US Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA),
another reported funding source for Hamas is through the 21,000 Arabs of
Palestinian and Lebanese descent who live in the Foz do Iguaçu area of the
tri-border region of Latin America. According to Paraguayan Interior Minister
Julio César Fanego, they have donated "something between $50 and $500 million"
to 16 Arab extremist groups between 1999 and 2001, in amounts ranging from $500
to $2,000. In the late 1980s, 10% of all Hamas funding came Islamic Republic of
Iran. Later, from 1993 to 2006, Iran provided Hamas with approximately $30 US
million annually. More recent assessments indicate that Iranian funding has
increased significantly between 2006–2009, to hundreds of millions of Euros
per year. After 2009, sanctions on Iran made funding difficult, forcing Hamas
instead to rely on religious donations by individuals in the West Bank, Qatar,
and Saudi Arabia. Since June 2011 funding from the Islamic Republic of Iran has
been cut to show "displeasure at Hamas's failure to hold public rallies in
support of President Assad" in the face of the Syrian uprising, and funding
from the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt has been cut so the MB can diverts funds
"to support Arab Spring revolts". The shortages have meant that Gaza's 40,000
civil service and security employees were not paid July 2011. Hamas linked
charities in 2010 invested heavily in Gaza business ventures, with the
condition that much of revenue stream from those ventures go to Hamas-linked
charitable purposes in Gaza. Generally, Hamas and its members have increasingly
dominated the Gaza economy, in particular since the 2006 Israel-led blockade of
Gaza and Gaza elections. Gaza domestic funding. Hamas approved a 540 million
dollar government budget for 2010 with up to 90% coming from "undisclosed"
foreign aid which includes funding from Iran and Egypt's Muslim Brotherhood
according to western intelligence agencies. Due to the Gaza blockade, Hamas
still faces a financial crisis. With a bureaucracy of around 30,000 staff, the
organisation is growing faster than can be handled with salaries being delayed
or prioritised for the lowest paid. To fund it's budget, Hamas has raised new
taxes on businesses and imposed a 14.5% tax on luxury goods smuggled through
the tunnels. Gaza businessmen have accused Hamas of profiting from the blockade
and using these taxes to buy large tracts of land and private buildings for
public facilities in competition to established businesses. In August 2011, the
U.S State Department threatened to cut a 100 million dollars in aid it sends to
the Gaza Strip if Hamas continues to insist upon auditing American foreign aid
organizations after Hamas suspended operations of the International Medical
Corps following the group's refusal to submit to an onsite audit. Most foreign
charities submit their own audits to the Interior Ministry in Ramallah.
Charities must be audited by law, possibly to ensure money is not diverted for
political or intelligence-gathering purposes but as the U.S. government forbids
direct contact with Hamas the action prompted Washington to issue the threat
via a third party. Aid provided by American and other foreign groups goes to
hundreds of thousands of Palestinians in Gaza, where most of the 1.6 million
residents are refugees A US official based in the region said "USAID-funded
partner organizations operating in Gaza are forced by Hamas's actions to
suspend their assistance work. (They) were put on hold effective August 12."
According to the official, Hamas demanded access to files and records of NGOs,
which would reveal financial and administrative information, details of staff
members and information on beneficiaries. He said Hamas shut down IMC and USAID
after the US objected to "unwarranted audits". Hamas administration official
Taher al-Nono said Hamas had a right to monitor their work in the territory but
an understanding had been reached that would allow independent auditing teams
to inspect the files of NGOs. A day after the US announced it was suspending
financial aid to Gaza, Hamas officials said they had reached an agreement with
the United States that would allow USAID to continue operations. In August
2011, the Hamas government in the Gaza Strip imposed new travel restrictions on
Palestinians active in non-governmental organizations by requiring them to
provide details of the trip to the ministry in what the Palestinian NGO Network
regards as another Hamas attempt to control and hamper them. The Palestinian
Center for Human Rights condemned the new laws. Tharut al Bic, head of the
interior ministry's NGO department, stated that "the new instructions are
intended to make it easier for travellers to better organize their trip and to
preserve order". Hamas requires sick people wishing to leave the Gaza Strip to
submit applications and meet various conditions, in addition to restrictions
Israel imposes on Palestinians leaving Gaza. Media. In 2005, Hamas announced
its intention to launch an experimental TV channel, "Al-Aqsa TV". The station
was launched on January 7, 2006, less than three weeks before the Palestinian
legislative elections. It has shown television programs, including some
children's television, which deliver anti-semitic messages. Hamas has stated
that the television station is "an independent media institution that often
does not express the views of the Palestinian government headed by Ismail
Haniyeh or of the Hamas movement," and that Hamas does not hold anti-semitic
views. Islamization efforts. In the Gaza Strip. From 1987 to 1991, during the
first intifada, Hamas campaigned for the wearing of the hijab alongside other
measures, including insisting women stay at home be segregated from men, and
the promotion of polygamy. In the course of this campaign women who chose not
to wear the hijab were verbally and physically harassed, with the result that
the hijab was being worn 'just to avoid problems on the streets'. Since Hamas
took control of the Gaza Strip in 2007, some of its members have attempted to
impose Islamic dress or the Hijab head covering on women. Also, the
government's "Islamic Endowment Ministry" has deployed Virtue Committee members
to warn citizens of the dangers of immodest dress, card playing and dating.
However, there are no government laws imposing dress and other moral standards,
and the Hamas education ministry reversed one effort to impose Islamic dress on
students. There has also been successful resistance to attempts by local Hamas
officials to impose Islamic dress on women. Hamas officials deny having any
plans to impose Islamic law, one legislator stating that "What you are seeing
are incidents, not policy," and that Islamic law is the desired standard "but
we believe in persuasion." The Hamas education ministry reversed one effort to
impose Islamic dress on students. In March 2010, the BBC interviewed five
"middle-class" women in Gaza City in March 2010, and all indicated there had
been little or no change toward more conservative dress and mores. In the West
Bank. In 2005, the human rights organization Freemuse released a report titled
"Palestine: Taliban-like attempts to censor music", which said that Palestinian
musicians feared that harsh religious laws against music and concerts will be
imposed since Hamas group scored political gains in the Palestinian Authority
local elections of 2005. The attempt by Hamas to dictate a cultural code of
conduct in the 1980s and early 1990s led to a violent fighting between
different Palestinan sectors. Hamas members reportedly burned down stores that
stocked videos which they deemed indecent and destroyed books which they
described as "heretical." In 2005, an outdoor music and dance performance in
Qalqiliya were suddenly banned by the Hamas led municipality, for the reason
that such an event would be forbidden by Islam, or "Haram". The municipality
also ordered that music no longer be played in the Qalqiliya zoo, and mufti
Akrameh Sabri issued a religious edict affirming the municipality decision. In
response, the Palestinian national poet Mahmoud Darwish warned that "There are
Taliban-type elements in our society, and this is a very dangerous sign". The
Palestinian columnist Mohammed Abd Al-Hamid, a resident of Ramallah, wrote that
this religious coercion could cause the migration of artists, and said "The
religious fanatics in Algeria destroyed every cultural symbol, shattered
statues and rare works of art and liquidated intellectuals and artists,
reporters and authors, ballet dancers and singers – are we going to imitate
the Algerian and Afghani examples?" Tayyip Erdoğan's Turkey as a Role Model.
Some Hamas members stated that the model of Islamic government that Hamas seeks
to emulate is that of Turkey under the rule of Tayyip Erdoğan. The foremost
members to distance Hamas from the practices of Taliban and to publicly support
the Erdoğan model were Ahmad Yousef and Ghazi Hamad, advisers to Prime
Minister Hanieh. Yusuf, the Hamas deputy foreign minister, reflected this goal
in an interview to a Turkish newspaper, stating that while foreign public
opinion equates Hamas with the Taliban or al-Qaeda, the analogy is inaccurate.
Yusuf described the Taliban as "opposed to everything," including education and
women's rights, while Hamas wants to establish good relations between the
religious and secular elements of society and strives for human rights,
democracy and an open society. According to professor Yezid Sayigh of the
King's College in London, how influential this view is within Hamas is
uncertain, since both Ahmad Yousef and Ghazi Hamad were dismissed from their
posts as advisers to Hamas Prime Minister Ismail Hanieh in October 2007. Both
have since been appointed to other prominent positions within the Hamas
government. Khaled al-Hroub of the West Bank-based and anti-Hamas Palestinian
daily Al Ayyam added that despite claims by Hamas leaders that it wants to
repeat the Turkish model of Islam, "what is happening on the ground in reality
is a replica of the Taliban model of Islam". Antisemitism and anti-Zionism.
According to academic Esther Webman, antisemitism is not the main tenet of
Hamas ideology, although antisemitic rhetoric is frequent and intense in Hamas
leaflets. The leaflets generally do not differentiate between Jews and
Zionists. In other Hamas publications and in interviews with its leaders
attempts at this differentiation have been made. In 2009 representatives of the
small Jewish sect Neturei Karta met with Hamas leader Ismail Haniya in Gaza,
who stated that he held nothing against Jews but only against the state of
Israel. Hamas Charter (1988). The Avalon Project: Hamas Covenant 1988.
Retrieved February 9, 2009.  "Today it is Palestine, tomorrow it will be one
country or another. The Zionist plan is limitless. After Palestine, the
Zionists aspire to expand from the Nile to the Euphrates. When they will have
digested the region they overtook, they will aspire to further expansion, and
so on. Their plan is embodied in the "Protocols of the Elders of Zion", and
their present conduct is the best proof of what we are saying." Statements by
Hamas members and clerics. In 2008 Imam Yousif al-Zahar of Hamas said in his
sermon at the "Katib Wilayat" mosque in Gaza that "Jews are a people who cannot
be trusted. They have been traitors to all agreements. Go back to history.
Their fate is their vanishing.". Another Hamas legislator and imam, Sheik Yunus
al-Astal, discussed a Koranic verse suggesting that "suffering by fire is the
Jews' destiny in this world and the next". He concluded "Therefore we are sure
that the Holocaust is still to come upon the Jews". In January 2009, Gazan
Hamas Health Minister Basim Naim published a letter in The Guardian, stating
that Hamas has no quarrel with Jewish people, only with the actions of Israel.
In May 2009, senior Hamas MP Sayed Abu Musameh said that "in our culture, we
respect every foreigner, especially Jews and Christians, but we are against
Zionists, not as nationalists but as fascists and racists." Following the
rededication of the Hurva Synagogue in Jerusalem in March 2010, senior Hamas
figure al-Zahar called on Palestinians everywhere to observe five minutes of
silence "for Israel's disappearance and to identify with Jerusalem and the al-
Aqsa mosque." He further stated stated that "Wherever you have been you've been
sent to your destruction. You've killed and murdered your prophets and you have
always dealt in loan-sharking and destruction. You've made a deal with the
devil and with destruction itself – just like your synagogue." On 8 January
2012, during a visit to Tunis, Gazan Hamas PM Ismail Haniyeh told The
Associated Press on that he disagrees with the anti-Semitic slogans. "We are
not against the Jews because they are Jews. Our problem is with those occupying
the land of Palestine," he said. "There are Jews all over the world, but Hamas
does not target them.". In response to a statement by Palestinian Authority
leader Mahmoud Abbas that Hamas preferred non-violent means and had agreed to
adopt "peaceful resistance," Hamas contradicted Abbas. According to Hamas
spokesman Sami Abu-Zuhri, "We had agreed to give popular resistance precedence
in the West Bank, but this does not come at the expense of armed resistance."
Hamas Official Ahmad Bahr Preaches for the Annihilation of Jews and Americans,
MEMRI, Clip No. 3538, August 10, 2012. Statements on the Holocaust.
www.palestine-info.com. qtd in Paz In August 2003, senior Hamas official Dr Abd
Al-Aziz Al-Rantisi wrote in the Hamas newspaper "Al-Risala" that the Zionists
encouraged murder of Jews by the Nazis with the aim of forcing them to
immigrate to Palestine. In 2005, Khaled Mashal called Mahmoud Ahmadinejad's
December 14, 2005 statements on the Holocaust that Europeans had "created a
myth in the name of Holocaust") as "courageous." Later in 2008, Basim Naim, the
minister of health in the Hamas-led Palestinian Authority government in Gaza
countered holocaust denial, and said "it should be made clear that neither
Hamas nor the Palestinian government in Gaza denies the Nazi Holocaust. The
Holocaust was not only a crime against humanity but one of the most abhorrent
crimes in modern history. We condemn it as we condemn every abuse of humanity
and all forms of discrimination on the basis of religion, race, gender or
nationality." In an open letter to Gaza Strip UNRWA chief John Ging published
August 20, 2009, the movement's Popular Committees for Refugees called the
Holocaust "a lie invented by the Zionists," adding that the group refused to
let Gazan children study about it. Hamas leader Younis al-Astal continued by
saying that having the Holocaust included in the UNRWA curriculum for Gaza
students amounted to "marketing a lie and spreading it." Al-Astal continued "I
do not exaggerate when I say this issue is a war crime, because of how it
serves the Zionist colonizers and deals with their hypocrisy and lies." In
February 2011, Hamas voiced opposition to UNRWA's teaching of the Holocaust in
Gaza. According to Hamas, "Holocaust studies in refugee camps is a contemptible
plot and serves the Zionist entity with a goal of creating a reality and
telling stories in order to justify acts of slaughter against the Palestinian
people." In July 2012, Fawzi Barhoum, a Hamas spokesman, denounced a visit by
Ziad al-Bandak, an adviser to Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas, to
the Auschwitz death camp, saying it was "unjustified" and "unhelpful" and only
served the "Zionist occupation" while coming "at the expense of a real
Palestinian tragedy". He also called the Holocaust an "alleged tragedy" and
"exaggerated." In October 2012, Hamas said that they were opposed to teaching
about the Holocaust in Gaza Strip schools run by the UN Relief and Works
Agency. The Refugee Affairs Department of Hamas said that teaching the
Holocaust was a “crime against the issue of the refugees that is aimed at
canceling their right of return.” Criticism. Proximity to civilians during
warfare. New York Times journalist Steven Erlanger reported that "Hamas rocket
and weapons caches, including rocket launchers, have been discovered in and
under mosques, schools and civilian homes." Another report published by
Intelligence and Terrorism Information Center revealed that Hamas used close to
100 mosques to store weapons and as launch-pads to shoot rockets. The report
contains testimony from variety Palestinian sources, including a Hamas militant
Sabhi Majad Atar, who said he was taught how to shoot rockets from inside a
mosque. Hamas has also been criticized by Israeli officials for blending into
or hiding among the Palestinian civilian population During the 2008–2009
Israel–Gaza conflict. The Israeli government published what it said was video
evidence of human shield tactics by Hamas. Israel said that Hamas frequently
used mosques and school yards as hideouts and places to store weapons, and that
Hamas militants stored weapons in their homes, making it difficult to ensure
that civilians close to legitimate military targets are not hurt during Israeli
military operations. Israeli officials also accused the Hamas leadership of
hiding under Shifa Hospital during the conflict, using the patients inside to
deter an Israeli attack. The Israeli government a filed report entitled "Gaza
Operations Investigation: Second Update" to the United Nations accusing Hamas
of exploiting its rules of engagement by shooting rockets and launching attacks
within protected civilian areas. Israel says 12,000 rockets and mortars were
fired at it between 2000 and 2008 - nearly 3,000 in 2008 alone. In one case, an
errant Israeli mortar strike killed dozens of people near a UN school. Hamas
said that the mortar killed 42 people and left dozens wounded. Israel said that
Hamas militants had launched a rocket from a yard adjacent to the school and
one mortar of three rounds hit the school, due to a GPS error. According to the
Israeli military probe, the remaining two rounds hit the yard used to launch
rockets into Israel, killing two members of Hamas' military wing who fired the
rockets. Human Right Watch called Hamas to "publicly renounce" the rocket
attacks against Israeli civilians and hold those responsible to account. Human
Right Watch program director Iain Levine said the attacks by Hamas were
"unlawful and unjustifiable, and amount to war crimes", and accused Hamas of
putting Palestinians at risk by launching attacks from built-up areas. Hamas
spokesman relied that the report was "biased" and he denied that Hamas uses
human shields. Human Rights Watch investigated 19 incidents involving 53
civilian deaths in Gaza which Israel said were the result of Hamas fighting in
densely populated areas and did not find evidence for existence of Palestinian
fighters in the areas at the time of the Israeli attack. In other cases where
no civilians had died, the report concluded that Hamas may have deliberately
fired rockets from areas close to civilians. HRW also investigated 11 deaths
that Israel said were civilians being used as human shields by Hamas. HRW found
no evidence that the civilians were used as human shields, nor had they been
shot in crossfire. The Israeli 'human shields' charge against Hamas was called
"full of holes" by "The National (Abu Dhabi)", which stated that only Israel
accused Hamas of using human shields during the conflict, though Hamas "may be
guilty" of "locating military objectives within or near densely populated
areas" and for "deliberately firing indiscriminate weapons into civilian
populated areas". Criticism of rocket and mortar attacks. The rocket attacks by
Hamas have been condemned by Human rights organizations as war crimes, both
because they usually target civilians and because the weapons' inaccuracy would
disproportionately endanger civilians even if military targets were chosen.
Human Rights Watch has also condemned the attackers for firing from near
residential structures, thus putting Gazan civilians at unnecessary risk. In
July 2008 Barack Obama, then the Democratic presidential candidate, said: "If
somebody was sending rockets into my house, where my two daughters sleep at
night, I'm going to do everything in my power to stop that, and I would expect
Israelis to do the same thing." On December 28, 2008, Secretary of State
Condoleezza Rice said in a statement: "the United States strongly condemns the
repeated rocket and mortar attacks against Israel". On March 2, 2009 Secretary
of State Hillary Clinton condemned the attacks. The August 2, 2010 Rocket
attacks on Eilat and Aqaba and Aqaba sparked rage in Egypt at Hamas and Iran.
The Egyptian press stated that the firing of the rockets from Egyptian
territory by Hamas or by organizations cooperating with it constituted the
crossing of a red line. The Egyptian position is that Iran is employing local
proxies, such as Hamas, to escalate violence in the Middle East and to sabotage
the Palestinian reconciliation efforts, as well as efforts to renew
Palestinian-Israeli peace negotiations. Later that year, the Egyptian
government daily Al-Gumhouriyya also slammed Hamas's firing of "primitive"
rockets at Israel that, according to the writer, serve only to prompt a deadly
response from Israel. He blamed Hamas for turning the Gaza Strip into a "big
prison" isolated from the world, where the residents suffer poverty while the
leaders live in luxury. Children. Children as human shields. Israel has accused
Hamas of using children as human shields. The Israeli government released video
footage of Hamas in which it describes as two Hamas militants grabbing a young
boy's arm from behind holding him to walk in front of them toward a group of
people waiting near a wall. The IDF argues the militants were placing the boy
between themselves and an Israeli sniper. The second scene shows an individual,
described as a Hamas militant, grabbing a school boy off of a floor, where he
is hiding behind a column from IDF fire, and using him as a human shield to
walk to a different location. In November 2006, the Israeli Air Force warned
Muhammad Weil Baroud, a Palestinian militant accused of launching rockets into
Israeli territory, to evacuate his home in a Jabalya refugee camp apartment
block in advance of a planned Israeli air strike. Hamas responded by calling
for volunteers to protect the apartment block and nearby buildings and,
according to the Jerusalem Post, hundreds of local residents, mostly women and
children, responded. Israel suspended the air strike. Israel termed the Hamas
action an example of the use of human shields, although surrounding an
apartment block under most interpretations of international law is not such an
example, since the term "human shield" involves warring parties placing
civilians in "proximity to a legitimate military target." In response to the
incident, Hamas proclaimed: 'We won. From now on we will form human chains
around every house threatened with demolition.'" In a November 22 press
release, Human Rights Watch condemned Hamas, stating: "There is no excuse for
calling civilians to the scene of a planned attack. Whether or not the home is
a legitimate military target, knowingly asking civilians to stand in harm's way
is unlawful". Political scientist Norman Finkelstein organized a campaign
against the Human Rights Watch condemnation, asking "Is it a war crime to
protect one's home from collective punishment?" When the UN-sponsored Goldstone
Commission Report on the Gaza War was commissioned in 2009, it stated that it
"found no evidence that Palestinian combatants mingled with the civilian
population with the intention of shielding themselves from attack." Children as
combatants. The Israeli government released a video compiled mostly from Arab
news sources showing Palestinian children under the age of 15 going through
military training and carrying and firing arms. The video's narration explains
that Hamas indoctrinates these child combatants and that Hamas operators send
the children "on missions from which they would not risk their own lives."
According to the Israeli government, the children are used as spotters, to
transport explosives and weapons, sent to play in areas to deter Israeli
attacks and are sent unknowingly with explosive devices in their schoolbags to
be blown up in the vicinity of Israelis. The United Nations defines the use of
children for military purposes as a war crime and a form of slavery. See
Military use of children. Although Hamas admits to sponsoring summer schools to
train teenagers in handling weapons they condemn attacks by children. Following
the deaths of three teenagers during a 2002 attack on Netzarim in central Gaza,
Hamas banned attacks by children and "called on the teachers and religious
leaders to spread the message of restraint among young boys". Children's
Magazine. Al-Fateh ("the conqueror") is the Hamas children's magazine,
published biweekly in London, and also posted in an online website. It began
publication in September 2002, and its 108th issue was released in mid-
September 2007. The magazine features stories, poems, riddles, and puzzles, and
states it is for "the young builders of the future". According to MEMRI, the
magazine includes incitement to jihad and martyrdom and glorification of
terrorist operations and of their planners and perpetrators. as well as
characterizations of Jews as "murderers of the prophets" and laudatory
descriptions of parents who encourage their sons to kill Jews. In each issue, a
regular feature titled "The Story of a Martyr" presents the "heroic deeds" of a
mujahid from one of the organizations who died in a suicide operation,
including operations against civilians, or who was killed by the IDF. MEMRI
also noted that the magazine includes illustrations of figures, including child
warriors, who embody the ethos of jihad and martyrdom, presenting them as role
models. These include the magazine's titular character, Al-Fateh ("The
Conqueror") - a small boy on a horse brandishing a drawn scimitar - as well as
children carrying guns, and photos of Hamas fighters launching Qassam rockets.
Al-Aqsa TV. Al-Aqsa TV is a television channel founded by Hamas. The station
began broadcasting in the Gaza Strip on January 9, 2006. Its programming
includes ideologically tinged children's shows, news talk, and religiously
inspired entertainment. According to the Anti-Defamation League, the station
promotes terrorist activity and incites hatred of Jews and Israelis. Hamas has
stated that the television station is "an independent media institution that
often does not express the views of the Palestinian government headed by Ismail
Haniyeh or of the Hamas movement," and that Hamas does not hold anti-semitic
views. Al-Aqsa TV is headed by Fathi Ahmad Hammad, chairman of al-Ribat
Communications and Artistic Productions - a Hamas-run company which also
produces Hamas's radio station, "Voice of al-Aqsa", and its bi-weekly
newspaper, "The Message". Teenage Academic Scholars Travel Ban. In September
2011, according to the Palestinian Center for Human Rights, the Hamas minister
of education informed eight high school National Merit Scholar students that
they could not leave the Gaza Strip to study in the United States, saying the
reasons were "social and cultural." Dissent and the media. Human rights groups
and Gazans have accused the Hamas government in the Gaza Strip of restricting
freedom of the press and forcefully suppressing dissent. Both foreign and
Palestinian journalists report harassment and other measures taken against
them. In September 2007 the Gaza Interior Ministry disbanded the Gaza Strip
branch of the pro-Fatah Union of Palestinian Journalists, a move criticized by
Reporters without borders. In November of that year the Hamas government
arrested a British journalist and for a time canceled all press cards in Gaza.
On February 8, 2008 Hamas banned distribution of the pro-Fatah Al-Ayyam
newspaper, and closed its offices in the Gaza Strip because it ran a caricature
that mocked legislators loyal to Hamas. The Gaza Strip Interior Ministry later
issued an arrest warrant for the editor. More widely, in late August 2007 the
group was accused in "The Telegraph", a conservative British newspaper, of
torturing, detaining, and firing on unarmed protesters who had objected to
policies of the Hamas government. Also in late August, Palestinian health
officials reported that the Hamas government had been shutting down Gaza
clinics in retaliation for doctor strikes – The Hamas government confirmed
the "punitive measure against doctors" because, in its view, they had incited
other doctors to suspend services and go out on strike. In September 2007 the
Hamas government banned public prayers, after Fatah supporters began holding
worship sessions that quickly escalated into raucous protests against Hamas
rule. Government security forces beat several gathering supporters and
journalists. In October 2008, the Hamas government announced it would release
all political prisoners in custody in Gaza. Several hours after the
announcement, 17 Fatah members were released. On 2 August 2012, the
International Federation of Journalists (IFJ) accused Hamas of harassing
elected officials belong to the Palestinian Journalists' Syndicate (PJS) in
Gaza. The IFJ said that journalists' leaders in Gaza have faced a campaign of
intimidation, as well as threats designed to force them to stop their union
work. Some of these journalists are now facing charges of illegal activities
and a travel ban, due to their refusal "to give in to pressure." The IFJ said
that these accusations are "malicious" and "should be dropped immediately." The
IFJ explained that the campaign against PJS members began in March 2012, after
their election, and included a raid organized by Hamas supporters who took over
the PJS offices in Gaza with the help of the security forces, and subsequently
evicted the staff and elected officials. Other harassment includes the
targeting of individuals who were bullied into stopping union work. The IFJ
backed the PJS and called on Prime Minister Ismail Haniyeh to intervene to stop
"his officials' unwarranted intereference in journalists' affairs." In November
2012, two Gazan journalists were prevented from leaving Gaza by Hamas. There
were scheduled to participate in a conference in Cairo, Egypt. After being
questioned by security forces, their passports were confiscated. Human rights
abuses. In June 2011, the Independent Commission for Human Rights based in
Ramallah published a report whose findings included that the Palestinians in
the West Bank and the Gaza Strip were subjected in 2010 to an "almost
systematic campaign" of human rights abuses by the Palestinian Authority and
Hamas, as well as by Israeli authorities, with the security forces belonging to
the PA and Hamas being responsible for torture, arrests and arbitrary
detentions. In 2012 the Human Rights Watch presented a 43 page long list of
human rights violation committed by Hamas. Among actions attributed to Hamas
the HRW report mentions beatings with metal clubs and rubber hoses, hanging of
alleged collaborationists with Israel, and torture of 102 individuals.
According to the report, Hamas also tortured civil society activists and
peaceful protesters. Reflecting on the captivity of Gilad Shalit, the HRW
report described it as "cruel and inhuman". The report also slams Hamas for
harassment of people based on so called morality offenses and for media
censorship. In a public statement Joe Stork, the deputy Middle East director of
HRW claimed that "after five years of Hamas rule in Gaza, its criminal justice
system reeks of injustice, routinely violates detainees' rights and grants
impunity to abusive security services". Hamas responded by denying charges and
describing them as "politically motivated" Political violence and terrorism.
Hamas uses both political activities and violence in pursuit of its goals. For
example, while politically engaged in the 2006 Palestinian Territories
parliamentary election campaign, Hamas stated in its election manifesto that it
was prepared to use "armed resistance to end the occupation". From 2000 to
2004, Hamas was responsible for killing nearly 400 Israelis and wounding more
than 2,000 in 425 attacks, according to the Israeli Ministry of Foreign
Affairs. From 2001 through May 2008, Hamas launched more than 3,000 Qassam
rockets and 2,500 mortar attacks into Israel. Attacks on civilians. In the
first years of the First Intifada (1987–1993), Hamas violence was directed
first at collaborators with Israel and at individuals it considered moral
deviants, and then later at the Israeli military. A new direction began with
the formation of the al-Qassam Brigades militia in 1992, and in 1993 suicide
attacks began against Israeli targets on the West Bank. The first such attack
occurred on April 16, 1993, when an al-Qassam Brigades operative detonated
explosives in a car he parked next to two buses, one military and one civilian,
in the West Bank town of Mehola, killing a Palestinian civilian and wounding 8
Israeli soldiers. After the February 1994 massacre by Baruch Goldstein of 30
Muslim civilians in a Hebron mosque, the al-Qassam Brigades expanded suicide
attacks to target primarily civilians. The first of the suicide bombings that
targeted civilians was at Afula on April 16, 1994, when a suicide bomber
detonated an explosives-laden car next to a bus, killing nine (including the
bomber) and wounding 50. The most deadly suicide bombing was an attack on a
Netanya hotel on March 27, 2002, in which 30 people were killed and 140 were
wounded. The attack has also been referred to as the Passover massacre since it
took place on the first night of the Jewish festival of Passover at a Seder.
Hamas defended the suicide attacks as a legitimate aspect of its asymmetric
warfare against Israel, but the practice is illegal under international law.
Hamas renounced suicide attacks in April 2006. In a 2002 report, Human Rights
Watch stated that Hamas leaders "should be held accountable" for "war crimes
and crimes against humanity" committed by the al-Qassam Brigades. In May 2006
Israel arrested a top Hamas official, Ibrahim Hamed, who Israeli security
officials alleged was responsible for dozens of suicide bombings and other
attacks on Israelis. Hamed's trial on those charges has not yet concluded.
While the suicide attacks ceased in 2005, al-Qassam Brigades rocket and mortar
attacks on towns and settlements near Gaza continued. Since 2002, paramilitary
soldiers of al-Qassam Brigades and other groups have used homemade Qassam
rockets to hit Israeli towns in the Negev, such as Sderot. Al-Qassam Brigades
was estimated in 2007 to have launched 22% of the rocket and mortar attacks,
which killed fifteen people between the years 2000 and 2009 (see Palestinian
rocket attacks on Israel). The introduction of the "Qassam-2" rocket in 2008
enabled Palestinian paramilitary groups to reach, from Gaza, such Israeli
cities such as Ashkelon. In 2008, Hamas leader Khaled Mashal, offered that
Hamas would attack only military targets if the IDF would stop causing the
deaths of Palestinian civilians. Following a June 19, 2008 ceasefire, the al-
Qassam Brigades ended its rocket attacks and arrested Fatah militants in Gaza
who had continued sporadic rocket and mortar attacks against Israel. The al-
Qassam Brigades resumed the attacks after the November 4 Israeli incursion into
Gaza. Rocket attacks on Israel. According to Human Rights Watch, Hamas and
other Palestinian armed groups have launched thousands of rockets into Israel
since 2001, killing 15 civilians, wounding many more, and posing an ongoing
threat to the nearly 800,000 Israeli civilians who live and work in the
weapons' range. Hamas officials have said that the rockets were aimed only at
military targets, saying that civilian casualties were the "accidental result"
of the weapons' poor quality. According to Human Rights Watch, statements by
Hamas leaders suggest that the purpose of the rocket attacks was indeed to
strike civilians and civilian objects. From January 2009, following Operation
Cast Lead, Hamas largely stopped launching rocket attacks on Israel and has on
at least two occasions arrested members of other groups who have launched
rockets, "showing that it has the ability to impose the law when it wants". In
February 2010, Hamas issued a statement regretting any harm that may have
befallen Israeli civilians as a result of Palestinian rocket attacks during the
Gaza war. It maintained that its rocket attacks had been aimed at Israeli
military targets but lacked accuracy and hence sometimes hit civilian areas.
Israel responded that Hamas had boasted repeatedly of targeting and murdering
civilians in the media. Attempts to derail 2010 peace talks. In 2010, Hamas,
who have been actively sidelined from the peace talks by Israel, spearheaded a
coordinated effort by 13 Palestinian militant groups, in attempt to derail the
stalled peace talks between Israel and Mahmoud Abbas, President of the
Palestinian Authority. According to the Israeli Coordinator of Government
Activities in the Territories Major Gen. Eitan Dangot, Israel seeks to work
with Salam Fayyad, to help revive the Palestinian economy, and hopes to ease
restrictions on the Gaza Strip further, "while somehow preventing the Islamic
militants who rule it from getting credit for any progress". According to
Dangot, Hamas must not be seen as ruling successfully or be allowed to "get
credit for a policy that would improve the lives of people." The campaign
consists of attacks against Israelis in which, according to a Hamas declaration
in early September, "all options are open". The participating groups also
include Palestinian Islamic Jihad, the Popular Resistance Committees and an
unnamed splinter group of Fatah. As part of the campaign, on August 31, 2010, 4
Israeli settlers, including a pregnant woman, were killed by Hamas militants
while driving on Route 60 near the settlement Kiryat Arba, in the West bank.
According to witnesses, militants opened fire on the moving vehicle, but then
"approached the car" and shot the occupants in their seats at "close range".
The attack was described by Israeli sources as one of the "worst" terrorist
acts in years. A senior Hamas official said that Israeli settlers in the West
Bank are legitimate targets since "they are an army in every sense of the
word". Themes of martyrdom. According to a translation by Palestinian Media
Watch, in 2008, Fathi Hamad, a member of the Palestinian Legislative Council,
stated on Al-Aqsa TV, "For the Palestinian people death became an industry, at
which women excel and so do all people on this land: the elderly excel, the
Jihad fighters excel, and the children excel. Accordingly (Palestinians)
created a human shield of women, children, the elderly and the Jihad fighters
against the Zionist bombing machine, as if they were saying to the Zionist
enemy: 'We desire death as you desire life'." In 2010, Hamas speaker Ahmad Bahr
praised the virtues of martyrdom and Jihad, and said that 2.5 million black-
eyed virgins were waiting in the Garden of Eden which could be entered only by
prophets, by the righteous, and by martyrs. He continued by saying that nobody
on Earth "will be able to confront the resistance, or to confront the
mujahideen, those who worship Allah and seek martyrdom." Guerrilla warfare.
Hamas has made great use of guerrilla tactics in the Gaza Strip and to a lesser
degree the West Bank. It has successfully adapted these techniques over the
years since its inception. According to a 2006 report by rival Fatah party,
Hamas had smuggled between several hundred and 1,300 tons of advanced rockets,
along with other weaponry, into Gaza. Hamas has used IEDs and anti-tank rockets
against the IDF in Gaza. The latter include standard RPG-7 warheads and home-
made rockets such as the Al-Bana, Al-Batar and Al-Yasin. The IDF has a
difficult, if not impossible time trying to find hidden weapons caches in
Palestinian areas — this is due to the high local support base Hamas enjoys.
Other targets and activities. In addition to killing Israeli civilians and
armed forces, Hamas has also attacked suspected Palestinian collaborators, and
Fatah rivals. In the wake of the Israeli invasion of Gaza in January 2009,
Hamas has been accused of systematically rounding up, torturing and summarily
executing Fatah supporters suspected of supplying information to Israel. On
February 2007, members of the Palestinian Red Crescent, speaking on conditions
of anonymity, said that Hamas had confiscated their humanitarian supply convoys
that were destined for Palestinian civilians. Human Rights Watch has cited a
number of summary executions as particular examples of violations of the rules
of warfare, including the case of Muhammad Swairki, 28, a cook for Palestinian
Authority Chairman Mahmoud Abbas's presidential guard, who was thrown to his
death, with his hands and legs tied, from a 15-story apartment building in Gaza
City. Hamas and other Palestinian militant groups are accused of frequently
extrajudicially executing or otherwise punishing those considered collaborators
with Israel. Frequent killings of unarmed people have also occurred during
Hamas-Fatah clashes. Thousands of angry Hamas loyalists marched on February 24,
2008 at the funeral of a Muslim preacher who died in PNA custody, turning the
ceremony into a rare show of defiance against President Mahmoud Abbas. On
August 14, 2009 Hamas fighters stormed the Mosque of radical cleric Abdel-Latif
Moussa. The cleric was protected by at least 100 fighters from Jund Ansar Allah
("Army of the Helpers of God"), an Islamist group with links to Al-Qaeda. The
resulting battle left at least 13 people dead, including Moussa and 6 Hamas
fighters, and 120 people injured. International designation of Hamas. United
States designation of Hamas. The State Department decided to add Hamas to its
U.S. State Department list of Foreign Terrorist Organizations in April 1993. ,
Hamas is still listed. The United States states that its strong stand against
Hamas arises from the group's use of violence, its opposition to U.S. interests
in the Middle East, and because Hamas is allegedly receiving support from Iran
and collaborating with the Lebanese group Hezbullah. The Hamas representative
in Iran denied the allegation that it had received $30 million from Iran in
1992, but acknowledged Iranian assistance to Palestinian groups. In particular,
the U.s. alleges that Hamas soldiers have been given refuge in southern
Lebanon, where they receive training and support from Hezbollah guerrillas. The
FBI and United States Department of Justice also stated, in 2004, that Hamas
threatened the United States through covert cells on US soil. Researcher Steven
Emerson in 2006 alleged that the group had "an extensive infrastructure in the
US mostly revolving around the activities of fundraising, recruiting and
training members, directing operations against Israel, organizing political
support and operating through human-rights front groups." Emerson added that
while the group had never acted outside of Israel or the Palestinian
Territories, it does have the capacity to carry out attacks in the U.S. "if it
decided to enlarge the scope of its operations." FBI director Robert Mueller in
2005 testified to the Senate Intelligence Committee that, the FBI's assessment
at that time was that there was "a limited threat of a coordinated terrorist
attack in the US from Palestinian terrorist organizations" such as Hamas. He
added that Hamas had "maintained a longstanding policy of focusing their
attacks on Israeli targets in Israel and the Palestinian territories, and that
the FBI believed that the main interest of Hamas in the U.S.remained "the
raising of funds to support their regional goals." Mueller also stated that,
"of all the Palestinian groups, Hamas has the largest presence in the US, with
a robust infrastructure, primarily focused on fundraising, propaganda for the
Palestinian cause, and proselytizing. Although it would be a major strategic
shift for Hamas, its US network is theoretically capable of facilitating acts
of terrorism in the US On 2 May 2011, Prime Minister Ismail Haniyeh condemned
the killing of Osama bin Laden in Pakistan by the United States. Haniyeh
praised Bin Laden, the founder of the jihadist organization al-Qaeda, as a
"martyr" and an "Arab holy warrior". The United States government condemned his
remarks as "outrageous". Public opinion of Hamas. In Arab countries. A 2010 Pew
Global Attitudes Survey found that 60% of Jordanian Muslims and 49% of Muslims
in both Lebanon and Egypt held a favorable opinion of Hamas. A 2007 Pew survey
found 62% of Palestinians holding a favorable opinion of the group. In Israel.
In February 2008 a Haaretz poll indicated that 64% of Israelis favour their
government holding direct talks with Hamas in Gaza about a cease-fire and the
release of captives. According to a November 2009 survey conducted by Haaretz,
57% of Israelis support the view of MK Shaul Mofaz of Kadima, that Israel
should establish a dialogue with Hamas under certain conditions, for example,
that Hamas renounces violence, recognizes Israel's right to exist as a Jewish
nation, and loses its designation as a terrorist organization. Hamas responded
to this by labeling it "Zionist vulgarity" and stating that they will never
negotiate with or recognize their "enemy", the state of Israel. Legal action
against Hamas. In the USA. The charitable trust Holy Land Foundation for Relief
and Development was accused in December 2001 of funding Hamas. The US Justice
Department filed 200 charges against the foundation. The case first ended in a
mistrial, in which jurors acquitted on some counts and were deadlocked on
charges ranging from tax violations to providing material support for
terrorists. In a retrial, on November 24, 2008, the five leaders of the
Foundation were convicted on 108 counts. In 2004, a federal court in the United
States found Hamas liable in a civil lawsuit for the 1996 murders of Yaron and
Efrat Ungar near Bet Shemesh, Israel. Hamas has been ordered to pay the
families of the Ungars $116 million. On July 5, 2004, the court issued a
default judgment against the PNA and the PLO regarding the Ungars' said that
the Palestinian Authority and the PLO provide safe haven to Hamas. On August
20, 2004, three Palestinians, one a naturalized American citizen, were charged
with a "lengthy racketeering conspiracy to provide money for terrorist acts in
Israel." The indicted include Mousa Mohammed Abu Marzook, senior member of
Hamas, believed to be currently in Damascus, Syria and considered a fugitive by
the US. On February 1, 2007, two men were acquitted of contravening US law by
supporting Hamas. Both men argued that they helped move money for Palestinian
causes aimed at helping the Palestinian people and not to promote terrorism. In
January 2009, a Federal prosecutor accused the Council on American-Islamic
Relations of having links to a charity designated as a support network for
Hamas. The Justice Department identified CAIR as an "un-indicted co-
conspirator" in the Holy Land Foundation case in Dallas, which concluded with
the sentencing of the two founders of the foundation to life in prison for
funneling $12 million to Hamas. Later, a federal appeals court removed that
label for all parties and instead, named them "joint venturers." In Germany. A
German federal court ruled in 2004 that Hamas was a unified organisation whose
humanitarian aid work could not be separated from its "terrorist and political
activities." In July 2010, Germany also outlawed Frankfurt-based International
Humanitarian Aid Organization (IHH e.V.), saying it had used donations to
support Hamas-affiliated relief projects in Gaza. While presenting their
activities to donors as humanitarian assistance, German Interior Minister
Thomas de Maiziere said, IHH e.V. had "exploited trusting donors' willingness
to help by using money that was given for a good purpose for supporting what
is, in the final analysis, a terrorist organization." A spokesperson for the
Islamic Human Rights Commission described the decision as "a victory for those
who seek to stigmatise all Islamic activism as supporting terrorism."
