Harry's Place Harry's Place is a British political blog. It has been nominated
for a number of awards, including a "Guardian" award for political blogs, the
2005 Weblog awards for UK blogs. Politics. "Harry's Place" was supportive of
the 2003 invasion of Iraq, the concept of liberal interventionism, and liberal
dissident movements in the Islamic world. It is a supporter of a two-state
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. It is opposed to Islamism and of
what it characterises as totalitarian, pro-Islamist and antisemitic tendencies.
Figures it associates with these tendencies are often strongly criticised,
including Raed Salah (whom it calls "a racist, an extremist and a funder of
Hamas"), Gilad Atzmon ("an outspoken antisemite who promotes Holocaust
denial"), and Yusuf al-Qaradawi ("a hate preacher who admires Hitler and who
hopes one day to be able to complete his work"). In the context of UK politics,
the site is particularly critical of Ken Livingstone, George Galloway, the
British National Party, RESPECT, the Socialist Workers Party, and the Stop the
War Coalition. It defines itself as a staunch opponent of religious and
political censorship of all kinds and was supportive of the 2006 London March
for Free Expression. The site was also one of the main backers of the Euston
Manifesto. Nick Cohen has argued that "Harry's Place" was one of only few
places where it was being noted that "a section of the left is allied with
religious fanaticism and, for the first time since the Hitler-Stalin pact,
[…] has gone soft on fascism". "Harry Hatchet" has had several guest columns
in "The Guardian's" technology and online commentary sections. However Guardian
editorial policies are commonly criticised by Harry's Place contributors.
Contributors. Harry's Place was originally started by a blogger, using the nom
de plumes Harry Steele and Harry Hatchet or just Harry, who was originally the
sole writer. The 11 September 2001 attacks on the World Trade Center served as
a "wake up call" according to Harry, prompting him to try to better understand
what political forces led up to it. In 2002, he began blogging as a way to
clarify his own thoughts on political issues such as the impending war in Iraq,
moving away from his Communism to embrace a more moderate social-democratic
worldview. He made a public break with his former views in a Workers' Liberty
message board discussion in October 2002, where he said Stalinism was a
viewpoint "I now reject totally". The rapid growth in the site's audience led
him to include other like-minded writers so that the blog could be updated more
regularly. Harry ceased to contribute regularly at the end of September 2005.
Other contributors include Marcus, Gene Zitver (aka "Gene"), David Toube, and
more recently, Aymenn Jawad Al-Tamimi, Adam LeBor, Brett Lock, Brian Meredith,
Edmund Standing, Hasan Afzal, Michael Ezra, 'Lucy Lips' and others. Marcus
attended the 15 February, 2003 anti-war protest in London, and came away with
the opinion that "I don't know if I can consider myself left-wing anymore if
this is the left". Marcus wrote about his views on the politics behind the 15
February demonstration, and soon became a regular contributor. Gene is a
resident of the United States from a trade union background, who has spent
several years living in Israel. Harry came across Gene's posts on a George
Orwell discussion list, and invited him to start posting on his blog. Gene is a
strong opponent of President Hugo Chavez of Venezuela, whom he accuses of being
authoritarian. Some Harry's Place writers post under pseudonyms: the pseudonyms
used include Lucy Lips, habibi, Libby T, Israelinurse, and Alan A. David Toube
is a lawyer and former lecturer. He also came to blogging after the 11
September attacks. One of his close childhood friends was among those killed in
the World Trade Center, while another close childhood friend became a militant
Islamist, and appeared in the media applauding the attacks. Toube claims that
he took up reading and writing blogs as a way of trying to making sense of
these events. Journalist Johann Hari also contributed articles to the weblog
until Autumn 2004, when he left to start his own blog. Controversy. The
comments pages on Harry's Place are an open forum where debates can frequently
become heated. "Harry's Place" has been accused of Islamophobia. The site's
contributors reply that they are criticizing what they see as a reactionary
interpretation of Islam, not Muslims in general, and that they are expressing
solidarity with Muslims who are oppressed by Islamists. The blog is frequently
critical of prominent anti-Zionist activists such as Gilad Atzmon, Keith
Burstein and Alexei Sayle and in particular academics who criticise Israel such
as Norman Finkelstein, Noam Chomsky, and Schlomo Sand. In July 2008 Harry's
Place posted on an Al Jazeera report, translated by one of its contributors, in
which the director of the British Muslim Initiative, Mohamed Sawalha, appeared
to speak of the "evil Jew". Al Jazeera subsequently changed the phrase to
"Jewish Lobby". The British Muslim Initiative claimed that the translation of
the original phrase was "malevolent" and implied that their President, Mohammed
Sawalha was "anti-semitic and hateful". Mohamed Sawalha had been identified by
the BBC in 2006 as a senior Hamas activist. On 26 August 2008, Harry's Place
was briefly offline following a complaint to its DNS provider. The site had
reported that a member of the University and College Union's discussion list
had posted links to American white nationalist David Duke's website to support
the call for a boycott on Israel.
