Health Services Union expenses affair The Health Services Union expenses affair
is an Australian political scandal concerning allegations by Fair Work
Australia that various senior officials used funds of the Health Services Union
(HSU) to pay for personal expenses. Health Services Union. The Health Services
Union (HSU) is a specialist health union with around 60,000 members working in
all areas of healthcare across Australia. The membership of the union includes
doctors, nurses and allied health professionals such as physiotherapists and
radiographers, ambulance officers, clerical and administrative staff, managers
and support staff. In April 2012 the Australian Council of Trade Unions voted
to suspend the membership of the HSU on the basis of corruption. Following
government action, the Federal Court of Australia removed the union's national
executive and appointed judge Michael Moore as administrator. New South Wales
Police raided the union's Sydney office on 2 May 2012, seizing documents and
computers as part of the "Strike Force Carnarvon" investigation into secret
commissions allegedly received by then national secretary Michael Williamson
and his predecessor, Craig Thomson. Williamson was intercepted in a basement
attempting to remove a bag of documents. Fair Work Australia inquiries. Fair
Work Australia (FWA)—Australia's industrial relations regulator —
investigated allegations of financial impropriety involving both the Victorian
No.1 Branch, and the National Office of the Health Services Union. On 23
December 2011 Nassios produced the Victoria No.1 report, which was not released
publicly until 16 March 2012. However his National Office report, consisting of
183 findings, was tabled in the Australian Senate on 7 May 2012. Within the
National Office report, 153 findings pertain to Craig Thomson's alleged
breaches of union rules and sections 237(1), 285(1), 286(1), and 287(1) of
Schedule 1 of the "Workplace Relations Amendment (Registration and
Accountability of Organisations) Act 2002". The FWA investigations have been
criticised for failing to investigate the finances of the HSU following a
petition by HSU No.4 Branch members in July 2009. Temby Report. A report
authored by lawyer Ian Temby, QC and accountant Dennis Robertson found that $20
million was paid by the HSU without any form of tendering or contract. This
included $5 million paid to companies operated by former HSU boss Michael
Williamson and his wife. Prime Minister Julia Gillard commented ‘‘It’s
clear that there have been real problems at the HSU. That’s distressing I
think to everyone who cares about working people.’’ Craig Thomson and Jeff
Jackson. Craig Thomson was elected as the National Secretary of the Health
Services Union (HSU) and held that position from 2002 until 2007. In 2007
Thomson was elected as the Australian Labor Party (ALP) candidate for the seat
of Dobell on the New South Wales central coast. He was re-elected in 2010. The
Fair Work Australia (FWA) report concluded that Thomson had spent almost
$270,000 of HSU funds on his 2007 election campaign to win the seat of Dobell
on the NSW Central Coast. This included $200,000 for two staffers who worked on
the campaign, and another $71,000 directly expended on the campaign. Other
money, including from Thomson's union credit card, was used to pay for office
supplies including furniture and utility connections. Following his successful
election campaign at the 2007 federal election Thomson resigned from the HSU on
14 December 2007. On 18 May 2012 it was reported that Terry Nassios, the FWA
investigator said he was unsure if some payments had been made on the card
after that date and that he was recommending the payments after the resignation
date be reported to the public prosecutor for investigation. During Question
Time on 16 August 2011, Prime Minister Gillard was asked if her confidence in
Craig Thomson was based on a thorough investigation of his credibility. She
replied, "I have complete confidence in the member for Dobell. I look forward
to him continuing to do that job for a very long, long, long time to come."
Gillard later moved to suspend Thomson from the ALP on 29 April 2012, saying
"At the moment, Australian voters see a dark cloud over Parliament. I have made
a judgment about the Parliament and about respect for the Parliament. There is
a line which has been crossed here." She said the decision was solely hers but
that Thomson agreed with her. Later he stated that he had had different reasons
for leaving the party than those given by the PM. In his speech to the House of
Representatives on 21 May 2012 Thomson said that there were credit cards which
showed expenditure on escorts and prostitutes for at least two other officials.
He implied that Jeff Jackson, a former HSU executive member and the former
husband of HSU National Secretary Kathy Jackson was one of two officials
responsible for the spending on prostitutes, a claim earlier made by HSU branch
president Pauline Fegan.Thomson's allegations were rejected by union figures he
named as being able to support his claims, including his half-brothe, former
union official Struan Robertson. Thomson questioned the impartiality of the
investigation. Michael Lawler the Vice President of FWA was involved in
internal HSU politics at the request of his partner Kathy Jackson. Jackson
allegedly supplied most of the documents used by the FWA in its HSU National
Office investigation. FWA's Nassios, citing a newspaper report, stated $15,000
had been repaid by Jeff Jackson in settlement of three payments of $5,000
identified as "back pay" dishonestly claimed. When asked by Fair Work Australia
to clarify if this claim pertained to Jackson, Thomson declined to provide any
details, citing legal advice. On 15 October 2012 Fair Work Australia launched
civil proceedings against Thomson related to his use of HSU funds. Thomson
stated that he would contest these charges. Michael Williamson. Michael
Williamson, former National President of the Australian Labor Party, served in
dual capacities within the HSU - as the National President of the HSU, and the
General Secretary of the HSU East Branch - until all positions were declared
vacated by the Federal Court in 2012. He was named in the Temby report as
engaging in irregularities, such as placing family members in union jobs,
paying inflated prices for services, and heading United Edge, a company
supplying information technology services to the union. On 4 October 2012,
Williamson was charged with offences relating to fraud and obstruction of
justice, and was suspended as director of United Edge. Australian Council of
Trade Unions. On 15 May 2012, ACTU president Ged Kearney addressed the ACTU
congress on the HSU scandal. "I know I speak for everyone in this room when I
say that misuse of member's money and contempt for the accountability to
members are unacceptable", she said. Union figure Paul Howes stressed the
positive, saying, "I'm actually pleased that we know that this happened because
it's the lesson for us is making sure it never happens again and never allowing
a couple of disgusting individuals get away with stealing money out of the
pockets of hard-working, low-paid health workers or any other union members in
this country." Addressing an ACTU congress on 15 May 2012, Gillard said of the
HSU's impact on the Australian union movement's reputation, "...the very poor
conduct of one union risks tarnishing that reputation." 2012 ACTU congress.
Paul Howes, addressing the ACTU congress on 16 May 2012, said, after defending
union skills in hunting down unscrupulous employers, "If we have a dodgy trade
union official who rips off those workers, we need to hunt them down too, hunt
them down too to make sure they pay back what they took from the hardworking
men and women of the Health Services Union." Gillard spoke in support of a
parliamentary code of conduct, saying, "I do want to see members of Parliament
always doing the right thing. There are various rules now for members of
Parliament but I'm obviously open to suggestions that we have a code of
conduct." Independent MP Tony Windsor flagged action along with Rob Oakeshott
to increase Parliament's powers to deal with cases such as Thomson's. "I think
that there is a need for, if people are proven to be guilty in some of these
circumstances, that Parliament may need some greater power or have a process
where they actually leave the building", he said.
