Hezbollah Hezbollah ( "", literally "Party of Allah" or "Party of God") is a
Shi'a Islamic militant group and political party based in Lebanon. It receives
financial and political support from Iran and Syria, and its paramilitary wing
is regarded as a resistance movement throughout much of the Arab and Muslim
worlds. The United States, the Netherlands, Bahrain, Egypt, the United Kingdom,
Australia, Canada and Israel classify Hezbollah as a terrorist organization, in
whole or in part. Hezbollah first emerged in response to the 1982 Israeli
invasion of Lebanon, during the Lebanese civil war. Its leaders were inspired
by Ayatollah Khomeini, and its forces were trained and organized by a
contingent of Iranian Revolutionary Guards. Hezbollah's 1985 manifesto listed
its four main goals as "Israel's final departure from Lebanon as a prelude to
its final obliteration", ending "any imperialist power in Lebanon", submission
of the Phalangists to "just rule" and bringing them to trial for their crimes,
and giving the people the chance to choose "with full freedom the system of
government they want", while not hiding its commitment to the rule of Islam.
Hezbollah leaders have also made numerous statements calling for the
destruction of the state of Israel, which they refer to as the "Zionist
entity". Hezbollah, which started with only a small militia, has grown to an
organization with seats in the Lebanese government, a radio and a satellite
television-station, and programs for social development. Hezbollah maintains
strong support among Lebanon's Shi'a population, and is able to mobilize
demonstrations of hundreds of thousands. Hezbollah alongside with some other
groups began the 2006‚Äì2008 Lebanese political protests in opposition to the
government of Prime Minister Fouad Siniora. A later dispute over Hezbollah
preservation of its telecoms network led to clashes and Hezbollah-led
opposition fighters seized control of several West Beirut neighborhoods from
Future Movement militiamen loyal to Fouad Siniora. These areas were then handed
over to the Lebanese Army. A national unity government was formed in 2008,
giving Hezbollah and its opposition allies control of eleven of thirty cabinets
seats; effectively veto power. Hezbollah receives military training, weapons,
and financial support from Iran, and political support from Syria. Following
the end of the Israeli occupation of Lebanon in 2000, its military strength
grew significantly. Despite a June 2008 certification by the United Nations
that Israel had withdrawn from all Lebanese territory, in August, Lebanon's new
Cabinet unanimously approved a draft policy statement which secures Hezbollah's
existence as an armed organization and guarantees its right to "liberate or
recover occupied lands". Since 1992, the organisation has been headed by Hassan
Nasrallah, its Secretary-General. Hezbollah became a part of the government for
the first time on June 13, 2011. History. 1980s. Ending Israel's occupation of
Southern Lebanon, which lasted for 18 years, was the primary focus of
Hezbollah's early activities. Israel had become militarily involved in Lebanon
in combat with the Palestine Liberation Organization, which had been invited
into Lebanon after Black September in Jordan. Israel had been attacking the PLO
in Southern Lebanon in the lead-up to the 1982 Lebanon War, and Israel had
invaded and occupied Southern Lebanon and besieged Beirut. When the Shi'a
population of southern Lebanon realized that Israel had no intention of
leaving, they rebelled. The Amal Movement ("hope"), the main political group,
initiated guerrilla warfare. Commenting on the issue in 2006 Ehud Barak, the
former Israeli prime minister, stated: Hezbollah waged an asymmetrical
guerrilla war against Israel using suicide attacks against the Israel Defense
Forces (IDF) and against Israeli targets outside of Lebanon. Hezbollah is
reputed to have been among the first Islamic resistance groups to use tactical
suicide bombing, assassination, and capturing foreign soldiers in the Middle
East. Hezbollah turned into a paramilitary organization and used missiles,
Katyusha, and other type of rocket launchers and detonations of explosive
charges instead of capturing, murders, and hijackings. At the end of the
Lebanese Civil War in 1990, despite the Taif Agreement asking for the
"disbanding of all Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias," Syria, in control of
Lebanon at that time, allowed Hezbollah to maintain their arsenal, and control
the Shiite areas in Southern Lebanon along the border with Israel. After 1990.
In the 1990s, Hezbollah transformed from a revolutionary group into a political
one, in a process which is described as the Lebanonisation of Hezbollah. Unlike
its uncompromising revolutionary stance in the 1980s, Hezbollah conveyed a
lenient stance towards the Lebanese state. In 1992, Hezbollah decided to
participate in elections, and Ali Khamenei, supreme leader of Iran, endorsed
it. Former Hezbollah secretary general, Subhi al-Tufayli, contested this
decision, which led to a schism in Hezbollah. Hezbollah won all twelve seats
which were on its electoral list. At the end of that year, Hezbollah began to
engage in dialog with Lebanese Christians. Hezbollah regards cultural,
political, and religious freedoms in Lebanon as sanctified, although it does
not extend these values to groups who have relations with Israel. In 1997,
Hezbollah formed multi-confessional Lebanese Brigades to Fighting the Israeli
Occupation, which was an attempt to revive national and secular resistance
against Israel, which marks the Lebanonisation of resistance. Islamic Jihad
Organization. Whether the Islamic Jihad Organization (IJO) was a "nom de
guerre" used by Hezbollah or a separate organization, is disputed. Hezbollah
leaders reportedly admitted their involvement in IJO's attacks and the nominal
nature of "Islamic Jihad" ‚Äì that it was merely a "telephone organization,"
and whose name was "used by those involved to disguise their true identity." A
2003 decision by an American court found IJO was the name used by Hezbollah for
its attacks in Lebanon, and parts of the Middle East, and Europe. Hezbollah
also used another name, Islamic Resistance, or "al-Muqawama al-Islamiyya," for
its attacks against Israel. The names Islamic Jihad Organization, Organization
of the Oppressed on Earth and the Revolutionary Justice Organization are
considered to be synonymous with Hezbollah by the United States, Israel, and
Canada. Ideology. The ideology of Hezbollah has been summarized as Shi'i
radicalism. Hezbollah was largely formed with the aid of the Ayatollah
Khomeini's followers in the early 1980s in order to spread Islamic revolution
and follows a distinct version of Islamic Shi'a ideology or Guardianship of the
Islamic Jurists) developed by Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, leader of the
"Islamic Revolution" in Iran. Although Hezbollah originally aimed to transform
Lebanon into a formal Faqihi Islamic republic, this goal has been abandoned in
favor of a more inclusive approach. The Hezbollah manifesto. On February 16,
1985, Sheik Ibrahim al-Amin issued Hezbollah's manifesto. Translated excerpts
from Hezbollah's original 1985 manifesto read:We are the sons of the umma
(Muslim community) ... We are an ummah linked to the Muslims of the whole world
by the solid doctrinal and religious connection of Islam, whose message God
wanted to be fulfilled by the Seal of the Prophets, i.e., Prophet Muhammad. ...
As for our culture, it is based on the Holy Quran, the Sunna and the legal
rulings of the faqih who is our source of imitation... Hezbollah follows the
Islamic Shi'a theology developed by Iranian revolutionary leader Ayatollah
Ruhollah Khomeini. Attitudes, statements, and actions concerning Israel and
Zionism. From the inception of Hezbollah to the present, the elimination of the
State of Israel has been one of Hezbollah's primary goals. Some translations of
Hezbollah's 1985 Arabic-language manifesto state that "our struggle will end
only when this entity is obliterated". According to Hezbollah's Deputy-General,
Na'im Qasim, the struggle against Israel is a core belief of Hezbollah and the
central rationale of Hezbollah's existence. Hezbollah says that its continued
hostilities against Israel are justified as reciprocal to Israeli operations
against Lebanon and as retaliation for what they claim is Israel's occupation
of Lebanese territory. Although Israel withdrew from Lebanon in 2000, and their
complete withdrawal was verified by the United Nations, Lebanon now considers
the Shebaa farms‚Äîa 26-km¬≤ (10-mi¬≤) piece of land captured by Israel from
Syria in the 1967 war and considered by the UN to be disputed territory between
Syria and Israel‚Äîto be Lebanese territory. Additionally, Hezbollah claims
that three Lebanese prisoners are being held in Israel. Finally, Hezbollah
consider Israel to be an illegitimate state. For these reasons, they justify
their actions as acts of defensive jihad. Attitudes and actions concerning Jews
and Judaism. Hezbollah officials say that the group distinguishes between
Judaism and Zionism. However, various anti-Semitic statements have been
attributed to them. Amal Saad-Ghorayeb, a Lebanese political analyst, argues
that although Zionism has influenced Hezbollah's anti-Judaism, "it is not
contingent upon it" because Hezbollah's hatred of Jews is more religiously
motivated than politically motivated. Robert S. Wistrich, a historian
specializing in the study of anti-Semitism, described Hezbollah's ideology
concerning Jews: Wistrich, Robert S. "A Lethal Obsession: Anti-Semitism from
Antiquity to the Global Jihad". New York: Random House, 2010. pp. 766‚Äì767.
Conflicting reports say Al-Manar accused either Israel or Jews of deliberately
spreading HIV and other diseases to Arabs throughout the Middle East. Al-Manar,
the Hezbollah-owned and operated television station, was criticized in the West
for airing "anti-Semitic propaganda" in the form of a television drama
depicting a Jewish world domination conspiracy. Hezbollah also used anti-
Semitic educational materials designed for 5-year-old scouts. The group has
been accused by American analysts of engaging in Holocaust denial. In November
2009, Hezbollah pressured a private English-language school to drop excerpts
from The Diary of Anne Frank, a book of the writings from the diary kept by the
Jewish child Anne Frank while she was in hiding with her family during the Nazi
occupation of the Netherlands, after Hezbollah's Al-Manar television channel
complained, asking how long Lebanon would "remain an open arena for the Zionist
invasion of education"? Organization. At the beginning many Hezbollah leaders
have maintained that the movement was "not an organization, for its members
carry no cards and bear no specific responsibilities," and that the movement
does not have "a clearly defined organizational structure." Nowadays, as
Hezbollah scholar Magnus Ranstorp reports, Hezbollah does indeed have a formal
governing structure, and in keeping with the principle of Guardianship of the
Islamic Jurists ("velayat-e faqih"), it "concentrate ... all authority and
powers" in its religious leaders, whose decisions then "flow from the ulama
down the entire community." Ranstorp, "Hizb'allah in Lebanon," (1997), p.45
Since the Supreme Leader of Iran is the ultimate clerical authority,
Hezbollah's leaders have appealed to him "for guidance and directives in cases
when Hezbollah's collective leadership too divided over issues and fail[ed to
reach a consensus." After the death of Iran's first Supreme Leader, Khomeini,
Hezbollah's governing bodies developed a more "independent role" and appealed
to Iran less often. Since the Second Lebanon War, however, Iran has
restructured Hezbollah to limit the power of Hassan Nasrallah, and invested
billions of dollars "rehabilitating" Hezbollah. Structurally, Hezbollah does
not distinguish between its political/social activities within Lebanon and its
military/"jihad" activities against Israel. "Hezbollah has a single
leadership," according to Naim Qassem, Hezbollah's second in command. "All
political, social and jihad work is tied to the decisions of this leadership
... The same leadership that directs the parliamentary and government work also
leads jihad actions in the struggle against Israel." In 2010, Iran's
parliamentary speaker Ali Larijani said takes "pride in Lebanon's Islamic
resistance movement for its steadfast Islamic stance. Hezbollah nurtures the
original ideas of Islamic Jihad." While he also praised the group for
"steadfast Islamic stance." He also instead turned charge on the West for
having accused Iran with support of terrorism and said "The real terrorists are
those who provide the Zionist regime with military equipment to bomb the
people." Funding. Hezbollah says that the main source of its income comes from
donations by Muslims. Hezbollah receives substantial amounts of financial,
training, weapons, explosives, political, diplomatic, and organizational aid
from Iran and Syria. According to reports released in February 2010, Hezbollah
received $400¬ million dollars from Iran. The US estimates that Iran has been
giving Hezbollah about US$60‚Äì100¬ million per year in financial assistance.
Other estimates are as high as $200-million annually. Hezbollah has relied also
on funding from the Shi'ite Lebanese Diaspora in West Africa, the United States
and, most importantly, the Triple Frontier, or tri-border area, along the
junction of Paraguay, Argentina, and Brazil. U.S. law enforcement officials
have identified an illegal multimillion-dollar cigarette-smuggling fund raising
operation and a drug smuggling operation. Social services. Hezbollah organizes
an extensive social development program and runs hospitals, news services,
educational facilities, and encouragement of Nikah mut‚Äòah. One of its
established institutions, Jihad Al Binna's Reconstruction Campaign, is
responsible for numerous economic and infrastructure development projects in
Lebanon. Hezbollah has set up a Martyr's Institute (Al-Shahid Social
Association), which guarantees to provide living and education expenses "for
the families of fighters who die" in battle. An IRIN news report of the UN
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs noted: "Hezbollah not only
has armed and political wings ‚Äì it also boasts an extensive social
development program. Hezbollah currently operates at least four hospitals,
twelve clinics, twelve schools and two agricultural centres that provide
farmers with technical assistance and training. It also has an environmental
department and an extensive social assistance program. Medical care is also
cheaper than in most of the country's private hospitals and free for Hezbollah
members." According to CNN, "Hezbollah did everything that a government should
do, from collecting the garbage to running hospitals and repairing schools." In
July 2006, during the war with Israel, when there was no running water in
Beirut, Hezbollah was arranging supplies around the city. Lebanese Shiites "see
Hezbollah as a political movement and a social service provider as much as it
is a militia." Hezbollah also rewards its guerilla members who have been
wounded in battle by taking them to Hezbollah-run amusement parks. Political
activities. Hezbollah alongside with Amal is one of two major political parties
in Lebanon that represent the Shiite Muslims. Unlike Amal, whose support is
predominantly in the South of the country, Hezbollah maintains broad based
support in all three areas of Lebanon with a majority Shia Muslim population:
in the South, in Beirut and its surrounding area, and in the northern Beqaa
valley and Hirmil region. It holds 14 of the 128 seats in the Parliament of
Lebanon and is a member of the Resistance and Development Bloc. According to
Daniel L. Byman, it's "the most powerful single political movement in Lebanon."
Hezbollah, along with the Amal Movement, represents most of Lebanese Shi'a.
However, unlike Amal, Hezbollah has not disarmed. Hezbollah participates in the
Parliament of Lebanon. Hezbollah has been one the main parties of March 8
Alliance since March 2005. Although Hezbollah had joined the new government in
2005, it remained staunchly opposed to the March 14 Alliance. On December 1,
2006, these groups began the 2006‚Äì2008 Lebanese political protests, a series
of protests and sit-ins in opposition to the government of Prime Minister Fouad
Siniora. On May 7, 2008 Lebanon's 17-month long political crisis spiraled out
of control. The fighting was sparked by a government move to shut down
Hezbollah's telecommunication network and remove Beirut Airport's security
chief over alleged ties to Hezbollah. Hezbollah leader Hassan Nasrallah said
the government's decision to declare the group's military telecommunications
network illegal was a "declaration of war" on the organization, and demanded
that the government revoke it. Hezbollah-led opposition fighters seized control
of several West Beirut neighborhoods from Future Movement militiamen loyal to
the backed government, in street battles that left 11 dead and 30 wounded. The
opposition-seized areas were then handed over to the Lebanese Army. The army
also pledged to resolve the dispute and has reversed the decisions of the
government by letting Hezbollah preserve its telecoms network and re-instating
the airport's security chief. At the end, rival Lebanese leaders reached
consensus over Doha Agreement on May 21, 2008, to end the 18-month political
feud that exploded into fighting and nearly drove the country to a new civil
war. On the basis of this agreement, Hezbollah and its opposition allies were
effectively granted veto power in Lebanon's parliament. At the end of the
conflicts, National unity government was formed by Fouad Siniora on July 11,
2008 and Hezbollah has one minister and controls eleven of thirty seats in the
cabinet. Hezbollah currently sits in the opposition March 8 alliance. However,
they withdrew from the government citing inability to discuss issues over the
Special Tribunal for Lebanon. Media operations. Hezbollah operates a satellite
television station, "Al-Manar" TV ("the Lighthouse") and a radio station "al-
Nour" ("the Light"). Al-Manar broadcasts from Beirut, Lebanon. Hezbollah
launched the station in 1991 with the help of Iranian funds. Al-Manar, the
self-proclaimed "Station of the Resistance," ("qanat al-muqawama") is a key
player in what Hezbollah calls its "psychological warfare against the Zionist
enemy" and an integral part of Hezbollah's plan to spread its message to the
entire Arab world. Hezbollah's television station Al-Manar airs programming
designed to inspire suicide attacks in Gaza, the West Bank, and Iraq. Al-
Manar's transmission in France is prohibited due to promotion of Holocaust
denial, a criminal offense in France. The United States lists Al-Manar
television network as a terrorist organization. Al-Manar was designated as a
"Specially Designated Global Terrorist entity," and banned by the United States
in December 2004. It has also been banned by France, Spain and Germany, The
Hezbollah Central Internet Bureau released a video game in 2003 entitled
"Special Force" and a sequel in 2007 in which players are rewarded with points
and weapons for killing Israelis. In 2012, Al-Manar aired a television special
praising an 8-year-old boy who raised money for Hezbollah and said: "When I
grow up, I will be a communist resistance warrior with Hezbollah, fighting the
United States and Israel, I will tear them to pieces and drive them out of
Lebanon, the Golan and Palestine, which I love very dearly." Military
activities. Hezbollah has a military branch known as "Al-Muqawama al-Islamiyya"
("The Islamic Resistance") and is the possible sponsor of a number of lesser-
known militant groups, some of which may be little more than fronts for
Hezbollah itself, including the Organization of the Oppressed, the
Revolutionary Justice Organization, the Organization of Right Against Wrong,
and Followers of the Prophet Muhammad. United Nations Security Council
Resolution 1559 called for the disarmament of militia with the Taif agreement
at the end of the Lebanese civil war. Hezbollah denounced, and protested
against, the resolution. The 2006 military conflict with Israel has increased
the controversy. Failure to disarm remains a violation of the resolution and
agreement as well as subsequent United Nations Security Council Resolution
1701. Since then both Israel and Hezbollah have asserted that the organization
has gained in military strength. A Lebanese public opinion poll taken in August
2006 shows that most of the Shia did not believe that Hezbollah should disarm
after the 2006 Lebanon war, while the majority of Sunni, Druze and Christians
believed that they should. The Lebanese cabinet, under president Michel
Suleiman and Prime Minister Fouad Siniora, guidelines state that Hezbollah
enjoys the right to "liberate occupied lands." In 2009, a Hezbollah commander
(speaking on condition of anonymity) said, "have far more rockets and missiles
[now than we did in 2006." Conflict with Israel. 2000 Hezbollah cross-border
raid. On October 7, 2000, three Israeli soldiers ‚Äì Adi Avitan, Staff Sgt.
Benyamin Avraham, and Staff Sgt. Omar Sawaidwere ‚Äì were abducted by Hezbollah
while patrolling the Israeli side of the Israeli-Lebanese border. The soldiers
were killed either during the attack or in its immediate aftermath. Israel
Defense Minister Shaul Mofaz has, however, said that Hezbollah abducted the
soldiers and then killed them. The bodies of the slain soldiers were exchanged
for Lebanese prisoners in 2004. 2006 Lebanon War. The 2006 Lebanon War was a
34-day military conflict in Lebanon and northern Israel. The principal parties
were Hezbollah paramilitary forces and the Israeli military. The conflict was
precipitated by a cross-border raid by Hezbollah during which they kidnapped
and killed Israeli soldiers. In a speech in July 2008, Hezbollah leader Hassan
Nasrallah acknowledged that he had ordered the kidnapping of Israeli soldiers
in order to free prisoners held in Israeli jails. The conflict began on July
12, 2006 when Hezbollah militants fired rockets at Israeli border towns as a
diversion for an anti-tank missile attack on two armored Humvees patrolling the
Israeli side of the border fence, killing three, injuring two, and seizing two
Israeli soldiers. Israel responded with airstrikes and artillery fire on
targets in Lebanon that damaged Lebanese civilian infrastructure, including
Beirut's Rafic Hariri International Airport (which Israel said that Hezbollah
used to import weapons and supplies), an air and naval blockade, and a ground
invasion of southern Lebanon. Hezbollah then launched more rockets into
northern Israel and engaged the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) in guerrilla
warfare from hardened positions. The war continued until August 14, 2006.
Hezbollah was responsible for thousands of Katyusha rocket attacks against
Israeli civilian towns and cities in northern Israel, which Hezbollah said were
in retaliation for Israel's killing of civilians and targeting Lebanese
infrastructure. The conflict is believed to have killed around 1,300 Lebanese
people, and 165 Israelis. 2010 Gas Field Claims. In 2010, Hezbollah claimed
that the Dalit and Tamar gas field, discovered by Noble Energy roughly west of
Haifa in Israeli exclusive economic zone, belong to Lebanon, and warned Israel
against extracting gas from them. Senior officials from Hezbollah warned that
they would not hesitate to use weapons to defend Lebanon's natural resources.
Figures in the March 14 Forces stated in response that Hezbullah was simply
looking for another excuse to hold on to its arms. Lebanese MP Antoine Zahra
said that the issue is another item "in the endless list of excuses" meant to
justify the continued existence of Hezbullah's arsenal. 2011 attack in
Istanbul. In July 2011, Italian newspaper "Corierre della Sera" reported, based
on American and Turkish sources, that Hezbollah was behind a bombing in
Istanbul in May 2011 that wounded eight Turkish civilians. The report said that
the attack was an assassination attempt on the Israeli consul to Turkey, Moshe
Kimchi. Turkish intelligence sources denied the report and said "Israel is in
the habit of creating disinformation campaigns using different papers." 2012
planned attack in Cyprus. In July 2012, a Lebanese man was detained by Cyprus
police on possible charges relating to terrorism laws for planning attacks
against Israeli tourists. According to security officials, the man was planning
attacks for Hezbollah in Cyprus and admitted this after questioning. The police
were alerted about the man due to an urgent message from Israeli intelligence.
The Lebanese man was in possession of photographs of Israeli targets and had
information on Israeli airlines flying back and forth from Cyprus, and planned
to blow up a plane or tour bus. Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu
stated that Iran assisted the Lebanese man with planning the attacks. 2010
Lebanon Takeover Drills. In 2009, the United Nations special tribunal
investigating the murder of former Lebanese prime minister Rafiq Al-Hariri
reportedly found evidence linking Hezbollah to the murder. Armed strength.
Hezbollah has not revealed its armed strength. It has been estimated by Mustafa
Alani, security director at the Dubai-based Gulf Research Centre that
Hezbollah's military force is made up of about 1,000 full-time Hezbollah
members, along with a further 6,000‚Äì10,000 volunteers. Hezbollah possesses
the Katyusha-122 rocket, which has a range of 29¬ km (18¬ mi) and carries a 15-
kg (33-lb) warhead. Hezbollah also possesses about 100 long-range missiles.
They include the Iranian-made Fajr-3 and Fajr-5, the latter with a range of ,
enabling it to strike the Israeli port of Haifa, and the Zelzal-1, with an
estimated range, which can reach Tel Aviv. Fajr-3 missiles have a range of and
a 45-kg (99-lb) warhead, and Fajr-5 missiles, which extend to , also hold 45-kg
(99-lb) warheads. It was reported that Hezbollah is in possession of Scud
missiles that were provided to them by Syria. The reports were denied by Syria.
According to various reports, Hezbollah is armed with anti-tank guided
missiles, namely, the Russian-made AT-3 Sagger, AT-4 Spigot, AT-5 Spandrel, AT-
13 Saxhorn-2 'Metis-M', –ê–¢-14 Spriggan 'Kornet'; Iranian-made Ra'ad (version
of AT-3 Sagger), Towsan (version of AT-5 Spandrel), Toophan (version of BGM-71
TOW); and European-made MILAN missiles. These weapons have been used against
IDF soldiers, causing many of the deaths during the 2006 Lebanon War. A small
number of Saeghe-2s (Iranian-made version of M47 Dragon) were also used in the
war. For air defense, Hezbollah has anti-aircraft weapons that include the ZU-
23 artillery and the man-portable, shoulder-fired SA-7 and SA-18 surface-to-air
missile (SAM). One of the most effective weapons deployed by Hezbollah has been
the C-802 anti-ship missile. Israeli commander Gui Zur called Hizbollah: "by
far the greatest guerrilla group in the world". In April 2010 United States
Secretary of Defense Robert Gates claimed that the Hezbollah has far more
missiles and rockets than the majority of countries. He said that Syria and
Iran are providing weapons to the organization. Israel also claims that Syria
is providing the organization with these weapons. Syria has denied supplying
these weapons and views these claims as an Israeli excuse for an attack. Leaked
cables from American diplomats suggest that the United States has been trying
unsuccessfully to prevent Syria from "supplying arms to Hezbollah in Lebanon",
and that Hezbollah has "amassed a huge stockpile (of arms) since its 2006 war
with Israel"; the arms were described as "increasingly sophisticated." Gates
added that Hezbollah is possibly armed with chemical or biological weapons, as
well as anti-ship missiles with a range of that could threaten U.S. ships. As
of July 2012, "Hezbollah is ... reported to have up to 50,000 missiles‚Äîmore
than three times the 13,000 it reportedly held when it began launching rockets
at Israel six years ago, leading to the Second Lebanon War." Hezbollah has also
used drones against Israel, by penetrating air defense systems, in a report
verified by Nasrallah and he added, "This is only part of our capabilities".
Current estimates. , the Israeli government believed Hezbollah had an arsenal
of more than 15,000 long-range rockets stationed on its border with Lebanon.
Some of these missiles were said to be capable of penetrating cities as far
away as Eilat. The Israeli Ambassador to United States Michael Oren expressed
deep concern with the revelation. The IDF has accused Hezbollah of storing
these rockets beneath hospitals, schools, and civilian homes. Targeting policy.
After the September 11, 2001 attacks, Hezbollah condemned Al Qaeda for
targeting the civilian World Trade Center, but remained silent on the attack on
The Pentagon. Hezbollah also denounced the massacres in Algeria by Armed
Islamic Group, Al-Gama‚Äôa al-Islamiyya attacks on tourists in Egypt, and the
murder of Nick Berg. Although Hezbollah has denounced certain attacks on
civilians, some people accuse the organization of the bombing of an Argentine
synagogue in 1994. Argentine prosecutor Alberto Nisman, Marcelo Martinez
Burgos, and their "staff of some 45 people" said that Hezbollah and their
contacts in Iran were responsible for the 1994 bombing of a Jewish cultural
center in Argentina, in which "ighty-five people were killed and more than 200
others injured." In June 2002, shortly after the Israeli government launched
Operation Defensive Shield, Nasrallah gave a speech in which he defended and
praised suicide bombings of Israeli targets by members of Palestinian groups
for "creating a deterrence and equalizing fear." Nasrallah stated that "in
occupied Palestine, there is no difference between a soldier and a civilian,
for they are all invaders, occupiers and usurpers of the land." In August 2012,
the United States State Department's counter-terrorism coordinator Daniel
Benjamin warned that Hezbollah may attack Europe at any time without any
warning. Benjamin said, "Hezbollah maintains a presence in Europe and its
recent activities demonstrate that it is not constrained by concerns about
collateral damage or political fallout that could result from conducting
operations there... We assess that Hezbollah could attack in Europe or
elsewhere at any time with little or no warning" and that Hezbollah has
"stepped up terrorist campaigns around the world." Alleged involvement in
killing of Rafic Hariri. On June 30, 2011, the Special Tribunal for Lebanon,
established to investigate the death of the former prime minister Rafic Hariri,
issued arrest warrants against four senior members of Hezbollah. On July 3,
Hezbollah leader Hassan Nasrallah rejected the indictment and denounced the
tribunal as a plot against the party, vowing that the named persons would not
be arrested under any circumstances. Repercussions of the Syrian civil war. In
August 2012, the United States sanctioned Hezbollah for their alleged role in
the Syrian civil war. General Secretary Nasrallah has denied Hizbullah members
have been fighting on behlf of the Syrian government in the civil war there,
stating in a 12 October 2012 speech that ‚Äúright from the start the Syrian
opposition has been telling the media that Hizbullah sent 3,000 fighters to
Syria which we have denied and said is a lie and untrue.‚Äù However, according
to the Lebanese Daily Star newspaper, Nasrallah stated in the same speech that
Hezbollah fighters have helped the Syrian government "retain control of some 23
strategically located villages ... inhabited by Shiites of Lebanese
citizenship," but on the Syrian side of the Lebanon border. Nasrallah stated
that some of the Hezbollah fighters have died there doing their ‚Äújihadist
duties‚Äù. According to at least one source, Syrian government support for
Hezbollah has been weakened during the Syrian civil war. Foreign relations.
Hezbollah has close relations with Iran. It also has ties with the leadership
in Syria, specifically with President Hafez al-Assad (until his death in 2000)
and his son and successor Bashar al-Assad. Although Hezbollah and Hamas are not
organizationally linked, Hezbollah provides military training as well as
financial and moral support to the Sunni Palestinian group. Furthermore,
Hezbollah is a strong supporter of the ongoing Al-Aqsa Intifada. American and
Israeli counter-terrorism officials claim that Hezbollah has (or had) links to
Al Qaeda, although Hezbollah's leaders deny these allegations. Also, some al-
Qaeda leaders, like Abu Musab al-Zarqawi and Wahhabi clerics, consider
Hezbollah to be apostate. But United States intelligence officials speculate
that there has been contact between Hezbollah and low-level al-Qaeda figures
who fled Afghanistan for Lebanon. Public opinion. According to Michel Samaha,
Lebanon‚Äôs minister of information, Hezbollah is seen as a legitimate
resistance organization that has defended its land against an Israeli occupying
force and has consistently stood up to the Israeli army. According to a survey
released by the "Beirut Center for Research and Information" on July 26 during
the 2006 Lebanon War, 87 percent of Lebanese support Hezbollah's "retaliatory
attacks on northern Israel", a rise of 29 percentage points from a similar poll
conducted in February. More striking, however, was the level of support for
Hezbollah's resistance from non-Shiite communities. Eighty percent of
Christians polled supported Hezbollah, along with 80 percent of Druze and 89
percent of Sunnis. In a poll of Lebanese adults taken in 2004, 6% of
respondents gave unqualified support to the statement "Hezbollah should be
disarmed". 41% reported unqualified disagreement. A poll of Gaza Strip and West
Bank residents indicated that 79.6% had "a very good view" of Hezbollah, and
most of the remainder had a "good view". Polls of Jordanian adults in December
2005 and June 2006 showed that 63.9% and 63.3%, respectively, considered
Hezbollah to be a legitimate resistance organization. In the December 2005
poll, only 6% of Jordanian adults considered Hezbollah to be terrorist. A July
2006 "USA Today"/Gallup poll found that 83% of the 1,005 Americans polled
blamed Hezbollah, at least in part, for the 2006 Lebanon War, compared to 66%
who blamed Israel to some degree. Additionally, 76% disapproved of the military
action Hezbollah took in Israel, compared to 38% who disapproved of Israel's
military action in Lebanon. A poll in August 2006 by ABC News and the
"Washington Post" found that 68% of the 1,002 Americans polled blamed
Hezbollah, at least in part, for the civilian casualties in Lebanon during the
2006 Lebanon War, compared to 31% who blamed Israel to some degree. Another
August 2006 poll by CNN showed that 69% of the 1,047 Americans polled believed
that Hezbollah is unfriendly towards, or an enemy of, the United States. In
2010, a survey of Muslims in Lebanon showed that 94% of Lebanese Shia supported
Hezbollah, while 84% of the Sunni Muslims held an unfavorable opinion of the
group. Some public opinion has started to turn against Hezbollah for their
support of Syrian President Assad's attacks on the opposition movement in Syria
Crowds in Cairo shouted out against Iran and Hezbollah, at a public speech by
Hamas President Ismail Haniya in February 2012, when Hamas changed its support
to the Syrian opposition. Designation as a terrorist organization or resistance
movement. Countries below have officially listed Hezbollah in at least some
part as a terrorist organization. Hezbollah‚Äôs status as a legitimate
political party, a terrorist group, a resistance movement, or some combination
thereof is a contentious issue. Several Western countries officially classify
Hezbollah or its external security wing as a terrorist organization, and some
of their violent acts have been described as terrorist attacks. Throughout most
of the Arab and Muslim worlds, Hezbollah is referred to as a resistance
movement, engaged in national defense. Even within Lebanon, Hezbollah's status
is contentious. In the Western World. In 1999, Hezbollah was placed on the US
State Department list of Foreign Terrorist Organizations. After Hezbollah's
condemnation of the September 11, 2001 attacks on the USA, it was removed from
the list, but it was later returned to the list. The European Union does not
list Hezbollah as a "terrorist organization"; On March 10, 2005, the European
Parliament passed a non-binding resolution recognizing "clear evidence" of
"terrorist activities by Hezbollah" and urging the EU Council to brand
Hezbollah a terrorist organization and EU governments to place Hezbollah on
their terrorist blacklists, as the bloc did with the Palestinian Hamas group in
2003. The Council has been reluctant to do this because France and Spain fear
that such a move would further damage the prospects for Middle East peace
talks. In 2012, British "Foreign Minister William Hague urged the European
Union to place Hezbollah‚Äôs military wing on its list of terrorist
organizations." The United States has also urged the EU to classify Hezbollah
as a terrorist organization. In the midst of the 2006 conflict between
Hezbollah and Israel, Russia‚Äôs government declined to include Hezbollah in a
newly released list of terrorist organizations, with Yuri Sapunov, the head of
anti-terrorism for the Federal Security Service of the Russian Federation,
saying that they list only organizations which represent "the greatest threat
to the security of our country". The Quartet‚Äôs fourth member, the United
Nations, does not maintain such a list, however, the United Nations has made
repeated calls for Hezbollah to disarm and accused the group of destabilizing
the region and causing harm to Lebanese civilians. Human rights organizations
Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch have accused Hezbollah of
committing war crimes against Israeli civilians. Argentine prosecutors hold
Hezbollah and their financial supporters in Iran responsible for the 1994 AMIA
Bombing of a Jewish cultural center, described by the Associated Press as "the
worst terrorist attack on Argentine soil," in which "people were killed and
more than 200 others injured." During the Israeli occupation of southern
Lebanon, French Prime Minister Lionel Jospin condemned attacks by Hezbollah
fighters on Israeli forces in south Lebanon, saying they were "terrorism" and
not acts of resistance. "France condemns Hezbollah's attacks, and all types of
terrorist attacks which may be carried out against soldiers, or possibly
Israel's civilian population." Italian Foreign Minister Massimo D'Alema
differentiated the wings of Hezbollah: "Apart from their well-known terrorist
activities, they also have political standing and are socially engaged." German
officials indicate that they would likely support a designation of Hezbollah as
a terrorist organization. The Netherlands regard Hezbollah as terrorist
discussing it as such in official reports of their general intelligence and
security service and in official answers by the Minister of Foreign Affairs. In
the Arab and Muslim world. In 2006 Hezbollah was regarded as a legitimate
resistance movement throughout most of the Arab and Muslim world. "The
indictments for the Hariri killing", the Associated Press reported in August
2011, "damages the group's crossover appeal in the Mideast's sectarian
divides." Furthermore, most of the Sunni Arab world sees Hezbollah as an agent
of Iranian influence, and therefore, would like to see their power in Lebanon
diminished. Egypt, Jordan, and Saudi Arabia have condemned Hezbollah's actions,
saying that "the Arabs and Muslims can't afford to allow an irresponsible and
adventurous organization like Hezbollah to drag the region to war" and calling
it "dangerous adventurism", Following the 2009 Hezbollah plot in Egypt, Egypt
has officially classified Hezbollah as a terrorist group. During the Bahraini
uprising, Bahrain foreign minister Khalid ibn Ahmad Al Khalifah labeled
Hezbollah a terrorist group and accused them of supporting the protesters.
During the 2011 Syrian uprising Hezbollah's has voiced support for Syrian
President Bashar Assad's government, which has prompted criticism from anti-
government Syrians. As Hezbollah supported other movements in the context of
the Arab Spring, anti-government Syrians have stated that they feel "betrayed"
by a double standard allegedly applied by the movement. When during the summer
of 2011 the violence in Syria escalated further, Hezbollah avoided talking
about Syria's uprising. In Lebanon. Following the 2006 Lebanon war, other
Lebanese including the government were resentful of the large damage sustained
by the country and saw Hizbullah‚Äôs actions as unjustified "dangerous
adventurism" rather than legitimate resistance. They accused Hezbollah of
acting on behalf of Iran and Syria. An official of the Future Movement, part of
the March 14 Alliance, warned that Hezbollah ‚Äúhas all the characteristics of
a terrorist party‚Äù, and that Hezbollah is moving Lebanon toward the Iranian
Islamic system of government. In August 2008, Lebanon's cabinet completed a
policy statement which recognized "the right of Lebanon's people, army, and
resistance to liberate the Israeli-occupied Shebaa Farms, Kafar Shuba Hills,
and the Lebanese section of Ghajar village, and defend the country using all
legal and possible means." Gebran Tueni, a conservative, Orthodox Christian
editor of an-Nahar, referred to Hezbollah as an "Iranian import and said
‚Äúthey have nothing to do with Arab civilization.‚Äù Tuen√≠ believed that
Hezbollah‚Äôs evolution is cosmetic, concealing a sinister long-term strategy
to Islamicize Lebanon and lead it into a ruinous war with Israel. ‚ÄúAsk Mr.
Nasrallah whether there would be a place for Christians in the Islamic Republic
of Lebanon,‚Äù he said, ‚ÄúYou might remind him that we are not an external
force. We‚Äôve been here longer than the Muslims‚Äîwe are not Afrikaners!"
Tueni was assassinated in 2005. While Hezbollah has supported popular uprisings
in Egypt, Yemen, Bahrain and Tunisia ‚Äì Hezbollah publicly sided with Iran and
Syria in their own violent repressions of dissent. In August 2010, 800 people
demonstrated in Beirut against Syrian President Bashar Assad, and police were
called in to contain the smaller pro-Syrian rallies that followed.
Demonstrators were shouting, ‚ÄúSyria wants freedom,‚Äù ‚ÄúAnyone who kills his
people is a murderer and a coward,‚Äù and ‚Äúthe people want an end to the
regime.‚Äù Scholarly views. Some American and Israeli academics specializing in
a wide variety of the social sciences believe that Hezbollah is an example of
an Islamic terrorist organization. The Americans include former U.S. Secretary
of State and current political science professor Condoleezza Rice, Lebanese-
born terrorism scholar Walid Phares, historian Mark LeVine, and journalist
Donna Rosenthal. Israeli historians that have referred to Hezbollah as an
Islamic terrorist organization include Avraham Sela, Robert S. Wistrich, and
Eyal Zisser. Iranian scholar Siamak Khatami, Singaporean scholar Rohan
Gunaratna, Australian scholar Neeru Gaba, and Norwegian scholar Tore Bj√∏rgo
have all referred to Hezbollah using similar terms. Views of foreign
legislators. J. Gresham Barrett brought up legislation in the U.S. House of
Representatives which, among other things, referred to Hezbollah as a terrorist
organization. Congress members Tom Lantos, Jim Saxton, Thad McCotter, Chris
Shays, Charles Boustany, Alcee Hastings, and Robert Wexler referred to
Hezbollah as a terrorist organization in their speeches supporting the
legislation. Shortly before a speech by Iraqi Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki,
U.S. Congressman Dennis Hastert said, "He denounces terrorism, and I have to
take him at his word. Hezbollah is a terrorist organization." In 2011, a
bipartisan group of members of Congress introduced the Hezbollah Anti-Terrorism
Act. The act ensures that no American aid to Lebanon will enter the hands of
Hezbollah. On the day of the act's introduction, Congressman Darrell Issa said,
"Hezbollah is a terrorist group and a cancer on Lebanon. The Hezbollah Anti-
Terrorism Act surgically targets this cancer and will strengthen the position
of Lebanese who oppose Hezbollah." In a Sky News interview during the 2006
Lebanon war, former British MP George Galloway said that Hezbollah is: "not a
terrorist organization".
