History of the Jews in the United States The history of the Jews in the United
States (United States of America), has been part of the American national
fabric since colonial times. Until the 1830s the Jewish community of
Charleston, South Carolina was the most numerous in North America. With the
large scale immigration of Jews from Germany in the 19th century, they
established themselves in many small towns and cities. A much larger
immigration of Eastern European Jews, 1880–1914, brought a large, poor,
traditional element to New York City. Refugees arrived from Europe after World
War II, and many arrived from the Soviet Union after 1970. In the 1940s Jews
comprised 3.7% of the national population. Today the population is about 5
million—under 2% of the national total—and shrinking because of small
family sizes and intermarriage. The largest population centers are the
metropolitan areas of New York (2.1 million in 2000), Los Angeles (668,000),
Miami (331,000), Philadelphia (285,000), Chicago (265,000) and Boston
(254,000). Jewish immigration. The Jewish population of the US is the product
of waves of immigration primarily from Europe; it was initially inspired by the
pull of social and entrepreneurial opportunities, and later as a refuge from
the push of continuing antisemitism there. Few ever returned to Europe,
although committed advocates of Zionism have emigrated to Israel. America and
its culture developed as an easy-to-enter "Melting Pot" for many cultures,
creating a new commonality of culture and political values. This open culture
allowed many minority groups, including Jews, to flourish in Christian and
predominantly Protestant America. Antisemitism in the United States has always
been less common than in other historic areas of Jewish population, whether in
Christian Europe or in the Muslim Middle East, where most nations developed
around different majority ethnicities or languages. From a population of 1000-
2000 Jewish residents in 1790, mostly Dutch Sephardic Jews, Jews from England,
and British subjects, the American Jewish community grew to about 15,000 by
1840, and to about 250,000 by 1880. Most of the mid-19th century Ashkenazi
Jewish immigrants to the US came from German-speaking states, as part of the
larger concurrent German migration. They all initially spoke German, and
settled across the nation, assimilating with their new countrymen; the Jews
among them commonly engaged in trade, manufacturing, and operated dry goods
(clothing) stores in many cities. Between 1880 and the start of World War I in
1914, about two million Yiddish-speaking Ashkenazi Jews immigrated from Eastern
Europe, where repeated pogroms made life unpredictable. They came from Jewish
populations of Russia, the Pale of Settlement (modern Poland, Lithuania,
Belarus, Ukraine and Moldova), and the Russian-controlled portions of Poland.
The latter group clustered in New York City, created the garment industry
there, which supplied the dry goods stores across the country, and were heavily
engaged in the trade unions. This wave was also part of a larger migration of
eastern and southern European immigrants, which was unlike the historically
predominant American demographic from northern and western Europe; Records
indicate between 1880 and 1920 that these new immigrants rose from less than
five percent of all European immigrants to nearly 50%. This feared change
caused renewed nativist sentiment, the birth of the Immigration Restriction
League, and congressional studies by the Dillingham Commission from 1907 to
1911. The Emergency Quota Act of 1921 established immigration restrictions
specifically on these groups, and the Immigration Act of 1924 further tightened
and codified these limits. With the ensuing Great Depression, and despite
worsening conditions for European Jews, with the rise of Nazi Germany, these
quotas remained in place with minor alterations until the Immigration and
Nationality Act of 1965. Jews quickly created support networks consisting of
many small synagogues and Ashkenazi Jewish "Landsmannschaften" (German for
"Territorial Associations") for Jews from the same town or village. Leaders of
the time urged assimilation and integration into the wider American culture,
and Jews quickly became part of American life. During World War II, 500,000
American Jews, about half of all Jewish males between 18 and 50, enlisted for
service, and after the war, Jewish families joined the new trend of
suburbanization, as they became wealthier and more mobile. The Jewish community
expanded to other major cities, particularly around Los Angeles and Miami.
Their young people attended secular high schools and colleges and met
Christians, so that intermarriage rates soared to nearly 50%. Synagogue
membership however, grew considerably, from 20% of the Jewish population in
1930 to 60% in 1960. The earlier waves of immigration and immigration
restriction were followed by the Holocaust that destroyed most of the European
Jewish community by 1945; these also made the United States the home for the
largest Jewish population in the world. In 1900 there were 1.5 million
Americans Jews; in 2005 there were 5.3 million. See Historical Jewish
population comparisons On a theological level, American Jews are divided into a
number of Jewish denominations, of which the most numerous are Reform Judaism,
Conservative Judaism and Orthodox Judaism. However, roughly 25% of American
Jews are unaffiliated with any denomination. Conservative Judaism arose in
America and Reform Judaism was founded in Germany and popularized by American
Jews. Colonial era. The first Jew to set foot on American soil was Joachim Gans
in 1584. Some people would argue that the first Jew was Luis de Carabajal y
Cueva, a Spanish conquistador and converso, who first set foot in what is now
Texas in 1554. Solomon Franco, a Jewish merchant, arrived in Boston in 1649;
subsequently he was given a stipend from the Puritans there, on condition he
leave on the next passage back to Holland. In September 1654, shortly before
the Jewish New Year, twenty-three Jews from the Sephardic community in the
Netherlands, coming from Recife, Brazil, then a Dutch colony, arrived in New
Amsterdam (New York City). Governor Peter Stuyvesant tried to enhance his Dutch
Reformed Church by discriminating against other religions, but religious
pluralism was already a tradition in the Netherlands and his superiors at the
Dutch West India Company in Amsterdam overruled him. Religious tolerance was
also established elsewhere in the colonies; the colony of South Carolina, for
example, was originally governed under an elaborate charter drawn up in 1669 by
the English philosopher John Locke. This charter granted liberty of conscience
to all settlers, expressly mentioning "Jews, heathens, and dissenters." As a
result, Charleston, South Carolina has a particularly long history of Sephardic
settlement, which in 1816 numbered over 600, then the largest Jewish population
of any city in the United States. Sephardic Dutch Jews were also among the
early settlers of Newport (where the country's oldest surviving synagogue
building stands), Savannah, Philadelphia and Baltimore. In New York City,
Shearith Israel Congregation is the oldest continuous congregation started in
1687 having their first synagogue erected in 1728, and its current building
still houses some of the original pieces of that first. By the time of American
Revolution, the Jewish population in America was very small, with only 1,000-
2000, in a colonial population of about 2.5 million. Revolutionary era. By 1776
and the War of Independence, around 2,000 Jews lived in America, most of them
Sephardic Jews of Spanish and Portuguese origin. They played a significant role
in the struggle for independence, including fighting the British, with Francis
Salvador being the first Jew to die, and playing a key role in financing the
revolution, with the most important of the financiers being Haym Solomon.
Others, like David Salisbury Franksan, despite loyal service in both the
Continental Army and the American diplomatic corps, suffered from his
association as aide-de-camp for the traitorous general Benedict Arnold. "May
the children of the stock of Abraham who dwell in the land continue to merit
and enjoy the goodwill of the other inhabitants. While everyone shall sit
safely under his own vine and fig-tree and there shall be none to make him
afraid." In 1790, the approximate 2,500 Jews in America faced a number of legal
restrictions in various states that prevented non-Christians from holding
public office and voting, but Delaware, Pennsylvania, South Carolina, and
Georgia soon eliminated these barriers, as did the Bill of Rights in 1791
generally. Sephardic Jews became active in community affairs in the 1790s,
after achieving "political equality in the five states in which they were most
numerous." Other barriers did not officially fall for decades in the states of
Rhode Island (1842), North Carolina (1868), and New Hampshire (1877). Despite
these restrictions, which were often enforced unevenly, there were really too
few Jews in 17th- and 18th-century America for anti-Jewish incidents to become
a significant social or political phenomenon at the time. The evolution for
Jews from toleration to full civil and political equality that followed the
American Revolution helped ensure that Antisemitism would never become as
common as in Europe. 19th century. Following traditional religious and cultural
teachings about improving the lot of their brethren, Jewish residents in the
United States began to organize their communities in the early 19th century.
Early examples include a Jewish orphanage set up in Charleston, South Carolina
in 1801, and the first Jewish school, Polonies Talmud Torah, established in New
York in 1806. In 1843, the first national secular Jewish organization in the
United States, the B'nai B'rith was established. See also History of Jewish
education in the United States (pre-20th century). Jewish Texans have been a
part of Texas History since the first European explorers arrived in the 16th
century. Spanish Texas did not welcome easily identifiable Jews, but they came
in any case. Jao de la Porta was with Jean Laffite at Galveston, Texas in 1816,
and Maurice Henry was in Velasco in the late 1820s. Jews fought in the armies
of the Texas Revolution of 1836, some with Fannin at Goliad, others at San
Jacinto. Dr. Albert Levy became a surgeon to revolutionary Texan forces in
1835, participated in the capture of Béxar, and joined the Texas Navy the next
year. By 1840, Jews constituted a tiny, but nonetheless stable, middle-class
minority of about 15,000 out of the 17 million Americans counted by the U.S.
Census. Jews intermarried rather freely with non-Jews, continuing a trend that
had begun at least a century earlier. However, as immigration increased the
Jewish population to 50,000 by 1848, negative stereotypes of Jews in
newspapers, literature, drama, art, and popular culture grew more commonplace
and physical attacks became more frequent. During the 19th century, (especially
the 1840s and 1850s), Jewish immigration was primarily of Ashkenazi Jews from
Germany, bringing a liberal, educated population that had experience with the
Haskalah, or Jewish Enlightenment. It was in the United States during the 19th
century that two of the major branches of Judaism were established by these
German immigrants: Reform Judaism (out of German Reform Judaism) and
Conservative Judaism, in reaction to the perceived liberalness of Reform
Judaism. Civil War. During the American Civil War, approximately 3,000 Jews
(out of around 150,000 Jews in the United States) fought on the Confederate
side and 7,000 fought on the Union side. Jews also played leadership roles on
both sides, with nine Jewish generals and 21 Jewish colonels participating in
the War. Judah P. Benjamin, a non-observant Jew, served as Secretary of State
and acting Secretary of War of the Confederacy. Several Jewish bankers played
key roles in providing government financing for both side of the Civil war:
Speyer and Seligman family, for the Union, and Emile Erlanger and Company for
the Confederacy. By the time of the Civil War, tensions over race and
immigration, as well as economic competition between Jews and non-Jews,
combined to produce the worst outbreak of antisemitism to that date. Americans
on both sides of the slavery issue denounced Jews as disloyal war profiteers,
and accused them of driving Christians out of business and of aiding and
abetting the enemy. The Jews, as a class violating every regulation of trade
established by the Treasury Department and also department orders, are hereby
expelled …within twenty-four hours from the receipt of this order. This order
was quickly rescinded by President Abraham Lincoln but not until it had been
enforced in a number of towns. Grant later issued an order "that no Jews are to
be permitted to travel on the road southward." His aide, Colonel John V.
DuBois, ordered "all cotton speculators, Jews, and all vagabonds with no honest
means of support", to leave the district. "The Israelites especially should be
kept out…they are such an intolerable nuisance." Participation in politics.
Jews also began to organize as a political group in the United States,
especially in response to the United States' reaction to the 1840 Damascus
Blood Libel. The first Jewish member of the United States House of
Representatives, Lewis Charles Levin, and Senator, David Levy Yulee, were
elected in 1845 (although Yulee converted to Episcopalianism the following
year). Official government antisemitism continued, however, with New Hampshire
only offering equality to Jews in 1877, the last state to do so. Banking. In
the middle of the 19th century, a number of German Jews founded investment
banking firms which later became mainstays of the industry. Most prominent
Jewish banks in the United States were investment banks, rather than commercial
banks. Important banking firms included Goldman Sachs (founded by Samuel Sachs
and Marcus Goldman), Kuhn Loeb (Solomon Loeb and Jacob H. Schiff), Lehman
Brothers (Henry Lehman), Salomon Brothers, and Bache & Co. (founded by Jules
Bache). The Seligman family moved from merchandising to banking in the late
1860s, with operations in New York, St. Louis, and Philadelphia as well as
Frankfurt, Germany, London and Paris that gave European investors an
opportunity to buy American government and railroad bonds. By the 1880s the
firm financed the French efforts to build a Panama Canal as well as the
American effort after 1900. By the 1890s J.& W. Seligman & Co. Inc. underwrote
the securities of newly formed trusts, participated in stock and bond issues in
the railroad and steel and wire industries, and invested in Russia and Peru,
and in American in shipbuilding, bridges, bicycles, mining, and other
enterprises. In 1910 William C. Durant of the fledgling General Motors
Corporation gave control of his company to the Seligmans and Lee, Higginson &
Co. in return for underwriting $15 million worth of corporate notes. After the
death of Jacob Schiff in 1921, many banks which had their roots in the German-
Jewish immigrant community began to lose their Jewish character. They no longer
filled the ranks of management nor sought their capital needs from within the
family or the "crowd". By the 1930s, Jewish presence in the private investment
banking had diminished dramatically. West Coast settlements. The German Jews
settled in small towns throughout the South and West, and became most prominent
in the far west. Following the California Gold Rush of 1849, German Jews
established themselves on the West Coast, with important settlements in
Portland, Oregon; Seattle, Washington; and especially San Francisco, which
became the second-largest Jewish city in the nation. Eisenberg, Kahn, and Toll
(2009) emphasize the creative freedom Jews found in western society,
unburdening them from past traditions and opening up new opportunities for
entrepreneurship, philanthropy and civic leadership. The most popular
occupation was clothing merchant, followed by the small-scale manufacturing and
general retailing. Everyone was a newcomer, and the Jews were generally
accepted with few signs of discrimination, according to Eisenberg, Kahn, and
Toll (2009). Many Jewish activists became prominent in municipal and state
politics, winning election to public office with little attention paid to their
Jewish identity. They set up Reform congregations, and generally gave a little
support to Zionism down to the 1940s. In the 20th century, Metropolitan Los
Angeles became the second-largest Jewish base in the United States. The most
dramatic cast of newcomers there were in Hollywood, where Jewish producers were
highly visible if not dominant in the film industry after 1920. 1880-1925.
Immigration of Eastern European Jews. None of the early migratory movements
assumed the significance and volume of that from Russia and neighboring
countries. This emigration, mainly from Russian Poland and other areas of the
Russian Empire, began as far back as 1821, but did not become especially
noteworthy until after the German immigration fell off in 1870. Though nearly
50,000 Russian, Polish, Galician, and Romanian Jews went to the United States
during the succeeding decade, it was not until the pogroms, anti-Jewish
uprisings in Russia, of the early 1880s, that the immigration assumed
extraordinary proportions. From Russia alone the emigration rose from an annual
average of 4,100 in the decade 1871-80 to an annual average of 20,700 in the
decade 1881-90. Anti-semitism and official measures of persecution over the
past century combined with the desire for economic freedom and opportunity have
motivated a continuing flow of Jewish immigrants from Russia and Eastern Europe
over the past century. The Romanian persecutions, beginning in 1900, forced
large numbers of Jews to seek refuge in the US. Though most of these immigrants
arrived on the Eastern seaboard, many came as part of the Galveston Movement,
through which Jewish immigrants settled in Texas as well as the western states
and territories. By 1924, two million Jews had arrived from Eastern Europe.
Growing anti-immigration feelings in the United States at this time, resulted
in the National Origins Quota of 1924 which severely restricted immigration
from many regions including Eastern Europe. The Jewish community took the lead
in opposing immigration restrictions, which remained in effect until 1965.
Local developments. Clarksburg, West Virginia. In 1900, five of seven clothing
merchants in Clarksburg, West Virginia, were Jewish, and into the 1930s the
Jews here were primarily merchants. Because of the need to expand their
synagogue, the Orthodox Jewish congregation merged with a smaller Reform group
to form a compromise Conservative congregation in 1939, and Jewish community
life in Clarksburg centered around this synagogue. The community, which reached
a population peak of about three hundred in the mid-1950s, is still represented
by about thirty families. Wichita, Kansas. The Jews of Wichita, Kansas,
fashioned an ethnoreligious world that was distinct, vibrant, and tailored to
their circumstances. They had migrated west with capital, credit, and know-how,
and their family-based businesses were extensions of family businesses in the
east. They distinguished themselves in educational, leadership, and civic
positions. Predominantly German Jews through the 1880s, their remoteness and
small numbers encouraged the practice of Reform Judaism, which in turn
increased their interaction with non-Jews and hastened the erosion of their
heritage. The arrival of conservative Jews from Eastern Europe after the 1880s
brought tension into the Wichita Jewish community, but also stirred an
ethnoreligious revival. The German Jews were well respected in the Wichita
community, which facilitated the integration of the Eastern European newcomers.
The Jewish community was characterized by a "dynamic tension" between tradition
and modernization. Oakland, California. The Jewish community in Oakland,
California, is representative of many cities. Jews played a prominent role, and
were among the pioneers of Oakland in the 1850s. In the early years, the
Oakland Hebrew Benevolent Society, founded in 1862, was the religious, social,
and charitable center of the community. Later, the first synagogue, founded in
1875, took over the religious and burial functions. Jews from Poland
predominated in the community, and most of them worked in some aspect of the
clothing industry. David Solis-Cohen, the noted author, was a leader in the
Oakland Jewish community in the 1870s. In 1879 Oakland's growing Jewish
community organized a second congregation, a strictly orthodox group, Poel
Zedek. Women's religious organizations flourished, their charitable services
extending to needy gentiles as well as Jews. Oakland Jewry was part of the
greater San Francisco community, yet maintained its own character. In 1881 the
First Hebrew Congregation of Oakland, elected Myer Solomon Levy as its rabbi.
The London-born Levy practiced traditional Judaism. Oakland's Jews were pushed
hard to excel in school, both secular and religious. Fannie Bernstein was the
first Jew to graduate from the University of California at Berkeley, in 1883.
First Hebrew Congregation sponsored a Sabbath school which had 75 children in
1887. Oakland Jewry was active in public affairs and charitable projects in the
1880s. Rabbi Myer S. Levy was chaplain to the state legislature in 1885. The
Daughters of Israel Relief Society continued its good works both inside and
outside the Jewish community. Beth Jacob, the traditional congregation of Old
World Polish Jews, continued its separate religious practices while it
maintained friendly relations with the members of the first Hebrew
Congregation. Able social and political leadership came from David Samuel
Hirshberg. Until 1886 he was an officer in the Grand Lodge of B'nai B'rith. He
served as Under Sheriff of Alameda County in 1883 and was active in Democratic
party affairs. In 1885 he was appointed Chief Clerk of the US Mint in San
Francisco. As a politician, he had detractors who accused him of using his
position in B'nai B'rith to foster his political career. When refugees from the
fire-stricken, poorer Jewish quarter of San Francisco came to Oakland, the
synagogue provided immediate aid. Food and clothing were given to the needy and
350 people were given a place to sleep. For about a week the synagogue fed up
to 500 people three times a day. A large part of the expenses were paid by the
Jewish Ladies' organization of the synagogue. Progressive movement. With the
influx of Jews from Central and Eastern Europe many members of the Jewish
community were attracted to labor and socialist movements and numerous Jewish
newspapers such as "Forwerts" and "Morgen Freiheit" had a socialist
orientation. Left wing organizations such as the Arbeter Ring and the Jewish
People's Fraternal Order played an important part in Jewish community life
until World War II. Jewish Americans were not just involved in nearly every
important social movement but in the forefront of promoting such issues as
workers rights, civil rights, woman's rights, freedom of religion, peace
movements, and various other progressive causes. Americanization. Jacob Schiff
played a major role as a leader of the American Jewish community in the late
19th century. As a wealthy German Jew, Schiff made important decisions
regarding the arrival of Eastern European Jewish immigrants. At a time of
increasing demand for immigration restriction, Schiff supported and worked for
Jewish Americanization. A Reform Jew, he backed the creation of the
Conservative Jewish Theological Seminary of America. He took a stand favoring a
modified form of Zionism, reversing his earlier opposition. Above all, Schiff
believed that American Jewry could live in both the Jewish and American worlds,
creating a balance that made possible an enduring American Jewish community.
The National Council of Jewish Women (NCJW), founded in Chicago in 1893, had
the goals of philanthropy and the Americanization of Jewish immigrants.
Responding to the plight of Jewish women and girls from Eastern Europe, the
NCJW created its Department of Immigrant Aid to assist and protect female
immigrants from the time of their arrival at Ellis Island until their
settlement at their final destination. The NCJW's Americanization program
included assisting immigrants with housing, health, and employment problems,
leading them to organizations where women could begin to socialize, and
conducting English classes while helping them maintain a strong Jewish
identity. The council, pluralistic rather than conformist, continued its
Americanization efforts and fought against restrictive immigration laws after
World War I. At the forefront of its activities was the religious education of
Jewish girls, who were ignored by the Orthodox community. Philanthropy. Since
the 1820s organized philanthropy has been a core value of the American Jewish
community. In most cities the philanthropic organizations are the center of the
Jewish community and activism is highly valued. Much of the money now goes to
Israel, as well as hospitals and higher education; previously it went to poor
Jews. This meant in the 1880-1930 era wealth German Reform Jews were
subsidizing poor Orthodox newcomers, and helping their process of
Americanization, thus helping bridge the cultural gap. This convergence brought
Jews into the political debates in the 1900-1930 period over immigration
restriction. Jews were the leading opponents of restrictions, but could not
stop their passage in 1924 or their use to keep out most refugees from Hitler
in the 1930s. Julius Rosenwald (1862–1932) moved to Chicago in the late
1880s. Purchasing a half-interest in 1895, he transformed a small mail order
house Sears, Roebuck into the largest retailer in America. He used his wealth
for philanthropy targeted especially at the plight of rural blacks in
collaboration with Booker T. Washington. From 1917 to 1932 the Julius Rosenwald
Foundation set up 5,357 public schools for blacks. He funded numerous hospitals
for blacks in the South as well as 24 YMCA's; he was a major contributor to the
NAACP and the National Urban League. His major contributions to the University
of Chicago and to various Jewish philanthropies were on a similar grand scale.
He spent $11 million to fund the Chicago Museum of Science and Industry. Rise
to affluence in the 20th century. During the 20th century, Jews in America
joined the middle class, and towards the end of the 20th century, became
relatively wealthy. Although not all Jewish Americans are wealthy, which is
somewhat became a stereotype, the majority of American Jews are in a good
socioeconomic status position. In 1983, economist Thomas Sowell of Stanford
University wrote "Jewish family incomes are the highest of any large ethnic
group in the US - 72% above the national average." Sowell points out that
Episcopalians have also experienced similar prosperity - as a group - as Jews,
but it is the "social and economic distance covered in a relatively short time"
that makes the Jewish experience in America unique. Gerald Krefetz discusses
the prosperity that Jews earned in the United States following their emigration
from Europe in the 19th and 20h centuries, and he attributes their success to
their familiarity with "trading and exchanging, commerce, city living, property
rights, ... and accumulation of funds for future investment ... " Historian
Edward Shapiro cites a Forbes magazine survey from the 1980s, which showed
that, of the 400 richest Americans, over 100 were Jewish, which was nine times
greater than would be expected based on the overall population. Shapiro also
estimates that over 30% of American billionaires are Jewish, and he cites a
1986 issue of Financial World that listed the top 100 money makers in 1985, and
"half the people mentioned" were Jewish, including George Soros, Asher Edelman,
Michael Milkin, and Ivan Boesky. Gerald Krefetz writes "hether it is called
intestinal fortitude, operation bootstrap, moxie, social striving ,or upward
mobility, American Jews have fought mightily for financial security... As a
group Jews have attained a higher standard of living and earn more money than
any other religious group in the United States... Jews are the richest of the
rich". Lynching of Leo Frank. In 1913, a Jew in Atlanta named Leo Frank was
convicted for the rape and murder of Mary Phagan, a 13-year-old Christian girl
in his employ. Frank was sentenced to death but Governor Slaton, convinced by a
review of the evidence that Frank was innocent, commuted the sentence to life
imprisonment. As a result of public outrage over this act, a Georgia mob
kidnapped Frank from prison and lynched him. In response to the lynching of Leo
Frank, Sigmund Livingston founded the Anti-Defamation League (ADL) under the
sponsorship of B'nai B'rith. The ADL became the leading Jewish group fighting
anti-Semitism in the United States. The lynching of Leo Frank coincided with
and helped spark the revival of the Ku Klux Klan. The Klan disseminated the
view that anarchists, communists and Jews were subverting American values and
ideals. World War I. The number of Jews who served in the American military
during World War I was disproportionate to their representation in the American
population at large. The 250,000 Jews who served represented approximately 5%
of the American armed forces whereas Jews only constituted 3% of the general
population. As early as 1914, the American Jewish community mobilized its
resources to assist the victims of the European war. Cooperating to a degree
not previously seen, the various factions of the American Jewish
community—native-born and immigrant, Reform, Orthodox, secular, and
socialist—coalesced to form what eventually became known as the American
Jewish Joint Distribution Committee. All told, American Jews raised 63 million
dollars in relief funds during the war years and became more immersed in
European Jewish affairs than ever before. 1930s. David Gerber describes the
middle and late 1930s as a period characterized by a "quasi-fascist and anti-
communist anti-Semitism which blamed Jews for the Great Depression and the
international crises in Europe." Refugees from Nazi Germany. In the years
before and during World War II the United States Congress, the Roosevelt
Administration, and public opinion expressed concern about the fate of Jews in
Europe but consistently refused to permit large-scale immigration of Jewish
refugees. In a report issued by the State Department, Undersecretary of State
Stuart Eizenstat noted that the United States accepted only 21,000 refugees
from Europe and did not significantly raise or even fill its restrictive
quotas, accepting far fewer Jews per capita than many of the neutral European
countries and fewer in absolute terms than Switzerland. According to David
Wyman, "The United States and its Allies were willing to attempt almost nothing
to save the Jews." U.S. opposition to immigration in general in the late 1930s
was motivated by the grave economic pressures, the high unemployment rate, and
social frustration and disillusionment. The U.S. refusal to support
specifically Jewish immigration, however, stemmed from something else, namely
antisemitism, which had increased in the late 1930s and continued to rise in
the 1940s. It was an important ingredient in America's negative response to
Jewish refugees. About 100,000 German Jews did arrive in the 1930s, escaping
Hitler’s persecution. MS St. Louis. The SS St. Louis sailed from Germany in
May 1939 carrying 936 (mainly German) Jewish refugees. On 4 June 1939, it was
also refused permission to unload on orders of President Roosevelt as the ship
waited in the Caribbean Sea between Florida and Cuba. Initially, Roosevelt
showed limited willingness to take in some of those on board. But the
Immigration Act of 1924 made that illegal and public opinion was strongly
opposed . The ship returned to Europe. 620 of the passengers were eventually
accepted in continental Europe, of these only 365 survived the Holocaust. World
War II and the Holocaust. The United States’ tight immigration policies were
not lifted during the Holocaust, news of which began to reach the United States
in 1941 and 1942 and it has been estimated that 190,000–200,000 Jews could
have been saved during the Second World War had it not been for bureaucratic
obstacles to immigration deliberately created by Breckinridge Long and others.
Rescue of the European Jewish population was not a priority for the US during
the war, and the American Jewish community did not realize the severity of the
Holocaust until late in the conflict. The Holocaust. During the World War II
period the American Jewish community was bitterly and deeply divided, and was
unable to form a common front. Most Eastern Europeans favored Zionism, which
saw a homeland as the only solution; this had the effect of diverting attention
from the horrors in Nazi Germany. German Jews were alarmed at the Nazis but
were disdainful of Zionism. Proponents of a Jewish state and Jewish army
agitated, but many leaders were so fearful of an antisemitic backlash inside
the U.S. that they demanded that all Jews keep a low public profile. One
important development was the sudden conversion of most (but not all) Jewish
leaders to Zionism late in the war. The Holocaust was largely ignored by
America media as it was happening. Why that was is illuminated by the anti-
Zionist position taken by Arthur Hays Sulzberger, publisher of the "New York
Times," during World War II. Committed to classical Reform Judaism, which
defined Judaism as a religious faith and not as a people, Sulzberger insisted
that as an American he saw European Jews as part of a refugee problem, not
separate from it. As publisher of the nation's most influential newspaper, "The
New York Times", he permitted only a handful of editorials during the war on
the extermination of the Jews. He supported the anti-Zionist American Council
for Judaism. Even after it became known that the Nazis had singled out the Jews
for destruction, Sulzberger held that all refugees had suffered. He opposed the
creation of Israel. In effect, he muted the enormous potential influence of the
"Times" by keeping issues of concern regarding Jews off the editorial page and
burying stories about Nazi atrocities against Jews in short items deep inside
the paper. In time he grew increasingly out of step with the American Jewish
community by his persistent refusal to recognize Jews as a people and despite
obvious flaws in his view of American democracy. While Jews owned few
prestigious newspapers other than the "New York Times", they had a major
presence in Hollywood and in network radio. Hollywood films and radio with few
exceptions avoided questioning Nazi persecution of Europe's Jews prior to Pearl
Harbor. Jewish studio executives did not want to be accused of advocating
Jewish propaganda by making films with overtly antifascist themes. Indeed, they
were pressured by such organizations as the Anti-Defamation League and by
national Jewish leaders to avoid such themes lest American Jews suffer an
antisemitic backlash. Rescue. Despite strong public and political sentiment to
the contrary, however, there were some who encouraged the US government to help
victims of Nazi genocide. In 1943, just before Yom Kippur, 400 rabbis marched
in Washington to draw attention to the plight of Holocaust victims (see "The
Day the Rabbis Marched".) A week later, Senator William Warren Barbour (R; New
Jersey), one of a handful of politicians who met with the rabbis on the steps
of the US Capitol, proposed legislation that would have allowed as many as
100,000 victims of the Holocaust to emigrate temporarily to the United States.
Barbour died six weeks after introducing the bill, and it was not passed. A
parallel bill was introduced in the House of Representatives by Rep. Samuel
Dickstein (D; New York). This also failed to pass. During the Holocaust, fewer
than 30,000 Jews a year reached the United States, and some were turned away
due to immigration policies. The US did not change its immigration policies
until 1948. Impact. The Holocaust had a profound impact on the community in the
United States, especially after 1960, as Jews tried to comprehend what had
happened, and especially to commemorate and grapple with it when looking to the
future. Abraham Joshua Heschel summarized this dilemma when he attempted to
understand Auschwitz: "To try to answer is to commit a supreme blasphemy.
Israel enables us to bear the agony of Auschwitz without radical despair, to
sense a ray God's radiance in the jungles of history." Postwar. 500,000
American Jews (or half of the eligible men) fought in World War II, and after
the war younger families joined the new trend of suburbanization. There, Jews
became increasingly assimilated and demonstrated rising intermarriage. The
suburbs facilitated the formation of new centers, as Jewish school enrollment
more than doubled between the end of World War II and the mid-1950s, and
synagogue affiliation jumped from 20% in 1930 to 60% in 1960; the fastest
growth came in Reform and, especially, Conservative congregations. Having never
been subjected to the Holocaust, the United States stood after the Second World
War as the largest, richest, and healthiest center of Judaism in the world.
Smaller Jewish communities turned increasingly to American Jewry for guidance
and support. Immediately after the Second World War, some Jewish refugees
resettled in the United States, and another wave of Jewish refugees from Arab
nations settled in the US after expulsion from their home countries. Liberal
politics. While earlier Jewish elements from Germany were business oriented and
voted as conservative Republicans, the wave of Eastern European Jews starting
in the 1880s, were more liberal or left wing and became the political majority.
Many came to America with experience in the socialist and anarchist movements
as well as the Labor Bund, based in Eastern Europe. Many Jews rose to
leadership positions in the early 20th century American labor movement and
helped to found unions in the "needle trades" (clothing industry) that played a
major role in the CIO and in Democratic Party politics. Sidney Hillman of the
CIO was especially powerful in the early 1940s at the national level. By the
1930s Jews were a major political factor in New York City, with strong support
for the most liberal programs of the New Deal. Since most East European Jews
were excluded from the Irish-controlled Democratic Party in New York City they
worked through third parties, the American Labor Party and the Liberal Party of
New York. By the 1940s they were inside the Democratic Party, and helped
overthrow Tammany Hall. They continued as a major element of the New Deal
coalition, giving special support to the Civil Rights Movement. By the mid
1960s, however, the Black Power movement caused a growing separation between
blacks and Jews, though both groups remained solidly in the Democratic camp.
Although German Jews generally leaned Republican in the second half of the 19th
century, the East European elements voted Democratic or for left parties since
at least 1916, when they voted 55% for Woodrow Wilson. American Jews voted 90%
against the Republicans and supported Democrats Franklin D. Roosevelt and Harry
S. Truman in the elections of 1940, 1944 and 1948, despite both party platforms
supporting the creation of a Jewish state in the latter two elections. During
the 1952 and 1956 elections, they voted 60% or more for Democrat Adlai
Stevenson, while General Eisenhower garnered 40% for his reelection; the best
showing to date for the Republicans since Harding's 43% in 1920. In 1960, 83%
voted for Democrat John F. Kennedy, a Catholic, against Richard Nixon, and in
1964, 90% of American Jews voted for Lyndon Johnson; his Republican opponent,
arch-conservative Barry Goldwater, was Protestant but his paternal grandparents
were Jewish. Hubert Humphrey garnered 81% of the Jewish vote in the 1968
elections, in his losing bid for president against Richard Nixon, a high level
of Jewish support not seen since. During the Nixon re-election campaign of
1972, Jewish voters were apprehensive about George McGovern and only favored
the Democrat by 65%, while Nixon more than doubled Republican Jewish support to
35%. In the election of 1976, Jewish voters supported Democrat Jimmy Carter by
71% over incumbent president Gerald Ford’s 27%, but in 1980 they abandoned
Carter, leaving him with only 45% support, while Republican winner, Ronald
Reagan, garnered 39%, and 14% went to independent John Anderson. During the
Reagan re-election campaign of 1984, the Jews returned home to the Democratic
Party, giving Reagan only 31% compared to 67% for Democrat Walter Mondale. The
same 2-1 pattern reappeared in 1988 as Democrat Michael Dukakis had 64%, while
victorious George Bush polled 35%. Bush's Jewish support collapsed during his
re-election in 1992, to just 11%, with 80% voting for Bill Clinton and 9% going
to independent Ross Perot. Clinton’s re-election campaign in 1996 maintained
high Jewish support at 78%, with 16% supporting Bob Dole and 3% for Perot.
Exceptionalism. Historians believe American Jewish history has been
characterized by an unparalleled degree of freedom, acceptance, and prosperity
that has made it possible for Jews to bring together their ethnic identities
with the demands of national citizenship far more effortlessly than Jews in
Europe. American Jewish exceptionalism differentiates Jews from other American
ethnic groups by means of educational and economic attainments and, indeed, by
virtue of Jewish values, including a devotion to political liberalism. As
Dollinger (2002) has found, for the last century the most secular Jews have
tended toward the most liberal or even leftist political views, while more
religious Jews are politically more conservative. Modern Orthodox Jews have
been less active in political movements than Reform Jews. They vote Republican
more often than less traditional Jews. In contemporary political debate, strong
Orthodox support for various school voucher initiatives undermines the
exceptionalist belief that the Jewish community seeks a high and impenetrable
barrier between church and state. Creation of the State of Israel. With its
establishment in 1948, the State of Israel became the focal point of American
Jewish life and philanthropy, as well as the symbol around which American Jews
united. Six-Day War. The Six-Day War of June 1967 marked a turning point in the
lives of many 1960s-era Jews. The paralyzing fear of a "second Holocaust"
followed by tiny Israel's seemingly miraculous victory over the combined Arab
armies arrayed to destroy it struck deep emotional chords among American Jews.
Their financial support for Israel rose sharply in the war's wake, and more of
them than ever before chose in those years to make Israel their permanent home.
A lively internal debate commenced, following the Six-Day War. The American
Jewish community was divided over whether they agreed with the Israeli
response; the great majority came to accept the war as necessary. A tension
existed especially for leftist Jews, between their liberal ideology and Zionist
backing in the midst of this conflict. This deliberation about the Six-Day War
showed the depth and complexity of Jewish responses to the varied events of the
1960s. Civil rights. Jews were highly visible as leaders of movements for civil
rights for all Americans, including themselves and African Americans. Seymour
Siegel argues the historic struggle against prejudice faced by Jewish people
led to a natural sympathy for any people confronting discrimination. This
further led Jews to discuss the relationship they had with African Americans.
Jewish leaders spoke at the two iconic marches of the era. Joachim Prinz,
president of the American Jewish Congress, appeared at the March on Washington
on 28 August 1963, noting that "As Jews we bring to this great demonstration,
in which thousands of us proudly participate, a twofold experience--one of the
spirit and one of our history" Two years later Abraham Joshua Heschel of the
Jewish Theological Seminary marched in the front row of the Selma-to-Montgomery
march. Within Judaism, increasing involvement in the civil rights movement
caused some tension. Rabbi Bernard Wienberger exemplified this point of view,
warning that "northern liberal Jews" put at risk southern Jews who faced
hostility from white southerners because of their northern counterparts.
However, most known Jewish responses to the civil rights movement and black
relations lean toward acceptance and against prejudice, as the disproportionate
involvement of Jews in the movement would indicate. Despite this history of
participation, relations between African Americans and Jews have sometimes been
strained by their close proximity and class differences, especially in New York
and other urban areas. Jewish feminism. In its modern form, the Jewish feminist
movement can be traced to the early 1970s in the United States. According to
Judith Plaskow, who has focused on feminism in Reform Judaism, the main issues
for early Jewish feminists in these movements were the exclusion from the all-
male prayer group or "minyan", the exemption from positive time-bound
"mitzvot", and women's inability to function as witnesses and to initiate
divorce. Immigration from the Soviet Union. The last large wave of immigration
came from the Soviet Union after 1988, in response to heavy political pressure
from the U.S. government. After the 1967 Six-Day War and the liberalization
tide in Eastern Europe in 1968, Soviet policy became more restrictive. Jews
were denied educational and vocational opportunities. These restrictive
policies led to the emergence of a new political group - the 'refuseniks' -
whose main goal was emigrating. The refuseniks (Jews who were refused exit
visas) attracted the attention of the West, particularly the United States, and
became an important factor influencing economic and trade relations between the
United States and the Soviet Union. The 1975 Jackson Amendment to the Trade
Reform Act linked granting the USSR 'most favored nation' status to
liberalization of Soviet emigration laws. Beginning in 1967 the Soviet Union
allowed some Jewish citizens to leave for family reunification in Israel. Due
to the break in diplomatic relations between Israel and the USSR, most
émigrés traveled to Vienna, Austria, or Budapest, Hungary, from where they
were then flown to Israel. After 1976 the majority of émigrés who left on
visas for Israel 'dropped out' in Vienna and chose to resettle in the West.
Several American Jewish organizations helped them obtain visas and aided their
resettlement in the United States and other countries. However Israel wanted
them and tried to prevent Soviet Jewish émigrés from resettling in the United
States after having committed to immigrating to Israel. Israeli officials
pressured American Jewish organizations to desist from aiding Russian Jews who
wanted to resettle in the United States. Initially, American Jews resisted
Israeli efforts. Following Mikhail Gorbachev's decision in the late 1980s to
allow free emigration for Soviet Jews, the American Jewish community agreed to
a quota on Soviet Jewish refugees in the U.S., which resulted in most Soviet
Jewish émigrés settling in Israel. The Russian Jewish population in the
United States is the second only to the population of Russian Jews in Israel.
According to RINA, there is a core Russian-Jewish population of 350,000 in the
U.S. The enlarged Russian Jewish population in the U.S. is estimated to be
700,000. Some 100,000 Ashkenazi and Bukharian Jews immigrate to the United
States. Large pockets of Russian-Jewish Communities include Brooklyn, New York,
specifically Brighton Beach and Sheepshead Bay, and in the Sunny Isles Beach
neighborhood of South Florida. Another large pocket of Russian Jewish residence
is Northeast Philadelphia and surrounding Bucks and Montgomery Counties, as
well as Northern New Jersey. Local Developments. Nashville, Tennessee. Reform
Jews, predominantly German, became Nashville's largest and most influential
Jewish community in the first half of the 20th century; they enjoyed good
relations with the Orthodox and Conservative congregations. Some German Jewish
refugees resettled in Nashville from 1935 to 1939, helped by prominent
Nashville families. Both the Orthodox and Conservative congregations had
relocated their synagogues to the suburbs by 1949, and the entire Jewish
community had shifted southwest by about five miles. Although subtle social
discrimination existed, Nashville's Jews enjoyed the respect of the larger
community. Public acceptance, however, required complicity in racial
segregation. The Observer, Nashville's weekly Jewish newspaper, tried to find a
middle ground between assimilation and particularism, but after years of
calling for group solidarity, accepted that the Jewish community was
pluralistic. Palm Springs, California. About 32,000 Jews reside in the Palm
Springs area, reports the United Jewish Congress of the Desert . The world-
famous desert resort community has been widely known for its Hollywood
celebrities. Philadelphia publisher Walter Annenberg opened the Tamarisk
Country Club in 1946, after being refused membership in the Los Angeles
Lakeside country club. But his connections with Hollywood and corporations
alike made his country club a success, and made it a policy to allow Jews and
all people, regardless of race and religion, to have access to his facility.
Many elderly American Jews from the East coast and the Los Angeles metropolitan
area, come to retire in the warm climates such as the Coachella Valley,
favoring in golf course and mobile home communities. By the 1990s they were a
large component of demography in the desert resort. There are 12 Jewish places
of worship, including a Jewish community center in Palm Desert, where an
estimated 20-25 percent of the population are of Jewish descent . Palm Springs
has the annual "Winter Festival of Lights" parade, which began as a separate
parade to celebrate Chanukah in the 1960s. Over time, that and the Christmas-
themed parade merged into the one celebrating the season's lights of menorahs,
Christmas trees and the calendar new year. Miami. After 1945 many northeastern
Jews moved to Florida, especially to Miami, Miami Beach, and nearby cities.
They found familiar foods and better weather, and founded more open, less
tradition-bound communities, where greater materialism and more leisure-
oriented, less disciplined Judaism developed. Many relaxed their religiosity
and attended services only during Rosh Hashana and Yom Kippur. In South Florida
synagogue affiliation, Jewish community center membership, and per capita
contributions to the United Jewish Appeal and the Jewish Federation are among
the lowest of any Jewish community in the United States. Princeton, New Jersey.
The development of Jewish (particularly Orthodox) student life at Princeton
University improved rapidly since the end of World War II, when Jewish students
were few and isolated. In 1958 Jewish students were more numerous; they
protested against the Bicker system of eating club member selection. In 1961
Yavneh House was established as Princeton's first kosher kitchen. In 1971
Stevenson Hall opened as a university-managed kosher eating facility in the
midst of the older private eating clubs. Jewish student initiative and
Princeton administration openness deserve credit for this progress. Current
situation. (p. 64) Note: These charts are for the U.S. core Jewish population
only. 1810 is an extrapolation as figures are not available for this exact
year. American Jews continued to prosper throughout the early 21st century.
American Jews are disproportionately represented in business, academia and
politics. Forty percent of partners in the leading law firms in New York and
Washington are Jewish. Thirty percent of American Nobel prize winners in
science and 37 percent of all American Nobel winners are Jewish. An estimated
thirty percent of Ivy League students are Jewish. Demographically, the
population is not increasing. With their success, American Jews have become
increasingly assimilated into American culture, with high intermarriage rates
resulting in either a falling or steady population rate at a time when the
country was booming. It has not grown appreciably since 1960, comprises a
smaller percentage of America's total population than it had in 1910, and seems
likely to witness an actual decline in numbers in the decades ahead. Jews also
began to move to the suburbs, with major population shifts from New York and
the Northeast to Florida and California. New Jewish organizations were founded
to accommodate an increasing range of Jewish worship and community activities,
as well as geographic dispersal. Politically, the Jewish population remained
strongly liberal. The heavily Democratic pattern continued into the 21st
century. Since 1936 the great majority of Jews have been Democrats. In 2004 74%
of Jews voted for Democrat John Kerry, a Catholic of partial Jewish descent,
and in 2006 87% voted for Democratic candidates for the House. By the 1990s
Jews were becoming prominent in Congress and state governments throughout the
country. Jews proved to be strong supporters of the American Civil Rights
Movement. Self identity. Social historians analyze the American population in
terms of class, race, ethnicity, religion, gender, region and urbanism. Jewish
scholars generally emphasize ethnicity. First, it reflects the suppression of
the term "Jewish race," a contested but fairly common usage right into the
1930s and its replacement by the more acceptable "ethnic" usage. Second, it
reflects a post-religious evaluation of American Jewish identity, in which
"Jewishness" (rather than "Judaism") is taken to be more inclusive, embracing
the secularized as well as the religious experiences of Jews. Korelitz (1996)
shows how American Jews during the late 19th and early 20th centuries abandoned
a racial definition of Jewishness in favor of one that embraced ethnicity. The
key to understanding this transition from a racial self-definition to a
cultural or ethnic one can be found in the "Menorah Journal" between 1915 and
1925. During this time contributors to the Menorah promoted a cultural, rather
than a racial, religious, or other view of Jewishness as a means to define Jews
in a world that threatened to overwhelm and absorb Jewish uniqueness. The
journal represented the ideals of the menorah movement established by Horace
Kallen and others to promote a revival in Jewish cultural identity and combat
the idea of race as a means to define or identify peoples. Siporin (1990) uses
the family folklore of ethnic Jews to their collective history and its
transformation into an historical art form. They tell us how Jews have survived
being uprooted and transformed. Many immigrant narratives bear a theme of the
arbitrary nature of fate and the reduced state of immigrants in a new culture.
By contrast, ethnic family narratives tend to show the ethnic more in charge of
his life, and perhaps in danger of losing his Jewishness altogether. Some
stories show how a family member successfully negotiated the conflict between
ethnic and American identities. After 1960 memories of the Holocaust, together
with the Six-Day War in 1967 that resulted in the survival of Israel had major
impacts on fashioning Jewish ethnic identity. The provided Jews with a
rationale for their ethnic distinction at a time when other minorities were
asserting their own. Antisemitism in the United States. During the Civil War,
General Ulysses S. Grant issued an order (quickly rescinded by President
Abraham Lincoln) of expulsion against Jews from the portions of Tennessee,
Kentucky and Mississippi under his control. ("See General Order No. 11")
Antisemitism continued into the first half of 20th century. Jews were
discriminated against in some employment, not allowed into some social clubs
and resort areas, given a quota on enrollment at colleges, and not allowed to
buy certain properties. Antisemitism in America reached its peak during the
interwar period. The rise of the Ku Klux Klan in the 1920s, the antisemitic
works of Henry Ford, and the radio speeches of Father Coughlin in the late
1930s indicated the strength of attacks on the Jewish community. Antisemitism
in the United States has rarely turned into physical violence against Jews.
Some more notable cases of such violence include the attack of Irish workers
and police on the funeral procession of Rabbi Jacob Joseph in New York City in
1902, the lynching of Leo Frank in 1915, the murder of Alan Berg in 1984, and
the Crown Heights riots of 1991. Following the Second World War and the
American Civil Rights Movement, anti-Jewish sentiment waned. Some members of
the Black Nationalist Nation of Islam claimed that Jews were responsible for
the exploitation of black labor, bringing alcohol and drugs into their
communities, and unfair domination of the economy. Furthermore, according to
surveys begun in 1964 by the Anti-Defamation League, a Jewish organization,
African Americans are significantly more likely than white Americans to hold
antisemitic beliefs, although there is a strong correlation between education
level and the rejection of antisemitic stereotypes for all races. However,
black Americans of all education levels are nevertheless significantly more
likely than whites of the same education level to be antisemitic. In the 1998
survey, blacks (34%) were nearly four times as likely as whites (9%) to fall
into the most antisemitic category (those agreeing with at least 6 of 11
statements that were potentially or clearly antisemitic). Among blacks with no
college education, 43% fell into the most antisemitic group (vs. 18% for the
general population), which fell to 27% among blacks with some college
education, and 18% among blacks with a four-year college degree (vs. 5% for the
general population). The 2005 Anti-Defamation League survey includes data on
Hispanic attitudes, with 29% being most antisemitic (vs. 9% for whites and 36%
for blacks); being born in the United States helped alleviate this attitude:
35% of foreign-born Hispanics, but only 19% of those born in the US. Religious
tensions continued to exist in the United States, but numerous polls indicated
that Jews were no longer the focus of hostility, and indeed that antisemitism
is at a low point in the U.S. As an example of religious tension, in 2010
widespread debate erupted over building an Islamic cultural center and mosque
in New York City near the World Trade Center site. The city of New York has
officially endorsed the project, but public opinion nationwide has been
hostile. A Time (magazine) poll in August 2010 of 1000 individuals indicated
that 13 percent hold unfavorable views of Jews, compared with 43 percent who
had unfavorable views of Muslims, 17 percent who felt unfavorably toward
Catholics and 29 percent who viewed Mormons unfavorably. By contrast,
antisemitic attitudes are much higher in Europe and are growing.
