Holodomor The Holodomor (, or "hunger-extermination") was a man-made famine in
the Ukrainian SSR between 1932 and 1933. During the famine, which is also known
as the "Terror-Famine in Ukraine" and "Famine-Genocide in Ukraine", millions of
Ukrainians died of starvation in a peacetime catastrophe unprecedented in the
history of Ukraine. Early estimates of the death toll by scholars and
government officials varied greatly; anywhere between 1.8 and 12 million ethnic
Ukrainians were said to have been killed as a result of the famine. Recent
research has since narrowed the estimates to between 2.4 and 7.5 million. The
exact number of deaths is hard to determine, due to a lack of records, but the
number increases significantly when the deaths inside heavily Ukrainian-
populated Kuban are included. The demographic deficit caused by unborn or
unrecorded births is said to be as high as 6 million. Older estimates are still
often cited in political commentary. Scholars disagree on the relative
importance of natural factors and bad economic policies as causes of the famine
and the degree to which the destruction of the Ukrainian peasantry was
premeditated on the part of Joseph Stalin. Scholars and politicians using the
word "Holodomor" emphasize the man-made aspects of the famine, arguing that it
was genocide; some consider the resultant loss of life comparable to the
Holocaust. They argue that the Soviet policies were an attack on the rise of
Ukrainian nationalism and therefore fall under the legal definition of
genocide. Other scholars argue that the Holodomor was a consequence of the
economic problems associated with radical economic changes implemented during
the period of Soviet industrialization. Legal recognition. As of March 2008,
several governments have recognized the actions of the Soviet government as an
act of genocide. The joint statement at the United Nations in 2003 has defined
the famine as the result of actions and policies of the totalitarian regime
that caused the deaths of millions of Ukrainians, Russians, Kazakhs and other
nationalities in the USSR. On 28 November 2006, the Verkhovna Rada (Ukrainian
Parliament) narrowly passed a law defining the Holodomor as a deliberate act of
genocide and made public denial illegal. Even though in April 2010 newly
elected president Yanukovych reversed Yushchenko's position on the Holodomor
famine, the law has not been repealed and remains in force. On 23 October 2008,
the European Parliament adopted a resolution that recognized the Holodomor as a
crime against humanity. On 12 January 2010, the court of appeals in Kiev opened
hearings into the "fact of genocide-famine Holodomor in Ukraine in 1932–33".
In May 2009 the Security Service of Ukraine started a criminal case "in
relation to the genocide in Ukraine in 1932–33". In a ruling on 13 January
2010 the court found Joseph Stalin and other Bolshevik leaders guilty of
genocide against the Ukrainians. The court dropped criminal proceedings against
the leaders: Stalin, Vyacheslav Molotov, Lazar Kaganovich, Stanislav Kosior,
Pavel Postyshev and others, who had all died years before. This decision became
effective on 21 January 2010. On 27 April 2010, a draft Parliamentary Assembly
of the Council of Europe resolution declared the famine was caused by the
"cruel and deliberate actions and policies of the Soviet regime" and was
responsible for the deaths of "millions of innocent people" in Ukraine,
Belarus, Kazakhstan, Moldova and Russia. Even though PACE found Stalin guilty
of causing the famine, they rejected several amendments to the resolution,
which proposed the Holodomor be recognized as an act of genocide against the
Ukrainian people. Etymology. The word "Holodomor" literally translated from
Ukrainian means "death by hunger," or "to kill by hunger, to starve to death."
Sometimes the expression is translated into English as "murder by hunger or
starvation." Holodomor is a portmanteau word of the Ukrainian word "holod"
meaning "hunger" and "mor" meaning "plague." The expression "moryty holodom"
means "to inflict death by hunger." The Ukrainian verb "moryty" (морити)
means "to poison somebody, drive to exhaustion or to torment somebody." The
perfective form of the verb "moryty" is "zamoryty" – "kill or drive to death
by hunger, exhausting work." The word was used in print as early as 1978 by
Ukrainian immigrant organizations in the United States and Canada. However, in
the USSR – of which Ukraine was a member – references to the famine were
controlled, even after de-Stalinization in 1956. Historians could speak only of
'food difficulties', and the use of the very word "golod"/"holod" (hunger,
famine) was forbidden. Discussion of the Holodomor became more open as part of
"Glasnost" in the late 1980s. In Ukraine, the first official use of the word
was a December 1987 speech by Volodymyr Shcherbytskyi, First Secretary of the
Central Committee of the Communist Party of Ukraine, on the occasion of the
republic's seventieth anniversary. An early public usage in the Soviet Union
was in February 1988, in a speech by Oleksiy Musiyenko, Deputy Secretary for
ideological matters of the party organization of the Kiev branch of the Union
of Soviet Writers in Ukraine. The term may have first appeared in print in the
Soviet Union on 18 July 1988, in his article on the topic. "Holodomor" is now
an entry in the modern, two-volume dictionary of the Ukrainian language,
published in 2004. The term is described as "artificial hunger, organised in
vast scale by the criminal regime against the country's population." History.
Scope and duration. The famine affected the Ukrainian SSR as well as the
Moldavian ASSR (a part of the Ukrainian S.S.R. at the time) in the spring of
1932 and from February to July 1933, with the greatest number of victims
recorded in the spring of 1933. The population in every part of the territory
did not suffer from the Holodomor for the whole period. There are reports that
famine stopped directly at the border between Ukraine and the Russian (and
Belarusian) republics. Between 1926 and 1939, the Ukrainian population
increased by 6.6%, whereas Russia and Belarus grew by 16.9% and 11.7%,
respectively. From the 1932 harvest Soviet authorities were able to procure
only 4.3 million tons as compared with 7.2 million tons obtained from the 1931
harvest. Rations in town were drastically cut back, and in the winter of
1932–33 and spring of 1933 many urban areas were starved. The urban workers
were supplied by a rationing system (and therefore could occasionally assist
their starving relatives of the countryside), but rations were gradually cut
and by the spring of 1933, the urban residents also faced starvation. At the
same time, workers were shown agitprop movies, where all peasants were
portrayed as counterrevolutionaries hiding grain and potatoes at the time when
workers, who are constructing the “bright future” of socialism, were
starving. The first reports of mass malnutrition and deaths from starvation
emerged from two urban areas of Uman, reported in January 1933 by the Vinnytsya
and Kiev oblasts. By mid-January 1933 there were reports about mass
“difficulties” with food in urban areas, which had been undersupplied
through the rationing system, and deaths from starvation among people who were
withdrawn from the rationing supply. This was to comply with the Central
Committee of the Communist Party of Ukraine Decree December 1932. By the
beginning of February 1933, according to reports from local authorities and
Ukrainian GPU, the most affected area was Dnipropetrovsk Oblast, which also
suffered from epidemics of typhus and malaria. Odessa and Kiev oblasts were
second and third, respectively. By mid-March, most reports originated from Kiev
Oblast. By mid-April 1933, the Kharkiv Oblast reached the top of the most
affected list, while Kiev, Dnipropetrovsk, Odessa, Vinnytsya, Donetsk oblasts
and Moldavian SSR followed it. Reports about mass deaths from starvation, dated
mid-May through the beginning of June 1933, originated from raions in Kiev and
Kharkiv oblasts. The “less affected” list noted the Chernihiv Oblast and
northern parts of Kiev and Vinnytsya oblasts. The Central Committee of the CP
(b) of Ukraine Decree of 8 February 1933, said no hunger cases should have
remained untreated. Local authorities had to submit reports about the numbers
suffering from hunger, the reasons for hunger, number of deaths from hunger,
food aid provided from local sources, and centrally provided food aid required.
The GPU managed parallel reporting and food assistance in the Ukrainian SSR.
(Many regional reports and most of the central summary reports are available
from present-day central and regional Ukrainian archives.) Evidence of
widespread cannibalism was documented during the Holodomor. The Soviet regime
printed posters declaring: "To eat your own children is a barbarian act." More
than 2500 people were convicted of cannibalism during the Holodomor. The
"Ukrainian Weekly", which was tracking the situation in 1933, reported the
difficulties in communications and appalling situation in the Ukraine. In
addition, on 1 December 1933 the newspaper reported a mass protest planned to
take place in Syracuse, New York. Causes. The reasons for the famine are a
subject of scholarly and political debate. Some scholars suggest that the
famine was a consequence of the economic problems associated with changes
implemented during the period of Soviet industrialization. Collectivization
also contributed to famine in 1932. Collectivization in the USSR, including the
Ukrainian SSR, was not popular among the peasantry and forced collectivization
lead to numerous peasant revolts. The First Five-Year Plan changed the output
expected from Ukrainian farms, from the familiar crop of grain to unfamiliar
crops like sugar beets and cotton. In addition, the situation was exacerbated
by poor administration of the plan and the lack of relevant general management.
Significant amounts of grain remained unharvested, and – even when harvested
– a significant percentage was lost during processing, transportation, or
storage. However, it has also been proposed by certain historians that the
Soviet leadership used the famine to attack Ukrainian nationalism and thus may
fall under the legal definition of genocide. For example, special and
particularly lethal policies were adopted in and largely limited to Soviet
Ukraine at the end of 1932 and 1933; "each of them may seem like an anodyne
administrative measure, and each of them was certainly presented as such at the
time, and yet each had to kill." A 2011 documentary, "Genocide Revealed",
presents evidence for the view that Stalin and his cohorts in the Communist
regime (not necessarily the Russian people as a whole) deliberately targeted
Ukrainians in the mass starvation of 1932–1933. For more about the Holodomor
as an act of genocide, see the section below on the Genocide question.
Implementation and abuse. On 7 August 1932 a law came into force that
stipulated that all food was state property and that mere possession of food
was evidence of a crime. Among the most enthusiastic enforcers of the law were
urban members of youth organizations, educated under the Soviet system, who
fanned out into the countryside in order to prevent the "theft" of state
property. They constructed and staffed watchtowers (over 700 in the Odessa
region alone) to ensure that no peasants took food home from the fields. The
youth brigades lived off the land, eating what they confiscated from the
peasants. They often humiliated the starving peasants by forcing them to box
each other for sport, or forcing them to crawl and bark like dogs. Under the
pretext of grain confiscation, the brigades routinely raped women living alone.
Several thousand Ukrainian peasants managed to cross the river Dniester into
Romania, and received asylum there. Many were killed during the crossing by
Soviet border-guards. Death toll. By the end of 1933, millions of people had
starved to death or had otherwise died unnaturally in Ukraine and the other
Soviet republics. The total number of famine victims across the entire Soviet
Union is estimated as 6–7 million or 6–8 million. The Soviet Union long
denied that the famine had taken place. The NKVD (and later KGB) archives on
the Holodomor period made records available very slowly. The exact number of
the victims remains unknown and is probably impossible to estimate, even within
a margin of error of a hundred thousand. The media occasionally reports
estimates by historians of fatalities as high as seven to ten million. Former
Ukranian president Yuschenko stated in a speech to the United States Congress
that the Holodomor "took away 20 million lives of Ukrainians", while Canadian
Prime Minister Stephen Harper issued a public statement giving the death toll
at about 10 million. The use of this figure has been criticized by historians
Timothy Snyder and Stephen G. Wheatcroft. Snyder wrote: "President Viktor
Yushchenko does his country a grave disservice by claiming ten million deaths,
thus exaggerating the number of Ukrainians killed by a factor of three; but it
is true that the famine in Ukraine of 1932–1933 was a result of purposeful
political decisions, and killed about three million people." In an email to
Postmedia News, Wheatcroft wrote: "I find it regrettable that Stephen Harper
and other leading Western politicians are continuing to use such exaggerated
figures for Ukrainian famine mortality" and "There is absolutely no basis for
accepting a figure of 10 million Ukrainians dying as a result of the famine of
1932–33." Elsewhere, Wheatcroft has noted: "The USSR and especially Ukraine
were not impoverished third world countries that could not afford an effective
statistical registration system. The Soviet Union had an unparalleled
statistical service at this time and its level of work in Ukraine and general
literacy of the Ukrainian population were of the highest level in the Soviet
Union." Some estimates are based on the people who died within the 1933 borders
of Ukraine; while others are based on deaths within current borders of Ukraine.
Other estimates are based on deaths of Ukrainians in the Soviet Union. Some
estimates use a simple methodology: based on the percentage of deaths reported
in one area, they apply the percentage to the entire country. Others use more
sophisticated techniques, including analyzing the demographic statistics based
on various archival data. Some historians question the accuracy of Soviet
censuses, since they may have been doctored to support Soviet propaganda. Other
estimates come from recorded discussion between world leaders like Churchill
and Stalin. In an August 1942 conversation, Stalin gave Churchill his estimates
of the number of "kulaks" who were repressed for resisting collectivization as
10 million, in all of the Soviet Union, rather than only in Ukraine. When using
this number, Stalin implied that it included not only those who lost their
lives, but also forcibly deported. Additional variations were due to some
estimates including the death toll from political repression: e.g., those who
died in the Gulag labor camps, while others estimated only those who starved to
death. In addition, many of the estimates are based on different time periods.
Thus, a definitive number of deaths continues to be a source of great debate.
The estimate prior to the opening of former Soviet archives also varied widely
but the range was narrower: for example, 2.5 million (Volodymyr Kubiyovych),
4.8 million (Vasyl Hryshko) and 5 million (Robert Conquest). One modern
calculation that uses demographic data, including that recently available from
Soviet archives, narrows the losses to about 3.2 million or, allowing for the
lack of precise data, 3 million to 3.5 million. The Soviet archives show that
excess deaths in Ukraine in 1932–1933 numbered a minimum of 1.8 million (2.7
including birth losses). It should be noted that this source further states
"Depending upon the estimations made concerning unregistered mortality and
natality, these figures could be increased to a level of 2.8 million to a
maximum of 4.8 million excess deaths and to 3.7 million to a maximum of 6.7
million population losses (including birth losses)". In 1932–1933, there were
a combined 1.2 million cases of typhus and 500,000 cases of typhoid fever. All
major types of disease, apart from cancer, tend to increase during famine as a
result of undernourishment lowering resistance, as well as unsanitary
conditions from populations too weak to care for themselves, or migrating to
refugee camps; thus, these deaths resulted primarily from disease rather than
starvation "per se". In the years 1932–34, the largest rate of increase was
recorded for typhus, which is spread by lice. In conditions of harvest failure
and increased poverty, lice are likely to increase. Gathering numerous refugees
at railway stations, on trains and elsewhere facilitates the spread. In 1933,
the number of recorded cases was 20 times the 1929 level. The number of cases
per head of population recorded in Ukraine in 1933 was already considerably
higher than in the USSR as a whole. By June 1933, incidence in Ukraine had
increased to nearly 10 times the January level, and it was much higher than in
the rest of the USSR. The number of the recorded excess deaths extracted from
the birth/death statistics from the Soviet archives is contradictory. The data
fails to add up to the differences between the results of the 1927 Census and
the 1937 Census. Kulchytsky summarized the natural population change. The
declassified Soviet statistics show a decrease of 538,000 people in the
population of Soviet Ukraine between 1926 census (28,925,976) and 1937 census
(28,388,000). The number of births and deaths (in thousands) according to the
declassified records are given in the table (right). According to the
correction for officially non-accounted child mortality in 1933 by 150,000
calculated by Sergei Maksudov, the number of births for 1933 should be
increased from 471,000 to 621,000. Assuming the natural mortality rates in 1933
to be equal to the average annual mortality rate in 1927–1930 (524,000 per
year), a natural population growth for 1933 would have been 97,000. This was
five times less than the growth in the previous three years (1927–1930). The
natural population growth from 1927 to 1936 should have been 4.043 million,
while the census data showed a decrease of 538,000. The sum of the two numbers
gives an estimated total demographic loss of 4.581 million people. Estimates of
the human losses due to famine must account for the numbers involved in
migration (including forced resettlement). According to Soviet statistics, the
migration balance for the population in Ukraine for 1927–1936 period was a
loss of 1.343 million people. Even when the data was collected, the Soviet
statistical institutions acknowledged that the precision was less than for the
data of the natural population change. The total number of death in Ukraine due
to unnatural causes for the given ten years was 3.238 million; accounting for
the lack of precision, estimates of the human toll range from 2.2 million to
3.5 million deaths. In addition to the direct losses from unnatural deaths, the
indirect losses due to the decrease of the birth rate should be taken into
account in consideration in estimating of the "demographic consequences" of the
Famine for Ukraine. For instance, the natural population growth in 1927 was
662,000, while in 1933 it was 97,000, "does not fit with the table, it had to
be a decline of 1.379 thousand, i.e., approx. 1.4 million" in 1934 it was
88,000. The combination of direct and indirect losses from Holodomor gives
4.469 million, of which 3.238 million (or more realistically 3 to 3.5 million)
is the number of the direct deaths according to this estimate. A 2002 study by
Vallin et al. utilizing some similar primary sources to Kulchytsky, and
performing an analysis with more sophisticated demographic tools with forward
projection of expected growth from the 1926 census and backward projection from
the 1939 census estimate the amount of direct deaths for 1933 as 2.582 million.
This number of deaths does not reflect the total demographic loss for Ukraine
from these events as the fall of the birth rate during crisis and the out-
migration contribute to the latter as well. The total population shortfall from
the expected value between 1926 and 1939 estimated by Vallin amounted to 4.566
million. Of this number, 1.057 million is attributed to birth deficit, 930,000
to forced out-migration, and 2.582 million to the combination of excess
mortality and voluntary out-migration. With the latter assumed to be negligible
this estimate gives the number of deaths as the result of the 1933 famine about
2.2 million. According to this study the life expectancy for those born in 1933
sharply fell to 10.8 years for females and to 7.3 years for males and remained
abnormally low for 1934 but, as commonly expected for the post-crisis peaked in
1935–36. According to historian Timothy Snyder, the recorded figure of excess
deaths was 2.4 million. However, Snyder claims that this figure is
"substantially low" due to many deaths going unrecorded. Snyder states that
demographic calculations carried out by the Ukrainian government provide a
figure of 3.89 million dead, and opined that the actual figure is likely
between these two figures, approximately 3.3 million deaths to starvation and
disease related to the starvation in Ukraine from 1932–1933. Snyder also
estimates that of the million people who died in Soviet Russia from famine at
the same time, approximately 200,000 were ethnic Ukrainians due to Ukrainian-
inhabited regions being particularly hard hit in Russia. According to estimates
about 81.3% of the famine victims in Ukrainian SRR were ethnic Ukrainians, 4.5%
Russians, 1.4% Jews and 1.1% were Poles. Many Belarusians, Hungarians, Volga
Germans and other nationalities became victims as well. The Ukrainian rural
population was the hardest hit by the Holodomor. Since the peasantry
constituted a demographic backbone of the Ukrainian nation, the tragedy deeply
affected the Ukrainians for many years. According to the Encyclopædia
Britannica, the overall number of Ukrainians who died from 1932–1933 famine
is estimated as about four to five million out of six to eight million people
who died in the Soviet Union as a whole. Genocide question. Robert Conquest,
the author of the "Harvest of Sorrow", initially believed that the famine of
1932–33 was a deliberate act of mass murder, if not genocide committed as
part of Joseph Stalin's collectivization program in the Soviet Union. In
criticism of his work, Mark Tauger claims that Conquest's book on the famine is
replete with errors and inconsistencies and that it deserves to be considered
an example of Cold War lack of objectivity. They see the leadership under
Stalin as making significant errors in planning for the industrialization of
agriculture. This retraction by Conquest is also noted by Kulchytsky. Dr.
Michael Ellman of the University of Amsterdam argues that, in addition to
deportations, internment in the Gulag and shootings (See: Law of Spikelets),
there is some evidence that Stalin used starvation as a weapon in his war
against the peasantry. He analyses the actions of the Soviet authorities, two
of commission and one of omission: (i) exporting 1.8 million tonnes of grain
during the mass starvation (enough to feed more than five million people for
one year), (ii) preventing migration from famine afflicted areas (which may
have cost an estimated 150,000 lives) and (iii) making no effort to secure
grain assistance from abroad (which caused an estimated 1.5 million excess
deaths), as well as the attitude of the Stalinist regime in 1932–33 (that
many of those starving to death were "counterrevolutionaries", "idlers" or
"thieves" who fully deserved their fate). Based on this analysis he concludes,
however, that the actions of Stalin's authorities against Ukrainians do not
meet the standards of specific intent required to proof genocide as defined by
the UN convention (the notable exception is the case of Kuban Ukrainians).
Ellman further concluded that if the relaxed definition of genocide is used,
the actions of Stalin's authorities do fit such a definition of genocide.
However, this more relaxed definition of genocide makes the latter the common
historical event, according to Ellman. Genocide scholar Adam Jones stresses
that, while controversial, some of the actions of the Soviet leadership during
1931-32 should be considered genocidal. Not only did the famine kill millions,
it took place against "a backdrop of persecution, mass execution, and
incarceration clearly aimed at undermining Ukrainians as a national group."
Norman Naimark, a historian at Stanford University who specializes in modern
East European history, genocide and ethnic cleansing, argues that some of the
actions of Stalin's regime, not only those during the Holodomor but also
Dekulakization and targeted campaigns against particular ethnic groups, can be
looked at as genocidal. In 2006, the Security Service of Ukraine declassified
more than 5 thousand pages of Holodomor archives. These documents suggest that
the Soviet regime singled out Ukraine by not giving it the same humanitarian
aid given to regions outside it. Some historians maintain that the famine was
an unintentional consequence of collectivization, and that the associated
resistance to it by the Ukrainian peasantry exacerbated an already-poor
harvest. Some researchers state that while the term Ukrainian Genocide is often
used in application to the event, technically, the use of the term "genocide"
is inapplicable. The statistical distribution of famine's victims among the
ethnicities closely reflects the ethnic distribution of the "rural population
of Ukraine" Moldavian, Polish, German and Bulgarian population that mostly
resided in the rural communities of Ukraine suffered in the same proportion as
the rural Ukrainian population. While ethnic Russians in Ukraine lived mostly
in urban areas and the cities were affected little by the famine, the rural
Russian population was affected the same way as the rural population of any
other ethnicity. West Virginia University professor Dr Mark Tauger claims that
any analysis that asserts that the harvests of 1931 and 1932 were not
extraordinarily low and that the famine was a political measure intentionally
imposed through excessive procurements is based on an insufficient source base
and an uncritical approach to the official sources. Other scholars, such as Dr.
David Marples, professor of history at the University of Alberta, have been
critical of Tauger's claims. Wheatcroft states Tauger's view represents the
opposite extreme in arguing the famine was totally accidental. Timothy Snyder,
Professor of History at Yale University, asserts that in 1933 "Joseph Stalin
was deliberately starving Ukraine" through a "heartless campaign of
requisitions that began Europe's era of mass killing." He argues the Soviets
themselves "made sure that the term "genocide", contrary to Lemkin's
intentions, excluded political and economic groups." Thus the Ukrainian famine
can be presented as "somehow less genocidal because it targeted a class,
kulaks, as well as a nation, Ukraine." In his 1953 speech the "father of the
Genocide Convention," Dr Raphael Lemkin described "the destruction of the
Ukrainian nation" as the "classic example of genocide," for "...the Ukrainian
is not and never has been a Russian. His culture, his temperament, his
language, his religion, are all different...to eliminate (Ukrainian)
nationalism...the Ukrainian peasantry was sacrificed...a famine was necessary
for the Soviet and so they got one to order...if the Soviet program succeeds
completely, if the intelligentsia, the priest, and the peasant can be
eliminated [then Ukraine will be as dead as if every Ukrainian were killed, for
it will have lost that part of it which has kept and developed its culture, its
beliefs, its common ideas, which have guided it and given it a soul, which, in
short, made it a nation...This is not simply a case of mass murder. It is a
case of genocide, of the destruction, not of individuals only, but of a culture
and a nation."  Mr. Chamberlin was a Moscow correspondent of the Christian
Science Monitor for 10 years. In 1934 he was reassigned to the Far East. After
he left the Soviet Union he wrote his account of the situation in Ukraine and
North Caucasus (Poltava, Bila Tserkva, and Kropotkin). Chamberlin later
published a couple of books: "Russia's Iron Age" and "The Ukraine: A Submerged
Nation". Soviet and Western denial. Holodomor denials are the assertions that
the 1932–1933 famine in Soviet Ukraine did not occur. Denying the existence
of the famine was the Soviet state's position, and reflected in both Soviet
propaganda and the work of some Western journalists and intellectuals including
Walter Duranty and Louis Fischer.
