Homosexual agenda Homosexual agenda (or gay agenda) is a term originated by
some conservative Christians in the United States to describe the advocacy of
cultural acceptance and normalization of non-heterosexual orientations and
relationships. The term is applied to efforts to change government policies and
laws on lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) issues. The term has
also been used by some social conservatives to describe alleged goals of LGBT
rights activists, such as 'recruiting' heterosexuals into what they term a
'homosexual lifestyle'. Origins and usage. Initial usage. In the US, the term
"the gay agenda" was first used in public discourse in 1992 when the Family
Research Council, an American conservative Christian group, released a video
series called "The Gay Agenda" as part of a pack of materials campaigning on
homosexual issues and the "hidden gay agenda". In the same year the Oregon
Citizens Alliance used this video as part of their campaign for Ballot Measure
9 to amend the Oregon Constitution to prevent what the OCA called special
rights for gays, lesbians, and bisexuals. Paul Cameron — co-founder of the
Institute for the Scientific Investigation of Sexuality in Lincoln, later
renamed the Family Research Institute — appeared in the video, wherein he
asserted that 75 percent of gay men regularly ingest feces and that 70-78
percent have had a sexually transmitted disease. "The Gay Agenda" was followed
by three other video publications; "The Gay Agenda in Public Education" (1993),
"The Gay Agenda: March on Washington" (1993) and a feature follow-up
"Stonewall: 25 Years of Deception" (1994). The videos contained interviews with
opponents of LGBT rights, and the series was made available through Christian
right organizations. Current usage and meaning. The term is applied to efforts
to change government policies and laws on lesbian, gay, bisexual, and
transgender (LGBT) issues - such as, for example, same-sex marriage and civil
unions, LGBT adoption, recognizing sexual orientation as a protected civil
rights minority classification, LGBT military participation, inclusion of LGBT
history and themes in public education, introduction of anti-bullying
legislation to protect LGBT minors - as well as non-governmental campaigns and
individual actions that increase visibility and cultural acceptance of LGBT
people, relationships, and identities. The term has also been used by some
social conservatives to describe alleged goals of LGBT rights activists, such
as 'recruiting' heterosexuals into what they term a 'homosexual lifestyle'. The
idea of a "homosexual agenda" is also used by some Christian critics of LGBT
rights in conjunction with a putative ideology they refer to as "homosexualism"
(as opposed to a synonym for homosexuality), using "homosexualists" to describe
people who seek to advance LGBT emancipation. The use of "homosexualist" in
this way first appeared in 1995 in Scott Lively and Kevin Abrams' book "The
Pink Swastika", "to refer to any person, homosexual or not, who actively
promotes homosexuality as morally and socially equivalent to heterosexuality as
a basis for social policy". Lively and Abrahams in The Pink Swastika argue that
alleged homosexuality found in the Nazi Party, specifically within Ernst Rohm's
SA, contributed to the extreme militarism of Nazi Germany, and write about the
"gay agenda" in this context. On January 8, 2008, the United States Patent and
Trademark Office granted the Gay Agenda trademark to Vibe Media, Inc. Vibe
Media, Inc created a news website on the domain gayagenda.com which is used to
"provide information, news and commentary in the field of entertainment
relating to the gay community" according to the trademark filing. "After the
Ball: How America Will Conquer Its Fear and Hatred of Gays in the '90s". "" is
a book published in 1989 by Marshall Kirk and Hunter Madsen. It argues that
after the gay liberation phase of the 1970s and 1980s, gay rights groups should
adopt more professional public relations techniques to convey their message. It
was published by Doubleday and was generally available. According to a
Christian Broadcasting Network article by Paul Strand, Sears and Osten argue
that "After the Ball" follows from "a 1988 summit of gay leaders in Warrenton,
Virginia, who came together to agree on the agenda" and that "the two men (Kirk
and Madsen) proposed using tactics on 'straight' America that are remarkably
similar to the brainwashing methods of Mao Tse-Tung's Communist Chinese –
mixed with Madison Avenue's most persuasive selling techniques." The article
goes on to claim that films such as "Brokeback Mountain" are part of this
"well-planned propaganda campaign". Responses. The Gay & Lesbian Alliance
Against Defamation (GLAAD) describes the term as a "rhetorical invention of
anti-gay extremists seeking to create a climate of fear by portraying the
pursuit of civil rights for LGBT people as sinister", and commentators have
remarked on a lack of realism and veracity to the idea of a gay agenda per se.
Such campaigns based on a presumed "gay agenda" have been described as anti-gay
propaganda by researchers and critics. GLAAD describes the association of
homosexuality with pedophilia or child abuse as an attempt to "insinuate that
lesbians and gay men pose a threat to society, to families, and to children in
particular." GLAAD considers assertions linking pedophilia and homosexuality to
be defamatory, damaging and entirely inaccurate. Some writers have described
the term as pejorative. In a 22 December 2010 press conference, U.S. Rep.
Barney Frank said that the "gay agenda" is Satire. A satirical article by
Michael Swift which appeared in the "Gay Community News" in February 1987
entitled "Gay Revolutionary" describes a scenario in which homosexual men
dominate American society and suppress all things heterosexual. This was
reprinted in "Congressional Record" without the opening line: "This essay is an
outré, madness, a tragic, cruel fantasy, an eruption of inner rage, on how the
oppressed desperately dream of being the oppressor." The term is sometimes used
satirically as a counterfoil by people who would normally find this term
offensive, such as the spoof agenda found on the Betty Bowers satirical
website, and when Bishop Gene Robinson declared that "Jesus is the agenda, the
homosexual agenda in the Episcopal Church". On an episode of "The Daily Show",
Jon Stewart defined the gay agenda as "gay marriage, civil rights protection,
Fleet Week expanded to Fleet Year, Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)
assistance for when it's raining men, Kathy Griffin to host everything and a
nationwide ban on pleated pants."
