Human rights in the United States Human rights in the United States are legally
protected by the Constitution of the United States, including the amendments,
state constitutions, conferred by treaty, and enacted legislatively through
Congress, state legislatures, and plebiscites (state referenda). Federal courts
in the United States have jurisdiction over international human rights laws as
a federal question, arising under international law, which is part of the law
of the United States. History. The first human rights organization in the
Thirteen Colonies of British America, dedicated to the abolition of slavery,
was formed by Anthony Benezet in 1775. A year later, the Declaration of
Independence advocated to the monarch of England (who was asserting sovereignty
through a divine right of kings), for civil liberties based on the "self-
evident truth" “that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by
their Creator with certain unalienable Rights, that among these are Life,
Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness.” This view of human liberties
postulates that fundamental rights are not granted by a divine or supernatural
being to monarchs who then grant them to subjects, but are granted by a divine
or supernatural being to each man (but not woman) and are inalienable and
inherent. After the Revolutionary War, the former thirteen colonies, free of
the English monarch's claim of sovereignty, went through a pre-government phase
of more than a decade, with much debate about the form of government they would
have. The United States Constitution, adopted in 1787 through ratification at a
national convention and conventions in the colonies, created a republic that
guaranteed several rights and civil liberties; the Constitution significantly
referred to "Persons", not "Men" as was used in the Declaration of
Independence, omitted any reference to the supernatural imagination (such as a
"Creator" or "God") and any authority derived or divined therefrom, and allowed
"affirmation" in lieu of an "oath" if preferred. The Constitution thus
eliminated any requirement of supernatural grant of human rights and provided
that they belonged to all Persons (presumably meaning men and women, and
perhaps children, although the developmental distinction between children and
adults poses issues and has been the subject of subsequent amendments, as
discussed below). Some of this conceptualization may have arisen from the
significant Quaker segment of the population in the colonies, especially in the
Delaware Valley, and their religious views that all human beings, regardless of
sex, age, or race or other characteristics, had the same Inner light. Quaker
and Quaker-derived views would have informed the drafting and ratification of
the Constitution, including through the direct influence of some of the Framers
of the Constitution, such as John Dickinson (politician) and Thomas Mifflin,
who were either Quakers themselves or came from regions founded by or heavily
populated with Quakers. Dickinson, Mifflin and other Framers who objected to
slavery were outvoted on that question, however, and the original Constitution
sanctioned slavery (although not based on race or other characteristic of the
slave) and, through the Three-Fifths Compromise, counted slaves (who were not
defined by race) as three-fifths of a Person for purposes of distribution of
taxes and representation in the House of Representatives (although the slaves
themselves were discriminated against in voting for such representatives). See
Three-Fifths Compromise. As the new Constitution took effect in practice,
concern over individual liberties and concentration of power at the federal
level, gave rise to the amendment of the Constitution through adoption of the
Bill of Rights (the first ten amendments of the Constitution). Courts and
legislatures also began to vary in the interpretation of "Person," with some
jurisdictions narrowing the meaning of "Person" to cover only people with
property, only men, or only white men. For example, although women had been
voting in some states, such as New Jersey, since the founding of the United
States, and prior to that in the colonial era, other states denied them the
vote. In 1756 Lydia Chapin Taft voted, casting a vote in the local town hall
meeting in place of her deceased husband. In 1777 women lost the right to
exercise their vote in New York, in 1780 women lost the right to exercise their
vote in Massachusetts, and in 1784 women lost the right to exercise their vote
in New Hampshire. From 1775 until 1807, the state constitution in New Jersey
permitted all persons worth over fifty pounds (about $7,800 adjusted for
inflation, with the election laws referring to the voters as "he or she") to
vote; provided they had this property, free black men and single women
regardless of race therefore had the vote until 1807, but not married women,
who could have no independent claim to ownership of fifty pounds (anything they
owned or earned belonged to their husbands by the Common law of Coverture). In
1790, the law was revised to specifically include women, but in 1807 the law
was again revised to exclude them, an unconstitutional act since the state
constitution specifically made any such change dependent on the general
suffrage. See Women's suffrage in the United States. Through the doctrine of
coverture, many states also denied married women the right to own property in
their own name, although most allowed single women (widowed, divorced or never
married) the "Person" status of men, sometimes pursuant to the common law
concept of a femme sole. Over the years, a variety of claimants sought to
assert that discrimination against women in voting, in property ownership, in
occupational license, and other matters was unconstitutional given the
Constitution's use of the term "Person", but the all-male courts did not give
this fair hearing. See, e.g., Bradwell v. Illinois. In the 1860s, after decades
of conflict over southern states' continued practice of slavery, and northern
states' outlawing it, the Civil War was fought, and in its aftermath the
Constitution was amended to prohibit slavery and to prohibit states' denying
rights granted in the Constitution. Among these amendments was the Fourteenth
Amendment, which included an Equal Protection Clause which seemed to clarify
that courts and states were prohibited in narrowing the meaning of "Persons".
After the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution was adopted,
Susan B. Anthony, buttressed by the equal protection language, voted. She was
prosecuted for this, however, and ran into an all-male court ruling that women
were not "Persons"; the court leveed a fine but it was never collected. Fifty
years later, in 1920, the Constitution was amended again, with the Nineteenth
Amendment to definitively prohibit discrimination against women's suffrage. In
the 1970s, the Burger Court made a series of rulings clarifying that
discrimination against women in the status of being Persons violated the
Constitution and acknowledged that previous court rulings to the contrary had
been Sui generis and an abuse of power. The most often cited of these is Reed
v. Reed, which held that any discrimination against either sex in the rights
associated with Person status must meet a strict scrutiny standard. The 1970s
also saw the adoption of the Twenty-seventh Amendment, which prohibited
discrimination on the basis of age, for Persons 18 years old and over, in
voting. Other attempts to address the developmental distinction between
children and adults in Person status and rights have been addressed mostly by
the Supreme Court, with the Court recognizing in 2012, in Miller v. Alabama a
political and biological principle that children are different from adults. In
the 20th century, the United States took a leading role in the creation of the
United Nations and in the drafting of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights. Much of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights was modeled in part
on the U.S. Bill of Rights. Even as such, the United States is in violation of
the Declaration, in as much that "everyone has the right to leave any country"
because the government may prevent the entry and exit of anyone from the United
States for foreign policy, national security, or child support rearage reasons
by revoking their passport. The United States is also in violation of the
United Nations' human rights Convention on the Rights of the Child which
requires both parents to have a relationship with the child. Conflict between
the human rights of the child and those of a mother or father who wishes to
leave the country without paying child support or doing the personal work of
child care for his child can be considered to be a question of Negative and
positive rights. Legal framework. Domestic legal protection structure.
According to "Human Rights: The Essential Reference", "the American Declaration
of Independence was the first civic document that met a modern definition of
human rights." The Constitution recognizes a number of inalienable human
rights, including freedom of speech, freedom of assembly, freedom of religion,
the right to keep and bear arms, freedom from cruel and unusual punishment, and
the right to a fair trial by jury. Constitutional amendments have been enacted
as the needs of the society evolved. The Ninth Amendment and Fourteenth
Amendment recognize that not all human rights have yet been enumerated. The
Civil Rights Act and the Americans with Disabilities Act are examples of human
rights that were enumerated by Congress well after the Constitution's writing.
The scope of the legal protections of human rights afforded by the US
government is defined by case law, particularly by the precedent of the Supreme
Court of the United States. Within the federal government, the debate about
what may or may not be an emerging human right is held in two forums: the
United States Congress, which may enumerate these; and the Supreme Court, which
may articulate rights that the law does not spell out. Additionally, individual
states, through court action or legislation, have often protected human rights
not recognized at federal level. For example, Massachusetts was the first of
several states to recognize same sex marriage. Effect of international
treaties. In the context of human rights and treaties that recognize or create
individual rights, there are self-executing and non-self-executing treaties.
Non-self-executing treaties, which ascribe rights that under the Constitution
may be assigned by law, require legislative action to execute the contract
(treaty) before it can apply to law. There are also cases that explicitly
require legislative approval according to the Constitution, such as cases that
could commit the U.S. to declare war or appropriate funds. Treaties regarding
human rights, which create a duty to refrain from acting in a particular manner
or confer specific rights, are generally held to be self-executing, requiring
no further legislative action. In cases where legislative bodies refuse to
recognize otherwise self-executing treaties by "declaring them to be non-self-
executing" in an act of legislative non-recognition, constitutional scholars
argue that such acts violate the separation of powersin cases of controversy,
the judiciary, not Congress, has the authority under Article III to apply
treaty law to cases before the court. This is a key provision in cases where
the Congress declares a human rights treaty to be non-self-executing, for
example, by contending it does not add anything to human rights under U.S.
domestic law. The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights is one
such case, which, while ratified after more than two decades of inaction, was
done so with reservations, understandings, and declarations. Equality. Racial.
The Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States
Constitution guarantees that "the right of citizens of the United States to
vote shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or by any State on
account of race, color, or previous condition of servitude." In addition,
Fifteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution prohibits the denial of a
citizen of the right to vote based on that citizen's "race, color, or previous
condition of servitude". The United States was the first major industrialized
country to enact comprehensive legislation prohibiting discrimination on the
basis of race and national origin in the workplace in the Civil Rights Act of
1964 (CRA), while most of the world contains no such recourse for job
discrimination. The CRA is perhaps the most prominent civil rights legislation
enacted in modern times, has served as a model for subsequent anti-
discrimination laws and has greatly expanded civil rights protections in a wide
variety of settings. The United States' 1991 provision of recourse for victims
of such discrimination for punitive damages and full back pay has virtually no
parallel in the legal systems of any other nation. In addition to individual
civil recourse, the United States possesses anti-discrimination government
enforcement bodies, such as the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, while
only the United Kingdom and Ireland possess faintly analogous bureaucracies.
Beginning in 1965, the United States also began a program of affirmative action
that not only obliges employers not to discriminate, but requires them to
provide preferences for groups protected under the Civil Rights Act to increase
their numbers where they are judged to be underrepresented. Such affirmative
action programs are also applied in college admissions. The United States also
prohibits the imposition of any "...voting qualification or prerequisite to
voting, or standard, practice, or procedure ... to deny or abridge the right of
any citizen of the United States to vote on account of race or color," which
prevents the use of grandfather clauses, literacy tests, poll taxes and white
primaries. Prior to the passage of the Thirteenth Amendment to the United
States Constitution, slavery was legal in some states of the United States
until 1865. Influenced by the principles of the Religious Society of Friends,
Anthony Benezet formed the Pennsylvania Abolition Society in 1775, believing
that all ethnic groups were considered equal and that human slavery was
incompatible with Christian beliefs. Benezet extended the recognition of human
rights to Native Americans and he argued for a peaceful solution to the
violence between the Native and European Americans. Benjamin Franklin became
the president of Benezet's abolition society in the late 18th century. In
addition, the Fourteenth Amendment was interpreted to permit what was termed
"Separate but equal" treatment of minorities until the United States Supreme
Court overturned this interpretation in 1954, which consequently overturned Jim
Crow laws. Native Americans did not have citizenship rights until the Dawes Act
of 1887 and the Indian Citizenship Act of 1924. Following the 2008 presidential
election, Barack Obama was sworn in as the first African-American president of
the United States on January 20, 2009. In his Inaugural Address, President
Obama stated "A man whose father less than 60 years ago might not have been
served at a local restaurant can now stand before you to take a most sacred
oath...So let us mark this day with remembrance, of who we are and how far we
have traveled". Gender. The Nineteenth Amendment to the United States
Constitution prohibits the states and the federal government from denying any
citizen the right to vote because of that citizen's sex. While this does not
necessarily guarantee all women the right to vote, as suffrage qualifications
are determined by individual states, it does mean that states' suffrage
qualifications may not prevent women from voting due to their gender. The
United States was the first major industrialized country to enact comprehensive
CRA legislation prohibiting discrimination on the basis of gender in the
workplace while most of the world contains no such recourse for job
discrimination. The United States' 1991 provision of recourse for
discrimination victims for punitive damages and full back pay has virtually no
parallel in the legal systems of any other nation. In addition to individual
civil recourse, the United States possesses anti-discrimination government
enforcement bodies, such as the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, while
only the United Kingdom and Ireland possess faintly analogous bureaucracies.
Beginning in 1965, the United States also began a program of affirmative action
that not only obliges employers not to discriminate, but also requires them to
provide preferences for groups protected under the CRA to increase their
numbers where they are judged to be underrepresented. Such affirmative action
programs are also applied in college admissions. The United States was also the
first country to legally define sexual harassment in the workplace. Because
sexual harassment is therefore a Civil Rights violation, individual legal
rights of those harassed in the workplace are comparably stronger in the United
States than in most European countries. The Selective Service System does not
require women to register for a possible military draft and the United States
military does not permit women to serve in some front-line combat units.
Disability. The United States was the first country in the world to adopt
sweeping antidiscrimination legislation for people with disabilities, the
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA). The ADA reflected a dramatic
shift toward the employment of persons with disabilities to enhance the labor
force participation of qualified persons with disabilities and in reducing
their dependence on government entitlement programs. The ADA amends the CRA and
permits plaintiffs to recover punitive damages. The ADA has been instrumental
in the evolution of disability discrimination law in many countries, and has
had such an enormous impact on foreign law development that its international
impact may be even larger than its domestic impact. Although ADA Title I was
found to be unconstitutional, the Supreme Court has extended the protection to
people with Acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS). It is important to note
that federal benefits such as Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI) and
Supplemental Security Income (SSI) are often administratively viewed in the
United States as being primarily or near-exclusively the entitlement only of
impoverished U.S. people with disabilities, and not applicable to those with
disabilities who make significantly above-poverty level income. This is proven
in practice by the general fact that in the U.S., a disabled person on SSI
without significant employment income who is suddenly employed, with a salary
or wage at or above the living wage threshold, often discovers that government
benefits they were previously entitled to have ceased, because supposedly the
new job "invalidates" the need for this assistance. The U.S. is the only
industrialized country in the world to have this particular approach to
physical disability assistance programming. Sexual orientation. The
Constitution of the United States explicitly recognizes certain individual
rights. The 14th Amendment has several times been interpreted using the living
constitution doctrine, for example, civil rights for people of color,
disability rights, and women's rights were long unrecognized. There may exist
additional gender-related civil rights that are presently not recognized by US
law but it does not explicitly state any sexual orientation rights. Some states
have recognized sexual orientation rights, which are discussed below. The
United States Federal Government does not have any substantial body of law
relating to marriage; these laws have developed separately within each state.
The Full faith and credit clause of the US Constitution ordinarily guarantees
the recognition of a marriage performed in one state by another. However, the
Congress passed the Defense of Marriage Act of 1996, which affirmed that no
state (or other political subdivision within the United States) need recognize
a marriage between persons of the same sex, even if the marriage was concluded
or recognized in another state and the Federal Government may not recognize
same-sex marriages for any purpose, even if concluded or recognized by one of
the states. The US Constitution does not grant the federal government any
authority to limit state recognition of sexual orientation rights or
protections. DOMA only limits the interstate recognition of individual state
laws and does not limit state law in any way. DOMA has been ruled to be
unconstitutional by various US federal courts for violating the 14th Amendment
to the United States Constitution (specifically its due process and equal
protection clauses) and will potentially be reviewed by the Supreme Court of
the United States. State laws. Wisconsin was the first state to pass a law
explicitly prohibiting discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation. In
1996, Hawaii ruled same-sex marriage is a Hawaiian constitutional right.
Massachusetts, Connecticut, Iowa, Vermont, New Hampshire, New York, Washington
D.C., and Washington State are the only states that allow same-sex marriage.
Same-sex marriage rights were established by the California Supreme Court in
2008, and over 18,000 same-sex couples were married. In November 2008 voters
passed Proposition 8, amending the state constitution to deny same-sex couples
marriage rights, which was upheld in a May 2009 decision that also allowed
existing same-sex marriages to stand. Privacy. Privacy is not explicitly stated
in the United States Constitution. In the "Griswold v. Connecticut" case, the
Supreme Court ruled that it is implied in the Constitution. In the "Roe v.
Wade" case, the Supreme Court used privacy rights to overturn most laws against
abortion in the United States. In the "Cruzan v. Director, Missouri Department
of Health" case, the Supreme Court held that the patient had a right of privacy
to terminate medical treatment. In "Gonzales v. Oregon", the Supreme Court held
that the Federal Controlled Substances Act can not prohibit physician-assisted
suicide allowed by the Oregon Death with Dignity Act. The Supreme Court upheld
the constitutionality of criminalizing oral and anal sex in the "Bowers v.
Hardwick" decision; however, it overturned the decision in the "Lawrence v.
Texas" case and established the protection to sexual privacy. Accused. The
United States maintains a presumption of innocence in legal procedures. The
Fourth, Fifth, Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution and Eighth
Amendment to the United States Constitution deals with the rights of criminal
suspects. Later the protection was extended to civil cases as well In the
"Gideon v. Wainwright" case, the Supreme Court requires that indigent criminal
defendants who are unable to afford their own attorney be provided counsel at
trial. Since the "Miranda v. Arizona" case, the United States requires police
departments to inform arrested persons of their rights, which is later called
Miranda warning and typically begins with "You have the right to remain
silent." Freedoms. Freedom of religion. The establishment clause of the first
amendment prohibits the establishment of a national religion by Congress or the
preference of one religion over another. The clause was used to limit school
praying, beginning with "Engel v. Vitale", which ruled government-led prayer
unconstitutional. "Wallace v. Jaffree" banned moments of silence allocated for
praying. The Supreme Court also ruled clergy-led prayer at public high school
graduations unconstitutional with "Lee v. Weisman". The free exercise clause
guarantees the free exercise of religion. The Supreme Court's "Lemon v.
Kurtzman" decision established the "Lemon test" exception, which details the
requirements for legislation concerning religion. The "Employment Division v.
Smith" decision, the Supreme Court maintained a "neutral law of general
applicability" can be used to limit religion exercises. In the "City of Boerne
v. Flores" decision, the Religious Freedom Restoration Act was struck down as
exceeding congressional power; however, the decision's effect is limited by the
"Gonzales v. O Centro Espirita Beneficente Uniao do Vegetal" decision, which
requires states to express compelling interest in prohibiting illegal drug use
in religious practices. Freedom of expression. Some laws remain controversial
due to concerns that they infringe on freedom of expression. These include the
Digital Millennium Copyright Act and the Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act. In two
high profile cases, grand juries have decided that "Time" magazine reporter
Matthew Cooper and "New York Times" reporter Judith Miller must reveal their
sources in cases involving CIA leaks. Time magazine exhausted its legal
appeals, and Mr. Cooper eventually agreed to testify. Miller was jailed for 85
days before cooperating. U.S. District Chief Judge Thomas F. Hogan ruled that
the First Amendment does not insulate "Time" magazine reporters from a
requirement to testify before a criminal grand jury that's conducting the
investigation into the possible illegal disclosure of classified information.
Approximately 30,000 government employees and contractors are currently
employed to monitor telephone calls and other communications. Right to
peaceably assemble. Although Americans are supposed to enjoy the freedom to
peacefully protest, protesters are sometimes mistreated, beaten, arrested,
jailed or fired upon. On February 19, 2011, Ray McGovern was dragged out of a
speech by Hillary Clinton on Internet freedom, in which she said that people
should be free to protest without fear of violence. McGovern, who was wearing a
Veterans for Peace t-shirt, stood up during the speech and silently turned his
back on Clinton. He was then assaulted by undercover and uniformed police,
roughed up, handcuffed and jailed. He suffered bruises and lacerations in the
attack and required medical treatment. Protesters have also been arrested for
protesting outside of designated “free speech zones”. At the 2004
Republican National Convention in New York City, over 1,700 protesters were
arrested. On May 4, 1970, Ohio National Guardsmen opened fire on protesting
students at Kent State University, killing four students. Investigators
determined that 28 Guardsmen fired 61 to 67 shots. The Justice Department
concluded that the Guardsmen were not in danger and that their claim that they
fired in self-defense was untrue. The nearest student was almost 100 yards away
at the time of the shooting. On March 7, 1965, approximately 600 civil rights
marchers were violently dispersed by state and local police near the Edmund
Pettus Bridge outside of Selma, Alabama. In June 2009, the ACLU asked the
Department of Defense to stop categorizing political protests as "low-level
terrorism" in their training courses. During the fall of 2011, large numbers of
protesters taking part in the "Occupy movement" in cities around the country
were arrested on various charges during protests for economic and political
reforms. Freedom of movement. As per § 707(b) of the Foreign Relations
Authorization Act, Fiscal Year 1979, United States passports are required to
enter and exit the country, and as per the and Haig v. Agee, the Presidential
administration may deny or revoke passports for foreign policy or national
security reasons at any time. Perhaps the most notable example of enforcement
of this ability was the 1948 denial of a passport to U.S. Representative Leo
Isacson, who sought to go to Paris to attend a conference as an observer for
the American Council for a Democratic Greece, a Communist front organization,
because of the group's role in opposing the Greek government in the Greek Civil
War. The United States prevents U.S. citizens to travel to Cuba, citing
national security reasons, as part of an embargo against Cuba that has been
condemned as an illegal act by the United Nations General Assembly. The current
exception to the ban on travel to the island, permitted since April 2009, has
been an easing of travel restrictions for Cuban-Americans visiting their
relatives. Restrictions continue to remain in place for the rest of the
American populace. On June 30, 2010, the American Civil Liberties Union filed a
lawsuit on behalf of ten people who are either U.S. citizens or legal residents
of the U.S., challenging the constitutionality of the government's "no-fly"
list. The plaintiffs have not been told why they are on the list. Five of the
plaintiffs have been stranded abroad. It is estimated that the "no-fly" list
contained about 8,000 names at the time of the lawsuit. The Secretary of State
can deny a passport to anyone imprisoned, on parole, or on supervised release
for a conviction for international drug trafficking or sex tourism, or to
anyone who is behind on their child support payments. "The use of the highway
for the purpose of travel and transportation is not a mere privilege, but a
common fundamental right of which the public and individuals cannot rightfully
be deprived." Chicago Motor Coach v. Chicago, 337 Ill. 200; 169 N.E. 22 (1929).
"The right of the citizen to travel upon the public highways and to transport
his property thereon, either by carriage or by automobile, is not a mere
privilege which a city may prohibit or permit at will, but a common law right
which he has under the right to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness."
Thompson v. Smith, Supreme Court of Virginia, 155 Va. 367; 154 S.E. 579;
(1930). "Undoubtedly the right of locomotion, the right to move from one place
to another according to inclination, is an attribute of personal liberty, and
the right, ordinarily, of free transit from or through the territory of any
State is a right secured by the 14th amendment and by other provisions of the
Constitution." Schactman v. Dulles, 225 F.2d 938; 96 U.S. App. D.C. 287 (1955).
"The right to travel is a well-established common right that does not owe its
existence to the federal government. It is recognized by the courts as a
natural right." Schactman v. Dulles 225 F.2d 938; 96 U.S. App. D.C. 287 (1955)
at 941. "The right to travel is a part of the liberty of which the citizen
cannot be deprived without due process of law under the Fifth Amendment." Kent
v. Dulles, 357 US 116, 125 (1958). Freedom of association. Freedom of
association is the right of individuals to come together in groups for
political action or to pursue common interests. Freedom of association in the
U.S. is restricted by the Smith Act, which bans political parties that advocate
the violent overthrow of the U.S. government. Between 1956 and 1971, the FBI
attempted to "expose, disrupt, misdirect, discredit, or otherwise neutralize"
radical groups through the COINTELPRO program. In 2008, the Maryland State
Police admitted that they had added the names of Iraq War protesters and death
penalty opponents to a terrorist database. They also admitted that other
"protest groups" were added to the terrorist database, but did not specify
which groups. It was also discovered that undercover troopers used aliases to
infiltrate organizational meetings, rallies and group e-mail lists. Police
admitted there was "no evidence whatsoever of any involvement in violent crime"
by those classified as terrorists. National security exceptions. The United
States government has declared martial law, suspended (or claimed exceptions
to) some rights on national security grounds, typically in wartime and
conflicts such as the United States Civil War, Cold War or the War against
Terror. 70,000 Americans of Japanese ancestry were legally interned during
World War II under Executive Order 9066. In some instances the federal courts
have allowed these exceptions, while in others the courts have decided that the
national security interest was insufficient. Presidents Lincoln, Wilson, and
F.D. Roosevelt ignored such judicial decisions. Historical restrictions.
Sedition laws have sometimes placed restrictions on freedom of expression. The
Alien and Sedition Acts, passed by President John Adams during an undeclared
naval conflict with France, allowed the government to punish "false" statements
about the government and to deport "dangerous" immigrants. The Federalist Party
used these acts to harass supporters of the Democratic-Republican Party. While
Woodrow Wilson was president, another broad sedition law called the Sedition
Act of 1918, was passed during World War I. It also caused the arrest and ten
year sentencing of Socialist Party of America Presidential candidate Eugene V.
Debs for speaking out against the atrocities of World War I, although he was
later released early by President Warren G. Harding. Countless others, labeled
as "subverts" (especially the Wobblies), were investigated by the Woodrow
Wilson Administration. Presidents have claimed the power to imprison summarily,
under military jurisdiction, those suspected of being combatants for states or
groups at war against the United States. Abraham Lincoln invoked this power in
the American Civil War to imprison Maryland secessionists. In that case, the
Supreme Court concluded that only Congress could suspend the writ of habeas
corpus, and the government released the detainees. During World War II, the
United States interned thousands of Japanese-Americans on alleged fears that
Japan might use them as saboteurs. The Fourth Amendment of the United States
Constitution forbids unreasonable search and seizure without a warrant, but
some administrations have claimed exceptions to this rule to investigate
alleged conspiracies against the government. During the Cold War, the Federal
Bureau of Investigation established COINTELPRO to infiltrate and disrupt left-
wing organizations, including those that supported the rights of black
Americans. National security, as well as other concerns like unemployment, has
sometimes led the United States to toughen its generally liberal immigration
policy. The Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882 all but banned Chinese immigrants,
who were accused of crowding out American workers. Nationwide Suspicious
Activity Reporting Initiative. The federal government has set up a data
collection and storage network that keeps a wide variety of data on tens of
thousands of Americans who have not been accused of committing a crime.
Operated primarily under the direction of the Federal Bureau of Investigation,
the program is known as the Nationwide Suspicious Activity Reporting Initiative
or SAR. Reports of suspicious behavior noticed by local law enforcement or by
private citizens are forwarded to the program, and profiles are constructed of
the persons under suspicion. see also Fusion Center. Labor rights. Labor rights
in the United States have been linked to basic constitutional rights.
Comporting with the notion of creating an economy based upon highly skilled and
high wage labor employed in a capital-intensive dynamic growth economy, the
United States enacted laws mandating the right to a safe workplace, Workers
compensation, Unemployment insurance, fair labor standards, collective
bargaining rights, Social Security, along with laws prohibiting child labor and
guaranteeing a minimum wage. While U.S. workers tend to work longer hours than
other industrialized nations, lower taxes and more benefits give them a larger
disposable income than those of most industrialized nations, however the
advantage of lower taxes have been challenged. See: Disposable and
discretionary income. U.S. workers are among the most productive in the world.
During the 19th and 20th centuries, safer conditions and workers' rights were
gradually mandated by law. In 1935, the National Labor Relations Act recognized
and protected "the rights of most workers in the private sector to organize
labor unions, to engage in collective bargaining, and to take part in strikes
and other forms of concerted activity in support of their demands." However,
many states hold to the principle of at-will employment, which says an employee
can be fired for any or no reason, without warning and without recourse, unless
violation of State or Federal civil rights laws can be proven. In 2011, 11.8%
of U.S. workers were members of labor unions with 37% of public sector
(government) workers in unions while only 6.9% of private sector workers were
union members. Health care. The Universal Declaration of Human Rights, adopted
by the United Nations in 1948, states that “everyone has the right to a
standard of living adequate for the health and well-being of oneself and
one’s family, including food, clothing, housing, and medical care.” In
addition, the "Principles of Medical Ethics" of the American Medical
Association require medical doctors to respect the human rights of the patient,
including that of providing medical treatment when it is needed. Americans'
rights in health care are regulated by the US Patients' Bill of Rights. Unlike
most other industrialized nations, the United States does not offer most of its
citizens subsidized health care. The United States Medicaid program provides
subsidized coverage to some categories of individuals and families with low
incomes and resources, including children, pregnant women, and very low-income
people with disabilities (higher-earning people with disabilities do not
qualify for Medicaid, although they do qualify for Medicare). However,
according to Medicaid's own documents, "the Medicaid program does not provide
health care services, even for very poor persons, unless they are in one of the
designated eligibility groups." Nonetheless, some states offer subsidized
health insurance to broader populations. Coverage is subsidized for persons age
65 and over, or who meet other special criteria through Medicare. Every person
with a permanent disability, both young and old, is inherently entitled to
Medicare health benefits — a fact not all disabled US citizens are aware of.
However, just like every other Medicare recipient, a disabled person finds that
his or her Medicare benefits only cover up to 80% of anything in the U.S.
medical system, and that the other 20% must be paid by other means (typically
supplemental, privately-held insurance plans, or cash out of the person's own
pocket). Therefore, even the Medicare program is not truly national health
insurance or universal health care the way most of the rest of the
industrialized world understands it. The Emergency Medical Treatment and Active
Labor Act of 1986, an unfunded mandate, mandates that no person may ever be
denied emergency services regardless of ability to pay, citizenship, or
immigration status. The Emergency Medical Treatment and Labor Act has been
criticized by the American College of Emergency Physicians as an unfunded
mandate. 46.6 million residents, or 15.9 percent, were without health insurance
coverage in 2005. This number includes about ten million non-citizens, millions
more who are eligible for Medicaid but never applied, and 18 million with
annual household incomes above $50,000. According to a study led by the Johns
Hopkins Children's Center, uninsured children who are hospitalized are 60% more
likely to die than children who are covered by health insurance. Justice
system. The Fourth, Fifth, Sixth and Eighteenth Amendments of the Bill of
Rights, along with the Fourteenth Amendment, ensure that criminal defendants
have significant procedural rights that are unsurpassed by any other justice
system. The Fourteenth Amendment's incorporation of due process rights adds
these constitutional protections to the state and local levels of law
enforcement. Similarly, the United States possesses a system of judicial review
over government action more powerful than any other in the world. Death
penalty. The USA was the only country in the G8 to have carried out executions
in 2011. Three countries in the G20 carried out executions in 2011: China,
Saudi Arabia and the USA. The USA and Belarus were the only two of the 56
Member States of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe to
have carried out executions in 2011. Capital punishment is controversial. Death
penalty opponents regard the death penalty as inhumane and criticize it for its
irreversibility and assert that it lacks a deterrent effect, as have several
studies and debunking studies that claim to show a deterrent effect. According
to Amnesty International, "the death penalty is the ultimate, irreversible
denial of human rights." The 1972 US Supreme Court case "Furman v. Georgia"
held that arbitrary imposition of the death penalty at the states' discretion
constituted cruel and unusual punishment in violation of the Eighth Amendment
to the United States Constitution. In "California v. Anderson" 64 Cal.2d 633,
414 P.2d 366 (Cal. 1972), the Supreme Court of California classified capital
punishment as cruel and unusual and outlawed the use of capital punishment in
California, until it was reinstated in 1976 after the federal supreme court
rulings Gregg v. Georgia, , "Jurek v. Texas", , and Proffitt v. Florida, . As
of January 25, 2008, the death penalty has been abolished in the District of
Columbia and fourteen states, mainly in the Northeast and Midwest. The UN
special rapporteur recommended to a committee of the UN General Assembly that
the United States be found to be in violation of Article 6 the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights in regards to the death penalty in 1998,
and called for an immediate capital punishment moratorium. The recommendation
of the special rapporteur is not legally binding under international law, and
in this case the UN did not act upon the lawyer's recommendation. Since the
reinstatement of the death penalty in 1976 there have been 1077 executions in
the United States (as of May 23, 2007). There were 53 executions in 2006. Texas
overwhelmingly leads the United States in executions, with 379 executions from
1976 to 2006; the second-highest ranking state is Virginia, with 98 executions.
A ruling on March 1, 2005 by the Supreme Court in "Roper v. Simmons" prohibits
the execution of people who committed their crimes when they were under the age
of 18. Between 1990 and 2005, Amnesty International recorded 19 executions in
the United States for crime committed by a juvenile. It is the official policy
of the European Union and a number of non-EU nations to achieve global
abolition of the death penalty. For this reason the EU is vocal in its
criticism of the death penalty in the US and has submitted "amicus curiae"
briefs in a number of important US court cases related to capital punishment.
The American Bar Association also sponsors a project aimed at abolishing the
death penalty in the United States, stating as among the reasons for their
opposition that the US continues to execute minors and the mentally retarded,
and fails to protect adequately the rights of the innocent. Some opponents
criticize the over-representation of blacks on death row as evidence of the
unequal racial application of the death penalty. This over-representation is
not limited to capital offenses, in 1992 although blacks account for 12% of the
US population, about 34 percent of prison inmates were from this group. In
McCleskey v. Kemp, it was alleged the capital sentencing process was
administered in a racially discriminatory manner in violation of the Equal
Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. In 2003, Amnesty International
reported those who kill whites are more likely to be executed than those who
kill blacks, citing of the 845 people executed since 1977, 80 percent were put
to death for killing whites and 13 percent were executed for killing blacks,
even though blacks and whites are murdered in almost equal numbers. Prison
system. The United States is seen by social critics, including international
and domestic human rights groups and civil rights organizations, as a state
that violates fundamental human rights, because of disproportionately heavy, in
comparison with other countries, reliance on crime control, individual behavior
control (civil liberties), and societal control of disadvantaged groups through
a harsh police and criminal justice system. The U.S. penal system is
implemented on the federal, and in particular on the state and local levels.
This social policy has resulted in a high rate of incarceration, which affects
Americans from the lowest socioeconomic backgrounds and racial minorities the
hardest. Some have criticized the United States for having an extremely large
prison population, where there have been reported abuses. As of 2004 the United
States had the highest percentage of people in prison of any nation. There were
more than 2.2 million in prisons or jails, or 737 per 100,000 population, or
roughly 1 out of every 136 Americans. According to The National Council on
Crime and Delinquency, since 1990 the incarceration of youth in adult jails has
increased 208%. In some states youth - juvenile is defined as young as 13 years
old. The researchers for this report found that Juveniles often were
incarcerated to await trial for up to two years and subjected to the same
treatment of mainstream inmates. The incarcerated adolescent is often subjected
to a highly traumatic environment during this developmental stage. The long
term effects are often irreversible and detrimental. "Human Rights Watch
believes the extraordinary rate of incarceration in the United States wreaks
havoc on individuals, families and communities, and saps the strength of the
nation as a whole." Examples of mistreatment claimed include prisoners left
naked and exposed in harsh weather or cold air; and pepper spray;, solitary
confinement of violent prisoners in soundproofed cells for 23 or 24 hours a
day; and a range of injuries from serious injury to fatal gunshot wounds, with
force at one California prison "often vastly disproportionate to the actual
need or risk that prison staff faced." Such behaviors are illegal, and,
"Professional standards clearly limit staff use of force to that which is
necessary to control prisoner disorder." Human Rights Watch raised concerns
with prisoner rape and medical care for inmates. In a survey of 1,788 male
inmates in Midwestern prisons by Prison Journal, about 21% claimed they had
been coerced or pressured into sexual activity during their incarceration and
7% claimed that they had been raped in their current facility. Tolerance of
serious sexual abuse and rape in United States prisons are consistently
reported as widespread. It has been fought against by organizations such as
Stop Prisoner Rape. The United States has been criticized for having a high
amount of non-violent and victim-less offenders incarcerated, as half of all
persons incarcerated under State jurisdiction are for non-violent offences and
20 percent are incarcerated for drug offences, mostly for possession of
cannabis. The United States is the only country in the world allowing
sentencing of young adolescents to life imprisonment without the possibility of
parole. There are currently 73 Americans serving such sentences for crimes they
committed at the age of 13 or 14. In December 2006 the United Nations took up a
resolution calling for the abolition of this kind of punishment for children
and young teenagers. 185 countries voted for the resolution and only the United
States against. Police brutality. In a 1999 report, Amnesty International said
it had "documented patterns of ill-treatment across the U.S., including police
beatings, unjustified shootings and the use of dangerous restraint techniques."
According to a 1998 Human Rights Watch report, incidents of police use of
excessive force had occurred in cities throughout the U.S., and this behavior
goes largely unchecked. An article in USA Today reports that in 2006, 96% of
cases referred to the U.S. Justice Department for prosecution by investigative
agencies were declined. In 2005, 98% were declined. In 2001, the "New York
Times" reported that the U.S. government is unable or unwilling to collect
statistics showing the precise number of people killed by the police or the
prevalence of the use of excessive force. Since 1999, at least 148 people have
died in the United States and Canada after being shocked with Tasers by police
officers, according to a 2005 ACLU report. In one case, a handcuffed suspect
was tasered nine times by a police officer before dying, and six of those
taserings occurred within less than three minutes. The officer was fired and
faced the possibility of criminal charges. War on Terrorism. Inhumane treatment
and torture of captured non-citizens. International and U.S. law prohibits
torture and other ill-treatment of any person in custody in all circumstances.
However, the United States Government has categorized a large number of people
as unlawful combatants, a United States classification used mainly as an excuse
to bypass international law, which denies the privileges of prisoner of war
(POW) designation of the Geneva Conventions. Certain practices of the United
States military and Central Intelligence Agency have been condemned by some
sources domestically and internationally as torture. A fierce debate regarding
non-standard interrogation techniquesExtended forced maintenance of "stress
positions" such as standing or squatting; psychological tricks and "mind
games"; sensory deprivation; exposure to loud music and noises; extended
exposure to flashing lights; prolonged solitary confinement; denigration of
religion; withholding of food, drink, or medical care; withholding of hygienic
care or toilet facilities; prolonged hooding; forced injections of unknown
substances; sleep deprivation; magneto-cranial stimulation resulting in mental
confusion; threats of bodily harm; threats of rendition to torture-friendly
states or Guantánamo; threats of rape or sodomy; threats of harm to family
members; threats of imminent execution; prolonged constraint in contorted
positions (including strappado, or "Palestinian hanging"); facial smearing of
real or simulated feces, urine, menstrual blood, or semen; sexual humiliation;
beatings, often requiring surgery or resulting in permanent physical or mental
disability; release or threat of release to attack dogs, both muzzled or un-
muzzled; near-suffocation or asphyxiation via multiple detainment hoods,
plastic bags, water-soaked towels or blankets, duct tape, or ligatures; gassing
and chemical spraying resulting in unconsciousness; confinement in small
chambers too small to fully stand or recline; underwater immersion just short
of drowning (i.e. dunking); and extended exposure to extreme temperatures below
freezing or above 120 °F (48 °C). exists within the US civilian and military
intelligence community, with no general consensus as to what practices under
what conditions are acceptable. Abuse of prisoners is considered a crime in the
United States Uniform Code of Military Justice. According to a January 2006
Human Rights First report, there were 45 suspected or confirmed homicides while
in US custody in Iraq and Afghanistan; "Certainly 8, as many as 12, people were
tortured to death." Abu Ghraib prison abuse. In 2004, photos showing
humiliation and abuse of prisoners were leaked from Abu Ghraib prison, causing
a political and media scandal in the US. Forced humiliation of the detainees
included, but is not limited to nudity, rape, human piling of nude detainees,
masturbation, eating food out of toilets, crawling on hand and knees while
American soldiers were sitting on their back sometimes requiring them to bark
like dogs, and hooking up electrical wires to fingers, toes, and penises.
Bertrand Ramcharan, acting UN High Commissioner for Human Rights stated that
while the removal of Saddam Hussein represented "a major contribution to human
rights in Iraq" and that the United States had condemned the conduct at Abu
Ghraib and pledged to bring violators to justice, "willful killing, torture and
inhuman treatment" represented a grave breach of international law and "might
be designated as war crimes by a competent tribunal." In addition to the acts
of humiliation, there were more violent claims, such as American soldiers
sodomizing detainees (including an event involving an underage boy), an
incident where a phosphoric light was broken and the chemicals poured on a
detainee, repeated beatings, and threats of death. Six military personnel were
charged with prisoner abuse in the Abu Ghraib torture and prisoner abuse
scandal. The harshest sentence was handed out to Charles Graner, who received a
10 year sentence to be served in a military prison and a demotion to private;
the other offenders received lesser sentences. The Road to Abu Ghraib, Human
Rights Watch Enhanced interrogation and waterboarding. On February 6, 2008, the
CIA director General Michael Hayden stated that the CIA had used waterboarding
on three prisoners during 2002 and 2003, namely Khalid Shaikh Mohammed, Abu
Zubayda and Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri. The June 21, 2004 issue of "Newsweek"
stated that the Bybee memo, a 2002 legal memorandum drafted by former OLC
lawyer John Yoo that described what sort of interrogation tactics against
suspected terrorists or terrorist affiliates the Bush administration would
consider legal, was "...prompted by CIA questions about what to do with a top
Qaeda captive, Abu Zubaydah, who had turned uncooperative ... and was drafted
after White House meetings convened by George W. Bush's chief counsel, Alberto
Gonzales, along with Defense Department general counsel William Haynes and
David Addington, Vice President Dick Cheney's counsel, who discussed specific
interrogation techniques," citing "a source familiar with the discussions."
Amongst the methods they found acceptable was waterboarding. In November 2005,
ABC News reported that former CIA agents claimed that the CIA engaged in a
modern form of waterboarding, along with five other "enhanced interrogation
techniques," against suspected members of al Qaeda. UN High Commissioner for
Human Rights, Louise Arbour, stated on the subject of waterboarding "I would
have no problems with describing this practice as falling under the prohibition
of torture," and that violators of the UN Convention Against Torture should be
prosecuted under the principle of universal jurisdiction. It’s a clear-cut
case: Waterboarding can without any reservation be labeled as torture. It
fulfils all of the four central criteria that according to the United Nations
Convention Against Torture (UNCAT) defines an act of torture. First, when water
is forced into your lungs in this fashion, in addition to the pain you are
likely to experience an immediate and extreme fear of death. You may even
suffer a heart attack from the stress or damage to the lungs and brain from
inhalation of water and oxygen deprivation. In other words there is no doubt
that waterboarding causes severe physical and/or mental suffering – one
central element in the UNCAT’s definition of torture. In addition the CIA’s
waterboarding clearly fulfills the three additional definition criteria stated
in the Convention for a deed to be labeled torture, since it is 1) done
intentionally, 2) for a specific purpose and 3) by a representative of a state
– in this case the US. Lt. Gen. Michael D. Maples, the director of the
Defense Intelligence Agency, concurred by stating, in a hearing before the
Senate Armed Services Committee, that he believes waterboarding violates Common
Article 3 of the Geneva Conventions. The CIA director testified that
waterboarding has not been used since 2003. In April 2009, the Obama
administration released four memos in which government lawyers from the Bush
administration approved tough interrogation methods used against 28 terror
suspects. The rough tactics range from waterboarding (simulated drowning) to
keeping suspects naked and denying them solid food. These memos were
accompanied by the Justice Department's release of four Bush-era legal opinions
covering (in graphic and extensive detail) the interrogation of 14 high-value
terror detainees using harsh techniques beyond waterboarding. These additional
techniques include keeping detainees in a painful standing position for long
periods (Used often, once for 180 hours), using a plastic neck collar to slam
detainees into walls, keeping the detainee's cell cold for long periods,
beating and kicking the detainee, insects placed in a confinement box (the
suspect had a fear of insects), sleep-deprivation, prolonged shackling, and
threats to a detainee's family. One of the memos also authorized a method for
combining multiple techniques. Details from the memos also included the number
of times that techniques such as waterboarding were used. A footnote said that
one detainee was waterboarded 83 times in one month, while another was
waterboarded 183 times in a month. This may have gone beyond even what was
allowed by the CIA's own directives, which limit waterboarding to 12 times a
day. The Fox News website carried reports from an unnamed US official who
claimed that these were the number of pourings, not the number of sessions.
Physicians for Human Rights has accused the Bush administration of conducting
illegal human experiments and unethical medical research during interrogations
of suspected terrorists. The group has suggested this activity was a violation
of the standards set by the Nuremberg Trials. Guantánamo Bay. The United
States maintains a detention center at its military base at Guantánamo Bay,
Cuba where numerous enemy combatants of the war on terror are held. The
detention center has been the source of various controversies regarding the
legality of the center and the treatment of detainees. Amnesty International
has called the situation "a human rights scandal" in a series of reports. 775
detainees have been brought to Guantánamo. Of these, many have been released
without charge. The United States assumed territorial control over Guantánamo
Bay under the 1903 Cuban-American Treaty, which granted the United States a
perpetual lease of the area. United States, by virtue of its complete
jurisdiction and control, maintains "de facto" sovereignty over this territory,
while Cuba retained ultimate sovereignty over the territory. The current
government of Cuba regards the U.S. presence in Guantánamo as illegal and
insists the Cuban-American Treaty was obtained by threat of force in violation
of international law. A delegation of UN Special Rapporteurs to Guantanamo Bay
claimed that interrogation techniques used in the detention center amount to
degrading treatment in violation of the ICCPR and the Convention Against
Torture. Amnesty International also condemned the Guantánamo facility as
"...the gulag of our times," which raised heated conversation in the United
States. The purported legal status of ""unlawful combatants"" in those nations
currently holding detainees under that name has been the subject of criticism
by other nations and international human rights institutions including Human
Rights Watch and the International Committee of the Red Cross. The ICRC, in
response to the US-led military campaign in Afghanistan, published a paper on
the subject. HRW cites two sergeants and a captain accusing U.S. troops of
torturing prisoners in Iraq and Afghanistan. However, former Republican
governor Mike Huckabee, for example, has stated that the conditions in
Guantánamo are better than most US prisons. The US government argues that even
if detainees were entitled to POW status, they would not have the right to
lawyers, access to the courts to challenge their detention, or the opportunity
to be released prior to the end of hostilities—and that nothing in the Third
Geneva Convention provides POWs such rights, and POWs in past wars have
generally not been given these rights. The U.S. Supreme Court ruled in "Hamdan
v. Rumsfeld" on June 29, 2006 that they were entitled to the minimal
protections listed under Common Article 3 of the Geneva Conventions. Following
this, on July 7, 2006, the Department of Defense issued an internal memo
stating that prisoners would in the future be entitled to protection under
Common Article 3. Extraordinary rendition. United States citizens and foreign
nationals are occasionally captured and abducted outside of the United States
and transferred to secret US administered detention facilities, sometimes being
held incommunicado for periods of months or years, a process known as
extraordinary rendition. According to "The New Yorker", "The most common
destinations for rendered suspects are Egypt, Morocco, Syria, and Jordan, all
of which have been cited for human-rights violations by the State Department,
and are known to torture suspects." Notable cases. In November 2001, Yaser Esam
Hamdi, a U.S. citizen, was captured by Afghan Northern Alliance forces in
Konduz, Afghanistan, amongst hundreds of surrendering Taliban fighters and was
transferred into U.S. custody. The U.S. government alleged that Hamdi was there
fighting for the Taliban, while Hamdi, through his father, has claimed that he
was merely there as a relief worker and was mistakenly captured. Hamdi was
transferred into CIA custody and transferred to the Guantanamo Bay Naval Base,
but when it was discovered that he was a U.S. citizen, he was transferred to
naval brig in Norfolk, Virginia and then he was transferred brig in Charleston,
South Carolina. The Bush Administration identified him as an unlawful combatant
and denied him access to an attorney or the court system, despite his Fifth
Amendment right to due process. In 2002 Hamdi's father filed a "habeas corpus"
petition, the Judge ruled in Hamdi's favor and required he be allowed a public
defender; however, on appeal the decision was reversed. In 2004, in the case of
"Hamdi v. Rumsfeld" the U.S. Supreme court reversed the dismissal of a "habeas
corpus" petition and ruled detainees who are U.S. citizens must have the
ability to challenge their detention before an impartial judge. In December
2004, Khalid El-Masri, a German citizen, was apprehended by Macedonian
authorities when traveling to Skopje because his name was similar to Khalid al-
Masri, an alleged mentor to the al-Qaeda Hamburg cell. After being held in a
motel in Macedonia for over three weeks he was transferred to the CIA and
extradited to Afghanistan. While held in Afghanistan, El-Masri claims he was
sodomized, beaten, and repeatedly interrorgated about alleged terrorist ties.
After being in custody for five months, Condoleezza Rice learned of his
detention and ordered his release. El-Masri was released at night on a desolate
road in Albania, without apology or funds to return home. He was intercepted by
Albanian guards, who believed he was a terrorist due to his haggard and unkept
appearance. He was subsequently reunited with his wife who had returned to her
family in Lebanon with their children because she thought her husband had
abandoned them. Using isotope analysis, scientists at the Bavarian archive for
geology in Munich analyzed his hair and verified that he was malnourished
during his disappearance. In 2007, U.S. President Bush signed an Executive
order banning the use of torture in the CIA's interrogation program. According
to the Human Rights Watch report (September 2012) the United States government
during the U.S. President Bush republican administration “waterboarding”
tortured opponents of Muammar Gaddafi during interrogations, then transferred
them to mistreatment in Libya. President Barack Obama has denied water torture.
International comparison. According to Canadian historian Michael Ignatieff,
during and after the Cold War, the United States placed greater emphasis than
other nations on human rights as part of its foreign policy, awarded foreign
aid to facilitate human rights progress, and annually assessed the human rights
records of other national governments. Support. The U.S. Department of State
publishes a yearly report "Supporting Human Rights and Democracy: The U.S.
Record" in compliance with a 2002 law that requires the Department to report on
actions taken by the U.S. Government to encourage respect for human rights. It
also publishes a yearly "Country Reports on Human Rights Practices.". In 2006
the United States created a "Human Rights Defenders Fund" and "Freedom Awards."
The "Ambassadorial Roundtable Series", created in 2006, are informal
discussions between newly-confirmed U.S. Ambassadors and human rights and
democracy non-governmental organizations. The United States also support
democracy and human rights through several other tools. The "Human Rights and
Democracy Achievement Award" recognizes the exceptional achievement of officers
of foreign affairs agencies posted abroad. Under legislation by congress, the
United States declared that countries utilizing child soldiers may no longer be
eligible for US military assistance, in an attempt to end this practice.
International Bill of Rights. The International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights (ICCPR) and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights (ICESCR) are the legal treaties that enshrine the rights outlined in the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Together, and along with the first and
second optional protocols of the ICCPR they constitute the International bill
of rights The US has not ratified the ICESCR or either of the optional
protocols of the ICCPR. The US's ratification of the ICCPR was done with five
reservations – or limits – on the treaty, 5 understandings and 4
declarations. Among these is the rejection of sections of the treaty that
prohibit capital punishment. Included in the Senate's ratification was the
declaration that "the provisions of Article 1 through 27 of the Covenant are
not self-executing", and in a Senate Executive Report stated that the
declaration was meant to "clarify that the Covenant will not create a private
cause of action in U.S. Courts." This way of ratifying the treaty was
criticized as incompatible with the Supremacy Clause by Louis Henkin. As a
reservation that is "incompatible with the object and purpose" of a treaty is
void as a matter of international law, Vienna Convention on the Law of
Treaties, art. 19, 1155 U.N.T.S. 331 (entered into force Jan. 27, 1980)
(specifying conditions under which signatory States can offer "reservations"),
there is some issue as to whether the non-self-execution declaration is even
legal under domestic law. At any rate, the United States is but a signatory in
name only. International Criminal Court. The U.S. has not ratified the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court (ICC), which was drafted for
prosecuting individuals above the authority of national courts in the event of
accusations of genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes, and crime of
aggression. Nations that have accepted the Rome Statute can defer to the
jurisdiction of the ICC or must surrender their jurisdiction when ordered. The
US rejected the Rome Statute after its attempts to include the nation of origin
as a party in international proceedings failed, and after certain requests were
not met, including recognition of gender issues, "rigorous" qualifications for
judges, viable definitions of crimes, protection of national security
information that might be sought by the court, and jurisdiction of the UN
Security Council to halt court proceedings in special cases. Since the passage
of the statute, the US has actively encouraged nations around the world to sign
"bilateral immunity agreements" prohibiting the surrender of US personnel
before the ICC and actively attempted to undermine the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court. The US Congress also passed a law, American
Service-Members' Protection Act (ASPA) authorizing the use of military force to
free any US personnel that are brought before the court rather than its own
court system. Human Rights Watch criticized the United States for removing
itself from the Statute. I think it is a very backwards step. It is
unprecedented which I think to an extent smacks of pettiness in the sense that
it is not going to affect in any way the establishment of the international
criminal court...The US have really isolated themselves and are putting
themselves into bed with the likes of China, the Yemen and other undemocratic
countries. While the US has maintained that it will "bring to justice those who
commit genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes," its primary
objections to the Rome Statute have revolved around the issues of jurisdiction
and process. A US ambassador for War Crimes Issues to the UN Security Council
said to the US Senate Foreign Relations Committee that because the Rome Statute
requires only one nation to submit to the ICC, and that this nation can be the
country in which an alleged crime was committed rather than defendant’s
country of origin, U.S military personnel and US foreign peaceworkers in more
than 100 countries could be tried in international court without the consent of
the US. The ambassador states that "most atrocities are committed internally
and most internal conflicts are between warring parties of the same
nationality, the worst offenders of international humanitarian law can choose
never to join the treaty and be fully insulated from its reach absent a
Security Council referral. Yet multinational peacekeeping forces operating in a
country that has joined the treaty can be exposed to the court's jurisdiction
even if the country of the individual peacekeeper has not joined the treaty."
Other treaties not signed or signed but not ratified. Where the signature is
subject to ratification, acceptance or approval, the signature does not
establish the consent to be bound. However, it is a means of authentication and
expresses the willingness of the signatory state to continue the treaty-making
process. The signature qualifies the signatory state to proceed to
ratification, acceptance or approval. It also creates an obligation to refrain,
in good faith, from acts that would defeat the object and the purpose of the
treaty. Inter-American human rights system. The US is a signatory to the 1948
American Declaration of the Rights and Duties of Man and has signed but not
ratified the 1969 American Convention on Human Rights. It is a member of Inter-
American Convention on the Granting of Political Rights to Women (1948). It
does not accept the adjudicatory jurisdiction of the Costa Rica-based Inter-
American Court of Human Rights. Coverage of violations in the media. Studies
have found that the "New York Times" coverage of worldwide human rights
violations is seriously biased, predominantly focusing on the human rights
violations in nations where there is clear U.S. involvement, while having
relatively little coverage of the human rights violations in other nations.
Amnesty International's Secretary General Irene Khan explains, "If we focus on
the U.S. it's because we believe that the U.S. is a country whose enormous
influence and power has to be used constructively ... When countries like the
U.S. are seen to undermine or ignore human rights, it sends a very powerful
message to others." Further assessments. According to Freedom in the World, an
annual report by US based think-tank Freedom House, which rates political
rights and civil liberties, in 2007, the United States was ranked "Free" (the
highest possible rating), together with 92 other countries. The Polity data
series, which rate regime and authority characteristics, covering the years
1800-2004, has ranked the United States with the highest possible rating since
1871. According to the Economist Magazine's Democracy Index, the US ranks 17
out of 167 nations. According to the annual Worldwide Press Freedom Index
published by Reporters Without Borders, due to wartime restrictions the United
States was ranked 53rd from the top in 2006 (out of 168), 44th in 2005. 22nd in
2004, 31st in 2003 and 17th in 2002. According to the annual Corruption
Perceptions Index, which was published by Transparency International, the
United States was ranked 20th from the top least corrupt in 2006 (out of 163),
17th in 2005, 18th in 2003, and 16th in 2002. According to the annual Privacy
International index of 2007, the United States was ranked an "endemic
surveillance society", scoring only 1.5 out of 5 privacy points. According to
the Gallup International Millennium Survey, the United States ranked 23rd in
citizens' perception of human rights observance when its citizens were asked,
"In general, do you think that human rights are being fully respected,
partially respected or are they not being respected at all in your country?"
Other issues. In the aftermath of the devastation caused by Hurricane Katrina,
criticism by some groups commenting on human rights issues was made regarding
the recovery and reconstruction issues The American Civil Liberties Union and
the National Prison Project documented mistreatment of the prison population
during the flooding, while United Nations Special Rapporteur Doudou Diène
delivered a 2008 report on such issues. The United States was elected in 2009
to sit on the United Nations Human Rights Council (UNHRC), which the U.S. State
Department had previously asserted had lost its credibility by its prior
stances and lack of safeguards against severe human rights violators taking a
seat. In 2006 and 2007, the UNHCR and Martin Scheinin were critical of the
United States regard permitting executions by lethal injection, housing
children in adult jails, subjecting prisoners to prolonged isolation in
supermax prisons, using enhanced interrogation techniques and domestic poverty
gaps. See also. Criticism of the US Human rights record '"US Human rights
abuses "'Organizations involved in US human rights '"People involved in US
human rights "'Notable comments on Human Rights
