Human rights of Kurdish people in Turkey Human rights of Kurdish people in
Turkey looks at the human rights of Kurds in Turkey. Issues. Education. In
Turkey, the only language of instruction in the education system is Turkish.
The Kurdish population of Turkey has long sought to have Kurdish included as a
language of instruction in public schools as well as a subject. Several
attempts at opening Kurdish instruction centers were stopped on technical
grounds, such as wrong dimensions of doors. An experiment at running Kurdish-
language schools was wound up in 2004 because of an apparent lack of interest.
Kurdish is permitted as a subject in universities, but in reality there are
only few pioneer courses. But currently Kursdish is elective among other
lessons in schools. Multiculturalism, Assimilation. Due to the large number of
Turkish Kurds, successive governments have viewed the expression of a Kurdish
identity as a potential threat to Turkish unity, a feeling that has been
compounded since the armed rebellion initiated by the PKK in 1984. One of the
main accusations of cultural assimilation relates to the state's historic
suppression of the Kurdish language. Kurdish publications created throughout
the 1960s and 1970s were shut down under various legal pretexts. Following the
military coup of 1980, the Kurdish language was officially prohibited in
government institutions. US Congressman Bob Filner spoke of a "cultural
genocide", stressing that "a way of life known as Kurdish is disappearing at an
alarming rate". Mark Levene suggests that the genocidal practices were not
limited to cultural genocide, and that the events of the late 19th century
continued until 1990. Cultural expression. Between 1983 and 1991, it was
forbidden to publicize, publish and/or broadcast in any language other than
Turkish, unless that language was the first official language of a country that
Turkey has diplomatic relations with. Though this ban technically applied to
any language, it had the largest effect on the Kurdish language, which is not
the first official language of any country, despite being widely spoken in the
Kurdistan region. In June 2004, Turkey's public television TRT began
broadcasting a half-hour Kurdish program, and on March 8, 2006, the Radio and
Television Supreme Council (RTÜK) allowed two TV channels (Gün TV and Söz
TV) and one radio channel (Medya FM) to have limited service in the Kurdish
language. This legislation came into force as an effort to meet one of the
European Union’s requirements for membership in its talks with Turkey. The
new regulation will allot five hours of weekly radio broadcast and four of
television. Despite these reforms, use of Kurdish in the public sphere and
government institutions is still severely restricted. On June 14, 2007, the
Interior Ministry took a decision to remove Abdullah Demirbaş from his office
as elected mayor of the Sur district of Diyarbakir. They also removed elected
members of the municipal council. The high court endorsed the decision of the
ministry and ruled that "giving information on various municipal services such
as culture, art, environment, city cleaning and health in languages other than
Turkish is against the Constitution. This is despite the fact that according to
the above-mentioned municipality, 72% of the people of the district use Kurdish
in their daily lives. In another case, the mayor of Diyarbakır, Osman
Baydemir, is being subjected to a similar set of interrogations and judicial
processes. His case is related to the use of the Kurdish phrase "Sersala We
Pîroz Be" (Happy New Year) in the new year celebration cards issued by the
municipality. The prosecutor wrote: "It was determined that the suspect used a
Kurdish sentence in the celebration card, ‘Sersala We Piroz Be’ (Happy New
Year). I, on behalf of the public, demand that he be punished under Article
222/1 of the Turkish Penal Code". Political representation. The Turkish
Constitution bans the formation of political parties on an ethnic basis.
Several Kurdish political parties have been shut down by the Turkish
Constitutional Court under excuse of supporting the PKK, which is listed as a
terrorist organization by NATO members like Turkey, USA, the European Union
History. Ottoman era. Following the Young Turk Revolution at the beginning of
this century and the flowering of Turkish nationalism, the destruction or
assimilation of minority populations (particularly Armenians and Kurds) has
been a recurring pattern. PKK era. During the 1980s and 1990s, Turkey displaced
a large number of its citizens in southeastern Anatolia from rural areas,
allegedly to protect them from guerrilla violence of the Kurdistan Workers'
Party (PKK), that is considered a terrorist organization by the US and the
European Union. Turkey has claimed that the actions of the Turkish Armed Forces
(TAF) included burning of 'deserted' villages in order for the PKK not to use
them as outposts or hiding places. Clashes between Turkish and PKK militants
have resulted in some 30,000 casualties according a report by the US Department
of State. Selected incidents. Leyla Zana. In 1994 Leyla Zana—who, three years
prior, had been the first Kurdish woman elected to the Turkish parliament—was
sentenced to 15 years for "separatist speech". At her inauguration as an MP,
she reportedly identified herself as a Kurd. She took the oath of loyalty in
Turkish, as required by law, then added in Kurdish, "I have completed this
formality under duress. I shall struggle so that the Kurdish and Turkish
peoples may live together in a democratic framework." Parliament erupted with
shouts of "Separatist", "Terrorist", and "Arrest her". In April 2008, she was
sentenced to two years in prison for allegedly "spreading terrorist propaganda"
by saying in a speech, "Kurds have three leaders, namely Massoud Barzani, Celal
Talabani and Abdullah Ocalan." Akin Birdal. In 2000, the chairman of the
Turkish Human Rights Association Akin Birdal was imprisoned under Article 312
for a speech in which he called for "peace and understanding" between Kurds and
Turks. He was forced to resign from his post, as the Law on Associations
forbids persons who breach this and several other laws from serving as
association officials. Diyarbakır detentions (2006). Violent disturbances took
place in several cities in the southeast in March and April 2006. Over 550
people were detained as a result of these events, including over 200 children.
The Diyarbakır Bar Association submitted more than 70 complaints of ill-
treatment to the authorities. Investigations were launched into 39 of these
claims. During the events in Diyarbakır, forensic examinations of detained
were carried out in places of detention. According to the Report of the
Commission, "this contravenes the rules and the circulars issued by the
Ministries of Justice and Health as well as the independence of the medical
profession". The Commission also believes that "the new provisions introduced
in June 2006 to amend the anti-terror law could undermine the fight against
torture and ill-treatment". The Commission also stresses that "a return to
normality in Southeast can only be achieved be opening dialogue with local
counterparts". "A comprehensive strategy should be pursued to achieve the
socio-economic development of the region and the establishment of conditions
for the Kurdish population to enjoy full rights and freedoms. Issues that need
to be addressed include the return of internally displaced persons,
compensation for losses incurred by victims of terrorism, landmines as well as
the issue of village guards". Status quo. In 2009, the state-run broadcaster,
TRT, launched a channel (TRT 6) in the Kurdish language. Famous Kurdish
musicians attended the inauguration, at which the prime minister made a speech
in Kurdish. The "Turkey 2006 Progress Report" underscores that, according to
the Law on Political Parties, the use of languages other than Turkish is
illegal in political life. This was seen when Leyla Zana spoke Kurdish in her
inauguration as an MP she was arrested in 1994 and charged with treason and
membership in the armed Kurdistan Workers Party (PKK). Zana and the others were
sentenced to 15 years in prison. Prior to this in 1992, the Kurd Institute in
Istanbul was raided by police who arrest five people and confiscated books on
Kurdish language, literature, and history The European Commission concludes as
of 2006 that "overall Turkey made little progress on ensuring cultural
diversity and promoting respect for and protection of minorities in accordance
with international standards". "The Economist" also asserts that "reforms have
slowed, prosecutions of writers for insulting Turkishness have continued,
renewed fighting has broken out with Kurds and a new mood of nationalism has
taken hold", but it is also stressed that "in the past four years the Turkish
prime minister, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, improved rights for Kurds".
