Isa Gambar Isa Yunis oglu Qambar (), also known as Isa Gambar or Isa Qambar
(born February 24, 1957), is an Azerbaijani politician and leader of Equality
Party "(Müsavat)", the largest opposition block in Azerbaijan. Biography
details. İsa Qambar is married and has two sons. His wife, Aida Bağırova, is
a Doctor of History, a Professor at Baku State University. 2003 elections.
Human Rights Watch commented on the 2003 elections: Human Rights Watch research
found that the government had heavily intervened in the elections campaign in
favour of Prime Minister İlham Aliyev, son of the current President Heydar
Aliyev. The government had stacked the Central Election Commission and local
election commission with its supporters, and banned local non-governmental
organizations from monitoring the vote. As the elections drew nearer,
government officials have openly sided with the campaign of İlham Aliyev,
constantly obstructing opposition rallies and attempting to limit public
participation in opposition events. In some cases, local officials have closed
all the roads into town during opposition rallies, or have extended working and
school hours, in one case, even declaring a Sunday work day, to prevent
participation in opposition rallies. (source: http://www.hrw.org/backgrounder/
eca/azerbaijan/index.htm) 2011 protests. In his role as leader of Müsavat,
Gambar has played a major part in spring 2011 demonstrations inspired by other
protests throughout the Middle East. He and his party have organized protests,
occasionally joining with fellow opposition groups like the Popular Front Party
to rally in Baku despite a government ban and the steadfast efforts of security
forces to disperse gatherings and arrest activists. "There is a criminal,
authoritarian and corrupt regime in Azerbaijan, and the people of Azerbaijan no
longer want to live under these conditions," Gambar told "The New York Times".
In early April, Ilkin Gambar, the opposition leader's son currently serving in
the Azerbaijani Army, claimed on his Facebook page that he was being sent to
the front lines in Azerbaijan's standoff with Armenia and that his father had
been "warned" that this could be a result of his continuing involvement in
protests. For his part, Isa Gambar said, "The Ministry of Defence has a right
to place soldiers in any location at its disposal. So I don't want to
politicize this issue."
