American Jews American Jews, also known as Jewish Americans, are American
citizens of the Jewish faith or Jewish ethnicity. The Jewish community in the
United States is composed predominantly of Ashkenazi Jews who emigrated from
Jewish diaspora communities of Central and Eastern Europe, and their U.S.-born
descendants. Minorities from all Jewish ethnic divisions are also represented,
including Sephardi Jews, Mizrahi Jews, and a number of converts. The American
Jewish community manifests a wide range of Jewish cultural traditions, as well
as encompassing the full spectrum of Jewish religious observance. Depending on
religious definitions and varying population data, the United States is home to
the largest or second largest (after Israel) Jewish community in the world. The
population of American religious adherents of Judaism was estimated to be
approximately 5,128,000 or 1.7% of the total population in 2007 (301,621,000);
As a contrast, Israel's Central Bureau of Statistics estimated the Israeli
Jewish population was 5,664,000 in 2009 (75.4% of the total population).
History. Jews have been present in what is today the United States of America
as early as the 17th century. However, they were small in numbers and almost
exclusively Sephardic Jewish immigrants of Spanish and Portuguese ancestry.
While denied the vote or ability to hold office in some areas, Sephardic Jews
became active in community affairs in the 1790s, after achieving political
equality in the five states where they were most numerous. Until about 1830,
Charleston, South Carolina had more Jews than anywhere else in North America.
Large scale Jewish immigration, however, did not commence until the nineteenth
century, when, by mid-century, many secular Ashkenazi Jews from Germany arrived
in the United States, primarily becoming merchants and shop-owners. There were
approximately 250,000 Jews in the United States by 1880, many of them being the
educated, and largely secular, German Jews, although a minority population of
the older Sephardic Jewish families remained influential. Jewish immigration to
the United States increased dramatically in the early 1880s, as a result of
persecution and economic difficulties in parts of Eastern Europe. Most of these
new immigrants also were Yiddish-speaking Ashkenazi Jews, though most came from
the poor rural populations of the Russian Empire and the Pale of Settlement,
located in modern-day Poland, Lithuania, Belarus, Ukraine and Moldova. During
the same period, a great number of Ashkenazi Jews arrived also from Galicia, at
that time the most impoverished region of Austro-Hungarian empire with heavy
Jewish urban population, driven out mainly by economic reasons. Over 2,000,000
Jews arrived between the late nineteenth century and 1924, when the Immigration
Act of 1924 and the National Origins Quota of 1924 restricted immigration. Most
settled in the New York metropolitan area, establishing what became one of the
world's major concentrations of Jewish population. At the beginning of the
twentieth century, these newly arrived Jews built support networks consisting
of many small synagogues and Ashkenazi Jewish "Landsmannschaften" (German for
"Territorial Associations") for Jews from the same town or village. American
Jewish writers of the time urged assimilation and integration into the wider
American culture, and Jews quickly became part of American life. 500,000
American Jews (or half of all Jewish males between 18 and 50) fought in World
War II, and after the war younger families joined the new trend of
suburbanization. There, Jews became increasingly assimilated and demonstrated
rising intermarriage. The suburbs facilitated the formation of new centers, as
Jewish school enrollment more than doubled between the end of World War II and
the mid-1950s, while synagogue affiliation jumped from 20% in 1930 to 60% in
1960; the fastest growth came in Reform and, especially, Conservative
congregations. More recent waves of Jewish immigration from Russia and other
regions have largely joined the mainstream American Jewish community. Self
identity. Korelitz (1996) shows how American Jews during the late 19th and
early 20th centuries abandoned a racial definition of Jewishness in favor of
one that embraced ethnicity. The key to understanding this transition from a
racial self-definition to a cultural or ethnic one can be found in the
‚Äò‚ÄôMenorah Journal‚Äô‚Äô between 1915 and 1925. During this time
contributors to the Menorah promoted a cultural, rather than a racial,
religious, or other view of Jewishness as a means to define Jews in a world
that threatened to overwhelm and absorb Jewish uniqueness. The journal
represented the ideals of the menorah movement established by Horace M. Kallen
and others to promote a revival in Jewish cultural identity and combat the idea
of race as a means to define or identify peoples. Siporin (1990) uses the
family folklore of ethnic Jews to their collective history and its
transformation into an historical art form. They tell us how Jews have survived
being uprooted and transformed. Many immigrant narratives bear a theme of the
arbitrary nature of fate and the reduced state of immigrants in a new culture.
By contrast, ethnic family narratives tend to show the ethnic more in charge of
his life, and perhaps in danger of losing his Jewishness altogether. Some
stories show how a family member successfully negotiated the conflict between
ethnic and American identities. After 1960 memories of the Holocaust, together
with the Six Day War in 1967 that resulted in the survival of Israel had major
impacts on fashioning Jewish ethnic identity. The provided Jews with a
rationale for their ethnic distinction at a time when other minorities were
asserting their own. Politics. In New York City, while the German Jewish
community was well established 'uptown', the more numerous East European Jews
faced tension 'downtown' with Irish and German Catholic neighbors, especially
the Irish Catholics who controlled Democratic Party Politics at the time. Jews
successfully established themselves in the garment trades and in the needle
unions in New York. By the 1930s they were a major political factor in New
York, with strong support for the most liberal programs of the New Deal. They
continued as a major element of the New Deal Coalition, giving special support
to the Civil Rights Movement. By the mid 1960s, however, the Black Power
movement caused a growing separation between blacks and Jews, though both
groups remained solidly in the Democratic camp. While earlier Jewish immigrants
from Germany tended to be politically conservative, the wave of Eastern
European Jews starting in the early 1880s, were generally more liberal or left
wing and became the political majority. Many came to America with experience in
the socialist, anarchist and communist movements as well as the Labor Bund,
emanating from Eastern Europe. Many Jews rose to leadership positions in the
early 20th century American labor movement and helped to found unions that
played a major role in left wing politics and, after 1936, in Democratic Party
politics. Although American Jews generally leaned Republican in the second half
of the 19th century, the majority has voted Democratic or leftist since at
least 1916, when they voted 55% for Woodrow Wilson. American Jews voted 90% for
Democrat Franklin D. Roosevelt in the elections of 1940, and 1944, representing
the highest of support, only equaled once since. In the election of 1948,
Jewish support for Democrat Harry S. Truman dropped to 75%, with 15% supporting
the new Progressive Party. As a result of lobbying, and hoping to better
compete for the Jewish vote, both major party platforms had included a pro-
Zionist plank since 1944, and supported the creation of a Jewish state; it had
little apparent effect however, with 90% still voting other-than Republican. In
every election since, no Democratic presidential candidate has won with less
than 71% of the Jewish vote. During the 1952 and 1956 elections, they voted 60%
or more for Democrat Adlai Stevenson, while General Eisenhower garnered 40% for
his reelection; the best showing to date for the Republicans since Harding's
43% in 1920. In 1960, 83% voted for Democrat John F. Kennedy against Richard
Nixon, and in 1964, 90% of American Jews voted for Lyndon Johnson, over his
Republican opponent, arch-conservative Barry Goldwater. Hubert Humphrey
garnered 81% of the Jewish vote in the 1968 elections, in his losing bid for
president against Richard Nixon. During the Nixon re-election campaign of 1972,
Jewish voters were apprehensive about George McGovern and only favored the
Democrat by 65%, while Nixon more than doubled Republican Jewish support to
35%. In the election of 1976, Jewish voters supported Democrat Jimmy Carter by
71% over incumbent president Gerald Ford‚Äôs 27%, but during the Carter re-
election campaign of 1980, Jewish voters greatly abandoned the Democrat, with
only 45% support, while Republican winner, Ronald Reagan, garnered 39%, and 14%
went to independent John Anderson. During the Reagan re-election campaign of
1984, the Republican retained 31% of the Jewish vote, while 67% voted for
Democrat Walter Mondale. The 1988 election saw Jewish voters favor Democrat
Michael Dukakis by 64%, while George H W Bush polled a respectable 35%, but
during his re-election in 1992, Jewish support dropped to just 11%, with 80%,
voting for Bill Clinton and 9% going to independent Ross Perot. Clinton‚Äôs re-
election campaign in 1996 maintained high Jewish support at 78%, with 16%
supporting Robert Dole and 3% for Perot. In the 2000 presidential election, Joe
Lieberman was the first American Jew to run for national office on a major
party ticket when he was chosen as Democratic presidential candidate Al Gore's
vice-presidential nominee. The elections of 2000 and 2004 saw continued Jewish
support for Democrats Al Gore and John Kerry, a Catholic, remain in the high-
to mid-70% range, while Republican George W. Bush‚Äôs re-election in 2004 saw
Jewish support rise from 19% to 24%. In the 2008 presidential election, 78% of
Jews voted for Barack Obama, who became the first African-American to be
elected president. Additionally, 83% of white Jews voted for Obama compared to
just 34% of white Protestants and 47% of white Catholics, though 67% of those
identifying with another religion and 71% identifying with no religion also
voted Obama. As American Jews have progressed economically over time, some
commentators have wondered why Jews remain so firmly Democratic and have not
shifted political allegiances to the center or right in the way other groups
who have advanced economically, such as Hispanics and Arab-Americans, have. For
congressional and senate races, since 1968, American Jews have voted about
70‚Äì80% for Democrats; this support increased to 87% for Democratic House
candidates during the 2006 elections. The first American Jew to serve in the
Senate was David Levy Yulee, who was Florida's first Senator, serving
1845‚Äì1851 and again 1855‚Äì1861. Today, there are 13 Jews among 100 U.S.
Senators: 11 Democrats (Michael Bennet, Richard Blumenthal, Barbara Boxer,
Benjamin Cardin, Dianne Feinstein, Al Franken, Herb Kohl, Frank Lautenberg,
Carl Levin, Charles Schumer, Ron Wyden), and both of the Senate's independents
(Joe Lieberman and Bernie Sanders; both caucus with the Democrats). This is
down one from the last Congress (Arlen Specter was defeated in his primary;
Russ Feingold in his general; and Richard Blumenthal was newly elected). In two
states, both Senators are Jewish: Connecticut (Lieberman and Blumenthal) and
California (Feinstein and Boxer). Prior to the defeat of Russ Feingold in the
2010 elections, Wisconsin also had two Jewish Senators (Kohl and Feingold).
There were 27 Jews among the 435 U.S. Representatives at the start of the 112th
Congress; 26 Democrats and one (Eric Cantor) Republican. While many of these
Members represented coastal cities and suburbs with significant Jewish
populations, others did not (for instance, Gabrielle Giffords of Tucson,
Arizona; John Yarmuth of Louisville, Kentucky; Jared Polis of Boulder,
Colorado; and Steve Cohen of Memphis, Tennessee). The total number of Jews
serving in the House of Representatives declined from 31 in the 111th Congress.
John Adler of New Jersey, Steve Kagan of Wisconsin, Alan Grayson of Florida,
and Ron Klein of Florida all lost their re-election bids, Rahm Emanuel resigned
to become the President's Chief of Staff; and Paul Hodes of New Hampshire did
not run for re-election but instead (unsuccessfully) sought his state's open
Senate seat. David Cicilline of Rhode Island was the only Jewish American who
was newly elected to the 112th Congress; he had been the Mayor of Providence.
The number declined when Jane Harman, Anthony Weiner, and Gabrielle Giffords
resigned during the 112th Congress. The only three openly gay men serving in
Congress are all Jewish: Barney Frank of Massachusetts; Jared Polis of
Colorado; and David Cicilline of Rhode Island. In November 2008, Cantor was
elected as the House Minority Whip, the first Jewish Republican to be selected
for the position. Participation in civil rights movements. As a group, American
Jews have been very active in fighting prejudice and discrimination, and have
historically been active participants in civil rights movements. In the mid-
twentieth century, American Jews were among the most active participants and
supporters of the black civil rights movement. Contemporaneously, Betty Friedan
wrote her 1963 book The Feminine Mystique, which is sometimes credited with
sparking the second wave of feminism, and was the first of many prominent
American Jewish feminists which extended into the feminist third wave. American
Jews have also since its founding been largely supportive of and active figures
in the struggle for gay rights in America. Seymour Siegel suggests that the
historic struggle against prejudice faced by Jews led to a natural sympathy for
any people confronting discrimination. Joachim Prinz, president of the American
Jewish Congress, stated the following when he spoke from the podium at the
Lincoln Memorial during the famous March on Washington on August 28, 1963: "As
Jews we bring to this great demonstration, in which thousands of us proudly
participate, a twofold experience‚Äîone of the spirit and one of our history...
From our Jewish historic experience of three and a half thousand years we say:
Our ancient history began with slavery and the yearning for freedom. During the
Middle Ages my people lived for a thousand years in the ghettos of Europe... It
is for these reasons that it is not merely sympathy and compassion for the
black people of America that motivates us. It is, above all and beyond all such
sympathies and emotions, a sense of complete identification and solidarity born
of our own painful historic experience. " The Holocaust. During the World War
II period, the American Jewish community was bitterly and deeply divided and
was unable to form a common front. Most Eastern European Jews favored Zionism,
which saw a return to their homeland as the only solution; this had the effect
of diverting attention from the horrors in Nazi Germany. German Jews were
alarmed at the Nazis but were disdainful of Zionism. Proponents of a Jewish
state and Jewish army agitated, but many leaders were so fearful of an
antisemitic backlash inside the U.S. that they demanded that all Jews keep a
low public profile. One important development was the sudden conversion of most
(but not all) Jewish leaders to Zionism late in the war. The Holocaust was
largely ignored by American media as it was happening. The Holocaust had a
profound impact on the community in the United States, especially after 1960,
as Jews tried to comprehend what had happened, and especially to commemorate
and grapple with it when looking to the future. Abraham Joshua Heschel
summarized this dilemma when he attempted to understand Auschwitz: "To try to
answer is to commit a supreme blasphemy. Israel enables us to bear the agony of
Auschwitz without radical despair, to sense a ray God's radiance in the jungles
of history." International affairs. Jews began taking a special interest in
international affairs in the early twentieth century, especially regarding
pogroms in Imperial Russia, and restrictions on immigration in the 1920s.
Political Zionism became a well-organized movement in the U.S. with the
involvement of Louis Brandeis and the British promise of a homeland in the
Balfour Declaration of 1917. Jewish Americans organized large-scale boycotts of
German merchandise during the 1930s, to protest the Nazi rule in Germany.
Franklin D. Roosevelt's leftist domestic policies received strong Jewish
support in the 1930s and 1940s, as did his anti-Nazi foreign policy and his
promotion of the United Nations. Support for political Zionism in this period,
although growing in influence, remained a distinctly minority opinion among
German Jews until about 1944‚Äì45, when the early rumors and reports of the
systematic mass murder of the Jews in German-occupied Europe became publically
known with the liberation of the Nazi concentration camps and extermination
camps. The founding of Israel in 1948 made the Middle East a center of
attention; the immediate recognition of Israel by the American government was
an indication of both its intrinsic support and the influence of political
Zionism. This attention initially was based on a natural and religious affinity
toward and support for Israel and world Jewry. The attention is also because of
the ensuing and unresolved conflicts regarding the founding Israel and Zionism
itself. A lively internal debate commenced, following the Six-Day War. The
American Jewish community was divided over whether or not they agreed with the
Israeli response; the great majority came to accept the war as necessary. A
tension existed especially for some Jews on the left who saw Israel as too
anti-Soviet and anti-Palestinian. Similar tensions were aroused by the 1977
election of Begin and the rise of revisionist policies, the 1982 Lebanon War
and the continuing occupation of the West Bank and Gaza. Disagreement over
Israel‚Äôs 1993 acceptance of the Oslo Accords caused a further split among
American Jews; this mirrored a similar split among Israelis and led to a
parallel rift within the pro-Israel lobby. Abandoning any pretense of unity,
both segments began to develop separate advocacy and lobbying organizations.
The liberal supporters of the Oslo Accord worked through Americans for Peace
Now (APN), Israel Policy Forum (IPF) and other groups friendly to the Labour
government in Israel. They tried to assure Congress that American Jewry was
behind the Accord and defended the efforts of the administration to help the
fledgling Palestinian authority (PA) including promises of financial aid. In a
battle for public opinion, IPF commissioned a number of polls showing
widespread support for Oslo among the community. In opposition to Oslo, an
alliance of Orthodox groups, such as ZOA, Americans For a Safe Israel (AFSI),
and the Jewish Institute for National Security Affairs (JINSA) launched a major
public opinion campaign. On October 10, 1993, the opponents of the Palestinian-
Israeli accord, organized at the American Leadership Conference for a Safe
Israel, where they warned that Israel was prostrating itself before a ‚Äúan
armed thug‚Äù, and predicted and that the ‚Äúthirteenth of September is a date
that will live in infamy‚Äù. Hard-core Zionists also criticized, often in harsh
language, Prime Minister Rabin and Shimon Perez, his foreign minister and chief
architect of the peace accord. With the community so strongly divided, AIPAC
and the Presidents Conference, which was tasked with representing the national
Jewish consensus, struggled to keep the increasingly shrill discourse civil.
Reflecting these tensions, Abraham Foxman from the Jewish Anti-defamation
League was forced by the conference to apologize for bad mouthing ZOA‚Äôs
Klein. The Conference, which under its organizational guidelines was in charge
of moderating communal discourse, reluctantly censured some Orthodox
spokespeople for attacking Colette Avital, the labor-appointed Israel Council
General in New York and an ardent supporter of the peace process. A 2004 poll
indicated that a majority of Jewish Americans favor the creation of an
independent Palestinian state and believe that Israel should remove some or all
of its settlements from the West Bank. Demographics. The Jewish population of
the United States is either the largest in the world, or second to that of
Israel, depending on the sources and methods used to measure it. Precise
population figures vary depending on whether Jews are accounted for based on
halakhic considerations, or secular, political and ancestral identification
factors. There were about 4 million adherents of Judaism in the U.S. as of
2001, approximately 1.4% of the US population. The community self-identifying
as Jewish by birth, irrespective of halakhic (unbroken maternal line of Jewish
descent or formal Jewish conversion) status, numbers about 7 million, or 2.5%
of the US population. According to the Jewish Agency, for the year 2007 Israel
is home to 5.4 million Jews (40.9% of the world's Jewish population), while the
United States contained 5.3 million (40.2%). The most recent large scale
population survey, released in the 2006 "American Jewish Yearbook population
survey" estimates place the number of American Jews at 6.4 million, or
approximately 2.1% of the total population. This figure is significantly higher
than the previous large scale survey estimate, conducted by the 2000‚Äì2001
National Jewish Population estimates, which estimated 5.2 million Jews. A 2007
study released by the Steinhardt Social Research Institute (SSRI) at Brandeis
University presents evidence to suggest that both of these figures may be
underestimations with a potential 7.0‚Äì7.4 million Americans of Jewish
descent. Jews in the U.S. settled largely in and near the major cities. The
Ashkenazi Jews, who are now the vast majority of American Jews, settled first
in the Northeast and Midwest cities, but in recent decades increasingly in the
South and West. Within the metropolitan areas of New York City, Los Angeles,
and Miami lives nearly one quarter of the world's Jews. Significant Jewish
population centers. Although the New York City metropolitan area is the second
largest Jewish population center in the world (after the Gush Dan metropolitan
area in Israel), the Miami metropolitan area has a slightly greater Jewish
population on a per-capita basis (9.9% compared to metropolitan New York's
9.3%). Several other major cities have large Jewish communities, including Los
Angeles, Baltimore, Boston, Chicago, San Francisco and Philadelphia. In many
metropolitan areas, the majority of Jewish families live in suburban areas. The
Greater Phoenix area was home to about 83,000 Jews in 2002, and has been
rapidly growing. The Israeli immigrant community in America is less widespread.
The significant Israeli immigrant communities in the United States are in Los
Angeles, New York City, Miami, and Chicago. According to the 2001 undertaking
of the National Jewish Population Survey, 4.3 million American Jews have some
sort of strong connection to the Jewish community, whether religious or
cultural. Assimilation and population changes. These parallel themes have
facilitated the extraordinary economic, political, and social success of the
American Jewish community, but also have contributed to widespread cultural
assimilation. More recently however, the propriety and degree of assimilation
has also become a significant and controversial issue within the modern
American Jewish community, with both political and religious skeptics. While
not all Jews disapprove of intermarriage, many members of the Jewish community
have become concerned that the high rate of interfaith marriage will result in
the eventual disappearance of the American Jewish community. Intermarriage
rates have risen from roughly 6% in 1950 to approximately 40‚Äì50% in the year
2000. This, in combination with the comparatively low birthrate in the Jewish
community, has led to a 5% decline in the Jewish population of the United
States in the 1990s. In addition to this, when compared with the general
American population, the American Jewish community is slightly older. Despite
the fact that only 33% of intermarried couples provide their children with a
Jewish upbringing, doing so is more common among intermarried families raising
their children in areas with high Jewish populations. The Boston area, for
example, is exceptional in that an estimated 60% percent of children of
intermarriages are being raised Jewish, meaning that intermarriage would
actually be contributing to a net "increase" in the number of Jews. As well,
some children raised through intermarriage rediscover and embrace their Jewish
roots when they themselves marry and have children. In contrast to the ongoing
trends of assimilation, some communities within American Jewry, such as
Orthodox Jews, have significantly higher birth rates and lower intermarriage
rates, and are growing rapidly. The proportion of Jewish synagogue members who
were Orthodox rose from 11% in 1971 to 21% in 2000, while the overall Jewish
community declined in number.¬  In 2000, there were 360,000 so-called "ultra-
orthodox" (Haredi) Jews in USA (7.2%). The figure for 2006 is estimated at
468,000 (9.4%). About half of the American Jews are considered to be religious.
Out of this 2,831,000 religious Jewish population, 92% are non-Hispanic white,
5% Hispanic (of any race) (Most commonly from Argentina, Venezuela, or Cuba;
many are Hispanics who converted after finding out they are descendants of Jews
forced to convert to Roman Catholicism during the Spanish Inquisition. See
Hispanic#Religious diversity), 1% Asian (Mostly Bukharian and Persian Jews), 1%
Black and 1% Other (Mixed Race.etc.). Almost this many non-religious Jews exist
in United States, the proportion of Whites being higher than that among the
religious population. American Jews and race. Approximately 7.5% to 10% of
American Jews are nonwhite, a result of interracial parents, adoption, or
conversion to Judaism. African American Jews and other American Jews of African
descent. The American Jewish community includes African American Jews and other
American Jews of African descent (such as American Beta Israel), excluding
North African Jewish Americans, who are considered Mizrahi or Sephardi.
Estimates of the number of American Jews of African descent in the United
States range from 20,000 to 200,000. Jews of African descent belong to all of
American Jewish denominations. Like their white Jewish counterparts, some black
Jews are Jewish atheists or ethnic Jews. Relations between American Jews of
African descent and other Jewish Americans are generally cordial. There are,
however, some tensions with a specific minority among African-Americans who
consider themselves (but not Ashkenazi Jews) to be the true descendants of the
Israelites of the Torah. They are generally not considered to be members of the
mainstream Jewish community, since they have not formally converted to Judaism,
nor are they ethnically related to other Jews. One such group, the African
Hebrew Israelites of Jerusalem, emigrated to Israel and was granted permanent
residency status there. Notable African-American Jews include Lisa Bonet, Sammy
Davis, Jr., Yaphet Kotto, Jordan Farmar, and rabbis Capers Funnye and Alysa
Stanton. Socioeconomics. As a group, American Jews tend to be better educated
and earn more than Americans as a whole. Forty-six percent (55% of Reform Jews)
report family incomes of over $100,000 compared to 19% of all Americans, with
the next highest group being Hindus at 43%. And while 27% of Americans have had
college or postgraduate education, fifty-nine percent (66% of Reform Jews) of
American Jews have, the second highest of any religious group after American
Hindus. Either of these two statistics may be confounded by the fact that the
Jewish population is on average older than other religious groups in the
country, with 51% of polled adults over the age of 50 compared to 41%
nationally. Older people tend to both have higher income and be more highly
educated. According to analysis by Gallup, American Jews have the highest well-
being of any ethnic or religious group in America. The great majority of
school-age Jewish students attend public schools, although Jewish day schools
and yeshivas are to be found throughout the country. Jewish cultural studies
and Hebrew language instruction is also commonly offered at synagogues in the
form of supplementary Hebrew schools or Sunday schools. Until the 1950s, a
quota system at elite colleges and universities limited the number of Jewish
students. Before 1945, only a few Jewish professors were permitted as
instructors at elite universities. In 1941, for example, antisemitism drove
Milton Friedman from a non-tenured assistant professorship at the University of
Wisconsin‚ÄìMadison. Harry Levin became the first Jewish full professor in the
Harvard English department in 1943, but the Economics department decided not to
hire Paul Samuelson in 1948. Harvard hired its first Jewish biochemists in
1954. Today, American Jews no longer face the discrimination in higher
education that they did in the past, particularly in the Ivy League. For
example, by 1986, a third of the presidents of the elite undergraduate final
clubs at Harvard were Jewish. Rick Levin has been president of Yale University
since 1993, Judith Rodin was president of the University of Pennsylvania from
1994 to 2004 (and is currently president of the Rockefeller Foundation), Paul
Samuelson's nephew, Lawrence Summers, was president of Harvard University from
2001 until 2006, and Harold Shapiro was president of Princeton University from
1992 until 2000. There are an estimated 4,000 Jewish students at the University
of California, Berkeley. Religion. Jewishness is considered an ethnic identity
as well as a religious one. See Ethnoreligious group. Observances and
engagement. Jewish religious practice in America is quite varied. Among the 4.3
million American Jews described as "strongly connected" to Judaism, over 80%
report some sort of active engagement with Judaism, ranging from attendance at
daily prayer services on one end of the spectrum to as little as attendance
Passover Seders or lighting Hanukkah candles on the other. A 2003 Harris Poll
found that 16% of American Jews go to the synagogue at least once a month, 42%
go less frequently but at least once a year, and 42% go less frequently than
once a year. The survey found that of the 4.3 million strongly connected Jews,
46% belong to a synagogue. Among those households who belong to a synagogue,
38% are members of Reform synagogues, 33% Conservative, 22% Orthodox, 2%
Reconstructionist, and 5% other types. Traditionally, Sephardic and Mizrahis do
not have different branches (Orthodox, Conservative, Reform, etc.) but usually
remain observant and religious. The survey discovered that Jews in the
Northeast and Midwest are generally more observant than Jews in the South or
West. Reflecting a trend also observed among other religious groups, Jews in
the Northwestern United States are typically the least observant. In recent
years, there has been a noticeable trend of secular American Jews returning to
a more observant, in most cases, Orthodox, lifestyle. Such Jews are called
baalei teshuva ("returners", see also Repentance in Judaism). It is uncertain
how widespread or demographically important this movement is at present. The
2008 American Religious Identification Survey found that around 3.4 million
American Jews call themselves religious ‚Äì out of a general Jewish population
of about 5.4 million. The number of Jews who identify themselves as only
culturally Jewish has risen from 20% in 1990 to 37% in 2008, according to the
study. In the same period, the number of all US adults who said they had no
religion rose from 8% to 15%. Jews are more likely to be secular than Americans
in general, the researchers said. About half of all US Jews ‚Äì including those
who consider themselves religiously observant ‚Äì claim in the survey that they
have a secular worldview and see no contradiction between that outlook and
their faith, according to the study's authors. Researchers attribute the trends
among American Jews to the high rate of intermarriage and "disaffection from
Judaism" in the United States. About one-sixth of American Jews maintain kosher
dietary standards. Religious beliefs. American Jews are more likely to be
atheist or agnostic than most Americans, especially so compared with
Protestants or Catholics. A 2003 poll found that while 79% of Americans believe
in God, only 48% of American Jews do, compared with 79% and 90% for Catholics
and Protestants respectively. While 66% of Americans said they were "absolutely
certain" of God's existence, 24% of American Jews said the same. And though 9
percent of Americans believe there is no God (8% Catholic and 4% Protestant),
19 percent of American Jews believe God does not exist. Though Jewish views on
evolution are varied, most schools of Jewish thought have reconciled Judaism
with evolution. A 2009 Harris Poll showed American Jews as the religious group
most accepting of evolution, with 80% believing in evolution, compared to 51%
for Catholics, 32% for Protestants, and 16% of Born-again Christians. They were
also less likely to believe in supernatural phenomena such as miracles, angels,
or heaven. Buddhism. Jews are overrepresented in American Buddhism, with
between one fifth and 30% of all American Buddhists identifying as Jewish
though only 1.4% of Americans are Jewish. Nicknamed "Jubu"s, an increasing
number of American Jews have begun adopting Buddhist spiritual practice.
Notable American Jewish Buddhists include: Robert Downey, Jr. Allen Ginsberg,
Goldie Hawn and daughter Kate Hudson, Steven Seagal, and Garry Shandling.
Contemporary politics. Today, American Jews are a distinctive and influential
group in the nation's politics. Jeffrey S. Helmreich writes that the ability of
American Jews to effect this through political or financial clout is
overestimated, that the primary influence lies in the group's voting patterns.
"Jews have devoted themselves to politics with almost religious fervor," writes
Mitchell Bard, who adds that Jews have the highest percentage voter turnout of
any ethnic group (84% reported being registered to vote). While 2‚Äì2.5% of the
United States population is Jewish, 94% live in 13 key electoral college
states, which combined have enough electors to elect the president. Though the
majority (60‚Äì70%) of the country's Jews identify as Democratic, Jews span the
political spectrum, with those at higher levels of observance being far more
likely to vote Republican than their less observant and secular counterparts.
Owing to high Democratic identification in the 2008 United States Presidential
Election, 78% of Jews voted for Democrat Barack Obama versus 21% for Republican
John McCain, despite Republican attempts to connect Obama to Muslim and pro-
Palestinian causes. It has been suggested that running mate Sarah Palin's
conservative views on social issues may have nudged Jews away from the
McCain‚ÄìPalin ticket. In the 2012 United States presidential election, 69% of
Jews voted for the Democratic incombent President Obama. Foreign policy.
Helmreich describes Jews as "a uniquely swayable bloc" as a result of
Republican stances on Israel. A paper by Dr. Eric Uslaner of the University of
Maryland disagrees, at least with regard to the 2004 election: "Only 15% of
Jews said that Israel was a key voting issue. Among those voters, 55% voted for
Kerry (compared to 83% of Jewish voters not concerned with Israel)." The paper
goes on point out that negative views of Evangelical Christians had a
distinctly negative impact for Republicans among Jewish voters, while Orthodox
Jews, traditionally more conservative in outlook as to social issues, favored
the Republican Party. A "New York Times" article suggests that the Jewish
movement to the Republican party is focused heavily on faith-based issues,
similar to the Catholic vote, which is credited for helping President Bush
taking Florida in 2004. However, Natan Guttman, "The Forward"‚Äôs Washington
bureau chief, dismisses this notion, writing in "Moment" that while "t is true
that Republicans are making small and steady strides into the Jewish
community‚Ä¶a look at the past three decades of exit polls, which are more
reliable than pre-election polls, and the numbers are clear: Jews vote
overwhelmingly Democratic,‚Äù an assertion confirmed by the most recent
presidential election results. Though critics have charged that Jewish
interests were partially responsible for the push to war with Iraq, Jewish
Americans were actually more strongly opposed to the Iraq war from its onset
than any other major religious group or even most Americans. The greater
opposition to the war was not simply a result of high Democratic identification
among U.S. Jews, as Jews of all political persuasions were more likely to
oppose the war than non-Jews who shared the same political leanings. Domestic
issues. American Jews are largely supportive of gay rights with 79% responding
in a Pew poll that homosexuality should be "accepted by society". A split on
homosexuality exists by level of observance. Reform rabbis in America perform
same-sex marriages as a matter of routine, and there are fifteen LGBT Jewish
congregations in North America. Reform, Reconstructionist and, increasingly,
Conservative, Jews are far more supportive on issues like gay marriage than
Orthodox Jews are. A 2007 survey of Conservative Jewish leaders and activists
showed that an overwhelming majority supported gay rabbinical ordination and
same-sex marriage. Accordingly, 78% percent of Jewish voters rejected
Proposition 8, the bill that banned gay marriage in California. No other ethnic
or religious group voted as strongly against it. In considering the trade-off
between the economy and environmental protection, American Jews were
significantly more likely than other religious groups (excepting Buddhism) to
favor stronger environmental protection. Jews in America also overwhelmingly
oppose current United States marijuana policy. Eighty-six percent of Jewish
Americans opposed arresting nonviolent marijuana smokers, compared to 61% for
the population at large and 68% of all Democrats. Additionally, 85% of Jews in
the United States opposed using federal law enforcement to close patient
cooperatives for medical marijuana in states where medical marijuana is legal,
compared to 67% of the population at large and 73% of Democrats. Jewish
American culture. Since the time of the last major wave of Jewish immigration
to America (over 2,000,000 Eastern European Jews who arrived between 1890 and
1924), Jewish secular culture in the United States has become integrated in
almost every important way with the broader American culture. Many aspects of
Jewish American culture have, in turn, become part of the wider culture of the
United States. Language. Most American Jews today are native English-speakers.
A variety of other languages are still spoken within some American Jewish
communities, communities that are representative of the various Jewish ethnic
divisions from around the world that have come together to make up America's
Jewish population. Many of America's Hasidic Jews, being exclusively of
Ashkenazi descent, are raised speaking Yiddish. Yiddish was once spoken as the
primary language by most of the several million European Jews who immigrated to
the United States. It was, in fact, the original language in which "The
Forward" was published. Yiddish has had an influence on American English, and
words borrowed from it include "chutzpah" ("effrontery", "gall"), "nosh"
("snack"), "schlep" ("drag"), "schmuck" ("an obnoxious, contemptible person",
euphemism for "penis"), and, depending on ideolect, hundreds of other terms.
(See also Yinglish.) The Persian Jewish community in the United States, notably
the large community in and around Los Angeles and Beverly Hills, California,
primarily speak Persian (see also Judeo-Persian) in the home and synagogue.
They also support their own Persian language newspapers. Persian Jews also
reside in eastern parts of New York such as Kew Gardens and Great Neck, Long
Island. Many recent Jewish immigrants from the Soviet Union speak primarily
Russian at home, and there are several notable communities where public life
and business are carried out mainly in Russian, such as in Brighton Beach in
New York City and Sunny Isles Beach in Miami. 2010 estimates of the number of
Jewish Russian-speaking households in the New York city area are around 92,000,
and the number of individuals are somewhere between 223,000‚Äì350,000. Another
high population of Russian Jews can be found in the Richmond District of San
Francisco where Russian markets stand alongside the numerous Asian businesses.
American Bukharan Jews speak Bukhori, a dialect of Persian, and Russian. They
publish their own newspapers such as the "Bukharian Times" and a large portion
live in Queens, New York. Forest Hills in the New York City borough of Queens
is home to 108th Street, which is called by some "Bukharian Broadway", a
reference to the many stores and restaurants found on and around the street
that have Bukharian influences. Many Bukharians are also represented in parts
of Arizona, Miami, Florida, and areas of Southern California such as San Diego.
Classical Hebrew is the language of most Jewish religious literature, such as
the Tanakh (Bible) and Siddur (prayerbook). Modern Hebrew is also the primary
official language of the modern State of Israel, which further encourages many
to learn it as a second language. Some recent Israeli immigrants to America
speak Hebrew as their primary language. Some Jews, particularly in Miami and
Los Angeles, immigrated from Latin America. Many of these Hispanic Jews, many
of them of Sephardic origin dating back to the Spanish colonial era, but also
some from Ashkenazi descent from recent Central and Eastern European
immigration to Latin America, speak Spanish in the home, and some have
intermarried with the non-Jewish Hispanic population. Recent Jews from Spain
speak Spanish, and Spanish may be spoken by other Jews with ancestry outside
Spain and Latin America, but who live in areas near predominantly Hispanic
populations. There is a large number of synagogues in the Miami area that give
services in Spanish. Also in Miami and Los Angeles there are many Luso-Jews
with origin from Brazil and Portugal. Sephardic, Ashkenazi, and Mizrahi Jews
from Brazil often speak Portuguese at home. There are also a handful of older
European immigrant communities that still speak Ladino. Jewish American
literature. Although American Jews have contributed greatly to American arts
overall, there remains a distinctly Jewish American literature. Jewish American
literature often explores the experience of being a Jew in America, and the
conflicting pulls of secular society and history. American Jews. Popular
culture. Many individual Jews have made significant contributions to American
popular culture. There have been many Jewish American actors and performers,
ranging from early 1900s actors, to classic Hollywood film stars, and
culminating in many currently known actors. Many of the early Hollywood moguls
and pioneers were Jewish. The field of American comedy includes many Jews. The
legacy also includes songwriters and authors. Many Jews have been at the
forefront of women's issues. Jews have also done well in the field of sport.
Government and military. Since 1845, a total of 34 Jews have served in the
Senate, including the 14 present-day senators noted above. Judah P. Benjamin
was the first practicing Jewish Senator, and would later serve as Confederate
Secretary of War and Secretary of State during the Civil War. Rahm Emanuel
served as Chief of Staff to President Barack Obama. The number of Jews elected
to the House rose to an all-time high of 30. Seven Jews have been appointed to
the United States Supreme Court. In April 1984, an unusual historic connection
between American history and American Jewish history was made when President
Ronald Reagan read Jewish Navy chaplain Arnold Resnicoff's eyewitness account
of the 1983 Beirut barracks bombing as his keynote speech to the Rev. Jerry
Falwell's "Baptism Fundamentalism '84" Washington, DC, convention. At least
twenty eight American Jews have been awarded the Medal of Honor. World War II.
More than 550,000 Jews served in the U.S. military during World War II; about
11,000 were killed and more than 40,000 were wounded. There were three
recipients of the Medal of Honor, 157 recipients of the Army Distinguished
Service Medal, Navy Distinguished Service Medal, Distinguished Service Cross,
or Navy Cross, and about 1600 recipients of the Silver Star. About 50,000 other
decorations. citations and awards were given to Jewish military personnel, for
a total of 52,000 decorations. During this period, Jews were approximately 3.3
percent of the total U.S. population but constituted about 4.23 percent of the
U.S. armed forces. About 60 percent of all Jewish physicians in the United
States under 45 years of age were in service as military physicians and medics.
Many Jewish physicists, including project lead J. Robert Oppenheimer, were
involved in the Manhattan Project, the secret World War II effort to develop
the atomic bomb. Many of these were refugees from Nazi Germany or from
antisemitic persecution elsewhere in Europe. American Folk Music. Jews have
been involved in the American folk music scene since the late 19 Century; these
tended to be refugees from Central and Eastern Europe, and significantly more
economically disadvantaged than their established Western European and
Sephardic coreligionists. Historians see it as a legacy of the secular Yiddish
theater, cantorial traditions and a desire to assimilate. By the 1940s Jews had
become established in the American folk music scene. Examples of the major
impact Jews have had in the American folk music arena include, but are not
limited to: Moe Asch the first to record and release much of the music of
Woodie Guthrie, including "This Land is Your Land" in response to Irving
Berlin's "God Bless America", and Guthrie wrote Jewish songs. Guthrie married a
Jew and their son Arlo became influential in his own right. Asch's one man
corporation Folkway Records, also released much of the music of Leadbelly and
Pete Seeger from the 40's and 50's. Asch's large music catalog was voluntarily
donated to the Smithsonian. Three of the four creators of the Newport Folk
Festival, Wein, Bikell and Grossman (Seeger is not) were Jewish. Albert
Grossman put together Peter Paul and Mary, of which Yarrow is Jewish. Oscar
Brand, from a Canadian Jewish family, has the longest running radio program
"Oscar Brand's Folksong Festival" which has been on air consecutively since
1945 from NYC. And is the first American broadcast where the host himself will
answer any personal correspondence. Influential group The Weavers, successor to
the Almanac Singers, lead by Pete Seeger, had a Jewish manager, and 2 of the 4
members of the group were Jewish (Gilbert and Hellerman). The B-side of "Good
Night Irene" had the Hebrew folk song personally chosen for the record by Pete
Seeger "Tzena, Tzena, Tzena". The influential folk music magazine 'Sing Out!'
was co-founded and edited by Irwin Silber in 1951, and edited by him until
1967, when the magazine stopped publication for decades. Rolling Stone
magazine's first music critic Jon Landau is of German Jewish descent. Izzy
Young who created the legendary Folklore Center in NY, and currently the
Folklore Centrum near Mariatorget in S√∂dermalm, Sweden, which relates to
American and Swedish folk music. Finance. Jews have been involved in both
financial thought from many diverting perspectives, and practical investment in
the U.S.. During the colonial era, before the establishment of the U.S.A. Jews
were the first non-Protestants to receive rights to trade fur, from the Dutch
and Swedish controlled colonies. The colonial United Kingdom honored after
transitioning control of the colonies. During the Revolutionary War, Haim
Solomon gave up his fortune to help create America's first semi-central bank,
and advised Alexander Hamilton on the building of America's financial system.
American Jews in the 19th, 20th and 21st centuries played a major role in
American finance, both at investment banks and investment funds. German Jewish
bankers began to assume a major role in American finance in the 1830s when
government and private borrowing to pay for canals, railroads and other
internal improvements increased rapidly and significantly. Men such as August
Belmont (Rothschild's agent in New York and a leading Democrat), Philip Speyer,
Jacob Schiff (at Kuhn, Loeb & Company), Joseph Seligman, Philip Lehman (of
Lehman Brothers), Jules Bache, and Marcus Goldman (of Goldman Sachs) illustrate
this financial elite. As was true of their non-Jewish counterparts, family,
personal, and business connections, a reputation for honesty and integrity,
ability, and a willingness to take calculated risks were essential to recruit
capital from widely scattered sources. The families and the firms which they
controlled were bound together by religious and social factors, and by the
prevalence of intermarriage. These personal ties fulfilled real business
functions before the advent of institutional organization in the 20th century.
Nevertheless, antisemitic elements often falsely targeted them as key players
in a supposed Jewish cabal conspiring to dominate the world. Since the late
20th century have Jews played a major role in the hedge fund industry,
according to Zuckerman (2009) Thus SAC Capital Advisors, Soros Fund Management,
Och-Ziff Capital Management, GLG Partners and Renaissance Technologies are
large hedge funds cofounded by Jews. They have also played a pivotal role in
the private equity industry, co-founding some of the largest firms, such as
Blackstone, Carlyle Group, Warburg Pincus, and KKR. Federal Reserve. Paul
Warburg, one of the leading advocates of the establishment of a central bank in
the U.S. and one of the first governors of the newly established Federal
Reserve System, came from a prominent Jewish family in Germany. Several Jews
have served as chairmen of the Fed, including Ben Bernanke, the current
Chairman, and Alan Greenspan, the prior chairman. Science, business, and
academia. Jews have traditionally been drawn to business and academia (see
Secular Jewish culture for some of the causes), and have made major
contributions in science, economics, and the humanities. Of American Nobel
Prize winners, 37 percent have been Jewish Americans (18 times the percentage
of Jews in the population), as have been 65 percent of the John Bates Clark
Medal winners (thirty-one times the Jewish percentage). While Jewish Americans
only constitute roughly 2.5 percent of the U.S. population, they occupied 7.7
percent of board seats at U.S. corporations. Since many jobs/careers in
science, business, and academia generally pay well, Jewish Americans also tend
to have a higher average income than most Americans. The 2000‚Äì2001 National
Jewish Population Survey shows that the median income of a Jewish family is
$54,000 a year and 34% of Jewish households report income over $75,000 a year.
The 2010 Inside Baltimore Jewish Lifestyle Magazine shows that the median
American Jewish household income stood at $80,000 prior to the economic
recession.
