Kashmir Kashmir (; ; ; ) is the northwestern region of the Indian subcontinent.
Until the mid-19th century, the term "Kashmir" geographically denoted only the
valley between the Great Himalayas and the Pir Panjal mountain range. Today
"Kashmir" denotes a larger area that includes the Indian-administered state of
Jammu and Kashmir (which consists of the divisions: the Kashmir valley, Jammu
and Ladakh), the Pakistani-administered Gilgit‚ÄìBaltistan and the Azad Kashmir
provinces, and the Chinese-administered regions of Aksai Chin and Trans-
Karakoram Tract. In the first half of the first millennium, the Kashmir region
became an important center of Hinduism and later of Buddhism; later still, in
the ninth century, Kashmir Shaivism arose. In 1349, Shah Mir became the first
Muslim ruler of Kashmir and inaugurated the "Salatin-i-Kashmir" or Swati
dynasty. For the next five centuries, Muslim monarchs ruled Kashmir, including
the Mughals, who ruled from 1526 until 1751, then the Afghan Durrani Empire
that ruled from 1747 until 1820. That year, the Sikhs, under Ranjit Singh,
annexed Kashmir. In 1846, upon the purchase of the region from the British
under the Treaty of Amritsar, the Dogras‚Äîunder Gulab Singh‚Äîbecame the new
rulers. Dogra Rule, under the "paramountcy" (or tutelage) of the British Crown,
lasted until 1947, when the former princely state became a disputed territory,
now administered by three countries: India, Pakistan, and the People's Republic
of China. Etymology. The word Kashmir is an ancient Sanskrit word which
literally means Land of Kashyap Rishi. Kashyap Rishi was a Saraswat Brahmin and
one of the Saptarshis, who was key in formalizing the ancient Historical Vedic
Religion. The Kashmiri Pandits are his descendants and have named the valley
after him, in his honour. History. Buddhism in Kashmir. The Buddhist Mauryan
emperor Ashoka is often credited with having founded the old capital of
Kashmir, Shrinagari, now ruins on the outskirts of modern Srinagar. Kashmir was
long to be a stronghold of Buddhism. As a Buddhist seat of learning, the
SarvƒÅstivƒÅdan school strongly influenced Kashmir. East and Central Asian
Buddhist monks are recorded as having visited the kingdom. In the late 4th
century AD, the famous Kuchanese monk KumƒÅrajƒ´va, born to an Indian noble
family, studied Dƒ´rghƒÅgama and MadhyƒÅgama in Kashmir under Bandhudatta. He
later became a prolific translator who helped take Buddhism to China. His
mother Jƒ´va is thought to have retired to Kashmir. VimalƒÅk·π£a, a
SarvƒÅstivƒÅdan Buddhist monk, travelled from Kashmir to Kucha and there
instructed KumƒÅrajƒ´va in the "Vinayapi·π≠aka". Adi Shankara visited the pre-
existing "" (Sharada Peeth) in Kashmir in late 8th century or early 9th century
AD. The "Madhaviya Shankaravijayam" states this temple had four doors for
scholars from the four cardinal directions. The southern door (representing
South India) had never been opened, indicating that no scholar from South India
had entered the Sarvajna Pitha. Adi Shankara opened the southern door by
defeating in debate all the scholars there in all the various scholastic
disciplines such as Mimamsa, Vedanta and other branches of Hindu philosophy; he
ascended the throne of Transcendent wisdom of that temple. Abhinavagupta
(approx. 950 - 1020 AD) was one of India's greatest philosophers, mystics and
aestheticians. He was also considered an important musician, poet, dramatist,
exeget, theologian, and logician - a polymathic personality who exercised
strong influences on Indian culture. He was born in the Valley of Kashmir in a
family of scholars and mystics and studied all the schools of philosophy and
art of his time under the guidance of as many as fifteen (or more) teachers and
gurus. In his long life he completed over 35 works, the largest and most famous
of which is TantrƒÅloka, an encyclopedic treatise on all the philosophical and
practical aspects of Trika and Kaula (known today as Kashmir Shaivism). Another
one of his very important contributions was in the field of philosophy of
aesthetics with his famous AbhinavabhƒÅratƒ´ commentary of NƒÅ·π≠ya≈õƒÅstra of
Bharata Muni. In the 10th century AD "Moksopaya" or "Moksopaya Shastra", a
philosophical text on salvation for non-ascetics ("moksa-upaya": 'means to
release'), was written on the Pradyumna hill in ≈örƒ´nagar. It has the form of
a public sermon and claims human authorship and contains about 30,000 shloka's
(making it longer than the "Ramayana"). The main part of the text forms a
dialogue between Vasistha and Rama, interchanged with numerous short stories
and anecdotes to illustrate the content. This text was later (11th to the 14th
century AD) expanded and vedanticized, which resulted in the "Yoga Vasistha".
Muslim rule. The Muslims and Hindus of Kashmir lived in relative harmony, since
the Sufi-Islamic way of life that Muslims followed in Kashmir complemented the
Rishi tradition of Kashmiri Pandits, and Sufi saints such as Sheikh Noor-ud-din
Wali were thought of as Muslim Rishis. This led to a syncretic culture where
Hindus and Muslims revered the same local saints and prayed at the same shrines
. Famous sufi saint Bulbul Shah was able to convert Rinchan to Islam and he
adopted the name of Sultan Sadruddin. Rinchan who was then prince of Kashgar
Ladakh to an Islamic lifestyle, thus founding the Sufiana composite culture.
Under this rule, Muslim, Hindu and Buddhist Kashmiris generally co-existed
peacefully. Over time, however, the Sufiana governance gave way to outright
Muslim monarchs. First Muslim ruler: Shah Mir Swati-Shams Al-Din. Shah Mir was
the First Muslim ruler of Kashmir and the founder of the Swati dynasty named
after him. Jonaraja, in his Rajatarangini mentioned him as Sahamera who was a
Pashtun from Swat region, the (then) tribal belt of Pakhtunkhwa province of
present day Pakistan. Shah Mir was succeeded by his eldest son Jamshid, but he
was deposed by his brother Ali Sher probably within few months, who ascended
the throne under the name of Alauddin Following the Shahmiri Dynasty, was the
Chak Dynasty that ruled until Mughal conquest in 1586. In his Book, the New
Islamic Dynasties, Clifford Edmond Bosworth has referred to the King as Shah
Mir Swati, Shams Al Din; p/310). Some Kashmiri rulers, such as Sultan Zain-ul-
Abidin who was popularly known as Budshah(ÿ®⁄àÿ¥ÿß€Å) (the King) (r.1423-1474),
were tolerant of all religions in a manner comparable to Akbar. However,
several Muslim rulers of Kashmir were intolerant of other religions. Sult√£n
Sikandar Butshikan of Kashmir (AD 1389-1413) is often considered the worst of
these. Historians have recorded many of his atrocities. The Tarikh-i-Firishta
records that Sikandar persecuted the Hindus and issued orders proscribing the
residence of any other than Muslims in Kashmir. He also ordered the breaking of
all "golden and silver images". The Tarikh-i-Firishta further states: "Many of
the Brahmins, rather than abandon their religion or their country, poisoned
themselves; some emigrated from their native homes, while a few escaped. After
the emigration of the Brahmins, Sikandar ordered all the temples in Kashmir to
be thrown down. Having broken all the images in Kashmir, (Sikandar) acquired
the title of 'Destroyer of Idols'." Kalhana's metrical chronicle of the kings
of Kashmir, called the "Rajatarangini," has been pronounced by Professor H. H.
Wilson to be the only Sanskrit composition yet discovered to which the
appellation "history" can with any propriety be applied. It first became known
to the Muslims when, on Akbar's invasion of Kashmir in 1588, a copy was
presented to the emperor. A translation into Persian was made at his order. A
summary of its contents, taken from this Persian translation, is given by Abul
Fazl in the "Ain-i-Akbari". The "Rajatarangini" was written around the middle
of the 12th century. His work, in six books, makes use of earlier writings that
are now lost. The "Rajatarangini" is the first of a series of four histories
that record the annals of Kashmir. Commencing with a rendition of traditional
history of very early times, the "Rajatarangini" comes down to the reign of
Sangrama Deva, ("c."1006 AD). The second work, by Jonaraja, continues the
history from where Kalhana left off, and, entering the Muslim period, gives an
account of the reigns down to that of Zain-ul-Abidin, 1412. Srivara carried on
the record to the accession of Fah Shah in 1486. The fourth work, called
"Rajavalipataka", by Prajnia Bhatta, completes the history to the time of the
incorporation of Kashmir in the dominions of the Mogul emperor Akbar, 1588.
Sikh rule. In 1819, the Kashmir valley passed from the control of the Durrani
Empire of Afghanistan, and four centuries of Muslim rule under the Mughals and
the Afghans, to the conquering armies of the Sikhs under Ranjit Singh of
Lahore. As the Kashmiris had suffered under the Afghans, they initially
welcomed the new Sikh rulers. However, the Sikh governors turned out to be hard
taskmasters, and Sikh rule was generally considered oppressive, protected
perhaps by the remoteness of Kashmir from the capital of the Sikh empire in
Lahore; The Sikhs enacted a number of anti-Muslim laws, which included handing
out death sentences for cow slaughter, closing down the Jamia Masjid in
Srinagar, and banning the "azaan", the public Muslim call to prayer. Kashmir
had also now begun to attract European visitors, several of whom wrote of the
abject poverty of the vast Muslim peasantry and of the exorbitant taxes under
the Sikhs. High taxes, according to some contemporary accounts, had depopulated
large tracts of the countryside, allowing only one-sixteenth of the cultivable
land to be cultivated. However, after a famine in 1832, the Sikhs reduced the
land tax to half the produce of the land and also began to offer interest-free
loans to farmers; Kashmir became the second highest revenue earner for the Sikh
empire. During this time Kashmiri shawls became known world wide, attracting
many buyers especially in the west. Earlier, in 1780, after the death of Ranjit
Deo, the Raja of Jammu, the kingdom of Jammu (to the south of the Kashmir
valley) was also captured by the Sikhs and afterwards, until 1846, became a
tributary to the Sikh power. Ranjit Deo's grandnephew, Gulab Singh,
subsequently sought service at the court of Ranjit Singh, distinguished himself
in later campaigns, especially the annexation of the Kashmir valley, and, for
his services, was appointed governor of Jammu in 1820. With the help of his
officer, Zorawar Singh, Gulab Singh soon captured for the Sikhs the lands of
Ladakh and Baltistan to the east and north-east, respectively, of Jammu.
Princely state. In 1845, the First Anglo-Sikh War broke out. According to the
Imperial Gazetteer of India, "Gulab Singh contrived to hold himself aloof till
the battle of Sobraon (1846), when he appeared as a useful mediator and the
trusted advisor of Sir Henry Lawrence. Two treaties were concluded. By the
first the State of Lahore (i.e. West Punjab) handed over to the British, as
equivalent for one crore indemnity, the hill countries between the rivers Beas
and Indus; by the second the British made over to Gulab Singh for 75 lakhs all
the hilly or mountainous country situated to the east of the Indus and the west
of the Ravi "i.e." the Vale of Kashmir)." Drafted by a treaty and a bill of
sale, and constituted between 1820 and 1858, the Princely State of Kashmir and
Jammu (as it was first called) combined disparate regions, religions, and
ethnicities: to the east, Ladakh was ethnically and culturally Tibetan and its
inhabitants practised Buddhism; to the south, Jammu had a mixed population of
Hindus, Muslims and Sikhs; in the heavily populated central Kashmir valley, the
population was overwhelmingly "Sunni" Muslim, however, there was also a small
but influential Hindu minority, the Kashmiri brahmins or pandits; to the
northeast, sparsely populated Baltistan had a population ethnically related to
Ladakh, but which practised "Shi'a" Islam; to the north, also sparsely
populated, Gilgit Agency, was an area of diverse, mostly "Shi'a" groups; and,
to the west, Punch was Muslim, but of different ethnicity than the Kashmir
valley. After the Indian Rebellion of 1857, in which Kashmir sided with the
British, and the subsequent assumption of direct rule by Great Britain, the
princely state of Kashmir came under the suzerainty of the British Crown. In
the British census of India of 1941, Kashmir registered a Muslim majority
population of 77%, a Hindu population of 20% and a sparse population of
Buddhists and Sikhs comprising the remaining 3%. That same year, Prem Nath
Bazaz, a Kashmiri Pandit journalist wrote: ‚ÄúThe poverty of the Muslim masses
is appalling. ... Most are landless laborers, working as serfs for absentee
landlords ... Almost the whole brunt of official corruption is borne by the
Muslim masses.‚Äù For almost a century until the census, a small Hindu elite
had ruled over a vast and impoverished Muslim peasantry. Driven into docility
by chronic indebtedness to landords and moneylenders, having no education
besides, nor awareness of rights, the Muslim peasants had no political
representation until the 1930s. 1947 and 1948. Ranbir Singh's grandson Hari
Singh, who had ascended the throne of Kashmir in 1925, was the reigning monarch
in 1947 at the conclusion of British rule of the subcontinent and the
subsequent partition of the British Indian Empire into the newly independent
Union of India and the Dominion of Pakistan. According to Burton Stein's
"History of India", Viscount Louis Mountbatten, the last Viceroy of British
India, stayed on in independent India from 1947 to 1948, serving as the first
Governor-General of the Union of India. for assistance, and the governor-
general agreed on the condition that the ruler accede to India. Indian soldiers
entered Kashmir and drove the Pakistani-sponsored irregulars from all but a
small section of the state. The United Nations was then invited to mediate the
quarrel. The UN mission insisted that the opinion of Kashmiris must be
ascertained, while India insisted that no referendum could occur until all of
the state had been cleared of irregulars." In the last days of 1948, a
ceasefire was agreed under UN auspices, but since the plebiscite demanded by
the UN was never conducted, relations between India and Pakistan soured, and
eventually led to two more wars over Kashmir in 1965 and 1999. India has
control of about half the area of the former princely state of Jammu and
Kashmir, while Pakistan controls a third of the region, the Northern Areas and
Azad Kashmir. According to Encyclop√¶dia Britannica, "Although there was a
clear Muslim majority in Kashmir before the 1947 partition and its economic,
cultural, and geographic contiguity with the Muslim-majority area of the Punjab
(in Pakistan) could be convincingly demonstrated, the political developments
during and after the partition resulted in a division of the region. Pakistan
was left with territory that, although basically Muslim in character, was
thinly populated, relatively inaccessible, and economically underdeveloped. The
largest Muslim group, situated in the Valley of Kashmir and estimated to number
more than half the population of the entire region, lay in Indian-administered
territory, with its former outlets via the Jhelum valley route blocked."
Current status and political divisions. The eastern region of the former
princely state of Kashmir has also been involved in a boundary dispute. In the
late 19th- and early 20th centuries, although some boundary agreements were
signed between Great Britain, Afghanistan and Russia over the northern borders
of Kashmir, China never accepted these agreements, and the official Chinese
position did not change with the communist revolution in 1949. By the mid-1950s
the Chinese army had entered the north-east portion of Ladakh. The region is
divided among three countries in a territorial dispute: Pakistan controls the
northwest portion (Northern Areas and Azad Kashmir), India controls the central
and southern portion (Jammu and Kashmir) and Ladakh, and China controls the
northeastern portion (Aksai Chin and the Trans-Karakoram Tract). India controls
the majority of the Siachen Glacier area including the Saltoro Ridge passes,
whereas Pakistan controls the lower territory just southwest of the Saltoro
Ridge. India controls of the disputed territory, Pakistan and China, the
remaining . Jammu and Pakistan administered Kashmir lie outside Pir Panjal
range, and are under Indian and Pakistani control respectively. These are
populous regions. The main cities are Mirpur, Dadayal, Kotli, Bhimber Jammu,
Muzaffarabad and Rawalakot. The Gilgit‚ÄìBaltistan, formerly called "Northern
Areas", are a group of territories in the extreme north, bordered by the
Karakoram, the western Himalayas, the Pamir, and the Hindu Kush ranges. With
its administrative center at the town of Gilgit, the Northern Areas cover an
area of 72,971¬ km¬≤ (28,174¬ mi¬≤) and have an estimated population
approaching 1,000,000. The other main city is Skardu. Ladakh is a region in the
east, between the Kunlun mountain range in the north and the main Great
Himalayas to the south. Main cities are Leh and Kargil. It is under Indian
administration and is part of the state of Jammu and Kashmir. It is one of the
most sparsely populated regions in the area and is mainly inhabited by people
of Indo-Aryan and Tibetan descent. Aksai Chin is a vast high-altitude desert of
salt that reaches altitudes up to . Geographically part of the Tibetan Plateau,
Aksai Chin is referred to as the Soda Plain. The region is almost uninhabited,
and has no permanent settlements. Though these regions are in practice
administered by their respective claimants, neither India nor Pakistan has
formally recognised the accession of the areas claimed by the other. India
claims those areas, including the area "ceded" to China by Pakistan in the
Trans-Karakoram Tract in 1963, are a part of its territory, while Pakistan
claims the entire region excluding Aksai Chin and Trans-Karakoram Tract. The
two countries have fought several declared wars over the territory. The Indo-
Pakistani War of 1947 established the rough boundaries of today, with Pakistan
holding roughly one-third of Kashmir, and India one-half, with a dividing line
of control established by the United Nations. The Indo-Pakistani War of 1965
resulted in a stalemate and a UN-negotiated ceasefire. Demographics. In the
1901 Census of the British Indian Empire, Muslims constituted 74.16% of the
total population of the princely state of "Kashmir and Jammu" where Gujjar
Muslims constitute 20% population, Hindus, 23.72%, and Buddhists, 1.21%. The
Hindus were found mainly in Jammu, where they constituted a little less than
70% of the population. In the Kashmir Valley, Muslims constituted 95.6% of the
population and Hindus 3.24%. These percentages have remained fairly stable for
the last 100 years. Forty years later, in the 1941 Census of British India,
Muslims accounted for 93.6% of the population of the Kashmir Valley and the
Hindus for 4%. In 2003, the percentage of Muslims in the Kashmir Valley was 95%
and those of Hindus 4%; the same year, in Jammu, the percentage of Hindus was
66% and those of Muslims 30%. In the 1901 Census of the British Indian Empire,
the population of the princely state of "Kashmir and Jammu" was 2,905,578. Of
these 2,154,695 were Muslims (74.16%), 689,073 Hindus (23.72%), 25,828 Sikhs,
and 35,047 Buddhists. Among the Muslims of the princely state, four divisions
were recorded: "Shaikhs, Saiyids, Mughals, and Pathans. The Shaikhs, who are by
far the most numerous, are the descendants of Hindus, but have retained none of
the caste rules of their forefathers. They have clan names known as "krams"
..." It was recorded that these "kram" names included "Tantre," "Shaikh,",
"Bhat", "Mantu," "Ganai," "Dar," "Damar," "Lon" etc. The Saiyids, it was
recorded "could be divided into those who follow the profession of religion and
those who have taken to agriculture and other pursuits. Their "kram" name is
"Mir." While a Saiyid retains his saintly profession Mir is a prefix; if he has
taken to agriculture, Mir is an affix to his name." The "Mughals" who were not
numerous were recorded to have "kram" names like "Mir" (a corruption of
"Mirza"), "Beg," "Bandi," "Bach," and "Ashaye." Finally, it was recorded that
the Pathans "who are more numerous than the Mughals, ... are found chiefly in
the south-west of the valley, where Pathan colonies have from time to time been
founded. The most interesting of these colonies is that of Kuki-Khel Afridis at
Dranghaihama, who retain all the old customs and speak Pashtu." Among the main
tribes of Muslims in the princely state are the Butts, Dar, Lone, Jat, Gujjar,
Rajput, Sudhan and Khatri. A small number of Butts, Dar and Lone use the title
Khawaja and the Khatri use the title Shaikh the Gujjar use the title of
Chaudhary. All these tribes are indigenous of the princely state and many
Hindus also belong to these tribes. The Hindus were found mainly in Jammu,
where they constituted a little less than 60% of the population. In the
"Kashmir Valley", the Hindus represented "524 in every 10,000 of the population
("i.e." 5.24%), and in the frontier "wazarats" of Ladhakh and Gilgit only 94
out of every 10,000 persons (0.94%)." In the same Census of 1901, in the
Kashmir Valley, the total population was recorded to be 1,157,394, of which the
Muslim population was 1,083,766, or 93.6% and the Hindu population 60,641.
Among the Hindus of "Jammu" province, who numbered 626,177 (or 90.87% of the
Hindu population of the princely state), the most important castes recorded in
the census were "Brahmans (186,000), the Rajputs (167,000), the Khattris
(48,000) and the Thakkars (93,000)." In the 1911 Census of the British Indian
Empire, the total population of "Kashmir and Jammu" had increased to 3,158,126.
Of these, 2,398,320 (75.94%) were Muslims, 696,830 (22.06%) Hindus, 31,658 (1%)
Sikhs, and 36,512 (1.16%) Buddhists. In the last census of British India in
1941, the total population of Kashmir and Jammu (which as a result of the
second world war, was estimated from the 1931 census) was 3,945,000. Of these,
the total Muslim population was 2,997,000 (75.97%), the Hindu population was
808,000 (20.48%), and the Sikh 55,000 (1.39%). The Kashmiri Pandits, the only
Hindus of the Kashmir valley, who had stably constituted approximately 4 to 5%
of the population of the valley during Dogra rule (1846‚Äì1947), and 20% of
whom had left the Kashmir valley by 1950, began to leave in much greater
numbers in the 1990s. According to a number of authors, approximately 100,000
of the total Kashmiri Pandit population of 140,000 left the valley during that
decade. Other authors have suggested a higher figure for the exodus, ranging
from the entire population of over 150,000, to 190,000 of a total Pandit
population of 200,000, to a number as high as 300,000. Culture and cuisine.
Kashmiri cuisine includes dum aloo (boiled potatoes with heavy amounts of
spice), tzaman (a solid cottage cheese), rogan josh (lamb cooked in heavy
spices), yakhiyn (lamb cooked in curd with mild spices), hakh (a spinach-like
leaf), rista-gushtaba (minced meat balls in tomato and curd curry),danival
korme and of course the signature rice which is particular to Asian cultures.
The traditional wazwan feast involves cooking meat or vegetables, usually
mutton, in several different ways. Alcohol is strictly prohibited in most
places. There are two styles of making tea in the region: Noon Chai, or salt
tea, which is pink in colour (known as chinen posh rang or peach flower colour)
and popular with locals; and kahwah, a tea for festive occasions, made with
saffron and spices (cardamom, cinamon,sugar, noon chai leaves), and black tea.
Economy. Kashmir's economy is centred around agriculture. Traditionally the
staple crop of the valley was rice, which formed the chief food of the people.
In addition, Indian corn, wheat, barley and oats were also grown. Given its
temperate climate, it is suited for crops like asparagus, artichoke, seakale,
broad beans, scarletrunners, beetroot, cauliflower and cabbage. Fruit trees are
common in the valley, and the cultivated orchards yield pears, apples, peaches,
and cherries. The chief trees are deodar, firs and pines, chenar or plane,
maple, birch and walnut, apple, cherry. Historically, Kashmir became known
worldwide when Cashmere wool was exported to other regions and nations (exports
have ceased due to decreased abundance of the cashmere goat and increased
competition from China). Kashmiris are well adept at knitting and making
Pashmina shawls, silk carpets, rugs, kurtas, and pottery. Saffron, too, is
grown in Kashmir. Efforts are on to export the naturally grown fruits and
vegetables as organic foods mainly to the Middle East. Srinagar is known for
its silver-work, papier mache, wood-carving, and the weaving of silk. The
economy was badly damaged by the 2005 Kashmir earthquake which, as of October
8, 2005, resulted in over 70,000 deaths in the Pakistan-controlled part of
Kashmir and around 1,500 deaths in Indian controlled Kashmir. The Indian-
administered portion of Kashmir is believed to have potentially rich rocks
containing hydrocarbon reserves. Transport. Transport is predominantly by air
or road vehicles in the region. Kashmir has a long modern railway line that
started in October 2009 and connects Baramulla in the western part of Kashmir
to Srinagar and Qazigund. It will link the Kashmir to Banihal across the Pir
Panjal mountains through the Banihal rail tunnel in 2013 and to the rest of
India in another few years as the construction of the railway line from Jammu
to Banihal progresses steadily. History of tourism in Kashmir. The state of
Jammu & Kashmir is a region of widely varying people and geography. In the
south, Jammu is a transition zone from the Indian plains to the Himalaya .
Nature has lavishly endowed Kashmir with certain distinctive favors which
hardly find a parallel in any alpine land of the world. It is the land of snow
clad mountains that shares a common boundary with Afghanistan, China and
Pakistan, Jammu and Kashmir is the northernmost state of the Indian Union.
Known for its extravagant natural beauty this land formed a major caravan route
in the ancient times. Trade relations through these routes between China and
Central Asia made it a land inhabited by various religious and cultural groups.
It was during the reign of Kashyapa that the various wandering groups led a
settled life Buddhism influenced Kashmir during the rule of Ashoka and the
present town of Srinagar was founded by him. This place was earlier called
'Srinagari' or Purandhisthan. The Brahmins who inhabited these areas admired
and adorned Buddhism too. From the regions of Kashmir Buddhism spread of
Ladakh, Tibet, Central Asia and China. Various traditions co-existed till the
advent of the Muslims. The Mughal had a deep influence on this land and
introduced various reforms in the revenue industry and other areas that added
to the progress of Kashmir. In 1820 Maharaj Gulab Singh got the Jagir of Jammu
from Maharaj Ranjit Sigh. He is said to have laid the foundation of the Dogra
dynasty. In 1846 Kashmir was sold to Maharaj Gulab Singh. Thus the two areas of
Kashmir and Jammu were integrated into a single political unit. A few
chieftains who formed part of the administration were of the Hunza, Kishtwar,
Gilgit Ladakh. During the Dogra dynasty trade improved, along with the
preservation and promotion of forestry.
