Laura Schlessinger Laura Catherine Schlessinger (born January 16, 1947) is an
American talk radio host, socially conservative commentator and author. Her
radio program consists mainly of her responses to callers' requests for
personal advice and has occasionally featured her short monologues on social
and political topics. Her website says that her show "preaches, teaches, and
nags about morals, values and ethics". Previously, Schlessinger combined a
local radio career with a private practice as a marriage and family counselor,
but after going into national syndication she concentrated her efforts on the
daily "The Dr. Laura Program", and on authoring self-help books. The books "Ten
Stupid Things Women Do to Mess Up Their Lives", and "The Proper Care and
Feeding of Husbands" are among her bestselling works. A short-lived television
talk show hosted by Schlessinger was launched in 2000. In August 2010, she
announced that she would end her syndicated radio show in December 2010. Her
show moved to Sirius XM Radio's Sirius XM Stars on January 3, 2011.
Schlessinger announced a "multi-year" deal to be on satellite radio. Early life
and education. Schlessinger was born in Brooklyn, New York, and raised in
Brooklyn and on Long Island. Her parents were Monroe (Monty) Schlessinger, a
civil engineer of Jewish heritage, and Yolanda Ceccovini Schlessinger, an
Italian-Catholic war bride. Schlessinger has said her father was charming and
her mother beautiful as a young woman. She has a sister, Cindy, who is eleven
years younger. Schlessinger has described her childhood environment as unloving
and unpleasant, and her family as dysfunctional. She has ascribed some of the
difficulty to extended family rejection of her parents' mixed faith Jewish-
Catholic marriage. Schlessinger said her father was "petty, insensitive, mean,
thoughtless, demeaning and downright unloving". She described her mother as
person with "pathological pride", who "was never grateful", who "would always
find something to criticize," and who "constantly expressed disdain for men,
sex and love". She credited her father with giving her the drive to succeed.
Schlessinger attended Westbury High School and Jericho High School where she
showed an interest in science. She received a bachelor's degree from Stony
Brook University. Moving to Columbia University for graduate studies, she
earned a Master's and Ph.D. in physiology in 1974. Her doctoral thesis was on
insulin's effects on laboratory rats. After she began dispensing personal
advice on the radio, she obtained training and certification in marriage and
family counseling from the University of Southern California, and a therapist's
license from the State of California. In addition, she opened up a part-time
practice as a marriage and family counselor. Radio career. Schlessinger's first
appearance on radio was in 1975 when she called into a KABC show hosted by Bill
Ballance. Impressed by her quick wit and sense of humor, Ballance began
featuring her in a weekly segment. Schlessinger's stint on Ballance's show led
to her own shows on a series of small radio stations. By 1979 she was on the
air Sunday evenings from 9:00 to midnight on KWIZ in Santa Ana, California.
That year, the "Los Angeles Times" described her show as dealing with all types
of emotional problems, "though sex therapy is the show's major focus". In the
late 1980s, Schlessinger was filling in for Barbara De Angelis' noon-time
relationship-oriented talk show in Los Angeles on KFI, while working weekends
at KGIL in San Fernando. Her big break came when Sally Jessy Raphael began
working at ABC Radio, and Maurice Tunick, former Vice-President of Talk
Programming for the ABC Radio Networks, needed a regular sub for Raphael's
evening personal advice show. Tunick chose Schlessinger to fill in for Raphael.
Ultimately, Schlessinger began broadcasting a daily show on KFI which was
nationally syndicated in 1994 by Synergy, a company owned by Schlessinger and
her husband. In 1997, Synergy sold its rights to the show to Jacor
Communications, Inc., for $71.5 million. Later, Jacor merged with Clear Channel
Communications and a company co-owned by Schlessinger, Take On The Day, LLC,
acquired the production rights. The show became a joint effort between Take On
The Day, which produced it, Talk Radio Network, which syndicated and marketed
it to radio stations, and Premiere Radio Networks, (a subsidiary of Clear
Channel), which provided satellite facilities and handled advertising sales. As
of September 2009, Schlessinger broadcast from her home in Santa Barbara,
California with KFWB as her flagship station. Podcasts and live streams of the
show have been available on her website for a monthly fee, and the show was
also on XM Satellite Radio. In May 2002, the show still had an audience of more
than 10 million, but had lost several million listeners in the previous two
years as it was dropped by WABC and other affiliates, and was moved from day to
night in cities such as Seattle and Boston. These losses were attributed in
part to Schlessinger's shift from giving relationship advice to lecturing on
morality and conservative politics. Pressure from gay rights groups caused
dozens of sponsors to drop the radio show as well. In 2006, Schlessinger's show
was being aired on approximately 200 stations. As of 2009, it was tied for
third place along with "The Glenn Beck Program" and "The Savage Nation".
Schlessinger used "Hot Talkin' Big Shot", a song by country and blues singer
and songwriter Nikki Hornsby, for several years as cue music for her radio
program and for a national radio commercial advertising for the show. On August
17, 2010, during an appearance on "Larry King Live", Schlessinger announced the
end of her radio show saying that her motivation was to "regain her First
Amendment rights", and that she wanted to be able to say what is on her mind
without "some special interest group deciding this is a time to silence a voice
of dissent." Several of her affiliates and major sponsors had dropped her show
after her on air use of a racial epithet on August 10. On January 3, 2011,
Schlessinger's show moved exclusively to Sirius XM Radio. Television show. In
2000, Schlessinger signed a deal with Paramount Domestic Television to produce
a syndicated talk show, which would be carried mainly by television stations
owned and operated by CBS. The producers hoped to extend the success of
Schlessinger's radio show to daytime television, however, the show was
controversial before it ever aired, and it proved to be short-lived. In the
months before the premiere of her TV show, Schlessinger called homosexuality a
"biological error", said that homosexuality was acceptable as long as it was
not public, and said that homosexuals should not attempt to adopt children. She
regularly compared gay parenting to pedophilia by reiterating her view that "a
huge portion of the male homosexual populace is predatory on young boys."
Schlessinger was frequently criticized in lesbian, gay, bisexual, and
transsexual (LGBT) media for these views. Gay & Lesbian Alliance Against
Defamation (GLAAD), an LGBT media watchdog group, began monitoring
Schlessinger's on-air comments about LGBT people, posting transcripts of
relevant shows on its website. In March 2000, a group of gay activists launched
StopDrLaura.com, an online campaign with the purpose of convincing Paramount to
cancel the Dr. Laura television show prior to its premiere. The group protested
at Paramount studios, stating her views were offensively bigoted.
StopDrLaura.com eventually organized protests in 34 cities in the U.S. and
Canada, and picked up on an advertiser boycott of both the radio and the TV
shows started by another grass-roots organization which called itself "Silence
Of The Slams" operating its boycott through AOL Hometown. The first episode of
Schlessinger's television show aired September 11, 2000. Critics and viewers
complained that the format had been dumbed down and did not stand out from any
other daytime talk show. The biting rhetoric that worked well on radio seemed
overly harsh for face-to-face discourse, owing to the normal sympathetic nature
of most other daytime hosts; the radical change in Schlessinger's demeanor from
her radio persona left viewers cold. Ultimately, the television show failed to
generate the energy and interest of Schlessinger's radio show. The credibility
of Schlessinger's television program also suffered during its first month when
the "New York Post" reported that Schlessinger had used show staff to falsely
pose as guests on the show. A September 25, 2000, episode named "Readin',
Writin', and Cheatin'" featured a so-called college student who specialized in
professional note-taking. On the next day's show, "Getting to the Altar," the
same guest appeared in different hair and makeup and said she was a woman
living with her boyfriend. In fact, the woman was San-D Duchas, a researcher
for the show whose name appeared in the closing credits of the shows on which
she posed as a guest. Apparently, Schlessinger was unaware of this incident
until it was disclosed by the Post, and immediately put a stop to any further
use of this practice. By November 2000, advertisers that had originally
committed to Schlessinger's show left, and the ratings plummeted. CBS directed
its stations to move the show to a late-night slot or replace it altogether.
Other stations outside of CBS did the same thing, while others moved it to
weaker sister stations. The television show was cancelled in March 2001 and
last aired in September 2001. In 2004, Schlessinger said that although there is
more money and celebrity in television, it is not as meaningful or intimate as
radio, and for her television was a "terrible experience". Publications.
Columns. For several years, Schlessinger wrote a weekly column syndicated by
Universal Press Syndicate that was carried in many newspapers, as well as
"Jewish World Review". She discontinued the column in July 2000, citing lack of
time due to her upcoming television show. She wrote a monthly column for
"WorldNetDaily" between 2002 and 2004, with one entry in 2006. In 2006,
Schlessinger joined the "Santa Barbara News-Press", writing bi-weekly columns
dealing with Santa Barbara news, as well as general news and cultural issues
discussed on her radio show. She suspended the column in mid 2007, resumed
writing it later, then discontinued it in December 2008. She currently writes
columns on her blog, on a variety of topics. Books. Schlessinger has written
thirteen books for adults and four for children. Several follow the mold of her
successful "Ten Stupid Things Women Do to Mess Up Their Lives", with similarly
named books giving advice for men, couples, and parents, while others are more
moral in orientation. Her 2004 book, "The Proper Care and Feeding of Husbands",
sold well despite poor reviews by critics. It was a departure from her previous
books, which tended to focus on premarital relationships and children. "Proper
Care" asserts that men need direct communication, respect, appreciation, food,
and good loving, rather than tearing down the husband's sense of strength and
importance. Schlessinger's thesis is that wives have the power to change their
husbands' attitudes by seeing to these needs, and then their husbands will
"swim across shark-infested waters to bring you a lemonade." The book proposes
that wives have the power to promote devotion, compassion, and love from their
husbands. Magazine. For several years, Schlessinger published a monthly
magazine, "Dr. Laura Perspective". She was the editor, her husband a
contributing photographer, and her son the creative consultant. The magazine
has since gone out of publication. Website. Schlessinger has a website which
contains hints for stay-at-home parents, her blog, a reading list, and
streaming audio of her shows (by subscription only). When it was started,
310,000 people tried to access it simultaneously and it crashed. Certain
aspects of feminism are often discussed on her website; she was a self-
proclaimed feminist in the 1970s, but is now opposed to feminism. Charitable
work. Schlessinger created the Laura Schlessinger Foundation to help abused and
neglected children in 1998. Schlessinger regularly asked her on-air audience to
donate items for "My Stuff" bags, which go to children in need. All other
donations came from other people or groups, usually in the form of donated
items for the bags. Per the foundation's reports, money not used for operations
was directed toward pro-life organizations, such as crisis pregnancy centers.
In September 2004, Schlessinger announced that she was closing down the
foundation because it had become too difficult and costly for her and her
husband to underwrite, and they wished to devote their "energies and resources
to other pressing needs". In 2007, Schlessinger began fundraising for Operation
Family Fund, an organization which aids the families of fallen or seriously
injured veterans of the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq. In 2008, she helped raise
more than $1 million dollars for the organization. Awards. Schlessinger has
received numerous awards from both media and conservative organizations. She
was the first woman to win the Marconi Award for Network/Syndicated Personality
of the Year (1997). In 1998 she received the American Women in Radio &
Television's Genii Award. She was on the Forbes top 100 list of celebrities in
2000 with estimated earnings of $13 million. In September 2002, the industry
magazine "Talkers" named Schlessinger as the seventh-greatest radio talk show
host of all time. In 2005 and 2008, she was nominated for induction into the
National Radio Hall of Fame, but was not selected. Schlessinger received a
National Heritage award from the National Council of Young Israel in March
2001. She also received the National Religious Broadcasters Chairman's Award,
and has lectured on the national conservative circuit. She was the commencement
speaker at Hillsdale College in June 2002, and was awarded an honorary degree
as a doctor of tradition and culture. In 2007, Schlessinger was given an
Exceptional Public Service award by the Office of the U.S. Secretary of
Defense. In 2008, Talkers Magazine presented her with an award for outstanding
community service by a radio talk show host. Religious beliefs. Schlessinger
was non-religious until she and her son began practicing Conservative Judaism
in 1996. In 1998, Schlessinger, Bishop, and their son converted to Orthodox
Judaism, and began instruction under Rabbi Reuven P. Bulka of Ottawa, Ontario.
During this time, Schlessinger sometimes used Jewish law and examples to advise
her callers about their moral dilemmas. She occasionally clarified ethical and
moral issues with her local Orthodox Rabbi Moshe D. Bryski, before mentioning
them on the air. She was embraced by many in the politically conservative
segment of Orthodox Judaism for bringing more awareness of Orthodoxy to her
radio show. Some of her expressed views were explicitly religious, and are
referenced her 1999 book "The Ten Commandments: The Significance of God's Laws
in Everyday Life". Although her other books have stressed the importance of
morality, they are more secular in nature. In July 2003, Schlessinger announced
on her show that she was no longer an Orthodox Jew. Marriage and family life.
Schlessinger met and married Michael F. Rudolph, a dentist, in 1972 while she
was attending Columbia University. The couple had a Unitarian ceremony.
Separating from Rudolph, Schlessinger moved to Encino, California in 1975 when
she obtained a job in the science department at the University of Southern
California. Their divorce was finalized in 1977. In 1975, while working in the
labs at USC, she met Lewis G. Bishop, a professor of neurophysiology who was
married and the father of three children. Bishop separated from his wife and
began living with Schlessinger the same year. Schlessinger has vociferously
proclaimed her disapproval of unwed couples "shacking up" and having children
out of wedlock. But according to personal friend, Shelly Herman, "Laura lived
with Lew for about nine years before she was married to him." "His divorce was
final in 1979. Bishop and Schlessinger married in 1985. Herman says that
Schlessinger told her she was pregnant at the time, which Herman recalls as "
particularly joyful because of the happy news." Schlessinger's only child, a
son named Deryk, was born in November 1985. Schlessinger was estranged from her
sister for years, and many thought she was an only child. She had not spoken to
her mother for 18 to 20 years before her mother's death in 2002 from heart
disease. Her mother's remains were found in her Beverly Hills condo
approximately two months after she died, and lay unclaimed for some time in the
Los Angeles morgue before Schlessinger had them picked up for burial.
Concerning the day that she heard about her mother’s death, she said:
“Apparently she had no friends and none of her neighbors were close, so
nobody even noticed! How sad.” In 2006, Schlessinger wrote that she had been
attacked in a "vulgar, inhumane manner by media types" because of the
circumstances surrounding her mother's death, and that false allegations had
been made that she was unfit to dispense advice based on family values. She
said that she had not mourned the deaths of either of her parents because she
had no emotional bond to them. Controversies. Libel lawsuit. In 1998,
Schlessinger was in a Costa Mesa surf shop with her son when she began perusing
the skateboarding magazine, "Big Brother". On her radio program, Schlessinger
declared the magazine to be "stealth pornography." When the owner of the store
publicly denied that she found pornography in his store, Schlessinger sued him
for lying, claiming that his denial had hurt her reputation. When the case went
to court, the judge dismissed her suit, but the shop owner's $4 million
defamation countersuit lodged for hurting the reputation of his store was
allowed to stand. The suit has since been settled, but the terms of the
settlement have not been revealed. Internet publication of nude photos. In
1998, Schlessinger's early radio mentor, Bill Ballance, sold nude photos that
he had taken of Schlessinger in the mid-1970s to a company specializing in
internet porn. The photos were taken while Schlessinger was involved in a brief
affair with then-married Bill Ballance. Schlessinger sued after the photos were
posted on the internet, claiming invasion of privacy and copyright violation.
The court ruled that Schlessinger did not own the rights to the photos; she did
not appeal the ruling. She told her radio audience that she was embarrassed,
but that the photos were taken when she was going through a divorce and had "no
moral authority." Repeated use of the word "nigger". On August 10, 2010, Nita
Hanson, an African-American woman married to a white man, called Schlessinger's
show to ask for advice on dealing with racial comments made by acquaintances.
During the call, Schlessinger used the word "nigger" eleven times. When Hanson
asked, "Is it ever OK to say that word?," Schlessinger responded, "It depends
how it’s said. Black guys talking to each other seem to think it’s OK."
After the call Schlessinger said, "If you're that hypersensitive about color
and don't have a sense of humor, don't marry out of your race." Immediately
after that call, she took herself off the air, and early that evening wrote an
apology to Los Angeles Radio People online journalist Don Barrett to post on
his now-defunct website. A day later, as soon as she was back on the air,
Schlessinger apologized. Hanson questioned the motivation and sincerity of
Schlessinger's apology, believing it to be result of being "caught". Hanson
also said that Schlessinger did not apologize for her comments on interracial
marriage. Schlessinger announced she would end her radio show at the end of
2010: Schlessinger said that she will not retire. Bibliography. Children's
books Fictional portrayals. In 1999, Schlessinger was parodied as "Dr. Nora" on
the sitcom "Frasier". The character was portrayed as having dogmatic and
fundamentalist social views that promoted social conservatism. The character
was also shown to have a degree that belies her therapeutic advice and was
estranged from her mother. In 2000, in the episode The Midterms on "The West
Wing", the fictional "Dr. Jenna Jacobs" is scolded by President Bartlet, who
criticizes her views on homosexuality, and points out she is not a doctor in
any field related to morality, ethics, or theology. He quotes from the Bible to
point out the inconsistency of condemning certain sins but not others. Show
creator Aaron Sorkin admitted to modeling Bartlet's diatribe on an anonymous
"Letter to Dr. Laura," which was a popular viral email at the time.
Schlessinger is featured as an antagonist in the animated series "Queer Duck".
