Lebanon Lebanon ( or ; or , Lebanese Arabic: ), officially the Lebanese
Republic ( , Lebanese Arabic: ), is a country in the East Mediterranean. It is
bordered by Syria to the north and east and Israel to the south. Lebanon's
location at the crossroads of the Mediterranean Basin and the Arabian
hinterland has dictated its rich history and shaped a cultural identity of
religious and ethnic diversity. The earliest evidence of civilization in
Lebanon dates back more than seven thousand years, predating recorded history.
Lebanon was the home of the Phoenicians, a maritime culture that flourished for
over two and a half thousand years (c.8000‚Äì539 BC). Following the collapse of
the Ottoman Empire after World War I, the five provinces that constitute modern
Lebanon were mandated to France. The French expanded the borders of Mount
Lebanon, which was mostly populated by Maronites and Druze, to include more
Muslims. Lebanon gained independence in 1943, establishing a unique political
system"confessionalism"that is a power-sharing mechanism based on religious
communities. Bechara El Khoury (independent Lebanon's first President) and Riad
El-Solh (Lebanon's first Prime Minister) are considered the founders of the
modern Republic of Lebanon and are national heroes for having led the country's
independence. French troops withdrew from Lebanon in 1946. Before the Lebanese
Civil War (1975‚Äì1990), the country experienced a period of relative calm and
prosperity, driven by tourism, agriculture, and banking. Because of its
financial power and diversity, Lebanon was known in its heyday as the
"Switzerland of the East". It attracted large numbers of tourists, such that
the capital Beirut was referred to as "Paris of the Middle East." At the end of
the war, there were extensive efforts to revive the economy and rebuild
national infrastructure. Etymology. The name "Lebanon" comes from the Semitic
root "LBN", meaning "white", likely a reference to the snow-capped Mount
Lebanon. Occurrences of the name have been found in different texts from the
library of Ebla, which date to the third millennium BC, nearly 70 times in the
Hebrew Bible, and three of the twelve tablets of the Epic of Gilgamesh (perhaps
as early as 2100 BC). The name is recorded in Ancient Egyptian as "Rmnn", where
"R" stood for Canaanite "L". History. Ancient history. Evidence of an early
settlement in Lebanon was found in Byblos, which is considered to be one of the
oldest continuously inhabited cities in the world, and date back to earlier
than 5000 BC. Archaeologists discovered remnants of prehistoric huts with
crushed limestone floors, primitive weapons, and burial jars left by the
Neolithic and Chalcolithic fishing communities who lived on the shore of the
Mediterranean Sea over 7,000 years ago. Lebanon was a part of northern Canaan,
and consequently became the homeland of Canaanite descendants - the
Phoenicians, a seafaring people that spread across the Mediterranean before the
rise of Cyrus the Great. Their most famous colonies were Carthage in today‚Äôs
Tunisia and Cadiz in today‚Äôs Spain. The Phoenicians are best known as the
inventors of the alphabet, among many other things. After two centuries of
Persian rule, Macedonian ruler Alexander the Great attacked and burned Tyre,
the most prominent Phoenician city. Throughout the subsequent centuries leading
up to recent times, the country became part of numerous succeeding empires,
among them Egyptian Empire, Persian, Assyrian, Hellenistic, Roman, Eastern
Roman, Arab, Seljuk, Mamluk, the Crusader's state of County of Tripoli founded
by Raymond IV of Toulouse that encompassed most of present day Lebanon, and the
Ottoman Empire. Ottoman Era and French mandate. In 1590, Fakhr-al-Din II became
successor to Korkmaz. He was a skilled politician and described as a pupil of
Machiavelli. Fakhr-al-Din II adjusted to the lifestyles of the Druze,
Christianity and Islam, according to his needs. He paid tribute to the
Sultanate of the Ottoman Empire and shared the spoils of war with his masters.
Eventually, Fakhr-al-Din II was appointed Sultan of Mt. Lebanon, with full
authority. He was considered one of the greatest rulers of the region, also
across the Middle of Lebanon. But, his enemies and governors angered the
Ottoman Sultanate. Hence, a campaign, calling for the arrest of Fakhr-al-Din
II, found the deposed leader in Istanbul, where he was executed by hanging.
Shortly afterwards, the Emirate of Mt. Lebanon that lasted more than 500 years
was replaced, instead of the emirate meteor. Approximately 10,000 Christians
were killed by the Druzes in 1860. Lebanon was part of the Ottoman Empire for
over 400 years, until 1918 when the area became a part of the French influence,
following World War I. By the end of the war, famine had killed an estimated
100,000 people in Beirut and Mount Lebanon, about 30% of the total population.
In the first half of 1920, Lebanese territory was claimed as part of the Arab
Kingdom of Syria, but shortly the Franco-Syrian War resulted in Arab defeat and
capitulation of the Hashemites. On 1 September 1920, France reestablished
Greater Lebanon after the Moutasarrifiya rule removed several regions belonging
to the Principality of Lebanon and gave them to Syria. Lebanon was a largely
Christian country (mainly Maronite territory with some Greek Orthodox enclaves)
but it also included areas containing many Muslims (including Druze). On 1
September 1926, France formed the Lebanese Republic. A constitution was adopted
on 25 May 1926 establishing a democratic republic with a parliamentary system
of government. Post-independence. Lebanon gained independence in 1943, while
France was occupied by Germany. General Henri Dentz, the Vichy High
Commissioner for Syria and Lebanon, played a major role in the independence of
the nation. The Vichy authorities in 1941 allowed Germany to move aircraft and
supplies through Syria to Iraq where they were used against British forces. The
United Kingdom, fearing that Nazi Germany would gain full control of Lebanon
and Syria by pressure on the weak Vichy government, sent its army into Syria
and Lebanon. After the fighting ended in Lebanon, General Charles de Gaulle
visited the area. Under political pressure from both inside and outside
Lebanon, de Gaulle recognized the independence of Lebanon. On 26 November 1941
General Georges Catroux announced that Lebanon would become independent under
the authority of the Free French government. Elections were held in 1943 and on
8 November 1943 the new Lebanese government unilaterally abolished the mandate.
The French reacted by throwing the new government into prison. In the face of
international pressure, the French released the government officials on 22
November 1943 and recognized the independence of Lebanon. The allies kept the
region under control until the end of World War II. The last French troops
withdrew in 1946. Lebanon's unwritten National Pact of 1943 required that its
president be Maronite Christian, its speaker of the parliament to be a Shiite
Muslim, its prime minister be Sunni Muslim, and the Deputy Speaker of
Parliament and the Deputy Prime Minister be Greek Orthodox. Lebanon's history
since independence has been marked by alternating periods of political
stability and turmoil (including a civil conflict in 1958) interspersed with
prosperity built on Beirut's position as a regional center for finance and
trade. In May 1948, Lebanon supported neighbouring Arab countries against
Israel. While some irregular forces crossed the border and carried out minor
skirmishes against Israel, it was without the support of the Lebanese
government, and Lebanese troops did not officially invade. Lebanon agreed to
support the forces with covering artillery fire, armored cars, volunteers and
logistical support. On 5‚Äì6 June 1948, the Lebanese army captured Al-Malkiyya.
This was Lebanon's only success in the war. During the war, some 100,000
Palestinians fled to Lebanon, while Israel did not permit their return at the
end of hostilities. Palestinians, previously prevented from working at all due
to denial of citizenship, are now forbidden to work in some 20 professions
after liberalization laws. Today, more than 400,000 refugees remain in limbo,
about half in camps. With the defeat of PLO in Jordan, many Palestinian
militants relocated to Lebanon, increasing their Armed resistance against the
occupation in Israel. The relocation of Palestinian bases also led to
increasing sectarian tensions between Palestinians vs. the Maronites and other
Lebanese factions. Civil war and occupation. In 1975, following increasing
sectarian tensions, a full scale civil war broke out in Lebanon. The Lebanese
Civil War lasted fifteen years, devastating the country's economy, and
resulting in massive loss of human life and property. It is estimated that
150,000 people were killed and another 200,000 wounded. Some 900,000 people,
representing one-fifth of the pre-war population, were displaced from their
homes. The war ended in 1990 with the signing of the Taif Agreement and parts
of Lebanon were left in ruins. Following the civil war, the Syrian occupation
of Lebanon continued until 2005, while Israel remained in control of Southern
Lebanon until 2000, when Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak led its full
withdrawal driven by a belief that the violence would diminish and dissolve
without the Israeli presence in Lebanon. Hezbollah, however declared that it
would not stop its operations against Israel until this area was liberated.
21st century. The internal political situation in Lebanon significantly changed
in early 2000s. After the Israeli withdrawal from southern Lebanon and the
death of Hafez Al-Assad in 2000, the Syrian military presence faced criticism
and resistance from the Lebanese population. On 14 February 2005, former Prime
Minister Rafik Hariri was assassinated in a car bomb explosion. Leaders of the
March 14 Alliance accused Syria of the attack, while the March 8 Alliance and
Syrian officials claimed that the Mossad was behind the assassination. The UNSC
Resolution 1595 called for an investigation into the assassination. The UN
International Independent Investigation Commission published its preliminary
findings on 20 October 2005 in the Mehlis report, which cited indications that
high-ranking members of the Syrian and Lebanese governments were involved in
the assassination. The assassination triggered the Cedar Revolution, a series
of demonstrations which demanded the withdrawal of Syrian troops from Lebanon
and the establishment of an international commission to investigate the
assassination. Under pressure from the West, Syria began withdrawing, and by 26
April 2005 all Syrian soldiers had returned to Syria. The Hariri assassination
marked the beginning of a series of assassinations that resulted in the death
of many prominent Lebanese figures. On 12 July 2006, Hezbollah launched a
series of rocket attacks and raids into Israeli territory, where they killed
three Israeli soldiers and captured a further two. Israel responded with
airstrikes and artillery fire on targets in Lebanon, and a ground invasion of
southern Lebanon, resulting in the 2006 Lebanon War. The conflict was
officially ended by the UNSC Resolution 1701 on 14 August 2006, which ordered a
ceasefire. Some 1,191 Lebanese and 160 Israelis were killed in the conflict.
Beirut's southern suburb was heavily damaged by Israeli airstrikes where
Hezbollah military infrastructure was deeply embedded among the civilian
population. In 2007, the Nahr al-Bared refugee camp became the center of the
2007 Lebanon conflict between the Lebanese Army and Fatah al-Islam. At least
169 soldiers, 287 insurgents and 47 civilians were killed in the battle. Funds
for the reconstruction of the area have been slow to materialize. Between 2006
and 2008, a series of protests led by groups opposed to the pro-Western Prime
Minister Fouad Siniora demanded the creation of a national unity government,
over which the mostly Shia opposition groups would have veto power. When √âmile
Lahoud's presidential term ended in October 2007, the opposition refused to
vote for a successor unless a power-sharing deal was reached, leaving Lebanon
without a president. On 9 May 2008, Hezbollah and Amal forces, sparked by a
government declaration that Hezbollah's communications network was illegal,
seized western Beirut, leading to the 2008 conflict in Lebanon. The Lebanese
government denounced the violence as a coup attempt. At least 62 people died in
the resulting clashes between pro-government and opposition militias. On 21 May
2008, the signing of the Doha Agreement ended the fighting. As part of the
accord, which ended 18 months of political paralysis, Michel Suleiman became
president and a national unity government was established, granting a veto to
the opposition. The agreement was a victory for opposition forces, as the
government caved in to all their main demands. In early January 2011, the
national unity government collapsed due to growing tensions stemming from the
Special Tribunal for Lebanon, which was expected to indict Hezbollah members
for the Hariri assassination. The parliament elected Najib Mikati, the
candidate for the Hezbollah-led March 8 Alliance, Prime Minister of Lebanon,
making him responsible for forming a new government. Hezbollah leader Hassan
Nasrallah insists that Israel was responsible for the assassination of Hariri.
A report leaked by the Al-Akhbar newspaper in November 2010 stated that
Hezbollah has drafted plans for a takeover of the country in the case an
indictment against its members is issued by the Special Tribunal for Lebanon.
The 2012 Syrian civil war threatens to spill over in Lebanon, causing more
incidents of sectarian violence and armed clashes between Sunnis and Alawites
in Tripoli. Geography. Lebanon is located in Western Asia between latitudes
33¬∞ and 35¬∞ N, and longitudes 35¬∞ and 37¬∞ E. The country's surface area is
of which is land. Lebanon has a coastline and border of on the Mediterranean
sea to the west, a border shared with Syria to the north and east and a long
border with Israel to the south. The border with the Israeli-occupied Golan
Heights is disputed by Lebanon in a small area called Shebaa Farms. Lebanon is
divided into four distinct physiographic regions: the coastal plain, the
Lebanon mountain range, the Beqaa valley and the Anti-Lebanon mountains. The
narrow and discontinuous coastal plain stretches from the Syrian border in the
north where it widens to form the Akkar plain to Ras al-Naqoura at the border
with Israel in the south. The fertile coastal plain is formed of marine
sediments and river deposited alluvium alternating with sandy bays and rocky
beaches. The Lebanon mountains rise steeply parallel to the Mediterranean coast
and form a ridge of limestone and sandstone that runs for most of the country's
length. The mountain range varies in width between 10¬ km and 56¬ km; it is
carved by narrow and deep gorges. The Lebanon mountains peak at above sea level
in Qurnat as Sawda' in North Lebanon and gradually slope to the south before
rising again to a height of in Mount Sannine. The Beqaa valley sits between the
Lebanon mountains in the west and the Anti-Lebanon range in the east; it's a
part of the Great Rift Valley system. The valley is 180¬ km long and 10 to
26¬ km wide, its fertile soil is formed by alluvial deposits. The Anti-Lebanon
range runs parallel to the Lebanon mountains, its highest peak is in Mount
Hermon at . The mountains of Lebanon are drained by seasonal torrents and
rivers foremost of which is the long Leontes that rises in the Beqaa Valley to
the west of Baalbek and empties into the Mediterranean Sea north of Tyre.
Climate. Lebanon has a moderate Mediterranean climate. In coastal areas,
winters are generally cool and rainy whilst summers are hot and humid. In more
elevated areas, temperatures usually drop below freezing during the winter with
heavy snow cover that remains until early summer on the higher mountaintops.
Although most of Lebanon receives a relatively large amount of rainfall, when
measured annually in comparison to its arid surroundings, certain areas in
north-eastern Lebanon receive little because of rain shadow created by the high
peaks of the western mountain range. Environment. In ancient times, Lebanon was
covered by large forests of Cedar, the national emblem of the country. As a
result of longstanding exploitation, few old Cedar trees remain in pockets of
forests in Lebanon, but there is an active program to conserve and regenerate
the forests. The Lebanese approach has emphasized natural regeneration over
planting by creating the right conditions for germination and growth. The
Lebanese state has created several nature reserves that contain cedars,
including the Shouf Biosphere Reserve, the Jaj Cedar Reserve, the Tannourine
Reserve, the Ammouaa and Karm Shbat Reserves in the Akkar district, and the
Forest of the Cedars of God near Bsharri. In 2010, the Environment Ministry set
a 10-year plan to increase the national forest coverage by 20% that is
equivalent to the planting of two million new trees each year. The plan, which
was funded the U.S. development agency, USAID, and overseen by the U.S. Forest
Service, and the Lebanon Reforestation Initiative, was inaugurated in 2011 by
planting of seedlings, such as cedar, pine, wild almond, juniper, fir and oak,
in five regions around Lebanon. The forests cover 13.4% of the Lebanese land
area; they are under constant threat from wildfires caused by the long dry
summer season. Government and politics. Lebanon is a parliamentary democracy,
which implements a special system known as confessionalism. This system is
intended to deter sectarian conflict and attempts to fairly represent the
demographic distribution of the 18 recognized religious groups in government.
High-ranking offices are reserved for members of specific religious groups. The
President, for example, has to be a Maronite Christian, the Prime Minister a
Sunni Muslim, the Speaker of the Parliament a Shi‚Äôa Muslim, the Deputy Prime
Minister and the Deputy Speaker of Parliament Greek Orthodox. Lebanon's
national legislature is the unicameral Parliament of Lebanon. Its 128 seats are
divided equally between Christians and Muslims, proportionately between the 18
different denominations and proportionately between its 26 regions. Prior to
1990, the ratio stood at 6:5 in favor of Christians; however, the Taif Accord,
which put an end to the 1975‚Äì1990 civil war, adjusted the ratio to grant
equal representation to followers of the two religions. The Parliament is
elected for a four-year term by popular vote on the basis of sectarian
proportional representation. The executive branch consists of the President,
the head of state, and the Prime Minister, the head of government. The
parliament elects the president for a non-renewable six-year term by a two-
third majority. The president appoints the Prime Minister, following
consultations with the parliament. The President and the Prime Minister form
the Cabinet, which must also adhere to the sectarian distribution set out by
confessionalism. The next nation-wide elections are scheduled for 2013. Law.
The Lebanese legal system is based on the French system, and is a civil law
country, with the exception for matters related to personal status (heritage,
marriage, divorce, etc.), which are governed by a separate set of laws designed
for each sectarian community. For instance, the Islamic personal status laws
are inspired by the Sharia law. For Muslims, these tribunals deal with
questions of marriage, divorce, custody, and inheritance and wills. For non-
Muslims. personal status jurisdiction is split: the law of inheritance and
wills falls under national civil jurisdiction, while Christian and Jewish
religious courts are competent for marriage, divorce, and custody. Catholics
can additionally appeal before the Vatican Rota court. The most notable set of
codified laws is the Code des Obligations et des Contrats promulgated in 1932
and equivalent to the French Civil Code. Capital punishment is still used to
sanction certain crimes. The Lebanese court system consists of three levels:
courts of first instance, courts of appeal, and the court of cassation. The
Constitutional Council rules on constitutionality of laws and electoral frauds.
There also is a system of religious courts having jurisdiction over personal
status matters within their own communities, with rules on matters such as
marriage and inheritance. Foreign relations. Lebanon concluded negotiations on
an association agreement with the European Union in late 2001, and both sides
initialed the accord in January 2002. Lebanon also has bilateral trade
agreements with several Arab states and is working toward accession to the
World Trade Organization. Lebanon enjoys good relations with virtually all of
the other Arab countries (despite historic tensions with Libya, the
Palestinians, Syria and Iraq), and hosted an Arab League Summit in March 2002
for the first time in more than 35 years. Lebanon is a member of the
Francophone countries and hosted the Francophone Summit in October 2002 as well
as the Jeux de la Francophonie in 2009. Military. The Lebanese Armed Forces
(LAF) has 72,000 active personnel, including 1,100 in the air force, and 1,000
in the navy. The motto of the Lebanese Armed Forces is "Honor, Sacrifice,
Loyalty" ( ‚Äì Sharaf.Tadhia.Wafa'). The Lebanese Armed Forces Emblem consists
of a Lebanon Cedar tree surrounded by two laurel leaves, positioned above the
symbols of the three branches: the ground forces represented by the two swords,
the navy represented by an anchor, and the air force represented by two wings.
The Lebanese Armed Forces' primary missions include defending Lebanon and its
citizens against external aggression, maintaining internal stability and
security, confronting threats against the country's vital interests, engaging
in social development activities, and undertaking relief operations in
coordination with public and humanitarian institutions. Lebanon is a major
recipient of foreign military aid. With $400¬ million since 2005, it is the
second largest per capita recipient of American military aid behind Israel.
Economy. Lebanon‚Äôs economy follows a laissez-faire model. Most of the economy
is dollarized, and the country has no restrictions on the movement of capital
across its borders. The Lebanese government‚Äôs intervention in foreign trade
is minimal. The Lebanese economy grew 8.5% in 2008 and a revised 9% in 2009
despite a global recession. Real GDP growth is estimated to have slowed from
7.5% in 2010 to 1.5% in 2011, according to IMF preliminary estimates, with
nominal GDP estimated at $41.5 billion in 2011. The Banque du Liban projects
real GDP growth could reach 4% in 2012, with 6% inflation (versus 4% in 2011).
The political and security instability in the Arab world, especially in Syria,
is expected to have a negative impact on the domestic business and economic
environment. Lebanon faces major financial challenges, notably a very high
level of public debt and large external financing needs. The 2010 public debt
exceeded 150.7% of GDP, ranking fourth highest in the world as a percentage of
GDP, though down from 154.8% in 2009. Finance minister Mohamad Chatah stated
that the debt reached $47¬ billion in 2008 and would increase to $49¬ billion
if privatization of two telecoms companies did not occur. The "Daily Star"
wrote that exorbitant debt levels have "slowed down the economy and reduced the
government's spending on essential development projects." The urban population
in Lebanon is noted for its commercial enterprise. Emigration has yielded
Lebanese "commercial networks" throughout the world. Remittances from Lebanese
abroad total $8.2¬ billion and account for one fifth of the country's economy.
Lebanon has the largest proportion of skilled labor among Arab States. The
Investment Development Authority of Lebanon was established with the aim of
promoting investment in Lebanon. In 2001, Investment Law No.360 was enacted to
reinforce the organisation's mission. History. The 1975‚Äì1990 civil war
heavily damaged Lebanon's economic infrastructure, cut national output by half,
and all but ended Lebanon's position as a West Asian entrep√¥t and banking hub.
The subsequent period of relative peace enabled the central government to
restore control in Beirut, begin collecting taxes, and regain access to key
port and government facilities. Economic recovery has been helped by a
financially sound banking system and resilient small- and medium-scale
manufacturers, with family remittances, banking services, manufactured and farm
exports, and international aid as the main sources of foreign exchange. Until
July 2006, Lebanon enjoyed considerable stability, Beirut's reconstruction was
almost complete, and increasing numbers of tourists poured into the nation's
resorts. The economy witnessed growth, with bank assets reaching over
75¬ billion US dollars, Market capitalization was also at an all time high,
estimated at $10.9¬ billion at the end of the second quarter of 2006. The
month-long 2006 war severely damaged Lebanon's fragile economy, especially the
tourism sector. According to a preliminary report published by the Lebanese
Ministry of Finance on 30 August 2006, a major economic decline was expected as
a result of the fighting. Over the course of 2008 Lebanon rebuilt its
infrastructure mainly in the real estate and tourism sectors, resulting in a
comparatively robust post war economy. Major contributors to the reconstruction
of Lebanon include Saudi Arabia (with US$ 1.5¬ billion pledged), the European
Union (with about $1¬ billion) and a few other Persian Gulf countries with
contributions of up to $800¬ million. Primary. Although Lebanon is ideally
suited for agricultural activities in terms of water availability and soil
fertility, as it possesses the highest proportion of cultivable land in the
Arabic speaking world, it does not have a large agricultural sector. Attracting
only 12% of the total workforce, agriculture is the least popular economic
sector in Lebanon. It contributes approximately 11.7% of the country's GDP,
also placing it in the lowest rank compared to other economic sectors. Major
produce includes apples, peaches, oranges, and lemons. Oil has recently been
discovered inland and in the seabed between Lebanon, Cyprus, Israel and Egypt
and talks are underway between Cyprus and Egypt to reach an agreement regarding
the exploration of these resources.The seabed separating Lebanon and Cyprus is
believed to hold significant quantities of crude oil and natural gas. Industry.
Industry in Lebanon is mainly limited to small businesses that reassemble and
package imported parts. In 2004, industry ranked second in workforce, with 26%
of the Lebanese working population, and second in GDP contribution, with 21% of
Lebanon's GDP. Services. The majority of the Lebanese workforce (nearly 65%)
attain employment in the services sector. The GDP contribution, accordingly,
amounts to roughly 67.3% of the annual Lebanese GDP. However, dependence on the
tourism and banking sectors leaves the economy vulnerable to political
instability. Lebanon's strict financial secrecy and capitalist economy have
given it significant, though no longer dominant, economic status among Arab
countries. Given the frequent turmoil it has faced, the Lebanese banking system
has adopted a conservative approach, with strict regulations imposed by the
central bank to protect the economy from political instability. These
regulations have generally left Lebanese banks unscathed by the Financial
crisis of 2007‚Äì2010. Lebanese banks remain, under the current circumstances,
high on liquidity and reputed for their security. Lebanon was one of the only
seven countries in the world in which the value of the stock markets increased
in 2008. Tourism. The tourism industry has been historically important to the
local economy and remains a major source of revenue to this day. Between 2005
and 2007, a state of turmoil led to a sharp fall in tourism. Lebanon has seen a
recovery in tourism since 2006. Lebanon managed to attract around 1,333,000
tourists in 2008, thus placing it as rank 79 out of 191 countries. In 2009, the
New York Times ranked Beirut the No.¬ 1 travel destination worldwide due to its
Unique Nightlife and Hospitality. In January 2010, the Ministry of Tourism
announced that 1,851,081 tourists had visited Lebanon in 2009, a 39% increase
from 2008. In 2009, Lebanon hosted the largest number of tourists to date,
eclipsing the previous record set before the Lebanese Civil War. Saudi Arabia,
Jordan, and Japan are the three most popular origin countries of foreign
tourists to Lebanon. The recent influx of Japanese tourists is probably the
reason for the recent rise in popularity of Japanese Cuisine in Lebanon.
Demographics. The population of Lebanon was estimated to be 4,125,247 in July
2010, however no official census has been taken since 1932 due to the sensitive
confessional political balance between Lebanon's various religious groups.
Identifying all Lebanese as ethnically Arab is a widely employed example of
panethnicity since in reality, the Lebanese ‚Äúare descended from many
different peoples who have occupied, invaded, or settled this corner of the
world,‚Äù making Lebanon, ‚Äúa mosaic of closely interrelated cultures‚Äù.
While at first glance, this ethnic, linguistic, religious and denominational
diversity might seem to cause civil and political unrest, ‚Äúfor much of
Lebanon‚Äôs history this multitudinous diversity of religious communities has
coexisted with little conflict‚Äù. Millions of people of Lebanese descent are
spread throughout the world, mostly Christians, especially in Latin America.
Brazil has the largest expatriate population. "(See Lebanese Brazilians)".
Large numbers of Lebanese migrated to West Africa, particularly to the Ivory
Coast (home to over 100,000 Lebanese) and Senegal (roughly 30,000 Lebanese).
Australia is home to over 270,000 Lebanese (1999 est.). As of 2012, Lebanon was
host to over 460,000 refugees and asylum seekers: 405,425 Palestinians,
50,000‚Äì60,000 from Iraq, over 80,000 from Syria, and 4,500 from Sudan. Their
primary sources of income are UNRWA aid and menial labor sought in competition
with about 300,000 Syrian guest workers. In the last three decades, lengthy and
destructive armed conflicts have ravaged the country. The majority of Lebanese
have been affected by armed conflict; those with direct personal experience
include 75% of the population, and most others report suffering a range of
hardships. In total, almost the entire population (96%) has been affected in
some way ‚Äì either personally or because of the wider consequences of armed
conflict. Religion. Lebanon's population of the major religions are estimated
to be 59% Muslim (27% Sunni; 27% Shia; 5% Druze), 41% Christian (21% Maronite,
8% Greek Orthodox, 5% Melkite Catholic, 7% other Christian groups such as
Armenian Orthodox, Syriac Catholic, Armenian Catholic, Syriac Orthodox, Roman
Catholic, Chaldean, Assyrian, Copt, Protestant). The rest of the population in
Lebanon include those of other religions and non believers. Over the past 60
years, there has been a steady decline in the ratio of Christians to Muslims,
due to higher emigration rates of Christians, and a higher birth rate in the
Muslim population. The most recent study conducted by Statistics Lebanon, a
Beirut-based research firm, found that approximately 27% of the population was
Sunni, 27% Shi'a, 21% Maronite, 8% Greek Orthodox, 5% Druze, 5% Greek Catholic,
and 7% other Christian sects such as Armenians who are 4% of the population and
Syrian Orthodox. There are 18 state-recognized religious sects ‚Äì 4 Muslim, 12
Christian, 1 Druze, and 1 Jewish. The Shi'a community is estimated to be 27% of
Lebanon's total population. Shi'a residents primarily live in South Beirut, the
Beqaa Valley, and southern Lebanon. The Sunni community is estimated to be 27%
of Lebanon's total population. Sunni residents primarily live in West Beirut,
the southern coast of Lebanon, and northern Lebanon. Kurds in Lebanon are Sunni
Muslims. The Maronite community is estimated to be approximately 21% of
Lebanon's total population. Maronite residents tend to live in East Beirut and
the mountains of Lebanon. They are the largest Christian community in Lebanon.
The Greek Orthodox community is estimated to be approximately 8% of Lebanon's
total population. Greek Orthodox residents primarily live in Koura, Beirut,
Zahleh, Rachaya, Matn, Aley, Akkar, Tripoli, Hasbaya and Marjeyoun. They are
the second largest Christian community in Lebanon and the 4th largest religious
community in the country. Language. Article 11 of Lebanon's Constitution states
that "Arabic is the official national language. A law determines the cases in
which the French language may be used". The majority of Lebanese people speak
Lebanese Arabic, while Modern Standard Arabic is mostly used in magazines,
newspapers, and formal broadcast media. Almost 40% of Lebanese are considered
francophone, and another 15% "partial francophone," and 70% of Lebanon's
secondary schools use French as a second language of instruction. By
comparison, English is used as a secondary language in 30% of Lebanon's
secondary schools. The use of French is a legacy of the post-World War I League
of Nations mandate over Lebanon given to France; as of 2004, some 20% of the
population used French on a daily basis. It should be noted, however, that
Arabic is increasingly becoming less and less used by Lebanon's educated youth,
who prefer to speak in French and English. English is increasingly used in
science and business interactions. Lebanese people of Armenian, Assyrian, or
Greek descent often speak Armenian, Neo-Aramaic, or Greek with varying degrees
of fluency. There are currently around 150,000 Armenians in Lebanon, or around
5% of the population. Culture. The culture of Lebanon is the cross culture of
various civilizations over thousands of years. Originally home to the
Phoenicians, and then subsequently conquered and occupied by the Assyrians, the
Persians, the Greeks, the Romans, the Arabs, the Crusaders, the Ottoman Turks
and most recently the French, Lebanese culture has over the millennia evolved
by borrowing from all of these groups. Lebanon's diverse population, composed
of different ethnic and religious groups, has further contributed to the
country's festivals, musical styles and literature as well as cuisine. Despite
the ethnic, linguistic, religious and denominational diversity of the Lebanese,
they ‚Äúshare an almost common culture‚Äù. Lebanese Arabic is universally
spoken while food, music, and literature are deep-rooted ‚Äúin wider
Mediterranean and Levantine norms‚Äù. Arts. In literature, Khalil Gibran is
particularly known for his book "The Prophet" (1923), which has been translated
into more than twenty different languages. Several contemporary Lebanese
writers have also achieved international success; including Elias Khoury, Amin
Maalouf, Hanan al-Shaykh, and Georges Schehad√©. In visual arts, Moustafa
Farroukh was one of Lebanon's most prominent painters of the 20th century.
Formally trained in Rome and Paris, he exhibited in venues from Paris to New
York to Beirut over his career. Many more contemporary artists are currently
active, such as Walid Raad, a contemporary media artist currently residing in
New York. In the field of photography, the Arab Image Foundation has a
collection of +400,000 photographs from Lebanon and the Middle East. The
photographs can be viewed in a research center and various events and
publications have been produced in Lebanon and worldwide to promote the
collection. Popular culture. The Music of Lebanon is pervasive in Lebanese
society. While traditional folk music remains popular in Lebanon, modern music
reconciling Western and traditional Arabic styles, pop, and fusion are rapidly
advancing in popularity. Radio stations feature a variety of music, including
traditional Lebanese, classical Arabic, Armenian and modern French, English,
American, and Latin tunes. Cinema of Lebanon, according to film critic and
historian, Roy Armes, was the only other cinema in the Arabic-speaking region,
beside Egypt's, that could amount to a national cinema. Cinema in Lebanon has
been in existence since the 1920s, and the country has produced over 500 films,
The Media of Lebanon is not only a regional center of production but also the
most liberal and free in the Arab world. According to Press freedom's Reporters
Without Borders, "the media have more freedom in Lebanon than in any other Arab
country". Despite its small population and geographic size, Lebanon plays an
influential role in the production of information in the Arab world and is "at
the core of a regional media network with global implications". Holidays and
Festivals. Lebanon celebrates national and both Christian and Muslim holidays.
Christian holidays are celebrated following both the Gregorian Calendar and
Julian Calendar. Catholics, Protestant, and Melkite Christians follow the
Gregorian Calendar and thus celebrate Christmas on 25 December. Greek Orthodox
and Armenian Orthodox Christians celebrate Christmas on 6 January, as they
follow the Julian Calendar. Muslim holidays are followed based on the Islamic
lunar calendar. Muslim holidays that are celebrated include Eid al-Fitr (the
three-day feast at the end of the Ramadan month), Eid al-Adha (The Feast of the
Sacrifice) which is celebrated during the annual pilgrimage to Mecca and also
celebrates Abraham‚Äôs willingness to sacrifice his son to God,the Birth of the
Prophet Muhammad, and Ashura (the Shiite Day of Atonement). Lebanon's National
Holidays include Workers Day, Independence day, and Martyrs Day. Music
festivals, often hosted at historical sites, are a customary element of
Lebanese culture. Among the most famous are Baalbeck International Festival,
Byblos International Festival, Beiteddine International Festival, Broumana
Festival, Batroun Festival, Dhour Chwer Festival and Tyr Festival. These
festivals are promoted by Lebanon's Ministry of Tourism. Lebanon hosts about 15
concerts from international performers each year, ranking 1st for nightlife in
the Middle East, and 6th worldwide. Sports. Both summer and winter sports
thrive in Lebanon because of the unique geography. In autumn and spring, for
example, it is possible to go skiing in the morning and swimming in the
Mediterranean Sea in the afternoon. At the competitive level, basketball and
football are among Lebanon‚Äôs most popular sports. In recent years, Lebanon
has hosted the AFC Asian Cup and the Pan Arab Games. Lebanon has six ski
resorts, with opportunities also available for cross-country skiing,
snowshoeing, and snowmobiling. In the summer, skilifts can be used to access
hiking trails, with views stretching as far as Cyprus to the west and Syria to
the east on clear days. Canoeing, cycling, rafting, climbing, swimming, sailing
and caving are among the other common leisure sports in Lebanon. Adventure and
extreme sports are also possible throughout the country. The Beirut Marathon is
held every fall, drawing top runners from Lebanon and abroad. Race day is
promoted as a fun, family event, and it has become a tradition for many to
participate in costumes or outlandish clothing. Rugby league is a relatively
new but growing sport in Lebanon. The Lebanon national rugby league team
participated in the 2000 Rugby League World Cup, and narrowly missed
qualification for the 2008 and 2013 tournaments. Lebanon also took part in the
2009 European Cup where, after narrowly failing to qualify for the final, the
team defeated Ireland to finish 3rd in the tournament. Lebanon international
Hazem El Masri holds the record as the all-time highest points scorer in
Australia's National Rugby League, having moved from Lebanon to Australia as a
child. The strongest sport in Lebanon is Basketball with the Lebanese National
Team qualifying for the FIBA World Championship 3 times in a row. Considered as
one of the basketball power houses in Asia, Lebanon was able to defeat strong
teams such as Venezuela and France. In 2010 FIBA World Championship, Lebanon
defeated Canada national men's basketball team but failed to qualify to the
second round. Lebanese Rony Seikaly played in the NBA for over a decade, and
Fadi El Khatib is the most decorated player in the Lebanese National Basketball
League. Dominant Basketball teams in Lebanon are Sporting Al Riyadi Beirut, who
are the current Arab and Asian champions, Club Sagesse who were able to earn
the Asian and Arab championships before, along with Champville SC, Al Mouttahed
Tripoli, and Hoops Club,and Byblos. Football is also one of the more popular
sports in the country with the Lebanese Premier League with its most successful
clubs being Al-Ansar Club and Nejmeh SC with notable players being Roda Antar
and Youssef Mohamad, the first Arab to captain a European premier league team.
Lebanon hosted the 2009 Jeux de la Francophonie from 27 September to 6 October,
and have participated in every Olympic Games since its independence, winning a
total of four medals. Prominent Lebanese bodybuilders include Samir Bannout,
Mohammad Bannout and Ahmad Haidar. Education. The United Nations assigned
Lebanon an education index of 0.871 in 2008. The index, which is determined by
the adult literacy rate and the combined primary, secondary, and tertiary gross
enrollment ratio, ranked the country 88th out of the 177 countries
participating. Schools. All Lebanese schools are required to follow a
prescribed curriculum designed by the Ministry of Education. Some of the 1400
private schools offer IB programs, and may also add more courses to their
curriculum with approval from the Ministry of Education. The main subjects
taught are mathematics, sciences, Arabic, and at least one secondary language
(either French or English). The government introduces a mild form of
selectivity into the curriculum by giving 11th graders choice between two
"concentrations": sciences, humanities, and 12th graders choose between four
concentrations: life sciences, general sciences, sociology and economics, and
humanities and literature. The choices in concentration do not include major
changes in the number of subjects taken (if at all). However, subjects that
fall out of the concentration are given less weight in grading and are less
rigorous, while subjects that fall within the concentration are more
challenging and contribute significantly to the final grade. The first eight
years are, by law, compulsory. Higher education. Following secondary school,
Lebanese students may choose to study at a university, a college, or a
vocational training institute. The number of years to complete each program
varies. While the Lebanese educational system offers a very high quality and
international class of education, the local employment market lacks sufficient
opportunities, thus encouraging many of the young educated to travel abroad.
Lebanon has forty-one nationally accredited universities, several of which are
internationally recognized. The American University of Beirut (AUB) and the
Universit√© Saint-Joseph (USJ) were the first Anglophone and the first
Francophone universities to open in Lebanon, respectively. Another prestigious
and internationally recognized university is the Lebanese American University.
Universities in Lebanon, both public and private, largely operate in French or
English. At the English universities, students who have graduated from an
American-style high school program enter at the freshman level to earn their
baccalaureate equivalence from the Lebanese Ministry of Higher Education. This
qualifies them to continue studying at the higher levels. Such students are
required to have already taken the SAT I and the SAT II upon applying to
college, in lieu of the official exams. On the other hand, students who have
graduated from a school that follows the Lebanese educational system are
directly admitted to the year. These students are still required to take the
SAT I, but not the SAT II. The university academic degrees for the first stage
are the Bachelor or the Licence, for the second stage are the Master or the DEA
and the third stage is the doctorate. Health. As of 2011 the average life
expectancy in Lebanon was 79.5 years old with 84 years old for the females and
77 for males.
