Boricua Popular Army The Boricua Popular/People's Army - or Ejército Popular
Boricua in Spanish - is a clandestine organization based on the island of
Puerto Rico, with cells in the United States. They campaign for, and support,
the independence of Puerto Rico from the United States. In 2001, FBI Director
Louis J. Freeh linked Los Macheteros to acts of terrorism. Also known as Los
Macheteros ("the Machete Wielders") and the "Puerto Rican Popular Army," their
active membership was calculated in 2006 by Prof. Michael González Cruz, in
his book "Nacionalismo Revolucionario Puertorriqueño," to be composed of
approximately 5,700 members with an additional unknown number of supporters,
sympathizers, collaborators and informants throughout the U.S. and other
countries. A report by "The Economist" places the number of active members at
1,100, excluding supporters. The group has claimed responsibility for numerous
bombings, attacks against the United States armed forces, and armed robberies
since 1978, and was led primarily by former FBI Most Wanted Fugitive Filiberto
Ojeda Ríos until his death in 2005. History. The name "Machetero" evokes
images of an impromptu band of Puerto Ricans who assembled to defend the island
of Puerto Rico from the invading forces of the United States Army during the
Spanish–American War, between July 26 and August 12, 1898. "Macheteros de
Puerto Rico" were dispatched throughout the island, working in cooperation with
other voluntary groups including the "Guardias de la Paz" in Yauco and
"Tiradores de Altura" in San Juan. These voluntary units were involved in most
of the battles in the Puerto Rican Campaign. Their last involvement was in the
"Battle of Asomante", where along units led by Captain Hernaíz, defended
Aibonito Pass from invading units. The allied offensive was effective,
prompting a retreat order from the American side. However, the following
morning the signing of the Treaty of Paris was made public. Subsequently, both
Spanish and Puerto Rican soldiers and volunteers disengaged and Puerto Rico was
annexed by the United States. The Boricua Popular Army was organized in the
1970s by Filiberto Ojeda Ríos, Juan Enrique Segarra-Palmer and Orlando
González Claudio. The group began its operations in 1976, however it can trace
its origins back to the Armed Forces of National Liberation (FALN). Upon its
beginnings, the group attracted a wide variety of Puerto Rican independence
supporters, including some of the members of the University Pro-Independence
Federation of Puerto Rico (FUPI) and the Pro-Independence Movement. Only some
members of the above groups supported the Macheteros' ideology and methods.
Notable incidents. The Boricua Popular Army and two other groups—the
Volunteers of the Puerto Rican Revolution and Armed Forces of Popular
Resistance—jointly took responsibility for the attacks. A second attack, on
off-duty sailors returning from liberty, killed one and wounded three. The
attack was in retaliation for the murder in a prison of a member of the
Macheteros by the prison guards who were retired Marines. Terrorism vs.
national liberation. Supporters of independence for Puerto Rico argue that the
U.S. favored the establishment of the present Commonwealth status to create a
perpetual consumer base for U.S. and foreign products and services. Foreign
products and services are redirected to Puerto Rico and other "unincorporated"
lands of the United States to satisfy a portion of foreign trade agreements,
while allowing domestic products and services a greater "home" market share.
The majority of the Puerto Rican electorate has favored a continuation or
enhancement of the present Commonwealth status (50%), or statehood (46%).
However, the "ELA Soberano" or "Sovereign Commonwealth," a principle based on
the development of Puerto Rico's political status based on autonomy has been
approved by the Popular Democratic Party, one of the two major parties, for
more than a decade after winning the 1998 referendum under the fifth column.
According to federal and international law, as well as the proposed definition
of terrorism under the United Nations' Office on Drugs and Crime, "Los
Macheteros" is considered a terrorist organization due to the methods they have
employed to further their agenda. Beginning in the 1960s, the FBI infiltrated
Puerto Rico's free press and political circles in order to monitor and disrupt
efforts related to the independence movement. This operation was part of
COINTELPRO. Another argument by the independence movement is that the
"Macheteros" are continuing the historical rebellion that Puerto Ricans such as
Pedro Albizu Campos and the Nationalist Party have waged, against U.S.
domination of the island. It is known, for example, that Los Macheteros
deliberately chose September 12 for their White Eagle assault on the Wells
Fargo depot, because September 12 was the birthday of Puerto Rican Nationalist
leader Pedro Albizu Campos. Focus on public education. Recently, the
"Macheteros" have focused on public education regarding the use of Culebra and
Vieques as bombing targets for the U.S. Navy; the disproportionate number of
military bases on the island (compared to states in the Union); the proportion
of deaths within the ranks of the Independence and Nationalist leadership,
including the alleged experimentation with radiation on Nationalist leader
Pedro Albizu Campos while he was incarcerated; the secret testing of Agent
Orange on Puerto Rican soil; and cancer "experiments" administered by Cornelius
P. Rhoads, in which he admitted killing Puerto Rican patients and injecting
cancer cells to others, working as part of a medical investigation conducted in
San Juan's Presbyterian Hospital for the Rockefeller Institute. Documentary. A
80-minute documentary film about the "Macheteros," titled MACHETERO, was
released in 2008. Starring Not4Prophet (Ricanstruction), as Pedro Taíno, and
Isaach De Bankolé ("Casino Royale"), as French journalist Jean Dumont, the
film takes place in both New York City and Puerto Rico. Other actors Kelvin
Fernández (first starring role) and Dylcia Pagán. The film was the winner of
the 2008 South Africa International Film Festival, 2009 Swansea Film Festival,
2009 Heart of England Film Festival, 2009 International Film Festival Thailand,
and the 2009 International Film Festival Ireland.
