Macedonians (ethnic group) The Macedonians ()also referred to as Macedonian
Slavsare a South Slavic ethnic group who are primarily associated with the
Republic of Macedonia. They speak the Macedonian language, a South Slavic
language. About two thirds of all ethnic Macedonians live in the Republic of
Macedonia and there are also communities in a number of other countries.
Origins. The question of Macedonian origins depends on which aspect is
examined. Linguistically, the Slavic languages from which Macedonian developed
are thought to have expanded in the region during the post-Roman period,
although the exact mechanisms of this linguistic expansion remains a matter of
scholarly discussion. Many aspects of Macedonian culture developed during the
rule of Medieval Byzantine, Bulgarian and Serbian Empires which alternately
controlled the region. Certain of these cultural aspects developed within
Macedonia itself, becoming a cradle of Slav Orthodox Culture.
Anthropologically, Macedonians possess genetic lineages postulated to represent
Balkan prehistoric and historic demographic processes. Such lineages are also
typically found in other South Slavs, especially Bulgarians, Serbs, Bosnians,
Montenegrins, but also to the northern Greeks and Romanians. Traditional
historiography has equated the appearance of Sclaveni (independent tribal
polities) with postulated Slavic migrations. However, more recent
anthropological and archaeological perspectives have viewed the appearance of
Slavs in Macedonia, and throughout the Balkans in general, as part of a broad
and complex process of transformation of the cultural, political and ethno-
linguistic Balkan landscape after the collapse of Roman authority. That
movements of the population groups known as the Sclaveni and the Antes, who
initially dwelt beyond the Danube, contributed to this process is not denied,
however, such migration was actually rather small scale and not the cause "per
se" for the ethno-linguistic transformation of the formerly Roman provincial
populace. Subsequently, the Sclaveni in Macedonia were incorporated into the
Bulgarian Empire, and eventually, Kutmichevitsa became the second political and
cultural center of "Medieval" Bulgaria. Identities. The large majority of
Macedonians identify as Orthodox Christians, who speak a Slavic language, and
share a cultural - historical "Orthodox Byzantine-Slavic heritage" with their
neighbours. The concept of a "Macedonian" ethnicity, distinct from their
Orthodox Balkan neighbours, is seen to be a comparatively newly emergent one.
The earliest manifestation of a Macedonian identity emerged in the late 19th
century, and this was consolidated by Yugoslav governmental policy from the
1940s. Throughout the Middle Ages and the Ottoman rule, up until the early 20th
century the Slavic speaking majority in the Region of Macedonia had been
referred predominantly to (both, by themselves and outsiders) as Bulgarians.
However, in such pre-nationalist times, terms such as "Bulgarian" did not
possess a strict ethno-nationalistic meaning, rather, they were loose, often
interchangeable terms which could simultaneously denote regional habitation,
alliegence to a particular empire, religious orientation, membership in certain
social groups. By and large, in pre-modern Europe, identity based on ethnicity
did not exist amongst the masses of commoners; rather identity was rooted at
the local level: the clan, village and parish. With the disintegration of the
Ottoman Empire, the Macedonian upper stratum had to decide whether Macedonia
was to emerge as an independent state or as part of a “Greater Bulgaria”.
During this period, the first expressions of ethnic nationalism by certain
Macedonian intellectuals occurred in Belgrade, Sofia, Istanbul, Thessaloniki
and St. Petersburg. The activities of these people was registered by Petko
Slaveykov and Stojan Novaković The emergence of Macedonian identity was a
relatively nascent and nebulous affair because Ottoman rule (a regimen which
suppressed liberalism and nationalism) had lasted there the longest, the
subsequent propaganda and armed conflict between newly formed Balkans
monarchies (Greece, Bulgaria, Serbia) over Macedonian territory, and indeed the
cultural similarity between Macedonians and their closest neighbours
(especially Bulgarians). On the other hand Theodosius of Skopje, a priest who
have hold a high ranking positions within the Bulgarian Exarchate was chosen as
a bishop of the episcopacy of Skopje in 1885. As a bishop of Skopje, Theodosius
renounced de facto the Bulgarian Exarchate and attempted to restore the
Archbishopric of Ohrid and to separate the episcopacies in Macedonia from the
Exarchate. During this time period Metropolitan Bishop Theodosius of Skopje
made several pleas to the Bulgarian church to allow a separate Macedonian
church, he viewed this as the only way to end the turmoil in the Balkans. The
next great figure of the Macedonian awakening was Dimitrija Čupovski, one of
the founders of the Macedonian Literary Society, established in Saint
Petersburg in 1902. In the period 1913–1918, Čupovski published the
newspaper "Македонскi Голосъ (Macedonian Voice)" in which he and
fellow members of the Petersburg Macedonian Colony propagated the existence of
a Macedonian people separate from the Greeks, Bulgarians and Serbs, and sought
to popularize the idea for an independent Macedonian state. After the Balkan
Wars, following division of the region of Macedonia amongst the Kingdom of
Greece, the Kingdom of Bulgaria and the Kingdom of Serbia, and after World War
I, the idea of belonging to a separate Macedonian nation was further spread
among the Slavic-speaking population. The suffering during the wars, the
endless struggle of the Balkan monarchies for dominance over the population
increased the Macedonians' sentiment that the institutionalization of an
independent Macedonian nation would put an end to their suffering. On the
question of whether they were Serbs or Bulgarians, the people more often
started answering: "Neither Bulgar, nor Serb... I am Macedonian only, and I'm
sick of war." The consolidation of an international Communist organization (the
Comintern) in the 1920s led to some failed attempts by the Communists to use
the Macedonian Question as a political weapon. In the 1920 Yugoslav
parliamentary elections, 25% of the total Communist vote came from Macedonia,
but participation was low (only 55%), mainly because the pro-Bulgarian IMRO
organised a boycott against the elections. In the following years, the
communists attempted to enlist the pro-IMRO sympathies of the population in
their cause. In the context of this attempt, in 1924 the Comintern organized
the filed signing of the so called May Manifesto, in which independence of
partitioned Macedonia was required. In 1925 with the help of the Comintern, the
Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization (United) was created, composed
of former left-wing Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization (IMRO)
members. This organization promoted in the early 1930s the existence of a
separate ethnic Macedonian nation. This idea was internationalized and backed
by the Comintern which issued in 1934 a resolution supporting the development
of the entity. This action was attacked by the IMRO, but was supported by the
Balkan communists. The Balkan communist parties supported the national
consolidation of the ethnic Macedonian people and created Macedonian sections
within the parties, headed by prominent IMRO (United) members. The sense of
belonging to a separate Macedonian nation gained credence during World War II
when ethnic Macedonian communist partisan detachments were formed. In 1943 the
Communist Party of Macedonia was established and the resistance movement grew
up. After the World War II ethnic Macedonian institutions were created in the
three parts of the region of Macedonia, then under communist control, including
the establishment of the People's Republic of Macedonia within the Socialist
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (SFRJ). Following the collapse of Yugoslavia,
the issue of Macedonian identity has again emerged. Nationalists and
governments alike from neighbouring countries (especially Greece and Bulgaria)
espouse to the view that the creation of a Macedonian ethnicity is a modern,
artificial creation. Such views have been seen by Macedonian historians to
represent irredentist motives on Macedonian territory. Moreover, western
historians are quick to point out that in fact "all" modern nations are recent,
politically motivated constructs based on creation "myths". The creation of
Macedonian identity is “no more or less artificial than any other
identity”. Contrary to the claims of Romantic nationalists, modern,
territorially bound and mutually exclusive nation states have little in common
with the large territorial or dynastic medieval empires; and any connection
between them is tenuous at best. In any event, irrespective of shifting
political afﬁliations, the Macedonian Slavs shared in the fortunes of the
“Byzantine Commonwealth”, and they contributed to the common Orthodox
civilization. Like all peoples whose ancestors belonged to the Byzantine
Commonwealth, they can claim it as their common heritage. Loring Danforth
states similarly, the ancient heritage of modern Balkan countries is not “the
mutually exclusive property of one specific nation” but “the shared
inheritance of all Balkan peoples”. History. The history of the ethnic
Macedonians has been shaped by population shifts and political developments in
the region of Macedonia. Following the dissolution of the Ottoman Empire in the
early 20th. century, the decisive point in the ethnogenesis of the Slavic
ethnic group was the creation of the Socialist Republic of Macedonia after
World War II, a state in the framework of the Socialist Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. Population. The vast majority of ethnic Macedonians live along the
valley of the river Vardar, the central region of the Republic of Macedonia.
They form about 64.18% of the population of the Republic of Macedonia
(1,297,981 people according to the 2002 census). Smaller numbers live in
eastern Albania, northern Greece, and southern Serbia, mostly abutting the
border areas of the Republic of Macedonia. A large number of Macedonians have
immigrated overseas to Australia, United States, Canada and in many European
countries: Germany, the United Kingdom, Italy, and Austria, among others.
Balkans. Greece. The existence of an ethnic Macedonian minority in Greece is
rejected by the Greek government. The number of people speaking Macedonian
dialects has been estimated at somewhere between 10,000 and 250,000. Most of
these people however do not have an ethnic Macedonian national consciousness,
with most choosing to identify as ethnic Greeks or rejecting both ethnic
designations. In 1999 the Greek Helsinki Monitor estimated that the number of
people identifying as ethnic Macedonians numbered somewhere between 10,000 and
30,000, while Loring Danforth estimates it at around 10,000. Macedonian sources
generally claim the number of ethnic Macedonians living in Greece at somewhere
between 200,000 – 350,000. Since the late 1980s there has been an ethnic
Macedonian revival in Northern Greece, mostly centering around the region of
Florina. Since then ethnic Macedonian organisations including the "Rainbow"
political party have been established. "Rainbow" has seen limited success at a
national level, its best result being achieved in the 1994 European elections,
with a total of 7,263 votes. Since 2004 it has participated in European
Parliament elections and local elections, but not in national elections. A few
of its members have been elected in local administrative posts. "Rainbow" has
recently re-established Nova Zora, a newspaper that was first published for a
short period in the mid 90's, with reportedly 20,000 copies being distributed
free of charge. Lately, there have been reports of unofficial Macedonian
language lessons, at a small scale, in Florina, Thessaloniki and Edessa.
Serbia. Within Serbia, Macedonians constitute an officially recognised ethnic
at both a local and national level. Within Vojvodina, Macedonians are
recognised under the Statute of the Autonomous Province of Vojvodina, along
with other ethnic groups. Large Macedonian settlements within Vojvodina can be
found in Plandište, Jabuka, Glogonj, Dužine and Kačarevo. These people are
mainly the descendants of economic migrants who left the Socialist Republic of
Macedonia in the 1950s and 1960s. The Macedonians in Serbia are represented by
a national council and in recent years the Macedonian language has begun to be
taught. The most recent census recorded 25,847 Macedonians living in Serbia.
Albania. Macedonians represent the second largest ethnic minority population in
Albania. Albania recognises the existence of a Macedonian minority within the
Mala Prespa region, most of which is comprised by Liqenas Municipality.
Macedonians have full minority rights within this region, including the right
to education and the provision of other services in the Macedonian language.
There also exist unrecognised Macedonian populations living in the Golo Brdo
region, the "Dolno Pole" area near the town of Peshkopi, around Lake Ohrid and
Korce as well as in Gora. 4,697 people declared themselves ethnic Macedonians
in the 1989 census. Bulgaria. Bulgarians are considered most closely related to
the neighboring Macedonians, indeed it is sometimes said there is no clear
ethnic difference between them. As regards self-identification, a total of
1,654 people officially declared themselves to be ethnic Macedonians in the
last Bulgarian census in 2011 (0,02%) and 561 of them are in Blagoevgrad
Province (0,2%). 1,091 of them are Macedonian citizens, who are permanent
residents in Bulgaria. Krassimir Kanev, chairman of the non-governmental
organization (NGO) Bulgarian Helsinki Committee, claimed 15,000 – 25,000 in
1998 (see here). In the same report Macedonian nationalists (Popov et al.,
1989) claimed that 200,000 ethnic Macedonians live in Bulgaria. However,
"Bulgarian Helsinki Committee" stated that the vast majority of the Slavic
population in Pirin Macedonia has a Bulgarian national self-consciousness and a
regional Macedonian identity similar to the Macedonian regional identity in
Greek Macedonia. Finally, according to personal evaluation of a leading local
ethnic Macedonian political activist, Stoyko Stoykov, the present number of
Bulgarian citizens with ethnic Macedonian self-consciousness is between 5,000
and 10,000. The Bulgarian Constitutional Court banned UMO Ilinden-Pirin, a
small Macedonian political party, in 2000 as separatist. Subsequently,
activists attempted to re-establish the party but could not gather the required
signatures to this aim. File:Map of the majority ethnic groups of Macedonia by
municipality.svg|Macedonians in the Republic of Macedonia, according to the
2002 census File:Macedonians in Serbia.png|Concentration of Macedonians in
Serbia (excluding Kosovo) File:MalaPrespaiGoloBrdo.png|Regions where ethnic
Macedonians live within Albania  Diaspora. Other significant ethnic Macedonian
communities can also be found in the other Western European countries such as
Austria, France, Switzerland, Netherlands, United Kingdom, etc. Also in
Uruguay, with a significant population in Montevideo. Culture. The culture of
the Macedonian people is characterized with both traditionalist and modernist
attributes. It is strongly bound with their native land and the surrounding in
which they live. The rich cultural heritage of the Macedonians is accented in
the folklore, the picturesque traditional folk costumes, decorations and
ornaments in city and village homes, the architecture, the monasteries and
churches, iconostasis, wood-carving and so on. The culture of Macedonians can
roughly be explained as a Balkanic, closely related to that of Serbs and
Bulgarians. Architecture. The typical Macedonian village house is presented as
a construction with two floors, with a hard facade composed of large stones and
a wide balcony on the second floor. In villages with predominantly agricultural
economy, the first floor was often used as a storage for the harvest, while in
some villages the first floor was used as a cattle-pen. The stereotype for a
traditional Macedonian city house is a two-floor building with white façade,
with a forward extended second floor, and black wooden elements around the
windows and on the edges. Cinema and theater. The history of film making in the
Republic of Macedonia dates back over 110 years. The first film to be produced
on the territory of the present-day the country was made in 1895 by Janaki and
Milton Manaki in Bitola. From then, continuing the present, Macedonian film
makers, in Macedonia and from around the world, have been producing many films.
From 1993–1994 1,596 performances were held in the newly formed republic, and
more than 330,000 people attended. The Macedonian National Theater (Drama,
Opera and Ballet companies), the Drama Theater, the Theater of the
Nationalities (Albanian and Turkish Drama companies) and the other theater
companies comprise about 870 professional actors, singers, ballet dancers,
directors, playwrights, set and costume designers, etc. There is also a
professional theatre for children and three amateur theaters. For the last
thirty years a traditional festival of Macedonian professional theaters has
been taking place in Prilep in honor of Vojdan Černodrinski, the founder of
the modern Macedonian theater. Each year a festival of amateur and experimental
Macedonian theater companies is held in Kočani. Music and art. Macedonian's
music has an exceptionally rich musical heritage. Their music has many things
in common with the music of neighboring Balkan countries, but maintains its own
distinctive sound. The founders of modern Macedonian painting included Lazar
Licenovski, Nikola Martinoski, Dimitar Pandilov, and Vangel Kodzoman. They were
succeeded by an exceptionally talented and fruitful generation, consisting of
Borka Lazeski, Dimitar Kondovski, Petar Mazev who are now deceased, and
Rodoljub Anastasov and many others who are still active. Others include: Vasko
Taskovski and Vangel Naumovski. In addition to Dimo Todorovski, who is
considered to be the founder of modern Macedonian sculpture, the works of Petar
Hadzi Boskov, Boro Mitrikeski, Novak Dimitrovski and Tome Serafimovski are also
outstanding. Economy. In the past, the Macedonian population was predominantly
involved with agriculture, with a very small portion of the people who were
engaged in trade (mainly in the cities). But after the creation of the People's
Republic of Macedonia which started a social transformation based on Socialist
principles, a middle and heavy industry were started. Language. The Macedonian
language (македонски јазик) is a member of the Eastern group of
South Slavic languages. Standard Macedonian was implemented as the official
language of the Socialist Republic of Macedonia after being codified in the
1940s, and has accumulated a thriving literary tradition. The closest relative
of Macedonian is Bulgarian, followed by Serbo-Croatian. All the South Slavic
languages, including Macedonian, form a dialect continuum, in which Macedonian
is situated between Bulgarian and Serbian. The Torlakian dialect group is
intermediate between Bulgarian, Macedonian and Serbian, comprising some of the
northernmost dialects of Macedonian as well as varieties spoken in southern
Serbia. The orthography of Macedonian includes an alphabet, which is an
adaptation of the Cyrillic script, as well as language-specific conventions of
spelling and punctuation. Religion. Most Macedonians are members of the
Macedonian Orthodox Church. The official name of the church is Macedonian
Orthodox Church – Ohrid Archbishopric and is the body of Christians who are
united under the Archbishop of Ohrid and Macedonia, exercising jurisdiction
over Macedonian Orthodox Christians in the Republic of Macedonia and in
exarchates in the Macedonian diaspora. The church gained autonomy from the
Serbian Orthodox Church in 1959 and declared the restoration of the historic
Archbishopric of Ohrid. On 19 July 1967, the Macedonian Orthodox Church
declared autocephaly from the Serbian church, a move which is not recognised by
any of the churches of the Eastern Orthodox Communion, and since then, the
Macedonian Orthodox Church is not in communion with any Orthodox Church.
Between the 15th and the 20th century, during Ottoman rule, a large number of
Orthodox Macedonian Slavs converted to Islam. Today in the Republic of
Macedonia they are regarded as Macedonian Muslims. A small number of
Macedonians belong to the Protestant and the Roman Catholic churches. Cuisine.
Macedonian cuisine is a representative of the cuisine of the
Balkans—reflecting Mediterranean (Greek and Turkish) and Middle Eastern
influences, and to a lesser extent Italian, German and Eastern European
(especially Hungarian) ones. The relatively warm climate in Macedonia provides
excellent growth conditions for a variety of vegetables, herbs and fruits.
Thus, Macedonian cuisine is particularly diverse. Famous for its rich Shopska
salad, an appetizer and side dish which accompanies almost every meal,
Macedonian cuisine is also noted for the diversity and quality of its dairy
products, wines, and local alcoholic beverages, such as rakija. Tavče Gravče
and mastika are considered the national dish and drink of the Republic of
Macedonia, respectively. Symbols. Unofficial symbols Macedonians through
history. People that are considered to be Bulgarians in Bulgaria and
Macedonians in the Republic of Macedonia. the first author that separated the
Macedonian nation from the others. File:Teodisij gologanov.jpg|Theodosius of
Skopje, the first priest who attempted to create a separate Macedonian Church.
File:G Delchev.jpg|Goce Delchev, IMARO revolutionary, considered a native
national hero in both Bulgaria and the Republic of Macedonia. File:Krste P.
Misirkov.jpg|Krste Petkov Misirkov, a philologist who first outlined the
principles of the Macedonian language. File:Dimitrija Cupovski.jpg|Dimitrija
Čupovski, Macedonian textbook writer and lexicographer. File:Vlahov
Kazanlak.jpg| Dimitar Vlahov, politician, who actively worked for the
recognition of the Macedonians as separate nation. File:Cede Filipovski
Dame.JPG|Čede Filipovski Dame, Macedonian partisan (On the picture: Memorial
to Dame in Gostivar, Macedonia). File:Kočo Racin Samobor.jpg|Kočo Racin, poet
and revolutionary (On the picture: Memorial to Racin in Samobor, Croatia).
File:Cento Monument in Skopje.JPG|Metodija Andonov, statesman and first
president of the S. R. of Macedonia. File:Lazar Kolishevski left.jpg|Lazar
Koliševski, political leader of Socialist Republic of Macedonia and briefly of
the SFRY. File:BorisTrajkovski1.jpg|Boris Trajkovski, the second president of
the Republic of Macedonia. File:Branko-Crvenkovski.JPG|Branko Crvenkovski,
politician who was several times Prime Minister and President of the RoM. File:
Blagoj Nacoski 2.jpg| Blagoj Nacoski, tenor opera singer. File:Darko in
2004.jpg| Darko Dimitrov, composer. File:Ed Jovanovski2.jpg| Ed Jovanovski,
National Hockey League player. File:Elena risteska.JPG|Elena Risteska, singer
and songwriter. File:Pandev Lazio allenamento.JPG|Goran Pandev, football
striker. File:Jose Theodore 2012-03-09.JPG| José Théodore, National Hockey
League player. File:Kaliopi koncert.jpg|Kaliopi, singer and songwriter. File:
Goceva-ESC2007-portrait.jpg|Karolina Gočeva, singer. File:Katarina Ivanovska
crop.jpg|Katarina Ivanovska, international model. File:Kevin Kouzmanoff
2500809292.jpg| Kevin Kouzmanoff, Major League Baseball player. File:Kiril
Lazarov 03.jpg|Kiril Lazarov, handball player. File:Mike Z.JPG| Mike S.
Zafirovski, CEO of Nortel Networks and Board of Directors at Boeing. File:
Milcho Manchevski.jpg|Milčo Mančevski, film director and screen writer. File:
Kuzman Ivanov.JPG|Pasko Kuzman, archaeologist. File:Peter Daicos.jpg| Peter
Daicos, Australian Rules Football player. File:Steven Stamkos.JPG| Steven
Stamkos, National Hockey League player. File:Toseproeskiskopje.jpg|Toše
Proeski, singer and humanitarian.
