Masculism Masculism or masculinism may refer to advocacy of the rights or needs
of men and the adherence to or promotion of opinions, values, etc., regarded as
typical of men. Two of the most prominent men's rights advocates, Warren
Farrell and Jack Kammer, have been said to define "masculism" as "1. the belief
that equality between the sexes requires the recognition and redress of
prejudice and discrimination against men as well as women. 2. the movement
organized around this belief." Adherents to such a philosophy may call
themselves masculists or masculinists. Masculism may instead refer to
antifeminism and advocacy of male superiority and dominance. Controversial
definition. What is contested in the definition of masculism is its attitude
toward feminism. The Merriam-Webster Dictionary defines a "masculinist" as "an
advocate of male superiority and dominance". Oxford English Dictionary regards
it as "Advocacy of the rights of men; adherence to or promotion of opinions,
values, etc., regarded as typical of men; (more generally) anti-feminism,
machismo." Masculist concerns. Discrimination against men. Education Employment
Violence Custody "Custody law is perhaps the best-known area of men's rights
activism", as it is more common for the mother to obtain custody of children in
case of divorce. David Benatar, head of philosophy at the University of Cape
Town, argues: "When the man is the primary care-giver his chances of winning
custody are lower than when the woman is the primary care-giver. Even when the
case is not contested by the mother, he's still not as likely to get custody as
when the woman's claim is uncontested". Reactions. Feminism. Feminists respond
to the different ideologies of masculism in different ways. Masculists who
promote gender equality are often considered male feminists. It is the general
opinion of modern feminists that masculism, when defined as "male superiority
or dominance", is inherently opposed to the equality cause and is considered a
form of misogyny. Some feminists are actively involved in promoting men's
rights, especially father's rights and social equality, arguing that this
position is necessary for feminism and women's equality. Criticisms and
responses. To the extent that masculism is associated with antifeminist
masculininism, its primary focus is on “masculinity and the place of white
heterosexual men in North America and European societies.” As previously
stated, some masculinists believe that differentiated gender roles are natural.
There is considerable evidence for social influences (e.g. gender division of
labor, socialization) as the sole or primary origin of gender differentiation.
Furthermore, belief in inherent gender differences allows for inequality and
for the dominant group to assert power by means of perceived difference.
Despite the concern of some feminist groups towards the rights of men, some
masculinist movements are explicitly antifeminist. According to Blais and
Dupuis-Déri, “the contents of websites and the testimony of feminists that
we questioned confirm that masculinists are generally critical of even moderate
feminists and feminists at the head of official feminist organizations.”
Masculinist activism has involved disruption of events organized by feminists
and lawsuits against feminist academics, journalists, or activists.
Furthermore, masculinist actions are sometimes extreme; father’s rights
activists have bombed family courts in Australia and have issued bomb threats
in the UK, although it is ambiguous whether there was public and organized
militant group involvement. They have also engaged in “tire-slashing, the
mailing of excrement-filled packages, threats against politicians and their
children.” Spokesmen for these groups have also spoken out against public
awareness campaigns to prevent sexual assault, arguing that they portray a
negative image of men, and one masculinist group harassed administrators of
dozens of battered women’s shelters and women’s centers. Education
Employment Family
