Medical torture Medical torture describes the involvement and sometimes active
participation of medical professionals in acts of torture, either to judge what
victims can endure, to apply treatments which will enhance torture, or as
torturers in their own right. Medical torture may be called medical
interrogation if it involves the use of their expert medical knowledge to
facilitate interrogation or corporal punishment, in the conduct of torturous
human experimentation or in providing professional medical sanction and
approval for the torture of prisoners. Medical torture also covers torturous
scientific (or pseudo-scientific) experimentation upon unwilling human
subjects. Medical ethics and international law. It is generally accepted that
medical torture fundamentally violates medical ethics, which all medical
practitioners are expected to adhere to. Asserted medical or professional
complicity. According to the Center for Constitutional Rights' When Healers
Harm campaign, health professionals were complicit in the torture and abuse of
detainees during the so-called “war on terror” of U.S. President George W.
Bush. Health professionals are those who are trained or licensed in a healing
profession, including: medical doctors, psychiatrists, medical examiners,
psychologists, and nurses. All of these professions have been implicated in the
torture and abuse of prisoners in CIA secret prisons and in military detention
centers, such as those in Guantánamo, Afghanistan, and Iraq. State licensing
boards and the professional associations have the responsibility to uphold
medical ethics and to hold medical professionals accountable for their
participation in abuse. To date, none of these bodies has investigated – nor,
in some cases, even acknowledged – abusive conduct by individual members of
their professions. In 2009, after years of denial, the American Psychological
Association finally recognized that psychologists had engaged in torture.
However, the American Psychological Association has yet to acknowledge that
psychologists were in fact integral to the Bush Administration’s torture
policy. Some criticize the APA for failing to respond to allegations of
“collusion between APA officials and the national security apparatus in
providing ethical cover for psychologists’ participation in detainee abuse."
[http://psychoanalystsopposewar.org/blog/2009/06/29/open-letter-in-response-to-
the-american-psychological-association-board/] Although the American Medical
Association has made clear that physicians should not be involved in
interrogations of any kind, it continues to insist that it has “no specific
knowledge of doctors being involved in abuse or torture,” despite widely
known evidence to the contrary, including government documents and Office of
Legal Counsel memos, a report by the International Committee of the Red Cross
and multiple accounts by survivors.[http://armed-services.senate.gov/
Publications/Detainee%20Report%20Final_April%2022%202009.pdf][http://
www.aclu.org/safefree/general/olc_memos.html]
