Moldavia Moldavia ( ) is a geographic and historical region and former
principality in Eastern Europe, corresponding to the territory between the
Eastern Carpathians and the Dniester river. An initially independent and later
autonomous state, it existed from the 14th century to 1859, when it united with
Wallachia as the basis of the modern Romanian state; at various times, the
state included the regions of Bessarabia (with the Budjak), all of Bukovina and
(under Stephen the Great) Pokuttya. The western part of Moldavia is now part of
Romania and the eastern part belongs to the Republic of Moldova, while the
northern and south-eastern parts are territories of Ukraine. Name and
etymology. In several early references, "Moldavia" is rendered under the
composite form "Moldo-Wallachia" (in the same way Wallachia may appear as
"Hungro-Wallachia"). Ottoman Turkish references to Moldavia included "Boğdan
Iflak" (meaning "Bogdan's Wallachia") and "Boğdan" (and occasionally "Kara-
Boğdan" - "Black Bogdania"). "See also: Name in other languages". The name of
the region in other languages: , , , , History. Early Middle Ages. In the early
13th century A.D., the "Brodniks", a possible Slavic–Vlach vassal state of
Halych, were present, alongside the Vlachs, in much of the region's territory
(towards 1216, the Brodniks are mentioned as in service of Suzdal). On the
border between Halych and the Brodniks, in the 11th century, a Viking by the
name of "Rodfos" was killed in the area by Vlachs who supposedly betrayed him.
[http://www.vikingart.com/VArt/PS_Sjonhem.htm] In 1164, the future Byzantine
Emperor Andronicus I Comnenus, was taken prisoner by Vlach shepherds around the
same region. High Middle Ages. Later in the 13th century, King Charles I of
Hungary attempted to expand his realm and the influence of the Roman Catholic
Church eastwards after the fall of Cuman rule, and ordered a campaign under the
command of Phynta de Mende (1324). In 1342 and 1345, the Hungarians were
victorious in a battle against Tatars; the conflict was resolved by the death
of Jani Beg, in 1357. The Polish chronicler Jan Długosz mentioned Moldavians
(under the name "Wallachians") as having joined a military expedition in 1342,
under King Władysław I, against the Margraviate of Brandenburg. In 1353,
Dragoş, mentioned as a Vlach "Knyaz" in Maramureş, was sent by Louis I to
establish a line of defense against the Golden Horde forces on the Siret River.
This expedition resulted in a polity vassal to Hungary, centered around Baia
("Târgul Moldovei" or "Moldvabánya"). Bogdan of Cuhea, another Vlach voivode
from Maramureş who had fallen out with the Hungarian king, crossed the
Carpathians in 1359, took control of Moldavia, and succeeded in removing
Moldavia from Hungarian control. His realm extended north to the Cheremosh
River, while the southern part of Moldavia was still occupied by the Tatars.
After first residing in Baia, Bogdan moved Moldavia's seat to Siret (it was to
remain there until Petru Muşat moved it to Suceava; it was finally moved to
Iaşi under Alexandru Lăpuşneanu - in 1565). The area around Suceava, roughly
correspondent to future Bukovina, formed one of the two administrative
divisions of the new realm, under the name "Ţara de Sus" (the "Upper Land"),
whereas the rest, on both sides of the Prut River, formed "Ţara de Jos" (the
"Lower Land"). Disfavored by the brief union of Angevin Poland and Hungary (the
latter was still the country's overlord), Bogdan's successor Laţcu accepted
conversion to Roman Catholicism around 1370, but his gesture was to remain
without consequences. Despite remaining officially Eastern Orthodox and
culturally connected with the Byzantine Empire after 1382, princes of the
Muşatin family entered a conflict with the Constantinople Patriarchy over
control of appointments to the newly founded Moldavian Metropolitan seat;
Patriarch Antony IV even cast an anathema over Moldavia after Roman I expelled
his appointee back to Byzantium. The crisis was finally settled in favor of the
Moldavian princes under Alexandru cel Bun. Nevertheless, religious policy
remained complex: while conversions to faiths other than Orthodox were
discouraged (and forbidden for princes), Moldavia included sizable Roman
Catholic communities (Germans and Hungarians), as well as non-Chalcedonic
Armenians; after 1460, the country welcomed Hussite refugees (founders of
Ciuburciu and, probably, Huşi). The principality of Moldavia covered the
entire geographic region of Moldavia. In various periods, various other
territories were politically connected with the Moldavian principality. This is
the case of the province of Pokuttya, the fiefdoms of Cetatea de Baltă and
Ciceu (both in Transylvania) or, at a later date, the territories between the
Dniester and the Bug Rivers. Petru I profited from the end of the Hungarian-
Polish union, and moved the country closer to the Jagiellon realm, becoming a
vassal of Władysław II on September 26, 1387. This gesture was to have
unexpected consequences: Petru supplied the Polish ruler with funds needed in
the war against the Teutonic Knights, and was granted control over Pokuttya
until the debt was to be repaid; as this is not recorded to have been carried
out, the region became disputed by the two states, until it was lost by
Moldavia in the Battle of Obertyn (1531). Prince Petru also expanded his rule
southwards to the Danube Delta, and established a frontier with Wallachia; his
brother Roman I conquered the Hungarian-ruled Cetatea Albă in 1392, giving
Moldavia an outlet to the Black Sea, before being toppled from the throne for
supporting Theodor Koriatovich in his conflict with Vytautas the Great of
Lithuania. Under Stephen I, growing Polish influence was challenged by
Sigismund of Hungary, whose expedition was defeated at Ghindăoani in 1385;
however, Stephen disappeared in mysterious circumstances, and the throne was
soon occupied by Yury Koriatovich (Vytautas' favorite). Alexandru cel Bun,
although brought to the throne in 1400 by the Hungarians (with assistance from
Mircea I of Wallachia), shifted his allegiances towards Poland (notably
engaging Moldavian forces on the Polish side in the Battle of Grunwald and the
Siege of Marienburg), and placed his own choice of rulers in Wallachia. His
reign was one of the most successful in Moldavia's history, but also saw the
very first confrontation with the Ottoman Turks at Cetatea Albă in 1420, and
later even a conflict with the Poles. A deep crisis was to follow Alexandru's
long reign, with his successors battling each other in a succession of wars
that divided the country until the murder of Bogdan II and the ascension of
Petru Aron in 1451. Nevertheless, Moldavia was subject to further Hungarian
interventions after that moment, as Matthias Corvinus deposed Aron and backed
Alexăndrel to the throne in Suceava. Petru Aron's rule also signified the
beginning of Moldavia's Ottoman Empire allegiance, as the ruler agreed to pay
tribute to Sultan Mehmed II. Late Middle Ages. Under Stephen the Great, who
took the throne and subsequently came to an agreement with Kazimierz IV of
Poland in 1457, the state reached its most glorious period. Stephen blocked
Hungarian interventions in the Battle of Baia, invaded Wallachia in 1471, and
dealt with Ottoman reprisals in a major victory (the 1475 Battle of Vaslui);
after feeling threatened by Polish ambitions, he also attacked Galicia and
resisted Polish reprisals in the Battle of the Cosmin Forest (1497). However,
he had to surrender Chilia (Kiliya) and Cetatea Albă (Bilhorod-Dnistrovs'kyi),
the two main fortresses in the Bujak, to the Ottomans in 1484, and in 1498 he
had to accept Ottoman suzereignty, when he was forced to agree to continue
paying tribute to Sultan Bayezid II. Following the taking of Hotin (Khotyn) and
Pokuttya, Stephen's rule also brought a brief extension of Moldavian rule into
Transylvania: Cetatea de Baltă and Ciceu became his fiefs in 1489. Early
Modern Era and Renaissance. Under Bogdan III cel Orb, Ottoman overlordship was
confirmed in the shape that would rapidly evolve into control over Moldavia's
affairs. Petru Rareş, who reigned in the 1530s and 1540s, clashed with the
Habsburg Monarchy over his ambitions in Transylvania (losing possessions in the
region to George Martinuzzi), was defeated in Pokuttya by Poland, and failed in
his attempt to extricate Moldavia from Ottoman rule – the country lost Bender
to the Ottomans, who included it in their Silistra Eyalet. A period of profound
crisis followed. Moldavia stopped issuing its own coinage circa 1520, under
Prince Ştefăniţă, when it was confronted with rapid depletion of funds and
rising demands from the Porte. Such problems became endemic when the country,
brought into the Great Turkish War, suffered the impact of the Stagnation of
the Ottoman Empire; at one point, during the 1650s and 1660s, princes began
relying on counterfeit coinage (usually copies of Swedish riksdalers, as was
that issued by Eustratie Dabija). The economic decline was accompanied by a
failure to maintain state structures: the feudal-based Moldavian military
forces were no longer convoked, and the few troops maintained by the rulers
remained professional mercenaries such as the "seimeni". However, Moldavia and
the similarly affected Wallachia remained both important sources of income for
the Ottoman Empire and relatively prosperous agricultural economies (especially
as suppliers of grain and cattle – the latter was especially relevant in
Moldavia, which remained an under-populated country of pastures). In time, much
of the resources were tied to the Ottoman economy, either through monopolies on
trade which were only lifted in 1829, after the Treaty of Adrianople (which did
not affect all domains directly), or through the raise in direct taxes - the
one demanded by the Ottomans from the princes, as well as the ones demanded by
the princes from the country's population. Taxes were directly proportional
with Ottoman requests, but also with the growing importance of Ottoman
appointment and sanctioning of princes in front of election by the boyars and
the boyar Council – "Sfatul boieresc" (drawing in a competition among
pretenders, which also implied the intervention of creditors as suppliers of
bribes). The fiscal system soon included taxes such as the "văcărit" (a tax
on head of cattle), first introduced by Iancu Sasul in the 1580s. The economic
opportunities offered brought about a significant influx of Greek and Levantine
financiers and officials, who entered a stiff competition with the high boyars
over appointments to the Court. As the manor system suffered the blows of
economic crises, and in the absence of salarisation (which implied that persons
in office could decide their own income), obtaining princely appointment became
the major focus of a boyar's career. Such changes also implied the decline of
free peasantry and the rise of serfdom, as well as the rapid fall in the
importance of low boyars (a traditional institution, the latter soon became
marginal, and, in more successful instances, added to the population of towns);
however, they also implied a rapid transition towards a monetary economy, based
on exchanges in foreign currency. Serfdom was doubled by the much less numerous
slave population, composed of migrant Roma and captured Nogais. The conflict
between princes and boyars was to become exceptionally violent – the latter
group, who frequently appealed to the Ottoman court in order to have princes
comply with its demands, was persecuted by rulers such as Alexandru
Lăpuşneanu and Ioan Vodă cel Cumplit. Ioan Vodă's revolt against the
Ottomans ended in his execution (1574). The country descended into political
chaos, with frequent Ottoman and Tatar incursions and pillages. The claims of
Muşatins to the crown and the traditional system of succession were ended by
scores of illegitimate reigns; one of the usurpers, Ioan Iacob Heraclid, was a
Protestant Greek who encouraged the Renaissance and attempted to introduce
Lutheranism to Moldavia. In 1595, the rise of the Movileşti boyars to the
throne with Ieremia Movilă coincided with the start of frequent anti-Ottoman
and anti-Habsburg military expeditions of the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth
into Moldavian territory (see "Moldavian Magnate Wars"), and rivalries between
pretenders to the Moldavian throne encouraged by the three competing powers.
The Wallachian prince Michael the Brave deposed Prince Ieremia in 1600, and
managed to become the very first monarch to unite Moldavia, Wallachia, and
Transylvania under his rule; the episode ended in Polish conquests of lands
down to Bucharest, soon ended by the outbreak of the Polish-Swedish War and the
reestablishment of Ottoman rule. Polish incursions were dealt a blow by the
Ottomans during the 1620 Battle of Cecora, which also saw an end to the reign
of Gaspar Graziani. The following period of relative peace saw the more
prosperous and prestigious rule of Vasile Lupu, who took the throne as a boyar
appointee in 1637, and began battling his rival Gheorghe Ştefan, as well as
the Wallachian prince Matei Basarab – however, his invasion of Wallachia with
the backing of Cossack Hetman Bohdan Khmelnytsky ended in disaster at the
Battle of Finta (1653). A few years later, Moldavia was occupied for two short
intervals by the anti-Ottoman Wallachian prince Constantin Şerban, who clashed
with the first ruler of the Ghica family, Gheorghe Ghica. In the early 1680s,
Moldavian troops under George Ducas intervened in Right-bank Ukraine and
assisted Mehmed IV in the Battle of Vienna, only to suffer the effects of the
Great Turkish War. Phanariots (1711-1822). During the late 17th century,
Moldavia became the target of the Russian Empire's southwards expansion,
inaugurated by Peter the Great during the Russo-Turkish War of 1710-1711;
Prince Dimitrie Cantemir's siding with Peter and open anti-Ottoman rebellion,
ended in defeat at Stănileşti, provoked Sultan Ahmed III's reaction, and the
official discarding of recognition of local choices for princes, imposing
instead a system which relied solely on Ottoman approval – the Phanariote
epoch, inaugurated by the reign of Nicholas Mavrocordatos. Short and frequently
ended through violence, Phanariote rules were usually marked by political
corruption, intrigue, and high taxation, as well as by sporadic incursions of
Habsburg and Russian armies deep into Moldavian territory; nonetheless, they
also saw attempts at legislative and administrative modernization inspired by
The Enlightenment (such as Constantine Mavrocordatos' decision to salirize
public offices, to the outrage of boyars, and the abolition of serfdom in 1749,
as well as Scarlat Callimachi's "Code"), and signified a decrease in Ottoman
demands after the threat of Russian annexation became real and the prospects of
a better life led to waves of peasant emigration to neighboring lands. The
effects of Ottoman control were also made less notable after the 1774 Treaty of
Kucuk Kaynarca allowed Russia to intervene in favour of Ottoman subjects of the
Eastern Orthodox faith - leading to campaigns of petitioning by the Moldavian
boyars against princely policies. In 1712, Hotin was taken over by the
Ottomans, and became part of a defensive system that Moldavian princes were
required to maintain, as well as an area for Islamic colonization (the Laz
community). Moldavia also lost Bukovina, Suceava included, to the Habsburgs in
1772, which meant both an important territorial loss and a major blow to the
cattle trade (as the region stood on the trade route to Central Europe). The
1792 Treaty of Jassy forced the Ottoman Empire to cede all of its holdings in
what is now Transnistria to Russia, which made Russian presence much more
notable, given that the Empire acquired a common border with Moldavia. The
first effect of this was the cession of Bessarabia to the Russian Empire, in
1812 (through the Treaty of Bucharest). Organic Statute, 1848 revolution, and
union with Wallachia. Phanariote rules were officially ended after the 1821
occupation of the country by Alexander Ypsilantis' Filiki Eteria during the
Greek War of Independence; the subsequent Ottoman retaliation brought the rule
of Ioan Sturdza, considered as the first one of a new system – especially
since, in 1826, the Ottomans and Russia agreed to allow for the election by
locals of rulers over the two Danubian Principalities, and convened on their
mandating for seven-year terms. In practice, a new fundament to reigns in
Moldavia was created by the Russo-Turkish War of 1828-1829, and a period of
Russian domination over the two countries which ended only in 1856: begun as a
military occupation under the command of Pavel Kiselyov, Russian domination
gave Wallachia and Moldavia, which were not removed from nominal Ottoman
control, the modernizing "Organic Statute" (the first document resembling a
constitution, as well as the first one to regard both principalities). After
1829, the country also became an important destination for immigration of
Ashkenazi Jews from the Kingdom of Galicia and Lodomeria and areas of Russia
("see History of the Jews in Romania and Sudiţi"). The first Moldavian rule
established under the Statute, that of Mihail Sturdza, was nonetheless
ambivalent: eager to reduce abuse of office. Sturdza introduced reforms (the
abolition of slavery, secularization, economic rebuilding), but he was widely
seen as enforcing his own power over that of the newly instituted consultative
Assembly. A supporter of the union of his country with Wallachia and of
Romanian Romantic nationalism, he obtained the establishment of a customs union
between the two countries (1847) and showed support for radical projects
favored by low boyars; nevertheless, he clamped down with noted violence the
Moldavian revolutionary attempt in the last days of March 1848. Grigore
Alexandru Ghica allowed the exiled revolutionaries to return to Moldavia cca.
1853, which led to the creation of "Partida Naţională" (the "National
Party"), a trans-boundary group of radical union supporters which campaigned
for a single state under a foreign dynasty. Russian domination ended abruptly
after the Crimean War, when the Treaty of Paris passed the two principalities
under the tutelage of Great European Powers (together with Russia and the
Ottoman overlord, power-sharing included the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Ireland, the Austrian Empire, the French Empire, the Kingdom of Piedmont-
Sardinia, and Prussia). Due to Austrian and Ottoman opposition and British
reserves, the union program as demanded by radical campaigners was debated
intensely. In September 1857, given that "Caimacam" Nicolae Vogoride had
perpetrated fraud in elections in Moldavia in July, the Powers allowed the two
states to convene "Ad-hoc divans", which were to decide a new constitutional
framework; the result showed overwhelming support for the union, as the
creation of a liberal and neutral state. After further meetings among leaders
of tutor states, an agreement was reached (the "Paris Convention"), whereby a
limited union was to be enforced – separate governments and thrones, with
only two bodies (a Court of Cassation and a Central Commission residing in
Focşani); it also stipulated that an end to all privilege was to be passed
into law, and awarded back to Moldavia the areas around Bolhrad, Cahul, and
Izmail. However, the Convention failed to note whether the two thrones could
not be occupied by the same person, allowing "Partida Naţională" to introduce
the candidacy of Alexander John Cuza in both countries. On January 17 (January
5, 1859 Old Style), in Iaşi, he was elected prince of Moldavia by the
respective electoral body. After street pressure over the much more
conservative body in Bucharest, Cuza was elected in Wallachia as well (February
5/January 24). Exactly three years later, after diplomatic missions that helped
remove opposition to the action, the formal union created the United
Principalities (the basis of modern Romania) and instituted Cuza as "Domnitor"
(all legal matters were clarified after the replacement of the prince with
Carol of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen in April 1866, and the creation of an
independent Kingdom of Romania in 1881) - this officially ending the existence
of the Principality of Moldavia. Slavery. Slavery () was part of the social
order from before the founding of the Principality of Moldavia, until it was
abolished in stages during the 1840s and 1850s. Most of the slaves were of Roma
(Gypsy) ethnicity. There were also slaves of Tatar ethnicity, probably
prisoners captured from the wars with the Nogai and Crimean Tatars. The
institution of slavery was first attested in a 1470 Moldavian document, through
which Prince Stephan the Great frees Oană, a Tatar slave who had fled to
Jagiellon Poland. The exact origins of slavery are not known, slavery being a
common practice in Europe at the time. In the Byzantine Empire, they were
slaves of the state and it seems the situation was the same in Bulgaria and
Serbia until their social organization was changed by the Ottoman conquest.
Historian Nicolae Iorga associated the Roma people's arrival with the 1241
Mongol invasion of Europe and considered their slavery as a vestige of that
era, the Romanians taking the Roma from the Mongols as slaves and preserving
their status. Other historians consider that they were enslaved while captured
during the battles with the Tatars. The practice of enslaving prisoners may
also have been taken from the Mongols. The ethnic identity of the "Tatar
slaves" is unknown, they could have been captured Tatars of the Golden Horde,
Cumans, or the slaves of Tatars and Cumans. While it is possible that some
Romani people were slaves or auxiliary troops of the Mongols or Tatars, the
bulk of them came from south of the Danube, making slavery a widespread
practice. The Tatar slaves, smaller in numbers, were eventually merged into the
Roma population. Traditionally, Roma slaves were divided into three categories.
The smallest was owned by the "hospodars", and went by the Romanian-language
name of "ţigani domneşti" ("Gypsies belonging to the lord"). The two other
categories comprised "ţigani mănăstireşti" ("Gypsies belonging to the
monasteries"), who were the property of Romanian Orthodox and Greek Orthodox
monasteries, and "ţigani boiereşti" ("Gypsies belonging to the boyars"), who
were enslaved by the category of landowners. The abolition of slavery was
carried out following a campaign by young revolutionaries who embraced the
liberal ideas of the Enlightenment. In 1844, Moldavian Prince Mihail Sturdza
proposed a law on the freeing of slaves owned by the church and state. By the
1850s, the movement gained support from almost the whole of Romanian society,
and, in December 1855, following a proposal by Prince Grigore Alexandru Ghica,
a bill drafted by Mihail Kogălniceanu and Petre Mavrogheni was adopted by the
Divan; the law emancipated all slaves to the status of taxpayers (citizens).
Support for the abolitionists was reflected in Romanian literature of the mid-
19h century. The issue of the Roma slavery became a theme in the literary works
of various liberal and Romantic intellectuals, many of whom were active in the
abolitionist camp. The Romanian abolitionist movement was also influenced by
the much larger movement against Black slavery in the United States through
press reports and through a translation of Harriet Beecher Stowe's "Uncle Tom's
Cabin". Translated by Theodor Codrescu and first published in Iaşi in 1853,
under the name "Coliba lui Moşu Toma sau Viaţa negrilor în sudul Statelor
Unite din America" (which translates back as "Uncle Toma's Cabin or the Life of
Blacks in the Southern United States of America"), it was the first American
novel to be published in Romanian, and it included a foreword study on slavery
by Mihail Kogălniceanu. Geography. Geographically, Moldavia is limited by the
Carpathian Mountains to the West, the Cheremosh River to the North, the
Dniester River to the East and the Danube and Black Sea to the South. The Prut
River flows approximately through its middle from north to south. Of late 15th
century Moldavia, with an area of approximately , the biggest part is located
in Romania (47.5%), followed by the Republic of Moldova (30.5%) and Ukraine
(22%). This represents 88% of the Republic of Moldova's surface, 19.5% of
Romania's surface, and 3.5% of Ukraine's surface. The region is mostly hilly,
with a range of mountains in the west, and plain areas in the southeast.
Moldavia's highest altitude is Ineu peak (2,279m), which is also the
westernmost point of the region. Population. Historical population.
Contemporary historians estimate the populatian of the Moldavian Principality
in the 15th century, at between 250,000 - 600,000 people, but an extensive
catagraphy was first conducted in 1769-1774. In 1848, the northwestern part,
annexed in 1775 by the Habsburg Empire, Bukovina, had a population of 377,571;
in 1856, the eastern half of Moldavia, Bessarabia, annexed in 1812 by the
Russian Empire, had a population of 990,274, while the population of Moldavia
proper (the western half), in 1859, was 1,463,927. Current population. 1There
is an ongoing dispute over whether Romanians and Moldovans are the same ethnic
group, namely whether Moldovans' self-identification constitutes an ethnic
group distinct and apart from Romanians or a subset. At the Moldovan and
Ukrainian censa, citizens could declare only one nationality. Consequently, one
could not declare oneself both Moldovan and Romanian. 2Includes people who
declared themselves as Romanians.
