Moldovans Moldovans or Moldavians (in Moldovan/Romanian "moldoveni" ; also
written "молдовень" in the Moldovan Cyrillic script currently used
only in Transnistria) are the current inhabitants of the territory of
historical Principality of Moldavia. The territory is currently divided among
Romania (42%), Ukraine (24%, including Northern Bukovina, Hertsa, Northern
Bessarabia and Budjak) and the Republic of Moldova (34%). This article refers
primarily to the Romance-speakers of the Republic of Moldova, the historical
Bessarabia and diaspora originating from these regions. There is an ongoing
controversy whether Moldovans are a fully fledged ethnic group or a subgroup of
the Romanian ethnic group. Population. Moldovan self-awareness. A poll
conducted in the Republic of Moldova by IMAS-Inc Chisinau in October 2009
presented a detailed picture. The respondents were asked to rate the
relationship between the identity of Moldovans and that of Romanians on a scale
between 1 (entirely the same) to 5 (completely different). The poll showed that
26% of the entire sample, which included all ethnic groups, claimed the two
identities were the same or very similar, whereas 47% claimed they were
different or entirely different. The results varied significantly among
different categories of subjects. For instance, while 33% of the young
respondents (ages 18–29) chose the same or very similar and 44% different or
very different, among the senior respondents (aged over 60) the corresponding
figures were 18.5% and 53%. The proportion of those who chose the same or very
similar identity was higher than the average among the native speakers of
Romanian/Moldovan (30%), among the urban dwellers (30%), among those with
higher education (36%), and among the residents of the capital city (42%).
According to a study conducted in the Republic of Moldova in May 1998, when the
self-declared Moldovans were asked to relate the Romanian and Moldovan
identities, 55% considered them somewhat different, 26% very different and less
than 5% identical. A survey carried out in the Republic of Moldova by William
Crowther in 1992 showed that 87% of the Romanian/Moldovan speakers chose to
identify themselves as "Moldovans", rather than "Romanians". Moldovan
intellectuals and the Romanian identity. As opposed to large segments of the
population, a significant number of major Moldovan intellectuals considered
themselves part of the Romanian nation. Alexei Mateevici (1888–1917), author
of the current Moldovan anthem Limba noastră said at a congress of Bessarabian
teachers in 1917: "Yes, we are Moldovans, sons of the old Moldavia, but we
belong to the large body of the Romanian nation, that lives in Romania,
Bukovina and Transylvania. Our brothers from Bukovina, Transylvania and
Macedonia don't call themselves after the places they live in, but call
themselves Romanians. That is what we should do as well!" Emanoil Catelli
(1883–1943) a politician of the Moldavian Democratic Republic, and later of
Romania, said in 1917: „The Moldovans who remained silent for 106 years,
should speak louder today [...] because they are Romanians, and only the
Russians demoted them to the role of "Moldovans". Maria Cebotari (1910–1949)
one of the most famous sopranos born in Bessarabia said „Never and in no
circumstance has it crossed my mind to say that I am anything else than a
Romanian from Bessarabia, or, simply, a Romanian.“ Eugen Doga (b. 1937), a
famous Moldovan composer, explained in an interview his visit to Alba-Iulia
(Romania) "This is the capital of the unification, a real Mecca [...]. I think
people come here not forced, but freely, for a return to their brothers"
Gheorghe Duca (b. 1952), president of the Moldovan Academy of Sciences said
"Just like the whole Romanian nation, that Grigore Vieru praised, I cannot
believe the Poet left home forever" Constantin Tănase (b. 1949), director of
the Moldovan newspaper ""Timpul de dimineață"", one of the most influential
opinion leaders from Moldova "The academia, the political and cultural elite
has to show that Romanianness in the Republic of Moldova is not an extremist
whim, but a reality and a condition of the existence of this state" The
resolution of the "Association of Historians from the Republic of Moldova"
(AIRM) from October 28, 2009 in favor of teaching the history of Romanians in
Moldovan schools reads "The people of the Moldovan SSR were subjected to the
Communist ideology, with the aim of replacing the Romanian identity of the
native population, with one newly created" The welcome message of the Union of
Writers from Moldova is a quote from Mircea Eliade: "We invite you to become
initiated in the literary life of Bessarabia, border Romanian land subjected to
a long, too long terror of history" The national poet of Moldova and Romania,
Mihai Eminescu was born and lived outside of the territory of the current
Republic of Moldova and considered himself Romanian. He is often quoted as
saying ""We are Romanians and period/Suntem români şi punct"". Censuses. The
2004 census results reported that out of the 3,383,332 people living in Moldova
(without Transnistria), 75.81% declared themselves Moldovans and only 2.17%
Romanians. A group of international observers considered the census was
generally conducted in a professional manner, although they reported several
cases when enumerators encouraged respondents to declare themselves Moldovans
rather than Romanians. The 2001 census in Ukraine counted 258,600 Moldovans and
150,989 Romanians. The self-identified Moldovans live mostly in the historical
regions of Bessarabia (the Budjak region of the Odessa oblast and the
Novoselytskyi Raion of Chernivtsi oblast), whereas the self-identified
Romanians live mostly in the Northern Bukovina and Hertsa regions of the
Chernivtsi oblast. In Russia, 172,330 Moldovans have been counted in the 2002
Russian census. They are concentrated mostly in Moscow, but also in some rural
areas in Kuban, southern Siberia, and the Russian Far East, where they were
deported generations ago. Around 20,000 Moldovans live in Kazakhstan, mostly in
the former capital Almaty, but also in some rural areas in the northern parts
of the country (another destination of Soviet deportations). Regional identity
in Romania. The largest share (47.5%) of the territory of the historical
Principality of Moldavia together with all its formal capitals (Târgul
Moldovei, Suceava and Iaşi) and the famous painted churches are located in
Romania. The river Moldova (possibly, the origin of the name of the
Principality, see "Etymology of Moldova") now flows entirely through Romania.
After the Russian annexation of Bessarabia in 1812, and Austrian annexation of
Bukovina in 1775, the rest of Moldova united with Walachia and formed the
modern Romania. According to the Romanian census of 2002, there are 4.7 million
Romanian speakers in the 8 counties that were once part of the Principality of
Moldavia. The number of people, if any, who possibly declared themselves as
Moldovans in this census is impossible to know, since Moldovan is officially
considered a regional identity in Romania. The Romanian-speaking inhabitants of
these counties generally refer to themselves as "Moldavians", but declare
Romanian ethnicity. In February 2007, a small group of Romanian citizens who
created the "Moldovan/Moldavian Community in Romania" (Comunitatea moldovenilor
din România) attempted unsuccessfully to gain recognition of the minority
status for Moldovans from Romania. The organization was initially registered
legally, but the decision was soon reverted. Around the same time, during a
visit to Moldova, three delegates met with President Vladimir Voronin, who
promised them his support. Being denied legal recognition the Community
eventually dissolved. In 1998, Constantin Simirad, the former mayor of Iaşi
founded the Party of the Moldavians "(Partidul Moldovenilor)" which later
joined the Social Democratic Party. However, the party's declared objective was
to represent the interests of the Moldavia region in Romania rather than any
ethnic identification. In Romania, the Moldovans from Bessarabia are usually
called Bessarabians "(basarabeni)" in order to distinguish them from the
inhabitants of Eastern Romania. Identity in the historical Principality of
Moldova. According to Miron Costin, a prominent chronicler from the 17th
century Moldavia, the inhabitants of the Principality of Moldavia spoke
Romanian and called themselves "Moldovans", but also "Romanians" which, he
notes, comes from "romanus". Also, the Slavic neighbours called Moldovans
"Vlachs" or "Volokhs", a term equally used to refer to all native Romance
speakers from Eastern Europe and the Balkan peninsula. As the ethnonym
"Romanian" was gaining more and more popularity throughout the West Moldavia
and Bukovina during the 19th century, its dissemination in Bessarabia, a more
backward and rural province of the Russian Empire at the time, was welcomed
mostly by the Romanian-oriented intellectuals, while the majority of the rural
population continued to use the old self-identification "Moldovans". Until the
1920s, historians generally considered Moldovans as a subgroup of the Romanian
ethnos. After 1924, within the newly created Moldavian Autonomous Soviet
Socialist Republic, Soviet authorities supported the creation of a different
standardized language (see Moldovan language) to prove that Moldovans form a
separate ethnic group. If in the past, the term "Moldovan" has been used to
refer to the population of the historical Principality of Moldavia. However,
for the inhabitants of Bessarabia living under the Russian rule, the term
gained an ethnic connotation by the beginning 20th century: in May 1917, at a
congress of Bessarabian teachers, a dispute arose over the identification of
the native population; a group protested against being called "Romanians",
affirming they were "Moldovan", while another group, led by the poet Alexei
Mateevici, supported the view that the Moldovans are also Romanians. In 1918,
Bessarabia joined the Kingdom of Romania, following a vote of Sfatul Ţării.
The circumstance of the vote was itself complex, since the Romanian troops were
present in Bessarabia at the request of the Sfatul Ţării as it was facing
exterior threats and anarchy. By the time of the union, the largely illiterate
Romanian-speaking peasants of Bessarabia did not consider themselves part of a
larger Romanian nation, and there was no mass nationalist movement as in other
regions, such as Transylvania. The unified Romanian state promoted a common
identity for all its Romanian-speaking inhabitants. Owing partly to its
relative underdevelopment compared to other regions of Greater Romania, as well
as to the low competence and corruption of the new Romanian administration in
this province, the integration process of Bessarabia in the unified Romanian
state was less successful than in other regions and was soon to be disrupted by
the Soviet occupation. In 1940, during World War II, Romania agreed to an
ultimatum and ceded the region to the Soviet Union, which organized it into the
Moldavian SSR. The Soviets began a campaign to strengthen the Moldovan identity
different from that of the rest of Romanian speakers, taking advantage of the
incomplete integration of the Bessarabia into the interwar Romania (see also
Moldovenism). The official Soviet policy also stated that Romanian and Moldovan
were two different languages and, to emphasize this distinction, Moldovan had
to be written in a new Cyrillic alphabet (the Moldovan alphabet) based on the
Russian Cyrillic, rather than the older Romanian Cyrillic that ceased to be
used in the 19th century in the Old Kingdom and 1917 in Bessarabia. Identity
and politics in Moldova. The major Moldovan political forces have diverging
opinions regarding the identity of Moldovans. (see also Controversy over
linguistic and ethnic identity in Moldova). This contradiction is reflected in
their stance toward the national history that should be taught in Moldovans
schools. Forces such as the Liberal Party (PL), Liberal Democratic Party (PLDM)
and Our Moldova Alliance (AMN) support the teaching of the history of
Romanians. Others, such as the Democratic Party (PD) and the Party of
Communists (PCRM) support the history of Republic of Moldova The diverging
opinions are also reflected in the official state documents issued in
successive legislatures. The Declaration of Independence of 1991 calls the
official language "Romanian", and the first anthem adopted by the independent
Moldova was "Deşteaptă-te, române" ("Awaken, Romanian!"), the same as the
anthem of Romania. Mirroring different political configurations of the later
Moldovan Parliament, the Constitution of Moldova (1994) calls the official
language "Moldovan", while the "Concept of the National Policy of the Republic
of Moldova" (2003) adopted by the Communist-dominated Parliament distinguishes
explicitely Moldovans and Romanians as ethnic groups, and so does the census of
2004. Religion in Moldova. The major denomination in Moldova is Eastern
Orthodox Christianity. The majority of Moldovan Orthodox Christians belong to
the Moldovan Orthodox Church, a branch of the Russian Orthodox Church, while a
minority belongs to the Metropolis of Bessarabia, a branch of the Romanian
Orthodox Church. Both bodies are in full communion, the dispute between them
being purely territorial and revolves around the legitimate succession of the
interwar Metropolitan See of Bessarabia. As of 2007, the Moldovan Orthodox
Church has 1255 parishes, while the Metropolis of Bessarabia has 219.
