Efforts to impeach George W. Bush During the presidency of George W. Bush,
several American politicians sought to either investigate Bush for allegedly
impeachable offenses, or to bring actual impeachment charges on the floor of
the United States House of Representatives Judiciary Committee. The most
significant of these efforts occurred on June 10, 2008, when Congressman Dennis
Kucinich, along with co-sponsor Robert Wexler, introduced 35 articles of
impeachment against Bush to the U.S. House of Representatives. The House voted
251 to 166 to refer the impeachment resolution to the Judiciary Committee on
July 25, where no further action was taken on it. Bush's presidency ended on
January 20, 2009, with the completion of his second term in office, rendering
impeachment efforts moot. Kucinich/Wexler impeachment articles. The Kucinich/
Wexler impeachment resolution contained 35 articles covering the Iraq war, the
Valerie Plame affair, creating a case for war with Iran, capture and treatment
of prisoners of war, spying and or wiretapping inside the United States, use of
signing statements, failing to Comply with Congressional Subpoenas, the 2004
elections, medicare, Hurricane Katrina, global warming, and 9/11. The 2003
invasion of Iraq was the most substantial portion of the articles of
impeachment introduced by Kucinich and Wexler. 15 of the 35 articles directly
relate to alleged misconduct by Bush in seeking authority for the war, and in
the conduct of military action itself. Five other articles address allegations
partially or tertiarily relating to the war, including the "outing" of Valerie
Plame, treatment of prisoners (both in Iraq and from operations in Afghanistan
and other countries), and building a case for Iran being a threat based in part
on alleging Iranian actions in Iraq. Justification for invasion. The first 4
impeachment articles charge the president with illegally creating a case for
war with Iraq, including charges of a propaganda campaign, falsely representing
Iraq as responsible for 9/11, and falsely representing Iraq as an imminent
danger to the United States. Legitimacy of invasion. Articles 5 - 8 and 12 deal
with the invasion of Iraq and include charges that funds were misspent before
the war, that the war was in violation of HJRes114, that Iraq was invaded
without a war declaration, that the war is a violation of the UN Charter, and
that the purpose of the war was to control the country's oil supplies. Conduct
of the Iraq war. Articles 9, 10, 11, and 13 deal with conduct of the war,
including failing to provide troops with body armor, falsifying US troop deaths
and injuries, establishing a permanent military base in Iraq, and creating a
secret task force to develop energy and military policies with respect to Iraq
and other countries. Articles 15 and 16 cover contractors in Iraq and charges
that the president misspent money on contractors and provided them with
immunity. Valerie Plame Wilson. Article 14 is about the outing of Valerie Plame
Wilson. Treatment of detainees. Articles 17-20 concern the treatment of
detainees, the "kidnapping" and detention of foreign nationals, and the use of
torture. Attempt to overthrow the government of Iran. Article 21 claims that
the president misled Congress and the American people about threats from Iran,
and supported terrorist organizations within Iran, with the goal of
overthrowing the Iranian government. NSA warrantless surveillance controversy.
Articles 24 and 25 charge the president with illegally spying on American
citizens, directing US telecom companies to create databases of citizens, and
violating the fourth amendment of the US Constitution. Signing statements.
Article 26 concerns the presidential use of signing statements. Congressional
subpoenas. Article 27 is about failing to comply with congressional subpoenas.
2004 elections. Articles 28 and 29 charge the president with tampering with the
2004 elections and violating the Voting Rights Act of 1965. Medicare. Article
30 states "Misleading Congress and the American People in an Attempt to Destroy
Medicare." Katrina. Article 31 concerns the supposed failure to plan and
respond to Hurricane Katrina. Global warming. Article 32 charges the president
with "Systematically Undermining Efforts to Address Global Climate Change." 9/
11. Articles 33, 34 and 35 concern 9/11, alleging that the president failed to
respond to prior intelligence, obstructed post 9/11 investigations and
endangered the health of 9/11 first responders. Political views and actions.
Democrats in Congress. On June 16, 2005 Rep. John Conyers (D-MI) assembled an
unofficial meeting to discuss the Downing Street memo and to consider grounds
for impeachment. Conyers filed a resolution on December 18, 2005 to create an
investigative committee to consider impeachment. His resolution gained 38 co-
sponsors before it expired at the end of the 109th Congress. He did not
reintroduce a similar resolution for the 110th Congress. Keith Ellison was the
leading figure behind the resolution to impeach Bush brought to the Minnesota
State House of Representatives in May 2006. Ellison was elected to the United
States House of Representatives in November 2006. During the campaign and when
he was named to the House Judiciary Committee, Ellison repeatedly called for an
investigation into a possible impeachment. In support of his candidacy, he
“received a $1,000 contribution from ImpeachPAC”. Later, on April 22, 2007,
Ellison met with constituents and listed new conditions for his support for
impeachment hearings, such as verifiable facts and the backing of a majority of
the American people. At another unofficial hearing convened by Conyers on
January 20, 2006, Rep. Jerrold Nadler (D-NY) called for the committee to
explore whether Bush should face impeachment, stemming from his decision to
authorize domestic surveillance without court review. On May 10, 2006, House
Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D-CA) indicated she was not interested in pursuing
impeachment and had taken it "off the table", reiterating this phrase on
November 8, 2006. In July 2007, Pelosi stated that she "would probably
advocate" impeaching Bush if she were not in the House nor Speaker of the
House. On December 8, 2006 (the last day of the 109th Congress), then-
Representative Cynthia McKinney (D-GA) submitted a resolution, H. Res. 1106.
The bill expired along with the 109th Congress. We're hoping that as the cries
for the removal of both Cheney and Bush now reach 46 percent and 58 percent,
respectively, for impeachment, that we could begin to become a little bit more
cooperative, if not even amicable, in trying to get to the truth of these
matters. Presidential candidate Dennis Kucinich's major point in the Democratic
Presidential Debate on October 30, 2007 was that Bush and Cheney should be
impeached for the Iraq war. On November 6, 2007, Kucinich introduced a
resolution to impeach Vice President Cheney in the House of Representatives. In
November 2007, Joe Biden, then a candidate for the Democratic presidential
nomination in 2008, stated that he would move to impeach if President Bush were
to bomb Iran without first gaining congressional approval. However, no such
bombing occurred during the rest of Bush's term. On June 9, 2008,
Representative Dennis Kucinich (D-Ohio), introduced a resolution, , to impeach
president George W. Bush, which included 35 counts in the articles of
impeachment. At the end of the evening on June 10, Kucinich offered a motion to
refer HRes 1258 to the House Judiciary Committee. On June 11, the House voted
251-166 to send the resolution to the Committee. On July 14, 2008, Kucinich
introduced a new impeachment resolution () limited to a single count. State-
level Democratic party actions. On March 21, 2006 the New Mexico Democratic
Party, at a convention in Albuquerque, adopted a plank to their platform saying
“the Democratic Party of New Mexico supports the impeachment of George Bush
and his lawful removal from office.” On March 24, 2007, the Vermont
Democratic State Committee voted to support JRH 15, a state legislative
resolution supporting impeachment, calling for its passage as "appropriate
action." On January 2, 2008, Betty Hall (D), an 87-year-old, fourteen-term
State Representative, introduced New Hampshire House Resolution 24 in the
State-Federal Relations and Veterans Affairs Committee of the New Hampshire
House of Representatives. The resolution was "petitioning Congress to commence
impeachment procedures" against Bush and Cheney for "high crimes and
misdemeanors", including domestic spying, illegal detentions, signing
statements, electioneering, the breaking of international treaties, and war
crimes. The bill further asserted that "section 603 of Jefferson's "Manual of
Parliamentary Practice" states that an impeachment may be set in motion by the
United States House of Representatives by charges transmitted from the
legislature of a state". On February 20, 2008, the bill was ruled "Inexpedient
to Legislate" to pass by a 10 to 5 vote within committee, which passed the
resolution on to the full House for a vote. The bill was tabled in the New
Hampshire House of Representatives on April 16, 2008. After three efforts to
have the bill removed from the table were unsuccessful, it died on the table on
September 24, 2008.
