Muslim Brotherhood The Society of the Muslim Brothers ¬ (, often simply: , the
Muslim Brotherhood, transliterated: "")¬  is the Arab world's most influential
and one of the largest Islamic movements, and is the largest political
opposition organization in many Arab states. Founded in Egypt in 1928 as a Pan-
Islamic, religious, political, and social movement by the Islamic scholar and
schoolteacher Hassan al-Banna, by the end of World War II the MB had an
estimated two million members. Its ideas had gained supporters throughout the
Arab world and influenced other Islamist groups with its "model of political
activism combined with Islamic charity work". The Brotherhood's credo was and
is, "Allah is our objective; the Quran is our law, the Prophet is our leader;
Jihad is our way; and death for the sake of Allah is the highest of our
aspirations." Its most famous slogan, used worldwide, is "Islam is the
solution." The Brotherhood's stated goal is to instill the Qur'an and Sunnah as
the "sole reference point for¬ ...ordering the life of the Muslim family,
individual, community¬ ... and state". The movement officially opposes violent
means to achieve its goals, although it at one time encompassed a paramilitary
wing and its members were involved in massacres, bombings and assassinations of
political opponents; notably Egyptian Prime Minister Mahmoud an-Nukrashi Pasha.
The Muslim Brotherhood started as a religious social organization; preaching
Islam, teaching the illiterate, setting up hospitals and even launching
commercial enterprises. As it continued to rise in influence, starting in 1936,
it began to oppose British rule in Egypt. Many Egyptian nationalists accuse the
MB of violent killings during this period. After the Arab defeat in the First
Arab-Israeli war, the Egyptian government dissolved the organisation and
arrested its members. It supported the Egyptian Revolution of 1952, but after
an attempted assassination of Egypt's president it was once again banned and
repressed. The MB has been suppressed in other countries as well, most notably
in Syria in 1982 during the Hama massacre. The MB is financed by contributions
from its members, who are required to allocate a portion of their income to the
movement. Some of these contributions are from members who work in Saudi Arabia
and other oil-rich countries. Beliefs. The Brotherhood's credo was and is,
"Allah is our objective; the Quran is our law, the Prophet is our leader; Jihad
is our way; and death for the sake of Allah is the highest of our aspirations."
The Brotherhood's English language website describes the "principles of the
Muslim Brotherhood" as including firstly the introduction of the Islamic
Shari`ah as "the basis for controlling the affairs of state and society;" and
secondly work to unify "Islamic countries and states, mainly among the Arab
states, and liberating them from foreign imperialism". According to a
spokesman, the MB believe in reform, democracy, freedom of assembly, press,
etc. interview w/Dr. Mohamed El-Sayed Habib Its founder, Hassan Al-Banna, was
influenced by Islamic reformers Muhammad Abduh and Rashid Rida. In the group's
belief, the Quran and Sunnah constitute a perfect way of life and social and
political organization that God has set out for man. Islamic governments must
be based on this system and eventually unified in a Caliphate. The Muslim
Brotherhood's goal, as stated by Brotherhood founder Hassan al-Banna was to
reclaim Islam's manifest destiny, an empire, stretching from Spain to
Indonesia. It preaches that Islam enjoins man to strive for social justice, the
eradication of poverty and corruption, and political freedom to the extent
allowed by the laws of Islam. The Brotherhood strongly opposes Western
colonialism, and helped overthrow the pro-western monarchies in Egypt and other
Muslim countries during the early 20th century. On the issue of women and
gender the Muslim Brotherhood interprets Islam conservatively. Its founder
called for "a campaign against ostentation in dress and loose behavior",
"segregation of male and female students", a separate curriculum for girls, and
"the prohibition of dancing and other such pastimes ... " The MB is a movement,
not a political party, but members have created political parties in several
countries, such as the Islamic Action Front in Jordan and Hamas in Gaza and the
West Bank and the newly created Freedom and Justice Party in Egypt. These
parties are staffed by Brotherhood members but kept independent from the MB to
some degree, unlike Hizb ut-Tahrir which is highly centralized. There are
breakaway groups from the movement, including the Al-Gama'a al-Islamiyya and Al
Takfir Wal Hijra. Osama bin Laden criticized the Brotherhood, and accused it of
betraying jihad and the ideals of Sayyid Qutb, an influential Brother member
and author of "Milestones". Organization. ‚Äì Executive leadership ‚Äì
Organisational office ‚Äì Secretariat general ‚Äì Education office ‚Äì
Political office ‚Äì Sisters office The Muslim Brotherhood aimed to build a
transnational organisation, founding groups in Lebanon (in 1936), Syria (1937),
and Transjordan (1946). It also recruited among the foreign students in Cairo
where its headquarters became a center and meeting place for representatives
from the whole Muslim world. In each country there is a Branch committee with a
Masul (leader) appointed by the General Executive leadership with essentially
the same Branch-divisions as the Executive office has. To the duties of every
branch belong fundraising, infiltrating and overtaking other Muslim
organisations for the sake of uniting the Muslims to dedicate them to the
general goals of the MB. In Egypt. Founding. Hassan al-Banna founded the Muslim
Brotherhood in the city of Ismailia in March 1928 along with six workers of the
Suez Canal Company, as a Pan-Islamic, religious, political, and social
movement. The Suez Canal Company helped Banna build the mosque in Ismailia that
would serve as the Brotherhood's headquarters, according to Richard Mitchell's
The Society of Muslim Brothers. According to al-Banna, contemporary Islam had
lost its social dominance, because most Muslims had been corrupted by Western
influences. Sharia law based on the Qur'an and the Sunnah were seen as laws
passed down by God that should be applied to all parts of life, including the
organization of the government and the handling of everyday problems. Al-Banna
was populist in his message of protecting workers against the tyranny of
foreign and monopolist companies. It founded social institutions such as
hospitals, pharmacies, schools, etc. Al-Banna held highly conservative views on
issues such as women's rights, opposing equal rights for women. The Brotherhood
grew rapidly going from 800 members in 1936, to 200,000 by 1938, 500,000 in
1948. Post WWII. In November 1948, following several bombings and assassination
attempts, the government arrested 32 leaders of the Brotherhood's "secret
apparatus" and banned the Brotherhood. At this time the Brotherhood was
estimated to have 2000 branches and 500,000 members or sympathizers. In
succeeding months Egypt's prime minister was assassinated by a Brotherhood
member, and following that Al-Banna himself was assassinated in what is thought
to be a cycle of retaliation. In 1952 members of the Muslim Brotherhood are
accused of taking part in the Cairo Fire that destroyed some "750 buildings" in
downtown Cairo ‚Äî mainly night clubs, theatres, hotels, and restaurants
frequented by British and other foreigners. In 1952 Egypt's monarchy was
overthrown by nationalist military officers supported by the Brotherhood.
However the Brotherhood opposed the secularist constitution of the coup leaders
and in 1954 some historians claim that they attempted an assassination against
Egypt's President (Gamal Abdel Nasser), and blamed on the "secret apparatus" of
the Brotherhood (this attempt was unsuccessful). The Brotherhood was again
banned and this time thousands of its members were imprisoned, many of them
held for years in prisons and concentration camps, and tortured. Since the
1970s the Egyptian Brotherhood has disavowed violence and sought to participate
in Egyptian politics. Imprisoned Brethren were released and the organization
was tolerated to varying degrees with periodic arrests and crackdowns until the
2011 Revolution. Mubarak era. In the 2005 parliamentary elections, the
Brotherhood's candidates, who had to run as independents because of their
illegality as a political party, won 88 seats (20% of the total). (The legal
opposition won only 14 seats.) This was despite electoral irregularities,
including the arrest of hundreds of Brotherhood members. The Brotherhood became
"in effect, the first opposition party of Egypt‚Äôs modern era." Accounts
differ over the Brotherhood's record in parliament. Initially there was
widespread skepticism inside and outside Egypt towards the MB's commitment to
democracy, along with fears of "severe restrictions on its freedom of opinion
and belief" in both religious matters, and "social, political, economic and
cultural affairs." But by 2007 a New York Times journalist wrote: "While many
secular critics fear that the brotherhood harbors a hidden Islamist agenda, so
far the organization has posed a democratic political challenge to the regime,
not a theological one."; and another report praised the MB for an "unmatched
record of attendance", forming a coalition to fight the extension of Egypt's
emergency law, and generally attempting to transform "the Egyptian parliament
into a real legislative body, as well as an institution that represents
citizens and a mechanism that keeps government accountable". However, in
December 2006 a campus demonstration by Muslim Brotherhood students in
uniforms, demonstrating martial arts drills betrayed "the group's intent to
plan for the creation of militia structures, and a return by the group to the
era of 'secret cells,'" according to Jameel Theyabi. Another report highlighted
the MB's efforts in Parliament to combat what one member called the `current
US-led war against Islamic culture and identity,' forcing the Minister of
Culture (Farouk Hosny) to ban the publication of three novels on the ground
they promoted blasphemy and unacceptable sexual practices. In October 2007, the
Muslim Brotherhood issued a detailed political platform. Amongst other things
it called for a board of Muslim clerics to oversee the government, and limiting
the office of the presidency to Muslim men. In the "Issues and Problems"
chapter of the platform, it declared that a woman was not suited to be
president because the post's religious and military duties "conflict with her
nature, social and other humanitarian roles." While underlining "equality
between men and women in terms of their human dignity," the document warned
against "burdening women with duties against their nature or role in the
family." Since 2005 Muslim Brotherhood members in Egypt have also become a
significant movement online, with some "cyberactivists" critical of the
organization. Whether or not the Brotherhood would unconditionally or
conditionally dissolve Egypt's 32-year peace treaty with Israel is disputed
within the Brotherhood. While the deputy leader of the Brotherhood has said the
Brotherhood would seek the dissolution of Egypt's 32-year peace treaty with
Israel, a Brotherhood spokesman has said that the Brotherhood would respect the
treaty as long as "Israel shows real progress on improving the lot of the
Palestinians." The Brotherhood remains the largest opposition group in Egypt,
advocating Islamic reform, democratic system and maintaining a vast network of
support through Islamic charities working among poor Egyptians. Ex-Knesset
member and author Uri Avnery argues that the Muslim Brotherhood is above all
'an Arab and Egyptian party, deeply embedded in Egyptian history, more Arab and
more Egyptian than fundamentalist.' They have never been fanatical, and
throughout their history, the outstanding quality they exhibit is 'pragmatism'
and adherence to their religious principles. They form "an old established
party which has earned much respect with its steadfastness in the face of
recurrent persecution, torture, mass arrests and occasional executions. Its
leaders are untainted by the prevalent corruption, and admired for their
commitment to social work". 2011 revolution and after. Following the 2011
Egyptian revolution and fall of Hosni Mubarak, the group was legalized. The
Brotherhood supported the constitutional referendum in March 2011 which was
also supported by the Egyptian army and opposed by Egyptian liberals. On 30
April 2011, it launched a new party called the Freedom and Justice Party, which
reportedly plans to "contest up to half the seats" in the Egyptian
parliamentary election scheduled for September 2011. The party "rejects the
candidacy of women or Copts for Egypt's presidency", but not for cabinet
positions. Some splinter groups have appeared in the wake of the revolution.
Over 30 million people voted (over 60 percent of the eligible voters) in the
elections. Over a third of these people voted for the Freedom and Justice Party
put forward by the Muslim Brotherhood. The party won 127 seats through the
party list and 108 individual seats for a total of 235 seats. The parliament
consists of 498 elected members, 10 appointed, for a total of 508 seats.
According to the Anti-Defamation League, several former Brotherhood officials
from the organization's 15-member Guidance Council assumed key roles within the
new party, and used their positions in the FJP to reiterate the Brotherhood's
long-standing hostility toward Zionism and support for other organizations that
oppose Zionism. The Muslim Brotherhood's candidate for Egypt's 2012
presidential election was Mohamed Morsi. The Egyptian cleric Safwat Higazi
spoke at the announcement rally for the Muslim Brotherhood's candidate Morsi
and expressed his hope and belief that Morsi would liberate Gaza, restore the
Caliphate of the "United States of the Arabs" with Jerusalem as its capital,
and that ""our cry shall be: 'Millions of martyrs march towards Jerusalem.'""
Morsi himself did not echo these statements, and later promised to stand for
peaceful relations with Israel. In the First Egyptian elections after Mubarak,
the candidate of the Muslim Brotherhood, Mohamed Morsi, won the election with
51.73% of the vote - over his competitor Ahmed Shafiq, the last prime minister
under Mubarak's rule. On the verdict that was announced for the former
president Hosni Mubarak on 2 June 2012, a life sentence for complicity in the
killings of protesters, the party made outspoken comments about it being too
light, and actively engaged in action as a response. The sentences announced
that Mubarak and his interior minister, as well as the latter's six assistants
would be acquitted of similar charges. In a separate corruption case, however,
the former president and his two sons, as well as Egypt's tycoon for business
Hussein Selem were all found free of charges-non guilty. With the announcement
followed mass scale of protests in Cairo's Tahrir Square, questioning the
integrity of the Judge Ahmed Refaat, to the trial that seemed crucial and
meaningful to the history of people of Egypt. The demonstrations also denounced
the presence of one presidential elections runoff Ahmed Shafiq. Shafiq was one
of the high-profile governmental member during the period of President Mubarak,
positioning himself as counter force to the spirit of the revolution that
operates as a driving force in current Egyptian society. The result of trials
and roaring response from the public have motivated actions from the party as
well. Muslim Brotherhood's presidential finalist Mohamed Morsi met Hamdeen
Sabbahi, Abdel-Moneim Abul-Fotouh and Khaled Ali-who are the former
presidential candidates- on Monday to discuss the verdict and the upcoming
presidential election runoff. As the event is regarded as a major event for
Egypt, one of the initiating countries of the Arab Revolution in the region,
the party finds itself deeply involved and set to be ready. A spokesperson for
the Muslim Brotherhood's presidential candidate Muhammad Morsi expressed
concern by saying that "The punishment is mild considering the crimes he
committed against his homeland for over 30 years". Such announcement is made,
also to note the affect of the verdict on the elections. Also he mentioned that
"The Egyptians will insist on electing a president that would renew the trial
and avenge the blood of the martyrs,", warning that another revolution can
happen in Egypt following the sentence. The Muslim brotherhood won the Egyptian
elections on 24 June 2012. Mohamed Morsi became the first president-elect of
Egypt after the 2011 Egyptian revolution, backed by the Muslim Brotherhood. In
West Asia. Bahrain. In Bahrain, the Muslim Brotherhood is represented by the Al
Eslah Society and its political wing, the Al-Menbar Islamic Society. Following
parliamentary elections in 2002, Al Menbar became the largest joint party with
eight seats in the forty seat Chamber of Deputies. Prominent members of Al
Menbar include Dr Salah Abdulrahman, Dr. Salah Al Jowder, and outspoken MP
Mohammed Khalid. The party has generally backed government sponsored
legislation on economic issues, but has sought a clampdown on pop concerts,
sorcery and soothsayers. It has strongly opposed the government's accession to
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights on the grounds that
this would give Muslim citizens the right to change religion, when in the
party's view they should be "beheaded". In March 2009, the Shi'a group The
Islamic Enlightenment Society held its annual conference with the announced aim
of diffusing tension between Muslim branches. The society invited national
Sunni and Shi'a scholars to participate. Bahraini independent Salafi religious
scholars Sheikh Salah Al Jowder and Sheikh Rashid Al Muraikhi, and Shi'a
clerics Sheikh Isa Qasim and Abdulla Al Ghoraifi spoke about the importance of
sectarian cooperation. Additional seminars were held throughout the year. In
2010, the U.S. government sponsored the visit of Al-Jowder, described as a
prominent Sunni cleric, to the United States for a three-week interfaith
dialogue program in several cities." Syria. Muslim Brotherhood in Syria was
founded in the 1930s (according to lexicorient.com) or in 1945, a year before
independence from France, (according to journalist Robin Wright (author)). In
the first decade or so of independence it was part of the legal opposition, and
in the 1961 parliamentary elections it won ten seats (5.8% of the house). But
after the 1963 coup that brought the Baath Party to power it was banned. It
played a major role in the mainly Sunni-based movement that opposed the
secularist, pan-Arabist Baath party. This conflict developed into an armed
struggle that continued until culminating in the Hama uprising of 1982, when
the rebellion was crushed by the military. Membership in the Syrian Brotherhood
became a capital offence in Syria in 1980 (under Emergency Law 49, which was
revoked in 2011), but the headquarters of the MB-linked Palestinian group,
Hamas, is located in the Syria's capital Damascus, where it is given Syrian
government support. This is seen by some as an example of the lack of
international centralisation or even coordination of the MB. The brotherhood is
said to have "resurrected itself" and become "dominant group" in the opposition
during the Syrian civil war against the Assad regime according to the
Washington Post newspaper. Jordan. The Jordanian branch of the Muslim
Brotherhood was formed in 1942, and is a strong factor in Jordanian politics.
While most political parties and movements were banned for a long time in
Jordan such as Hizb ut-Tahrir, the Brotherhood was exempted and allowed to
operate by the Jordanian monarchy. The Jordanian Brotherhood has formed its own
political party, the Islamic Action Front, which has the largest number of
seats of any party in the Jordanian parliament. The Muslim Brotherhood is
playing an active role in the unrest in several Arab countries in January 2011.
For example, at a rally held outside the Egyptian Embassy in Amman on Saturday,
29 January 2011 with some 100 participants, Hammam Saeed, head of the Muslim
Brotherhood of Jordan and a close ally of the Hamas's Damascus-based leader,
Khaled Meshaal, said: "Egypt's unrest will spread across the Mideast and Arabs
will topple leaders allied with the United States." However, he did not
specifically name Jordanian King Abdullah II. The Muslim brotherhood is
rightfully or wrongfully feared by several commentators in the west, however it
is not known how many seats in a democratic government the brotherhood will
gain in any of the aforementioned countries. Iran. Although Iran is a
predominately Shia Muslim country and the Muslim Brotherhood is Sunni in
doctrine, Olga Davidson and Mohammad Mahallati claim the Brotherhood has had
influence among Shia in Iran. Navab Safavi, who founded Fada'iyan-e Islam,
(also Fedayeen of Islam, or Fadayan-e Islam), an Iranian Islamic organization
active in Iran in the 1940s and 1950s, "was highly impressed by the Muslim
Brotherhood. From 1945 to 1951 the Fadain assassinated several high level
Iranian personalities and officials who they believed to be un-Islamic. They
included anti-clerical writer Ahmad Kasravi, Premier Haj Ali Razmara, former
Premier Abdolhossein Hazhir, and Education and Culture Minister Ahmad Zangeneh.
At that time Navab Safavi and Salar Golestanian now based in the UK where
associates and allies of Ayatollah Khomeini who went on to become a figure in
the Iranian Revolution of 1979. Khomeini and other religious figures in Iran
worked to establish Islamic unity and downplay Shia-Sunni differences. Iraq.
The Iraqi Islamic Party was formed in 1960 as the Iraqi branch of the
Brotherhood, but was banned from 1961 during the nationalist rule of Abd al-
Karim Qasim. As government repression hardened under the Baath Party from
February 1963, the group was forced to continue underground. After the fall of
the Saddam Hussein regime in 2003, the Islamic Party has reemerged as one of
the main advocates of the country's Sunni community. The Islamic Party has been
sharply critical of the U.S.-led occupation of Iraq, but participates in the
political process. Its leader is Iraqi Vice-President Tariq Al-Hashimi. Also,
in the north of Iraq there are several Islamic movements inspired by or part of
the Muslim Brotherhood network. The Kurdistan Islamic Union (KIU) holds seats
in the Kurdish parliament, and is the main political force outside the
dominance of the two main secularist parties, the PUK and KDP. Israel and
Palestinian Territories. 'Abd al-Rahman al-Banna, the brother of the Muslim
Brotherhood founder Hasan al-Banna, went to the British Mandate for Palestine
and established the Muslim Brotherhood there in 1935. Al-Hajj Amin al-Husseini,
eventually appointed by the British as Grand Mufti of Jerusalem in hopes of
accommodating him, was the leader of the group in Palestine. Another important
leader associated with the Muslim Brotherhood in Palestine was 'Izz al-Din al-
Qassam, an inspiration to Islamists because he had been the first to lead an
armed resistance in the name of Palestine against the British in 1935. In 1945,
the group established a branch in Jerusalem, and by 1947 twenty-five more
branches had sprung up, in towns such as Jaffa, Lod, Haifa, Nablus, and
Tulkarm, which total membership between 12,000 to 20,000. Brotherhood members
fought alongside the Arab armies during the 1948 Arab-Israeli war, and, after
Israel's creation, the ensuing Palestinian refugee crisis encouraged more
Palestinian Muslims to join the group. After the war, in the West Bank, the
group's activity was mainly social and religious, not political, so it had
relatively good relations with Jordan, which was in control of the West Bank
after 1950. In contrast, the group frequently clashed with the Egyptian regime
that controlled the Gaza Strip until 1967. After the 1967 Six Day War, Israel
may have looked to cultivate political Islam as a counterweight to Fatah, the
main secular Palestinian nationalist political organization. Between 1967 and
1987, the year Hamas was founded, the number of mosques in Gaza tripled from
200 to 600, and the Muslim Brotherhood named the period between 1975 and 1987 a
phase of 'social institution building.' During that time, the Brotherhood
established associations, used zakat (alms giving) for aid to poor
Palestinians, promoted schools, provided students with loans, used waqf
(religious endowments) to lease property and employ people, and established
mosques. Likewise, antagonistic and sometimes violent opposition to Fatah, the
Palestine Liberation Organization and other secular nationalist groups
increased dramatically in the streets and on university campuses. After the
Intifada, Hamas was established. The "Islamic Resistance Movement", or Hamas,
founded in 1987 in Gaza, is a wing of the Brotherhood, formed out of
Brotherhood-affiliated charities and social institutions that had gained a
strong foothold among the local population. During the First Intifada
(1987‚Äì93), Hamas militarized and transformed into one of the strongest
Palestinian terrorist groups. The Hamas takeover of the Gaza Strip in 2007 was
the first time since the Sudanese coup of 1989 that brought Omar al-Bashir to
power, that a Muslim Brotherhood group ruled a significant geographic
territory. Saudi Arabia. The Muslim Brotherhood's brand of Islam and Islamic
politics differs from the strict Salafi creed, Wahhabiyya, officially held by
the state of Saudi Arabia. Despite this, the Brotherhood has been tolerated by
the Saudi government, and maintains a presence in the country. Aside from
tolerating the Brotherhood organization, and according to "Washington Post"
report, the then Saudi Interior Minister Prince Nayef denounced the
Brotherhood, saying it was guilty of "betrayal of pledges and ingratitude" and
was "the source of all problems in the Islamic world". Kuwait. The Muslim
Brotherhood in Kuwait is represented in the Kuwaiti parliament by Hadas. Yemen.
The Muslim Brotherhood is the political arm of the Yemeni Congregation for
Reform, commonly known as Islah. President Ali Abdullah Saleh accused them of
being in league with Al Qaida and stirring up the 2011 Yemen protests against
his rule. Oman. Sultan Qaboos bin Said al Said of Oman claimed that the Muslim
Brotherhood obtained support from the uneducated people. Elsewhere in Africa.
Algeria. The Muslim Brotherhood reached Algeria during the later years of the
French colonial presence in the country (1830‚Äì1962). Sheikh Ahmad Sahnoun led
the organization in Algeria between 1953 and 1954 during the French
colonialism. Brotherhood members and sympathizers took part in the uprising
against France in 1954‚Äì1962, but the movement was marginalized during the
largely secular FLN one-party rule which was installed at independence in 1962.
It remained unofficially active, sometimes protesting the government and
calling for increased Islamization and Arabization of the country's politics.
When a multi-party system was introduced in Algeria in the early 1990s, the
Muslim Brotherhood formed the Movement for the Society of Peace (MSP,
previously known as Hamas), led by Mahfoud Nahnah until his death in 2003 (he
was succeeded by present party leader Boudjerra Soltani). The Muslim
Brotherhood in Algeria did not join the Front islamique du salut (FIS), which
emerged as the leading Islamist group, winning the 1991 elections and which was
banned in 1992 following a military coup d'√©tat, although some Brotherhood
sympathizers did. The Brotherhood subsequently also refused to join the violent
post-coup uprising by FIS sympathizers and the Armed Islamic Groups (GIA)
against the Algerian state and military which followed, and urged a peaceful
resolution to the conflict and a return to democracy. It has thus remained a
legal political organization and enjoyed parliamentary and government
representation. In 1995, Sheikh Nahnah ran for President of Algeria finishing
second with 25.38% of the popular vote. During the 2000s (decade), the
party‚Äîled by Nahnah's successor Boudjerra Soltani‚Äîhas been a member of a
three-party coalition backing President Abdelaziz Bouteflika. Sudan. Until the
election of Hamas in Gaza, Sudan was the one country were the Brotherhood was
most successful in gaining power, its members making up a large part of the
government officialdom following the 1989 coup d'√©tat by General Omar Hassan
al-Bashir. Always close to Egyptian politics, Sudan has had a Muslim
Brotherhood presence since 1949. In 1945, a delegation from the Muslim
Brotherhood in Egypt visited Sudan and held various meetings inside the country
advocating and explaining their ideology. Sudan has a long and deep history
with the Muslim Brotherhood compared to many other countries. By April 1949,
the first branch of the Sudanese Muslim Brotherhood organization emerged.
However, simultaneously, many Sudanese students studying in Egypt were
introduced to the ideology of the Brotherhood. The Muslim student groups also
began organizing in the universities during the 1940s, and the Brotherhood's
main support base has remained to be college educated. In order to unite them,
in 1954, a conference was held, attended by various representatives from
different groups that appeared to have the same ideology. The conference voted
to establish a Unified Sudanese Muslim Brotherhood Organization based on the
teachings of Imam Hassan Al-banna. An offshoot of the Sudanese branch of the
Muslim Brotherhood, the Islamic Charter Front grew during the 1960, with
Islamic scholar Hasan al-Turabi becoming its Secretary general in 1964. The
Islamic Charter Front (ICM) was renamed several times most recently being
called the National Islamic Front (NIF). Turabi has been the prime architect of
the NIF as a modern Islamist party. He worked within the Institutions of the
government, which led to a prominent position of his organization in the
country. NIF supported women's right to vote and ran women candidates. The
Muslim Brotherhood/NIF's main objective in Sudan was to Islamize the society
"from above" and to institutionalize the Islamic law throughout the country
where they succeeded. The Brotherhood penetrated into the ruling political
organizations, the state army and security personal, the national and regional
assemblies of Sudan. They also launched their own mass organizations among the
youth and women such as the shabab al-binna, and raidat al-nahda, and launched
educational campaigns to Islamize the communities throughout the country. At
the same time, they gained control of several newly founded Islamic missionary
and relief organizations to spread their ideology. The Brotherhood members took
control of the newly established Islamic Banks as directors, administrators,
employees and legal advisors, which became a source of power for the
Brotherhood. The Sudanese government has come under considerable criticism for
its human rights policies, links to terrorist groups, and war in southern Sudan
and Darfur. The conservatism of at least some elements of the Sudanese Muslim
Brotherhood was highlighted in an August 3, 2007 Al-Jazeera television
interview of Sudanese Muslim Brotherhood leader Sheikh Sadeq Abdallah bin Al-
Majed. As translated by the Israeli-based MEMRI, Bin Al-Majed told his
interviewer that "the West, and the Americans in particular¬ ‚Ä¶ are behind all
the tragedies that are taking place in Darfur", as they "realized that it
Darfur is full of treasures"; that "Islam does not permit a non-Muslim to rule
over Muslims;" and that he had issued a fatwa prohibiting the vaccination of
children, on the grounds that the vaccinations were "a conspiracy of the Jews
and Freemasons". Somalia. Somalia's wing of the Muslim Brotherhood is known by
the name Harakat Al-Islah or "Reform Movement". Nonetheless, the Brotherhood,
as mentioned earlier, has inspired many Islamist organizations in Somalia.
Muslim Brotherhood ideology reached Somalia in the early 1960s, but Al-Islah
movement was formed in 1978 and slowly grew in the 1980s. Al-Islah has been
described as "a generally nonviolent and modernizing Islamic movement that
emphasizes the reformation and revival of Islam to meet the challenges of the
modern world", whose "goal is the establishment of an Islamic state" and which
"operates primarily in Mogadishu". The founders of the Islah Movement are: Sh.
Mohamed Ahmed Nur, Dr. Ali Sheikh Ahmed, Dr. Mohamed Yusuf Abdi, Sh. Ahmed
Rashid Hanafi, and Sh. Abdullah Ahmed Abdullah. The organization structured
itself loosely and was not openly visible on the political scene of Somali
society. They chose to remain a secret movement fearing the repressive regime
of Siad Barre but are considered the first ever opposition to the dictatorship.
However, they emerged from secrecy when the regime collapsed in 1991 and
started working openly thereafter. Most Somalis were surprised to see the new
group they had never heard of, which was in the country since the 1970s in
secrecy. According to the Islah by-law, every five years the organization has
to elect its Consultative (Shura) Council which elects the Chairman and the two
Vice-chairman. During the last 30 years, four chairmen were elected. These are
Sheikh Mohamed Geryare (1978‚Äì1990), Dr. Mohamed Ali Ibrahim (1990‚Äì1999),
Dr. Ali Sheikh Ahmed (1999‚Äì2008) and Dr. Ali Bashi Omar Roraye (2008‚Äì2013).
Dr. Ali Bashi is a medical doctor, a former university professor and a member
of the transitional parliament (2000‚Äì2008). During the 1990s, Al-Islah
devoted much effort to humanitarian efforts and providing free basic social
services. The leaders of Al-Islah played a key role in the educational network
and establishing Mogadishu University. Through their network, they educate more
than 120,000 students in the city of Mogadishu. Many other secondary schools
such as the University of East Africa in Bosasso, Puntland, are externally
funded and administered through organizations affiliated with the Muslim
Brotherhood-affiliated Islamic organization Al-Islah. In Somalia, they are
known to be a peaceful organization that does not participate in any factional
fighting and rejects the use of violence. Today the group's membership includes
urban professionals and students. According to a Crisis Group Report, Somalia's
Islamists, "Al-Islah organization is dominated by a highly educated urban elite
whose professional, middle class status and extensive expatriate experiences
are alien to most Somalis." Although Al-Islah have been criticized by some
hardcore Islamists who considered them to be influenced by imperialist western
values, Al-Islah speaks of democratic peaceful Somalia. They promote women's
rights, human rights, and other ideas, which they argue that these concepts
originate from Islamic concepts. Al-Islah is gaining momentum in the Somali
societies for their humanitarian work and moderate view of Islam, which is
compatible to modernisation and respect of human rights. Currently, Islah
initiated to establish political party under the name of Justice and Unity
Party which is open for all citizens of Somalia. Tunisia. Like their
counterparts elsewhere in the Islamic world in general, the Egyptian Muslim
Brotherhood has influenced the Tunisia's Islamists. One of the notable
organization that was influenced and inspired by the Brotherhood is Ennahda
(The Revival or Renaissance Party), which is Tunisia's major Islamist political
grouping. An Islamist named Rashid Ghannouchi founded the organization in 1981.
While studying in Damascus and Paris, Rashid Ghannouchi embraced the ideology
of the Muslim Brotherhood, which he disseminated on his return to Tunisia.
Libya. The Libyan branch of the Muslim Brotherhood was founded in 1949, however
it had not been able to operate openly in Libya until after the Libyan civil
war. A public conference was held on November 17, 2011, attended by Libyan
Muslim Brotherhood leader Suleiman Abdelkader and Tunisia's Rashid Ghannouchi.
On December 24, 2011, the Libyan Muslim Brotherhood announced that they had
formed the Justice and Development Party which contested the Libyan General
National Congress election, 2012. Other states. Russian Federation. The Muslim
Brotherhood is banned in Russia as a terrorist organisation. As affirmed on 14
February 2003 by the decision of the Supreme Court of Russia, the Muslim
Brotherhood coordinated the creation of an Islamic organisation called "The
Supreme Military Majlis ul-Shura of the United Forces of Caucasian Mujahedeen"
(, led by Ibn Al-Khattab and Basaev; an organisation that committed multiple
terror-attack acts in Russia and was allegedly financed by drug trafficking,
counterfeiting of coins and racketeering. United States. The MB's organisations
in the USA were started by activists involved with the Muslim Brotherhood and
included the Muslim Students Association in 1963, North American Islamic Trust
in 1971, the Islamic Society of North America in 1981, the American Muslim
Council in 1990, the Muslim American Society in 1992 and the International
Institute of Islamic Thought in the 1980s. According to the "Washington Post",
Muslim activists say the MSA's members represent "all schools of Islam and
political leanings¬ ‚Äì many are moderates, while others express anti-U.S.
views or support resistance against Israelis." The Holy Land Foundation trial
has led to the release, as evidence, of several documents on the Muslim
Brotherhood. One of these documents, dated in 1991, explains that the goal of
the Muslim Brotherhood called Civilization Jihad. Its primary objective in the
U.S. is to advance Islamic "settlement," defined by the brotherhood as a jihad
aimed at destroying Western civilization from within and allowing for the
victory of Islam over other religions. In another one of these documents,
"Ikhwan in America", the author alleges that the activities of the Muslim
Brotherhood in the US include going to camps to do weapons training (referred
to as "Special work" by the Muslim Brotherhood), as well as engaging in
counter-espionage against US government agencies such as the FBI and CIA
(referred to as "Securing the Group"). United Kingdom. In 1996, the first
representative of the MB in Britain, Kamal el-Helbawy, an Egyptian, was able to
say that "there are not many members here, but many Muslims in Britain
intellectually support the aims of the Muslim Brotherhood." He added that at
that time, the object of the MB in Britain was only to disseminate information
on Islam, Islamic issues and movements, and to rectify the distortions and
misunderstandings created by "different forces against Islam". In September
1999, the MB opened a "global information centre" in London. A press notice
published in Muslim News and SalarO.com the web sites developers stated that it
would "specialize in promoting the perspectives and stances of the Muslim
Brotherhood, and between Islamic movements and the global mass media."
Indonesia. Several Party and organizations in Indonesia are linked or at least
inspired by MB, although none has a formal relationship with MB. One of the MB
linked Parties is PKS (Prosperous Justice Party) with 10% seats in the
parliament based on the Indonesian legislative election, 2009. The PKS
relationship with the Egyptian MB was confirmed by Yusuf al-Qaradawi, a
prominent MB leader . PKS is a member of current government coalition under
President SBY with 3 ministers in the cabinet. Indian subcontinent. The Jamaat-
e-Islami (Urdu: ÿ¨ŸÖÿßÿπÿ™Ÿê ÿßÿ≥ŸÑÿßŸÖ€å;, lit. "Islamic Party" abbreviation,
JI) is a political party founded on August 26, 1941 in Lahore by Muslim
theologian Abul Ala Maududi. Jamaat-e-Islami is said to be the Muslim
Brotherhood in the Indian subcontinent and Muslim Brotherhood is called the
Jamaat-e-Islami of the Arab world. Jamaat-e-Islami has independent oganizations
in Pakistan, India, Bangladesh and Sri Lanka. Criticisms. The Brotherhood was
criticised by Ayman al-Zawahiri in 2007 for its refusal to advocate the violent
overthrow of the Mubarak regime. Issam al-Aryan, a top Egyptian Muslim
Brotherhood figure, denounced the al-Qaeda leader: "Zawahiri's policy and
preaching bore dangerous fruit and had a negative impact on Islam and Islamic
movements across the world." Response to criticism. According to authors
writing in the Council on Foreign Relations magazine Foreign Affairs: "At
various times in its history, the group has used or supported violence and has
been repeatedly banned in Egypt for attempting to overthrow Cairo's secular
government. Since the 1970s, however, the Egyptian Brotherhood has disavowed
violence and sought to participate in Egyptian politics." Jeremy Bowen, BBC
Middle East editor, calls it "conservative and non-violent"; Yet even though
the Brotherhood has condemned terrorism and the 9/11 attacks. The Brotherhood
itself denounces the "catchy and effective terms and phrases" like
"fundamentalist" and "political Islam" which it claims are used by "Western
Media" to pigeonhole the group, and points to its "15 Principles" for an
Egyptian National Charter, including "freedom of personal conviction...
opinion... forming political parties... public gatherings... free and fair
elections..." Similarly, some analysts maintain that whatever the source of
modern Jihadi terrorism and the actions and words of some rogue members, the
Brotherhood now has little in common with radical Islamists and modern
jihadists who often condemn the Brotherhood as too moderate. They also deny the
existence of any centralized and secretive global MB leadership. Some claim
that the origins of modern Muslim terrorism are found in Wahhabi ideology, not
that of the Muslim Brotherhood. According to anthropologist Scott Atran, the
influence of the Muslim Brotherhood even in Egypt has been overstated by
Western commentators. He estimates that it can count on only 100,000 militants
(out of some 600,000 dues paying members) in a population of more than
80¬ million, and that such support as it does have among Egyptians‚Äîan often
cited figure is 20 percent to 30 percent‚Äîis less a matter of true attachment
than an accident of circumstance: secular opposition groups that might have
countered it were suppressed for many decades, but in driving the Egyptian
Revolution of 2011, a more youthful constellation of secular movements has
emerged to threaten the Muslim Brotherhood's dominance of the political
opposition. This has not yet been the case, however, as evidenced by the
Brotherhood's strong showing in national elections. Foreign Relations. On 29
June 2011, as the Brotherhood's political power became more apparent and
solidified following the 2011 Egyptian revolution, the United States announced
that it would reopen formal diplomatic channels with the group, with whom it
had suspended communication as a result of suspected terrorist activity. The
next day, the Brotherhood's leadership announced that they welcomed the
diplomatic overture. Footnotes. See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:
Footnotes for an explanation of how to generate footnotes using the tags.
