National-Anarchism National-Anarchism is a radical, anti-capitalist, anti-
Marxist, anti-statist, right-wing political and cultural ideology which
emphasizes ethnic tribalism. As a prelude to an anticipated racial civil war
and a collapse of the capitalist system, National-Anarchists seek to establish
autonomous villages for "völkisch" communities, which have seceded from the
state's economy and are no-go areas for unwelcomed ethnic groups and state
authorities. The term "National Anarchism" dates back as far as the 1920s.
However, it has been primarily redefined and popularized since the 1990s by
British ideologue Troy Southgate to promote a synthesis of ideas from the
Conservative Revolutionary movement, Traditionalist School, Third Positionism,
"Nouvelle Droite", and various anarchist schools of thought. National-
Anarchists therefore argue they hold a syncretic political stance that is
"beyond left and right" because the conventional left–right political
spectrum is obsolete and should be replaced with a centralist–decentralist
paradigm. Scholars counter that National-Anarchism represents a further
evolution in the thinking of the radical right rather than an entirely new
dimension. National-Anarchism has elicited skepticism and outright hostility
from both left- and right-wing critics. The former accuse National-Anarchists
of misappropriating a sophisticated left-wing anarchist critique of problems
with the modern world only to offer neo-fascism as the solution, while the
latter argue they want the militant chic of calling themselves anarchists
without the historical and philosophical baggage that accompanies such a claim.
History. The term "National Anarchist" dates back as far as the 1920s, when
Helmut Franke, a German conservative revolutionary writer, used it to describe
his political stance. However, it would be the writings of other members of the
Conservative Revolutionary movement, such as Ernst Jünger, which would later
provide the philosophical foundation of the contemporary National-Anarchist
movement. However, the present usage of term "National-Anarchist" derives from
Hans Cany, editor of the French Satanist music magazine "Requiem Gothique", who
first used the term in the early 1990s, along with the related terms "National-
Libertarian" and "Anarcho-Identitarian". Around the same time, British editor
Richard Hunt left the editorial board of "Green Anarchist" magazine, due to a
disagreement over political strategies, and formed his own journal,
"Alternative Green". Due to "Alternative Green"'s policy of publishing articles
from across the political spectrum, the remaining "Green Anarchist" staff
constantly accused Hunt of supporting fascism and a red-green-brown alliance,
while British left-anarchist writer Stewart Home accused both "Alternative
Green" and "Green Anarchist" of supporting ecofascism. In the mid-1990s, Troy
Southgate, a former member of the British National Front and founder of the
International Third Position, began to move away from Strasserism and Catholic
distributism towards new anarchism and the primitivist green anarchism
articulated in Hunt's 1997 book "To End Poverty". However, he fused his
anarchist views with the radical traditionalism of Italian esotericist Julius
Evola and the ethnopluralism and pan-European nationalism of French New Right
philosopher Alain de Benoist to create a newer form of National-Anarchism. For
a period, Southgate was a member of "Alternative Green"'s editorial board,
which he had hoped could become a platform to disseminate his National-
Anarchist views into the green anarchist movement. In 1998, inspired by the
concept of the Political Soldier and leaderless resistance, Southgate formed
the National Revolutionary Faction (NRF) as a clandestine cell system of
professional revolutionaries conspiring to overthrow the British state. The NRF
stressed this was a "highly militant strategy" and advised that some members
may only fund the organization. Southgate claims that the NRF took part in
anti-vivisection protests in August 2000 alongside hunt saboteurs and the
Animal Liberation Front by following a strategy of entryism, but its only known
public action under the "National-Anarchist" name was to hold an Anarchist
Heretics Fair in October 2000, in which a number of fringe groups participated.
However, after a coalition of green anarchists and anti-fascists blocked three
further events from being held in 2001, Southgate and the NRF abandoned this
strategy and retreated to purely disseminating their ideas in Internet forums.
The NRF had long been aware of the bridging power of the Internet, which
provided it with a reach and influence hitherto not available to the
groupuscular right. It thus became part of the Euro-American radical right, a
virtual community of European and American right-wing extremists seeking to
establish a new pan-national and ethnoreligious identity for all people they
believe belong to the "Aryan race". Later, Southgate disavowed guerrilla
warfare in favor of back-to-the-land counter-economics to achieve his aims, and
disbanded the NRF in 2003. Shortly after Southgate and other NRF associates
became involved with "Synthesis", the online journal of a forum called the
"Cercle de la Rose Noire", which seeks a fusion of anarchism, occultism and
metapolitics with the contemporary concerns of the ecological and global
justice movements. Thus, through the medium of musical subcultures (industrial
metal, gothic metal and neo folk music scenes) and the creation of autonomous
villages for "völkisch" communities, they hope to disseminate their subversive
ideas throughout society in order to achieve cultural hegemony. Southgate's
political evolution concluded in 2005 with him becoming co-organizer of the UK-
based New Right, a political philosophy forum which seeks to unite the
disparate strands of the British right and align it with the broader European
New Right. The National-Anarchist meme has spread around the world over the
Internet, assisted by groups such as the Thule-Seminar which set up web sites
in the 1990s. In the United States, only a few web sites have been established
but there has been a trend towards a steady increase. National-Anarchism in the
U.S. remains a relatively obscure movement, made up of probably fewer than 200
individuals, led by Andrew Yeoman of the Bay Area National Anarchists (BANA),
based in the San Francisco Bay Area, and a couple of other groups in Northern
California and Idaho. Organizations based on National-Anarchist ideology have
gained a foothold in Russia and sown turmoil in the environmental movement in
Germany. There are adherents in England, Spain and Australia, among other
nations. On 8 September 2007 in Sydney, Australia, the anti-globalization
movement mobilized against neoliberal economic policies by opposing the Asia-
Pacific Economic Cooperation summit. During the street protests, National-
Anarchists infiltrated the left-anarchist black bloc but the police had to
protect them from being expelled by irate activists. Since then, National-
Anarchists have joined other marches in Australia and in the U.S.; in April
2008, they protested on behalf of the Tibetan independence movement against the
Chinese government during the Olympic torch relay in both Canberra, Australia,
and San Francisco. Now, National-Anarchists in the U.S. are carefully studying
the successes and failures of their more prominent international counterparts
as they attempt to similarly win converts from the radical environmentalist and
white nationalist movements in the U.S. In 2008, Southgate agreed with Yeoman's
proposition that "Tribal Anarchism" is a slightly more accurate description of
the goals of the movement. However, the term "National-Anarchism" continues to
be the most common way of describing the movement. On May Day 2010, BANA
participated in the Golden Gate Minutemen's march in front of San Francisco
City Hall in support of Arizona's anti-illegal immigration senate bill. The
march took place during International Workers' Day demonstrations as an attempt
to counter mass protest against the bill, in San Francisco's Mission District.
Local news media reported that Yeoman and four other National-Anarchists were
physically assaulted by about 10 protesters as they left the march. On 19
September 2010, Southgate launched the National-Anarchist Movement (N-AM) and
unveiled a manifesto. The groupuscule also launched a magazine called "Tribal
Resonance". Views. The conservative revolutionary concept of the Anarch, as
articulated by Jünger, is central to National-Anarchism. National-Anarchists
see the artificial hierarchies inherent in the state and capitalism as
systematically oppressive and environmentally destructive. They distance
themselves from fascism and Marxism as statist and totalitarian, and reject
Nazism as the discredited ideology of a failed dictatorship. National-
Anarchists see modernity, liberalism, materialism, consumerism, immigration,
multiracialism, multiculturalism, and globalization as the primary causes of
the social decline of nations and cultural identity. They stress a strategic
and ideological alliance of racial separatists in the Western world, neo-
Eurasianists in Russia, Islamists in the Muslim world, and autonomist and
secessionist movements in the least developed countries to resist the "New
World Order" — globalization viewed as an instrument of Jewish-dominated
international banking and American imperialism — that is inevitably leading
to global economic collapse and ecological collapse. National-Anarchists are
ethnopluralists, who oppose multiracialism and miscegenation, but they do not
seek to impose their racialist views on others because they reject universalism
and embrace particularism. Asserting the right to difference, National-
Anarchists publicly advocate a model of society in which communities that
practice racial, ethnic, religious or sexual separatism are able to peacefully
coexist alongside mixed or integrated communities without requiring force. They
claim that "National Autonomous Zones" (NAZ) could exist with their own rules
for permanent residence without the strict ethnic divisions and violence
advocated by other forms of "blood and soil" ethnic nationalism. They further
argue that areas without significant human development and borderlands would be
maintained collectively, and that free zones allowing trade and sharing between
communities would be established with the agreement of all parties involved.
Some National-Anarchists, however, see the establishment of whites-only NAZs
which have seceded from the state's economy — no-go areas for unwelcomed
ethnic groups and state authorities — as a strategy to foment civil and
racial strife in order to provoke a racial civil war and the collapse of the
capitalist system. Many National-Anarchists are influenced by the perennial
philosophy of Evola and the radical Traditionalist School, which calls for a
"revolt against the modern world". They therefore have a pessimistic vision of
Western culture yet optimistically believe that the “decline of the West”
will pave the way for its materialism to be expunged and replaced by the
idealism of Evolian Tradition. Many National-Anarchists reject Judeo-
Christianity as incompatible with National-Anarchism because they argue it is a
slave morality that usurped Mithraism as the historically dominant religion of
the West. They therefore embrace various forms of neopaganism, occultism and
ethnic mysticism as genuine expressions of Western spirituality, culture and
identity — which can serve as an antidote to the socially alienating effects
of Americanized consumer culture — and hold "völk" autonomy as the ultimate
barrier against the cultural imperialism of globalization. According to
American pan-secessionist Keith Preston, National-Anarchism and classical
American ideals of Jeffersonian democracy are reconcilable, despite the anti-
Americanism of European National-Anarchists and the patriotism of American
paleoconservatives, because of their common values: regionalism, localism,
agrarianism, and traditionalism. Position in the political spectrum. The
conservative revolutionary concept of the Anarch provides sanction for the
ideological shapeshifting and unrestrained eclecticism of National-Anarchism,
allowing its adherents to assert they have transcended the dichotomy of
conventional politics to embrace higher political forms that are "beyond left
and right". National-Anarchists argue the left–right political spectrum is
obsolete and should be replaced with a centralist–decentralist paradigm in
light of the fall of communism and the rise of a neoliberal form of
globalization. While the synthesis of left-wing and right-wing views in
syncretic political ideologies makes their classification problematic, scholars
who have examined National-Anarchism consider it to be on the radical right. In
2003, Roger Griffin argued that National-Anarchism is a segment of the
groupuscular right which has evolved towards a "mazeway resynthesis" between
"classic fascism, Third Positionism, neo-anarchism and new types of anti-
systemic politics born of the anti-globalization movement." In 2005, Alan Sykes
argued that National-Anarchism represents a further evolution in the thinking
of the radical right rather than an entirely new dimension, a response to the
new situation of the late 20th century in which the apparent triumph of
materialist capitalism on a global scale requires a greater assertion of the
centrality of anti-materialist nationalism. Graham D. Macklin argued that
despite a protean capacity for change far-right groupuscules retain
recognizable core fascist values (i.e. palingenesis), and therefore concludes
that National-Anarchism is a synthesis of anarchism and fascism, specifically
Evolian fascism, which represents a "revolt against the modern world". In 2008,
Spencer Sunshine argued that National-Anarchism is a new version of the fascist
right, influenced by Third Positionism, "Nouvelle Droite", and primitivist
green anarchism, whose main ideological innovation is a stateless palingenetic
ultranationalism. Criticisms. National-Anarchism has critics on both the left
and right of the political spectrum. Both left- and right-wing critics find it
incongruous of white nationalists to be promoting Third Positionist, Islamist,
communist, and anarchist thinkers. Left-wing critics assert that National-
Anarchism represents what many anti-fascists see as the potential new face of
fascism. They argue that it is a form of crypto-fascism which hopes to avoid
the stigma of traditional fascism by appropriating symbols, slogans and stances
of the left-wing anarchist movement, while engaging in entryism to inject core
fascist values (i.e. palingenetic ultranationalism) into the anti-globalization
and environmental movements. They further argue that National-Anarchists hope
to draw members away from traditional white nationalist groups to their own
synthesis of ideas, which they claim are "neither left nor right". These
critics warn that the danger National-Anarchists represent is not in their
marginal political strength, but in their potential to show an innovative way
that neo-fascist groups can rebrand themselves and reset their project on a new
footing. Even if the results are modest, this can disrupt left-wing social
movements and their focus on social justice and egalitarianism; and instead
spread elitist ideas based on naturalistic fallacy, racism, homophobia,
antisemitism and antifeminism amongst grassroots activists. Far-right critics
argue that neo-Nazis joining the National-Anarchist movement will lead to their
"anti-Zionist" struggle being co-opted by left-wing anarchists. They further
argue that National-Anarchists want the militant chic of calling themselves
anarchists without the historical and philosophical baggage that accompanies
such a claim, such as the link with 19th-century Jewish anarchists.
