Native American name controversy The Native American name controversy is a
dispute about the acceptable terminology for the indigenous peoples of the
Americas and broad subsets of these peoples, such as those sharing certain
cultures and languages by which more discrete groups identify themselves (e.g.,
"Algonquin-speaking peoples," "Pueblo-dwelling peoples"). Many English exonyms
have been used to refer to the indigenous peoples of what is now known as the
Americas, who were resident when European colonists arrived in the 15th and
16th centuries. Some of these names were based on French, Spanish, or other
European language terminology used by earlier explorers and/or colonists; some
resulted from the colonists' attempt to translate endonyms from the native
language into their own; and some were pejorative terms arising out of
prejudice and fear, during periods of conflict between the cultures involved.
In the 20th and 21st centuries, indigenous peoples in the Americas have been
more vocal about the ways they wish to be referred to, pressing for the
elimination of terms widely considered to be obsolete, inaccurate, or racist.
During the latter half of the 20th century and the rise of the Indian rights
movement, the United States government responded by proposing the use of the
term "Native American," to recognize the primacy of indigenous peoples' tenure
in the nation. The term has met with only partial acceptance. Other naming
conventions have been proposed and used, but none are accepted by all
indigenous groups. Typically, each name has a particular audience and political
or cultural connotation, and regional usage varies. United States. "Indian" and
"American Indian". Europeans at the time of Christopher Columbus's voyage often
referred to all of South and East Asia as "India" or "the Indias/Indies,"
sometimes dividing the area into "Greater India," "Middle India," and "Lesser
India." The oldest surviving terrestrial globe, by Martin Behaim in 1492
(before Columbus' voyage), labels the entire Asian subcontinent region as
"India". Columbus carried a passport in Latin from the Spanish monarchs that
dispatched him "ab partes Indie" ("toward the regions of India") on their
behalf. When he landed in the Antilles, Columbus referred to the resident
peoples he encountered there as "Indians" in the mistaken belief that he had
reached the Indian Ocean. Although Columbus' mistake was soon recognized, the
name stuck; for centuries the native people of the Americas were collectively
called "Indians." This misnomer was perpetuated in place naming; the islands of
the Caribbean were named, and are still known as, the West Indies. In the late
20th century, some American public figures suggested that the origin of the
term was not from a confusion with India, but from the Spanish expression "En
Dios", meaning "in God," or a similar one in Italian. Proponents of this idea
include the American Indian activist Russell Means; the author Peter
Matthiessen, author of "In the Spirit of Crazy Horse," a view of American
Indian history through the life and trial of Lakota activist Leonard Peltier;
and the comedian George Carlin. In his book "The Wind Is My Mother", the
Muskogee writer Bear Heart ("Nokus Feke Ematha Tustanaki") wrote, "When
Columbus found the natives here, they were gentle people who accepted him, so
Columbus wrote in his journal, 'These are people of God' (""una gente in
Dios""). Later the 's' was dropped and "Indio" became "Indian"." However, as
the writer David Wilton noted in his book "Word Myths: Debunking Linguistic
Urban Legends", this phrase does not appear in any of Columbus' writing. Wilton
also says that since Greek and Roman times, more than a millennium before the
voyages of Columbus, many European languages used variations of the term
"Indian" to describe the peoples of the Indian subcontinent. As European
colonists began to move into the Americas in the 17th and 18th centuries, and
have more sustained contact with the resident peoples, it became clear that the
residents were not a homogenous group sharing a unified culture and government,
but discrete societies with their own distinct languages and social systems.
Early historical accounts show that some colonists attempted to learn and
record the autonyms of these individual groups, but the use of the general term
"Indian" persisted. In 1968, the American Indian Movement was founded. In 1977,
a delegation from the International Indian Treaty Council, an arm of AIM,
elected to collectively identify as "American Indian," at the United Nations
Conference on Indians in the Americas at Geneva, Switzerland. Some activists
and public figures of indigenous descent, such as Russell Means, say that they
prefer "American Indian" to the more recently adopted "Native American."
Objections to the usage of "Indian" and "American Indian" include the fact that
"Indian" arose from an historical error, and thus does not accurately reflect
the derivation of the people to whom it refers; and some feel that the term has
absorbed negative and demeaning connotations through its historical usage that
render it objectionable in context. Additionally, "American Indian" is often
understood to mean only the peoples of the main body of the United States,
which excludes other indigenous groups of the Americas, including the Inuit,
Cup'ik/Yup'ik peoples, Iñupiat, Alutiiq, and Aleut peoples (i. e., the groups
whose traditional languages are Eskimo–Aleut languages). Supporters of the
terms "Indian" and "American Indian" argue that they have been in use for such
a long period of time that many people have become accustomed to them and no
longer consider them exonyms. Both terms are still widely used today. "American
Indian" appears often in treaties between the United States and the indigenous
peoples with whom they have been negotiating since the colonial period, and
many federal, state and local laws also use it. "Native American". The Oxford
English Dictionary cites usage of the uncapitalized term "native American" in
several publications reaching as far back as 1737, but it is unclear whether
these texts refer to indigenous peoples or simply to persons born on American
soil. During the 1850s, a group of Anglo-Saxon Protestant European-Americans
used the capitalized term "Native Americans" to differentiate themselves from
more recent Catholic Irish and German immigrants. The group later formed the
"Know-Nothings," a 19th-century political party that supported anti-immigrant
policy in the United States. The Know-Nothings also called themselves the
"Native American Party" and were referred to in the press with the capitalized
term. They hired the writer and orator George Copway (a member of the Ontario
Ojibwa tribe) for some of their publications, but it is unclear whether they
intended their usage of "Native American" to include indigenous peoples. In
1918, leaders of the Peyote Religion in Oklahoma incorporated as the Native
American Church of Oklahoma. In 1956, Aldous Huxley wrote a letter in which he
thanks his correspondent for "your most interesting letter about the Native
American churchmen" (note capitalization). The use of both "native American"
and "Native American" to refer to the indigenous peoples of the Americas came
into widespread common use during the civil rights movements of the 1960s and
1970s. Activists believed that it more accurately represented historical fact
(i.e., indigenous populations predated European colonization), and that it was
free of negative historical connotations that had come to be associated with
previous terms. Between 1982 and 1993, most American manuals of style came to
agree that "color terms" referring to ethnic groups should be capitalized as
proper names, including "Native American." Critics argue that the typographical
detail of capitalizing "native" to differentiate between the term's use for
indigeous peoples and other meanings is easily overlooked in written grammar,
and ineffective in speech. Other objections to "Native American," whether
capitalized or not, include a concern that it is often understood to exclude
American groups outside the continental U.S. (i.e., Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto
Rico), and indigenous groups in South America, Mexico and Canada. The word
"American" is sometimes questioned because the peoples referred to resided in
the Americas before they were so named, rendering the term a tautology. As of
1995, according to the US Census Bureau, 50% of people who identified as
indigenous preferred the term "American Indian," 37% preferred "Native
American" and the remainder preferred other terms or had no preference.
"Indigenous". The word "indigenous" comes from the Latin "indigena", meaning
"native," formed from "indu" "in" and "gen-" "beget." It is unrelated to the
formation of "Indian." According to The American Heritage Dictionary,
"indigenous specifies that something or someone is native rather than coming or
being brought in from elsewhere: an indigenous crop; the Ainu, a people
indigenous to the northernmost islands of Japan." The United Nations World
Summit on Sustainable Development used the term "indigenous peoples" for the
first time in its official political declaration in 2002. Prior to this date,
the terms was considered to be "still under debate" for usage in official UN
documents. Arguments against the use of the term "Indigenous Peoples" are that
it does not refer specifically to peoples affected by European colonization
during the 17th and 18th centuries, that it lumps all indigenous world groups
into a single "other," and that it fails to recognize migratory groups who do
not technically meet the definition of "indigenous." "Aboriginal" and
"Aborigine". The English adjective "aboriginal" and the noun "aborigine" come
from a Latin phrase meaning "from the origin;" the ancient Romans used it to
refer to the native peoples of central Italy who were their contemporaries.
Today throughout most of the English-speaking world, it is most commonly
understood to refer to the Indigenous Australians. "Alaska Native". "Alaska
Native" refers to the indigenous peoples in Alaska, including the Aleut, Inuit,
and Yupik peoples. In Alaska, the term "Alaska Native" predominates, because of
its legal use in the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (ANCSA) and because it
includes the Aleut, Inuit and Yupik peoples, the three groups of indigenous
Alaskan peoples. European Americans once used the term "Eskimo" for those
groups, but this term is in disfavor because the people consider it derogatory;
it was adopted from the exonym "Eskimo" used by the competing Algonquian-
speaking tribes of the northern tier. The Inuit are "a people inhabiting the
Arctic (northern Canada or Greenland or Alaska or eastern Siberia); the
Algonquian called them Eskimo ('eaters of raw flesh') but they call themselves
the Inuit ('the people') {Esquimau}, {Eskimo}." "Amerind". The term "Amerind"
is a blended form of "American Indian," though it can also be parsed as a blend
of "American" and "Indigenous." It was coined in 1902 by the American
Anthropological Association and is more commonly used in Latin America. Canada.
"Aboriginal peoples". In Canada, the term "Aboriginal peoples in Canada" is
used for all indigenous peoples within the country, including the Inuit and
First Nations, as well as the Métis. "First Nations". "First Nations" (most
often used in the plural) has come into general use for the Indigenous peoples
of North America located in what is now Canada, and their descendants,
excluding the Inuit and Métis, who have distinct identities. The singular
commonly used is "First Nations person" (when gender-specific, "First Nations
man" or "First Nations woman"). Some tribal governments of Canada also use the
term "First Nations" to refer to any indigenous, tribal or nomadic society,
using the term for such diverse groups as the Roma, Sinti, Saami, Māori,
Hmong, and the Australian Aborigines. Although the Canadian government has
formally adopted use of the term "First Nations" and "Aboriginal peoples," the
federal ministerial portfolio in charge of their affairs is named the
Department of Indian and Northern Affairs, and the historical term "Indian
Reserve" is still a legal land description. Some First Nations peoples also use
"Indian Band" in their official names. "Canadian Indians". The Canadian Indian
Act, in defining the rights of people of recognized First Nations, refers to
them as "Indians." The responsible federal government department was the
Department of Indian and Northern Affairs, now the Department of Aboriginal
Affairs and Northern Development, headed by the Minister of Indian Affairs and
Northern Development. The act officially recognizes people commonly known as
"Status Indians," although "Registered Indian" is the official term for those
on the Indian Register. Lands set aside for the use of First Nations are known
as Indian Reserves. "Native Canadians". "Native" or "Native Canadian" is an
ambiguous term, but people frequently use it in conversation or informal
writing. A great majority use this term for describing aboriginal peoples.
Including aboriginal people themselves. "First Peoples". "First Peoples" is a
broad term that includes First Nations, Inuit, Inuvialuit, and Métis
(equivalent to "Aboriginal" or "indigenous" peoples)—and could be extended
outside the Canadian context to comprise all descendents of pre-Columbian
ethnic groups in the Americas, including (self-identified) ethnic groups whose
ancestry is only partially of pre-Columbian groups (e.g. Mestizo). Due to its
similarity with the term "First Nations," the two terms are sometimes used
interchangeably. "Anishinaabe". The Algonquin autonym, "Anishinaabe" or
"Anishinabe", is used as a cross-tribal term in Algonquian-majority areas, such
as Anishnabe Health and Anishnabe Education and Training Circle. The term is
also used among historically Anishinaabe peoples in the Upper Midwest region of
the United States. Canadian French nomenclature. In Canadian French, the terms
are "première(s) nation(s)" for "First Nations" and "autochtone" for
"Aboriginal" (used both as a noun and adjective). The term "indien" or
"indienne" is used in the legislation, although the preferred term is now
"amérindien". The term "indigène" is not used as it is seen as having
negative connotations because of its similarity to the French equivalent of
"indigent" ("poor"). The old French term "sauvage" ("wild") is no longer used
either, as it is considered racist. Chinook Jargon nomenclature. The Chinook
Jargon, the old trade language of the Pacific Northwest, uses "siwash" (an
adaptation of the French "sauvage") for "Indian," "Native American," or "First
Nations," either as adjective or noun. While normally meaning a male native, it
is used in certain combinations, like "siwash cosho" ("a seal," literally
"Indian pig" or "Indian pork"). Many native communities perceive the terms
"sauvage" and "siwash" negatively, but others use it freely. They consider use
by non-natives to be derogatory. placenames and certain other usages. In the
creolized form of Chinook Jargon spoken at the Grand Ronde Agency in Oregon, a
distinction is made between "siwash" and "sawash". The accent in the latter is
on the second syllable, resembling the French original, and is used in Grand
Ronde Jargon meaning "anything native or Indian". By contrast, they consider
"siwash" to be defamatory. The Chinook Jargon term for a native woman is
"klootchman", an originally Nootka word which was adopted in regional English
to mean a native woman, or (as in the Jargon), all women and also anything
female. It originated as a compound of Nootka "łūts" 'female' with the
English suffix "-man". "Hyas klootchman tyee" means "queen", "klootchman
cosho", "sow"; "klootchman tenas" or "tenas klootchman" means "girl" or "little
girl". Generally "klootchman" in regional English simply means a native woman
and has not acquired the derisive sense of "siwash" or "squaw". The short form
"klootch", encountered only in English-Chinook hybrid phrasings, is often
derisive. Latin America. In Mexico, the preferred expression is "Indigenous
Peoples" ("pueblos indígenas" in Spanish. "Indios" is still in common use,
including among the indigenous peoples. In Mexico, Brazil, and several other
countries, these names are normally applied only to the ethnic groups that have
maintained their identity and, to a some extent, their original way of life. In
those countries there is also a large segment of the population with mixed
native and European ancestry, who are largely integrated in mainstream society,
and no longer identify themselves with their ancestral native groups. In some
Spanish speaking countries, there are also Ladinos who do not have significant
European ancestry, but have adopted the culture of the White and Mestizo
population. These people were originally called "mestizos" in Mexico,
"caboclos" in Brazil; however, those terms have largely fallen in disuse as
that segment has come to predominate among the population. In South America,
the preferred expression is "Indigenous Peoples" ("pueblos indígenas" in
Spanish, "povos indígenas" in Portuguese). However, "Indians" ("indios",
"índios") is often used too, even by indigenous peoples themselves, since this
expression is not seen as derogatory. It should also be noted that in
Portuguese "índios" does not conflict with the word for the people of India
("indianos"). International. "Indigenous peoples". During the late 20th century
the term "Indigenous peoples" evolved into a political term that refers to
ethnic groups with historical ties to groups that existed in a territory prior
to colonization or formation of a nation state. In the Americas, the term
"Indigenous peoples of the Americas" was adopted, and the term is tailored to
specific geographic or political regions, such as "Indigenous peoples of
Panama." "'Indigenous peoples' ... is a term that internationalizes the
experiences, the issues and the struggles of some of the world's colonized
peoples," writes Maori educator Linda Tuhiwai Smith. "The final 's' in
'indigenous peoples' ... a way of recognizing that there are real differences
between different indigenous peoples." Obsolete and/or unacceptable
terminology. "Redskin"/"Red Indian". Some Europeans called Native Americans
redskins; it was one of the color metaphors for race which colonists and
settlers historically used in North America and Europe. It is similar to the
expressions "pale face" or "pale skin", which some Native Americans used for
Europeans. Such terms are often considered pejorative. Different individuals
may hold differing opinions of the term's appropriateness. There is an American
football team named the Washington Redskins, and the Redskins serve as the
mascot of Red Mesa High School on the Navajo Reservation in Teec Nos Pos,
Arizona. The term's use was not restricted to the United States or North
America. The English-speaking world and Europeans, in loan-translations, used
redskin and the similar term "red Indian" throughout the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries to refer to indigenous Americans. For example, the French
translation "peaux-rouges" was used by Arthur Rimbaud in "Le Bateau ivre" and
Jean Raspail in several of his travelogues. "Savage". Anthropologists once used
"savage" as a blanket word to refer to indigenous peoples worldwide (e.g.
Bronisław Malinowski titled his 1929 study "The Sexual Life of Savages"). At
the beginning of the nineteenth century, representatives of the relatively new
United States government often used the term in official records when referring
to Indian nations (see, e.g., Justice Baldwin's concurring opinion in "Cherokee
Nation v. Georgia"). This was related to their association of non-Christian
people as savages. Other. European Christians once broadly used the word
"heathens" to refer to Native Americans, a pejorative term related to their
perceived lack of religious beliefs (because they were not Christian). Today,
"Injun" is an intentional-mispronunciation of "Indian", generally used in a
joking way to mock or impersonate Native Americans' or early settlers' supposed
heavily-accented English (e.g. "Honest Injun", "Injun time"). The word and
related terms have been defined as derogatory by indigenous people and are not
widely used. Some Native Americans consider the word "squaw" offensive,
derogatory, or racist, although there is some controversy on the topic.
Similarly, the term "Indian princess" is considered demeaning to Native
American women. The Indian princess stereotype is in some ways the opposite of
the squaw stereotype. However, this should not be confused with the practice of
tribes, powwow organizations, colleges, and other indigenous groups choosing
young women with exceptional knowledge of their cultures to represent the
groups as tribal "princesses."
