National Democratic Party of Germany The National Democratic Party of Germany
– The People's Union (, NPD), is a far-right German nationalist party. It was
founded in 1964 as successor to the German Reich Party (, DRP). Party
statements self-identify the party as Germany's "only significant patriotic
force". On 1 January 2011, the far-right German People's Union () merged with
the NPD and the party name of the National Democratic Party of Germany was
extended by the addition of "The People's Union". The party is usually
described as a neo-Nazi organization, and is known as "the most significant
neo-Nazi party to emerge after 1945". The German Federal Agency for Civic
Education, or BPB, has criticized the NPD for working with members of
organizations which were later found unconstitutional by the federal courts and
disbanded, while the German Federal Office for the Protection of the
Constitution, the Bundesamt für Verfassungsschutz, classifies the NPD as a
"threat to the constitutional order" because of its platform and philosophy,
and it is under their observation. The NPD rejects this depiction, viewing it
an attempt to discredit their politics. An effort to outlaw the party failed in
2003. It is currently represented in two of Germany's sixteen state
parliaments, with no seats at the federal level. Udo Voigt led the NPD from
1996 to 2011. He has been succeeded by Holger Apfel. Platform and philosophy.
The NPD's political philosophy coincides with the notion of a third political
position, an idea which developed amidst criticisms of both liberal capitalism
and communism. The NPD also endorses certain beliefs about human nature. NPD
leader Udo Voigt states that the philosophy of the NPD differs from both
communism and social liberalism in that it acknowledges people as unequal
products of their societies and environments, largely governed by what is
called natural law. Voigt states that the party is also influenced by the views
of modern ethologists such as Konrad Lorenz and Irenäus Eibl-Eibesfeldt. The
NPD calls itself a party of "grandparents and grandchildren" because the 1960s
generation in Germany, known for the leftist student movement, strongly opposes
the NPD's policies. The NPD's economic program promotes social security for
Germans and control against plutocracy, but it does not oppose private
property. They discredit and reject the "liberal-capitalist system". The NPD
argues that NATO fails to represent the interests and needs of European people.
The party considers the European Union to be little more than a reorganisation
of a Soviet-style Europe along financial lines. Although highly critical of the
EU, as long as Germany remains a part of it, the NPD opposes Turkey's
incorporation into the organisation. Voigt envisions future collaboration and
continued friendly relations with other nationalists and European national
parties. The NPD's platform says that Germany is larger than the present-day
Federal Republic, and calls for revision of the post-war border concessions. At
one point, a map of Germany was shown on the party website omitting the border
that divides Germany from Austria. The NPD also failed to colour in the Oder-
Neisse Line, the border which established the limits of federal Germany to the
east and was agreed upon with Poland in 1990.  International connections. Voigt
has held meetings with various proponents of white nationalism, including
American politician David Duke. History. Early history. The NPD achieved
success in the late 1960s, winning local government seats across West Germany.
In 1966 and 1967, it won 15 seats in Bavaria, 10 in lower Saxony, 8 in Hesse,
and several other seats. However, it did not then and has never since received
the minimum 5% of votes in federal elections that allow a party to send
delegates to the German Parliament. The NPD came the closest to that goal in
the 1969 election, when it got 4.3 percent of the vote. An economic downturn,
frustrations with the emerging leftist youth counter-culture and the emergence
of a coalition government between the center-right Christian Democratic Party
(CDU), the Christian Social Union (the CDU's present-day sister party), and the
center-left Social Democratic Party (SPD) helped pave the way for those NPD
gains. The coalition government had created a vacuum in the traditional
political right wing, which the NPD tried to fill. The historian Walter Laqueur
has argued that the NPD in the 1960s cannot be classified as a neo-Nazi party.
Yet, when the coalition fell apart, around 75 percent of those who had voted
for the NPD drifted back to the center-right. During the 1970s, the NPD went
into decline, suffering from an internal split over failing to get into the
German Parliament. The issue of immigration spurred a small rebound in popular
interest from the mid-1980s to the early 1990s, but the party only saw limited
success in various local elections. Recent history. Electoral history. In the
2004 state election in Saxony, the NPD won 9.2% of the overall vote. The NPD
currently sends 8 representatives to the Saxony state parliament, the Landtag,
having lost 4 representatives in the 2009 elections. The NPD maintained a non-
competition agreement with the German People's Union (DVU) between 2004 and
2009. The third white nationalist-oriented party, the Republicans (REP), has so
far refused to join this agreement. However, Kerstin Lorenz, a local
representative of the Republicans in Saxony, sabotaged her party's registration
to help the NPD in the Saxony election. In the 2005 federal elections, the NPD
received 1.6 percent of the vote nationally. It garnered the highest percent of
votes in the states of Saxony (4.9 percent), Thuringia (3.7 percent),
Mecklenburg-Vorpommern (3.5 percent) and Brandenburg (3.2 percent). In most
other states, the party won around 1 percent of the total votes cast. In the
2006 Mecklenburg-Vorpommern state election, the NPD received 7.3% of the vote
and thus achieved state representation there, as well. The NPD had 5,300
registered party members in 2004. Over the course of 2006, the NPD processed
roughly 2,000 party applications to push the membership total over 7,200. In
2008, the trend of a growing number of members has been reversed and NPD's
membership is estimated at about 7,000. The 2001–2003 banning attempt. In
2001, the federal government, the Bundestag, and the Bundesrat jointly
attempted to ban the NPD in a trial before the Federal Constitutional Court,
the Bundesverfassungsgericht, the highest court in Germany with the exclusive
power to ban parties if they are found to be "anti-constitutional". However,
the case was thrown out in 2003 after it was discovered that a number of the
NPD's inner circle were in fact undercover agents or informants of the German
secret services, like the federal Bundesamt für Verfassungsschutz. They
include a former deputy chairman of the party and author of an anti-Semitic
tract that formed a central part of the government's case. Since the government
assemblies were unwilling to fully disclose their agents' identities and
activities, the court found it impossible to decide which moves by the party
were based on genuine party decisions and which were controlled by the secret
services in an attempt to further the ban. “The party was, in part,
responding to the government's dictates”, the court said. “The presence of
the state at the leadership level makes influence on its aims and activities
unavoidable”, it concluded. Horst Mahler (NPD), a former member of the far
left terrorist organisation Red Army Faction, defended the NPD before the
court. In May 2009, several state politicians published an extensive document
which they claim proves the NPD's opposition to the constitution without
relying on information supplied by undercover agents. This move was intended to
lead up to a second attempt to have the NPD banned. Merger with DVU. At the
2010 NPD party conference at Bamberg it was announced that the party would ask
its members to approve a merger with the German People's Union (DVU). After the
merger on 1 January 2011, the party name of the NPD was extended by the
addition of 'The People's Union'. Between 2004 and 2009 the two parties had
agreed not to compete against each other in elections. However, on 27 January
2011, the Munich Landgericht (regional court) in a preliminary injunction
declared the merger null and void. World War II and Holocaust commemoration
controversies. On 21 January 2005, during a silence in the Saxon state assembly
in Dresden to mark the 60th anniversary of the liberation of the Nazi Auschwitz
extermination camp, twelve members of the NPD walked out in protest. The NPD
was upset that a moment of silence was being held for those who died in the
Auschwitz camp and that none was being given for those who died during the
bombing of Dresden in World War II, with the anniversary of both events falling
relatively close to each other. Holger Apfel, leader of the NPD in Saxony and
deputy leader of the party nationwide, made a speech in the Saxon State
Parliament in which he called the Allied forces of the United States of America
and Britain "mass murderers" because of their role in the bombing. His
colleague, Jürgen Gansel went on to describe the bombing itself as a
"holocaust of bombs". Voigt voiced his support and reiterated the statement,
which some controversially claimed was a violation of the German law which
forbids Holocaust denial. However, after judicial review, it was decided that
Udo Voigt's description of the 1945 RAF bombing of Dresden as a holocaust was
an exercise of free speech and "defamation of the dead" was not the purpose of
his statement. In 2009, the NPD joined the Junge Landsmannschaft Ostdeutschland
in a demonstration on the anniversary of the Bombing of Dresden in World War
II. 6,000 people took part in the event. Activism and controversy. The NPD's
strategy has been to create "national free-zones" and circumvent its marginal
electoral status by concentrating on regions where support is strongest. In
March 2006, musician Konstantin Wecker tried to set up an in-school anti-
fascist concert in Halberstadt, Saxony-Anhalt two weeks before the state
elections. The NPD argued that because of politics, the date and the in-school
venue, the concert "was an unacceptable form of political campaigning." In
protest, the NPD vowed to buy the tickets and turn up en masse at Wecker's
show, which led local authorities to cancel the event. The Social Democrats and
the Greens were outraged by the decision, which the Central Council for Jews
called "politically bankrupt". The NPD was going to sponsor a march through
Leipzig on 21 June 2006, as the 2006 World Cup was going on. The party wanted
to show its support for the Iranian national football team, which was playing
in Leipzig, and Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad. However, the NPD decided
against the demonstration; only a counter-demonstration took place that day, in
support of Israel. During the World Cup, the party's web site stated that due
to the prevalence of people of non-German descent on the German national
football team, the team "was not really German". Later in 2006, the party
designed leaflets, which said ""White – not just the color of a jersey! For a
true National team!"" This leaflet was never mass-distributed, but copies were
confiscated during a raid on the NPD's headquarters, when authorities had been
hoping to find material linking the party to Nazism. Patrick Owomoyela was
later informed about the poster after it was noted that the image depicted a
footballer wearing a white jersey with Owomoyela's number on it. Owomoyela, of
Nigerian descent, had played for the German national team in the years before
the World Cup and proceeded to file a lawsuit against the party. The party was
able to delay the procedures but in April 2009 three party officials (Udo
Voigt, Frank Schwerdt and Klaus Bieler) were sentenced for Volksverhetzung
(Voigt and Bieler to 7 months on probation, Schwerdt to 10 months on
probation). In November 2008, shortly after the 2008 United States Presidential
Election, the NPD published a document entitled "Africa conquers the White
House" which stated that the election of Barack Obama as the first African-
American President of the United States was the result of "the American
alliance of Jews and Negroes" and that Obama aimed to destroy the United
States' "white identity." The NPD claimed, "A non-white America is a
declaration of war on all people who believe an organically grown social order
based on language and culture, history and heritage to be the essence of
humanity" and "Barack Obama hides this declaration of war behind his pushy
sunshine smile." The NPD also stated that the extensive support for Obama in
Germany "resembles an African tropical disease." In September 2009, another
incident involving the NPD and a football player of the German national team
was reported. In a television show of a regional channel, NPD spokesman Beier
called midfielder Mesut Özil a "Plaste-Deutscher" ("Plastic German" or "ID
Card German"), meaning someone who is not born German, but becomes German by
naturalisation, particularly for certain benefits. The German Football
Association announced that they would immediately file a lawsuit against the
NPD and their spokesman, if requested by Özil. During Operation Cast Lead in
2009, the NPD planned a "holocaust vigil" for Gaza in support of the
Palestinians. Charlotte Knobloch, the head of the Central Council of Jews in
Germany, said "joint hatred of everything Jewish is unifying neo-Nazis and
Islamists." Knobloch, who broadly associated Palestinians with Nazis, claimed
German-Palestinian protestors "unashamedly admitted" that they would vote for
the NPD during the next election. In April 2009, the party was fined 2.5
million Euro for filing incorrect financial statements, resulting, according to
Deutsche Welle, in "serious financial trouble" for its administration. On 23
September 2009, four days before the federal elections, German police raided
the Berlin headquarters of the NPD to investigate claims that letters sent from
the NPD to politicians from immigrant backgrounds incited racial hatred. The
NPD leader in Berlin defended the letters saying that "As part of a democracy
we're entitled to say if something doesn't suit us in this country". The 2011
banning attempt. In 2011, authorities were reportedly trying to link the party,
and specifically 30-year-old national organization director Patrick Wieschke,
to the "so-called Zwickau terrorist cell". This raised the possibility of
another effort to outlaw the party. The cell had been implicated in a string of
murders and the November robbery of a savings bank in Eisenach. Authorities
were also pursuing a gun case against Ralf Wohlleben, former deputy chairman of
the party's branch in Thuringia, though the latter case was reportedly unlikely
to translate into a national-level challenge to the party's legal standing. The
likelihood of success of renewed banning attempts has been questioned, given
the Office for the Protection of the Constitution has over 130 informants in
the party, some in high positions, raising the question of whether the party is
effectively controlled by the government. 2012 Thor Steinar clothing
controversy. In June 2012, several NPD members of Saxony's parliament attended
the parliament's sittings wearing clothing from Thor Steinar, a clothing brand
that is popular amongst neo-Nazis; the legislature responded by saying that
such provocative clothing was not permitted to be worn in the parliament and
demanded that the NPD members remove and replace their attire; the NPD members
refused, resulting in the members being expelled from the parliament and banned
from attending the next three parliamentary sittings. The NPD members denied
accusations that they wore the shirts as a deliberate provocation.
