Neoconservatism Neoconservatism is a right-wing branch of American liberalism
that espouse political individualism and a qualified endorsement of free
markets.. It has also been described as an variant of conservatism which
advocates the assertive promotion of democracy and United States national
interest in international affairs including through military means.
Neoconservatism (or new conservatism) is rooted in a group of former liberals,
who in the late 1960s, began to embrace nationalism and interventionism in
opposition to the rise of the USSR and moved significantly to the right of the
spectrum. The term "neoconservative" (sometimes shortened to "neocon") was
initially used in the 1930s, to describe American liberals who criticized
communists for following a path closer to Soviet communism. Terminology. The
term "neoconservative" was popularized in the United States in 1973 by
Socialist leader Michael Harrington, who used the term to define Daniel Bell,
Daniel Patrick Moynihan, and Irving Kristol, whose ideologies differed from
Harrington's. The "neoconservative" label was embraced by Irving Kristol in his
1979 article "Confessions of a True, Self-Confessed 'Neoconservative.'" His
ideas have been influential since the 1950s, when he co-founded and edited
"Encounter" magazine. Another source was Norman Podhoretz, editor of
"Commentary" magazine from 1960 to 1995. By 1982 Podhoretz was calling himself
a neoconservative, in a "New York Times Magazine" article titled "The
Neoconservative Anguish over Reagan's Foreign Policy". In the late 1970s and
early 1980s, the neoconservatives were driven by "the notion that liberalism"
had failed and "no longer knew what it was talking about, " according to E. J.
Dionne. The term "neoconservative", which originally was used by a socialist to
criticize the politics of Social Democrats, USA, has since 1980 been used as a
criticism against proponents of American modern liberalism who had "moved to
the right". Before 1982, neoconservatives were skeptical about democracy
promotion and criticized the prudence of the Carter administrations policies on
human rights. Kirkpatrick and Norman Podhoretz before 1982 argued that
communism could not be overthrown and that the Polish labor-union Solidarity
was doomed. Podhoretz and Kirkpatrick were originally skeptical about the AFL-
CIO's support of Solidarity and about the use of U.S. economic aid to promote
liberalization and democratization in Poland. New York Intellectuals. Many
neoconservatives had been on the left in the 1930s and 1940s, where they
opposed Stalinism. After WWII, they continued to oppose Stalinism and to
support democracy during the Cold War. Of these, many were emerged from Jewish
intellectual milieu of New York City. Michael Lind's view. Lind's "amalgamation
of the defense intellectuals with the traditions and theories of 'the largely
Jewish-American Trotskyist movement' Lind's words" was criticized in 2003 by
University¬ of¬ Michigan professor Alan¬ M. Wald, who had discussed Trotskyism
in his history of "the New York intellectuals". Most were socialists, social-
democrats, or liberal Democrats into the 1960s, when they were confronted with
the New Left and rethought their positions. Many supported Senator Henry M.
Jackson, a liberal Democrat in domestic affairs who criticized the human-rights
violations of the Soviet Union in the 1970s. Rejecting the American New Left
and McGovern's New Politics. Kirkpatrick's political evolution was similar to
those of other socialists, social-democrats, and liberals who became
neoconservatives. They rejected the counterculture of the 1960s New Left, and
what they saw as anti-Americanism in the non-interventionism of the movement
against the Vietnam War. When the anti-war element took control of the party in
1972 and nominated George McGovern, the Democrats among them followed the lead
of Washington Senator Henry Jackson and revolted. Historian Justin Va√Øsse
calls this the "Second Age" of Neoconservatism, with its emphasis on the Cold
War. As the policies of the New Left pushed the Democrats to the Left, these
intellectuals became disillusioned with President Lyndon B. Johnson's Great
Society domestic programs. The influential 1970 bestseller "The Real Majority"
by Ben Wattenberg expressed that the "real majority" of the electorate
supported economic liberalism but social conservatism, and warned Democrats it
could be disastrous to take liberal stances on certain social and crime issues.
Many supported Democratic senator Henry M. "Scoop" Jackson in his unsuccessful
1972 and 1976 campaigns for president. Among those who worked for Jackson were
future neoconservatives Paul Wolfowitz, Doug Feith, and Richard Perle. In the
late 1970s neoconservative support moved to Ronald Reagan, the Republican hawk
who promised to confront Soviet expansionism. In another (2004) article,
Michael Lind also wrote Leo Strauss and his students. Neoconservatism draws on
several intellectual traditions. The students of political science Professor
Leo Strauss (1899‚Äì1973) comprised one major group. Eugene Sheppard notes
that, "Much scholarship tends to understand Strauss as an inspirational founder
of American neoconservatism." Strauss was a refugee from Nazi Germany who
taught at the New School for Social Research in New York (1939‚Äì49) and the
University of Chicago (1949‚Äì1958). Strauss asserted that "the crisis of the
West consists in the West's having become uncertain of its purpose." Resolution
lay in a restoration of the vital ideas and faith that in the past had
sustained the moral purpose of the West. Classical Greek political philosophy
and the Judeo-Christian heritage are the pillars of the Great Tradition in
Strauss's work. Strauss laid great emphasis on spirit of the Greek classics,
and West (1991) argues that for Strauss the American Founding Fathers were
correct in their understanding of the classics in their principles of justice.
For Strauss, political community is defined by convictions about justice and
happiness rather than by sovereignty and force. He repudiated the philosophy of
John Locke as a bridge to 20th-century historicism and nihilism, and defended
liberal democracy as closer to the spirit of the classics than other modern
regimes. For Strauss, the American awareness of ineradicable evil in human
nature, and hence the need for morality, was a beneficial outgrowth of the
premodern Western tradition. O'Neill (2009) notes that Strauss wrote little
about American topics but his students wrote a great deal, and that Strauss's
influence led his students to reject historicism and positivism. Instead they
promoted an Aristotelian perspective on America that produced a qualified
defense of its liberal constitutionalism. Strauss influenced "Weekly Standard"
editor William Kristol, editor John Podhoretz, and military strategist Paul
Wolfowitz. 1990s. During the 1990s, neoconservatives were once again in the
opposition side of the foreign policy establishment, both under the Republican
Administration of President George H. W. Bush and that of his Democratic
successor, President Bill Clinton. Many critics charged that the
neoconservatives lost their influence following the collapse of the Soviet
Union. The movement was galvanized by the decision of George H. W. Bush and
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff General Colin Powell to leave Saddam
Hussein in power after the first Gulf War in 1991. Many neoconservatives viewed
this policy, and the decision not to support indigenous dissident groups such
as the Kurds and Shiites in their 1991-1992 resistance to Hussein, as a
betrayal of democratic principles. Within a few years of the Gulf War in Iraq,
many neoconservatives were pushing to oust Saddam Hussein. On February 19,
1998, an open letter to President Clinton appeared, signed by dozens of
pundits, many identified with neoconservatism and, later, related groups such
as the PNAC, urging decisive action to remove Saddam from power.
Neoconservatives were also members of the blue team, which argued for a
confrontational policy toward the People's Republic of China and strong
military and diplomatic support for Taiwan. In the late 1990s Irving Kristol
and other writers in neoconservative magazines began touting anti-Darwinist
views, in support of intelligent design. Since these neoconservatives were
largely of secular backgrounds, a few commentators have speculated that
thisalong with support for religion generallymay have been a case of a "noble
lie", intended to protect public morality, or even tactical politics, to
attract religious supporters. 2000s. Administration of George W. Bush. The Bush
campaign and the early Bush administration did not exhibit strong support for
neoconservative principles. As a presidential candidate, Bush had argued for a
restrained foreign policy, stating his opposition to the idea of "nation-
building" and an early foreign policy confrontation with China was handled
without the vociferousness suggested by some neoconservatives. Also early in
the administration, some neoconservatives criticized Bush's administration as
insufficiently supportive of Israel, and suggested Bush's foreign policies were
not substantially different from those of President Clinton. Bush's policies
changed dramatically immediately after the September 11, 2001, attacks. Bush
laid out his vision of the future in his State of the Union speech in January
2002, following the September 11, 2001, attacks. The speech named Iraq, Iran,
and North Korea as states that "constitute an axis of evil" and "pose a grave
and growing danger". Bush suggested the possibility of preemptive war: "I will
not wait on events, while dangers gather. I will not stand by, as peril draws
closer and closer. The United States of America will not permit the world's
most dangerous regimes to threaten us with the world's most destructive
weapons." Some prominent defense and national-security personalities have been
quite critical of what they believed was neoconservative influence in getting
the United States to war with Iraq. Bush Doctrine. The "Bush Doctrine" of
preemptive war was explicitly stated in the National Security Council text
"National Security Strategy of the United States," published September 20,
2002. "We must deter and defend against the threat before it is unleashed . . .
even if uncertainty remains as to the time and place of the enemy's attack...
The United States will, if necessary, act preemptively." The choice to not use
the word 'preventive' in the 2002 National Security Strategy, and instead use
the word 'preemptive' was largely in anticipation of the widely perceived
illegality of preventive attacks in international law, via both Charter Law and
Customary Law. Policy analysts noted that the Bush Doctrine as stated in the
2002 NSC document bore a strong resemblance to recommendations originally
presented in a controversial Defense Planning Guidance draft written in 1992 by
Paul Wolfowitz, under the first Bush administration. The Bush Doctrine was
greeted with accolades by many neoconservatives. When asked whether he agreed
with the Bush Doctrine, Max Boot said he did, and that ‚ÄúI think is exactly
right to say we can‚Äôt sit back and wait for the next terrorist strike on
Manhattan. We have to go out and stop the terrorists overseas. We have to play
the role of the global policeman. . . . But I also argue that we ought to go
further.‚Äù Discussing the significance of the Bush Doctrine, neoconservative
writer William Kristol claimed: ‚ÄúThe world is a mess. And, I think, it‚Äôs
very much to Bush‚Äôs credit that he's gotten serious about dealing with it. .
. . The danger is not that we‚Äôre going to do too much. The danger is that
we're going to do too little.‚Äù 2008 Presidential election and aftermath.
Barack Obama campaigned for the Democratic nomination in 2008, by attacking his
opponents, especially Hillary Clinton, for originally supporting Bush's Iraq-
war policies. He gave the impression he would reverse such policies. However,
Obama adopted the main points of the Bush policy in Iraq, naming Clinton to the
State Department and keeping Robert Gates (Bush's Defense Secretary), and David
Petraeus (Bush's top general in Iraq), as well as implementing the Bush "surge"
of military force. By 2010, U.S. forces had switched from combat to a training
role in Iraq. Evolution of views. Usage and general views. In the early 1970s,
Socialist Michael Harrington was one of the first to use "neoconservative" in
its modern meaning. He characterized neoconservatives as former leftistswhom he
derided as "socialists for Nixon"who had moved significantly to the right.
These people tended to remain supporters of social democracy, but distinguished
themselves by allying with the Nixon administration over foreign policy,
especially by their support for the Vietnam War and opposition to the Soviet
Union. They still supported the "welfare state", but not necessarily in its
contemporary form. Irving Kristol remarked that a neoconservative is a "", one
who became more conservative after seeing the results of liberal policies.
Kristol also distinguished three specific aspects of neoconservatism from
previous forms of conservatism: neo-conservatives had a forward-looking
approach drawn from their liberal heritage, rather than the reactionary and
dour approach of previous conservatives; they had a meliorative outlook,
proposing alternate reforms rather than simply attacking social liberal
reforms; they took philosophical ideas and ideologies very seriously. In
January 2009, at the close of President George W. Bush's second term in office,
Jonathan Clarke, a senior fellow at the Carnegie Council for Ethics in
International Affairs, proposed the following as the "main characteristics of
neoconservatism": "a tendency to see the world in binary good/evil terms", a
"low tolerance for diplomacy", a "readiness to use military force", an
"emphasis on US unilateral action", a "disdain for multilateral organizations"
and a "focus on the Middle East". Views on foreign policy. According to Lead
Editor of e-International Relations, Stephen McGlinchey, "Neo-conservatism is
something of a chimera in modern politics. For its opponents it is a distinct
political movement that emphasizes the blending of military power with
Wilsonian idealism, yet for its supporters it is more of a ‚Äòpersuasion‚Äô
that individuals of many types drift into and out of. Regardless of which is
more correct, it is now widely accepted that the neo-conservative impulse has
been visible in modern American foreign policy and that it has left a distinct
impact" Neoconservatives hold the "conviction that communism was a monstrous
evil and a potent danger". They support social welfare programs that were
rejected by libertarians and paleoconservatives. Neoconservatism first emerged
in the late 1960s as an effort to combat the radical cultural changes taking
place within the United States. Irving Kristol wrote: "If there is any one
thing that neoconservatives are unanimous about, it is their dislike of the
counterculture." Norman Podhoretz agreed: "Revulsion against the counterculture
accounted for more converts to neoconservatism than any other single factor."
The movement began to focus on such foreign issues in the mid-1970s. In 1979 an
early study by liberal Peter Steinfels concentrated on the ideas of Irving
Kristol, Daniel Patrick Moynihan and Daniel Bell. He noted that the stress on
foreign affairs "emerged after the New Left and the counterculture had
dissolved as convincing foils for neoconservatism ... The essential source of
their anxiety is not military or geopolitical or to be found overseas at all;
it is domestic and cultural and ideological." Neoconservative foreign policy is
a descendant of Wilsonian idealism. Neoconservatives support democracy
promotion by the U.S. and other democracies, based on the claim that they think
that human rights belong to everyone. They criticized the United Nations and
detente with the Soviet Union. On domestic policy, they support a welfare
state, like European and Canadian conservatives and unlike U.S. social
conservatives. According to Norman Podhoretz, Democracy promotion is supported
by a belief that freedom is a universal human right and by polls showing
majority support for democracy in countries with authoritarian regimes.
Democracy promotion is said to have another benefit, in that democracy and
responsive government are expected to reduce the appeal of Islamicism.
Neoconservatives have cited political scientists who have argued that
democratic regimes are less likely to start wars. Further, they argue that the
lack of freedoms, lack of economic opportunities, and the lack of secular
general education in authoritarian regimes promotes radicalism and extremism.
Consequently, neoconservatives advocate the democracy promotion to regions of
the world where it currently does not prevail, notably the Arab nations of the
Middle East, communist China and North Korea, and Iran. In July 2008 Joe Klein
wrote in TIME magazine that today's neoconservatives are more interested in
confronting enemies than in cultivating friends. He questioned the sincerity of
neoconservative interest in exporting democracy and freedom, saying,
""Neoconservatism in foreign policy is best described as unilateral bellicosity
cloaked in the utopian rhetoric of freedom and democracy."" In February 2009
Andrew Sullivan wrote he no longer took neoconservatism seriously because its
basic tenet was defense of Israel: Neoconservatives respond to charges of
merely rationalizing support for Israel by noting that their "position on the
Middle East conflict was exactly congruous with the neoconservative position on
conflicts everywhere else in the world, including places where neither Jews nor
Israeli interests could be found‚Äînot to mention the fact that non-Jewish
neoconservatives took the same stands on all of the issues as did their Jewish
confr√®res." Views on economics. While neoconservatism is primarily concerned
with foreign policy, there is also some discussion of internal economic
policies. Neoconservatism is generally supportive of free markets and
capitalism, favoring supply side approaches, but it shows several points of
disagreement with classical liberalism and fiscal conservatism: Irving Kristol
states that neocons are more relaxed about budget deficits and tend to reject
the Hayekian notion that the growth of government influence on society and
public welfare is "the road to serfdom". Indeed, to safeguard democracy,
government intervention and budget deficits may sometimes be necessary, Kristol
argues. Further, neoconservative ideology stresses that while free markets do
provide material goods in an efficient way, they lack the moral guidance human
beings need to fulfill their needs. Morality can be found only in tradition,
they say and, contrary to the libertarian view, markets do pose questions that
cannot be solved within a purely economic framework. "So as the economy only
makes up part of our lives, it must not be allowed to take over and entirely
dictate to our society". Stelzer concludes that while neoconservative economic
policy helped to lower taxes and generate growth, it also led to a certain
disregard of fiscal responsibility. Critics consider neoconservatism a
bellicose and "heroic" ideology opposed to "mercantile" and "bourgeois" virtues
and therefore "a variant of anti-economic thought". Political scientist Zeev
Sternhell states that "Neoconservatism has succeeded in convincing the great
majority of Americans that the main questions that concern a society are not
economic, and that social questions are really moral questions." Distinctions
from other conservatives. Some influential members of the early neoconservative
movement, such as Elliot Abrams, were originally members of the Democratic
Party, where they advocated for "cold war liberalism". But since the election
of Ronald Reagan in 1980, in some cases, even before that, they have been in
electoral alignment with other conservatives in the Republican Party and have
served in the same presidential administrations. While they have often ignored
ideological differences in alliance against those to their left,
neoconservatives differ from "paleoconservatives". In particular, they disagree
with nativism, protectionism, and non-interventionism in foreign policy,
ideologies that are rooted in American history, but have fallen out of the
mainstream U.S. politics after World War II. Compared with traditionalist
conservatism and libertarianism, which may be non-interventionist,
neoconservatism emphasizes defense capability, challenging regimes hostile to
the values and interests of the United States. Neoconservatives also believe in
democratic peace theory, the proposition that democracies never or almost never
go to war with one another. Criticism of terminology. Some of those identified
as "neoconservative" reject the term, arguing that it lacks a coherent
definition, or that it was coherent only in the context of the Cold War. For
example, conservative writer David Horowitz argues that the increasing use of
the term "neoconservative" since the 2003 start of the Iraq War has made it
irrelevant: The term may have lost meaning due to excessive and inconsistent
use. For example, Dick Cheney, Condoleezza Rice, and Donald Rumsfeld have been
identified as leading neoconservatives despite the fact that they have been
lifelong conservative Republicans (though Cheney and Rice have supported Irving
Kristol's ideas) and differ from most neoconservatives on some issues. Some
critics reject the idea that there is a neoconservative movement separate from
traditional American conservatism; some traditional conservatives are skeptical
of the contemporary usage of the term and dislike being associated with its
stereotypes or supposed agendas. For example, columnist David Harsanyi wrote,
"These days, it seems that even temperate support for military action against
dictators and terrorists qualifies you a neocon." Jonah Goldberg rejected the
label as trite and over-used, arguing "There's nothing 'neo' about me: I was
never anything other than conservative." Antisemitism. Some writers and
intellectuals have argued that criticism of neoconservatism is often a
euphemism for criticism of Jews, and that the term has been adopted by the
political left to stigmatize support for Israel. In "The Chronicle of Higher
Education", Robert J. Lieber wrote that writers such as Michael Lind, Eric
Alterman and Pat Buchanan have identified neoconservative Paul Wolfowitz as the
center of a conspiracy theory involving the manipulation of the Bush White
House to gain control of the US military and make war on Iraq in the interest
of Israel rather than the US. Trotskyism allegation. Trotskyism is the current
of communism advocated by Leon Trotsky and his followers, emphasizing orthodox
Marxist concepts of workers' power in opposition to state bureaucracy, and
international proletarian revolution, while highly critical of Stalinism and
the Soviet Union. Critics of neo-conservatism have charged that neo-
conservatism is descended from Trotskyism, and that Trotskyist traits continue
to characterize ideologies and practices of neo-conservatism. During the Reagan
Administration, the charge was made that the foreign policy of the Reagan
administration was being run by Trotskyists. This claim was called a "myth" by
: This "Trotskyist" charge has been repeated and even widened by journalist
Michael Lind in 2003 to assert a takeover of the foreign policy of the George
W. Bush administration by former Trotskyists; Lind's "amalgamation of the
defense intellectuals with the traditions and theories of 'the largely Jewish-
American Trotskyist movement' Lind's words" was criticized in 2003 by
University¬ of¬ Michigan professor Alan¬ M. Wald, who had discussed Trotskyism
in his history of "the New York intellectuals". The charge that
neoconservativism is related to Leninism has been raised, also. Francis
Fukuyama identified neoconservatism with Leninism in 2006. He wrote that
neoconservatives:‚Ä¶believed that history can be pushed along with the right
application of power and will. Leninism was a tragedy in its Bolshevik version,
and it has returned as farce when practiced by the United States.
Neoconservatism, as both a political symbol and a body of thought, has evolved
into something I can no longer support. Criticisms. The term "neoconservative"
may be used pejoratively by self-described paleoconservatives, Democrats,
liberals, progressives, or libertarians. Critics take issue with
neoconservatives' support for aggressive foreign policy. Critics from the left
take issue with what they characterize as unilateralism and lack of concern
with international consensus through organizations such as the United Nations.
Neoconservatives respond by describing their shared view as a belief that
national security is best attained by actively promoting freedom and democracy
abroad as in the democratic peace theory through the support of pro-democracy
movements, foreign aid and in certain cases military intervention. This is a
departure from the traditional conservative tendency to support friendly
regimes in matters of trade and anti-communism even at the expense of
undermining existing democratic systems and possible destabilization.
Republican Congressman and libertarian leaning 2012 Presidential candidate Ron
Paul has been a longtime critic of the neoconservative movement as an attack on
freedom and the U.S. Constitution, including an extensive speech on the House
floor addressing neoconservative roots and how neoconservatism is neither new
nor conservative. That speech can be seen in a variety of places online. Paul
Krugman in a column named 'Years Of Shame' commemorating the tenth anniversary
of 9/11 attacks, criticized the Neoconservatives for taking America to a war
unrelated to 9/11 attacks and fought for wrong reasons. Imperialism and
secrecy. John McGowan, professor of humanities at the University of North
Carolina, states, after an extensive review of neoconservative literature and
theory, that neoconservatives are attempting to build an American Empire, seen
as successor to the British Empire, its aim being to perpetuate a Pax
Americana. As imperialism is largely seen as unacceptable by the American
public, neoconservatives do not articulate their ideas and goals in a frank
manner in public discourse. McGowan states, Friction with paleoconservatism.
Starting in the 1980s, disputes over Israel and public policy contributed to a
sharp conflict with paleoconservatives, who argue that neoconservatives are an
illegitimate addition to the conservative movement. For example, Pat Buchanan
calls neoconservatism "a globalist, interventionist, open borders ideology."
The open rift is often traced back to a 1981 dispute over Ronald Reagan's
nomination of Mel Bradford, a Southerner, to run the National Endowment for the
Humanities. Bradford withdrew after neoconservatives complained that he had
criticized Abraham Lincoln; the paleoconservatives supported Bradford.
Neoconservatism in other countries. The movement has been influential in other
countries. Variants of neoconservatism can be found in the Czech Republic, the
United Kingdom and Japan. Notable figures connected to neoconservatism. The
list includes public figures identified as personally a neoconservative at an
important time or a high official with numerous neoconservative advisors, such
as George W. Bush and Dick Cheney. Some are dead, or are ex-neoconservatives.
