Nullum crimen, nulla poena sine praevia lege poenali Nullum crimen, nulla poena
sine praevia lege poenali (Latin, "lit." "No crime, no punishment without a
previous penal law") is a basic maxim in continental European legal thinking.
It was written by Paul Johann Anselm Ritter von Feuerbach as part of the
Bavarian Criminal Code in 1813. The maxim states that there can be no crime
committed, and no punishment meted out, without a violation of penal law as it
existed at the time. Another consequence of this principle is that only those
penalties that had already been established for the offence in the time when it
was committed can be imposed. Thus, not only the existence of the crime depends
on there being a previous legal provision declaring it to be a penal offense
(nullum crimen sine praevia lege), but also, for a specific penalty to be
imposed in a certain case, it is also necessary that the penal legislation in
force at the time when the crime was committed ranked the penalty to be imposed
as one of the possible sanctions to that crime (nulla poena sine praevia lege).
This basic legal principle has been incorporated into international criminal
law. It thus prohibits the creation of "ex post facto laws" to the disadvantage
of the defendant. International criminal law. Since the Nuremberg Trials, penal
law is taken to include the prohibitions of international criminal law, in
addition to those of domestic law. Thus prosecutions have been possible of such
individuals as Nazi war criminals and officials of the German Democratic
Republic responsible for the Berlin Wall, even though their deeds may have been
allowed or even ordered by domestic law. Also, courts when dealing with such
cases will tend to look to the letter of the law at the time, even in regimes
where the law as it was written was generally disregarded in practice by its
own authors. However, some legal scholars criticize this, because generally, in
the legal systems of Continental Europe where the maxim was first developed,
"penal law" was taken to mean statutory penal law, so as to create a guarantee
to the individual, considered as a fundamental right, that he would not be
prosecuted for an action or omission that was not considered a crime according
to the statutes passed by the legislators in force at the time of the action or
omission, and that only those penalties that were in place when the
infringement took place would be applied. Also, even if one considers that
certain actions are prohibited under general principles of international law,
critics point out that a prohibition in a general principle does not amount to
the establishment of a crime, and that the rules of international law also do
not stipulate specific penalties for the violations. In an attempt to address
those criticisms, the statute of the recently established International
Criminal Court provides for a system in which crimes and penalties are
expressly set out in written law, that shall only be applied to future cases.
This principle is enshrined in several national constitutions, and a number of
international instruments. See e.g. European Convention on Human Rights,
article 7(1); Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, articles 22 and
23. Common law. In English criminal law there are offences of common law
origin. For example, murder is still a common law offence and lacks a statutory
definition. The Homicide Act 1957 did not include a statutory definition of
murder (or any other homicidal offense). There was, consequently, the
astonishing spectacle of the definition of murder, still a matter of common
law, being the subject of no less than six appeals to the House of Lords within
the next 40 years (Director of Public Prosecutions v. Smith A.C. 290; Hyam v.
Director of Public Prosecutions [1975 A.C. 55; Regina v. Cunningham A.C. 566;
Regina v. Moloney [1985 A.C. 905; Regina v. Hancock A.C. 455; Regina v. Woollin
[1998 4 A11 E.R. 103 (H.L.)).
