Mandatory Swedish In Finland, Swedish is a mandatory school subject for
Finnish-speaking pupils in the last three years of the primary education
(grades 7 to 9), in the same way as Finnish is for the Swedish-speaking Finns.
The so called "other domestic language" is also mandatory in high schools,
vocational schools, and vocational universities. Furthermore, all university
graduates must demonstrate a certain level of proficiency in other domestic
language (the so-called "public servant's Swedish/Finnish"). Altogether 92% of
Finnish citizens are native Finnish speakers, whereas 5.5% of the population
report Swedish as their mother tongue. According to the Finnish constitution,
both Finnish and Swedish are national official languages. The national
government as well as municipal governments in bilingual municipalities are
required to serve citizens in their mother tongue, either Finnish or Swedish.
The official term for both mandatory Swedish and Finnish is "the other domestic
language". However, the requirement to study Swedish is often referred to as
"pakkoruotsi", a somewhat charged term in Finnish meaning "mandatory Swedish",
or "enforced Swedish". Overview. The status of Swedish as an official national
language in Finland is defined by the Finnish constitution. The Swedish
language is an official language in Finland as a result of the history of the
country of Sweden, which gradually annexed what now is Finland from around A.D.
1200. There was also a migration of Swedish peasants to Finland during the
Middle Ages. During this period, when Finland was a part of Sweden, Swedish
language became part of the culture of Finland. Swedish was the language of the
ruling class and the Finnish language was not given an official status until
1860, well into the period of Russian rule (1809–1917). Swedish did get an
official status 1809, in Sweden its status was implicit. The autonomous Åland
Islands (pop. 26,000, 95% Swedish, 5% Finnish) has only one official language,
Swedish, and international treaties to some degree grant it the right of
remaining exclusively Swedophone. In Mainland Finland both official languages,
Finnish and Swedish, are mandatory subjects for pupils in primary and secondary
schools. The Swedish test of the Matriculation Examination was recently (2004)
made voluntary, although all university graduates must demonstrate that their
skills in the other official language meet the standard required of all
academically educated public servants. Usually this means the completion of a
so-called "public servant's Swedish" test. The Swedish language is also one of
the main agendas of the Swedish People's Party that has been a minor partner in
most Cabinets since Finland's independence, and in all Cabinets since 1979.
Supporters of Mandatory Swedish argue that it brings Finland closer to the
Nordic countries, since Swedish is quite similar to, and to some extent
mutually intelligible with, both Danish and Norwegian, while Finnish belongs to
the unrelated Finnic language group. Supporters also say that studying Swedish
makes it easier to learn other Germanic languages, such as English and German.
Lastly, they argue, mandatory Swedish is necessary to ensure that Swedish-
speakers can interact with governmental institutions and get service, such as
health care, in their own mother tongue. History. The area that today is
Finland was an integral part of Sweden proper from the Middle Ages to the end
of the Finnish War in 1809. Swedish migrants settled in coastal areas, and the
language of administration was Swedish. This prompted many Finnish-speakers to
learn Swedish in hopes of improving their social status, and some switched to
Swedish altogether. As a result of the Finnish War, Sweden ceded Finland to
Russia, and the Russian tsar established the autonomous Grand Duchy of Finland.
Although a Governor-General was installed by the Russians as the highest
authority within the Grand Duchy, much of the political system remained the
same: Finland was allowed to keep its ”laws, religion and language” from
the Swedish time. The tsar wanted to avoid trouble in the new territory and
also used former Swedish upper class to further modernisation in Russia;
Finnish was not an option at that time as official language, as the
administration did not know Finnish well enough and the language was
undeveloped regarding such use. When Finland became autonomous there was a big
interest in creating a new national identity. There was an immense interest in
the Finnish language and Finnish culture in the mostly Swedish speaking upper
class. At some point the Fennoman movement arose, that thought that the country
should be a united nation, with only one language, and, as a reaction, the
Svecoman movement, that was afraid that abandoning Swedish would lead to
slavicisation or worse. However, during the 1860s, under Tsar Alexander II, it
was decided that legal equality between Finnish and Swedish as languages of
administration was to be gradually introduced. Thus since the late 19th century
Finnish has been a co-official language of administration in Finland.
Modernizations typical for the era in Europe were introduced, boosting the
status of the Finnish-speaking majority: the special rights of the higher
estates of the realm were abolished, a modern parliament based on universal
suffrage was introduced 1907 and in 1917 Finland became independent. In the
current form, mandatory Swedish was implemented as a part of the modernisation
of the educational system in the 1970s. Previously, a Swedish test had been
compulsory on university level and in "oppikoulu", a secondary school that was
a prerequisite to matriculation to a university, but not in the common
"kansakoulu". The introduction of the "peruskoulu" (student ages 7–15),
compulsory for all children, introduced a course in Swedish compulsory to all
pupils, while Swedish courses and standardized tests at higher levels remained
compulsory. This was motivated by the possibility that any student could become
a public official and would thus be required to know Swedish. Current
situation. A compulsory introductory course to Swedish for all pupils in
primary education was introduced in the 1960s as a part of modernization of the
primary education system, where the nine-year school ("peruskoulu") was made
universally compulsory. Until then there had been mandatory courses only in
secondary and tertiary education. Administrative services have, since the end
of the 19th century, been offered in both domestic languages; therefore,
theoretically employees should be proficient in both Finnish and Swedish. The
reform was to some extent based on a political ambition to strengthen the ties
with the Western world through Scandinavia, and to show that Finland was still
a part of the Nordic countries, and not an Eastern Bloc country. It also sought
to improve social mobility by ensuring that a decision on language in the early
school years would not become an obstacle for applicants to the civil service.
In the upper secondary general school all the students learn at least two
languages besides their mother tongue, one of which is the other domestic
language, except for people studying some other language as mother tongue (e.g.
immigrants and those studying Sami). Finnish speakers take Swedish, and vice
versa. According to Statistics Finland, practically all the students take
English, either as a compulsory or an optional language. There is also a
possibility to take one or more extra foreign languages: 44 percent take German
and 21 percent French. Despite Finland being a neighbour of Russia, Russian is
not taught in most schools of Finland, and only 1.5% of Finns know some
Russian. The hindrances are cultural and political, as there has been
relatively little cultural exchange between the Finns and Russians in the 20th
century, and Finland's relations with the Soviet Union were hostile from the
Finnish Civil War (1918) until World War II (1939–1944). The arrangement of
"mandatory Swedish and practically-mandatory English" has been criticized,
because it reduces the diversity of the language skills of the population. The
EU target is to teach two foreign languages. As English is an overwhelmingly
popular choice, it has been suggested by, for example, the Confederation of
Finnish Industries that keeping Swedish compulsory directly prevents choosing
other languages, such as Russian. Surveys. A number of studies into opinions
regarding mandatory Swedish have been made with various results. The big
differences between studies exemplifies the problems in conducting a neutral
and broad study without asking leading questions on the particular subject.
Furthermore, some of the studies have been commissioned by organizations that
have politically partisan views on the subject of mandatory Swedish. Between
1990 and 2003 Taloustutkimus Oy conducted a series of more than ten surveys for
Suomalaisuuden liitto, an organisation opposing mandatory Swedish. According to
these surveys, 66–72% of Finns were "in favour of voluntary Swedish education
or against mandatory Swedish education". Suomen Gallup's 2003 survey concluded
that while a small majority supported "compulsory second domestic language
studying", it was opposed by 42% of Finns while 25% did not want both Finnish
and Swedish to be official languages of Finland. This study was commissioned by
YLE, the Finnish publicly funded national broadcasting company. The question
posed to those surveyed was very verbose in comparison to the Taloustutkimus
surveys on the same subject. The question did not include the word "Swedish".
In 1992 a study by "Valitut Palat" (the Finnish edition of "Reader's Digest")
concluded that 90 percent of the parents of third to fourth grade pupils
"supported a reduction of compulsory languages" (only Finnish and Swedish are
compulsory). When "Valitut Palat" did a new survey in 2003 it found 64%
opposing mandatory Swedish, and 25% not wanting to have two official languages.
An IEA study (2000) revealed that 67% of young people studying in Finnish-
speaking schools wanted to make Swedish a voluntary subject. The most
politically aware youths were the most critical against Swedishness in this
study. A study conducted in 1997 by Folktinget, an official consultative
organisation representing Finland's Swedish-speakers, concluded that 70% of the
Finnish-speaking population considered "Swedish a vital and important part of
Finnish society." This study also indicated that the most negative opinions
about mandatory Swedish were found among those with academic degrees. Opinions.
In many cases, pupils have negative expectations and experiences of learning
Swedish which may foster a negative attitude towards the Swedish language and
culture. This behaviour is claimed to hark back to the time when Finland was a
part of Sweden (see Sweden–Finland), and Swedish was the language of prestige
while Finnish was looked down on by the government. (Interestingly, however,
very similar negative attitudes and motivational problems have arisen in
Ireland against mandatory Irish, even though it is supposed to be the national
language, so the lack of motivation in learning a language spoken by a small
minority may not necessarily be due to nationalistic feelings among the
Finnish-speaking majority.) Negative opinions towards studying Swedish are also
grounded in the fact that mandatory Swedish is taught throughout the country,
even though there are few Swedish-speakers in mainland Finland outside the
coastal area by the Baltic Sea, and thus contact with Swedish-speakers is rare
for most Finns. This fact can for some make the policy of bilingualism seem
artificial, but the basic curriculum remains the same for the entire country.
On the other hand there is quite a lot of migration to the regions where
Swedish is spoken, such as the Helsinki region. According to a study published
in 2002 students are interested in the Swedish language, and find it an
important part of education, but they perceived Swedish being compulsory
lessened their motivation (this argument has been made very frequently in the
public debate). The experiment of making the Swedish test voluntary in the
matriculation examination (the completion of which is a "de facto" requirement
for university enrollment) was declared successful and was made permanent: 88%
of students take the Swedish test voluntarily. This, however, can be argued not
to reflect students' motivation, as after studying Swedish compulsorily for
many years, they naturally prefer to complete the Swedish test of the
examination. The percentage has since been constantly dropping and was 67% in
2009 (less than 50% of boys). There has also been a lot of criticism of the
methodology used to teach Swedish and the lack of competence in many of the
teachers. This has contributed to students' lack of motivation to study
Swedish, and many may not learn to speak the language beyond a very basic
level. Some students argue that they will never need Swedish as its utility in
the Finnish job market is limited to a few fields. Moreover, the rationale of
mandatory tuition in Swedish and other subjects is to give the students more of
a general knowledge base, and not train them for a specific field. In addition
to the direct costs of the tuition, some argue that mandatory Swedish
effectively replaces elective courses in languages such as French, German and
Russian, that these persons argue are more important than Swedish in a
globalized world. University students are required not only to master their
selected field, but also to study at least two languages beside their mother
tongue, one of which is obligatorily Swedish for Finnish-speakers. As study
material is often in English, this effectively removes the free choice; the two
"voluntarily chosen" languages must be Swedish and English. Despite being a
neighbour of Russia, it is in practice possible to study Russian only in some
schools (due to low interest or it not being offered); only 1.5% of the Finns
have a good knowledge of Russian. Also very few Finns speak Estonian (which is
not taught in most schools), a language of the same Finnic language group as
Finnish, and national language of Finland's southern neighbour Estonia,
although Finnish is popular in Estonia. Sentiments toward mandatory Swedish
vary. Many prominent politicians (both Finnish- and Swedish-speaking)
wholeheartedly support mandatory Swedish in schools, while others oppose it.
There have been numerous petitions and other similar campaigns arranged by some
small but dedicated organizations to pressure the lawmakers to abolish
mandatory Swedish, but to date, they have had no significant impact on the
established policy. Thus, while the ongoing debate is often heated and
passionate, the support for mandatory Swedish tuition remains strong enough
among politicians for the government not to consider a change of policy.
Mandatory Swedish is supported by the main political parties in Finland, the
National Coalition Party, the Centre Party, the Social Democrats and the Left
Alliance. However, the government recently dropped the requirement to take
Swedish (or Finnish in the case of the Swedish-speaking minority) as part of
the high school matriculation examination.
