Palestine Liberation Organization The Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO)
(; ) is a political and paramilitary organization which was created in 1964. It
is recognized as the "sole legitimate representative of the Palestinian people"
by the United Nations and over 100 states with which it holds diplomatic
relations, and has enjoyed observer status at the United Nations since 1974.
The PLO was considered by the United States and Israel to be a terrorist
organization until the Madrid Conference in 1991. In 1993, PLO recognized
Israel's right to exist in peace, accepted UN Security Council resolutions 242
and 338, and rejected "violence and terrorism"; in response, Israel officially
recognized the PLO as the representative of the Palestinian people. Founding.
Conceived by the Arab states at the first Arab summit meeting, the 1964 Arab
League summit (Cairo), its stated goal was the "liberation of Palestine"
through armed struggle. The organization was called Palestinian Liberation
Organization. The original PLO Charter (issued on 28 May 1964) stated that
"Palestine with its boundaries that existed at the time of the British mandate
is an integral regional unit" and sought to "prohibit... the existence and
activity" of Zionism. It also called for a right of return and self-
determination for Palestinians. Palestinian statehood was not mentioned,
although in 1974 the PLO called for an independent state in the territory of
Mandate Palestine. The group used multi-layered guerrilla tactics to attack
Israel from their bases in Jordan (including the West Bank), Lebanon, Egypt
(Gaza Strip), and Syria. Organization. The PLO has a nominal legislative body,
the Palestinian National Council (PNC), but most actual political power and
decisions are controlled by the PLO Executive Committee, made up of 18 people
elected by the PNC. The PLO incorporates a range of generally secular
ideologies of different Palestinian movements committed to the struggle for
Palestinian independence and liberation, hence the name of the organization.
The Palestine Liberation Organization is considered by the Arab League and by
the United Nations to be the legitimate representative of the Palestinian
people and holds a permanent observer seat in the United Nations General
Assembly. It has been widely criticized, however, over the lack of Hamas
presence in the Organization, even after Hamas won almost two-thirds of the
seats in the 2006 legislative council elections. Yasser Arafat was the Chairman
of the PLO Executive Committee from 1969 until his death in 2004. He was
succeeded by Mahmoud Abbas (also known as Abu Mazen). Initially, as an armed
guerrilla organization, the PLO was responsible for terrorist activities
performed against Israel in the 1970s and early 1980s. In 1988, however, the
PLO officially endorsed a two-state solution, contingent on terms such as
making East Jerusalem capital of the Palestinian state and giving Palestinians
the right of return to land occupied by Palestinians prior to 1948, as well as
the right to continue armed struggle until the end of "The Zionist Entity." In
1996, the PLO nullified the articles of the PLO's Charter, or parts of it,
which called for the destruction of Israel and for armed resistance. Other
institutions are the Chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization and the
Palestinian Central Council (PCC) which consists of 124 members from the PLO
Executive Committee, PNC, PLC and other Palestinian organizations. The PCC
makes policy decisions when PNC is not in session, acting as a link between the
PNC and the PLO-EC. The PCC is elected by the PNC and chaired by the PNC
speaker. Membership. The PLO has no central decision-making or mechanism that
enables it to directly control its factions, but they are supposed to follow
the PLO charter and Executive Committee decisions. Membership has fluctuated,
and some organizations have left the PLO or suspended membership during times
of political turbulence, but most often these groups eventually rejoined the
organization. Not all PLO activists are members of one of the factions – for
example, many PNC delegates are elected as independents. History. Creation. The
Arab League in Cairo Summit 1964 initiated the creation of an organization
representing the Palestinian people. The Palestinian National Council convened
in Jerusalem on 28 May 1964. Concluding this meeting the PLO was founded on 2
June 1964. Its "Statement of Proclamation of the Organization" declared "...
the right of the Palestinian Arab people to its sacred homeland Palestine and
affirming the inevitability of the battle to liberate the usurped part from it,
and its determination to bring out its effective revolutionary entity and the
mobilization of the capabilities and potentialities and its material, military
and spiritual forces". Due to the influence of the Egyptian President Nasser,
the PLO supported 'Pan-Arabism', as advocated by him – this was the ideology
that the Arabs should live in one state. The first executive committee was
formed on 9 August, with Ahmad Shuqeiri as its leader. In spite of the 1949
Armistice Agreements, the Arab states remained unreconciled to Israel's
creation as they had been to the proposed partition of Palestine in 1948.
Therefore, the Palestinian National Charter of 1964 stated: "The claims of
historic and spiritual ties between Jews and Palestine are not in agreement
with the facts of history or with the true basis of sound statehood... he Jews
are not one people with an independent personality because they are citizens to
their states." (Article 18). Although Egypt and Jordan favored the creation of
a Palestinian state on land they considered to be occupied by Israel, they
would not grant sovereignty to the Palestinian people in lands under Jordanian
and Egyptian military occupation, amounting to 53% of the territory allocated
to Arabs under the UN Partition Plan. Hence, Article 24: "This Organization
does not exercise any territorial sovereignty over the West Bank, the Gaza
Strip or in the Himmah Area." Leadership by Yasser Arafat. The resounding
defeat of Syria, Jordan and Egypt in the Six Day War of 1967 destroyed the
credibility of Arab states that had fought to be patrons for the Palestinian
people and their nationalist cause. The war radicalized the Palestinians and
significantly weakened Nasser's influence. The way was opened, particularly
after the Battle of Karameh in March 1968, for Yasser Arafat to rise to power.
He advocated guerrilla warfare and successfully sought to make the PLO a fully
independent organization under the control of the fedayeen organizations. At
the Palestinian National Congress meeting of 1969, Fatah gained control of the
executive bodies of the PLO. Arafat was appointed PLO chairman at the
Palestinian National Congress in Cairo on 4 February 1969. From then on, the
Executive Committee was composed essentially of representatives of the various
member organizations. The PLO at this time did not clearly either accept or
refute a two state solution. According to Israeli Likud leader Menachem Begin,
the PLO at this time was 'a Nazi organization' and its charter 'an Arabic Mein
Kampf'. War of attrition. From 1969 to September 1970 the PLO, with passive
support from Jordan, fought a war of attrition with Israel. During this time,
the PLO launched artillery attacks on the moshavim and kibbutzim of Bet Shean
Valley Regional Council, while fedayeen launched numerous attacks on Israeli
forces. Israel raided the PLO camps in Jordan, withdrawing only under Jordanian
military pressure. This conflict culminated in Jordan's expulsion of the PLO to
Lebanon in July 1971. Black September in Jordan. The PLO suffered a major
reversal with the Jordanian assault on its armed groups in the events known as
Black September in 1970. The Palestinian groups were expelled from Jordan, and
during the 1970s, the PLO was effectively an umbrella group of eight
organizations headquartered in Damascus and Beirut, all devoted to armed
resistance to either Zionism or Israeli occupation, using methods which
included direct clashing and guerrilla warfare against Israel. After Black
September, the Cairo Agreement led the PLO to establish itself in Lebanon. Ten
Point Program. In 1974, the PNC approved the Ten Point Program formulated by
Fatah's leaders, which calls for the establishment of a national authority over
any piece of liberated Palestinian land, and to actively pursue the
establishment of a democratic state in Israel/Palestine. The Ten Point Program
was considered the first attempt by PLO at a peaceful resolution, though the
ultimate goal was "completing the liberation of all Palestinian territory, and
as a step along the road to comprehensive Arab unity." This led to several
radical PLO factions (such as the PFLP, PFLP-GC and others) breaking out to
form the Rejectionist Front, which would act independently of PLO over the
following years. Suspicion between the Arafat-led mainstream and more hard-line
factions, inside and outside the PLO, have continued to dominate the inner
workings of the organization ever since, often resulting in paralysis or
conflicting courses of action. A temporary closing of ranks came in 1977, as
Palestinian factions joined with hard-line Arab governments in the
Steadfastness and Confrontation Front to condemn Egyptian attempts to reach a
separate peace with Israel (eventually resulting in the 1979 Camp David
Accords). Israel claimed to see the Ten Point Program as dangerous, because it
allegedly allows the Palestinian leadership to enter negotiations with Israel
on issues where Israel can compromise, but under the intention of exploiting
the compromises in order to "improve positions" for attacking Israel. The
Hebrew term for this is the "Plan of Stages" ("Tokhnit HaSHlabim"). During the
negotiations between Israel and the Palestinians in the 1990s, some Israelis
repeated this suspicion, claiming that the Palestinians' willingness to
compromise was just a smoke-screen to implement the Ten Point Program. After
the Oslo Accords were signed, Israeli right-wing politicians claimed (and still
claim) that this was part of the ploy to implement the Stage Program as Yasser
Arafat himself admitted in Arabic many times. The Ten Point Program was never
officially cancelled by the Palestinians. Lebanon and the Lebanese Civil War.
In the late 1960s, and especially after the expulsion of the Palestinian
militants from Jordan in Black September events in 1970-1971, Lebanon had
become the base for PLO operations. Palestinian militant organizations
relocated their headquarters to South Lebanon, and relying on the support in
Palestinian refugee camps, waged a campaign of attacks on the Galilee and on
Israeli and Jewish targets worldwide. Increasing penetration of Palestinians
into Lebanese politics and Israeli retaliations gradually deteriorated the
situation. By the mid-1970s, Arafat and his Fatah movement found themselves in
a tenuous position. Arafat increasingly called for diplomacy, perhaps best
symbolized by his Ten Points Program and his support for a UN Security Council
resolution proposed in 1976 calling for a two-state settlement on the pre-1967
borders. But the Rejectionist Front denounced the calls for diplomacy, and a
diplomatic solution was vetoed by the United States. In 1975, the increasing
tensions between Palestinian militants and Christian militias exploded into the
Lebanese Civil War, involving all factions. On 20 January 1976, the PLO took
part in the Damour massacre in retaliation to the Karantina massacre. The PLO
and Lebanese National Movement attacked the Christian town of Damour, killing
684 civilians and forcing the remainder of the towns population to flee. In
1976, Syria joined the war, by invading Lebanon, and beginning the 29 year
Syrian occupation of Lebanon, and in 1978 Israel invaded South Lebanon, in
response to the Coastal Road Massacre, executed by Palestinian militants based
in Lebanon. The population in the West Bank and Gaza Strip saw Arafat as their
best hope for a resolution to the conflict. This was especially so in the
aftermath of the Camp David Accords of 1978 between Israel and Egypt, which the
Palestinians saw as a blow to their aspirations to self-determination. Abu
Nidal, a sworn enemy of the PLO since 1974, assassinated the PLO's diplomatic
envoy to the European Economic Community, which in the Venice Declaration of
1980 had called for the Palestinian right of self-determination to be
recognized by Israel. Opposition to Arafat was fierce not only among radical
Arab groups, but also among many on the Israeli right. This included Menachem
Begin, who had stated on more than one occasion that even if the PLO accepted
UN Security Council Resolution 242 and recognized Israel's right to exist, he
would never negotiate with the organization. This contradicted the official
United States position that it would negotiate with the PLO if the PLO accepted
Resolution 242 and recognized Israel, which the PLO had thus far been unwilling
to do. Other Arab voices had recently called for a diplomatic resolution to the
hostilities in accord with the international consensus, including Egyptian
leader Anwar Sadat on his visit to Washington, DC in August 1981, and Crown
Prince Fahd of Saudi Arabia in his 7 August peace proposal; together with
Arafat's diplomatic maneuver, these developments made Israel's argument that it
had "no partner for peace" seem increasingly problematic. Thus, in the eyes of
Israeli hard-liners, "the Palestinians posed a greater challenge to Israel as a
peacemaking organization than as a military one". After the appointment of
Ariel Sharon to the post of Minister of defence in 1981, the Israeli government
policy of allowing political growth to occur in the occupied West Bank and Gaza
strip changed. The Israeli government tried, unsuccessfully, to dictate terms
of political growth by replacing local pro-PLO leaders with an Israeli civil
administration. In 1982, after an attack on a senior Israeli diplomat by
Lebanese based Palestinian militants in Lebanon, Israel invaded Lebanon in a
much larger scale in coordination with the Lebanese Christian militias,
reaching Beirut and eventually resulting in ousting of the PLO headquarters in
June that year. Low level Palestinian insurgency in Lebanon continued in
parallel with the consolidation of Shia militant organizations, but became a
secondary concern to Israeli military and other Lebanese factions. With ousting
of the PLO, the Lebanese Civil War gradually turned into a prolonged conflict,
shifting from mainly PLO-Christian coflict into involvement of all Lebanese
factions - whether Sunni, Shia, Druze and Christians. Tunis. In 1982, the PLO
relocated to Tunis, Tunisia after it was driven out of Lebanon by Israel during
Israel's six-month invasion of Lebanon. Following massive raids by Israeli
forces in Beirut, it is estimated that 8,000 PLO fighters evacuated the city
and dispersed. On 1 October 1985, in Operation Wooden Leg, Israeli Air Force F-
15s bombed the PLO's Tunis headquarters, killing more than 60 people. It is
suggested that the Tunis period (1982–1991) was a negative point in the PLO's
history, leading up to the Oslo negotiations and formation of the Palestinian
Authority (PA). The PLO in exile was distant from a concentrated number of
Palestinians and became far less effective. There was a significant reduction
in centres of research, political debates or journalistic endeavours that had
encouraged an energised public presence of the PLO in Beirut. More and more
Palestinians were abandoned, and many felt that this was the beginning of the
end. First Intifada. In 1987, the First Intifada broke out in the West Bank and
Gaza Strip. The Intifada caught the PLO by surprise, and the leadership abroad
could only indirectly influence the events. A new local leadership emerged, the
Unified National Leadership of the Uprising (UNLU), comprising many leading
Palestinian factions. After King Hussein of Jordan proclaimed the
administrative and legal separation of the West Bank from Jordan in 1988, the
Palestine National Council adopted the Palestinian Declaration of Independence
in Algiers, proclaiming an independent State of Palestine. The declaration made
reference to UN resolutions without explicitly mentioning Security Council
Resolutions 242 and 338. A month later, Arafat declared in Geneva that the PLO
would support a solution of the conflict based on these Resolutions.
Effectively, the PLO recognized Israel's right to exist within pre-1967
borders, with the understanding that the Palestinians would be allowed to set
up their own state in the West Bank and Gaza. The United States accepted this
clarification by Arafat and began to allow diplomatic contacts with PLO
officials. The Proclamation of Independence did not lead to statehood, although
over 100 states recognised the State of Palestine. Persian Gulf War. In 1990,
the PLO under Yasser Arafat openly supported Saddam Hussein in Iraqi regime's
invasion of Kuwait, leading to a later rupture in Palestinian-Kuwaiti ties and
the expulsion of many Palestinians from Kuwait. Within a single week, some
450,000 Palestinians were expelled in Kuwait, resulting in one of the fastest
and largest expulsions in modern history. Most of the Palestinians, who had
resided in Kuwait as foreign workers and residents, returned to Jordan. Oslo
Accords. In 1993, the PLO secretly negotiated the Oslo Accords with Israel. The
accords were signed on 20 August 1993. There was a subsequent public ceremony
in Washington D.C. on 13 September 1993 with Yasser Arafat and Yitzhak Rabin.
The Accords granted the Palestinians right to self-government on the Gaza Strip
and the city of Jericho in the West Bank through the creation of the
Palestinian Authority. Yasser Arafat was appointed head of the Palestinian
Authority and a timetable for elections was laid out which saw Arafat elected
president in January 1996, 18 months behind schedule. Although the PLO and the
PA are not formally linked, the PLO dominates the administration. The
headquarters of the PLO were moved to Ramallah on the West Bank. On 9 September
1993, Arafat issued a press release stating that "the PLO recognizes the right
of the State of Israel to exist in peace and security". Some Palestinian
officials have stated that the peace treaty must be viewed as permanent.
According to some opinion polls, a majority of Israelis believe Palestinians
should have a state of their own—a major shift in attitude after the Oslo
Accord—even though both Yitzhak Rabin and Shimon Peres opposed the creation
of a Palestinian state, both before and after the Accord. At the same time, a
significant portion of the Israeli public and some political leaders (including
the current Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu) express doubt over whether a
peaceful, coherent state can be founded by the PLO, and call for significant
re-organization, including the elimination of all terrorism, before any talk
about independence. Second Intifada. The Second or Al-Aqsa Intifada started
concurrent with the breakdown of talks at Camp David with Israeli Prime
Minister Ehud Barak. The Intifada never ended officially, but violence hit
relatively low levels during 2005. The death toll both military and civilians
of the entire conflict in 2000–2004 is estimated to be 3,223 Palestinians and
950 Israelis, although this number is criticized for not differentiating
between combatants and civilians. Members of the PLO have claimed
responsibility for a number of attacks against Israelis during the Second
Intifada. Palestinian National Charter. The Palestinian National Charter as
amended in 1968, endorsed the use of armed struggle against the internationally
recognized state of Israel. The most controversial element of text of the
Charter were many clauses declaring the creation of the state of Israel "null
and void", because it was created by force on Palestinian soil. This is usually
interpreted as calling for the destruction of the state of Israel. In letters
exchanged between Arafat and Rabin in conjunction with the 1993 Oslo Accords,
Arafat agreed that those clauses would be removed. On 24 April 1996, the
Palestine National Council held a meeting in camera, after which it was
announced that the Council had voted to nullify or amend all such clauses, and
called for a new text to be produced. At the time, Israeli political figures
and academics expressed doubt that this is what had actually taken place, and
continued to claim that controversial clauses were still in force. A letter
from Arafat to US President Bill Clinton in 1998 listed the clauses concerned,
and a meeting of the Palestine Central Committee approved that list. To remove
all doubt, the vote this time was held in a public meeting of PLO, PNC and PCC
members which was televised worldwide, and in the presence of Bill Clinton who
traveled to the Gaza Strip for that purpose. Israel's Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu accepted this as the promised nullification. He later wrote, "While
the PLO repeatedly committed itself to amend the charter..., no changes have
been made despite occasional claims to the contrary." However, a new text of
the Charter has not been produced, and this is the source of a continuing
controversy. Critics of the Palestinian organizations claim that failure proves
the insincerity of the clause nullifications. One of several Palestinian
responses is that the proper replacement of the Charter will be the
constitution of the forthcoming state of Palestine. The published draft
constitution states that the territory of Palestine "is an indivisible unit
based upon its borders on 4 June 1967" – which clearly implies an acceptance
of Israel's existence in its 1967 borders. In the United Nations. The United
Nations General Assembly recognized the PLO as the "representative of the
Palestinian people" in Resolution 3210 and Resolution 3236, and granted the PLO
observer status on 22 November 1974 in Resolution 3237. On 12 January 1976 the
UN Security Council voted 11–1 with 3 abstentions to allow the Palestinian
Liberation Organization to participate in a Security Council debate without
voting rights, a privilege usually restricted to UN member states. It was
admitted as a full member of the Asia group on 2 April 1986. After the
Palestinian Declaration of Independence the PLO's representation was renamed
Palestine. On 7 July 1998, this status was extended to allow participation in
General Assembly debates, though not in voting. Diplomatic representation. The
"Palestine Information Office" was registered with the Justice Department of
the United States as a foreign agent until 1968, when it was closed. It was
reopened in 1989 as the "Palestine Affairs Center." The PLO Mission office, in
Washington D.C was opened in 1994, and represented the PLO in the United
States. On 20 July 2010, the United States Department of State agreed to
upgrade the status of the PLO Mission in the United States to "General
Delegation of the PLO". Recognition by Israel and the Oslo Accords. In 1993,
PLO chairman Yasser Arafat recognized the State of Israel in an official letter
to its prime minister, Yitzhak Rabin. In response to Arafat's letter, Israel
decided to revert its stance toward the PLO and to recognize the organization
as the representative of the Palestinian people. This led to the signing of the
Oslo Accords in 1993. Terrorist activities. The PLO began their militancy
campaign from its inception with an attack on Israel's National Water Carrier
in January 1965. The PLO was designated a terrorist organization by the United
States in 1987., but in 1988 a presidential waiver was issued which permitted
contact with the organization. The United States attempted to prosecute Yasser
Arafat for his complicity in the assassination of two U.S diplomats. Israel
considered the PLO to be a terrorist organization until the Madrid Conference
in 1991. Most of the rest of the world recognized the PLO as the legitimate
representatives of the Palestinian people from the mid-1970s onwards (after the
PLO's admission to the UN as an observer.)
