Park51 Park51 (originally named Cordoba House) is a planned 13-story Islamic
community center in Lower Manhattan. The majority of the center will be open to
the general public and its proponents have said the center will promote
interfaith dialogue. Plans for the center include a Muslim prayer space which,
due to its location two blocks from the World Trade Center site, has
controversially been referred to as the "Ground Zero mosque", though numerous
commentators argued that it was neither a mosque nor at Ground Zero. It would
replace an existing 1850s building of Italianate style of architecture that was
being used as a Burlington Coat Factory before it was damaged in the September
11 attacks. The proposed multi-faith aspects of the design include a 500-seat
auditorium, theater, a performing arts center, a fitness center, a swimming
pool, a basketball court, a childcare area, a bookstore, a culinary school, an
art studio, a food court, and a memorial to the victims of the September 11
attacks. The prayer space for the Muslim community will accommodate
1,000–2,000 people. In late September 2011, the project developer opened a
Islamic center in renovated space at the Park 51 location. He hopes to build
the larger planned project within several years. Background. Plans to build
then-named Cordoba House were reported in "The New York Times" in December
2009, at a location that was already in use for Muslim worship. Early response
to the project was not pronounced, and one conservative commentator provided
positive coverage. The plans were reviewed by the local community board in May
2010, at which time they attracted some national media attention. Protests were
sparked by a campaign launched by conservative bloggers Pamela Geller and
Robert Spencer, founders of the group Stop Islamization of America, who dubbed
the project the "Ground Zero mosque", and a national controversy ensued. Some
opponents have also said that the building itself would serve as a "victory
memorial" to Islam. Supporters have said that arguments against the building
are based on the false notion that Islam, rather than Islamic radicals, is
responsible for the terrorist attack. The "New York Times" reported that Muslim
religious facilities previously existed at the World Trade Center itself before
the attacks. Opponents have also argued that the project should not be built
because polls have shown that most Americans, including most residents of New
York State and New York City (though not most residents of Manhattan), oppose
it. Most Americans and residents of New York State do, however, believe the
Park51 developers have a legal right to proceed with the project. The project's
organizers state that it is intended to be "a platform for multi-faith
dialogue. It will strive to promote inter-community peace, tolerance and
understanding locally in New York City, nationally in America, and globally,"
and have stated that it is modeled on the noted Manhattan Jewish Community
Center, the 92nd Street Y. The project's sponsors explained that the original
name of the center was meant to invoke 8th–11th century Córdoba, in Spain,
which they call a model of peaceful coexistence between Muslims, Christians,
and Jews. The proposal triggered an intense nationwide controversy, with
opponents of the project objecting to its proximity to the site of the
September 11 attacks, its scale, sources of funding, or expressing concern that
the project's name was intended as a reference to the Islamic conquest of the
Christian city of Córdoba. Supporters have appealed to the First Amendment as
well as the opportunity for Muslims to demonstrate peaceful Islamic values and
for Americans to reassert their commitment to tolerance and diversity. Naming
of the project. The project was originally called Cordoba House, then renamed
Park51, in reference to the street address on Park Place. Later, the Imam
leading the project introduced some ambiguity by again referring to the project
as "Cordoba House". The Park51 website then clarified that Park51 is the
community center, while Cordoba House is the "interfaith and religious
component of the center". Cordoba Initiative said the name "Cordoba House" was
meant to invoke 8th–11th century Córdoba, Spain, which they called a model
of peaceful coexistence between Muslims, Christians, and Jews. According to
"The Economist", the name was chosen because Muslims, Jews and Christians
created a center of learning in Córdoba together. The name was criticized; for
example, Newt Gingrich said that it was "a deliberately insulting term" which
symbolizes the Muslim conquerors' victory over Christian Spaniards, and noted
that the Muslims had converted a Cordoba church into the third largest mosque
in the world. Similarly, Raymond Ibrahim, a former associate director of the
Middle East Forum, said the project and name were not "a gesture of peace and
interfaith dialogue" but were "allusive of Islamic conquest and consolidation"
and that Americans should realize that mosques are not "Muslim counterparts to
Christian churches" but rather, "are symbols of domination and centers of
radicalization". The opposition to Park51 believes that Islam builds mosques on
"conquered territory" as symbols of "victory" and "conquest". Park51 is often
referred to as the "Ground Zero mosque". Since it is neither located directly
on the former World Trade Center site, Ground Zero, nor primarily a mosque,
some news media have advised against the use of this term. The Associated Press
suggested several alternate terms including "mosque 2 blocks from WTC site",
"Muslim (or Islamic) center near WTC site", "mosque near ground zero", and
"mosque near WTC site". Cordoba Initiative says the building is not strictly a
mosque. Anushay Hossain in "The Huffington Post" criticises the use of the name
Ground Zero mosque, and says it is "Not a mosque but an Islamic Community
Center". Jean Marbella in "The Baltimore Sun" says the building is closer to a
YMCA center than a house of worship. Project history. Muslims had a presence in
Lower Manhattan for many years prior to the September 11 attacks. At least two
mosques existed near the World Trade Center, and several designated Muslim
prayer rooms existed within the World Trade Center buildings. During the
attacks, the then-five-story building at 45–47 Park Place, between West
Broadway and Church Street, was severely damaged. When United Airlines Flight
175 struck the South Tower of the World Trade Center, part of the plane's
landing gear, engine and fuselage came out the north side of the tower and
crashed through the roof of 45–47 Park Place, and through two of its floors.
The plane parts destroyed three floor beams, and severely compromised the
building's internal structure. The 45–47 Park Place building, located about
two blocks () north of the World Trade Center site, was owned by Stephen
Pomerantz and his wife Kukiko Mitani and leased to the Burlington Coat Factory.
For years, Mitani attempted to sell the building, at one point asking for $18
million. It lay abandoned until its purchase in July 2009. For several months
thereafter, the building was used as an overflow prayer space for up to 450
Muslims, with services led by Feisal Abdul Rauf, an Imam based at the al-Farah
mosque in nearby TriBeCa. Purchase and investors. In July 2009, the real estate
company and developer Soho Properties purchased the building and property at
45–47 Park Place for $4.85 million in cash. Soho Properties' Chairman and
CEO, Sharif El-Gamal, initially planned to build a condominium complex at the
site, but was convinced by Imam Feisal Abdul Rauf's idea for a community center
with a prayer space. El-Gamal's partner is Nour Mousa, the nephew of Amr
Moussa, the Secretary General of the Arab League. The investors in the
transaction were the Cordoba Initiative, a tax-exempt foundation with assets of
$20,000, and the American Society for Muslim Advancement (ASMA), also a non-
profit organization. Rauf is founder, CEO, and Executive Director of Cordoba
Initiative, and founder and CEO of ASMA, and his wife, Daisy Khan, is the ASMA
Executive Director. In the Cordoba Initiative's first five years, from
2004–08, it raised less than $100,000. Both organizations are run out of the
same New York office. The two foundations proposed to use the property as the
site for a $100 million community center modeled after NYC's Jewish Community
Centers and YMCAs. They are working on the project with El-Gamal, their co-
developer. The 49–51 Park Place half of the "45–51" parcel is still owned
by the utility Con Edison (Con Ed). Soho Properties paid an additional $700,000
to assume a $33,000-a-year lease with Con Ed, for its adjacent attached former
sub-station. The plan is to build the facility on the site of the two
buildings. The lease for 49–51 Park Place expires in 2071. The two buildings
are connected internally, with common walls having been taken down. El-Gamal
informed Con Ed in February 2010 that he wanted to exercise his purchase option
on the lease. Con Ed is now conducting an appraisal to determine the property's
value. Once the property has been valued, El-Gamal will have the option of
accepting the price, which was reportedly estimated at $10–$20 million. El-
Gamal said the cost "is not an issue". The sale would be reviewed by the New
York Public Service Commission, where it might face a vote by a five-member
board controlled by New York Governor Paterson. The specific location of the
planned facility, "where a piece of the wreckage fell", so close to the World
Trade Center, was a primary selling point for the Muslims who bought the
building. Rauf said it "sends the opposite statement to what happened on 9/11"
and "We want to push back against the extremists." Planned facilities. The
official website for the facility had said it would include "a mosque, intended
to be run separately from Park51 but open to and accessible to all members,
visitors and our New York community". By September 2010, the word mosque had
been replaced with "prayer space". In an interview in July 2010, lead developer
of the project Sharif el-Gamal had supported the inclusion of a mosque as
needed by the New York Muslim community. The Muslim prayer space is planned to
occupy two floors of the 13 story building. Besides the prayer space, the
Initiative's plan includes a 500-seat auditorium, theater, performing arts
center, fitness center, swimming pool, basketball court, childcare services,
art exhibitions, bookstore, culinary school, and a food court serving halal
dishes. El-Gamal said he wanted the building to be energy-efficient and
transparent, most likely with a glass façade. The project envisions the
demolition of two buildings at 45–47 Park Place and Broadway which were
damaged on 9/11. They would be replaced by a glass and steel structure with a
new address, 45–51 Park Place. A number of commentators stated that the
builders planned either the groundbreaking or opening date to coincide with
anniversaries of the September 11 attacks. Khan said in July 2010 that such
assertions were "absolutely false" and that the construction timeline had not
been determined; furthermore, those making such assertions have no proof of
their claims. However, in a May 2010 Associated Press interview Khan said that
the Initiative may plan for groundbreaking to coincide with the 10th
anniversary of the attacks. Khan also said that it was anticipated that 1,000
to 2,000 Muslims would pray at the prayer center every Friday, once it was
completed. Khan said the project is intended to foster better relations between
Islam and Americans. Explaining the choice of location, she said, "We decided
we wanted to look at the legacy of 9/11 and do something positive." She added
that her group represents moderate Muslims who want "to reverse the trend of
extremism and the kind of ideology that the extremists are spreading". Pointing
to the fact that ordinary Muslims have been killed by Muslim extremists all
over the world, Khan also said about the mosque, "For us it is a symbol... that
will give voice to the silent majority of Muslims who suffer at the hands of
extremists. A center will show that Muslims will be part of rebuilding Lower
Manhattan." Community board advisory vote. On May 25, 2010, neighborhood
authorities in a non-binding advisory vote backed part of the plans for Cordoba
House to be built on the site. The endorsement related only to "the important
community facilities project will provide", and the resolution indicated that
the board "takes no position regarding the religious aspects or any religious
facilities associated with either the Cordoba Initiative or the Cordoba House
Project". The board's chairwoman, Julie Menin, supported deletion of references
to the building as a mosque and interfaith center that were in an earlier draft
of the resolution, saying: "I personally was uncomfortable with the language
that talked about the religious institution. I believe it's not the purview of
a city agency to be weighing in on the siting of any religious institution, be
it a mosque, synagogue, or church." The vote by the Lower Manhattan Community
Board 1 was 29-to-1, with 10 abstentions. Although the vote was not binding,
the meeting was contentious. Some of the speakers supporting the project were
Muslims who lost family members in the attacks, and were booed by protesters.
Some non-Muslim relatives of 9/11 victims also spoke in support, but other
family members objected to the project, claiming the location is insensitive.
Landmark status declined and litigation. One obstacle to construction was the
potential conferment of landmark status on the building. It had been
constructed between 1857 and 1858, in the Italian Renaissance palazzo style.
The stone-faced building, designed by Daniel Badger, was originally constructed
for a shipping firm of a prominent New York shipping magnate. Its Italian
palazzo style was a throwback to a prior time of European grandeur, and was
intended to evoke images of economic might. The building is an example of the
"store and loft" structures that were prevalent in the dry goods warehouse
districts of Lower Manhattan. The building was one of only a few stand-alone
structures in southern Tribeca that were nominated – but never designated –
as individual landmarks, during an effort in the 1980s to create a Tribeca
historic district. In September 1989, the Commission had held public hearings
and considered the building for landmark status, but it never acted on the
matter, and the building was "calendared" ever since. The "New York Post"
reported that city building records reflected that out of a group of 29
buildings, including 45–47 Park Place, that were proposed for historic
landmark designation in 1989, 23 had been deemed landmarks and 6 (including
45–47) were pending as of August 2010. New York City has more than 11,000
landmarked buildings. On August 3, 2010, New York City's Landmarks Preservation
Commission voted 9–0 against granting landmark status and historic protection
to the building. That cleared the way for it to be demolished, and the new
Cordoba House to be built in its place. The following day, Timothy Brown, a
firefighter who survived 9/11, filed a suit in New York State Supreme Court in
Manhattan asking the court to nullify the Commission's decision. He praised
45–47 Park Place, quoting the Commission's own description of it as "a fine
example of the Italian Renaissance-inspired palazzi" that flourished in the
mid-19th century in the area. The suit was filed on his behalf by the American
Center for Law and Justice, a conservative public interest firm. On July 10,
2011, Justice Paul G. Feinman of the New York State Supreme Court dismissed
Brown's case, writing that the firefighter was "an individual with a strong
interest in preservation of the building", but added that he lacked any special
legal standing on its fate. Adam Leitman Bailey, the lawyer who represented the
Islamic center's developer pro bono, called the decision "a victory for
America" and said, "Despite the tempest of religious hatred, the judge flexed
our Constitution's muscles enforcing the very bedrock of our democracy." Jack
Lester, a lawyer for Brown, said, "We believe the brave men and women who
risked their lives have standing to preserve the monuments and historic
buildings at ground zero." Continuing efforts. On August 2, 2011, the "New York
Times" reported that Sharif El-Gamal, the project's developer, is quietly
proceeding with efforts to move Park51 forward, embracing a "slower, more
deliberate and more realistic approach" than before. "New Republic" contributor
Isaac Chotiner wrote that El-Gamal "is at least partially acquiescing" to the
families of 9/11 victims who disapprove of the center being built near Ground
Zero. Opening. On September 21, 2011, Park51 was opened to the public as 4,000
square feet of renovated space in the Burlington Coat Factory building. The
center's opening was without incident. Visitors were able to view 160 portraits
of immigrant children living in New York during the exhibit called
"NYChildren", and a carpeted prayer room is located in the lower level. The
project's developer, Sharif El-Gamal, hopes that the new building can be
completed within several years. Presently, Park51 is opening its doors to New
Yorkers of all backgrounds for interfaith workshops, films and lectures.
Controversy. Opponents of the Park51 project argued that it is "a mosque" and
have that establishing a mosque "so close" to Ground Zero would be offensive
since the hijackers in the September 11, 2001 attacks were Islamic terrorists.
Project supporters have argued that the Park51 building would not be visible
from the World Trade Center site, that some victims and victims' families are
in favor of the Park51 project, and that some victims were also Muslims.
"Newsweek" quotes a Taliban operative as explicitly connecting increased
opposition to the mosque with increased support for the Taliban's cause. "By
preventing this mosque from being built, America is doing us a big favor," the
Taliban operative stated. "It's providing us with more recruits, donations, and
popular support." The Ahmadiyya Muslim Community does not directly oppose the
building of a mosque near ground zero but says that the sentiments of non-
Muslims should not be unduly hurt. They state that there are other places where
mosques can be built and they do not see why that particular location has been
chosen. Opposition. A CNN poll conducted August 6–10 found that two out of
three Americans – including four out of five Republicans – opposed the
Park51 project Some relatives of victims of the September 11 attacks said they
found the proposal offensive because the perpetrators who committed the attacks
did so in the name of Islam. A group of victims' relatives, 9/11 Families for a
Safe & Strong America, called the proposal "a gross insult to the memory of
those who were killed on that terrible day". A number of American politicians
spoke out against the Park51 project, such as John McCain, Sarah Palin, and
Mitt Romney. Former House Speaker Republican Newt Gingrich said: "It's not
about religion and is clearly an aggressive act that is offensive."  Former New
York City mayor Rudy Giuliani called it a "desecration; Nobody would allow
something like that at Pearl Harbor ... Let's have some respect for who died
there and why they died there.") Paul Sipos, a member of NYC Community Board 1,
said: If the Japanese decided to open a cultural center across from Pearl
Harbor, that would be insensitive. If the Germans opened a Bach choral society
across from Auschwitz, even after all these years, that would be an insensitive
setting. I have absolutely nothing against Islam. I just think: Why there?
Democratic Independent Connecticut Senator Joe Lieberman indicated that he felt
the project should be halted, pending further evaluation of its impact on the
families and friends of 9/11 victims, project's sponsors' intentions, and their
sources of funding. Senate Majority Leader Democrat Harry Reid of Nevada said
"it is time to bring people together, not a time for polarization and I think
it would be better off for everyone if it were built somewhere else." Jim
Manley, a spokesperson for Reid earlier said, "The First Amendment protects
freedom of religion... Senator Reid respects that, but thinks that the mosque
should be built some place else." More than 20,000 people signed an online
petition for the Committee to Stop the Ground Zero Mosque, and unsuccessfully
lobbied the NYC Landmarks Preservation Commission to give the location landmark
status, which would have added a major hurdle to construction. Zuhdi Jasser,
President of the American Islamic Forum for Democracy, called for transparency
in the funding of the project, suggesting foreign sources could imply an
ulterior agenda. Reza Aslan said that it would be acceptable to demand that
mosques be transparent about funding if the same was also demanded of a
Catholic church or a Jewish temple. Feisal Abdul Rauf, a Kuwaiti-American Sufi
Muslim, initially the chief proponent of the project until he was replaced in
January 2011, said "If I knew this would happen, this would cause this kind of
pain, I wouldn't have done it. My life has been devoted to peacemaking." Raheel
Raza and Tarek Fatah, board members of the Muslim Canadian Congress, opposed
the construction of the mosque as did Rima Fakih, the first Muslim-American
crowned Miss USA as Miss USA 2010, who said that construction of the mosque was
insensitive to families of 9/11 victims as did The Anti-Defamation League
(ADL), a U.S. Jewish civil rights group that had spoken out against anti-Muslim
bigotry, denounced what it saw as bigoted attacks on the mosque. Its head
opined that some of those who oppose the mosque are "bigots", and that the
plan's proponents may have every right to build the mosque at that location.
Nevertheless, the group recommended selecting a different location, and
appealed to the builders to consider the sensitivities of the victims'
families, saying that building the mosque at that site would unnecessarily
cause more pain for families of some victims of 9/11. As a consequence of their
statement Fareed Zakaria the winner of the ADL's 2005 Hubert Humphrey First
Amendment Freedoms Prize has returned the prize and the prize money. Support. A
Quinnipiac University Polling Institute poll of New York State residents
released August 31, 2010 found a 54–40 percent majority of voters agreeing
"that because of American freedom of religion, Muslims have the right to build
the mosque near Ground Zero". Some relatives of victims of the 9/11 attacks
expressed support for the project. Colleen Kelley, who lost her brother William
on 9/11, says, the "irony in the debate over the section of the building that
would house a mosque is that one might assume that God (the same God to Jews-
Christians-Muslims) would be pleased with any type of effort that involves
prayer and service to others." Marvin Bethea, a former EMS worker who was
forced to retire in 2004 because of breathing problems caused by working at the
9/11 site, believes racism is a factor in the controversy, He said "even though
my life has changed, I don't hate the Muslims. Especially being a black man, I
know what it's like to be discriminated against. I've lived with that." The
anti-war group September 11th Families for Peaceful Tomorrows, released a
statement in support of the center, saying "we believe that welcoming the
Center, which is intended to promote interfaith tolerance and respect, is
consistent with fundamental American values of freedom and justice for all,"
adding it will be "an emblem for the rest of the world that Americans stand
against violence, intolerance, and overt acts of racism and that we recognize
that the evil acts of a few must never damn the innocent". President Barack
Obama acknowledged the right of Muslims to build the Islamic center. Obama
said, "Muslims have the same right to practice their religion as anyone else in
this country. And that includes the right to build a place of worship and a
community center on private property in lower Manhattan, in accordance with
local laws and ordinances." New York Mayor Michael Bloomberg strongly endorsed
the project, saying that Ground Zero was a "very appropriate place" for a
mosque, because it "tells the world" that the U.S. has freedom of religion for
everyone. Responding to opposition, he said: The government should never, never
be in the business of telling people how they should pray, or where they can
pray. We want to make sure that everybody from around the world feels
comfortable coming here, living here, and praying the way they want to pray.
Additional New York politicians supported the proposal. They included Manhattan
Borough President Scott Stringer ("I'll do everything I can to make sure this
mosque does get opened"), U.S. Representative Jerrold Nadler ("the government
has no business deciding"), NY State Senator Daniel Squadron, NYC Comptroller
John Liu, NYC Council Speaker Christine Quinn, and NYC Public Advocate Bill de
Blasio. Former Minnesota Governor Jesse Ventura gave his support to Park51,
arguing that the First Amendment allows for a mosque to be built near Ground
Zero. Ventura also argued that denying the right for a mosque to be built near
Ground Zero would be similar to removing churches from Oklahoma City, where the
Oklahoma City bombing occurred (the deadliest act of terrorism in the United
States prior to 9/11), if Timothy McVeigh, the man who perpetrated the attack,
was a Christian. Orrin Hatch, a Republican Senator from Utah, voiced support of
the project on religious freedom grounds. Hatch is a Mormon and cited an
instance where a neighborhood tried to prevent a Mormon temple from being
built. Former US President Bill Clinton also supported Park51, after noting
that many Muslims were also killed on September 11. He suggested that the
developers could have avoided controversy if they dedicated the center to the
Muslim victims of the attacks.
