Patriotism Patriotism is a devotion to one's country, excluding differences
caused by the dependencies of the term's meaning upon context, geography and
philosophy. In a generalized sense applicable to all countries and peoples,
patriotism is a devotion to one's country. It is a related sentiment to
nationalism. The English term "patriot" is first attested in the Elizabethan
era, via Middle French from Late Latin (6th century) "patriota" "countryman",
ultimately from Greek πατριώτης ("patriōtēs") "countryman", from
πατρίς, "fatherland". The abstract noun "patriotism" appears in the early
18th century. History. The general notion of Civic virtue and group dedication
has been attested in culture globally throughout the historical period.
Enlightenment England and France. In classical 18th century patriotism, loyalty
to the State was chiefly considered in contrast to loyalty to the Church, and
it was argued that clerics should not be allowed to teach in public schools as
their "patrie" was heaven, so that they could not inspire love of the homeland
in their students. One of the most influential proponents of this classical
notion of patriotism was Jean-Jacques Rousseau. Conversely, in 1774, Samuel
Johnson published "The Patriot", a critique of what he viewed as false
patriotism. On the evening of 7 April 1775, he made the famous statement,
"Patriotism is the last refuge of the scoundrel." This line was not, as widely
believed, about patriotism in general, but the false use of the term
"patriotism" by John Stuart, 3rd Earl of Bute (the patriot-minister) and his
supporters; Johnson opposed "self-professed Patriots" in general, but valued
what he considered "true" patriotism. Philosophical issues. Patriotism may be
strengthened by adherence to a national religion (a civil religion or even a
theocracy). This is the opposite of the separation of church and state demanded
by the Enlightenment thinkers who saw patriotism and faith as similar forces.
Others, such as Michael Billig or Jean Bethke Elshtain argue that the
difference is difficult to discern and relies largely on the attitude of the
labeller. Surveys. Several surveys have tried to measure patriotism for various
reasons, such as the Correlates of War project which found some correlation
between war propensity and patriotism. The results from different studies are
time dependent. For example, patriotism in Germany before the Great War (WWI)
ranked at or near the top, whereas today it ranks at or near the bottom of
patriotism surveys. The Patriotism Score tables here are from the World Values
Survey and refer to the average answer "for high income residents" of a country
to the question: "Are you proud to be nationality?" It ranges from 1 (not
proud) to 4 (very proud). The higher value for Germany in 1990-92 likely
reflects a temporary effect from reunification occurring then.
