Paul Wolfowitz Paul Dundes Wolfowitz (born December 22, 1943) is a former
United States Ambassador to Indonesia, U.S. Deputy Secretary of Defense,
President of the World Bank, and former dean of the Paul H. Nitze School of
Advanced International Studies at Johns Hopkins University. He is currently a
visiting scholar at the American Enterprise Institute, working on issues of
international economic development, Africa and public-private partnerships, and
chairman of the US-Taiwan Business Council. He is a leading neoconservative. As
Deputy Secretary of Defense, he was "a major architect of President Bush's Iraq
policy and ... its most hawkish advocate." Donald Rumsfeld in his interview
with Fox News on February 8, 2011 said that Wolfowitz was the first to bring up
Iraq after the 9/11 attacks during a meeting at the presidential retreat at
Camp David. After serving two years, he resigned as president of the World Bank
Group ending what a Reuters report called "a protracted battle over his
stewardship, prompted by his involvement in a high-paying promotion for his
companion." Personal history. The second child of Jacob Wolfowitz (1910–1981)
and Lillian Dundes, Paul Wolfowitz was born in Brooklyn, New York, into a
Polish Jewish immigrant family, and grew up mainly in Ithaca, New York, where
his father was a professor of statistical theory at Cornell University."
Strongly influenced by his father, Paul Wolfowitz became "a soft-spoken former
aspiring-mathematician-turned-policymaker ... world views ... were forged by
family history and in the halls of academia rather than in the jungles of
Vietnam or the corridors of Congress ... [His father ... escaped Poland after
World War I. The rest of his father's family perished in the Holocaust." In the
mid-1960s, while they were both undergraduate students at Cornell, he met Clare
Selgin, who later became an anthropologist. They married in 1968, had three
children, lived in Chevy Chase, Maryland. They separated in 1999, and,
according to some sources, became legally separated in 2001 and divorced in
2002. In late 1999, Wolfowitz began dating Shaha Ali Riza. Their relationship
led to controversy later, during his presidency of the World Bank Group.
Wolfowitz speaks five languages in addition to English: Arabic, French, German,
Hebrew, and Indonesian. University education. Cornell University. Wolfowitz
entered Cornell University in 1961. He lived in the Telluride House in 1962 and
1963, while philosophy professor Allan Bloom served as a faculty mentor living
in the house, and served as a pallbearer at Frances Perkins' funeral. In August
1963, he and his mother participated in the civil-rights march on Washington
organized by Martin Luther King, Jr. Wolfowitz was a member of the Quill and
Dagger society. Wolfowitz graduated in 1965 with a bachelor's degree in
mathematics and chemistry. Against his father's wishes, Wolfowitz decided to go
to graduate school to study politics. "One of the things that ultimately led me
to leave mathematics and go into political science was thinking I could prevent
nuclear war." University of Chicago. Wolfowitz did graduate work at the
University of Chicago in political science, where he took two courses with Leo
Strauss. James Mann points out: "quite a few neo-conservatives, like Wolfowitz,
believed strongly in democratic ideals; they had taken from the philosopher Leo
Strauss the notion that there is a moral duty to oppose a leader who is a
'tyrant.'" He completed his PhD dissertation under Albert Wohlstetter. In the
summer of 1969, Wohlstetter arranged for his students Wolfowitz, Wilson, and
Richard Perle to join the Committee to Maintain a Prudent Defense Policy which
was set up by Cold War architects Paul Nitze and Dean Acheson. From 1970 to
1972, Wolfowitz taught in the Department of Political Science at Yale
University, where one of his students was I. Lewis "Scooter" Libby. In 1972,
Wolfowitz earned a Ph.D. in political science from the University of Chicago,
writing his doctoral dissertation on "nuclear proliferation in the Middle
East". Career. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency. In the 1970s Wolfowitz
served as an aide to Democratic Senator Henry M. Jackson, who influenced
several neoconservatives, including Wolfowitz and Richard Perle. Jackson was a
Cold War liberal supporting higher military spending and a hard line against
the Soviet Union, while also supporting social welfare programs, civil rights,
and labor unions. In 1972 U.S. President Richard Nixon, under pressure from
Senator Jackson, dismissed the head of the U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament
Agency (ACDA) and replaced him with Fred Ikle. Ikle brought in a new team
including Wolfowitz. Wolfowitz wrote research papers and drafted testimony, as
he had previously done at the Committee to Maintain a Prudent Defense Policy.
He traveled with Ikle to strategic arms limitations talks in Paris and other
European cities. He helped dissuade South Korea from reprocessing plutonium
that could be diverted into a clandestine weapons program. Under President
Gerald Ford, the American intelligence agencies came under attack over their
annually published National Intelligence Estimate. According to Mann: "The
underlying issue was whether the C.I.A. and other agencies were underestimating
the threat from the Soviet Union, either by intentionally tailoring
intelligence to support Kissinger's policy of détente or by simply failing to
give enough weight to darker interpretations of Soviet intentions." Attempting
to counter these claims, the new Director of Central Intelligence, George H.W.
Bush formed a committee of anti-Communist experts, headed by Richard Pipes, to
reassess the raw data. Based on the recommendation of Richard Perle, Pipes
picked Wolfowitz for this committee, which was later called Team B. The team's
1976 report, which was leaked to the press, stated that "All the evidence
points to an undeviating Soviet commitment to what is euphemistically called
the 'worldwide triumph of socialism,' but in fact connotes global Soviet
hegemony," highlighting a number of key areas where they believed the
government's intelligence analysts had failed. According to Jack Davis,
Wolfowitz observed later: Qtd. by Jack Davis, "The Challenge of Managing
Uncertainty: Paul Wolfowitz on Intelligence-Policy Relations", "Studies in
Intelligence" 39.5 (1996): 35-42, accessed May 21, 2007. ("Jack Davis served in
the Directorate of Intelligence.") title. Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense
for Regional Programs. In 1977, during the Carter administration, Wolfowitz
moved to the Pentagon. He was U.S. Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for
Regional Programs for the U.S. Defense Department, under U.S. Secretary of
Defense Harold Brown. In 1980, Wolfowitz resigned from the Pentagon and became
a visiting professor at the Paul H. Nitze School of Advanced International
Studies (SAIS) at Johns Hopkins University. According to "The Washington Post";
"He said it was not he who changed his political philosophy so much as the
Democratic Party, which abandoned the hard-headed internationalism of Harry
Truman, Kennedy and Jackson." State Department Director of Policy Planning.
Following the 1980 election of President Ronald Reagan, the new National
Security Advisor Richard V. Allen formed the administration's foreign policy
advisory team. Allen initially rejected Wolfowitz's appointment but following
discussions, instigated by former colleague John Lehman, Allen offered
Wolfowitz the position of Director of Policy Planning at the Department of
State. President Reagan's foreign policy was heavily influenced by the
Kirkpatrick Doctrine, as outlined in a 1979 article in "Commentary" by Jeane
Kirkpatrick entitled "Dictatorships and Double Standards". Although most
governments in the world are, as they always have been, autocracies of one kind
or another, no idea hold greater sway in the mind of educated Americans than
the belief that it is possible to democratize governments, anytime, anywhere,
under any circumstances... (But) decades, if not centuries, are normally
required for people to acquire the necessary disciplines and habits. Wolfowitz
broke from this official line by denouncing Saddam Hussein of Iraq at a time
when Donald Rumsfeld was offering the dictator support in his conflict with
Iran. James Mann points out: "quite a few neo-conservatives, like Wolfowitz,
believed strongly in democratic ideals; they had taken from the philosopher Leo
Strauss the notion that there is a moral duty to oppose a leader who is a
'tyrant.'" Other areas where Wolfowitz disagreed with the administration was in
his opposition to attempts to open up dialogue with the Palestine Liberation
Organization (PLO) and to the sale of Airborne Warning and Control System
(AWACS) aircraft to Saudi Arabia. "In both instances," according to Mann,
"Wolfowitz demonstrated himself to be one of the strongest supporters of Israel
in the Reagan administration." Mann stresses: "It was on China that Wolfowitz
launched his boldest challenge to the established order." After Nixon and
Kissinger had gone to China in the early 1970s, U.S. policy was to make
concessions to China as an essential Cold War ally. The Chinese were now
pushing for the U.S. to end arms sales to Taiwan, and Wolfowitz used the
Chinese incentive as an opportunity to undermine Kissinger's foreign policy
toward China. Instead, Wolfowitz advocated a unilateralist policy, claiming
that the U.S. did not need China’s assistance but that the Chinese needed the
U.S. to protect them against the far-more-likely prospect of a Soviet invasion
of the Chinese mainland. Wolfowitz soon came into conflict with Secretary of
State Alexander Haig, who had been Kissinger’s assistant at the time of the
visits to China. On March 30, 1982, "The New York Times" predicted that "Paul
D. Wolfowitz, the director of policy planning ... will be replaced," because
"Mr. Haig found Mr. Wolfowitz too theoretical." Instead, on June 25, 1982,
George P. Shultz replaced Haig as U.S. Secretary of State, and Wolfowitz was
promoted. State Department Assistant Secretary for East Asian and Pacific
Affairs. In 1982, the new U.S. Secretary of State George Schultz appointed
Wolfowitz as Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs.
Jeane Kirkpatrick, on a visit to the Philippines, was welcomed by the dictator
Ferdinand Marcos who quoted heavily from her 1979 "Commentary" article
"Dictatorships and Double Standards" and although Kirkpatrick had been forced
to speak-out in favor of democracy the article continued to influence
Reagan’s policy toward Marcos. Following the assassination of Philippine
opposition leader Benigno Aquino, Jr. in 1983 many within the Reagan
administration including the President himself began to fear that the
Philippines could fall to the communists and the U.S. military would lose its
strongholds at Clark Air Force Base and Subic Bay Naval Station. Wolfowitz
tried to change the administration’s policy, stating in an April 15, 1985
article in "The Wall Street Journal" that "The best antidote to Communism is
democracy." Wolfowitz and his assistant Lewis Libby made trips to Manila where
they called for democratic reforms and met with non-communist opposition
leaders. Mann points out that "the Reagan administration’s decision to
support democratic government in the Philippines had been hesitant, messy,
crisis-driven and skewed by the desire to do what was necessary to protect the
American military installations." Following massive street protests, Marcos
fled the country on a U.S. Air Force plane and the U.S. recognized the
government of Corazón Aquino. Ambassador to the Republic of Indonesia. From
1986 to 1989, during the military-backed government of President Suharto,
Wolfowitz was the U.S. Ambassador to the Republic of Indonesia. According to
Peter J. Boyer, Wolfowitz’s appointment to Indonesia was not an immediately
obvious match. He was a Jew representing America in the largest Muslim republic
in the world, an advocate of democracy in Suharto's dictatorship. But
Wolfowitz’s tenure as Ambassador was a notable success, largely owing to the
fact that, in essence, he went native. With tutoring help from his driver, he
learned the language, and hurled himself into the culture. He attended academic
seminars, climbed volcanoes, and toured the neighborhoods of Jakarta. Sipress
and Nakashima report that "Wolfowitz's colleagues and friends, both Indonesian
and American" pointed to the "U.S. envoy's quiet pursuit of political and
economic reforms in Indonesia." Dewi Fortuna Anwar, a foreign policy adviser to
B J Habibie, Suharto's successor as head of state (1998–1999), stated "that
Wolfowitz was a competent and popular envoy." But "he never intervened to push
human rights or stand up to corruption." Officials involved in the AID program
during Wolfowitz's tenure told "The Washington Post" that he "took a keen
personal interest in development, including health care, agriculture and
private sector expansion" and that "Wolfowitz canceled food assistance to the
Indonesian government out of concern that Suharto's family, which had an
ownership interest in the country's only flour mill, was indirectly
benefiting." Paul Wolfowitz, "The Tragedy of Suharto", "The Wall Street
Journal", May 27, 1998, accessed April 16, 2007. After the 2002 Bali bombing,
on October 18, 2002, then Deputy Secretary of Defense Wolfowitz observed that
"the reason the terrorists are successful in Indonesia is because the Suharto
regime fell and the methods that were used to suppress them are gone."
Undersecretary of Defense for Policy. From 1989 to 1993, Wolfowitz served in
the administration of George H.W. Bush as Undersecretary of Defense for Policy,
under then U.S. Defense Secretary Dick Cheney. During the 1991 Persian Gulf
War, Wolfowitz’s team co-ordinated and reviewed military strategy, raising
$50 billion in allied financial support for the operation. Wolfowitz was
present with Cheney, Colin Powell and others, on 27 February 1991 at the
meeting with the President where it was decided that the troops should be
demobilised. On February 25, 1998, Wolfowitz testified before a congressional
committee that he thought that "the best opportunity to overthrow Saddam was,
unfortunately, lost in the month right after the war." Wolfowitz added that he
was horrified in March as "Saddam Hussein flew helicopters that slaughtered the
people in the south and in the north who were rising up against him, while
American fighter pilots flew overhead, desperately eager to shoot down those
helicopters, and not allowed to do so." During that hearing, he also stated:
"Some people might say—and I think I would sympathise with this view—that
perhaps if we had delayed the ceasefire by a few more days, we might have got
rid of Saddam Hussein." After the 1991 Persian Gulf War, Wolfowitz and his
then-assistant Scooter Libby wrote the Wolfowitz Doctrine to "set the
nation’s direction for the next century." At that time the official
administration line was "containment", and the contents of Wolfowitz’s plan
calling for "preemption" and "unilateralism" which was opposed by Chairman of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff Colin Powell and President Bush. Defense Secretary
Cheney produced a revised plan released in 1992. Many of the ideas in the
Wolfowitz Doctrine later became part of the Bush Doctrine. He left the
government after the 1992 election. At the helm of SAIS - Johns Hopkins
University. From 1994 to 2001, Wolfowitz served as Professor of International
Relations and Dean of the Paul H. Nitze School of Advanced International
Studies (SAIS) at Johns Hopkins University. He was instrumental in adding more
than $75 million to the university's endowment, developing an international
finance concentration as part of the curriculum, and combining the various
Asian studies programs into one department. He also advised Bob Dole on foreign
policy during his 1996 U.S. Presidential election campaign, which was managed
by Donald Rumsfeld. According to Kampfner, "Wolfowitz used his perch at the
Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies as a test-bed for a new
conservative world vision." Wolfowitz was associated with the Project for the
New American Century (PNAC); he signed both the PNAC's June 3, 1997 "Statement
of Principles", and its January 26, 1998 open letter to President Bill Clinton.
In February 1998 Wolfowitz testified before a Congressional hearing, stating
that the current administration lacked the sense of purpose to "liberate
ourselves, our friends and allies in the region, and the Iraqi people
themselves from the menace of Saddam Hussein." In September 2000 the PNAC
produced a 90-page report entitled "Rebuilding America's Defenses: Strategies,
Forces and Resources for a New Century", advocating the redeployment of U.S.
troops in permanent bases in strategic locations throughout the world where
they can be ready to act to protect U.S. interests abroad. During the 2000 U.S.
Presidential election campaign, Wolfowitz served as a foreign policy advisor to
George W. Bush as part of the group led by Condoleezza Rice calling itself The
Vulcans. Deputy Secretary of Defense. From 2001 to 2005, during the George W.
Bush administration, Wolfowitz served as U.S. Deputy Secretary of Defense
reporting to U.S. Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld. The September 11
attacks in 2001 was a turning point in administration policy, as Wolfowitz
later explained: "9/11 really was a wake up call and that if we take proper
advantage of this opportunity to prevent the future terrorist use of weapons of
mass destruction that it will have been an extremely valuable wake up call,"
adding: "if we say our only problem was to respond to 9/11, and we wait until
somebody hits us with nuclear weapons before we take that kind of threat
seriously, we will have made a very big mistake." In the first emergency
meeting of the National Security Council on the day of the attacks, Rumsfeld
asked, "Why shouldn’t we go against Iraq, not just al-Qaeda?" with Wolfowitz
adding that Iraq was a "brittle, oppressive regime that might break easily—it
was doable," and, according to John Kampfner, "from that moment on, he and
Wolfowitz used every available opportunity to press the case." The idea was
initially rejected, at the behest of Secretary of State Colin Powell, but,
according to Kampfner, "Undeterred Rumsfeld and Wolfowitz held secret meetings
about opening up a second front—against Saddam. Powell was excluded." In such
meetings they created a policy that would later be dubbed the Bush Doctrine,
centering on "pre-emption" and the war on Iraq, which the PNAC had advocated in
their earlier letters. After the September 11 attacks, the U.S. invaded
Afghanistan to fight Al-Qaeda, which orchestrated the attack . The U.S.
invasion of Afghanistan began on October 7, 2001. And, although victory was
declared on March 6, 2002, fighting continues as of August 28, 2012. On October
10, 2001, George Robertson, then Secretary-General of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organisation, went to the Pentagon to offer NATO troops, planes and ships to
assist. Wolfowitz rebuffed the offer, saying: "We can do everything we need
to." Wolfowitz later announced publicly, according to Kampfner, "that 'allies,
coalitions and diplomacy' were of little immediate concern." Ten months later,
on January 15, 2003, with hostilities still continuing, Wolfowitz made a
fifteen-hour visit to the Afghan capital, Kabul, and met with the new president
Hamid Karzai. Wolfowitz stated, "We’re clearly moving into a different phase,
where our priority in Afghanistan is increasingly going to be stability and
reconstruction. There’s no way to go too fast. Faster is better." Despite the
promises, according to Hersh, "little effort to provide the military and
economic resources" necessary for reconstruction was made. This criticism would
also re-occur after the U.S. invasion of Iraq later that year. On April 16,
2002 the National Solidarity Rally for Israel was called in Washington to
promote US support and collaboration with Israel. Wolfowitz was the sole
representative of the Bush administration to attend, speaking alongside Former
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and former New York Mayor Rudolph
Giuliani. As reported by the BBC, Wolfowitz told the crowd that US President
George W. Bush "wants you to know that he stands in solidarity with you".
Sharon Samber and Matthew E. Berger reported for Jewish Telegraphic Agency
(JTA) that Wolfowitz continued by saying that "Innocent Palestinians are
suffering and dying as well. It is critical that we recognize and acknowledge
that fact," before being booed and drowned out by chants of "No more Arafat."
Following the declaration of victory in Afghanistan the Bush administration had
started to plan for the next stage of the War on Terror. According to John
Kampfner, "Emboldened by their experience in Afghanistan, they saw the
opportunity to root out hostile regimes in the Middle East and to implant very
American interpretations of democracy and free markets, from Iraq to Iran and
Saudi Arabia. Wolfowitz epitomised this view." Wolfowitz "saw a liberated Iraq
as both paradigm and linchpin for future interventions." The 2003 invasion of
Iraq began on March 19. Prior to the invasion, Wolfowitz actively championed
it, as he later stated: "For reasons that have a lot to do with the U.S.
government bureaucracy we settled on the one issue that everyone could agree on
which was weapons of mass destruction as the core reason" The job of finding
WMD and providing justification for the attack would fall to the intelligence
services, but, according to Kampfner, "Rumsfeld and Wolfowitz believed that,
while the established security services had a role, they were too bureaucratic
and too traditional in their thinking." As a result "they set up what came to
be known as the 'cabal', a cell of eight or nine analysts in a new Office of
Special Plans (OSP) based in the U.S. Defense Department." According to an
unnamed Pentagon source quoted by Hersh, the OSP "was created in order to find
evidence of what Wolfowitz and his boss, Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld,
believed to be true—that Saddam Hussein had close ties to Al Qaeda, and that
Iraq had an enormous arsenal of chemical, biological, and possibly even nuclear
weapons that threatened the region and, potentially, the United States." Within
months of being set up, the OSP "rivaled both the CIA and the Pentagon’s
Defense Intelligence Agency, the DIA, as President Bush’s main source of
intelligence regarding Iraq’s possible possession of weapons of mass
destruction and connection with Al Qaeda." Hersh explains that the OSP "relied
on data gathered by other intelligence agencies and also on information
provided by the Iraqi National Congress, or I.N.C., the exile group headed by
Ahmad Chalabi." According to Kampfner, the CIA had ended its funding of the
I.N.C. "in the mid-1990s when doubts were cast about Chalabi’s reliability."
Nevertheless "as the administration geared up for conflict with Saddam, Chalabi
was welcomed in the inner sanctum of the Pentagon" under the auspices of the
OSP, and "Wolfowitz did not see fit to challenge any of Chalabi’s
information." The actions of the OSP have led to accusation of the Bush
administration "fixing intelligence to support policy" with the aim of
influencing Congress in its use of the War Powers Act. Kampfner outlined
Wolfowitz’s strategy for the 2003 invasion of Iraq, which "envisaged the use
of air support and the occupation of southern Iraq with ground troops, to
install a new government run by Ahmed Chalabi’s Iraqi National Congress."
Wolfowitz believed that the operation would require minimal troop deployment,
Hersh explains, because "any show of force would immediately trigger a revolt
against Saddam within Iraq, and that it would quickly expand." The financial
expenditure would be kept low, Kampfner observes, if "under the plan American
troops would seize the oil fields around Basra, in the South, and sell the oil
to finance the opposition." On March 27, 2003, Wolfowitz told the House
Appropriations Committee that oil revenue earned by Iraq alone would pay for
Iraq's reconstruction after the Iraq war; he testified his "rough recollection"
was: "The oil revenues of that country could bring between $50 and $100 billion
over the course of the next two or three years. Now, there are a lot of claims
on that money, but ... We are dealing with a country that can really finance
its own reconstruction and relatively soon." By October of that year, "Lawrence
Di Rita, the Pentagon's chief spokesman, said 'prewar estimates that may be
borne out in fact are likelier to be more lucky than smart.' added that earlier
estimates and statements by Mr. Wolfowitz and others 'oozed with uncertainty.'"
Di Rita's comments came as a much less optimistic secret Pentagon study—which
had been complete at the time of Wolfowitz's testimony—was coming to public
light, and when actual production results in Iraq were coinciding with those
projected in the less optimistic Pentagon study. During Wolfowitz's pre-war
testimony before Congress, he dismissed General Eric K. Shinseki's estimates of
the size of the post war occupation force and estimated that fewer than 100,000
troops would be necessary in the war. Two days after Shinseki testified,
Wolfowitz said to the House Budget Committee on February 27, 2003:There has
been a good deal of comment—some of it quite outlandish—about what our
postwar requirements might be in Iraq. Some of the higher end predictions we
have been hearing recently, such as the notion that it will take several
hundred thousand U.S. troops to provide stability in post-Saddam Iraq, are
wildly off the mark. It is hard to conceive that it would take more forces to
provide stability in post-Saddam Iraq than it would take to conduct the war
itself and to secure the surrender of Saddam's security forces and his
army—hard to imagine. On October 26, 2003, while in Baghdad staying at the
Al-Rashid Hotel Wolfowitz narrowly escaped an attack when six rockets hit the
floors below his room. Army Lt. Col. Charles H. Buehring was killed and
seventeen other soldiers were wounded. Wolfowitz and his DOD staffers escaped
unharmed and returned to the United States on October 28, 2003. President of
the World Bank. In March 2005, Wolfowitz was nominated to be president of the
World Bank by U.S. President George W. Bush. Criticism of his nomination
appeared in the media. Nobel Laureate in Economics and former chief economist
for the World Bank Joseph Stiglitz said: "'The World Bank will once again
become a hate figure. This could bring street protests and violence across the
developing world.'" In a speech at the U.N. Economic and Social Council,
economist Jeffrey Sachs also opposed Wolfowitz: "It's time for other candidates
to come forward that have experience in development. This is a position on
which hundreds of millions of people depend for their lives ... Let's have a
proper leadership of professionalism." In the U.S. there was some praise for
the nomination. An editorial in "The Wall Street Journal" states: "Mr.
Wolfowitz is willing to speak the truth to power ... he saw earlier than most,
and spoke publicly about, the need for dictators to plan democratic
transitions. It is the world's dictators who are the chief causes of world
poverty. If anyone can stand up to the Robert Mugabes of the world, it must be
the man who stood up to Saddam Hussein." He was confirmed and became president
on June 1, 2005. He soon attended the 31st G8 summit to discuss issues of
global climate change and the economic development in Africa. When this meeting
was interrupted by the July 7, 2005 London bombings, Wolfowitz was present with
other world leaders at the press conference given by British Prime Minister
Tony Blair. Several of Wolfowitz's initial appointments at the Bank proved
controversial, including two US nationals (Robin Cleveland and Kevin Kellems)
formerly with the Bush administration, whom he appointed as close advisors with
$250,000 tax-free contracts. Another appointee, Juan José Daboub was
criticized by his colleagues and others for attempts to change policies on
family planning and climate change towards a conservative line." Wolfowitz gave
special emphasis to two particular issues. Identifying Sub-Saharan Africa as
the region most challenged to improve living standards, he traveled widely in
the region. He also made clear his focus on fighting corruption. Several
aspects of the latter program raised controversy. Overturning the names
produced by a formal search process, he appointed a figure linked to the US
Republican party to head the Bank's internal watchdog. Member countries worried
that Wolfowitz's willingness to suspend lending to countries on grounds of
corruption was vulnerable to selective application in line with US foreign
policy interests. In a debate on the proposed Governance and Anti-Corruption
Strategy at the Bank's 2006 Annual Meetings, shareholders directed Wolfowitz to
undertake extensive consultations and revise the strategy to show how objective
measures of corruption would be incorporated into decisions and how the
shareholders' representatives on the Bank's Board would play a key role.
Following the consultations and revisions, the Board approved a revised
strategy in spring 2007. Recent activities. As a 'Visiting Scholar' of the
American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research, Wolfowitz has blogged
with the group, and he also appeared in group events. In 2011, he wrote columns
that appeared in publications such as "The Independent", "The Sunday Times",
and "Newsweek". Wolfowitz is a former steering committee member of the
Bilderberg group. Recent controversies. Wolfowitz's relationship with Shaha
Riza. After President George W. Bush's nominated Wolfowitz as president of the
World Bank, journalists reported that Wolfowitz was involved in a relationship
with World Bank Senior Communications Officer (and Acting Manager of External
Affairs) for the Middle East and North Africa Regional Office Shaha Ali Riza.
According to Richard Leiby, of "The Washington Post", Riza is "an Oxford-
educated British citizen, was born in Tunisia and grew up in Saudi Arabia.
She's known for her expertise on women's rights and has been listed on the
bank's Web site as a media contact for Iraq reconstruction issues." According
to Leiby and Linton Weeks, in their essay "In the Shadow of a Scandal", Riza's
employment at the World Bank predated Wolfowitz's nomination as Bank president:
"Riza started at the World Bank as a consultant in July 1997 and became a full-
time employee in 1999"; and the relationship between Riza and Wolfowitz pre-
dated it as well: Linton Weeks and Richard Leiby, "In the Shadow of a Scandal",
"The Washington Post", May 10, 2007, accessed May 10, 2007. (Page 2 of 3
pages.) According to the London "Sunday Times" on March 20, 2005, despite their
cultural differences, "Riza, an Arab feminist who confounds portrayals of
Wolfowitz as a leader of a 'Zionist conspiracy' of Jewish neoconservatives in
Washington ... who works as the bank’s senior gender co-ordinator for the
Middle East and north Africa ... not only shares Wolfowitz’s passion for
spreading democracy in the Arab world, but is said to have reinforced his
determination to remove Saddam Hussein’s oppressive regime." The relationship
created further controversy over Wolfowitz’s nomination to head the World
Bank, because the bank's ethics rules preclude sexual relationships between a
manager and a staff member serving under that manager, even if one reports to
the other only indirectly through a chain of supervision. Sharon Churcher and
Annette Witheridge, in "The Daily Mail", quote one World Bank employee's
statement that "Unless Riza gives up her job, this will be an impossible
conflict of interest"; the observation of "a Washington insider": "His
womanizing has come home to roost ... Paul was a foreign policy hawk long
before he met Shaha, but it doesn't look good to be accused of being under the
thumb of your mistress"; and Wolfowitz's response: "If a personal relationship
presents a potential conflict of interest, I will comply with Bank policies to
resolve the issue." Wolfowitz initially proposed to the World Bank's Ethics
Committee that he recuse himself from personnel matters regarding Riza, but the
committee rejected that proposal. Riza was "seconded to the State Department",
or placed on "external assignment," assigned "a job at the state department
under Liz Cheney, the daughter of the vice-president, promoting democracy in
the Middle East ..." She "was also moved up to a managerial pay grade in
compensation for the disruption to her career," resulting in a raise of over
$60,000, as well as guarantees of future increases; "The staff association
claims that the pay rise was more than double the amount allowed under employee
guidelines." A promotion and raise had been among the options suggested by a
World Bank ethics committee that was set up to advise on the situation.
According to Steven R. Weisman, however, in a report published in "The New York
Times", the then-current chair of the committee emphasized that he was not
informed at the time of the details or extent of the present and future raises
built into the agreement with Riza. Wolfowitz referred to the controversy
concerning his relationship with Riza in a statement posted on the website of
the World Bank at the time (April 12, 2007). The affair resurfaced in headlines
in 2011. Wolfowitz's leadership of the World Bank Group. In early 2007, "Fox
News" published on a series of investigative stories on the World Bank, based
in part on leaks of internal bank documents. On April 11, 2007, Reuters and Al
Kamen in "The Washington Post", reported that Wolfowitz and the World Bank
board had hired the Williams & Connolly law firm to oversee an investigation
into the leaking of internal bank documents to Fox News. Those reports cite an
internal memo to the bank staff later posted on the internet, dated April 9,
2007, in which the World Bank's general counsel, Ana Palacio, states that the
Bank's legal staff was scrutinizing two articles by investigative reporter
Richard Behar published on the website of "Fox News" on January 31 and March
27, 2007. A day after the second report published by Behar, on March 28, 2007,
Kamen had disclosed that "Bank records obtained by the Government
Accountability Project" documented pay raises in excess of Bank policies given
to Shaha Riza On April 12, 2007 the London "Financial Times" reported that, in
a 2005 memorandum, Wolfowitz had personally directed the Bank's human resources
chief to offer Riza a large pay rise and promotion, according to two anonymous
sources who told the "Financial Times" that they had seen the memo. The memo
was part of a package of 102 pages of documents released by the bank on April
14, 2007. On April 14, 2007, after reviewing these documents, the "Financial
Times" concluded that it was "a potentially fatal blow" to Wolfowitz. In
contrast, "Fox News" concluded that the new documents might offer Wolfowitz a
"new lifeline" in the scandal, because the Bank's ethics committee had launched
a review of the Riza compensation case in early 2006 and concluded that it did
not warrant any further attention by the committee. Wolfowitz failed, on April
19, 2007, to attend a high-profile meeting and the controversy led to
disruption at the World Bank when some employees wore blue ribbons "in a
display of defiance against his leadership." World Bank Group's board of
executive directors and staffers complained also that Wolfowitz was imposing
Bush Administration policies to eliminate family planning from World Bank
programs. According to Nicole Gaouette, in her report published in the "Los
Angeles Times" on April 19, 2007, Juan José Daboub—the managing director
whom Wolfowitz had appointed who has also been criticized for overly-
conservative policies concerning climate change and "a Roman Catholic with ties
to a conservative Salvadoran political party"—repeatedly deleted references
to family planning from World Bank proposals. Wolfowitz appeared before the
World Bank Group's board of executive directors to respond on May 15. Adams
speculated that "With Mr Wolfowitz so far refusing to step down, the board may
need to take radical action to break the stalemate. Members have discussed a
range of options, including sacking Mr Wolfowitz, issuing a vote of no
confidence or reprimanding him. Some board members argue that a vote of no
confidence would make it impossible for him to stay in the job." By Wednesday,
May 16, 2007, "The New York Times", reported that "after six weeks of fighting
efforts to oust him as president ... Wolfowitz began today to negotiate the
terms of his possible resignation, in return for the bank dropping or softening
the charge that he had engaged in misconduct ..." After expressions from the
Bush administration that it "fully" supported Wolfowitz as World Bank president
and its urging a "fair hearing" for him, President Bush expressed "regret" at
Wolfowitz's impending resignation. On May 17, 2007 the World Bank Group's board
of Executive Directors announced that Paul Wolfowitz would resign as World Bank
Group president at the end of June 2007.
