People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals People for the Ethical Treatment of
Animals (PETA) (stylized PeTA) is an American animal rights organization based
in Norfolk, Virginia, and led by Ingrid Newkirk, its international president. A
non-profit corporation with 300 employees and two million members and
supporters, it claims to be the largest animal rights group in the world. Its
slogan is "animals are not ours to eat, wear, experiment on, or use for
entertainment." Founded in March 1980 by Newkirk and fellow animal rights
activist Alex Pacheco, the organization first caught the public's attention in
the summer of 1981 during what became known as the Silver Spring monkeys case,
a widely publicized dispute about experiments conducted on 17 macaque monkeys
inside the Institute of Behavioral Research in Silver Spring, Maryland. The
case lasted ten years, involved the only police raid on an animal laboratory in
the United States, triggered an amendment in 1985 to that country's Animal
Welfare Act, and established PETA as an internationally known organization.
Since then, in its campaigns and undercover work, it has focused on four core
issues‚Äîopposition to factory farming, fur farming, animal testing, and
animals in entertainment‚Äîthough it also campaigns against fishing, the
killing of animals regarded as pests, the keeping of chained backyard dogs,
cock fighting, dog fighting, and bullfighting. The group has been the focus of
criticism from inside and outside the animal rights movement. Newkirk and
Pacheco are seen as the leading exporters of animal rights to the more
traditional animal protection groups in the United States, but sections of the
movement nevertheless say PETA is not radical enough‚Äîlaw professor Gary
Francione calls them the new welfarists, arguing that their work with
industries to achieve reform makes them an animal welfare, not an animal
rights, group. Newkirk told "Salon" in 2001 that PETA works toward the ideal,
but tries in the meantime to provide carrot-and-stick incentives. There has
also been criticism from feminists within the movement about the use of
scantily clad women in PETA's anti-fur campaigns, and criticism in general that
the group's media stunts trivialize animal rights. Newkirk's view is that PETA
has a duty to be "press sluts". Outside the movement, the confrontational
nature of PETA's campaigns has caused concern, as has the estimated 85% of
animals it euthanizes. PETA was further criticized in 2005 by United States
Senator Jim Inhofe for having given grants several years earlier to Animal
Liberation Front (ALF) and Earth Liberation Front (ELF) activists, two groups
that the Federal Bureau of Investigation has identified as agents of domestic
terrorism. PETA responded that it has no involvement in ALF or ELF actions and
does not support violence, though Newkirk has elsewhere made clear that she
supports the removal of animals from laboratories and other facilities,
including as a result of illegal direct action. History. Ingrid Newkirk.
Specter, Michael. "The Extremist: The woman behind the most successful radical
group in America", "The New Yorker", April 4, 2003. In 1980, she divorced Steve
Newkirk, whom she had married when she was 19, and the same year met Alex
Pacheco, a political major at George Washington University. Pacheco had studied
for the priesthood, then worked as a crew member of the Sea Shepherd
Conservation Society's first ship. He volunteered at the shelter where she
worked, and they fell in love and began living together, though as Kathy Snow
Guillermo writes they were very different‚ÄîNewkirk was older and more
practical, whereas Pacheco could barely look after himself. He introduced
Newkirk to Peter Singer's influential book, "Animal Liberation" (1975), and in
March 1980 she persuaded him to join her in forming People for the Ethical
Treatment of Animals, at that point just five people in a basement, as Newkirk
described it. They were mostly students and members of the local vegetarian
society, but the group included a friend of Pacheco's from the UK, Kim
Stallwood, a British activist who went on to become the national organizer of
the British Union for the Abolition of Vivisection. Pacheco was reluctant at
first. "It just didn't sound great to me," he told "The Los Angeles Times" in
1992." I had been active in Europe ... and I thought there were just too many
formalities. I thought we should just do things ourselves. But she made a
convincing case that Washington needed a vehicle for animals because the
current organizations were too conservative." Silver Spring monkeys. The group
first came to public attention in 1981 during the Silver Spring monkeys case, a
dispute about experiments conducted by researcher Edward Taub on 17 macaque
monkeys inside the Institute of Behavioral Research in Silver Spring, Maryland.
The case led to the first police raid in the United States on an animal
laboratory, triggered an amendment in 1985 to the United States Animal Welfare
Act, and became the first animal-testing case to be appealed to the United
States Supreme Court, which upheld a Louisiana State Court ruling that denied
PETA's request for custody of the monkeys. Pacheco had taken a job in May 1981
inside a primate research laboratory at the Institute, intending to gain
firsthand experience of working inside an animal laboratory. Taub had been
cutting sensory ganglia that supplied nerves to the monkeys' fingers, hands,
arms, and legs‚Äîa process called "deafferentation"‚Äîso that the monkeys could
not feel them; some of the monkeys had had their entire spinal columns
deafferented. He then used restraint, electric shock, and withholding of food
and water to force the monkeys to use the deafferented parts of their bodies.
The research led in part to the discovery of neuroplasticity and a new therapy
for stroke victims called constraint-induced movement therapy. Pacheco went to
the laboratory at night, taking photographs that showed the monkeys living in
what the Institute for Laboratory Animal Research's "ILAR Journal" called
filthy conditions. He passed his photographs to the police, who raided the lab
and arrested Taub. Taub was convicted of six counts of animal cruelty, the
first such conviction in the United States of an animal researcher, overturned
on appeal. Norm Phelps writes that the case followed the highly publicized
campaign of Henry Spira in 1976 against experiments on cats being performed at
the American Museum of Natural History in New York, and Spira's subsequent
campaign in April 1980 against the Draize test. These and the Silver Springs
monkey case jointly put animal rights on the agenda in the United States. The
ten-year battle for custody of the monkeys‚Äîdescribed by "The Washington Post"
as a vicious mud fight, during which both sides accused the other of lies and
distortion‚Äî¬ transformed PETA into a national, then international, movement.
By February 1991, it claimed over 350,000 members, a paid staff of over 100,
and an annual budget of over $7 million. Philosophy and activism. Profile. PETA
writes that it is an animal rights organization, and as such it rejects
speciesism and the idea of animals as property, and opposes the use of animals
in any form: as food, clothing, entertainment, or as research subjects. One
oft-cited quote of Newkirk's is: "When it comes to feelings like hunger, pain,
and thirst, a rat is a pig is a dog is a boy." The group has been criticized by
other animal rights advocates for its willingness to work with industries that
use animals‚Äîa position many animal rights advocates find problematic. Newkirk
rejects the criticism, and has said of the group that it is here to hold the
radical line. PETA lobbies governments to impose fines where animal-welfare
legislation has been violated, promotes a vegan diet, tries to reform the
practices in factory farms and slaughterhouses, goes undercover into animal
research laboratories, farms, and circuses, initiates media campaigns against
particular companies or practices, helps to find sanctuaries for former circus
and zoo animals, and initiates lawsuits against companies. The group has two
million members and supporters, it received donations of over $32 million for
the year ending July 31, 2009, and its website was receiving four million hits
a month as of November 2008. Over 80 percent of its operating budget was spent
on its programs in 2008-2009, 15 percent on fundraising, and four percent on
management and general operations. Thirty-two percent of its staff earned under
$30,000, 24 percent over $40,000, and Newkirk just under $37,000. Pacheco left
the group in 1999 and since then, two key staff members next to Newkirk have
been Tracy Reiman, Executive Vice President, and Dan Mathews, Senior Vice-
President of campaigns. Campaigns and consumer boycotts. The organization is
known for its aggressive media campaigns, combined with a solid base of
celebrity support‚ÄîPamela Anderson, Drew Barrymore, Alec Baldwin, John
Gielgud, Bill Maher, Stella McCartney, and Alicia Silverstone have all appeared
in PETA ads. Every week, Newkirk holds what "The New Yorker" calls a war
council, with two dozen of her top strategists gathered round a square table in
the PETA conference room, no suggestion considered too outrageous. PETA also
gives a yearly prize, called the Proggy Award (for "progress"), to individuals
or organizations dedicated to animal welfare or who distinguish themselves
through their efforts within the area of animal welfare. Many of the campaigns
have focused on large corporations. Fast food companies such as KFC, Wendy's,
and Burger King have been targeted. In the animal-testing industry, PETA's
consumer boycotts have focused on Avon, Benetton, Bristol-Myers-Squibb,
Chesebrough-Pond's, Dow Chemical, General Motors, and others. Their "modus
operandi" includes buying shares in target companies such as McDonald's and
Kraft Foods in order to exert influence. The campaigns have delivered results
for PETA. McDonald's and Wendy's introduced vegetarian options after PETA
targeted them; Petco stopped selling some exotic pets; and Polo Ralph Lauren
said it would no longer use fur. Avon, Estee Lauder, Benetton, and Tonka Toy
Co. all stopped testing products on animals, the Pentagon stopped shooting pigs
and goats in wounds tests, and a slaughterhouse in Texas was closed down. As
part of its anti-fur action, PETA members have infiltrated hundreds of fashion
shows in the U.S, Europe, and once in China, throwing red paint on the
catwalks, and unfurling banners. Celebrities and supermodels have posed naked
for the group's "I'd Rather Go Naked than Wear Fur" campaign‚Äîsome men, but
mostly women‚Äîtriggering criticism from feminist animal rights advocates (see
below). "The New Yorker" writes that PETA activists have crawled through the
streets of Paris wearing leg-hold traps and thrown around money soaked in fake
blood at the International Fur Fair. They regularly engage in pie-throwing‚Äîin
January 2010, Canadian MP Gerry Byrne compared them to terrorists for throwing
a tofu cream pie at Canada's fishery minister Gail Shea in protest at the seal
hunt, a comment Newkirk called a silly chest-beating exercise. "The thing is,
we make them gawk," she told "Satya" magazine, "maybe like a traffic accident
that you have to look at." PETA has also objected to the practice of mulesing
(removing strips of wool-bearing skin from around the buttocks of a sheep). In
October 2004, PETA launched a boycott against the Australian wool industry,
leading some clothing retailers to ban products using Australian wool from
their stores. In response, the Australian wool industry sued PETA, claiming
among other things that mulesing prevents flystrike, a very painful disease
that can affect sheep. A settlement was reached, and PETA agreed to stop the
boycott, while the wool industry agreed to seek alternatives to mulesing. In
2011, PETA named five orcas as plaintiffs and sued SeaWorld over the animals'
enslavement, seeking their protection under the Thirteenth Amendment. A federal
judge heard the case and dismissed it in early 2012. Patricia de Leon worked
with PETA in 2011 to reduce support for bullfighting among Hispanic people, and
was photographed by Kike San Mart√≠n for an anti-bullfighting campaign. Some
campaigns have been particularly controversial. Newkirk was criticized in 2003
for sending a letter to PLO leader Yasser Arafat asking him to keep animals out
of the conflict, after a donkey was blown up during an attack in Jerusalem. The
group's 2003 "Holocaust on your Plate" exhibition‚Äîeight panels juxtaposing
images of Holocaust victims with animal carcasses and animals being transported
to slaughter‚Äîwas criticized by the Anti-Defamation League. In July 2010, the
German Federal Constitutional Court ruled that PETA's campaign was not
protected by free speech laws, and banned it within Germany as an offense
against human dignity. In 2005, the NAACP complained about the "Are Animals the
New Slaves?" exhibit, which showed images of African-American slaves, Native
Americans, child laborers, and women, alongside chained elephants and
slaughtered cows. PETA's "It's still going on" campaign features newspaper ads
comparing widely-publicized murder-cannibalization cases to the deaths of
animals in slaughterhouses. The campaign has attracted significant media
attention, controversy and generated angry responses from the victims' family
members. Ads were released in 1991 describing the deaths of the victims of
serial killer Jeffrey Dahmer, in 2002 describing the deaths of the victims of
serial killer Robert William Pickton, and in 2008 describing the murder of Tim
McLean. The group has also been criticized for aiming its message at young
people. "Your Mommy Kills Animals" features a cartoon of a woman attacking a
rabbit with a knife. To reduce milk consumption, it created the "Got Beer?"
campaign, a parody of the dairy industry's series of Got Milk? ads, which
featured celebrities with milk "mustaches" on their upper lips. When the mayor
of New York, Rudolf Giuliani, was diagnosed with prostate cancer in 2000, PETA
ran a photograph of him with a white mustache and the words "Got prostate
cancer?" to illustrate their claim that dairy products contribute to cancer, an
ad that caused an outcry in the United States. After PETA placed ads in school
newspapers linking milk to acne, obesity, heart disease, cancer, and strokes,
Mothers Against Drunk Driving and college officials complained it encouraged
underage drinking; the British Advertising Standards Authority asked that the
ads be discontinued after complaints from interest groups such as The National
Farmers' Unions. In August 2011, it was announced that PETA will be launching a
soft pornography website in the .xxx domain. PETA spokesperson Lindsay Rajt
told the "Huffington Post", ‚ÄúWe try to use absolutely every outlet to stick
up for animals,‚Äù adding that ‚ÄúWe are careful about what we do and
wouldn‚Äôt use nudity or some of our flashier tactics if we didn't know they
worked.‚Äù PETA also used nudity in its "Veggie Love" ad which it prepared for
the Super Bowl only to have it banned by the network. PETA's work has drawn the
ire of some feminists who argue that the organization sacrifices women's rights
to press its agenda. Lindsay Beyerstein criticized PETA saying ‚ÄúThey're the
ones drawing disturbing analogies between pornography, misogyny and animal
cruelty." PETA has also produced various Flash games showcasing their
campaigns, including parodies of "Cooking Mama", "Super Mario Bros.", "Super
Meat Boy", and "Pok√©mon". A game released in November 2011 features a skinned
tanuki chasing Mario to reclaim its fur from him. This was widely criticized as
"absurd and unresearched" by the gaming community, prompting PETA to claim that
it was a tongue-in-cheek effort to draw attention to the real-life issue of
tanuki being skinned alive. Other campaigns are less confrontational and more
humorous. In 2008, it launched the "Save the Sea Kittens" campaign to change
the name of fish to "sea kittens" to give them a positive image, and it
regularly asks towns to adopt a new name. It campaigned in 1996 for a new name
for Fishkill, New York, and in April 2003 offered free veggie burgers to
Hamburg, New York, if it would call itself Veggieburg. PETA sometimes issues
isolated statements or press releases, commenting on current events. After Lady
Gaga wore a dress made of meat in 2010, PETA issued a statement objecting to
the dress. After a fisherman in Florida was bitten by a shark in 2011, PETA
proposed an advertisement showing a shark biting a human, with the caption
"Payback Is Hell, Go Vegan". The proposed ad drew criticism from relatives of
the injured fisherman. Euthanasia of shelter animals. PETA opposes the no kill
movement, and, according to a "Newsweek" report, euthanizes an estimated 85% of
the animals that end up at their shelter. The group takes in feral cat colonies
with diseases such as feline AIDS and leukemia, stray dogs, litters of parvo-
infected puppies, and backyard dogs, and says that it would be unrealistic to
follow a no-kill policy in such instances. They offer free euthanasia services
to counties that kill unwanted animals via gassing or shooting‚Äîthey recommend
the use of an intravenous injection of sodium pentobarbital if administered by
a trained professional, and for severely ill or dying pets when euthanasia at a
veterinarian is unaffordable. They recommend euthanasia for certain breeds,
such as pit bull terriers, and in certain situations for animals in shelters:
for example, for those living for long periods in cramped cages. PETA's
operation of animal shelters has drawn criticism. In 2008, the Center for
Consumer Freedom formally petitioned Virginia's Department of Agriculture and
Consumer Services, requesting official reclassification of PETA as a
slaughterhouse. The CCF claimed in a press release that "(a)n official report
filed by PETA itself shows that the animal rights group put to death nearly
every dog, cat, and other pet it took in for adoption in 2006." A spokesperson
for the Virginia Department of Agriculture responded that "PETA will basically
take anything that comes through the door, and other shelters won't do that,"
and that it had considered changing PETA's status from "shelter" to "euthanasia
clinic." In another case, two PETA employees were acquitted in 2007 of animal
cruelty after at least 80 euthanized animals were left in dumpsters in a
shopping center in Ashoskie over the course of a month in 2005; the two
employees were seen leaving behind 18 dead animals, and 13 more were found
inside their van. The animals had been euthanized after being removed from
shelters in Northampton and Bertie counties. During the trial, Daphna
Nachminovitch, the supervisor of PETA's Community Animal Project, said PETA
began euthanizing animals in some rural North Carolina shelters after it found
the shelters killing animals in ways PETA considered inhumane. She also stated
that the dumping of animals did not follow PETA policy. PETA has promoted legal
initiatives to enforce existing euthanasia laws. In 1990, Georgia's "Humane
Euthanasia Act" became one of the first laws in the nation to mandate
intravenous injection of sodium pentobarbital as the prescribed method for
euthanizing cats and dogs in Georgia animal shelters. Prior to that time, gas
chambers and other means were commonly employed. Georgia Agriculture
Commissioner Tommy Irvin was tasked with licensing the shelters and enforcing
the new law, through the Department's Animal Protection Division. However,
Commissioner Irvin failed to abide by the terms of the law, and instead
continued to license gas chambers. PETA contacted the author of the original
legislation, and in March 2007, the Georgia Department of Agriculture and
Commissioner Irvin were sued by former State Representative Chesley V. Morton.
The Fulton County Superior Court ruled in favor of the plaintiffs, validating
the terms of the Humane Euthanasia Act, with an injunction prohibiting the
Department from issuing licenses to shelters using gas chambers in violation of
the Act. When the Department continued to license a gas chamber in Cobb County,
a second court action was brought, which resulted in the Department being held
in contempt. Undercover work. PETA sends its staff undercover into research
laboratories, factory farms, and circuses to document the treatment of animals,
where they spend many months as employees of the facility, making copies of
documents and wearing hidden cameras. By 2007, it had conducted 75 such
investigations. It has also produced videos based on material collected during
ALF raids. Some undercover efforts have led to lawsuits or government action
against the companies or universities. PETA itself faced legal action in April
2007 after the owners of a chinchilla ranch in Michigan complained about an
undercover inquiry there, but the judge ruled in PETA's favor that undercover
investigations can be legitimate. Notable cases include the 26-minute film PETA
produced in 1984, "Unnecessary Fuss", based on 60 hours of researchers' footage
obtained by the ALF during a raid on the University of Pennsylvania's head
injury clinic. The footage showed researchers laughing at baboons as they
inflicted brain damage on them with a hydraulic device intended to simulate
whiplash. Laboratory animal veterinarian Larry Carbone writes that the
researchers openly discussed how one baboon was awake before the head injury,
despite protocols being in place for anesthesia. The ensuing publicity led to
the suspension of funds from the university, the firing of its chief
veterinarian, the closure of the lab, and a period of probation for the
university. In 1990, two PETA activists posed as employees of Carolina
Biological, where they took pictures and video inside the company, alleging
that cats were being mistreated. Following the release of PETA's tapes, the
USDA conducted their own inspection and subsequently charged the company with
seven violations of the Animal Welfare Act. Four years later, an administrative
judge ruled that Carolina Biological had not committed any violations. In 1990,
Bobby Berosini, a Las Vegas entertainer, lost his wildlife license, as well as
(on appeal) a later lawsuit against PETA, after the group broadcast an
undercover film of him slapping and punching orangutans in 1989. In 1997, a
PETA investigation inside Huntingdon Life Sciences (HLS), a contract animal-
testing company, produced film of staff in the UK beating dogs, and what
appeared to be abuse of monkeys in the company's New Jersey facility. After the
video footage aired on British television in 1999, a group of activists set up
Stop Huntingdon Animal Cruelty to close HLS down, a campaign that continues. In
1999, a North Carolina grand jury handed down indictments against pig-farm
workers on Belcross Farm in Camden County, the first indictments for animal
cruelty on a factory farm in the United States, after a three-month PETA
investigation produced film of the workers beating the animals. In 2004, PETA
published the results of an eight-month undercover investigation in a West
Virginia Pilgrim's Pride slaughterhouse that supplies chickens to KFC. "The New
York Times" reported the investigation as showing workers stomping on live
chickens, throwing dozens against a wall, tearing the head off a chicken to
write graffiti, strangling one with a latex glove, and squeezing birds until
they exploded. Yum Brands, owner of KFC, called the video appalling, and
threatened to stop purchasing from Pilgrim's Pride if no changes were made;
Pilgrim's Pride fired 11 employees, and introduced an anti-cruelty pledge for
workers to sign. In 2004 and 2005, PETA shot footage inside Covance, an animal-
testing company in the United States and Europe, that appeared to show monkeys
being mistreated in the company's facility in Vienna, Virginia. According to
"The Washington Post", PETA said an employee of the group filmed primates there
being choked, hit, and denied medical attention when badly injured. After PETA
sent the video and a 253-page complaint to the United States Department of
Agriculture, Covance was fined $8,720 for 16 citations, three of which involved
lab monkeys; the other citations involved administrative issues and equipment.
The company said none of the issues were pervasive or endemic, and that they
had taken corrective action. In 2005 Covance initiated a lawsuit charging PETA
with fraud, violation of employee contract, and conspiracy to harm the
company's business, but did not proceed with it. PETA also goes undercover into
circuses. In 2006, they filmed trainers at Carson & Barnes Circus‚Äîincluding
Tim Frisco, the animal-care director‚Äîstriking elephants while shouting at
them; "The Washington Post" writes that the video shows Frisco shouting "Make
'em scream!". A company spokesman dismissed PETA's concerns as "Utopian
philosophical ideology", but said the circus would no longer use electric
prods. Positions. Direct action and the ALF. Newkirk is outspoken in her
support of direct action, writing that no movement for social change has ever
succeeded without what she calls the militarism component: "Thinkers may
prepare revolutions," she wrote of the ALF in 2004, "but bandits must carry
them out." In 2004 "The Observer" described what it called a network of
relationships between apparently unconnected animal rights groups on both sides
of the Atlantic, writing that, with assets of $6.5 million, and with the PETA
Foundation holding further assets of $15 million, PETA funds a number of
activists and groups‚Äîsome with links to militant groups, including the ALF,
which the FBI has named as a domestic terrorist threat. American writer Don
Liddick writes that PETA gave $1,500 to the Earth Liberation Front in
2001‚ÄîNewkirk said the donation was a mistake, and that the money had been
intended for public education about destruction of habitat, but Liddick writes
that it went to the legal defense of Craig Rosebraugh, an ELF spokesman. That
same year, according to "The Observer", PETA gave a $5,000 grant to American
animal rights activist Josh Harper, an advocate of arson. According to Liddick,
PETA has substantial links with Native American ALF activist Rod Coronado. He
alleges that two Federal Express packages were sent to an address in Bethesda,
Maryland, before and after a 1992 fire at Michigan State University that
Coronado was convicted of setting, reportedly as part of "Operation Bite Back,"
a series of ALF attacks on American animal testing facilities in the 1990s. The
first package was picked up by a PETA employee, Maria Blanton, and the second
intercepted by the authorities, who identified the handwriting as Coronado's.
Liddick writes that the package contained documents removed from the university
and a videotape of one of the perpetrators. When they searched Blanton's home,
police found some of the paraphernalia of animal liberation raids, including
code names for Coronado and Alex Pacheco‚ÄîPETA's co-founder‚Äîburglary tools,
two-way radios, and fake identification. Liddick also writes that PETA gave
Coronado $45,000 for his legal bills and another $25,000 to his father. Newkirk
is a strong supporter of direct action that removes animals from laboratories
and other facilities‚Äîshe told "The Los Angeles Times" in 1992 that when she
hears of anyone walking into a lab and walking out with animals, her heart
sings. In an interview for "Wikinews" in 2007, she said she had been asked by
other animal protection groups to condemn illegal acts. "And I won't do it,
because if it were my animal I'd be happy." But she added that she does not
support arson. "I would rather that these buildings weren't standing, and so I
think at some level I understand. I just don't like the idea of that, but maybe
that's wishy-washy of me, because I don't want those buildings standing if they
hurt anyone ... Why would you preserve building just so someone can make a
profit by continuing to hurt and kill individuals who feel every bit as much as
we do?" Neutering, backyard dogs, working animals, and pets. PETA runs several
programs though its Community Animal Project for cats and dogs in poorer areas
of Virginia, near its headquarters. In 2008 they neutered 7,485 cats, dogs, and
rabbits in that area, including pit bulls and feral cats, at a discounted rate
or free of charge. They shelter neglected dogs and cats who are ill and
injured, and pursue cruelty cases. They set up dog houses with straw bedding
for dogs chained outside all winter. They urge population control through
neutering and adoption from shelters, and campaign against organizations such
as the American Kennel Club that promote the selection of purebred breeds. PETA
argues that it would have been better for animals had the institution of
breeding them as "pets" never emerged, that the desire to own and receive love
from animals is selfish, and that their breeding, sale, and purchase can cause
immeasurable suffering. They write that millions of dogs spend their lives
chained outside in all weather conditions or locked up in chain-link pens and
wire cages in puppy mills, and that even in good homes animals are often not
well cared for. They would like to see the population of dogs and cats reduced
through spaying and neutering, and for people never to purchase animals from
pet shops or breeders, but to adopt them from shelters instead. PETA supports
hearing dog programs where animals are taken from shelters and placed in
appropriate homes, but does not endorse seeing-eye-dog programs because,
according to one of their Vice Presidents, "the dogs are bred as if there are
no equally intelligent dogs literally dying for homes in shelters." PETA also
opposes the keeping of fish in aquarium tanks, suggesting that people view
computer videos of fish instead. Wildlife conservation personalities. PETA is
critical of television personalities they call self-professed wildlife
warriors, arguing that while a conservationist message is getting across, some
of the actions are harmful to animals, such as invading animals' homes, netting
them, subjecting them to stressful environments, and wrestling with
them‚Äîoften involving young animals the group says should be with their
mothers. In 2006 when Steve Irwin died, PETA's vice-president Dan Mathews said
Irwin had made a career out of antagonizing frightened wild animals. Australian
Member of Parliament Bruce Scott said PETA should apologize to Irwin's family
and the rest of Australia. Animal testing. PETA opposes animal
testing‚Äîwhether toxicity testing, basic or applied research, or for education
and training‚Äîon both moral and practical grounds. Newkirk told "Vogue"
magazine in 1989 that even if it resulted in a cure for AIDS, PETA would oppose
it. The group also believes that it is wasteful, unreliable, and irrelevant to
human health, because artificially induced diseases in animals are not
identical to human diseases. They say that animal experiments are frequently
redundant and lack accountability, oversight, and regulation. They promote
alternatives, including embryonic stem cell research and in vitro cell
research. PETA employees have themselves volunteered for human testing of
vaccines; Scott Van Valkenburg, the group's Director of Major Gifts, said in
1999 that he had volunteered for human testing of HIV vaccines. Clothing. PETA
opposes the use of animals for producing clothing that utilizes fur, leather,
wool, or silk. PETA also opposes the use of down from birds and the use of silk
from silkworms or spiders. PETA Asia-Pacific. PETA Asia-Pacific was founded by
Ingrid Newkirk in Hong Kong in 2005 to support animal rights programs and
campaigns in Asia. Jason Baker, a former staff member of PETA who was involved
in setting up PETA India and PETA Australia, is PETA Asia Pacific's first
director. Its offices are in Hong Kong and Manila. It works through public
education, animal cruelty investigations, research, animal rescue, legislation,
special events, celebrity involvement, and protest campaigns. Its campaigns
cover countries including China, Japan, Malaysia, and South Korea. Vegetarian/
vegan/factory farming. PETA Asia-Pacific promotes vegetarian and vegan diets
through three specific campaigns: education about the benefits of a vegetarian
diet, demonstrations and celebrity involvement against fast food outlets, and
undercover investigations of animals used for live transport and traditional
religious slaughter. The organization has also used the PETA Lettuce Ladies in
local demonstrations. PETA Asia-Pacific regularly demonstrates against KFC
outlets to promote better treatment of chickens used by the company. Anti-fur.
PETA Asia-Pacific supports the PETA campaign "I'd Rather Go Naked Than Wear
Fur", in which celebrities appear nude to express their opposition to wearing
fur. The group also stages anti-fur events to publicize their opposition to
fur. PETA Asia-Pacific has been involved in several undercover investigations
of fur farms in China. Animals used for entertainment. The group regularly
protests the use of animals in entertainment, including circuses. These
demonstrations are specific to the area, including anti-bull riding, not
keeping wild animals in chains, and stopping human‚Äìanimal wrestling matches.
Other. PETA Asia Pacific also coordinates protests against other uses of
animals which it believes are abusive, such as improving the treatment of rats,
and it advocates for improvements for companion animals. Domain name disputes.
In February 1995, a parody website calling itself "People Eating Tasty Animals"
registered the domain name "peta.org". PETA sued, claiming trademark violation,
and won the suit in 2001. While still engaged in legal proceedings over
"peta.org", PETA themselves registered the domains "ringlingbrothers.com" and
"voguemagazine.com", using the sites to accuse Ringling Brothers and Barnum &
Bailey Circus and Vogue of animal cruelty. PETA later surrendered the domains
under threat of similar legal action over trademark infringement. Position
within the animal rights movement. Robert Garner of the University of Leicester
writes that Newkirk and Pacheco are the leading exporters of animal rights to
the more moderate groups in the United States‚Äîboth members of an animal
rights elite that he argues has shaken up the animal rights movement, setting
up new groups and radicalizing old ones. There is criticism of PETA from both
the conservative and radical ends of the movement. Michael Specter writes that
it provides for groups such as the Humane Society of the United States the same
dynamic that Malcolm X provided for Martin Luther King, or Andrea Dworkin for
Gloria Steinem‚Äîsomeone radical to alienate the mainstream and make moderate
voices more appealing. The failure to condemn the Animal Liberation Front
triggers complaints from the conservatives, while the more radical activists
say the group has lost touch with its grassroots, is soft on the idea of animal
rights, and that it should stop the media stunts, the pie-throwing, and the
targeting of women. "It's hard enough trying to get people to take animal
rights seriously without PETA out there acting like a bunch of jerks," one
activist told writer Norm Phelps. The ads featuring barely clad or naked women
have appalled feminist animal rights advocates. When Ronald Reagan's daughter
Patti Davis posed naked for "Playboy", donating half her $100,000 fee to PETA,
the group issued a press release saying Davis "turns the other cheek in an eye-
opening spread," then announced she had been photographed naked with Hugh
Hefner's dog for an anti-fur ad. In 1995, PETA formed a partnership with
"Playboy" to promote human organ donation, with the caption "Some People Need
You Inside Them" on a photograph of Hefner's wife. The long-standing campaign,
"I'd rather go naked than wear fur," in which celebrities and supermodels strip
for the camera, generated particular concern. Newkirk has replied to the
criticism that no one is being exploited, the women taking part are volunteers,
and if sexual attraction advances the cause of animals, she is unapologetic.
Asked by Wikinews how she feels when criticized from within the movement, she
said: "Somebody has to push the envelope. If you say something that someone
already agrees with, then what's the point, and so we make some more
conservative animal protection organizations uncomfortable; they don't want to
be associated with us because it will be embarrassing for them, and I
understand that. Our own members write to us sometimes and say, 'Oh why did you
do this? I don't want anyone to know I'm a PETA member.'" Gary Francione,
professor of law at Rutgers School of Law-Newark, argues that PETA is not an
animal rights group‚Äîand further that there is no animal rights movement in
the United States‚Äîbecause of their willingness to work with industries that
use animals to achieve incremental change. This makes them an animal welfare
group, in Francione's view: what he calls the new welfarists. A proponent of
abolitionism, Francione argues that PETA is trivializing the movement with what
he calls the "Three Stooges" theory of animal rights, making the public think
progress is underway when the changes are only cosmetic. Like Francione, PETA
describes itself as abolitionist. Newkirk told an animal rights conference in
2002 that PETA's goal remains animal liberation: "Reforms move a society very
importantly from A to B, from B to C, from C to D. It's very hard to take a
nation or a world that is built on seeing animals as nothing more than
hamburgers, handbags, cheap burglar alarms, tools for research, and move them
from A to Z ..." Francione has also criticized PETA for having caused
grassroots animal rights groups to close, groups that he argues were essential
for the survival of the animal rights movement, which rejects the centrality of
corporate animal charities. Francione writes that PETA initially set up
independent chapters around the United States, but closed them in favor of a
top-down, centralized organization, which not only consolidated decision-making
power, but centralized donations too. Now, local animal rights donations go to
PETA, rather than to a local group.
