Pioneer Fund The Pioneer Fund is an American non-profit foundation established
in 1937 "to advance the scientific study of heredity and human differences."
Until his death on 2 October 2012, the fund was headed by psychology professor
J. Philippe Rushton, the fund states that it focuses on projects it perceives
will not be easily funded due to controversial subject matter. The organization
is frequently described as racist and "white supremacist" in nature, or as a
"hate group". Two of the most notable studies funded by the Pioneer Fund are
the Minnesota Study of Twins Reared Apart and the Texas Adoption Project, which
studied the similarities and differences of identical twins and other children
adopted into non-biological families. The Pioneer Fund has also been an
important source of funding for research on the partly genetic hypothesis of IQ
variation among races. The fund's grantees and publications have generated
controversy including the 1994 publication of "The Bell Curve", which drew
heavily from Pioneer-funded research. The fund has also been criticized for its
ties to eugenics. Early history. The 1937 incorporation documents of the
Pioneer Fund list two purposes. The first, modeled on the Nazi Lebensborn
breeding program, was aimed at encouraging the propagation of those "descended
predominantly from white persons who settled in the original thirteen states
prior to the adoption of the Constitution of the United States and/or from
related stocks, or to classes of children, the majority of whom are deemed to
be so descended". Its second purpose was to support academic research and the
"dissemination of information, into the 'problem of heredity and eugenics and
"the problems of race betterment". The Pioneer Fund argues the "race
betterment" has always referred to the "human race" referred to earlier in the
sentence, and critics argue it referred to racial groups. The document was
amended in 1985 and the phrase changed to "human race betterment." The Pioneer
Fund supported the distribution of a eugenics film titled "Erbkrank"
("Hereditary Defective" or "Hereditary Illness") which was published by the
pre-war 1930s Nazi Party. William Draper obtained the film from the predecessor
to the Nazi Office of Racial Policy ("Rassenpolitisches Amt") prior to the
founding of the Pioneer Fund. According to the Pioneer Fund site, all founders
capable of doing so participated in the war against the Nazis. Draper secretly
met Dr. C. Nash Herndon of Bowman Gray School of Medicine at Wake Forest
University in 1949. Little is known about their meetings, but Herndon was
playing a major role in the expansion of the compulsory sterilization program
in North Carolina. In the 1950s and 1960s Draper supported two government
committees that gave grants for both anti-immigration and genetics research.
The committee members included Representative Francis E. Walter (chair of the
House Un-American Activities Committee and head of the Draper Immigration
Committee), Henry E. Garrett (an educator known for his belief in the genetic
inferiority of blacks), and Senator James O. Eastland of Mississippi, head of
the Draper Genetics Committee. Current funding. Pioneer Fund's figures are from
1971 to 1996 and are adjusted to 1997 USD. Political and legal funding. The
Fund gave the Federation for American Immigration Reform (FAIR) a total of $1.3
million between 1985 and 1994. Among the grants was $150,000 for 'studies in
connection with immigration policies'. Funding was dropped after negative
publicity during the campaign for California's Proposition 187 linked the
Pioneer Fund to ads purchased by FAIR. Other immigration reduction groups that
have received donations from the Pioneer Fund include ProjectUSA, Californians
for Population Stabilization, and American Immigration Control Foundation. A
grantee is the paleoconservative and white nationalist journalist Jared Taylor,
the editor of "American Renaissance" and a member the advisory board of the
white nationalist publication the "Occidental Quarterly". Another is Roger
Pearson's Institute for the Study of Man. Many of the key academic white
nationalists in both "Right Now!" and "American Renaissance" have been funded
by the Pioneer Fund, which was also directly involved in funding the parent
organization of "American Renaissance", the New Century Foundation.
Controversy. Criticism. The Pioneer Fund was described by the "Sunday
Telegraph" (March 12, 1989) as a "neo-Nazi organization closely integrated with
the far right in American politics." It has also been criticized by some
scientists and journalists, and in various peer-reviewed academic articles.
Critics of the fund include the SPLC, professor of psychology William H.
Tucker, and historian Barry Mehler and his Institute for the Study of Academic
Racism. The Southern Poverty Law Center (SPLC), a nonprofit organization, lists
the Pioneer Fund as a hate group, citing the fund's history, its funding of
race and intelligence research, and its connections with racist individuals.
They also state: "Race science has potentially frightening consequences, as is
evident not only from the horrors of Nazi Germany, but also from the troubled
racial history of the United States. If white supremacist groups had their way,
the United States would return to its dark days. In publication after
publication, hate groups are using this "science" to legitimize racial hatred.
In Calling Our Nation, the neo-Nazi Aryan Nations publishes a piece by a New
York psychologist surveying the work of Jensen, Garrett and numerous others.
National Vanguard, the publication of former physics professor William Pierce
(see The Alliance and its Allies) and his neo-Nazi National Alliance, runs a
similar piece that concludes that "it is the Negro's deficiency ... which kept
him in a state of savagery in his African environment and is now undermining
the civilization of a racially mixed America." The Center for New Community, a
human rights advocacy organization, mentioned the Pioneer Fund in an article on
their website. They characterize the Pioneer Fund as "a white supremacist
foundation that specializes in funding 'science' dedicated to demonstrating
white intellectual and moral superiority." They draw particular attention to
Rushton's theories about differences between races as evidence of the racial
slant which they claim accompanies much of the research which is backed by the
Fund. In accord with the tax regulations governing nonprofit corporations,
Pioneer does not fund individuals; under the law only other nonprofit
organizations are appropriate grantees. As a consequence, many of the fund's
awards go not to the researchers themselves but to the universities that employ
them, a standard procedure for supporting work by academically based
scientists. In addition to these awards to the universities where its grantees
are based, Pioneer has made a number of grants to other nonprofit
organizations, corporations Tucker feel have been created to channel resources
to a particular academic recipient while circumventing the institution where
the researcher is employed. Pioneer's administrative procedures are as unusual
as its charter. Although the fund typically gives away more than half a million
dollars per year, there is no application form or set of guidelines. Instead,
according to Weyher, an applicant merely submits "a letter containing a brief
description of the nature of the research and the amount of the grant
requested." There is no requirement for peer review of any kind; Pioneer's
board of directors—two attorneys, two engineers, and an investment
broker—decides, sometimes within a day, whether a particular research
proposal merits funding. Once the grant has been made, there is no requirement
for an interim or final report or even for an acknowledgment by a grantee that
Pioneer has been the source of support, all atypical practices in comparison to
other organizations that support scientific research. Rushton, the current
head, has spoken at conferences of the "American Renaissance" (AR) magazine, in
which he has also published articles. Anti-racist "Searchlight Magazine"
described one such AR conference as a "veritable 'who's who' of American white
supremacy." Steven J. Rosenthal has described the fund as a: "A Nazi endowment
specializing in production of justifications for eugenics since 1937, the
Pioneer Fund is embedded in a network of right-wing foundations, think tanks,
religious fundamentalists, and global anti-Communist coalitions". Responses to
criticisms. Behavioral geneticist David T. Lykken has defended his acceptance
of money from the fund, writing "If you can find me some rich villains that
want to contribute to my research—Qaddafi, the Mafia, whoever—the worse
they are, the better I'll like it. I'm doing a social good by taking their
money... Any money of theirs that I spend in a legitimate and honorable way,
they can't spend in a dishonorable way". Science writer Morton Hunt received
Pioneer funding for his book and wrote: "One could spend hundreds of pages on
the pros and cons of the case of the Pioneer Fund, but what matters to me—and
should matter to my readers—is that I have been totally free to research and
write as I chose. I alerted Pioneer to my political views when making the grant
proposal for this book but its directors never blinked." In a review of Richard
Lynn's book on the Pioneer Fund, psychologist Ulrich Neisser, a prominent
critic of race-based research, writes: "All things considered, I doubt that the
Pioneer Fund's political activities have made much difference one way or the
other. The world would have been much the same without them. On the other hand,
Lynn reminds us that Pioneer has sometimes sponsored useful research –
research that otherwise might not have been done at all. By that reckoning, I
would give it a weak plus." Charles Murray defended the use of studies
supported by the fund in his book "The Bell Curve" by saying: "Never mind that
the relationship between the founder of the Pioneer Fund and today's Pioneer
Fund is roughly analogous to the relationship between Henry Ford's antisemitism
and today's Ford Foundation. The charges have been made, they have wide
currency, and some people will always believe that "The Bell Curve" rests on
data concocted by neo-Nazi eugenicists." Researchers who have been criticized
for accepting grants from the fund have argued that the public debates have
been disconnected from the expert debates. Robert A. Gordon, for example,
replied to media criticisms of grant-recipients: "Politically correct
disinformation about science appears to spread like wildfire among literary
intellectuals and other nonspecialists, who have few disciplinary constraints
on what they say about science and about particular scientists and on what they
allow themselves to believe."
