Politics of North Korea The politics of North Korea take place within a
nominally democratic multi-party system within the framework of the official
state philosophy, Juche, a concept created by Hwang Chang-y≈èp for and later
attributed to Kim Il-sung. In practice, North Korea functions as a single-party
state under a totalitarian family dictatorship, described even as an absolute
monarchy with Kim Il-sung and his heirs adopting many aspects similar to the
Empire of Japan, especially under Tenn≈ç Hirohito in the 1930s, including
propaganda style, ‚Äúparanoid nationalism‚Äù, xenophobia, and racism ‚Äì
leading to the most recent characterization by some academics as national-
socialist state. Economist Intelligence Unit, while admitting that ‚Äúthere is
no consensus on how to measure democracy‚Äù and that ‚Äúdefinitions of
democracy are contested‚Äù, lists North Korea in last place as the most
authoritarian regime in its index of democracy assessing 167 countries. North
Korea's political system is built upon the principle of centralization. While
the constitution guarantees the protection of human rights, in practice there
are severe limits on freedom of expression, and the government supervises the
lives of the people closely. The constitution defines North Korea as "a
dictatorship of the people's democracy" under the leadership of the Workers'
Party of Korea, which is "de facto" the only legally permitted party. Despite
the constitution's provisions for democracy, in practice, the Supreme Leader,
Kim Jong-il (son of the state's founder, Kim Il-sung), exercised absolute
control over the government and the country, until 2011. The ruling party, the
WPK, is thought to allow some slight inner-party democracy (see Democratic
centralism). The WPK has ruled since the creation in 1948. Two minor political
parties exist but are legally bound to accept the ruling role of the WPK.
Elections occur only in single-candidate races where the candidate has been
selected by the WPK beforehand. Kim Il-sung served as General Secretary of the
WPK from 1948 until his death in July 1994, simultaneously holding the office
of Prime Minister from 1948 to 1972 and the office of President from 1972 to
1994. After his son won full power in 1998, the presidential post was written
out of the constitution, and Kim Il-sung was designated the country's "Eternal
President". Most analysts believe the title to be a product of the cult of
personality he cultivated during his life. The Western world generally views
North Korea as a dictatorship; the government has formally replaced all
references to Marxism-Leninism in its constitution with the locally developed
concept of "Juche", or self-reliance. In recent years, there has been great
emphasis on the "Songun" or "military-first" philosophy. All references to
communism were removed from the North Korean constitution in 2009. The status
of the military has been enhanced and it appears to occupy the center of the
North Korean political system; all the social sectors are forced to follow the
military spirit and adopt military methods. Kim Jong-il's public activity
focused heavily on on-the-spot guidance of places and events related to the
military. The enhanced status of the military and military-centered political
system was confirmed at the first session of the 10th Supreme People's Assembly
(SPA) by the promotion of National Defense Commission (NDC) members in the
official power hierarchy. All ten NDC members were ranked within the top twenty
on September 5, and all but one occupied the top twenty at the fiftieth
anniversary of National Foundation Day on September 9. Government. Parliament.
According to the constitution, the legislative Supreme People's Assembly (SPA)
is the highest organ of state power. It consists of 687 members, who are
elected every five years. The Assembly usually holds only two meetings
annually, each lasting a few days; this is the shortest meeting time of any
parliament. A standing committee known as the Presidium of the Supreme People's
Assembly and elected by the Assembly performs legislative functions when the
Assembly is not in session. The Assembly officially chooses between,
compromises upon, and ratifies the political positions on subjects put forward
by the three represented parties. The president of the Supreme People's
Assembly is Kim Yong-nam. Nearly all outside sources regard the SPA as a
rubberstamp body, due to the short period of its sessions, uncontested
elections to office, and the fact that it passes all proposals submitted by the
government over a period of a few days. In theory, North Korea's judiciary is
accountable to the SPA and the Presidium. The SPA's standing committee also
appoints judges to the highest court for 5-year terms that are concurrent with
those of the Assembly. Legal system. North Korea's judiciary is headed by the
Central Court of North Korea, which consists of a Chief Justice and two
People's Assessors; three judges may be present in some cases [http://
www.nyulawglobal.org/globalex/north_korea.htm]. Their terms of office coincide
with those of the members of the Supreme People's Assembly. Every court in
North Korea has the same composition as the Central Court. The judicial system
is theoretically held accountable to the SPA and the Presidium of the SPA when
the legislature is not in session. The judiciary does not practice judicial
review. The security forces so often interfere with the actions of the
judiciary that the conclusion of most cases is foregone; experts outside North
Korea and numerous defectors confirm this to be a widespread problem. Freedom
House states that, "North Korea does not have an independent judiciary and does
not acknowledge individual rights...reports of arbitrary detentions,
'disappearances,' and extrajudicial killings are common; torture is widespread
and severe" North Korea's fifth and current constitution was approved and
adopted in September 1998, replacing the one previously adopted in 1972. The
former constitution had last been amended in 1992. Under the constitution,
North Korea has an unusual legal system based upon German civil law and
influenced by Japanese legal theory. Criminal penalties can be stiff; one of
the basic functions of the system is to uphold the power of the regime. Because
so little information is available concerning what actually occurs inside of
the country, the extent to which there is any rule of law is uncertain. In any
case, North Korea is known for its poor human rights situation and regularly
detains thousands of dissidents without trial or benefit of legal advice.
According to a US Department of State report on human rights practices, the
government of North Korea often punishes the family of a criminal along with
the perpetrator. The exists a very unique ideology or doctrine that shaped most
of the legal frame of North Korea. That is the concept of "Socialism of our own
style". Internally, Kim Jong-il succeeded the regime but lacked political
legitimacy in the beginning. In order to differentiate himself from his
father's "Juche" (see below) and to skillfully secure his leadership, he
enumerated this unprecedented doctrine that emphasized the uniqueness and
subjectivity of North Korean system. Externally, as Soviet Union collapsed and
China normalized its diplomatic relations with South Korea, North Korea's
stance in international politics became very insecure. Thus, North Korea
desperately needed a device or at least a justification to sustain its
socialist system. Kim had to show the public that North Korea can better off,
even without compromising to the outside liberal world. Both external and
internal factors pressured Kim to isolate his regime from outside world and
step on the end of a cliff. With this new ideology that reinforced the unique
statism and nationalism, Kim could avoid internal complaints and external
crisis. As other socialist countries weakened and domestic public suffered from
severe famine, this strategy of isolation was the most effective for the Kim
regime to maintain its power. In this sense, it can be said that the "Socialism
of Our Own Style" doctrine by Kim Jong-il effectively framed North Korean
legislature, administration and military as a whole. National Defence
Commission. According to the Constitution of North Korea
(Ï°∞ÏÑ ÎØºÏ£ºÏ£ºÏùòÏù∏ÎØºÍ≥µÌôîÍµ≠ ÏÇ¨ÌöåÏ£ºÏùò ÌóåÎ≤ï) Article 100, "the
National Defence Commission is the highest military leadership body of State
power." According to Article 102, "the Chairman of the National Defence
Commission of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea commands and directs
all the armed forces and guides national defence as a whole." The position of
Chairman of the National Defence Commission has been declared the "highest
office of state" and has the "highest administrative authority" according to
decrees issued by the Supreme People's Assembly. Few people correctly
anticipated that Kim Jong-il would officially terminate the transitional period
by resuming the chairmanship of the National Defense Commission (NDC) and
abolishing the post of president. Under the 1998 constitution, the NDC's role
and status was strengthened. The 1998 constitution defines the NDC as "the
highest guiding organ of the military and the managing organ of military
matters." The chairman of the NDC controls the armed forces. In a speech
endorsing Kim Jong-il as NDC chairman, Kim Yong-nam made it clear that chairman
of the NDC is the highest position in the country, in charge of all matters
regarding the country's politics, economy, and military. Thus Kim Jong-il was,
until 2011, in substance head of the state, but theoretically the chairman of
the SPA Presidium represents the state and is responsible for foreign affairs,
such as reception. In June 2010, Kim appointed his brother-in-law, Chang Sung-
taek, as vice-chairman of the NDC, in a move seen as propping his own position.
Chang was already regarded as the second-most powerful person in North Korea
and his appointment strengthens the probability that Kim's third son, Kim Jong-
un, will succeed him. Party-Government relations. The relationship between the
party organ and the administrative organ is often compared to the relationship
between the man who steers the boat and the man who rows the boat. Party
workers in the back should steer so that administrative and economic workers
can stay on the party track. Article 11 of the constitution repeats that "the
DPRK shall conduct all activities under the leadership of the KWP". Although
relations between the party and the government have experienced both continuity
and change, the party has maintained a guiding role over the government. First,
North Korean leaders attribute the demise of the communist bloc in Eastern
Europe to the failure of ideology. Thus, they emphasize the importance of
ideology, which is led by the party. They also focus on the significance of
popular support of the party. Second, Kim Jong Il started his career as a party
cadre and his succession to power took place within the structure of the party.
Moreover, most of his strong supporters are in the party and the party at large
is his most loyal supporter. Third, North Korea's hesitation to implement a
policy aimed at integration into the international community makes one expect
that the status of the party vis-√ -vis that of the government will be
strengthened. Although North Korea is very concerned with the opening policy,
its economic policy is dictated by political considerations. North Korea's
opening policy is implemented in a very limited way because of the fear of the
side effects opening may bring. Thus the role of government technocrats is
clearly limited, and it is not feasible to see the government outside the
control of the party. Although the government gained in status under the new
constitution, this does not affect the guiding role of the party over the
government. Particularly in the area of organization and ideology, party
guidance may be firmer. Elimination of factionalists or enemies of class.
Political expression is tightly controlled in North Korea. Supporters of the
government who deviate from the government line are subject to reeducation in
sections of labor camps set aside for that purpose. Those who are successfully
rehabilitated may reassume responsible government positions on their release.
Troublesome political dissidents, factionalists and class enemies, who are
considered irredeemable are incarcerated together with any close family members
or children born in the camp in "Total Control Zones" for life at hard labor.
Labor camps in North Korea are actually areas of the country set aside for that
purpose, Camp 22 (also known as Kwan-li-so No.22 Haengyong) is 31 miles by 25
miles with a population of about 50,000. Those who attempt to escape or violate
camp rules are executed or sent to a separate prison within the camp. The labor
camps are reserved for political prisoners; common criminals are incarcerated
in a separate system. There are six such areas in the central and northeastern
part of North Korea. Three of them, Camp 14 in Kaechon, Camp 15 in Yodok and
Camp 18 in Bukchang, are described in detailed testimonies.Factionalists or
enemies of class, whoever they are, their seed must be eliminated through three
generations. Kim Il-sung (1972) Party-Military relations. The party has
controlled the military in North Korea since the Korean War, when North Korea
began to dispatch political officials to the military. In October 1950, party
committees began to be organized within the military. The party organs within
the military were strengthened after two incidents in 1956 and 1969 that
resulted in a wide-scale purge of factions opposed to Kim Il Sung. According to
the Party Act (article 46) adopted in 1980, "KPA is the revolutionary armed
forces of the KWP." Some believe, however, that the military-centred political
system of recent years may be damaging the party's control over the military.
Kim Jong-il treated the military better than ever by frequently visiting events
and places associated with it and by promoting military officials in the
official power hierarchy. Political parties and elections. According to the
constitution, North Korea is a Democratic Republic and the Supreme People's
Assembly and provincial People's Assemblies are elected by direct universal
suffrage and secret ballot. Suffrage is guaranteed to all citizens aged 17 and
over. In reality, elections in North Korea are non-competitive and have only
single candidate races. Those who want to vote against the sole candidate on
the ballot must go to a special booth to cross out the candidate's name before
dropping it into the ballot box‚Äîan act which, according to many North Korean
defectors, is far too risky to even contemplate. All elected candidates are
members of the Democratic Front for the Reunification of the Fatherland, a
popular front dominated by the WPK. The two minor parties in the coalition are
the Chondoist Chongu Party and the Korean Social Democratic Party; they also
have a few elected officials. The WPK exercises direct control over the
candidates selected for election by members of the other two parties. Political
developments. For much of its history, North Korean politics have been
dominated by its adversarial relationship with South Korea. During the Cold
War, North Korea aligned with the Soviet Union and the People's Republic of
China. The North Korean government invested heavily in its military, hoping to
develop the capability to reunify Korea by force if possible and also preparing
to repel any attack by South Korea or the United States. As relations with the
PRC and the Soviet Union loosened towards the end of the Cold War, North Korea
developed an ideology, Juche, based upon a high degree of economic independence
and the mobilization of all the resources of the nation to defend against
foreign powers seen as a threat to the country's sovereignty. In the wake of
the collapse of the Soviet Union and Soviet-supplied economic aid, North Korea
has faced a long period of economic crisis, including severe agricultural and
industrial shortages. North Korea's main political issue has been to find a way
to sustain its economy without compromising the internal stability of its
government or its ability to respond to perceived external threats. To date,
North Korean efforts to improve relations with South Korea to increase trade
and to receive development assistance have been mildly successful, but North
Korea's determination to develop nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles has
prevented relations with Japan or the United States from improving. North Korea
has also experimented with market economics in some sectors of its economy, but
these have had limited impact. Some outside observers have suggested that Kim
Jong-il himself favored such reforms but that some parts of the party and the
military resist any changes that might threaten stability. Although there exist
occasional reports of opposition to the government, these appear to be
isolated, and there is no evidence of major internal threats to the current
regime. Some foreign analysts have pointed to widespread starvation, increased
emigration through North Korea-China border, and new sources of information
about the outside world for ordinary North Koreans as factors pointing to an
imminent collapse of the regime, but North Korea has remained stable in spite
of more than a decade of such predictions. The Workers' Party of Korea
maintains a monopoly on political power and Kim Jong-il remained the leader of
the country, until 2011, ever since he first gained power following the death
of his father. According to Cheong Seong-chang of Sejong Institute, speaking on
June 25, 2012, there is some possibility that the new leader Kim Jong-un, who
has greater visible interest in the welfare of his people and engages in
greater interaction with them than his father did, will consider economic
reforms and regularization of international relations. Dismissal and possible
death of Ri Yong-ho. On 16 July 2012, North Korean state media reported that
the Chief of General Staff of the Korean People's Army Vice Marshal Ri Yong-ho
had been relieved of all his Party duties, namely his Politburo Standing
Committee membership, Politburo membership, and Party Central Military
Commission vice-chairmanship, stating this move was due to unspecified illness.
A spokesman for the South Korean Ministry of Unification said the move was
"very unusual". as the meeting at which his removal was announced was attended
by the entire Politburo standing committee, Politburo members and candidate
members, making ill health seem implausibly minor. Ri was replaced by Hyon
Yong-chol in the role of the Chief of the General Staff. On July 20, 2012,
unconfirmed reports from North Korea alleged that Ri had died or been injured
in a firefight with Political Bureau troops. Some reports suggest that this may
mark a shift in power between the political leadership and the armed forces,
with the political leadership in the ascendant. State leaders. Eternal
President: Kim Il-sung National Defence Commission of DPRK Eternal Chairman:
Kim Jong-il First Chairman: Kim Jong-un (from April 2012) Vice Chairman: Kim
Yong Chun, Ri Yong Mu, Jang Song Thaek(from June 2010), O Kuk Ryol (from April
2009) Members: Pak To Chun, Kim Jong Gak, Ju Kyu Chang, Paek Se Bong, and since
2012: Choe Ryong Hae, Kim Won Hong and Ri Myong Su Presidium of the SPA of the
DPRK President: Kim Yong-nam Vice presidents: Yang Hyong Sop and Kim Yong Dae
Honorary vice-president: Kim Yong Ju Secretary general of the Presidium: Thae
Hyong Chol (from April 2012) Supreme People's Assembly (SPA) Chairman: Choe
Thae-bok Vice-chairpersons: Kim Wan Su and Hong Son Ok Cabinet Premier: Choe
Yong Rim Vice Premiers: Ro Tu Chol (from April 2009), Pak Su Gil (from
September 2009), and Kang Nung Su, Kim Rak Hui, Ri Thae Nam, Jon Ha Chol, Jo
Pyong Ju, Han Kwang Bok (from June 2010), Kang Sok Ju (from September 2010), Ri
Sung Ho, Ri Chol Man, Kim In Sik (since April 2012) Minister of Foreign
Affairs: Pak Ui Chun Minister of People's Security: Ju Sang Song Minister of
Finance: Pak Su-gil Minister of People‚Äôs Armed Forces: Kim Jong Gak WPK
Central Committee Eternal General Secretary: Kim Jong-il First secretary of the
WPK: Kim Jong-un Presidium of the Political Bureau of the Workers' Party of
Korea Central Committee (since September 2010): 1.Kim Jong-un (since April
2012) 2.Kim Yong-nam 3. Choe Yong Rim 4.Choe Ryong Hae (since April 2012)
Members and Alternate Members of Political Bureau: Kim Jong-un, Kim Yong-nam,
Choe Yong Rim, Choe Ryong Hae, Kim Yong Chun, Jon Pyong Ho, Kim Kuk Thae, Kim
Ki Nam, Choe Thae-bok, Yang Hyong Sop, Kang Sok Ju, Pyon Yong Rip, Ri Yong Mu,
Ju Sang Song, Hong Sok Hyong and Kim Kyong Hui, and since April 2012 Kim Jong
Gak, Jang Song Thaek, Pak To Chun, Hyon Chol Hae, Kim Won Hong and Ri Myong Su
(members), Kim Yang Gon, Kim Yong Il, Choe Ryong Hae, Ju Kyu Chang, Ri Thae
Nam, Kim Rak Hui, Thae Jong Su, Kim Phyong Hae, U Tong Chuk, Pak Jong Sun, Kim
Chang Sop and Mun Kyong Dok and since April 2012: Kwak Pom Gi, O Kuk Ryol, Ro
Tu Chol, Ri Pyong Sam and Jo Yon Jun (alternate members) Secretariat of WPK
Central Committee: Kim Jong-un, Kim Ki Nam, Choe Thae-bok, Choe Ryong Hae, Mun
Kyong Dok, Pak To Chun, Kim Yong Il, Kim Yang Gon, Kim Phyong Hae, Thae Jong Su
and Hong Sok Hyong, and April 2012: Kim Kyong Hui and Kwak Pom Gi Central
Military Commission of the Workers' Party of Korea: Chairman Kim Jong-un (since
2012), Vice - Chairmen Choe Ryong Hae and Hyon Yong-chol (since 2012), Members
Kim Yong Chun, Kim Jong Gak, Kim Myong Guk, Kim Kyong Ok, Kim Won Hong, Jong
Myong Do, Ri Pyong Chol, Choe Pu Il, Kim Yong Chol, Yun Jong Rin, Ju Kyu Chang,
Choe Sang Ryo, Choe Kyong Song, U Tong Chuk, Jang Song Thaek, and since April
2012: Hyon Chol Hae, Ri Myong Su and Kim Rak Gyom.
