Political correctness Political correctness (adjectivally, politically correct;
both forms commonly abbreviated to PC) is a term which denotes language, ideas,
policies, and behavior seen as seeking to minimize social and institutional
offense in occupational, gender, racial, cultural, sexual orientation, certain
other religions, beliefs or ideologies, disability, and age-related contexts,
and, as purported by the term, doing so to an excessive extent. In current
usage, the term is primarily pejorative, while the term politically "in"correct
has been used as an implicitly positive self-description. Examples of the
latter include the conservative "The Politically Incorrect Guide" published by
Regnery Publishing and the television talk show "Politically Incorrect". In
these cases, the term "politically incorrect" connotes language, ideas, and
behavior unconstrained by a perceived orthodoxy or by concerns about offending
or expressing bias regarding various groups of people. History. Early usages.
Early usages of the phrase "politically correct" have been found in various
contexts, which may not relate to the current terminology. New Left rhetoric.
By 1970, New Left proponents had adopted the term "political correctness". In
the essay "The Black Woman", Toni Cade Bambara says: ". . . a man cannot be
politically correct and a chauvinist too." The New Left later re-appropriated
the term "political correctness" as satirical self-criticism; per Debra Shultz:
"Throughout the 1970s and 1980s, the New Left, feminists, and progressives . .
. used their term "politically correct" ironically, as a guard against their
own orthodoxy in social change efforts". Hence, it is a popular English usage
in the underground comic book "Merton of the Movement", by Bobby London, while
"ideologically sound", an alternative term, followed a like lexical path,
appearing in Bart Dickon‚Äôs satirical comic strips. Moreover, Ellen Willis
says: " . . . in the early ‚Äô80s, when feminists used the term "political
correctness", it was used to refer sarcastically to the anti-pornography
movement‚Äôs efforts to define a ‚Äòfeminist sexuality‚Äô ". Current usage.
Widespread use of the term "politically correct" and its derivatives began when
it was adopted as a pejorative term by the political right in the 1990s, in the
context of the Culture Wars. Writing in the New York Times in 1990, Richard
Bernstein noted "The term 'politically correct,' with its suggestion of
Stalinist orthodoxy, is spoken more with irony and disapproval than with
reverence. But across the country the term p.c., as it is commonly abbreviated,
is being heard more and more in debates over what should be taught at the
universities." Bernstein referred to a meeting of the Western Humanities
Conference in Berkeley, California, on "'Political Correctness' and Cultural
Studies," which examined "what effect the pressure to conform to currently
fashionable ideas is having on scholarship". Bernstein also referred to "p.c.p"
for "politically correct people," a term which did not take root in popular
discussion. Within a few years, this previously obscure term featured regularly
in the lexicon of the conservative social and political challenges against
curriculum expansion and progressive teaching methods in US high schools and
universities. In 1991, addressing a graduating class of the University of
Michigan, U.S. President George H. W. Bush spoke against "a movement would
declare certain topics 'off-limits,' certain expressions 'off-limits', even
certain gestures 'off-limits'" in allusion to liberal Political Correctness.
The most common usage here is as a pejorative term to refer to excessive
deference to particular sensibilities at the expense of other considerations.
The converse term "politically incorrect" came into use as an implicit term of
self-praise, indicating that the user was not afraid to ignore constraints
associated with political correctness. Examples of the latter include the
conservative Politically Incorrect Guides published by Regnery Publishing and
the television talk show "Politically Incorrect". The central uses of the term
relate to particular issues of race, gender, disability, ethnicity, sexual
orientation, culture and worldviews, and encompass both the language in which
issues are discussed and the viewpoints that are expressed. Proponents of the
view that differences in IQ test scores between blacks and whites are
(primarily or largely) genetically determined state that criticism of these
views is based on political correctness. In the United Kingdom, "political
correctness gone mad" is a catchphrase associated with the conservative "Daily
Mail" newspaper. In a more general sense, any policy regarded by the speaker as
representing an imposed orthodoxy may be criticized as "politically correct."
Linguistics. In addressing the linguistic problem of naming, Edna Andrews says
that using "inclusive" and "neutral" language is based upon the concept that
"language represents thought, and may even control thought." This claim has
been derived from the Sapir‚ÄìWhorf hypothesis, which states that a
language‚Äôs grammatical categories shape the speaker‚Äôs ideas and actions;
although Andrews says that moderate conceptions of the relation between
language and thought are sufficient to support the "reasonable deduction¬ ...
cultural change via linguistic change". Other cognitive psychology and
cognitive linguistics works indicate that word-choice has significant "framing
effects" on the perceptions, memories, and attitudes of speakers and listeners.
A relevant empirical question is whether or not sexist language promotes
sexism, i.e. sexist thought and action. Critics of such arguments, and of
inclusive language in general, commonly use the terminology of "political
correctness". A common criticism is that terms chosen by an identity group, as
acceptable descriptors of themselves, then pass into common usage, including
usage by the racists and sexists whose racism and sexism, et cetera, the new
terms mean to supersede. Alternately put, the new terms gradually acquire the
same disparaging connotations of the old terms. The new terms are thus
devalued, and another set of words must be coined, giving rise to lengthy
progressions such as "Negro", "Colored", "Black", "Afro-American", "African-
American", and so on, (cf. Euphemism treadmill). Criticisms. Discussion of
political correctness, to the extent that it uses the term and accepts the
existence of political correctness as a significant force, is almost invariably
critical. General. Bulgarian-French philosopher Julia Kristeva, a structuralist
who has been identified as a theorist instrumental to providing the
philosophical basis for American political correctness, denounced political
correctness in 2001 in "The New York Times" and said her works have been
distorted by Americans. She labeled identity politics and political correctness
in general as totalitarian. In "The Abolition of Britain", Peter Hitchens says:
‚ÄúWhat Americans describe with the casual phrase . . . ‚Äòpolitical
correctness‚Äô is the most intolerant system of thought to dominate the British
Isles since the Reformation‚Äù. The academic Camille Paglia said that PC
empowers the enemies of the Left, and alienates the masses against feminism.
Exclusion of certain groups. An article by Larry Elder in FrontPage Magazine
referred to an incident on Bill Maher's "Politically Incorrect" where the term
"white trash" was used in reference to guests on the Jerry Springer Show and
asked 'Why Is It Okay to Say "White Trash?"'. Commenting on this, and citing an
instance of the term in a glossy magazine, blogger Ed Driscoll asked "Why Is
"White Trash" An Acceptable Phrase In PC America?". Cultural Marxism.
University of Pennsylvania professor Alan Charles Kors and lawyer Harvey A.
Silverglate connect political correctness to Marxist philosopher Herbert
Marcuse. They claim that liberal ideas of free speech are repressive, arguing
that such "Marcusean logic" is the base of speech codes, which are seen by some
as censorship, in US universities. Kors and Silvergate later established the
Foundation for Individual Rights in Education, which campaigns against PC
speech codes. Some conservative critics claim that political correctness is a
Marxist undermining of Western values. William S. Lind and Patrick Buchanan
have characterized PC as a technique originated by the Frankfurt School,
through what Buchanan describes as "Cultural Marxism". In "The Death of the
West", Buchanan says: ‚ÄúPolitical Correctness is Cultural Marxism, a regime to
punish dissent and to stigmatize social heresy as the Inquisition punished
religious heresy. Its trademark is intolerance.‚Äù Higher education. A
conservative criticism of higher education in the United States is that the
political views of the faculty are much more liberal than the general
population, and that this situation contributes to an atmosphere of political
correctness. Counterclaims. Engineered political term. Moreover, the
commentators claimed there never was a ‚ÄúPolitical Correctness movement‚Äù in
the US, and that many who use the term do so to distract attention from
substantive debate about racial, class and gender discrimination and unequal
legal treatment. Similarly, Polly Toynbee argued that ‚Äúthe phrase is an empty
right-wing smear designed only to elevate its user‚Äù. False accusations. In
the United Kingdom, some newspapers reported that a school had altered the
nursery rhyme ‚ÄúBaa Baa Black Sheep‚Äù to read ‚ÄúBaa Baa Rainbow Sheep‚Äù.
But it is also reported that a better description is that the Parents and
Children Together (PACT) nursery had the children ‚Äúturn the song into an
action rhyme. . . . They sing happy, sad, bouncing, hopping, pink, blue, black
and white sheep etc.‚Äù That nursery rhyme story was circulated and later
extended to suggest that like language bans applied to the terms ‚Äúblack
coffee‚Äù and ‚Äúblackboard‚Äù. The Private Eye magazine reported that like
stories, all baseless, ran in the British press since "The Sun" first published
them in 1986. See also Loony Left#Baa Baa White Sheep. Science. Among
scientists, "correctness" (of procedures, results, or scientific claims)
derives from the factual truth of the matter or the soundness of the reasoning
by which it can be deduced from observations and first principles. When
publication, teaching, and public funding of science is decided by peer
committees, academic standards, and elected or appointed boards, the allegation
can arise that a work's acceptability has been assessed "politically".
Professor J. I. Katz applies the term PC to censure characterized by emotional,
rather than rational discourse. Groups opposing certain generally accepted
scientific views on evolution, second-hand smoke, AIDS, and other politically
contentious scientific matters argue that PC is responsible for the failure of
their perspectives to receive a fair public hearing; thus, in "Lamarck's
Signature: How Retrogenes are Changing Darwin's Natural Selection Paradigm",
Assoc. Prof. Edward J. Steele says: "We now stand on the threshold of what
could be an exciting new era of genetic research. . . . However, the
'politically correct' thought agendas of the neo-Darwinists of the 1990s are
ideologically opposed to the idea of 'Lamarckian Feedback', just as the Church
was opposed to the idea of evolution based on natural selection in the 1850s!"
"The Politically Incorrect Guide to Science", by Tom Bethell, is a
comprehensive presentation argument that mainstream science is dominated by
politically correct thinking. Bethell rejects mainstream views about evolution
and global warming, and supports AIDS denialism. Right-wing political
correctness. Accusations of political correctness, in the sense of enforced
orthodoxy, have also been directed against the political right. For example,
the intense backlash against country band the Dixie Chicks, for remarks
critical of President George W. Bush onstage in London in 2003, was described
by newspaper columnist Don Williams as the price for freely speaking political
views disapproved by supporters of the Iraq War. Williams went on to say,
‚Äúthe ugliest form of political correctness occurs whenever there‚Äôs a war
on. Then you‚Äôd better watch what you say.‚Äù He noted that Ann Coulter and
Bill O'Reilly called the remarks in question "treasonous". Bill Maher's show
"Politically Incorrect" lost some of its main advertisers after remarks he made
about the 9/11 hijackers including that the hijackers were not cowards but that
it was cowardly for the United States to launch cruise missiles on targets
thousands of miles away. He later apologized. White House press secretary under
President Bush at the time, Ari Fleischer stated, "people have to watch what
they say and watch what they do". Fleischer later stated that this referred to
both Maher and remarks against Arabs by Representative John Cooksey that were
considered disparaging. Two journalists lost their jobs soon after the 9/11
attacks for statements critical of the president. Linguistic examples of right-
wing adjustments to language criticized as examples of political correctness
include renaming French fries ‚ÄúFreedom fries‚Äù. In 2004, then Australian
Labor leader Mark Latham described conservative calls for "civility" as "The
New Political Correctness". Satirical use. Political correctness often is
satirized, for example in the "Politically Correct Manifesto" (1992), by Saul
Jerushalmy and Rens Zbignieuw X, and "Politically Correct Bedtime Stories"
(1994), by James Finn Garner, presenting fairy tales re-written from an
exaggerated PC perspective. Other examples include the television program
"Politically Incorrect", George Carlin‚Äôs "Euphemisms" routine, and "The
Politically Correct Scrapbook". The popularity of the "South Park" cartoon
program led to the creation of the term "South Park Republican" by Andrew
Sullivan, and later the book "South Park Conservatives" by Brian C. Anderson.
Replying to the ‚ÄúFreedom Fries‚Äù matter, wits suggested that the Fama-French
model used in corporate finance be renamed the ‚ÄúFama-Freedom‚Äù model.
British comedian Stewart Lee also satirized the oft-used phrase of criticism
for political correctness: "it's political correctness gone mad". In which Lee,
himself, criticized people for overusing this phrase without even understanding
the concept of political correctness (including many people's confusion of it
with Health & Safety laws). He in particular criticized Daily Mail columnist
Richard Littlejohn for his overzealous use of the phrase.
