Politics of Iran The politics of Iran take place in a framework of theocracy
guided by an Islamist ideology. The December 1979 constitution, and its 1989
amendment, define the political, economic, and social order of the Islamic
Republic of Iran, declaring that Shi'a Islam of the Twelver school of thought
is Iran's official religion. Iran has an elected president, parliament (or
Majlis), and an "Assembly of Experts" (which elects the Supreme Leader of
Iran), and local councils. According to the constitution all candidates running
for these positions must be vetted by the Guardian Council (with the exception
of those running for "Assembly of Experts") before being elected. In addition
there are nontransparent unelected organizations (usually under Supreme
Leader's control) trying to "protect the state's Islamic character". The
majority of the Iranian political parties are banned. Political conditions. As
in almost all revolutions, the early days of the regime were characterized by
political tumult. In November 1979 the American embassy was seized and its
occupants taken hostage and kept captive for 444 days. The eight-year
Iran–Iraq War killed hundreds of thousands and cost the country thousands of
dollars. By mid 1982, a succession of power struggles eliminated first the
center of political spectrum and then the Republicans leaving the Ayatollah
Khomeini and his supporters in power. Iran's post-revolution challenges have
included the imposition of economic sanctions and suspension of diplomatic
relations with Iran by the United States because of the hostage crisis and
other acts of terrorism that the U.S. government and some others have accused
Iran of sponsoring. Emigration has cost Iran "two to four million
entrepreneurs, professionals, technicians, and skilled craftspeople (and their
capital)." For this and other reasons Iran's economy has not prospered. Poverty
rose in absolute terms by nearly 45% during the first 6 years of the Islamic
revolution and per capita income has yet to reach pre-revolutionary levels. The
Islamic Republic Party was Iran's ruling political party and for some years its
only political party until its dissolution in 1987. Iran had no functioning
political parties until the Executives of Construction Party formed in 1994 to
run for the fifth parliamentary elections, mainly out of executive body of the
government close to the then-president Akbar Hashemi-Rafsanjani. After the
election of Mohammad Khatami in 1997, more parties started to work, mostly of
the reformist movement and opposed by hard-liners. This led to incorporation
and official activity of many other groups, including hard-liners. The Iranian
Government is opposed by a few armed political groups, including the Mojahedin-
e-Khalq, the People's Fedayeen, and the Kurdish Democratic Party. "For other
political parties see List of political parties in Iran." Supreme Leader. The
most powerful political office in the Islamic Republic is that of the Supreme
Leader, of which there have been two: the founder of the Republic, Ayatollah
Ruhollah Khomeini, and his successor, Ali Khamenei. Historically the Supreme
Leader has remained aloof from election politics. However, in the 2009
election, some of the pronouncements by Ali Khamenei were perceived by many to
favor the incumbent candidate. The Leader appoints the heads of many powerful
posts - the commanders of the armed forces, the director of the national radio
and television network, the heads of the major religious foundations, the
prayer leaders in city mosques, and the members of national security councils
dealing with defence and foreign affairs. He also appoints the chief judge, the
chief prosecutor, special tribunals and, with the help of the chief judge, half
of the 12 jurists of the Guardian Council – the powerful body that decides
both what bills may become law and who may run for president or parliament.
Also according to Iranian constitution the Supreme Leader asserts the authority
of the president. He can veto the laws made by the parliament and traditionally
he permits for presidential candidates to proclaim their candidacy. Executive
branch. The Constitution defines the President as the highest state authority
"after" the Supreme Leader. The President is elected by universal suffrage, by
those 18 years old and older, for a term of four years. Presidential candidates
must be approved by the Council of Guardians prior to running. After being
elected, the president must be appointed by the Supreme Leader. The President
is responsible for the implementation of the Constitution and for the exercise
of executive powers, except for matters directly related to the Supreme Leader.
The President appoints and supervises the Council of Ministers, coordinates
government decisions, and selects government policies to be placed before the
legislature. Currently, 10 Vice-Presidents serve under the President, as well
as a cabinet of 21 ministers, who must all be approved by the legislature.
Unlike many other states, the executive branch in Iran does not control the
armed forces. Although the President appoints the Ministers of Intelligence and
Defense, it is customary for the President to obtain explicit approval from the
Supreme Leader for these two ministers before presenting them to the
legislature for a vote of confidence. Legislative branch. The current
legislature of Iran is unicameral. Before the Iranian Revolution, the
legislature was bicameral, with the senate (upper house) half elected, half
appointed by the Shah. The senate was removed in the new constitution.
Parliament. The Parliament of Iran comprises 290 members elected for four-year
terms. The Parliament drafts legislation, ratifies international treaties, and
approves the national budget. All Parliament candidates and all legislation
from the assembly must be approved by the Council of Guardians. Guardian
Council. The Guardian Council is composed of 12 jurists, including six clerics
appointed by the Supreme Leader, and six jurists elected by the Majles from
among the Muslim jurists nominated by the Head of the Judicial System. The
Council interprets the constitution and may reject bills from parliament deemed
incompatible with the "constitution" or "Sharia" (Islamic law). These are
referred back to parliament for revision. In a controversial exercise of its
authority, the Council has drawn upon a narrow interpretation of Iran's
constitution to veto parliamentary candidates. As of the early 1990s, the
Guardian Council vets (approves) candidates for national election in Iran.
According to the CIA World Factbook, The Guardian Council is a part of the
Executive branch of the government. Expediency Council. The Expediency Council
has the authority to mediate disputes between the Majlis and the Council of
Guardians, and serves as an advisory body to the Supreme Leader, making it one
of the most powerful governing bodies in the country. Its members include heads
of the three government branches, the clerical members of the Guardian Council
and various other members appointed by the supreme leader for three-year terms.
Cabinet members and parliamentary leaders also serve as temporary members when
issues under their jurisdictions are under review. Judicial branch. The Supreme
Leader appoints the head of the Judiciary, who in turn appoints the head of the
supreme court and the chief public prosecutor. There are several types of
courts including public courts that deal with civil and criminal cases, and
"revolutionary courts" which deal with certain categories of offenses,
including crimes against national security. The decisions of the revolutionary
courts are final and cannot be appealed. The Special Clerical Court handles
crimes allegedly committed by clerics, although it has also taken on cases
involving lay people. The Special Clerical Court functions independently of the
regular judicial framework and is accountable only to the Supreme Leader. The
Court’s rulings are final and cannot be appealed. It has also been known to
organizations such as the United Nations and the World Criminal Court that a
very complex system of bribery has developed because of the high crime rate.
Assembly of Experts. The Assembly of Experts, which meets for at least two
days, twice annually, comprises 86 "virtuous and learned" clerics elected by
adult suffrage for eight-year terms. Based on the laws approved by the first
Assembly, the Council of Guardians has to determine candidates' eligibility
using a written examination. The Assembly elects the Supreme Leader and has the
constitutional authority to remove the Supreme Leader from power at any time.
As all of their meetings and notes are strictly confidential, the Assembly has
never been known to challenge any of the Supreme Leader's decisions. Political
parties and elections. For the parliamentary elections of February 20, 2004,
the Ministry of Interior Affairs announced a 50% turnout, the lowest in any
general election since 1979. It was disputed by the Guardian Council, which
claimed the result was closer to 60%. Conservative forces received 54% (156
seats), reformists received 14% of the vote (40 seats), and independents (34
seats); 60 seats were up for runoff election in May 2004. In the run-up to the
election many reformist candidates, including about 80 members of the outgoing
parliament, were disqualified by the Guardian Council; more than a 100 MPs
protested by staging a sit-in in the parliament that lasted for about 3 weeks
and ended to no avail. About 120 MPs then resigned and major reformist parties
and groups stated they will not take part in the election but did not boycott
it. The crisis resulted in a crack in the reformist front, when the Militant
Clerics League, of which President Khatami is a member, announced they will
participate in the election. Political pressure groups and leaders. Active
student groups include the pro-reform "Office for Strengthening Unity" and "the
Union of Islamic Student Societies'; Iranian opposition groups have been
severely repressed by the regime, an example being the Freedom party of Iran
that is now "forbidden". Repression of opposition groups is becoming more harsh
as of mid 2007. As a result the political pressure inside Iran many opposition
figures have left Iran and now live abroad. Military. The military and the
Corps of the Guardians (often mistranslated as "guards") of the Islamic
Revolution (or "Sepaah" in Persian meaning "the Corps") are charged with
defending Iran's borders and "Baseej" (Persian for "Mobilization") militia are
charged with maintaining both external and internal security. Administrative
divisions. Iran consists of 30 provinces ("ostaan-haa", singular: "ostan"):
Ardabil, Azarbayjan-e Gharbi, Azarbayjan-e Sharqi, Bushehr, Chahar Mahall va
Bakhtiari, Esfahan, Fars, Gilan, Golestan, Hamadan, Hormozgan, Ilam, Kerman,
Kermanshahan, North Khorasan, Khorasan, South Khorasan, Khuzestan, Kohkiluyeh
va Buyer Ahmadi, Kordestan, Lorestan, Markazi, Mazandaran, Qom, Qazvin, Semnan,
Sistan va Baluchestan, Tehran, Yazd, Zanjan. The provinces are each headed by a
governor general. The provinces are further divided into counties, districts,
and villages. Local government. Local councils are elected by public vote to 4-
year terms in all cities and villages of Iran. According to article 7 in Iran's
Constitution, these local councils together with the Parliament are "decision-
making and administrative organs of the State". This section of the
constitution was not implemented until 1999 when the first local council
elections were held across the country. Councils have many different
responsibilities including electing mayors, supervising the activities of
municipalities; studying the social, cultural, educational, health, economic,
and welfare requirements of their constituencies; planning and coordinating
national participation in the implementation of social, economic, constructive,
cultural, educational and other welfare affairs. Public finance and fiscal
policy. Budget. A unique feature of Iran's economy is the large size of the
religious foundations whose combined budgets make up more than 30% that of the
central government. Revenues. In 2004, about 45 percent of the government's
budget came from exports of oil and natural gas revenues, although this varies
with the fluctuations in world petroleum markets and 31 percent came from taxes
and fees. Overall, an estimated 50 percent of Iran’s GDP was exempt from
taxes in FY 2004. As of 2010, oil income accounts for 80% of Iran's foreign
currency revenues and 60% of the nation's overall budget. Any surplus revenues
from the sale of crude oil and gas are to be paid into the Oil Stabilization
Fund (OSF). The approved ""total budget"", including state owned commercial
companies, was $295 billion for the same period. The Government seeks to
increase the share of tax revenue in the budget through the implementation of
the so-called “economic reform plan” through more effective tax collection
from businesses. Expenditures. For a breakdown of expenditures for social and
economic purposes, see attached chart. Among current expenditures, wages and
salaries accounted for 36 percent; subsidies and transfers to households
accounted for 22 percent (not including "indirect" subsidies). Earmarked
expenditures totaled 13 percent of the central government total. Between FY
2000 and FY 2004, total expenditures and net lending accounted for about 26
percent of GDP. According to the Vice President for Parliamentary Affairs,
Iran's subsidy reforms would save 20 percent of the country's budget. According
to the head of the Department of Statistics of Iran, if the rules of budgeting
were observed in this very structure, the government could save at least 30 to
35 percent on its expenses. Notes: 1) Since 2002, the latest International
Monetary Fund Guidelines on government financial statistics have been used as a
model to prepare annual budgetary acts. Accordingly, revenues are classified
into “taxes and other revenues”, and “oil sales” which had earlier been
classified as revenue are now referred to as "transfer of capital assets".2) In
2007/08, it includes budget supplement at Rls. 9,500 billion.3) The government
budget does not include state revenues and expenses derived from state owned
commercial entreprises. 4) The government budget does not account for subsides
paid to state owned commercial enterprise. See also Subsidy reform plan. 5)
Excluding special revenues and expenditures and the figure for transparency in
the price (subsidy) of energy bearers. 6) For "Total Government Budget"
(including state owned commercial companies), see Statistical Center of Iran.
7) "Hidden" spending and liability not included. 2009-10. In Iran’s state
budget for the Iranian calendar year 1388 (2009–2010), of the $102 billion
earmarked for government spending, Oil revenues are calculated based on the
average price of $37.50 per barrel at the US Dollar conversion rate of 9,500
Rials. Iran balances its external accounts around $75 per barrel. 2010-11. The
budget for Iranian year 1389 (2010–2011), which starts on March 21, amounts
to $368.4bn, representing an increase of 31 per cent on the previous year and
is based on a projected oil price of $60 a barrel compared with just $37.50
last year. 2011-12. The public budget was $165 billion (1,770 trillion rials)
in Iranian year 2011-2012. The Iranian Parliament also approved a total budget
of $500 billion (5,170 trillion rials) that factors in $54 billion from price
hikes and subsidy cuts and aside from the government (or public budget) also
includes spending for state-owned companies. The budget is based on an oil
price of $80 per barrel. The value of the US dollar is estimated at IRR 10,500
for the same period. the 2011-total budget shows a 45-percent increase compared
with that of 2011 which stood at $368 billion. 2012-13. The "proposed" budget
for 2011-2012 amounts to 5.1 quadrillion rials (approximately $416 billion).
The funding for running the government has been decreased by 5.6 percent and
the government’s tax revenues have been envisaged to rise by 20 percent. The
defense budget shows an increase of 127 percent. The government also is seeking
higher sums for development, research, and health projects. Approved budget of
5,660 trillion Rials $477 billion is based on an oil price of $85 per barrel
and the average value of the U.S. dollar for the fiscal year has been projected
to be 12,260 rials, allowing the government to gain $53.8 billion from subsidy
cut. The approved total state budget figure shows an 11% increase in Rial
terms, in comparison to the previous year’s budget. Of this amount, $134
billion relates to the government’s general budget and the remaining $343
billion relates to state-owned companies and organizations. Of the $134 billion
for the government’s general budget, $117 billion relates to operating
expenditure and $17 billion is for infrastructure developments. The
government’s general budget for 2012-13 shows a 3.5% decline in comparison to
the previous year, while the budget for state-owned companies and organisations
has risen by 18.5%. Revenues from crude oil make up 37% of the state’s total
revenues in the budget. Revenues from taxes have been projected at 458 trillion
Rials ($37 billion), which shows a 10% increase year-on-year. In the first half
of 2012, Iran announced in Majlis that it has taken in only 25% of its budgeted
annual revenue. According to Apicorp, Iran needs oil to average $127 a barrel
in 2012 for its fiscal budget to break even. Complexity of the system.
According to the constitution, the Guardian Council oversees and approves
electoral candidates for most national elections in Iran. The Guardian Council
has 12 members, six clerics, appointed by the Supreme Leader and six jurists,
elected by the Majlis from among the Muslim jurists nominated by the Head of
the Judicial System, who is appointed by the Supreme Leader. According to the
current law, the Guardian Council approves the Assembly of Experts candidates,
which in turn supervise and elect the Supreme Leader. The reformists say this
system creates a closed circle of power. Iranian reformists, such as Mohammad-
Ali Abtahi have considered this to be the core legal obstacle for the reform
movement in Iran. International organization participation. CP, ECO, ESCAP,
FAO, G-15, G-24, G-77, GECF, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC,
IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, International Maritime Organization, Inmarsat, Intelsat,
Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer), ISO, ITU, NAM, OIC, OPCW, OPEC, PCA, SCO
(observer), UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WCO, WIPO, WFTU, WEF,
WHO, WMO, WTO (observer)
