Price–Anderson Nuclear Industries Indemnity Act The Price-Anderson Nuclear
Industries Indemnity Act (commonly called the Price-Anderson Act) is a United
States federal law, first passed in 1957 and since renewed several times, which
governs liability-related issues for all non-military nuclear facilities
constructed in the United States before 2026. The main purpose of the Act is to
partially indemnify the nuclear industry against liability claims arising from
nuclear incidents while still ensuring compensation coverage for the general
public. The Act establishes a no fault insurance-type system in which the first
approximately $12.6 billion (as of 2011) is industry-funded as described in the
Act. Any claims above the $12.6 billion would be covered by a Congressional
mandate to retroactively increase nuclear utility liability or would be covered
by the federal government. At the time of the Act's passing, it was considered
necessary as an incentive for the private production of nuclear power — this
was because electric utilities viewed the available liability coverage (only
$60 million) as inadequate. In 1978, the Act survived a constitutional
challenge in the Supreme Court case "Duke Power Co. v. Carolina Environmental
Study Group" (see below). The Act was last renewed in 2005 for a 20-year
period. How the law works. Funding and procedures. Power reactor licensees are
required by the act to obtain the maximum amount of insurance against nuclear
related incidents which is available in the insurance market (, $375 million
per plant). Any monetary claims that fall within this maximum amount are paid
by the insurer(s). The Price-Anderson fund, which is financed by the reactor
companies themselves, is then used to make up the difference. Each reactor
company is obliged to contribute up to $111.9 million per reactor in the event
of an accident with claims that exceed the $375 million insurance limit. , the
maximum amount of the fund is approximately $12.22 billion ($111.9m X 104
reactors) if all of the reactor companies were required to pay their full
obligation to the fund. This fund is not paid into unless an accident occurs.
However, fund administrators are required to have contingency plans in place to
raise funds using loans to the fund, so that claimants may be paid as soon as
possible. Actual payments by companies in the event of an accident are capped
at $17.5 million per year until either a claim has been met, or their maximum
individual liability (the $111.9 million maximum) has been reached. If a
coverable incident occurs, the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) is required
to submit a report on the cost of it to the courts and to Congress. If claims
are likely to exceed the maximum Price-Anderson fund value, then the President
is required to submit proposals to Congress. These proposals must detail the
costs of the accident, recommend how funds should be raised, and detail plans
for full and prompt compensation to those affected. Under the Act, the
administrators of the fund have the right to further charge plants if it is
needed. If Congress fails to provide for compensation, claims can be made under
the Tucker Act (in which the government waives its sovereign immunity) for
failure by the federal government to carry out its duty to compensate
claimants. Price-Anderson also covers Department of Energy (DOE) facilities,
private licensees, and their subcontractors including the USEC uranium
enrichment plants, national laboratories and the Yucca Mountain nuclear waste
repository. Any payments from the fund for accidents arising at DOE facilities
come from the US treasury. The fund size for such installations is set by
legislation (also at $11.6 billion), rather than being based upon the number of
plants contributing to the fund. Since Price-Anderson was enacted, nuclear
insurance pools have paid out about $151 million ($70 million of which was
related to the 1979 Three Mile Island accident) in claims, while the Department
of Energy has paid out $65 million. History of the Act. Origins. The Price-
Anderson Act is named for Representative Charles Melvin Price (D-Ill.) and
Senator Clinton Presba Anderson (D-N.M.), both of whom eventually chaired
Congress's Joint Committee on Atomic Energy. The Atomic Energy Act of 1946,
which followed the development of nuclear technology during World War II, had
created a framework for operation of nuclear plants under government control.
The intention of the government was to apply this technology to civilian
industry, especially in using nuclear plants to generate electricity. In 1954
the Atomic Energy Act Amendments Act removed the government monopoly on
operating nuclear plants by creating a licensing system for private operators.
The structure of the insurance industry as it existed until 1955 was incapable
of providing the extent of coverage needed to adequately address the risks of
nuclear power. The "amount of insurance required could not be underwritten at
the time by any single or joint company effort". A power plant, Shippingport,
was eventually constructed, but electric utility executives expressed concerns
about limited size of liability coverage offered by the insurance market ($60
million). A nuclear accident of privately held nuclear power appeared to be an
impossible barrier since the possible magnitude of claims could bankrupt any
electric utility held responsible. Nor could an insurance company offer
insurance policies with limits beyond its own resources to pay. Because of
these difficulties, it looked like it would be extremely unlikely that electric
utilities would want to enter the nuclear power industry. The potential
magnitude of worst-case accidents has been the subject of several major
studies, such as WASH-740, WASH-1400, CRAC-II, and NUREG-1150. The Nuclear
Regulatory Commission (NRC) is currently developing State-of-the-Art Reactor
Consequence Analyses (SOARCA), which is examining potential safety failures
with probabilities of "occurring more than once in a million reactor years, or
more than once in ten million reactor years for accidents that may bypass
containment features" To address these issues, Congress introduced the Price-
Anderson Act in 1957. The Act required companies to obtain the maximum possible
insurance cover against accidents, determined to be $60 million, and provided a
further government commitment of $500 million to cover any claims in excess of
the private insurance. Companies were relieved of any liability beyond the
insured amount for any incident involving radiation or radioactive releases
regardless of fault or cause. The act was intended to be temporary, and to
expire in August 1967 as it was assumed that once the companies had
demonstrated a record of safe operation they would be able to obtain insurance
in the private market. At the same time, Congress encouraged the insurance
industry to develop a way that power plant operators could meet their financial
protection responsibilities. The insurance industry responded by creating an
insurance pool called American Nuclear Insurers (ANI), which today includes 60
U.S. property and casualty insurance companies who represent some of the
largest insurance companies in the country. Extensions. By 1966 it had become
apparent that the industry would still be unable to obtain adequate private
insurance, so the act was extended until 1976. A provision was added to the Act
which prevented companies from offering certain defenses to damages claims
(particularly defenses which claimed that the accident had not been their
fault). A minimum time limit was also introduced (which could be surpassed by
state law), giving claimants three years after discovering harm in which to
make a claim. The alterations were intended to make the process of obtaining
funds from reactor companies easier, and to remove discrepancies in different
states where different laws applied. The new provisions only applied to
incidents where a significant escape of radioactive material was deemed to have
occurred (an ENO, extraordinary nuclear occurrence). In 1975 the act was
extended for 12 years, up until 1987. The total amount of insurance remained
the same, but a provision was added requiring each of the 60 or so reactors
then in existence to contribute between $2 million and $5 million in the event
of an uninsured accident. The insurance ceiling for each individual company was
increased to $140 million. These measures eliminated the contribution of the
federal government to the insurance pool. However, an explicit commitment was
made that in the event of a larger accident, Congress would take whatever
actions were necessary to provide full and prompt claims to the public. This
included the possibility of additional charges to reactor companies above and
beyond the prescribed limits set forth in the Act. In 1988 the act was extended
for 15 years up to August 2002. Individual insurance for each generator was
increased to $200 million, and the total fund to $9.5 billion. For each reactor
owned, the reactor company was liable to contribute up to $63 million towards
compensation for any claim against any company, though this could only be
recovered at a maximum rate of $10 million per year. Assessments were to be
adjusted for inflation every 5 years. The same level of indemnity was provided
for government DOE facilities, while small reactors (education and research
oriented) were required to obtain $250,000 insurance and have a government-
backed pool of $500 million in the event of accident. This extension provided
that all cases resulting from a nuclear accident to be heard in a federal
court, rather than local courts. In February 2002 the act was temporarily
extended to December 2003. After some debate in 2003, the Act was extended to
2017. The individual insurance for each site was increased to $300 million
while fund contributions per reactor were increased to $95.8 million. In 2005
it was extended again through 2025 via the Energy Policy Act of 2005. Usage.
Over the first 43 years of the Price-Anderson Act to 2000, the secondary
insurance was not required. A total of $151 million was paid to cover claims
(including legal expenses), all from primary insurance, including $71 million
for Three Mile Island. Additionally, the Department of Energy paid about $65
million to cover claims under liability for its own nuclear operations in the
same period. Constitutional challenge. The constitutionality of the Price-
Anderson Act was upheld in June, 1978 by the Supreme Court in the case of "Duke
Power Co. v. Carolina Environmental Study Group" link. The lawsuit challenged
the act on two grounds — first, that it violated the Fifth Amendment because
it did not ensure adequate compensation for victims of accidents, and that it
violated the Fourteenth Amendment because it treats nuclear accidents
differently from other accidents. Comparisons to Other Industries. United
States law requires payment of 8 cents per barrel of oil to the Oil Spill
Liability Trust Fund for all oil imported or produced. For this payment,
operators of offshore oil platforms (among others) are limited in liability to
$75 million for damages (which can be paid by the fund), but are not
indemnified from the cost of cleanup. As of 2010, before payouts related to the
Deepwater Horizon drilling rig explosion, the fund stood at $1.6 billion.
Criticisms. The Price-Anderson Act has been criticized by various think tanks
and environmental organizations, including Union of Concerned Scientists,
Greenpeace International, Public Citizen and the Cato Institute. Public Citizen
has been particularly critical of Price-Anderson; it claims that the Act
understates the risks inherent in atomic power, does not require reactors to
carry adequate insurance, and would therefore result in taxpayers footing most
of the bill for a catastrophic accident. An analysis by economists Heyes and
Heyes (1998) places the value of the government insurance subsidy at $2.3
million per reactor-year, or $237 million annually. In 2008 the Congressional
Budget Office estimated the value of the subsidy at only $600,000 per reactor
per year. Due to the structure of the liability immunities, as the number of
nuclear plants in operation is reduced, the public liability in case of an
accident goes up. The Price-Anderson Act has been used as an example of
corporate welfare by Ralph Nader. Price-Anderson has been criticized by many of
these groups due to a portion of the Act that indemnifies Department of Energy
and private contractors from nuclear incidents even in cases of gross
negligence and willful misconduct (although criminal penalties would still
apply). "No other government agency provides this level of taxpayer
indemnification to non-government personnel". The Energy Department counters
those critics by saying that the distinction is irrelevant, since the damage to
the public would be the same.
