Puerto Ricans in the United States Stateside Puerto Ricans or Puerto Rican
Americans (Spanish: Puertorriqueño estadounidense) are American citizens born
in Puerto Rico, or in one of the states of the United States to parents of
Puerto Rican origin, who have notably lived a significant part of their lives
in the District of Columbia or one of the states of the United States. Since
1898, Puerto Rico has been an unincorporated territory of the United States and
is officially named the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico since 1952, when its
constitution was adopted. The residents of the islands were given full U.S.
Citizenship in 1917, through the Jones-Shafroth Act. Most Puerto Ricans descend
from a combination of White Europeans (especially Spanish), the indigenous
Taino peoples, and Africans, with later smaller waves of immigrants from Latin
America, a small number of Asians (mostly Chinese), and non-Hispanic people
from the United States. Puerto Ricans are the second largest Hispanic group in
the US and comprise 9% of the Hispanic population in the US. Despite new
demographic trends, New York City continues to be home to the largest Puerto
Rican community in the United States, with Philadelphia having the second
largest Puerto Rican community. The portmanteau "Nuyorican" refers to Puerto
Ricans and their descendants in and around New York. A large portion of the
Puerto Rican population in the United States reside in the Northeastern states
and Florida, though there are significant Puerto Rican populations growing in
states like Illinois, Ohio, North Carolina, Texas, California, Virginia,
Maryland, and Georgia, among others. Introduction. The 2010 Census indicated a
population of 3,725,789 individuals on the island of Puerto Rico (95% of whom
were Puerto Rican). There have been more Puerto Ricans in the states, than on
the island since 2000. Today, there are over 4,623,000 Puerto Ricans in the 50
states and DC, approximately 900,000 more than in the islands of Puerto Rico
themselves. Congressman Jose Serrano, who represents the largest Puerto Rican
constituency in Congress, has been a strong advocate for Puerto Rican self-
determination. The last time Puerto Ricans voted on their political status was
in 1998. During that vote, Statehood narrowly failed to "none of the above"
(46%-50%). Another referendum for statehood is scheduled for November 2012. If
Puerto Ricans were to vote for statehood, there is no guarantee that it would
be granted, because only Congress has the authority to grant statehood,
although no territory has been denied a petition for admission. If Puerto Rico
were admitted as a state, it would likely have five seats in the United States
House of Representatives and two seats in the United States Senate. President
Barrack Obama and 2012 Presidential candidate Mitt Romney have promised to
support Puerto Rican statehood if that option is chosen by voters in Puerto
Rico. Identity. As a group, Puerto Ricans in the United States continue to have
a strong connection to the people of Puerto Rico. A strong indicator of the
Puerto Rican identity of stateside Puerto Ricans is their use of the Spanish
language. Most Puerto Rican Americans also speak English. They make up the
largest multi-lingual population in New York City and other cities. Puerto
Ricans have been migrating to the United States since the 19th century and have
a long history of collective social advocacy for their political and social
rights and preserving their cultural heritage. In New York City, which has the
largest concentration of Puerto Ricans in the United States, they began running
for elective office in the 1920s, electing one of their own to the New York
State Assembly for the first time in 1937. Important Puerto Rican institutions
have emerged from this long history. Aspira, a leader in the field of
education, was established in New York City in 1961 and is now one of the
largest national Latino nonprofit organizations in the United States. There is
also the National Puerto Rican Coalition in Washington, DC, the National Puerto
Rican Forum, the Puerto Rican Family Institute, Boricua College, the Center for
Puerto Rican Studies of the City University of New York at Hunter College, the
Puerto Rican Legal Defense and Education Fund, the National Conference of
Puerto Rican Women, and the New York League of Puerto Rican Women, Inc., among
others. One indicator of the strength of Puerto Rican identity and pride is the
annual National Puerto Rican Day Parade in New York City, which is the subject
of the poetry work "Empire of Dreams" by islander Giannina Braschi. There are
50 other Puerto Rican parades throughout the country. The government of Puerto
Rico has a long history of involvement with the stateside Puerto Rican
community. In July 1930, Puerto Rico's Department of Labor established an
employment service in New York City. The Migration Division (known as the
"Commonwealth Office"), also part of Puerto Rico’s Department of Labor, was
created in 1948, and by the end of the 1950s, was operating in 115 cities and
towns stateside. The Department of Puerto Rican Affairs in the United States
was established in 1989 as a cabinet-level department in Puerto Rico. The
Commonwealth operates the Puerto Rico Federal Affairs Administration, which is
headquartered in Washington, D.C., and has 12 regional offices throughout the
United States. The strength of stateside Puerto Rican identity is fueled by a
number of factors. These include the large circular migration between the
island and the United States, a long tradition of the government of Puerto Rico
promoting its ties to those stateside, the continuing existence of racial-
ethnic prejudice and discrimination in the United States, and high residential
and school segregation. Migration. Since 1493, Puerto Rico has been under the
control of colonial powers. Even during Spanish rule, Puerto Ricans settled in
the US. However, it was not until the end of the Spanish-American War that the
huge influx of Puerto Rican workers to the US began. With its victory in 1898,
the United States acquired Puerto Rico from Spain and has retained sovereignty
ever since. The 1917 Jones–Shafroth Act made all Puerto Ricans US citizens,
freeing them from immigration barriers. The massive migration of Puerto Ricans
to the United States was the largest in the early and late 20th century. U.S
political and economic interventions in Puerto Rico created the conditions for
emigration, "by concentrating wealth in the hands of US corporations and
displacing workers." Policymakers promoted "colonization plans and contract
labour programs to reduce the population. US employers, often with government
support, recruited Puerto Ricans as a source of low-wage labour to the United
States and other destinations." Puerto Ricans migrated in search of higher-wage
jobs, first to New York City, and later to other cities such as Chicago,
Philadelphia, Boston, Cleveland, Miami, Tampa, and Orlando. New York City.
Although the bulk of New York's Puerto Rican population migrated to the Bronx,
the largest influx was to Spanish Harlem and Loisaida, in Manhattan, from the
1950s all the way up to 1980s. Labor recruitment was the basis of this
particular community. In 1960, the number of stateside Puerto Ricans living in
New York City as a whole was 88%, as 69% were living in East Harlem. They
helped others settle, find work, and build communities by relying on social
networks containing friends and family. For a long time, Spanish Harlem (East
Harlem) and Loisaida (Lower East Side) were the two major Puerto Rican
communities in the city, but during the 1960s and 1970s predominately Puerto
Rican neighborhoods started to spring up in the Bronx because of its proximity
to East Harlem and in Brooklyn because of its proximity to the Lower East Side.
Although half of the city's Puerto Rican population is in the Bronx, there are
significant Puerto Rican communities in all five boroughs. The number of Puerto
Rican residents in New York City, peaked at around 1980. At that time there
were about 930,000 Puerto Rican residents in the city and about 80% of the
Hispanic population was Puerto Rican, representing about 15% of the city's
total population then. The number and percentage are significantly lower now
than they were in 1980. Philippe Bourgois, an anthropologist who has studied
Puerto Ricans in the inner city, suggests that "the Puerto Rican community has
fallen victim to poverty through social marginalization due to the
transformation of New York into a global city." The Puerto Rican population in
East Harlem and New York City as a whole remains the poorest among all migrant
groups in US cities. As of 1973, about "46.2% of the Puerto Rican migrants in
East Harlem were living below the federal poverty line." The struggle for legal
work and affordable housing remains fairly low and the implementation of
favorable public policy fairly inconsistent. New York City's Puerto Rican
community contributed to the creation of hip hop music, and to many forms of
Latin music including Salsa and Freestyle. Puerto Ricans in New York created
their own cultural movement, and cultural institutions such as the Nuyorican
Poets Cafe. It is often considered that the transformation of the US economy in
1973 and the 1980s mostly affected the entire Puerto Rican population of East
Harlem. Puerto Ricans were first desired for cheaper labor. The economy shift
from manufacturing to the service sector forcing these people into hard times,
as many of them had worked in factories and relied on these particular jobs to
support their families back home in Puerto Rico. The importance of factory jobs
for a decent standard of living for these former rural workers proved crucial:
Mencher, Joan. 1989. "Growing Up in Eastville, a Barrio of New York". New York:
Columbia University Press Chicago. The Puerto Rican community in Chicago has a
history that stretches back more than 70 years. The first small migration came
in the 1930s, not from the island, but from New York City. The first large wave
of migration occurred in the late 1940s. Starting in 1946, many people were
recruited by Castle Barton Associates as low-wage non-union foundry workers and
domestic workers. As soon as they were established in Chicago, many brought
their families. Although the number of Puerto Ricans peaked at around 1980, at
that time Chicago had about 240,000 Puerto Rican residents; before 1980, Puerto
Ricans were actually the city's largest Hispanic group, though they quickly
became overshadowed by a fast-growing Mexican population. In the early 1950s
there was a large concentration just north and west of downtown.It spread to
Old Town and then a large barrio or neighborhood developed in Lincoln Park.By
the 1960s, the Puerto Rican community was also centered in Wicker Park/West
Town and Humboldt Park on the Northwest Side. There were also many Puerto
Ricans in North Lawndale on the city's West Side. City-sponsored gentrification
in Lincoln Park to increase the tax base and because it was prime real estate
in proximity to Lake Michigan and to the Downtown Loop displaced the entire
Puerto Rican community in the 1960s. This forced people due to the high rents
that followed and the lack of social services to move west. Today Puerto Ricans
are mainly present on the Northwest side of Chicago and once again are facing
displacement. Still over half of Chicago's Puerto Rican community resides in
Humboldt Park, which is sometimes nicknamed "Little Puerto Rico" or Paseo
Boricua. Other neighborhoods with significant Puerto Rican populations are now
also west and include Hermosa, Logan Square, and West Town. Puerto Ricans are
no longer visible in Lincoln Park. However, in the process a national civil
rights movement of Puerto Ricans lead by the Young Lords originated in Lincoln
Park. From the 1950s to the early 1990s, the Humboldt Park neighborhood was
considered an economic dead zone by city planners and developers. It became a
motherland to Chicago's Puerto Rican super-gangs such as the Puerto Rican
Stones, Insane Spanish Cobras, Latin Eagles, Maniac Latin Disciples, and the
Latin Kings, one of the largest Latino gangs in the country. Also, the Young
Lords community activists hail from this area. They set up various neighborhood
programs and are considered to be the Puerto Rican equivalent of the Black
Panther Party. Although there was a vital community of families, property
owners, and businesses, many people inside and out of the community saw little
opportunity. Chicago's Puerto Rican community largely participated in the
Division Street Riots in 1966, which lasted for seven days, and was the only
major Puerto Rican riot in the country. However, in 1995, Division Street found
new life when city officials and Latino leaders offered a symbolic gesture (due
to a long history of neighborhood protests) to recognize the neighborhood and
the residents' roots. They christened it "Paseo Boricua" and installed two
metal Puerto Rican flags—each weighing 45 tons, measuring 59 feet (18 m)
vertically, and stretching across the street—at each end of the strip. The
struggling neighborhood transformed itself into one of the most vibrant Latino
neighborhoods in Chicago, uniting the once fragmented Puerto Rican community,
601,890 strong. The occupancy rate of the area rose to about 90 percent, and
home prices stabilized. A culture center was established, and local Puerto
Rican politicians relocated their offices to Division Street. Recently, the
City of Chicago set aside money for Paseo Boricua property owners who want to
restore their buildings' facades. The Humboldt Park Paseo Boricua neighborhood
is the political and cultural capital of the Puerto Rican community in the
Midwest and some say in the Puerto Rican Diaspora. Philadelphia. Puerto Ricans
represent the largest Latino community in Philadelphia, with over a century of
settlement in the city. Puerto Ricans represent nearly 70% of Philadelphia's
190,000 Hispanics. Although U.S. citizens, Puerto Ricans migrating to
Philadelphia encountered racism, discrimination, and limited economic
opportunities. Retaining strong ties to the island, they also worked hard to
make a home here and build a community structure of businesses, organizations,
houses of worship, and other institutions that have become the foundation of
Latino life in the city. Throughout the 1950s, many Puerto Rican migrants
settled east and west along Spring Garden Street. Puerto Ricans were not always
welcome newcomers, however, and many faced prejudice and discrimination in
their neighborhoods. As the Puerto Rican population continued to grow in the
1960s, it expanded east towards the Delaware River and north towards Lehigh
Avenue. During the 1980s and 1990s, the Puerto Rican community grew further
north into Olney and into the lower sections of the Northeast. The majority of
Philadelphia's Puerto Rican population resides in North Philadelphia, and
increasingly in lower Northeast Philadelphia. Though smaller yet still
significant populations are present in other parts of the city. Demographics of
stateside Puerto Ricans. Between 1990 and 2000, the stateside Puerto Rican
population grew by 12.5 percent, from 3.2 to 3.4 million. This growth rate was
significantly higher than the 8.4 percent growth of Puerto Rico during this
same period. In the most recent census in 2010, there were 4,623,716 Puerto
Rican Americans, native and foreign born, representing 9.2% of all Hispanics in
the US. About 53.1% identified themselves as white, which is the second largest
population of all other major Hispanic groups. (However, 75% of Puerto Ricans
in Puerto Rico self-identify themselves as white.) About 8.7% considered
themselves black. 0.5% considered themselves Asian and 0.9% considered
themselves Native American. The majority of Puerto Ricans are racially mixed,
but that they do not feel the need to identify as such. Furthermore, Puerto
Ricans, some of which may be of Black African, American Indian, and European
ancestry may only identify themselves as mixed if having parents "appearing" to
be of separate "races". (This may be true of non-Puerto Ricans or non-Hispanics
also.) Since many Puerto Ricans are light-skinned, like other whites, most
choose to identify as "white". The US Census shows that the majority of Puerto
Ricans have self-described themselves as "white". The racial identification
issue of Puerto Ricans in the US is controversial and heatly debated, a cause
of ethnic prejudice towards Puerto Ricans and also between those living
Stateside and on the Island. Population by state. Relative to the population of
each state. The Puerto Rican population by state, showing the percentage of the
state's population that identifies itself as Puerto Rican relative to the
state/territory population as a whole is shown in the following table. Since
2000, the Puerto Rican population has increased by 1.2 million. The Northeast
(including New England) gained 394,932 Puerto Ricans. Florida gained almost a
similar amount, with 365,523 Puerto Ricans. A slowing of growth in the Puerto
Rican population in the Northeast and a rapid rate of growth of Puerto Ricans
in the South, especially Florida, tends to support the notion of Puerto Rican
flight from the Northeast. The number of Puerto Ricans migrating from the
island to the mainland has significantly increased over the past few years. The
states with the highest net flow of Puerto Ricans from the island relocating
there, include Florida, Pennsylvania, Texas, Massachusetts, Connecticut, Ohio,
Georgia, North Carolina, Virginia, and Maryland, between 2000 and 2010, these
states were the major destinations for Puerto Ricans migrating from the island
to the fifty states, and possibly remain so. New York, remains a major
destination for Puerto Rican migrants, though only a third of recent Puerto
Rican arrivals went to New York. Although, Puerto Ricans constitute over 9
percent of Hispanics in the nation, there are some states where Puerto Ricans
make up over half of the Hispanic population, including Connecticut where 57
percent of the state's Hispanics are of Puerto Rican descent and Pennsylvania
where Puerto Ricans make up 53 percent of the Hispanics. Other states where
Puerto Ricans make up a remarkably large portion of the Hispanic community
include: Massachusetts where they make up 40 percent of all Hispanics, Rhode
Island at 39 percent, New York at 34 percent, New Jersey at 33 percent,
Delaware at 33 percent, Ohio at 27 percent, and Florida at 21 percent of all
Hispanics in that state. The U.S. States where Puerto Ricans were the largest
Hispanic group were New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Connecticut,
Massachusetts, New Hampshire, and Hawaii. Relative to the Puerto Rican
population nationwide. Puerto Rican population by state, showing the percentage
of Puerto Rican residents in each state relative to the Puerto Rican population
in the United States as a whole. Even with such movement of Puerto Ricans from
traditional to non-traditional states, the Northeast continues to dominate in
both concentration and population. The Northeast. The Northeast is home to 2.5
million Puerto Ricans, comprising 54% of the Puerto Rican population
nationwide. New York City has the largest population of Puerto Ricans in the
country, followed by Philadelphia. In New York, the cities of Dunkirk and
Amsterdam have the highest concentration of Puerto Ricans in the state. Puerto
Rican populations are significant in New York City, Long Island, the Hudson
Valley, especially Westchester County and the cities of Rochester and Buffalo.
In Pennsylvania, one-third of Puerto Ricans reside in Philadelphia. However,
Puerto Ricans are more concentrated in South Central Pennsylvania and the
Lehigh Valley. This area, extending from Harrisburg to the New Jersey border is
home to almost half of Puerto Ricans statewide. Cities along this stretch
include York, Harrisburg, Lancaster, Lebanon, Reading, Allentown, and
Bethlehem. In New Jersey, a slight majority of Puerto Ricans are located in
North Jersey. Cities with significant populations include Newark, Jersey City,
Paterson, and Elizabeth. The remaining half of Puerto Ricans are split evenly
between Central Jersey and South Jersey. In Central Jersey, cities with large
Puerto Rican populations include Trenton, Dover Township, and Perth Amboy. In
South Jersey, cities include Camden, Vineland, Millville, and Atlantic City. In
New England, half of the Puerto Rican population is situated along the
Interstate-91 corridor, extending from New Haven in Connecticut to Holyoke in
Massachusetts. The highest concentration of Puerto Ricans in the US can be
found in Holyoke. Cities situated along the corridor include Meriden, New
Britain, Hartford, Chicopee in Connecticut, and Springfield, Massachusetts. In
Connecticut, Puerto Ricans are the largest Hispanic group in four of the five
largest cities. Outside the Interstate-91 corridor, additional cities with
significant Puerto Ricans include Bridgeport, New London, and Willimantic. In
Massachusetts, Puerto Ricans continue to dominate in the central part of the
state in places like Fitchburg, Lowell, and Worcester. However, Puerto Rican
presence in Lawrence and Lynn is overshowed by a larger Dominican presence.
Puerto Ricans also exist in large numbers in Boston and Chelsea, yet a growing
Central American and Dominican population has impacted Puerto Rican prominence.
In Rhode Island, Puerto Ricans are half of the Dominican population in
Providence and are gradually being replaced by a growing Guatemalan population.
Statewide, Puerto Ricans are most prominent in Woonsocket. Within the metro
area, Puerto Ricans continue to be the largest Hispanic group, largely due to
Puerto Rican dominance in Fall River and New Bedford, both of which are in
Massachusetts. The South. The South is home to 1.3 million Puerto Ricans,
comprising 28% of the Puerto Rican population nationwide. Florida is home to
two-thirds of the Puerto Rican population in the South. The I-4 corridor,
extending from Daytona Beach to Tampa, is home to 500,000 Puerto Ricans, making
this the largest population of Puerto Ricans outside of Greater New York.
Places along the corridor include Deltona, Sanford, Altamonte Springs, Orlando,
Kissimmee, Saint Cloud, and Poinciana, FL. Osceola County is the only only
county in the country where Puerto Ricans are the largest ancestral group.
Puerto Ricans are also the majority Hispanic group in Volusia County. The I-
4 corridor is politically considered the swing section of the state, yet Puerto
Rican growth has created a Democratic registration advantage. Central Florida
has the fastest growing Puerto Rican community in the country. Puerto Rican
growth in Central Florida has also had a direct impact on the uninterrupted
influence Cubans once had. Elsewhere in Florida, Puerto Ricans are largely
present in South Florida, yet are largely overlooked by Cuban dominance, with
significant populations in Miami, and West Palm Beach. Since the early 2000s, a
thriving Puerto Rican community has been growing in the Jacksonville-Savannah
metropolitan area. Other Florida cities with sizeable communities include
Ocala, Palm Bay, Cape Coral, and Lehigh Acres compared to 789,172 in 2000,
decrease of 65,551; representing 8.9% of the city's total population and 32% of
the city's Hispanic population, are the city's largest Hispanic group. The top
25 US communities with the highest populations of Puerto Ricans (Source: Census
2010) Communities with high percentages of Puerto Ricans. The top 25 US
communities with the highest percentages of Puerto Ricans as a percent of total
population (Source: Census 2010) − Migration trends. However, despite these
dramatic growth rates, it was the decline in the Puerto Rican population in New
York City during the 1990s that became a focus of discussion of many Puerto
Ricans following Census 2000, along with the dramatic growth in Florida. During
this period, the city’s Puerto Rican population dropped by over 100,000, or
12 percent. Because of this, New York was the only state to register a decrease
in its Puerto Rican population during this time period (a phenomenon limited to
the three biggest counties in New York City). This is a good example of how
complex Puerto Rican demographics have become. While overall there was a
significant drop citywide in the 1990s, there was also significant growth in
two of its five boroughs (or counties). In addition, despite this decline, New
York City remains a major hub for migration from Puerto Rico and within the
United States. Numbering over 720,000, New York City’s Puerto Rican community
remains its largest Latino population group. The reasons for and impact of
these declines are not well understood. Especially in the New York case, this
has been the subject of much speculation but little serious analysis to date.
Between New York City, Philadelphia, and Chicago, the cities with the three
largest Puerto Rican populations, Philadelphia is the only one that actually
seen an increase, while the other two seen decreases. This is probably due to
Philadelphia's proximity to New York City, and its cheaper cost of living. To
put this population decline in a broader context, it is important to note that
beyond these major cities, the stateside Puerto Rican population dropped in
1990-2000 in 164 other smaller cities throughout the United States, 10.8
percent of the 1,503 cities and other places surveyed by the 2000 Census (CDPs
or Census-designated places). Of the ten places in the country with the highest
percentage drop in their Puerto Rican population, five were in California, two
each in Florida and New Jersey, and one in Massachusetts. None were in the
Midwest. The five places with the largest 1990-2000 declines were: Dispersion.
Like other groups, the theme of "dispersal" has had a long history with the
stateside Puerto Rican community. This history extends from the early concerns
of overpopulation of Puerto Rico to those in the 1940s and 1950s about the need
to disperse the rapidly growing Puerto Rican population dramatically
concentrating in New York City, Chicago and other US urban centers after World
War II. More recent demographic developments appear at first blush as if the
stateside Puerto Rican population has been dispersing in greater numbers.
However, upon closer examination, it is a process probably best described as a
“reconfiguration” or even the “nationalizing” of this community
throughout the United States. New York City was the center of the stateside
Puerto Rican community for most of the 20th century. With the 2000 Census, this
picture changed in dramatic ways. New York City was once home to over 80
percent of stateside Puerto Ricans and a place where Puerto Ricans were the
majority of its Latino population. By 2000, Puerto Ricans in New York City had
dropped only 23 percent of all stateside Puerto Ricans, and made up 37 percent
of the city’s Latino population. Nevertheless, they remain the largest Latino
group in the city. Numbering close to 800,000 in 2000, their population is
almost double that of Puerto Rico’s capital city, San Juan (estimated at
433,412 in 2002 by the Census Bureau). The dramatic growth of the Puerto Rican
population in Florida has generated considerable attention, especially given
its important political implications for US presidential elections. Between
1990 and 2000, their numbers almost doubled from 247,016 to 482,027 (a 95.1
percent increase). According to the Current Population Survey, in 2003, the
Puerto Rican population in the state was estimated to be 760,127, a growth of
57.7 percent since 2000. However, as already stated, it is not at all clear
whether these settlement changes can be characterized as simple population
dispersal. It is a fact that Puerto Rican population settlements today are less
concentrated than they were in places like New York City, Chicago and a number
of cities in Massachusetts, Connecticut, and New Jersey. However, 67.0 percent
of stateside Puerto Ricans in 2003 still resided in the two most traditional
areas, the Northeast and Midwest. The most dramatic Puerto Rican population
growth in the 1990s, as it was for Latinos as a whole, took place in smaller
cities and towns, such as Allentown, Pennsylvania, and other metro areas, such
as Houston, Texas, the DC Metro Area, and the Hartford, Connecticut-
Springfield, Massachusetts region. But while this type of growth outside of
central cities is usually associated with suburbanization and upward mobility,
in the Puerto Rican case, this has not been the case. While there was an
element of upward mobility, there was also a dispersal of the poor and low wage
workers. At the point when stateside Puerto Ricans began relocating to the
suburbs, these areas had begun in general to take on many of the negative
characteristics of the urban centers: housing and school segregation, poverty,
rising crime and so on. Rather than simple dispersal, what may be occurring is
a reconcentration and an increasingly complex migration circuit for stateside
Puerto Ricans. Undoubtedly driven largely by the current powerful force of
globalization and its attendant economic restructuring, this redistribution of
such a large portion of the stateside and island Puerto Rican populations is
creating a significant social reconfiguration, with an uncertain long-term
impact. Concentration. Despite these significant population movements, even in
2000, the Puerto Rican population of cities outside of the traditional regions
of the Northeast and Midwest did not rank high; Tampa and Orlando, both in
Florida, were only 20th and 23rd, respectively. Puerto Ricans continued to be
one of the most urbanized groups in the United States, with 55.8 percent living
in central cities in 2003. This was more than double the 25 percent of non-
Latinos and higher than Mexicans (43.1 percent), Cubans (22.3 percent), and
Central/South Americans (47.9 percent). Residential segregation is a cause of
stateside Puerto Rican population concentration. While blacks are the most
residentially segregated group in the United States, stateside Puerto Ricans
are the most segregated among US Latinos. Residential segregation is a serious
problem related primarily to housing discrimination, especially for groups like
Puerto Ricans, who have been migrating stateside for close to a century.
Residential concentrations are associated with high poverty conditions and a
host of other social problems, including low-performing schools, poor health
and low-paying jobs. Using a measure of degree of segregation called the Index
of Dissimilarity, for which a score of 60 or above indicates a high level of
segregation, Puerto Ricans exceeded this level in nine major metropolitan
areas. They were the most segregated in the following six metro areas in 2000:
Stateside Puerto Ricans also find themselves concentrated in a third
interesting way — they are disproportionately clustered in what has been
called the "Boston-New York-Washington Corridor" along the East Coast. This
area, coined a "megalopolis" by geographer Jean Gottman in 1956, is the largest
and most affluent urban corridor in the world, being described as a "node of
wealth ... area where the pulse of the national economy beats loudest and the
seats of power are well established." With major world class universities
clustered in Boston and stretching throughout this corridor, the economic and
media power and international power politics in New York City, and the seat of
the federal government in Washington, DC, this is a major global power center.
The actual and potential impact that stateside Puerto Ricans are and can have
on the United States and globally because of their significant presence in this
Boston-New York-Washington megalopolis has been considerable. It is a
locational advantage that can best be leveraged if this community is able to
develop the leadership and infrastructure to exploit it. It certainly helps to
account for the most disproportionate projection of stateside Puerto Rican
images globally through the media and institutions of higher education since
the "great migration" of the 1950s. Segmentation. These changes in the
settlement patterns of stateside Puerto Ricans between so-called traditional
and new areas have resulted in a greater economic and social segmentation or
polarization of this population along spatial lines. The Northeast, which in
2003 was home to 59.2 percent of stateside Puerto Ricans, was also where 88.5
percent of them receiving public assistance lived. The average household income
in 2002 of $42,032 was the lowest of any major racial-ethnic group in the
Northeast; this was the only region where it was lower than the national
average for stateside Puerto Ricans. The Northeast was also the region where
stateside Puerto Ricans had the lowest homeownership rate, 31.9 percent, aside
from California (the two most expensive housing markets in the United States in
general). Because of its greater visibility and the dramatic growth of its
Puerto Rican population, Florida is usually identified as the main engine
behind this polarization. However, there are more dramatic differences in
socioeconomic indicators between the Northeast and states like California,
Texas and Hawaii. This is also the case for states like New Jersey and
Illinois, which are in the more traditional Puerto Rican settlement regions.
The regional socioeconomic polarization is more complex than it may appear at
first glance. While the greater affluence of the Puerto Rican population in
states like California (for example the Coachella Valley) and Texas (such as
Austin) may be well-established, the future of a state like Florida (especially
the Orlando metro area) in this regard is not at all clear, given the rapidity
and size of the migration and the different economic forces and labor markets
at play. While the 1990-2000 population growth rate of stateside Puerto Ricans
of 24.9 percent was impressive compared to the 13.1 percent growth for the
overall population, it was less than half of the growth rate of the total
Latino population of 57.9 percent. In cities like New York, the Puerto Rican
share of the Latino population decreased, though in Florida it increased.
Overall, stateside Puerto Ricans make up about from 9 to 10 percent of the
national Latino population. These shifts in the relative sizes of Latino
populations have also changed the role of the stateside Puerto Rican community.
In many cases, Puerto Rican community leaders have become major advocates for
immigration reform despite the fact that Puerto Ricans are US citizens. In some
cases, because this community has had a longer history in dealing with the
political system, the increasing numbers of Puerto Ricans elected and appointed
government officials play gate-keeping and other roles in terms of the growing
non-Puerto Rican Latino communities. Thus, many long established Puerto Rican
institutions have had to revise their missions (and, in some cases, change
their names) to provide services and advocacy on behalf of non-Puerto Rican
Latinos. Some have seen this as a process that has made the stateside Puerto
Rican community nearly invisible as immigration and a broader Latino agenda
seem to have taken center stage, while others view this is a great opportunity
for stateside Puerto Ricans to increase their influence and leadership role in
a larger Latino world. Socioeconomic conditions. Income. The stateside Puerto
Rican community has usually been characterized as being largely poor and part
of the urban underclass in the United States. Studies and reports over the last
fifty years or so have documented the high poverty status of this community.
However, the picture at the start of the 21st century also reveals significant
socioeconomic progress and a community with a growing economic clout. In 2002,
the average individual income for stateside Puerto Ricans was $33,927, only
68.7 percent that of whites ($48,687) and below the average of Asians
($49,981), Cubans ($38,733) and Mexicans ($38,200). However, it was higher than
that of Dominicans ($28,467), and Central and South Americans ($30,444). In
2002, there were an estimated 24,450 stateside Puerto Ricans with individual
incomes of $100,000 or more, compared to 4,059 a decade earlier. The Latino
market and remittances to Puerto Rico. The combined income for stateside Puerto
Ricans in 2002 was $54.5 billion. This exceeded the total personal income of
Puerto Rico, which was $42.6 billion in 2000. This is a significant share of
the large and growing Latino market in the United States that has been
attracting increased attention from the media and the corporate sector. In the
last decade or so, major corporations have discovered the so-called "urban
markets" of blacks and Latinos that had been neglected for so long. This has
spawned a cottage industry of marketing firms, consultants and publications
that specialize in the Latino market. One important question this raises is the
degree to which stateside Puerto Ricans contribute economically to Puerto Rico.
The Puerto Rico Planning Board estimated that remittances totaled $66 million
in 1963. The only recent study that could be identified that examines the issue
of remittances by stateside Puerto Ricans to Puerto Rico limited itself to
migrants (those living stateside who were born on the island) and found that 38
percent of them indicated they sent money to Puerto Rico, averaging $1,179 per
year per person (these are unpublished figures not included in the report that
was released by DeSipio, et al. 2003). Using 2002 figures for island-born adult
stateside Puerto Ricans, this would represent $417.8 million in remittances
annually from that group alone. Since the island-born represented only 34
percent of the stateside Puerto Rican population in 2003, actual remittances
from the entire community are probably more than double this number, possibly
approaching or exceeding $1 billion a year. It is also important to keep in
mind that these are family remittances and do not include investments in
businesses and property in Puerto Rico, visitor expenditures and the like by
stateside Puerto Ricans. The full extent of the stateside Puerto Rican
community’s contributions to the economy of Puerto Rico is not known, but it
is clearly significant. The role of remittances and investments by Latino
immigrants to their home countries has reached a level that it has received
much attention in the last few years, as countries like Mexico develop
strategies to better leverage these large sums of money from their diasporas in
their economic development planning. Yet, the income disparity between the
stateside community and those living on the island is not as great as those of
other Latin-American countries, and the direct connection between second-
generation Puerto Ricans and their relatives is not as conducive to direct
monetary support. Many Puerto Ricans still living in Puerto Rico also remit to
family members who are living stateside. Gender. The average income in 2002 of
stateside Puerto Rican men was $36,572, while women earned an average $30,613,
83.7 percent that of the men. Compared to all Latino groups, whites, and
Asians, stateside Puerto Rican women came closer to achieving parity in income
to the men of their own racial-ethnic group. In addition, stateside Puerto
Rican women had incomes that were 82.3 percent that of white women, while
stateside Puerto Rican men had incomes that were only 64.0 percent that of
white men. Stateside Puerto Rican women were closer to income parity with white
women than were women who were Dominicans (58.7 percent), Central and South
Americans (68.4 percent), but they were below Cubans (86.2 percent), "other
Hispanics" (87.2 percent), blacks (83.7 percent), and Asians (107.7 percent).
Stateside Puerto Rican men were in a weaker position in comparison with men
from other racial-ethnic groups. They were closer to income parity to white men
than men who were Dominicans (62.3 percent), and Central and South Americans
(58.3 percent). Although very close to income parity with blacks (65.5
percent), stateside Puerto Rican men fell below Mexicans (68.3 percent), Cubans
(75.9 percent), other Hispanics (75.1 percent), and Asians (100.7 percent).
Educational attainment. Stateside Puerto Ricans, along with other US Latinos,
have experienced the long-term problem of a high school dropout rate that has
resulted in relatively low educational attainment. Of those 25 years and older,
63.2 percent graduated from high school, compared to 84.0 percent of whites,
73.6 percent of blacks, 83.4 percent of Asians, 68.7 percent of Cubans, and
72.6 percent of other Latinos. The rate, however, exceeded that of Mexicans
(48.7 percent), Dominicans (51.7 percent) and Central and South Americans (60.4
percent). While in Puerto Rico, according to the 2000 Census, 24.4 percent of
those 25 years and older had a four-year college degree, for stateside Puerto
Ricans the figure was only 9.9 percent. By 2003, it had increased to 13.1
percent, below the rate for whites (26.1 percent), blacks (14.4 percent) and
Asians (43.3 percent). Among Latinos, only Mexicans (6.2 percent) fared worse,
with other groups having higher rates: Dominicans (10.9 percent), Cubans (19.4
percent), Central and South Americans (16.0 percent) and other Latinos (16.1
percent). Only 3.1 percent of stateside Puerto Ricans 25 and older in 2003 had
graduate school degrees, compared to 4.7 percent in Puerto Rico in 2000. This
rate was lower than that of whites (8.7 percent), blacks (4.1 percent) and
Asians (15.6 percent). Among Latinos, Stateside Puerto Ricans fared better than
Mexicans (1.4 percent) and Dominicans (1.8 percent), but worse than Cubans (6.7
percent), Central and South Americans (4.2 percent) and other Latinos (5.6
percent). The University of Puerto Rico is the major Hispanic-serving
institution of higher education in the United States that has the capacity,
with increased federal government assistance, to open its doors much more
aggressively to stateside Puerto Ricans. Employment. In 2003, 20.7 percent of
stateside Puerto Ricans were in professional or managerial occupations, while
33.7 percent had service or sales jobs. The percentage in professional-
managerial positions was higher than that of Mexicans (13.2 percent) and
Central and South Americans (16.8 percent), but below that of Cubans (28.5
percent), other Latinos (29.0 percent), and non-Latinos (36.2 percent). Between
1993 and 2003, among stateside Puerto Ricans, those in professional-managerial
occupations grew from 15.3 to 20.7 percent. While significant, this increase
lagged behind that of non-Latinos (+8.8 points) and Cubans (+9.9 points).
Poverty. Stateside Puerto Ricans have been associated with problems faced by
communities with persistently high poverty levels. Some have characterized them
as part of the urban underclass in the United States. Their poverty rate was
only exceeded by that of Dominicans (29.9 percent). It was higher than every
other major group: whites (6.3 percent), blacks (21.3 percent), Asians (7.1
percent), Mexicans (21.2 percent), Cubans (12.9 percent), Central and South
Americans (14.1 percent) and other Latinos (13.2 percent). What is troubling
about these statistics is that among Latino groups, Puerto Ricans are the only
ones who are already US citizens, which should be an advantage, but apparently
is not. However, over three quarters were above the poverty line. This rate was
about half the poverty rate of Puerto Rico in 2000 of 85.6 percent. The
stateside Puerto Rican poverty rate for families headed by single women was
especially alarming, standing at 39.3 percent, although it was significantly
lower than the 61.3 percent corresponding poverty rate in Puerto Rico. As with
general family poverty, the stateside Puerto Rican poverty level for single
female headed households was higher than every other major group except
Dominicans (49.0 percent). The rate was 20.3 percent for whites, 35.3 percent
for blacks, 14.7 percent for Asians, 37.6 percent for Mexicans, 15.3 percent
for Cubans, 27.1 percent for Central and South Americans, and 24.8 percent for
other Latinos. Civic participation. The Puerto Rican community has organized
itself to represent its interests in stateside political institutions for close
to a century. In New York City, Puerto Ricans first began running for public
office in the 1920s. In 1937, they elected their first government
representative, Oscar Garcia Rivera, to the New York State Assembly. In
Massachusetts, Puerto-Rican Nelson Merced became the first Hispanic elected to
the Massachusetts House of Representatives, and the first Hispanic to hold
statewide office in the commonwealth. There are four Puerto Rican members of
the United States House of Representatives, Democrats Luis Gutierrez of
Illinois, José Enrique Serrano of New York, and Nydia Velázquez of New York,
and Republican Raúl Labrador of Idaho, complementing the one Resident
Commissioner elected to that body from Puerto Rico. Puerto Ricans have also
been elected mayor of major cities such as Miami, Hartford, and Camden. There
are various ways in which stateside Puerto Ricans have exercised their
influence. These include protests, campaign contributions and lobbying, and
voting. The level of voter participation in Puerto Rico is legendary, greatly
exceeding that of the United States. However, many see a paradox in that this
high level of voting is not echoed stateside. There, Puerto Ricans have had
persistently low voter registration and turnout rates, despite the relative
success they have had in electing their own to significant public offices
throughout the United States. To address this problem, the government of Puerto
Rico has, since the late 1980s, launched two major voter registration campaigns
to increase the level of stateside Puerto Rican voter participation. While
Puerto Ricans have traditionally been concentrated in the Northeast,
coordinated Latino voter registration organizations, such as the Southwest
Voter Registration Education Project and the United States Hispanic Leadership
Institute (based in the Midwest), have not concentrated in this region and have
focused on the Mexican-American voter. The government of Puerto Rico has sought
to fill this vacuum to insure that stateside Puerto Rican interests are well
represented in the electoral process, recognizing that the increased political
influence of stateside Puerto Ricans also benefits the island. The Census
Bureau estimated that 861,728 stateside Puerto Ricans cast their votes in the
November 7, 2000 presidential elections. They represented only 0.8 percent of
the total, but made up a significant 14.5 percent of the increasingly visible
Latino vote. The 5.9 million Latinos who voted in 2000 made up 5.4 percent of
total US voters, with higher percentages in politically important areas such as
Florida, California, Texas, New York and New Mexico. While for other Latino
groups citizenship status is a major obstacle to voting, this is not a
significant issue for stateside Puerto Ricans (99.7 percent of whom are US
citizens). One result of this is that although stateside Puerto Ricans made up
10.2 percent of all Latinos of voting age who are citizens, they constituted a
significantly higher 14.5 percent of Latinos who actually voted. In 2000, only
38.6 percent of voting age stateside Puerto Ricans who were citizens were
registered to vote. Of the racial-ethnic groups that exceeded this figure,
Cubans led the way with 55.9 percent, followed by whites at 54.7 percent, and
blacks at 44.6 percent. Among Latinos, the stateside Puerto Rican rate was
higher than that of Mexicans (24.0 percent), Central and South Americans (24.7
percent), and other Latinos (34.8 percent). In terms of actual voter turnout as
a percent of those registered, 79.8 percent of stateside Puerto Ricans voted in
2000, lower than whites (86.4 percent) and blacks (84.1 percent). Among
Latinos, stateside Puerto Rican turnout was lower than that of Cubans (87.2
percent), Central and South Americans (87.3 percent), and other Latinos (83.8
percent), but was higher than that of Mexicans (75.0 percent). To get a better
picture of the small proportion of voters among all those eligible to vote
(whether registered or not), the turnout rate can be calculated as the number
of voters as a percentage of the citizen voting age population (C-VAP) for each
group. Using this measure, the C-VAP turnout rate for stateside Puerto Ricans
was 30.8 percent in 2000. In other words, more than two-thirds of those
eligible to vote (1.9 million in actual numbers) did not do so in 2000. This
low level of electoral participation is in sharp contrast with voting levels in
Puerto Rico, which are much higher than that not only of this community, but
also the United States as a whole. In the 2000 gubernatorial election in Puerto
Rico, 90.1 percent of the voting age population was registered to vote, and the
voter turnout was 82.6 percent of those registered and 74.4 percent of the
total voting age population. In contrast, in the US presidential elections that
same year, only 49.5 percent of eligible Americans were registered to vote and
only 42.3 percent of these actually cast their ballots (and these are high
estimates based on respondents’ recall, while the figures from Puerto Rico
are based on actual returns). The reasons for the differences in Puerto Rican
voter participation have been an object of much discussion, but relatively
little scholarly research. Explanations have ranged from the structural/
institutional, the role of political parties, and political culture, to a
combination of these, and other explanations. However, relatively little has
been done by US scholars and policymakers to explore this conundrum. A number
of other characteristics, among them gender and race, did not appear to make a
significant difference. Attention has been given to electoral reforms in the
last decade or so to create conditions that would make voting and registration
easier. These include such things as: the federal "Motor Voter" law that allows
registration in government offices while applying for a driver’s license,
food stamps or other government service; more flexible absentee ballot
procedures; bilingual ballot provisions; same day registration; and so on.
Stateside Puerto Ricans registered to vote in 2000 in a variety of ways and
places. The largest group registered through the mail (30.8 percent), followed
by those who filled out a form at a voter registration drive (22.1 percent).
The other ways they registered were: same day registration at the polling place
(14.4 percent); government registration offices (13.7 percent); public
assistance agencies (8.4 percent); and schools, hospitals and on campuses (3.0
percent). Looking at the turnout rates for stateside Puerto Ricans depending on
how they registered, they were lowest for registration in government offices
and highest in other settings. The highest turnout rates were for those who
registered at registration drives (95.2 percent), through the mail (93.8
percent) and those who registered the same day at the polls (90.5 percent). It
was lowest for those who registered at government registration offices (70.9
percent) and public assistance agencies (52.7 percent). These figures indicate
that a reform like the "Motor Voter" law is having the least effect for
stateside Puerto Ricans, while the techniques being pursued by the government
of Puerto Rico (registration drives and direct mail) appear more promising.
However, much more analysis and fieldwork will be required to come to more
definite conclusions.
