Republic of Serbian Krajina The Republic of Serbian Krajina (RSK) (, ;
sometimes translated as "Republic of Serb Krajina") was a self-proclaimed Serb
entity within Croatia. Established in 1991, it was not recognized
internationally. It formally existed from 1991 to 1995, having been initiated a
year earlier via smaller separatist regions. The name "Krajina" means
"frontier". Its separatist government engaged in a war for ethnic Serb
independence from the Republic of Croatia, within and out of Yugoslavia, once
Croatian borders had been recognized by foreign states in August 1991 and
February 1992. Milan Babiƒá, former President of Serbian Krajina, testified to
the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) that
Krajina was provided weapons by Slobodan Milo≈°eviƒá's government in Serbia,
and that Krajina was economically and financially dependent upon Serbia. Babic
testified that Milo≈°eviƒá held "de facto" control over both the Army of
Serbian Krajina and the Yugoslav People's Army during its actions in Krajina
via an alternate chain of command through the Serbian police. The government of
Krajina had de facto control over central parts of the territory while control
of the outskirts changed with success and failures of the military activities.
In 1992, the Serb Krajina government signed a demilitarisation agreement and
removed all of the heavy artillery that were brought in by Yugoslav People's
Army at the start of the conflict, in exchange the area became a United Nations
Protected demilitarised zone. The territory was legally protected by the United
Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) and the Army of Serbian Krajina that
frequently attacked neighbouring Bihaƒá enclave (then in the Republic of Bosnia
and Herzegovina) with heavy artillery. Its main portion was overrun by Croatian
forces in 1995; a rump remained in eastern Slavonia under UNTAES administration
until its peaceful reintegration into Croatia in 1998. Etymology. The name
Krajina was adopted from the Military Frontier that was carved out of parts of
the crown lands of Croatia and Slavonia by Austria between 1553‚Äì1578 as a
means of defending against the expansion of the Ottoman Empire. Many Croats,
Serbs and Vlachs immigrated from nearby parts of Ottoman Empire (Ottoman Bosnia
and Serbia) into the region and helped bolster and replenish the numbers of
Croats as well as the garrisoned German troops in the fight against the
Ottomans. The Austrians controlled the Frontier from military headquarters in
Vienna and did not make it a crown land, though it had some special rights in
order to encourage settlement in an otherwise deserted, war-ravaged territory.
The abolition of the military rule took place between 1869 and 1871. In order
to attract Serbs to be part of Croatia, on 11 May 1867, the Sabor solemnly
declared that "the Triune Kingdom recognizes the Serbian/Vlach people living in
it as a nation identical and equal with the Croatian nation." After that, the
Military Frontier was reincorporated in Croatia in 1881. Following World War I,
the regions formerly part of the Military Frontier became part of Kingdom of
Yugoslavia where it was in the Sava Banovina with most of old Croatia-Slavonia.
Between the two world wars the Serbs of the Croatian and Slavonian Krajinas, as
well as the Bosnian Krajina and other regions west of Serbia, organized a
notable political party, the Independent Democratic Party under Svetozar
Pribiƒáeviƒá. In the new state there existed much tension between the Croats
and Serbs over differing political visions, with the campaign for Croatian
autonomy culminating in the assassination of their leader Stjepan Radiƒá in the
parliament and repression by the Serb dominated security structures. Between
1939‚Äì1941, in an attempt to resolve the Croat-Serb political and social
antagonism in the first Yugoslavia, an autonomous Banovina of Croatia was
created incorporating (amongst other territories) much of the former Military
Frontier as well as parts of Bosnia and Herzegovina. In 1941, the axis powers
invaded Yugoslavia and in the aftermath the Independent State of Croatia (which
included whole of today's Bosnia and Herzegovina and parts of Serbia (Eastern
Syrmia) as well) was declared. The Usta≈°e (who were allegedly behind the
assassination of the Serbian king of Yugoslavia) were installed by the Germans
as rulers of the new country and promptly pursued a genocidal policy of
persecution of Serbs, Jews and Croats (from opposition groups) leading to
hundreds of thousands being killed. During this period, Croats coalesced around
the ruling authorities or the communist anti-fascist Partisans. Serbs from
around the Knin area tended to join the chetniks, whilst Serbs from the
Banovina and Slavonia regions tended to join the Partisans. At the end of the
war, the communist dominated Partisans prevailed and the region was part of the
People's Republic of Croatia until 7 April 1963, when the federal republic
changed its name to the Socialist Republic of Croatia. The autonomous political
organisations of the region were also suppressed by Tito (along with others
such as the Croatian Spring); however, the Yugoslav constitutions of 1965 and
1974 did give substantial rights to national minorities including the Serbs in
SR Croatia. Large sections of the historical Military Frontier were outside of
the Republic of Serb Krajina and contained a largely Croat population including
much of Lika, the area centred around the city of Bjelovar, central and south-
eastern Slavonia. Creation. The Serb-populated regions in Croatia were of
central concern to the Serbian nationalist movement of the late 1980s, led by
Slobodan Milo≈°eviƒá. The incidents started in 1988 and turned into full-scale
Serbian political rallies in 1989. The Croatian pro-independence victory in
1990 made matters more tense, especially since the country's Serbian minority
was supported both politically and militarily by the Yugoslav People's Army,
especially Serbian President Milo≈°eviƒá. At the time, Serbs comprised about
12.2% of Croatia's population: 581,663 people declared themselves Serbs in the
census of 1991. Serbs became increasingly opposed to the policies of Franjo
Tuƒëman, elected president of Croatia in April 1990, due to his overt desire
for the creation of an independent Croatia. On 30 May 1990, the Serb Democratic
Party of Jovan Ra≈°koviƒá broke all ties to the Croatian parliament. The
following June in Knin, the Serbs‚Äîled by the Serb Democratic
Party‚Äîproclaimed the creation of the Association of Municipalities of
Northern Dalmatia and Lika. In August 1990, the Serbs began what became known
as the Log Revolution, where barricades of logs were placed across roads
throughout the South as an expression of their secession from Croatia. This
effectively cut Croatia in two, separating the coastal region of Dalmatia from
the rest of the country. The Croatian constitution was passed in December 1990
putting Serbs in a minority category along with other ethnic groups such as
Italians, Hungarians, and others. Some would later justify their claim to an
independent Serb state by arguing that the new constitution contradicted the
1974 Yugoslav Constitution, because in their view, Croatia was still legally
governed by the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. This was contradicted
by the increased signs of fragmentation within the Yugoslav republics. Croatian
leaders officially insisted on the goal of an independent Croatia as a member
of Yugoslav confederation of independent states. Serbs in Croatia had
established a Serbian National Council in July 1990 to coordinate opposition to
Croatian independence. Their position was that if Croatia could secede from
Yugoslavia, then the Serbs could secede from Croatia. Milan Babiƒá, a dentist
from the southern town of Knin, was elected president. At his ICTY trial in
2004, he claimed that "during the events 1990-1992, and in particular at the
beginning of his political career, he was strongly influenced and misled by
Serbian propaganda, which repeatedly referred to the imminent threat of a
Croatian genocide perpetrated on the Serbs in Croatia, thus creating an
atmosphere of hatred and fear of Croats." The rebel Croatian Serbs established
a number of paramilitary militias under the leadership of Milan Martiƒá, the
police chief in Knin. In August 1990, a referendum was held in the Krajina on
the question of Serb "sovereignty and autonomy" in Croatia. The resolution was
confined exclusively to Serbs so it passed by a majority of 99.7%. As expected,
it was declared illegal and invalid by the Croatian government, who stated that
Serbs had no constitutional right to break away from Croatian legal territory.
Babiƒá's administration announced the creation of a Serbian Autonomous Oblast
of Krajina (or "SAO Krajina") on 21 December 1990. On 16 March 1991 another
referendum was held which asked "Are you in favour of the SAO Krajina joining
the Republic of Serbia and staying in Yugoslavia with Serbia, Montenegro and
others who wish to preserve Yugoslavia?". With 99.8% voting in favour, the
referendum was approved and the Krajina assembly declared that "the territory
of the SAO Krajina is a constitutive part of the unified state territory of the
Republic of Serbia". On 1 April 1991, it declared that it would secede from
Croatia. Other Serb-dominated communities in eastern Croatia announced that
they would also join SAO Krajina and ceased paying taxes to the Zagreb
government, and began implementing its own currency system, army regiments, and
postal service. Croatia held a referendum on independence on 19 May 1991, in
which the electorate‚Äîminus many Serbs, who chose to boycott it‚Äîvoted
overwhelmingly for independence with the option of confederate union with other
Yugoslav states. On 25 June 1991, Croatia and Slovenia both declared their
independence from Yugoslavia. As the JNA attempted unsuccessfully to suppress
Slovenia's independence in the short Slovenian War, clashes between rebelled
Croatian Serbs and Croatian security forces broke out almost immediately,
leaving dozens dead on both sides. Serbs calling themselves Chetniks were
supported by the remnants of the JNA (whose members were now only from Serbia
and Montenegro), which provided them military arms. Many Croatians fled their
homes in fear, or were forced out by the rebel Serbs. The European Union and
United Nations attempted to broker ceasefires and peace settlements, but all to
no avail. Around August 1991, the leadership of the Serbian Krajina, and that
of Serbia, allegedly agreed to embark on a campaign which the ICTY prosecutors
described as a "joint criminal enterprise" whose purpose "was the forcible
removal of the majority of the Croat and other non-Serb population from
approximately one-third of the territory of the Republic of Croatia, an area he
planned to become part of a new Serb-dominated state." The leaders are
documented to have included Milan Babiƒá, and other rebelled Croatian Serbs'
figures such as Milan Martiƒá, the Serbian militia leader Vojislav ≈ e≈°elj and
Yugoslav Army commanders including General Ratko Mladiƒá, who was at the time
the commander of JNA forces in Croatia. According to testimony given by Babiƒá
in his subsequent war crimes trial, during the summer of 1991 the Serbian
secret police‚Äîunder Milo≈°eviƒá's command‚Äîset up "a parallel structure of
state security and the police of Krajina and units commanded by the state
security of Serbia". Shadowy groups of paramilitaries with names such as the
"Vukovi sa Vucjaka" ("Wolves from Vucjak") and the "Beli Orlovi" ("White
Eagles"), funded by the Serbian secret police, were also a key component of
this structure. A wider-scale war was launched in August 1991. Over the
following months, a large area of territory, amounting to a third of Croatia,
was controlled by the rebel Serbs. The Croatian population suffered heavily,
fleeing or evicted with numerous killings, leading to ethnic cleansing. The
bulk of the fighting occurred between August and December 1991 when
approximately 80,000 Croats were expelled (and some were killed). Many more
died and or were displaced in fighting in eastern Slavonia (this territory
along the Croatian/Serbian border was not part of the Krajina, and it was the
JNA that was the principal actor in that part of the conflict). The total
number of exiled Croats and other non-Serbs range from 170,000 (ICTY) up to a
quarter of a million people (Human Rights Watch). The Gospiƒá massacre was one
of the war crimes committed by Croatian military against the Serbian civilians.
In the latter half of 1991, Croatia was beginning to form an army and their
main defenders, the local police, were overpowered by the JNA military who
supported rebelled Croatian Serbs. The RSK was located entirely inland, but
they soon started advancing deeper into Croatian territory. Among other places,
they shelled the Croatian coastal town of Zadar killing over 80 people in
nearby areas and damaging the Maslenica Bridge that connected northern and
southern Croatia, in the Operation Coast-91. They also tried to overtake
≈ ibenik, but the defenders successfully repelled the attack by JNA, in the
Battle of ≈ ibenik. The main city theatre was also bombed by JNA forces. The
city of Vukovar, however, was completely devastated by JNA attacks. The city of
Vukovar that warded off JNA attacks for months eventually fell, ending the
Battle of Vukovar. 2,000 defenders of Vukovar and civilians were killed, 800
went missing and 22,000 were forced into exile. The wounded were taken from
Vukovar Hospital to Ovcara near Vukovar where they were executed. On 19
December 1991, the SAO Krajina proclaimed itself the Republic of Serbian
Krajina. On 26 February 1992, the SAO Western Slavonia and SAO Slavonia,
Baranja and Western Srem were added to the RSK, which initially had only
encompassed the territories within the SAO Krajina. The Serb Army of Krajina
("–°—Ä–ø—Å–∫–∞ –í–æ—ò—Å–∫–∞ –ö—Ä–∞—ò–∏–Ω–µ" / "Srpska Vojska Krajine" ;
abbreviated "–°–í–ö" / "SVK") (or the Republic of Serbian Krajina Army) was
officially formed on 19 March 1992. The RSK occupied an area of some
17,028¬ km¬≤ at its greatest extent. 1992 ceasefire. A ceasefire agreement was
signed by Presidents Tuƒëman and Milo≈°eviƒá in January 1992, paving the way
for the implementation of a United Nations peace plan put forward by Cyrus
Vance. Under the Vance Plan, four United Nations Protected Areas (UNPAs) were
established in Croatian territory which was claimed by RSK. The Vance Plan
called for the withdrawal of the JNA from Croatia and for the return of
refugees to their homes in the UNPAs. The JNA officially withdrew from Croatia
in May 1992 but much of its weaponry and many of its personnel remained in the
Serb-held areas and were turned over to the RSK's security forces. Refugees
were not allowed to return to their homes and many of the remaining Croats and
other nationalities left in the RSK were expelled or killed in the following
months. On 21 February 1992, the creation of the United Nations Protection
Force (UNPROFOR) was authorised by the UN Security Council for an initial
period of a year, to provide security to the UNPAs. The agreement effectively
froze the front lines for the next three years. Croatia and the RSK had
effectively fought each other to a standstill. The Republic of Serbian Krajina
was not recognised de jure by any other country or international organisation.
Nevertheless it gained support from Serbia's allies, Greece, Russia, and
Romania. UNPROFOR was deployed throughout the region to maintain the ceasefire,
although in practice its light armament and restricted rules of engagement
meant that it was little more than an observer force. It proved wholly unable
to ensure that refugees returned to the RSK. Indeed, the rebel Croatian Serb
authorities continued to make efforts to ensure that they could "never" return,
destroying villages and cultural and religious monuments to erase the previous
existence of the Croatian inhabitants of the Krajina. Milan Babiƒá later
testified that this policy was driven from Belgrade through the Serbian secret
police‚Äîand ultimately Milo≈°eviƒá‚Äîwho he claimed were in control of all the
administrative institutions and armed forces in the Krajina. This would
certainly explain why the Yugoslav National Army took the side of the rebelled
Croatian Serbs in spite of its claims to be acting as a "peacekeeping" force.
Milo≈°eviƒá denied this, claiming that Babiƒá had made it up "out of fear".
After the ceasefire. However, Serbs considered this too late, as it was not the
amount of autonomy they wanted, and by now they had declared de facto
independence. The districts never actually functioned since they were located
within the self-proclaimed Republic of Serbian Krajina. Existence of the
Autonomous District of Glina was also provided in the draft of the Z-4 plan,
that was rejected. After Operation Storm, the application of the law which
allowed autonomy would be temporarily suspended. In 2000 this part of the law
was formally repealed. Decline. The partial implementation of the Vance Plan
drove a wedge between the governments of the RSK and Serbia, the RSK's
principal backer and supplier of fuel, arms and money. Milan Babiƒá strongly
opposed the Vance Plan but was overruled by the RSK's assembly. On 26 February
1992, Babiƒá was deposed and replaced as President of the RSK by Goran
Had≈æiƒá, a Milo≈°eviƒá loyalist. Babiƒá remained involved in RSK politics but
as a considerably weaker figure. The position of the RSK eroded steadily over
the following three years. On the surface, the RSK had all the trappings of a
state: army, parliament, president, government and ministries, currency and
stamps. However its economy was wholly dependent on support from the rump
Yugoslavia, which had the effect of importing that country's hyperinflation.
The economic situation soon became disastrous. By 1994, only 36,000 of the
RSK's 430,000 citizens were employed. The war had severed the RSK's trade links
with the rest of Croatia, leaving its few industries idle. With few natural
resources of its own it had to import most of the goods and fuel it required.
Agriculture was devastated, and operated at little more than a subsistence
level. Professionals went to Serbia or elsewhere to escape the republic's
economic hardships. To make matters worse, the RSK's government was grossly
corrupt and the region became a haven for black marketeering and other criminal
activity. It was clear by the mid-1990s that without a peace deal or support
from Yugoslavia the RSK was not economically viable. This was especially
evident in Belgrade, where the RSK had become an unwanted economic and
political burden for Milo≈°eviƒá. Much to his frustration, the rebel Croatian
Serbs rebuffed his government's demands to settle the conflict. In July 1992
the RSK issued its own currency, the Krajina dinar (HRKR), in parallel with the
Yugoslav dinar. This was followed by the "October dinar" (HRKO), first issued
on 1 October 1993 and equal to 1,000,000 Reformed Dinar, and the "1994 dinar",
first issued on 1 January 1994, and equal to 1,000,000,000 October dinar. The
RSK's weakness also adversely affected its armed forces, the Vojska Srpske
Krajine (VSK). Since the 1992 ceasefire agreement, Croatia had spent heavily on
importing weapons and training its armed forces with assistance from American
contractors. In contrast, the VSK had grown steadily weaker, with its soldiers
poorly motivated, trained and equipped. There were only about 55,000 of them to
cover a front of some 600¬ km in Croatia plus 100¬ km along the border with the
Bihaƒá pocket in Bosnia. With 16,000 stationed in eastern Slavonia, only about
39,000 were left to defend the main part of the RSK. Overall, only 30,000 were
capable of full mobilization, yet they faced a far stronger Croatian army.
Also, political divisions between Had≈æiƒá and Babiƒá occasionally led to
physical and sometimes even armed confrontations between their supporters;
Babiƒá himself was assaulted and beaten in an incident in Benkovac. In January
1993 the revitalized Croatian army attacked the Serbian positions around
Maslenica in southern Croatia which curtailed their access to the sea via
Novigrad. In a second offensive in September 1993 the Croatian army overran the
Medak pocket in the southern Krajina in a push to regain Serb-held Croatian
territory. This action was halted by international diplomacy but although the
rebel Croatian Serbs brought reinforcements forward fairly quickly, the
strength of the Croatian forces proved superior. Had≈æiƒá sent an urgent
request to Belgrade for reinforcements, arms and equipment. In response, around
4,000 paramilitaries under the command of Vojislav ≈ e≈°elj (the White Eagles)
and "Arkan" (the Serb Volunteer Guard) arrived to bolster the VSK. They found
the RSK government and military in a chaotic state. Operation Storm. Following
the rejection by both sides of the Z-4 plan for reintegration, the RSK's end
came in 1995, when Croatian forces gained control of SAO Western Slavonia in
Operation Flash (May) followed by the biggest part of occupied Croatia in
Operation Storm (August). The Krajina Serb Supreme Defence Council met under
president Milan Martiƒá to discuss the situation. A decision was reached at 16:
45 to "start evacuating the population unfit for military service from the
municipalities of Knin, Benkovac, Obrovac, Drni≈° and Graƒçac." The RSK was
disbanded and most of the Serb population fled. Only 5,000 to 6,000 people
remained, mostly the elderly. The Croatian historian Ivo Goldstein wrote, ""The
reasons for the Serb exodus are complex. Some had to leave because the Serb
army forced them to, while others feared the revenge of the Croatian army or of
their former Croatian neighbours, whom they had driven away and whose homes
they had mostly looted (it was later shown that this fear was far from
groundless)."". Most of the refugees ended in Serbia, Bosnia and eastern
Slavonia. Some of those who remained were murdered, tortured and forcibly
expelled by the Croatian Army and police. Croatia celebrates this victory on 5
August as Victory Day. There was also accusations of widespread arson committed
by the Croatian soldiers, per the indictment of the Office of the Prosecutor of
the ICTY, to be an action organised to prevent the Serbs from returning. This
case is pending judgment. A number of Croatian army officers (such as general
Ante Gotovina) were indicted by the ICTY in the Hague for command
responsibility for the killings committed by Croatian soldiers against the
civilian Serb population. On 15 April 2011, Croatian generals Ante Gotovina and
Mladen Markaƒç were convicted on charges of crimes against humanity and
violations of the laws or customs of war; Ivan ƒåermak, another Croatian
general, was acquitted. Later events. The parts of the former RSK in eastern
Croatia (along the Danube) remained in place, in what was previously the SAO
Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Syrmia. In 1995, Milan Milanoviƒá,
formerly a Republic of Serbian Krajina official, signed the Erdut Agreement as
a representative of the Serbian side. This agreement, co-signed by the
representative of the Croatian Government, was sponsored by the United Nations.
It set up a transitional period during which the United Nations Transitional
Authority for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium (UNTAES)
peacekeeping mission would oversee a peaceful reintegration of this territory
into Croatia, starting on 15 January 1996. In 1998, the UNTAES mission was
complete and the territory was formally returned to Croatia. Based on the Erdut
Agreement in 1997 was also established institution named Joint Council of
Municipalities. After the peaceful reintegration, two Croatian islands on the
Danube, the Island of ≈ arengrad and the Island of Vukovar, remained under
Serbian military control. In 2004, Serbian military was withdrawn from the
islands and replaced with Serbian police. Thus, the islands remain an open
question. In 1995 a Croatian court sentenced former RSK president Goran
Had≈æiƒá in absentia to 20 years in prison for rocket attacks on ≈ ibenik and
Vodice. In 1999 he was sentenced to an additional 20 years for war crimes in
Tenja, near Osijek, and in 2002 Croatia's state attorney brought another
indictment against him for the murder of almost 1,300 Croats in Vukovar,
Osijek, Vinkovci, ≈Ωupanja and elsewhere. On 4 June 2004, the International
Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) indicted him on 14 counts of
war crimes and crimes against humanity. In 2011 he was arrested and extradited
to the Hague, where his initial trial hearing was held on 25 July the same
year. Demographics. Thus Serbs comprised 52.3% and Croats 35.8% of the
population of SAO Krajina respectively in 1991. According to data set forth at
the meeting of the Government of the RSK in July 1992, its ethnic composition
was 88% Serbs, 7% Croats, 5% others. As of November 1993, less than 400 ethnic
Croats still resided in UNPA Sector South, and between 1,500 and 2,000 remained
in UNPA Sector North. Legal status. During its existence, this entity did not
achieve international recognition. In 29 November 1991, the Badinter commission
concluded that Yugoslavia was "in dissolution" and that the republics -
including Croatia - should be recognized as independent states when they asked
so. They also assigned these republics territorial integrity. For most of the
world this was a reason to recognize Croatia. However, Serbia did not accept
the conclusions of the commission in that period and recognized Croatia only
after Croatian military actions (Oluja and Bljesak) and the Dayton agreement.
On 20 November 1991 Lord Carrington asked Badinter commission: "Does the
Serbian population in Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina, as one of the
constituent peoples of Yugoslavia, have the right to self-determination?" The
commission concluded on 11 January 1992 that "that the Serbian population in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia is entitled to all the rights concerned to
minorities and ethnic groups[...]" and "that the Republics must afford the
members of those minorities and ethnic groups all the human rights and
fundamental freedoms recognized in international law, including, where
appropriate, the right to choose their nationality". Government. Presidents.
http://www.vladarsk.com/ At the Belgrade meeting, the former legislators
declared themselves to be the legitimate continuation of the RSK government and
called for the re-creation of the RSK on the basis of the 1994 Z-4 plan, which
had called for Krajina to have a status of "more than , less than independence"
within Croatia. They announced that a parliamentary election would be held and
that the new name of the self-proclaimed state would be "Republic of Serb-
Krajina". The meeting elected Milorad Buha as prime minister as well as six
ministers without portfolio whose names were not revealed. This move was
criticized by many, including top Serbian and Croatian government officials, as
well as senior representatives of Serbs in Croatia. They all stated that such a
meeting would harm Serb-Croat reconciliation and relations between the
communities in Croatia. It was pointed out that the Krajina Serb legislators
had rejected the Z-4 proposal when it had originally been put forward. Some
Serbian nationalists also criticized the move, saying that a government in
exile should have been created as soon as possible after Operation Storm, not
10 years later.
