Republika Srpska The Republika Srpska (Serbian, Croatian, Bosnian: "Republika
Srpska", Cyrillic script: "– –µ–ø—É–±–ª–∏–∫–∞ –°—Ä–ø—Å–∫a", ) is one of the two
main political entities of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the other being the
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Constitution of Republika Srpska
defines it as a territorially unified, indivisible and inalienable
constitutional and legal entity of Bosnia and Herzegovina, that independently
performs its constitutional, legislative, executive and judicial functions. The
National Assembly and the Government of Republika Srpska are based in Banja
Luka, although Sarajevo remains the official capital. Name. In the name "", the
first word means republic. The second word is a nominalized adjective derived
by adding the suffix to , the root of the noun , meaning Serb. The sequence
rather than is a result of voicing assimilation. Adjectives derived in this way
from ethnonyms are often used in Serbian as names of countries: e.g., ‚Äì (Scot
‚Äì Scotland), ‚Äì (Croat ‚Äì Croatia). Although the name is sometimes glossed
as "Serb Republic" or "Bosnian Serb Republic", and the government of uses the
semi-Anglicized term in English translations of official documents, western
news sources such as the BBC, "The New York Times", and "The Guardian"
generally refer to the entity as the "Republika Srpska". History. The Socialist
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina was one of Yugoslavia's six federal units,
defined in its constitution as a state of equal citizens, Muslims, Serbs,
Croats and others. The 1991 population census counted 43% Muslims, renamed
Bosniaks in 1993, 31% Serbs, and 17% Croats, the remainder being Yugoslavs and
others. The first democratic multi-party elections in the republic were held on
18 November 1990. Most seats in its parliament were won by political parties
that represented the three peoples: the Party of Democratic Action, the Serb
Democratic Party, and the Croatian Democratic Union. The three parties reached
a power sharing agreement covering all government bodies and public
institutions. In a session on 14 and 15 October 1991 the Parliament approved
the "Memorandum on Sovereignty" as had already been done by Slovenia and
Croatia. The Memorandum was adopted despite opposition from 73 Serb deputies,
belonging to the Serb Democratic Party (most of the Serb parliamentary
representatives) as well as the Serbian Renewal Movement and the Union of
Reform Forces, who regarded the move as illegal. On 24 October 1991, the Serb
deputies formed the Assembly of the Serb People in Bosnia and Herzegovina
("Skup≈°tina srpskog naroda u Bosni i Hercegovini") to be the highest
representative and legislative body of the Serb population, ending the
tripartite coalition. The Union of Reform Forces soon ceased to exist but its
members remained in the assembly as the Independent Members of Parliament
Caucus. The assembly undertook to address the achievement of equality between
the Serbs and other peoples and the protection of the Serbs' interests
jeopardized by decisions of the Bosnian parliament. On 9 January 1992, the
assembly proclaimed the Republic of the Serb People of Bosnia and Herzegovina
(), declaring it part of Yugoslavia. On 28 February 1992 the assembly adopted
the Constitution of the Serbian Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina (the name
adopted instead of the previous ). Its territory would include districts,
municipalities, and regions where Serbs were the majority and also those where
they had become a minority because of persecution during World War II. The
republic was part of Yugoslavia and could enter into union with political
bodies representing other peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Bosnian
parliament, without its Serb deputies, held a referendum on the independence of
Bosnia and Herzegovina on 29 February and 1 March 1992, but most Serbs
boycotted it since the assembly had previously (9‚Äì10 November 1991) held a
plebiscite in the Serb regions, 96% having opted for membership of the Yugoslav
federation formed only by Serbia and Montenegro. The referendum had a 64%
turnout and 92.7% or 99% (according to different sources) voted for
independence. On 6 March the Bosnian parliament promulgated the results of the
referendum, proclaiming the republic's independence from Yugoslavia. The
republic's independence was recognized by the European Community on 6 April
1992 and by the USA on 7 April. On the same day the Serbs' assembly in session
in Banja Luka declared a severance of governmental ties with Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The name "Republika Srpska" was adopted on 12 August 1992. The
political controversy escalated into the Bosnian War, which would last until
the autumn of 1995. According to numerous verdicts of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) Bosnian Serb forces
performed ethnic cleansing in their intended territories in order to create an
ethnically pure state of Republika Srpska. Republika Srpska's leadership
including Biljana Plav≈°iƒá, Momƒçilo Kraji≈°nik, and Radoslav Brƒëanin were
indicted and judged guilty for war crimes and ethnic cleansing. The former
president of Republika Srpska, Radovan Karad≈æiƒá, is currently under trial.
The top military general, Ratko Mladiƒá, was arrested on the 26 May 2011 in
connection with the siege of Sarajevo and the Srebrenica massacre. The war was
ended by the General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
reached at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base near Dayton, Ohio on 21 November and
formally signed in Paris on 14 December 1995. Annex 4 of the Agreement is the
current Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina, recognising Republka Srpska as
one of its two main political-territorial divisions and defining the
governmental functions and powers of the both entities. The boundary lines
between the entities were delineated in Annex 2 of the Agreement. From 1992 to
2008 the Constitution of Republika Srpska was amended 121 times. Article 1
states that Republika Srpska is a territorially unified, indivisible and
inalienable constitutional and legal entity that shall independently perform
its constitutional, legislative, executive and judicial functions. Impact of
war. The war in Bosnia and Herzegovina resulted in major changes in the
country, some of which were quantified in a 1998 report by UNESCO. In the non-
Serbian region 50% of houses were damaged and 6% destroyed while the number was
lower in the Serbian region, 25% damaged and 5% destroyed. About half the
country's population of 4 million was displaced. In 1996 there were some
435,346 Serbian refugees from the Federation in Republika Srpska while another
197,925 had gone to Serbia. In 1991, 27% of the non-agricultural labor force
had been unemployed in Bosnia and this number had increased due to the war. In
2009 the unemployment rate in Bosnia and Herzegovina was an estimated 29%
according to the CIA's "The World Factbook". In 1996 unemployment in Republika
Srpska was at 90%. Republika Srpska's population of Serbs had increased by
547,741 and ethnic cleansing considerably reduced the numbers of other groups.
The increasing of Serbs in the Republic is due to the influx of ethnic Serbs
that were ethnically cleansed from Croatia. The number of Croats was reduced by
135,386 (majority of prewar population), and the number of Bosniaks by some
434,144. Some 136,000 of approximately 496,000 Bosniak refugees and expulsees,
forced to flee the territory of what is now Republika Srpska, have returned
home. As of 2008, 35% of Bosniaks and 8.5% of Croats have returned to Republika
Srpska, while 24% of Serbs who left their homes in territories controlled by
Bosniaks or Croats, have returned to their pre-war addresses. In the early
2000s discrimination against non-Serbs was alleged by NGOs and the Helsinki
Commission. The International Crisis Group reported in 2002 that in some parts
of Republika Srpska a returnee is ten times more likely to be the victim of
violent crime than is a local Serb. The Helsinki Commission, in a 2001
statement on "Tolerance and Non-Discrimination," also pointed at violence
against non-Serbs, stating that in the city of Banja Luka and Trebinje mobs
attacked people who sought to lay foundations for new mosques on the ruins of
those destroyed. There were indications of police collaboration. Non-Serbs have
continued difficulty in returning to their original homes and the assembly‚Äôs
record of cooperation in apprehending individuals indicted for war crimes,
crimes against humanity and genocide is poor. Organizations such as the Society
for Threatened Peoples, reporting to the United Nations Human Rights Council in
2008, claim that non-Serbian refugees returning to Republika Srpska are
discriminated against and live under appalling conditions, particularly in the
Drina Valley (Srebrenica, Bratunac, Vi≈°egrad and Foƒça). Many are unemployed
and children must attend schools where all subjects are taught in Serbian.
Similar things are taking place in the Federation of Bosnia where the problem
of segregation is very visible in Herzegovinan and some Bosnian cities where
the population is predominantly Croatian. Separate schools for Croatians and
non-Croatians are formed. Croatian nationality students are taught using
Croatian curriculum whereas Serbian and Bosniak pupils are taught according to
the curriculum of Bosnia and Herzegovina According to the Ministry for Human
Rights and Refugees of Bosnia and Herzegovina, European Union Police Mission,
UNHCR, and other international organizations, the security in both Republika
Srpska and the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina is at present satisfactory,
although some minor threats, real or perceived, can still influence the
decision of individuals as to whether they will return to their pre-war
addresses, or not. Geography. Boundary. The Inter-Entity Boundary Line (IEBL)
between Bosnia and Herzegovina's two entities essentially follows the front
lines at the end of the Bosnian War with adjustments (most importantly in the
western part of the country and around Sarajevo) defined by the Dayton
Agreement. The total length of the IEBL is approximately ¬ km. The IEBL is an
administrative demarcation uncontrolled by military or police and there is free
movement across it. Municipalities. Under the Law on Territorial Organization
and Local Self-Government, adopted in 1994, Republika Srpska was divided into
80 municipalities. After the Dayton Peace Agreement the law was amended to
reflect changes to borders: it now comprises 63 municipalities. Demography.
There has been no census since the end of the war. The next census was expected
to occur in 2011 but has not yet been confirmed: these figures are estimates.
List of cities and municipalities in the Republika Srpska Economy. The currency
of Republika Srpska is the Bosnia and Herzegovina convertible mark (KM). A so-
called "regulatory guillotine" means that it takes only a few days to register
a business there, whereas in the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina it often
takes several months. Gross domestic product (PPP) was estimated in 2010 at
about US$7,895 per capita, but growth in the particular area was measured as
being the highest in Bosnia, with 6,5%. Foreign investment. An agreement on
strategic partnership has been concluded between the Iron Ore Mine Ljubija
Prijedor and the British company LNM (a major steel producer, now part of
ArcelorMittal). The Russian company Yuzhuralzoloto also signed a strategic
partnership with the Lead and Zinc Mine Sase Srebrenica. Recent foreign
investments include privatisation of Telekom Srpske, sold to the Serbian
Telekom Srbija for ‚Ç¨646 million, and the sale of the petroleum and oil
industry, based in Bosanski Brod, Modriƒça and Banja Luka, to Zarubezhneft of
Russia, whose investment is expected to total US$970 million in coming years.
On 16 May 2007, the Czech power utility ƒåEZ signed a ‚Ç¨1.4 billion contract
with the Elektroprivreda Republike Srpske, to renovate the Gacko I power plant
and build a second, Gacko II.As of September 2012, the President of Republika
Srpska, Milorad Dodik, has signed an agreement with the Russian company Gazprom
to build a part of the South Stream pipeline network and two gas power plants
in the entity. External trade. In recent years exports (not including trade
with the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina) have grown significantly and the
level of import coverage has improved ‚Äì from KM 1,130,518,000 (‚Ç¨565
million) and 38.3% in 2005, to KM 1,539,229,000 (‚Ç¨770 million) and 55.8% in
2006. In the first two months of 2007, exports grew 19% year on year and
imports by 39%. In 2010, exports amounted to ‚Ç¨1.11 billion and imports
‚Ç¨2.07 billion. In 2011 exports rose 17.6% to ‚Ç¨1.310 billion and imports
rose 13.1% to ‚Ç¨2.344 billion. Taxation and Salaries. Since 2001, Republika
Srpska initiated significant reforms in the sector of the tax system, which
lowered the tax burden to 28.6%, one of the lowest in the region. The 10% rate
of capital gains tax and income tax are the lowest in Europe and highly
stimulating for foreign investment, and there are no limits on the amount of
earnings. Increasing the number of taxpayers and budgeted incomes, and creating
a stable fiscal system, were necessary for further reforms in the fields of
taxation and duties; this area is a priority goal of the RS authorities. VAT
has been introduced in 2006. Income tax is 46% in the RS, compared to nearly
70% in the Federation, and the corporate tax rate is 10%, compared to 30% in
the Federation. These tax advantages have led to some companies moving their
business to RS from the other entity. Republika Srpska saw accelerated salary
growth in 2008. The average net salary in 2008 amounted to KM 755 (‚Ç¨386),
which represents an increase of 29% compared to 2007 average. High inflation
rate in 2008 caused the difference between the nominal and the real salary
growth to be higher than in 2007. Average net salaries in Republika Srpska saw
a real growth of 21.8%, since 2008 inflation measured by Consumer Price Index
was 7.2%. Marked salary growth was particularly contributed to by salary growth
in individual economic sectors, especially in public sector. Regarding pensions
in Republika Srpska, their growth in 2008 kept pace with salary trends. The
average pension in 2008 amounted to KM 294 (‚Ç¨150), which is larger by 27.8%
(y/y). Somewhat higher pension growth in the RS might be explained by
significantly faster growth of contributions of the PDI Fund. The average wage
as of 2011 stood at KM 809.0 (‚Ç¨414). Politics. Under its constitution,
Republika Srpska has a president, parliament (the 83-member National Assembly
of Republika Srpska), executive (with a prime minister and several ministries),
its own police, supreme court and lower courts, customs service (under the
state-level customs service), and postal service. It also has its own coat of
arms, flag (a variant of the Serbian flag without the coat of arms displayed),
and national anthem. However, the national anthem, like Spain, San Marino and
Abu Dhabi has no words to it. The Constitutional Law on Coat of Arms and Anthem
of the Republika Srpska was ruled not in conformance with the Constitution of
Bosnia and Herzegovina as it states that those symbols "represent statehood of
the Republika Srpska" and are used "in accordance with moral norms of Serb
people". According to the Constitutional Court's decision, the Law was to be
corrected by September 2006. The national assembly of Republika Srpska formed a
board which is going to make a proposal for the anthem and coat of arms of
Republika Srpska. Its former flagship airline, Air Srpska, ceased operations in
2003. The new airline, Sky Srpska, has been established in 2007, and has a
codeshare agreement with Slovenian airline Adria Airways since 2010. Although
the constitution names Sarajevo as the capital of Republika Srpska, the
northwestern city of Banja Luka is the headquarters of most of the institutions
of government ‚Äì including the parliament ‚Äì and is therefore the "de facto"
capital. After the war, Republika Srpska retained its army, but in August 2005,
the parliament consented to transfer control of Army of Republika Srpska to a
state-level ministry and abolish the Republic's defense ministry and army by 1
January 2006. These reforms were required by NATO as a precondition of Bosnia
and Herzegovina's admission to the Partnership for Peace. As of 14 December
2006, Bosnia and Herzegovina is a part of the Partnership for Peace programme.
External relations. On 26 September 2006, Republika Srpska officials signed a
"special ties agreement" with Serbia aimed at promoting economic and
institutional cooperation between Serbia and the Republika Srpska (RS). The
accord was signed by Serbia's President Boris Tadiƒá and Prime Minister
Vojislav Ko≈°tunica, former RS President Dragan ƒåaviƒá, and Prime Minister
Milorad Dodik. Tadiƒá and Ko≈°tunica, accompanied by several ministers and some
300 businessmen, arrived in Banja Luka on two special planes from Belgrade, in
what was seen as the biggest-ever boost to strengthening ties in all spheres of
life between the Republika Srpska and Serbia. The Serbian Komercijalna banka
and the Dunav osiguranje insurance company opened branches in Banja Luka and
the Serbian news agency Tanjug also inaugurated its international press center
in Banja Luka, on a day packed with business engagements. The document sets out
steps taken by Serbia and Republika Srpska officials to increase economic and
political ties. It is similar to a previous one signed in 2001 between the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the Republika Srpska, which had envisaged
close cooperation in economy, defense, education and dual citizenship for the
residents, said a Serbian government statement. The agreement gives Republika
Srpska, the same status with Serbia as the state of Bosnia-Herzegovina as a
whole. "This agreement will stabilize the relations between countries in the
region and it will promote economic, political and cultural relations between
Serbia and Republika Srpska," ƒåaviƒá told reporters after the signing
ceremony. Ko≈°tunica added "We have long waited for this day," and insisting
that the agreement would not be "a dead letter on paper," but would "live and
be useful to the citizens of Serbia and Republika Srpska." Under the Dayton
Agreement, which ended the Bosnian war in 1995, two entities ‚Äì Federation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and the Republika Srpska - formed a single state, but
with many decentralised powers. Representative offices. On 12 February 2009,
Republika Srpska opened a new representative office in Brussels. While EU
representatives were not present at the time, all top Republika Srpska
officials attended the opening ceremony, saying it would advance their
economic, political and cultural relations with the European Union. This notion
has been strongly condemned by Bosniak leaders, saying that this is further
proof of Republika Srpska distancing itself from Bosnia and Herzegovina.
President Rajko Kuzmanovic, on the other hand, told reporters that this move
does not jeopardize Republika Srpska's place within Bosnia and Herzegovina. He
added that Republika Srpska just used its constitutional right "to open up a
representation office in the center of developments with European relevance."
Republika Srpska also has offices of representation in Belgrade (Serbia),
Moscow (Russia), Stuttgart (Germany), Jerusalem (Israel) and Vienna (Austria).
In 2009 there were plans to open offices in Washington D.C. and Zagreb. Former
Croatian Prime Minister Ivo Sanader previously stated "that certainly won't be
nor can it be an embassy because the Republika Srpska government is not the
government of a sovereign state nor can it be". Holidays. According to the Law
on Holidays of Republika Srpska, passed by the National Assembly of Republika
Srpska, the holidays are divided into three categories: the republic holidays,
the religious ones, and the holidays not accompanied by leaves of absence. The
republic holidays include Republic Day (9 January), New Year's Day,
International Workers' Day, Victory over Fascism Day and Day of the General
Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina (21 November). The
religious holidays include Christmas and Easter according to both the Julian
and the Gregorian calendars, for the Orthodox and the Catholic citizens
respectively, and Eid al-Adha and Eid ul-Fitr for the Muslims. The holidays not
accompanied by leaves of absence include School Day (the Feast of Saint Sava,
27 January), Day of the Army of the Republika Srpska (12 May), Interior
Ministry Day (4 April), and Day of the First Serbian Uprising (14 February).
The most important of the republic holidays is Republic Day, commemorating the
establishment of Republika Srpska on 9 January 1992. It coincides with St.
Stephen's Day according to the Julian calendar. The Orthodox Serbs also refer
to the holiday as the Slava of Republika Srpska. They regard Saint Stephen The
Protomartyr And Archdeacon as the patron saint of Republika Srpska. The holiday
has therefore a religious dimension, being celebrated with special services in
Orthodox churches. Sport. Sport in Republika Srpska revolves mostly around team
sports. Among the most popular sports are football, basketball, volleyball,
handball and tennis. The main football clubs in Republika Srpska are FK Borac
Banja Luka, FK Leotar, FK Slavija, FK Rudar Prijedor and the others. FK Borac
Banja Luka is the most popular and most successful football club in the
country. Banja Luka as a capital of Republika Srpska is well known as one of
the most famous handball center in Balkan. RK Borac Banja Luka won the European
Champions' Cup in 1976. and EHF Cup in 1991. RK Borac Banja Luka players have
won 6 Gold Olympic medals for former Yugoslavia.
