Saskatchewan Party The Saskatchewan Party is a conservative liberal political
party in the Canadian province of Saskatchewan. The party was established in
1997 by a coalition of former provincial Progressive Conservative and Liberal
party members and supporters who sought to remove the Saskatchewan New
Democratic Party (NDP) from power. The Saskatchewan Party served as the
province's Official Opposition until the provincial election on November 7,
2007. The Saskatchewan Party won 38 seats in the Legislative Assembly, and
leader Brad Wall was sworn in as the province's 14th Premier on November 21,
2007. During the November 7, 2011 general election, the party won a landslide
victory, winning 49 of 58 seats and re-electing all 18 cabinet ministers. The
party's origins and political basis. Historically, Saskatchewan politics has
tended towards a two-party system, with third parties enjoying limited
political success. For the first 25 years of the province's existence,
political power was split between the Saskatchewan Liberal Party in government,
and the Conservatives (initially the Provincial Rights Party) in opposition.
The emergence of the Co-operative Commonwealth Federation (CCF), forerunner of
the NDP – a left-of-centre political party formed by the coming together of
various socialist, farm and labour groups under a united front – forced the
Liberals to the right. As a result of vote-splitting with the Liberals, the
less popular Conservative party was no longer able to win seats in the
Legislative assembly. In the late 1970s, the provincial Conservatives (now the
Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan) re-emerged as a political
force, forming government under Grant Devine for most of the 1980s. However,
dissatisfaction with the Conservative government towards the end of the decade
resulted in it being soundly defeated by the NDP in 1991. The Conservatives
lost almost half of their popular vote and retained only 10 of the 66 seats in
the Legislature. A subsequent corruption scandal further weakened the Tories,
and a poor showing in the 1995 general election by both the Liberals and
Progressive Conservatives resulted in a desire by many members of those parties
for a united centre-right alternative to the governing NDP. In 1997, the
Saskatchewan Party was formed by a coalition of four former Progressive
Conservatives (PC leader Bill Boyd, Dan D'Autremont, Ben Heppner, Don Toth) and
four Liberal Party members of the Legislature (Bob Bjornerud, June Draude, Rod
Gantefoer, Ken Krawetz). However, it did not result in a formal merger between
the two parties. While most Tory supporters and members joined the new party,
the Progressive Conservative Party itself was not disbanded, as the party would
have to forfeit its assets to the government if it ever lost its registration.
Instead, the Tories essentially went dormant for the next two election cycles;
with a select group running the minimum number of candidates necessary to keep
the party alive, while its assets were held in trust. The Saskatchewan Party
attracted fewer party members of the provincial Liberals, which continued to
contest elections. Because the new party consisted largely of former
Progressive Conservatives, it was initially derided by opponents as merely a
re-branding of the Progressive Conservative name in an attempt by the party to
distance itself from the still-fresh corruption scandal. This view has
continued to follow the party up to the present. In 1998, former Reform Party
federal house leader Elwin Hermanson was elected the party's first leader. The
party under Elwin Hermanson. Shortly after taking the leadership, Hermanson led
the party into the 1999 provincial election. The party had a strong showing,
retaking many rural ridings from the NDP. In the process, they won 25 seats and
reduced the NDP to a minority government. During the 2003 provincial election,
the Saskatchewan Party campaigned on a platform of tax reduction and decreased
government involvement in the private sector. The party won 28 seats, while the
NDP won 30 seats. The party was accused of having undisclosed plans to
privatize all of the province's crown corporations. Hermanson stated he would
not sell the four major crown corporations, but would consider any offers
received. The NDP used the ambiguity in the Saskatchewan Party's position to
turn the election into a referendum on crown corporation ownership for many
voters, and managed to narrowly win a majority government. Hermanson resigned
as leader shortly afterward. He outlined his reason as stating he had taken the
party as far as he could, and that it was time to hand it down to a new leader
who could take it further. The party under Brad Wall. Brad Wall was acclaimed
as the new party leader on March 15, 2004, after being the only declared
candidate for the leadership. Other caucus members who had expressed interest
in running included Jason Dearborn, Allan Kerpan (a former Reform MP), and Ken
Cheveldayoff, the MLA for Saskatoon Silver Springs who at one time was the
President of the Young Progressive Conservatives of Saskatchewan. Following his
appointment as leader, Wall undertook a full review of party policies. He soon
unveiled a more moderate policy platform that included, among other things,
plans for more treatment beds for crystal meth addicts, democratic workplaces,
and a new model for economic development in Saskatchewan. With significantly
revised core policies and increased emphasis on social issues, the party is
attempting to moderate its image to attract centre-right voters. In response to
the results of the 2003 election, the entire Saskatchewan Party caucus voted in
favour of the NDP's "Crown Corporations Public Ownership Act", which provided
legislative entrenchment for the ownership of the major crown utilities and
services. In February 2006, the party released a code of ethics document for
its members. It set out guidelines for conduct and outlined how to deal with
violators. Actions that are prohibited in this document include disseminating
false information, pressuring prospective contributors and offering bribes to
other political parties, candidates or voters. Penalties included having the
offender's party membership revoked. In a by-election held on March 5, 2007,
the Saskatchewan Party recaptured the seat in the Legislative Assembly left
vacant by the death of Ben Heppner. In a first for Saskatchewan politics,
Heppner's daughter – Nancy Heppner – won the seat in both the by-election
and the 2007 general election. In November 2007, the party was sued by the
Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan over a trust fund. The PC party
alleges that the trustees of the fund, which contains $2.9 million, conspired
with the Saskatchewan Party to deny the PC party access to their funds, and
thus not be able to run candidates in the next election. The Saskatchewan Party
denies any involvement, even though 3 of the 5 trustees are active in the
Saskatchewan Party. In the November 7, 2007 general election, the Saskatchewan
Party won 38 of the 58 seats in the legislature, forming a majority government.
In its first term, the Saskatchewan Party government undertook the largest
single-year income tax reduction in Saskatchewan history, the largest amount of
debt reduction in Saskatchewan history, the largest investment in
infrastructure in Saskatchewan history, while still maintaining a $1.9 billion
cash balance in the Growth and Financial Security Fund. The Saskatchewan Party
government also was successful in lobbying the federal government to block the
takeover bid of Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan from Australian mining giant
BHP Billiton. On November 7, 2011 general election, it won a landslide victory,
winning 49 of 58 seats. All 18 cabinet ministers were re-elected, and the
Saskatchewan Party captured a historic 64.2% of the popular vote. This resulted
in the worst election showing for the NDP since 1982. Clashes with the Calvert
government. In 2004, the Saskatchewan Party's aggressive questioning of the
provincial NDP government over a bad investment of public funds – SPUDCO –
forced cabinet minister Eldon Lautermilch to apologize for misleading the
legislature, a fact that only became apparent once sworn evidence was acquired
from a civil lawsuit against the province. The party's MLAs requested a public
inquiry. In March 2006, the Saskatchewan Party introduced a motion calling on
the NDP government to apologize for the highly unfavourable and inaccurate
portrayal of Jimmy Gardiner in "". The government has argued it was not
responsible for production of the film, and thus rebuked the motion for an
apology. In 2006, in preparation for the Weyburn-Big Muddy by-election, the
Saskatchewan Party was accused of using push polling by attempting to link
Liberal leader David Karwacki with the Canadian gun registry. The same poll
asked respondents if they linked the Saskatchewan Party with the Progressive
Conservative Party of Saskatchewan. On May 16, 2006, in an effort to gain
political support, Saskatchewan Party MLAs tried to associate the provincial
NDP – which had vocally opposed the gun registry – with their federal party
counterparts – which support it. In 2006 the party released a taxpayer-funded
advertisement for the Saskatchewan Party critical of the then-NDP
administration. This ad became known for the misspelling of Saskatchewan – as
"Saskatchwan". The ad was also criticized for having false information – for
example claiming rising tuition costs, despite the government policy of a 3
year freeze in the price of tuition. On November 23, 2006, the Saskatchewan
Party tried to make a political issue about the provincial government trying to
reclaim money from tobacco companies for the additional strain smokers placed
on the health care system. The NDP government pointed out in response that the
Saskatchewan Party had accepted a $10,000 donation from Imperial Tobacco in
2003. Federal political affiliations. While not officially aligned with any
federal political party, the majority of the Saskatchewan Party's supporters
are also involved with the Conservative Party of Canada, with others being
associated with the Liberal Party of Canada. Brad Wall, in the 2004 federal
election, personally endorsed Conservative candidate David L. Anderson, Member
of Parliament for Cypress Hills—Grasslands. In the 2006 federal election,
Brad Wall stated he supported the Conservative Party, but would not personally
get involved in a federal election. The previous leader, Elwin Hermanson, was a
member of the Reform and Canadian Alliance federal parties. Current
Saskatchewan Conservative MPs who have been historically involved with the
Saskatchewan Party include Carol Skelton, who served on Elwin Hermanson's
constituency executive; Tom Lukiwski, who served as a General Manager of the
Saskatchewan Party; Garry Breitkreuz, who supported the formation of the party;
and Lynne Yelich, who worked for Allan Kerpan while Kerpan served as MP and
received funding from him in the 2006 federal election. Others include former
MP Brian Fitzpatrick, who aided in policy direction while the party was formed,
and the late Dave Batters who held a membership in the Saskatchewan Party.
