School violence School violence is widely held to have become a serious problem
in recent decades in many countries, especially where weapons such as guns or
knives are involved. It includes violence between school students as well as
physical attacks by students on school staff. International character of school
violence. Australia. The Education Minister of the State of Queensland said in
July 2009 that the rising levels of violence in schools were "totally
unacceptable" and admitted that not enough had been done to combat violent
behaviour. 55,000 students had been suspended in the state's schools in 2008,
nearly a third of which were for "physical misconduct". In South Australia, 175
violent attacks against students or staff were recorded in 2008. Belgium. A
recent study found that violence experienced by teachers in francophone Belgium
was a significant factor in decisions to leave the teaching profession.
Bulgaria. Following "numerous reports over the past decade about school
violence", the Education Minister in 2009 introduced stricter regulations about
student behaviour, including inappropriate dress, being drunk, and carrying
mobile phones. Teachers were to be given new powers to punish disruptive
students. France. The French Education Minister claimed in 2000 that 39 out of
75,000 state schools were "seriously violent" and 300 were "somewhat violent".
Japan. A survey by the Education Ministry showed that students at public
schools were involved in a record number of violent incidents in 2007—52,756
cases, an increase of some 8,000 on the previous year. In almost 7,000 of these
incidents, teachers were the target of assault. Poland. In 2006, in response to
the suicide of a girl after she was sexually molested in school, the Polish
Minister of Education, Roman Giertych, launched a "zero tolerance" school
reform. Under this plan, teachers would have the legal status of civil
servants, making violent crimes against them punishable by higher penalties.
Head teachers (equivalent to principals in the US) will be, in theory, able to
send aggressive pupils to perform community service and these students' parents
may also be fined. Teachers who fail to report violent acts in school could
face a prison sentence. South Africa. The South African Human Rights Commission
has found that 40% of children interviewed said they had been the victims of
crime at school. More than a fifth of sexual assaults on South African children
were found to have taken place in schools. Exposure to domestic violence,
gangsterism, and drugs have had a substantial impact on student performance.
United Kingdom. A government inquiry in 1989 found that 2 percent of teachers
had reported facing physical aggression. In 2007 a survey of 6,000 teachers by
the teachers' trade union NASUWT found that over 16% claimed to have been
physically assaulted by students in the previous two years. On the basis of
police statistics found through a Freedom of Information request, in 2007 there
were more than 7,000 cases of the police being called to deal with violence in
schools in England. In April 2009 another teachers' union, the Association of
Teachers and Lecturers, released details of a survey of over 1,000 of its
members which found that nearly one quarter of them had been on the receiving
end of physical violence by a student. In Wales, a 2009 survey found that two-
fifths of teachers reported having been assaulted in the classroom. 49% had
been threatened with assault. United States. According to the U.S. National
Center for Education Statistics, school violence is a serious problem. In 2007,
the latest year for which comprehensive data were available, a nationwide
survey, conducted biennially by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC) and involving representative samples of U.S. high school students, found
that 5.9% of students carried a weapon (e.g. gun, knife, etc.) on school
property during the 30 days antedating the survey. The rate was three times
higher among males than among females. In the 12 months antedating the survey,
7.8% of high school students reported having been threatened or injured with a
weapon on school property at least once, with the prevalence rate among males
twice that as among females. In the 12 months antedating the survey, 12.4% of
students had been in a physical fight on school property at least once. The
rate among males was twice the rate found among females. In the 30 days
antedating the survey, 5.5% of students reported that because they did not feel
safe, they did not go to school on at least one day. The rates for males and
females were approximately equal. The most recent U.S. data on violent crime in
which teachers were targeted indicate that 7 percent (10 percent in urban
schools) of teachers in 2003 were subject to threats of injury by students.
Five percent of teachers in urban schools were physically attacked, with
smaller percentages in suburban and rural schools. Other members of school
staffs are also at risk for violent attack, with school bus drivers being
particularly vulnerable. Risk factors. The individual child. Internalizing and
externalizing behaviors. A distinction is made between internalizing and
externalizing behavior. Internalizing behaviors reflect withdrawal, inhibition,
anxiety, and/or depression. Internalizing behavior has been found in some cases
of youth violence although in some youth, depression is associated with
substance abuse. Because they rarely act out, students with internalizing
problems are often overlooked by school personnel. Externalizing behaviors
refer to delinquent activities, aggression, and hyperactivity. Unlike
internalizing behaviors, externalizing behaviors include, or are directly
linked to, violent episodes. Violent behaviors such as punching and kicking are
often learned from observing others. Just as externalizing behaviors are
observed outside of school, such behaviors also observed in schools. Other
individual factors. A number of other individual factors are associated with
higher levels of aggressiveness. Early starters have worse outcomes than
children whose antisocial activities begin late. Lower IQ is related to higher
levels of aggressivity. Other findings indicate that in boys early problematic
motor skills, attentional difficulties, and reading problems predict later
persistent antisocial conduct. Home environment. The home environment is
thought to contribute to school violence. The Constitutional Rights Foundation
suggests long-term exposure to gun violence, parental alcoholism, domestic
violence, physical abuse of the child, and child sexual abuse teaches children
that criminal and violent activities are acceptable. Harsh parental discipline
is associated with higher levels of aggressiveness in youth. There is some
evidence indicating that exposure to television violence and, to a lesser
extent, violent video games is related to increased aggressiveness in children,
which, in turn, may carry over into school. Straus adduced evidence for the
view that exposure to parental corporal punishment increases the risk of
aggressive conduct in children and adolescents. Straus's findings have been
contested by Larzelere and Baumrind. A meta-analysis of the vast literature on
corporal punishment, however, indicates that corporal punishment is related to
poorer outcomes in children and youth. The methodologically soundest studies
indicate "positive, moderately sized associations between parental corporal
punishment and children’s aggression." Gershoff found that the trajectory of
mean effect sizes (the size of the effect of corporal punishment on children's
problem behavior) was curvilinear with the largest mean effect size in middle
school ("M" = 0.55; on average the mean of corporal punishment group was more
than half a standard deviation higher than the mean of the non-punishment
group) and slightly smaller effect sizes in grade school ("M" = 0.43) and high
school ("M" = 0.45). Gerald Patterson’s social interactional model, which
involves the mother’s application and the child's counterapplication of
"coercive" behaviors, also explains the development of aggressive conduct in
the child. In this context, coercive behaviors include behaviors that are
ordinarily punishing (e.g., whining, yelling, hitting, etc.). Abusive home
environments can inhibit the growth of social cognitive skills needed, for
example, to understand the intentions of others. Short-term longitudinal
evidence is consistent with the view that a lack of social cognitive skills
mediates the link between harsh parental discipline and aggressive conduct in
kindergarten. Longer-term, follow-up research with the same children suggests
that partial mediating effects last until third and fourth grade. Hirschi's
(1969) control theory advances the view that children with weak affective ties
to parents and school are at increased risk of engaging in delinquent and
violent behavior in and out of school. Hirschi's cross-sectional data from
northern California high-school students are largely consistent with this view.
Findings from case-control and longitudinal studies are also consistent with
this view. Neighborhood environment. Neighborhoods and communities provide the
context for school violence. Communities with high rates of crime and drug use
teach youth the violent behaviors that are carried into schools. Dilapidated
housing in the neighborhood of the school has been found to be associated with
school violence. Teacher assault was more likely to occur in schools located in
high-crime neighborhoods. Exposure to deviant peers is a risk factor for high
levels of aggressivity. Research has shown that poverty and high population
densities are associated with higher rates of school violence. Well controlled
longitudinal research indicates that children's exposure to community violence
during the early elementary school years increases the risk of aggression later
in elementary school, as reported by teachers and classmates. Other, well
controlled longitudinal research that utilized propensity score matching
indicates that exposure to gun violence in early adolescence is related to the
initiation of serious physical violence in later adolescence. Neighborhood
gangs are thought to contribute to dangerous school environments. Gangs use the
social environment of the school to recruit members and interact with opposing
groups, with gang violence carrying over from neighborhoods into some schools.
School environment. Recent research has linked the school environment to school
violence. Teacher assaults are associated with a higher percentage male
faculty, a higher proportion of male students, and a higher proportion of
students receiving free or reduced cost lunch (an indicator of poverty). In
general, a large male population, higher grade levels, a history of high levels
of disciplinary problems in the school, high student to teacher ratios, and an
urban location are related to violence in schools. In students, academic
performance is inversely related to antisocial conduct. The research by Hirschi
and others, cited above in the section on the home environment, is also
consistent with the view that lack of attachment to school is associated with
increased risk of antisocial conduct. Controversies. Lax school authorities. In
2005 on a school bus in Montgomery County, Maryland, an 11-year old girl was
attacked by a group of several older boys who, the girl said, grabbed her
breasts and feigned sex acts. Also in 2005 on a school bus in Colonial Heights,
Virginia, south of Richmond, Virginia, three boys and two girls aged 8 to 13
held an 11-year-old girl down in the back of the bus and forcefully penetrated
her with an object. In the Maryland case, the child's mother, not the school,
called the police, although a school administrator did notify the girl's mother
(the students were not charged with sexual assault because the police
mishandled the paperwork); in the Virginia case, the bus driver saw the
incident and notified both the school and the girl's mother, prompting
coordinated investigations by the police and the school. In 2008, the Baltimore
School District failed to intervene in an act of violence committed against a
teacher. A student had taken a video of a peer beating her art teacher. School
officials ignored the problem until the video was posted on MySpace. Some cases
of school violence have not been brought to the attention of the authorities
because school administrators have not wanted their schools labeled unsafe
under the No Child Left Behind (NCLB) Act. With or without NCLB, in the US,
there has been a history of underreporting violent incidents occurring in
schools. The media. School shootings are rare and unusual forms of school
violence. School shootings are accountable for less than 1% of violent crimes
in public schools, with an average of 16.5 deaths per year from 2001–2008.
Some commentators claim that media coverage encourages school violence,
although a more likely explanation is that the reporting follows the events in
question. On April 16, 2007, Seung-Hui Cho killed 32 people at Virginia Tech
before committing suicide. On the other hand, the press would likely have been
faulted if it did not cover serious threats to public safety like the Virginia
Tech and Columbine massacres. Prevention and intervention. The goal of
prevention and intervention strategies is to stop school violence from
occurring. According to the CDC, there are at least four levels at which
violence-prevention programs can act: at the level of society in general, the
school community, the family, and the individual.
