Mitt Romney dog incident During a 1983 family vacation, Mitt Romney drove
twelve hours with his dog Seamus on top of the car in a windshield-equipped
carrier. This incident became the subject of negative media attention and
political attacks on Romney in both the 2008 and the 2012 presidential
elections. Road trip in 1983. In June 1983, the Romney family left their
Belmont, Massachusetts home on their way to Romney's parents' cottage in Beach
O'Pines, Ontario for an annual vacation along the shore of Lake Huron. Seamus
rode in a carrier on the roof of the family's Chevrolet Caprice station wagon
for the 12 hour trip. Romney had built a windshield for the carrier to make the
ride more comfortable for the dog. During the trip, Seamus had a bout of
diarrhea. Romney stopped at a gas station to wash the dog, the carrier and the
car. With Seamus back in the carrier, the family continued on their way.
Background about Seamus the dog. Seamus ( ), an Irish setter, was an active,
outgoing dog, and was the Romney family's first pet dog. It is generally
reported that, a few years after his ride to Canada, Seamus was given to Mitt
Romney's sister, Jane Romney Robinson of California, who said, "He kept ending
up at the pound. They were worried about him getting hit crossing the street.
We had more space, so he could roam more freely." The dog's date of death is
unknown, but Robinson stated that Seamus lived on her farm until a "ripe old
age". Response from the Romney family. When interviewed by Chris Wallace of Fox
News, Romney stated that Seamus enjoyed being in the dog carrier, an "air-tight
kennel", and that he was not aware of any violations of Massachusetts law. Ann
Romney, Mitt Romney's wife, has stated that the news media exaggerated the
severity of the incident, and compared traveling in the roof-top dog carrier to
riding a motorcycle or riding in the bed of a pickup truck. During an April
2012 interview with ABC News, Diane Sawyer asked Mitt Romney about the Seamus
story and if he would ever do it again. Romney replied, "Certainly not with the
attention it's received", after which Sawyer stated, "You said it was the most
wounding thing in the campaign so far", though it is ambiguous as to whether
Romney agreed with this statement. During the same interview, Ann Romney stated
that Seamus got diarrhea from eating turkey off the table before the trip, and
that the dog loved the crate. Mitt Romney states he loves his dog. Other
responses. In 2007, it was reported that Ingrid Newkirk, president of the
People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA), criticized Romney about
this incident. Responding to PETA, Romney claimed that "my dog likes fresh
air". Newkirk has elaborated (speaking for herself rather than for PETA) that
the Seamus incident irritates her because "there are far more serious issues to
talk about" regarding mistreatment of animals. During the 2012 U.S. Republican
presidential primaries, candidate Newt Gingrich aired an anti-Romney attack ad
that featured the story. While appearing on the ABC show "This Week",
Republican candidate Rick Santorum stated, "As far as Seamus the dog ... the
issues of character are important in this election. We need to look at all
those issues and make a determination as to whether that’s the kind of person
you want to be president of the United States.” Santorum's view was at odds
with that of Bill Wasik, senior editor of "Wired Magazine": "Yet looking back
on the Seamus Romney story today, what is most striking is its forgettability,
how indistinguishable it seems in retrospect from the idiots’ parade of
meaningless stories that came to define the [2008 campaign."  Journalist Ruth
Marcus of the "Washington Post" defended Mitt Romney's treatment of Seamus,
stating, "Doesn’t the fact that Romney chose to bring the dog on the family
vacation, rather than dump him in a kennel back home, suggest that he’s a dog
lover, not a hater?" Neil Swidey, the "Boston Globe" journalist who wrote the
initial article about Romney's 1983 road trip, stated, " always struck me as a
valuable window into how Romney operates. In everything the guy does, he
functions on logic, not emotion." A Public Policy Polling (PPP) survey found
that 74% of Democrats, 66% of Independents, and 63% of Republicans consider it
inhumane to put a family dog in a kennel on the roof of a car. The poll did not
mention the windshield. The poll also found that 35% of voters would be less
likely to vote for Romney because of the Seamus incident, whereas 55% of voters
said that it would not affect how they vote. As of September 2012, "New York
Times" columnist Gail Collins had mentioned the Romneys' car trip more than 70
times. Responding to Democrats who emphasized the Seamus story, conservative
bloggers such as Jim Treacher drew a comparison between the Seamus incident and
Barack Obama sampling dog meat as a child in Indonesia, where it is a local
delicacy, as mentioned in Obama's autobiography. While an Obama spokesman
called it an attack on a small child, Obama himself has displayed a sense of
humor about it. Obama supporters have referenced the Seamus incident in works
of art, music and in campaign-related merchandise. In August 2012, the band
Devo released a single called "Don't Roof Rack Me, Bro (Seamus Unleashed)", to
keep the incident in the news as the presidential campaign moves to a
conclusion. Seamus was the inspiration for Bob Staake’s March 12, 2012 "New
Yorker" cover showing Rick Santorum on the roof of a car. It also inspired a
book on the subject, and a website selling anti-Romney related wares.
