Sedition In law, sedition is overt conduct, such as speech and organization,
that is deemed by the legal authority to tend toward insurrection against the
established order. Sedition often includes subversion of a constitution and
incitement of discontent (or resistance) to lawful authority. Sedition may
include any commotion, though not aimed at direct and open violence against the
laws. Seditious words in writing are seditious libel. A seditionist is one who
engages in or promotes the interests of sedition. Typically, sedition is
considered a subversive act, and the overt acts that may be prosecutable under
sedition laws vary from one legal code to another. Where the history of these
legal codes has been traced, there is also a record of the change in the
definition of the elements constituting sedition at certain points in history.
This overview has served to develop a sociological definition of sedition as
well, within the study of state persecution. The difference between sedition
and treason consists primarily in the subjective ultimate object of the
violation to the public peace. Sedition does not consist of levying war against
a government nor of adhering to its enemies, giving enemies aid, and giving
enemies comfort. Nor does it consist, in most representative democracies, of
peaceful protest against a government, nor of attempting to change the
government by democratic means (such as direct democracy or constitutional
convention). Sedition is the stirring up of rebellion against the government in
power. Treason is the violation of allegiance to one's sovereign or state,
giving aid to enemies, or levying war against one's state. Sedition is
encouraging one's fellow citizens to rebel against their state, whereas treason
is actually betraying one's country by aiding and abetting another state.
Sedition laws somewhat equate to terrorism and public order laws. History in
common law jurisdictions. The term "sedition" in its modern meaning first
appeared in the Elizabethan Era (c. 1590) as the "notion of inciting by words
or writings disaffection towards the state or constituted authority". "Sedition
complements treason and martial law: while treason controls primarily the
privileged, ecclesiastical opponents, priests, and Jesuits, as well as certain
commoners; and martial law frightens commoners, sedition frightens
intellectuals." Australia. Australia's sedition laws were amended in anti-
terrorism legislation passed on 6 December 2005, updating definitions and
increasing penalties. In late 2006, the Commonwealth Government, under the
Prime-Ministership of John Howard proposed plans to amend Australia's Crimes
Act 1914, introducing laws that mean artists and writers may be jailed for up
to seven years if their work was considered seditious or inspired sedition
either deliberately or accidentally. Opponents of these laws have suggested
that they could be used against legitimate dissent. Australia’s new Sedition
Laws, Mike Head, "World Socialist Web Site", 27 October 2006 These laws were
amended in Australia on the 19-09-2011. The ‘sedition’ clauses was repealed
and replaced with ‘urging violence’. [http://www.visualarts.net.au/
newsdesk/2011/09/sedition-deleted-in-national-security-legislation-amendment-
act] Canada. During World War II former Mayor of Montreal Camillien Houde
campaigned against conscription in Canada. On August 2, 1940, Houde publicly
urged the men of Quebec to ignore the National Registration Act. Three days
later, he was placed under arrest by the Royal Canadian Mounted Police on
charges of sedition. After being found guilty, he was confined in internment
camps in Petawawa, Ontario, and Gagetown, New Brunswick, until 1944. Upon his
release on August 18, 1944, he was greeted by a cheering crowd of 50,000
Montrealers and won back his position as the Mayor of Montreal in the election
in 1944. Hong Kong. A Sedition Ordinance had existed in the territory since
1970, which was subsequently consolidated into the Crime Ordinance in 1972.
According to the Crime Ordinance, a seditious intention is an intention to
bring into hatred or contempt or to excite disaffection against the person of
government, to excite inhabitants of Hong Kong to attempt to procure the
alteration, otherwise than by lawful means, of any other matter in Hong Kong as
by law established, to bring into hatred or contempt or to excite disaffection
against the administration of justice in Hong Kong, to raise discontent or
disaffection amongst inhabitants of Hong Kong, to promote feelings of ill-will
and enmity between different classes of the population of Hong Kong, to incite
persons to violence, or to counsel disobedience to law or to any lawful order.
Article 23 of the Basic Law requires the special administrative region to enact
laws prohibiting any act of treason, secession, sedition, subversion against
the Central People's Government of the People's Republic of China. The National
Security (Legislative Provisions) Bill was tabled in early 2003 to replace the
existing laws regarding treason and sedition, and to introduce new laws to
prohibit secessionist and subversive acts and theft of state secrets, and to
prohibit political organisations from establishing overseas ties. The bill was
shelved following massive opposition from the public. India. While the United
Kingdom abolished sedition laws in 2010, sedition became a big issue in India
the same year as noted writer Arundhati Roy, amongst others, were sought to be
charged with sedition for advocating independence for the disputed Kashmir
region. This is by no means the only instance of sedition laws being used in
contemporary India. Many human rights activists have found themselves charged
with sedition. Binayak Sen MBBS, MD; is an Indian pediatrician, public health
specialist and activist was found guilty of sedition. He is the national Vice-
President of the People's Union for Civil Liberties (PUCL).On 24 December 2010,
the Additional Sessions and District Court Judge B.P Varma Raipur found Binayak
Sen, Naxal ideologue Narayan Sanyal and Kolkata businessman Piyush Guha, guilty
of sedition for helping the Maoists in their fight against the state.They were
sentenced to life imprisonment.However he got bail in Supreme court on 16 April
2011. On 10 September 2012, Aseem Trivedi, a political cartoonist, was sent to
judicial custody till 24 September 2012 on charges of sedition over a series of
political cartoons against corruption. Though the cartoons were derogatory to
National Emblem and the Constitution of India, the arrest of Aseem Trivedi
under sedition has been questioned by experts. Indian Penal code for Sedition
is Section 124A (1860) New Zealand. Sedition charges were not uncommon in New
Zealand early in the 20th Century. For instance, the future Prime Minister
Peter Fraser had been convicted of sedition in his youth for arguing against
conscription during World War I, and was imprisoned for a year. Perhaps
ironically, Fraser re-introduced the conscription of troops as the Prime
Minister during World War II. In New Zealand's first sedition trial in decades,
Tim Selwyn was convicted of sedition (section 83 of the Crimes Act 1961) on 8
June 2006. Shortly after, in September 2006, the New Zealand Police laid a
sedition charge against a Rotorua youth, Christopher Russell, 17, who was also
charged with threatening to kill. The Police withdrew the sedition charge when
Russell agreed to plead guilty on the other charge. In March 2007, Mark Paul
Deason, the manager of a tavern near the University of Otago, was charged with
seditious intent although he was later granted diversion when he pleaded guilty
to publishing a document which encourages public disorder Deason ran a
promotion for his tavern that offered one litre of beer for one litre of
petrol. At the end of the promotion, the prize would have been a couch soaked
in the petrol. It is presumed the intent was for the couch to be burned — a
popular university student prank. Police also applied for Deason's liquor
license to be revoked. Following a recommendation from the New Zealand Law
Commission, the New Zealand government announced on 7 May 2007 that the
sedition law would be repealed. The Crimes (Repeal of Seditious Offences)
Amendment Act 2007 was passed on 24 October 2007, and entered into force on 1
January 2008. United Kingdom. Sedition was a common law offence in the UK.
James Fitzjames Stephen's "Digest of the Criminal Law" stated that ""a
seditious intention is an intention to bring into hatred or contempt, or to
exite disaffection against the person of His Majesty, his heirs or successors,
or the government and constitution of the United Kingdom, as by law
established, or either House of Parliament, or the administration of justice,
or to excite His Majesty's subjects to attempt otherwise than by lawful means,
the alteration of any matter in Church or State by law established, or to
incite any person to commit any crime in disturbance of the peace, or to raise
discontent or disaffection amongst His Majesty's subjects, or to promote
feelings of ill-will and hostility between different classes of such subjects.
"An intention to show that His Majesty has been misled or mistaken in his
measures, or to point out errors or defects in the government or constitution
as by law established , with a view to their reformation, or to excite His
Majesty's subjects to attempt by lawful means the alteration of any matter in
Church or State by law established , or to point out, in order to secure their
removal, matters which are producing, or have a tendency to produce, feelings
of hatred and ill-will between classes of His Majesty's subjects, is not a
seditious intention."" Stephen in his "History of the Criminal Law of England"
accepted the view that a seditious libel was nothing short of a direct
incitement to disorder and violence. He stated that the modern view of the law
was plainly and fully set out by Littledale J. in "Collins". In that case the
jury were instructed that they could convict of seditious libel only if they
were satisfied that the defendant "meant that the people should make use of
physical force as their own resource to obtain justice, and meant to excite the
people to take the power in to their own hands, and meant to excite them to
tumult and disorder." The last prosecution for sedition in the United Kingdom
was in 1972, when three people were charged with seditious conspiracy and
uttering seditious words for attempting to recruit people to travel to Northern
Ireland to fight in support of Republicans. The seditious conspiracy charge was
dropped, but the men received suspended sentences for uttering seditious words
and for offences against the Public Order Act. In 1977, a Law Commission
working paper recommended that the common law offence of sedition in England
and Wales be abolished. They said that they thought that this offence was
redundant and that it was not necessary to have any offence of sedition.
However this proposal was not implemented until 2009, when sedition and
seditious libel (as common law offences) were abolished by section 73 of the
Coroners and Justice Act 2009 (with effect on 12 January 2010). Sedition by an
alien is still an offence under section 3 of the Aliens Restriction (Amendment)
Act 1919. In Scotland, section 51 of the Criminal Justice and Licensing
(Scotland) Act 2010 abolished the common law offences of sedition and leasing-
making with effect from 28 March 2011. United States. Civilian. In 1798,
President John Adams signed into law the Alien and Sedition Acts, the fourth of
which, the "Sedition Act" or "An Act for the Punishment of Certain Crimes
against the United States" set out punishments of up to two years of
imprisonment for "opposing or resisting any law of the United States" or
writing or publishing "false, scandalous, and malicious writing" about the
President or the U.S. Congress, but specifically not the Vice-President. This
Act of Congress was allowed to expire in 1801 after the election of Thomas
Jefferson to the Presidency. He had been the Vice-President at the time of the
Act's passage. In the Espionage Act of 1917, Section 3 made it a federal crime,
punishable by up to 20 years of imprisonment and a fine of up to $10,000, to
willfully spread false news of the American army and navy with an intent to
disrupt their operations, to foment mutiny in their ranks, or to obstruct
recruiting. This Act of Congress was amended Sedition Act of 1918, which
expanded the scope of the Espionage Act to any statement criticizing the
Government of the United States. These Acts were upheld in 1919 in the case of
"Schenck v. United States", but they were largely repealed in 1921, leaving
laws forbidding foreign espionage in the United States and allowing military
censorship of sensitive material. In 1940, the Alien Registration Act, or
"Smith Act", was passed, which made it a federal crime to advocate or to teach
the desirability of overthrowing the United States Government, or to be a
member of any organization which does the same. It was often used against
Communist Party organizations. This Act was invoked in three major cases, one
of which against the Socialist Worker's Party in Minneapolis in 1941, resulting
in 23 convictions, and again in what became known as the Great Sedition Trial
of 1944 in which a number of pro-Nazi figures were indicted but released when
the prosecution ended in a mistrial. Also, a series of trials of 140 leaders of
the Communist Party USA also relied upon the terms of the "Smith Act" -
- beginning in 1949—and lasting until 1957. Although the U.S. Supreme Court
upheld the convictions of 11 CPUSA leaders in 1951 in Dennis v. United States,
that same Court reversed itself in 1957 in the case of "Yates v. United
States", by ruling that teaching an ideal, no matter how harmful it may seem,
does not equal advocating or planning its implementation. Although unused since
at least 1961, the "Smith Act" remains a Federal law. There was, however, a
brief attempt to use the sedition laws against protesters of the Vietnam War.
On October 17, 1967, two demonstrators, including then Marin County resident Al
Wasserman, while engaged in a 'sit in' at the Army Induction Center in Oakland,
Ca., were arrested and charged with sedition by deputy US. Marshall Richard St.
Germain. U.S. Attorney Cecil Poole changed the charge to trespassing. Poole
said, "three guys (according to Mr. Wasserman there were only 2) reaching up
and touching the leg of an inductee, and that's conspiracy to commit sedition?
That's ridiculous!" The inductees were in the process of physically stepping on
the demonstrators as they attempted to enter the building, and the
demonstrators were trying to protect themselves from the inductees' feet.
Attorney Poole later added, "We'll decide what to prosecute, not marshals." On
October 1, 1995, Omar Abdel-Rahman and nine others were convicted of seditious
conspiracy. Laura Berg, a nurse at a U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs
hospital in New Mexico was investigated for sedition in September 2005 after
writing a letter to the editor of a local newspaper, accusing several national
leaders of criminal negligence. Though their action was later deemed
unwarranted by the director of Veteran Affairs, local human resources personnel
took it upon themselves to request an FBI investigation. Ms. Berg was
represented by the ACLU. Charges were dropped in 2006. On March 28, 2010, nine
members of the militia Hutaree were arrested and charged with crimes including
seditious conspiracy. Military. Sedition is a punishable offense under Article
94 of the Uniform Code of Military Justice. Civil law jurisdictions. Germany.
Volksverhetzung ("incitement of the people") is a legal concept unique to
Germany. It is sometimes loosely translated as sedition, although the law bans
the incitement of hatred against a segment of the population. Segment of the
population meaning, for example, a race or religion.
