Synarchism Synarchism is a term which generally refers to "joint rule" or
"harmonious rule". Beyond this general definition, however, both "synarchism"
and synarchy have been used to describe several different political processes
in various contexts. Increasingly, the terms have been used by conspiracy
theorists to mean rule by a secret elite. Origins. The earliest recorded use of
the term "synarchy" is attributed to Thomas Stackhouse (1677–1752), an
English clergyman who used the word in his "New History of the Holy Bible from
the Beginning of the World to the Establishment of Christianity" (published in
two folio volumes in 1737). The attribution can be found in the Webster's
Dictionary (the American Dictionary of the English Language, published by Noah
Webster in 1828). Webster's definition for "synarchy" is limited entirely to
"joint rule or sovereignty". The word is derived from the Greek stems "syn"
meaning with or together and "archy" meaning rule. The most substantial early
use of the word "synarchy" comes from the writings of Alexandre Saint-Yves
d'Alveydre (1842–1909), who used the term in his book "La France vraie" to
describe what he believed was the ideal form of government. In reaction to the
emergence of anarchist ideologies and movements, Saint-Yves elaborated a
political formula which he believed would lead to a harmonious society. He
defended social differentiation and hierarchy with collaboration between social
classes, transcending conflict between social and economic groups: synarchy, as
opposed to anarchy. Specifically, Saint-Yves envisioned a Federal Europe (as
well as all the states it has integrated) with a corporatist government
composed of three councils, one for academia, one for the judiciary, and one
for commerce. Rule by a secret elite. Some conspiracy theorists use the word
"synarchy" to describe a shadow government, a form of government where
political power effectively rests with a secret elite, in contrast to an
"oligarchy" where the elite is or could be known by the public. Occultism. Some
authors have claimed that Saint-Yves was a "theocratic occultist" who used
"synarchy" to describe a form of government where political power effectively
rests with secret societies or, more precisely, esoteric societies, which are
composed of oracles. Furthermore he is supposed to have associated "synarchy"
with the rule of "ascended masters" who lived in the subterranean caverns of
Agartha and supposedly communicated with him telepathically. However, other
authors have described these claims about Saint-Yves as false and originating
in occult conspiracy theories. In Vichy France. According to former OSS officer
William Langer ("Our Vichy Gamble", Alfred A Knopf, New York, 1947), there were
French industrial and banking interests who "even before the war, had turned to
Nazi Germany and had looked to Hitler as the savior of Europe from Communism.
These people were as good fascists as any in Europe. Many of them had extensive
and intimate business relations with German interests and were still dreaming
of a new system of 'synarchy', which meant government of Europe on fascist
principles by an international brotherhood of financiers and industrialists."
This theory allegedly originated with the discovery of a document called "Pacte
Synarchique" following the death of Jean Coutrot, former member of Groupe X-
Crise, on May 15, 1941. According to this document, a "Mouvement Synarchique
d'Empire" had been founded in 1922, with the aim of abolishing
parliamentarianism and replacing it with synarchy. This led to the belief that
La Cagoule, a far-right organisation, was the armed branch of French
synarchism, and that some important members of the Vichy Regime were
synarchists. An investigation was in fact ordered by the Vichy government,
leading to the "Rapport Chavin" but no evidence for the existence of the
"Mouvement Synarchiste d'Empire" was found. Most of the presumed synarchists
were either associated with the Banque Worms or with Groupe X-Crise and were
close to Admiral François Darlan, and this has led to the belief that
synarchists had engineered the military defeat of France for the profit of
Banque Worms. This belief system has been dismissed as a "work of a paranoid
imagination which wove together the histories of three disparate groups of
activists, creating a conspiracy among them where none existed". In fact, some
historians suspect that the "Pacte Synarchique" was a hoax created by some
members of La Cagoule to weaken Darlan and his technocrats. Propaganda Due. The
Propaganda Due lodge (P2) was a "textbook example" of an attempt to establish a
synarchy, as it united politicians, the Catholic Church, and the Mafia-
controlled tax-free drug economy guaranteed by the historically falsified
prohibition of psychotropic substances. LaRouche. Lyndon LaRouche, leader of a
controversial movement on the political fringe, describes a wide-ranging
historical phenomenon, starting with Alexandre Saint-Yves d'Alveydre and the
Martinist Order followed by important individuals, organizations, movements and
regimes that are alleged to have been synarchist, including the government of
Nazi Germany. He claims that during the Great Depression an international
coalition of financial institutions, raw materials cartels, and intelligence
operatives, installed fascist regimes throughout Europe (and tried to do so in
Mexico) to maintain world order and prevent the repudiation of international
debts. LaRouche identifies the former U.S. Vice President and former PNAC
member Dick Cheney as a modern "synarchist", and claims that "synarchists" have
"a scheme for replacing regular military forces of nations, by private armies
in the footsteps of a privately financed international Waffen-SS-like scheme, a
force deployed by leading financier institutions, such as the multi-billions
funding by the U.S. Treasury, of Cheney's Halliburton gang." Other uses of
synarchism. China. Harvard historian and sinologist John K. Fairbank used the
word "synarchism" in his 1953 book "Trade and Diplomacy on the China Coast: The
Opening of the Treaty Ports, 1842-1854" and in later writings, to describe the
mechanisms of government under the late Qing dynasty in China. Fairbank's
synarchy is a form of rule by co-opting existing elites and powers, bringing
them into the system and legitimising them through a schedule of rituals and
tributes that gave them a stake in the Chinese regime and neutralised any risk
that they might rebel against the monarchy. He believed that the Qing, who were
considered outside rulers because of their Manchu origins, had developed this
strategy out of necessity because they did not have their own political base in
China. This conception of Qing rule is not universally accepted among
sinologists and historians of China, but is a respected, mainstream view with
significant support in the field. The term is also used by some political
scientists to describe the British colonial government in Hong Kong
(1842–1997). Ambrose King, in his controversial 1975 paper "Administrative
Absorption of Politics in Hong Kong", described colonial Hong Kong's
administration as "elite consensual government". In it, he claimed, any
coalition of elites or forces capable of challenging the legitimacy of Hong
Kong's administrative structure would be co-opted by the existing apparatus
through the appointment of leading political activists, business figures and
other elites to oversight committees, by granting them British honours, and by
bringing them into elite institutions like Hong Kong's horse racing clubs. He
called this "synarchy", by extension of Fairbank's use of the word. Mexican
synarchism. "Synarchy" is also the name of the ideology of a political movement
in Mexico dating from the 1930s. In Mexico it was historically a movement of
the Roman Catholic extreme right, in some ways akin to fascism, violently
opposed to the populist and secularist policies of the revolutionary (PNR, PRM,
and PRI) governments that ruled Mexico from 1929 to 2000. The National
Synarchist Union "(Unión Nacional Sinarquista," UNS) was founded in May 1937
by a group of Catholic political activists led by José Antonio Urquiza, who
was murdered in April 1938, and Salvador Abascal. In 1946 a faction of the
movement loyal to deposed leader Manuel Torres Bueno regrouped as the Popular
Force Party (Partido Fuerza Popular). Synarchism revived as a political
movement in the 1970s through the Mexican Democratic Party (PDM), whose
candidate, Ignacio González Gollaz, polled 1.8 percent of the vote at the 1982
presidential election. In 1988 Gumersindo Magaña polled a similar proportion,
but the party then suffered a split, and in 1992 lost its registration as a
political party. It was dissolved in 1996. There are now two organisations,
both calling themselves the Unión Nacional Sinarquista, one apparently right-
wing orientation, the other apparently left-wing. Carlos Abascal, son of
Salvador Abascal, was Mexico's Secretary of the Interior during Vicente Fox's
presidency. Many "sinarquistas" are now militant in the National Action Party,
PAN, the party in power since 2000 first with Vicente Fox and now with Felipe
Calderón (since 2006) as presidents. "Sinarquistas" are influential policy
makers in matters like education and health.
