Syrian Social Nationalist Party The Syrian Social Nationalist Party (SSNP) (,
transliterated: "Al-Ḥizb Al-Sūrī Al-Qawmī Al-'Ijtimā'ī", often referred
to in French as "Parti populaire syrien" or "Parti social nationaliste
syrien"), is a secular nationalist political party operating in Lebanon, Syria,
Jordan and Palestinian territories.It advocates the establishment of a Syrian
nation state spanning the Fertile Crescent, including present day Syria,
Lebanon, Iraq, Jordan, the Palestinian Territories, Israel, Cyprus, Kuwait,
Sinai, southeastern Turkey and southwestern Iran. It is the largest political
group in Syria after the Arab Socialist Ba'ath Party, with over 100,000
members. In Lebanon, it is part of the March 8 Alliance. Founded in Beirut in
1932 as a national liberation organization hostile to French colonialism, the
party played a significant role in Lebanese politics and was involved in
attempted coup d'etats in 1949 and 1961 following which it was thoroughly
repressed. It was active in the resistance against the Israeli invasion of
Lebanon from 1982 to 2000 while continuously supporting the Syrian presence in
Lebanon. In Syria, the SSNP became a major political force in the early 1950s,
but was thoroughly repressed in 1955. It remained organised, and in 2005 was
legalised and joined the Ba'ath Party-led National Progressive Front. As of
2012, the party is part of the Popular Front for Change and Liberation.
Foundation and early years. The SSNP was founded by Antun Saadeh, a Lebanese
Syrian nationalist philosopher from a Greek Orthodox family in the town of
Dhour el Shweir. Saadeh had emigrated to South America in 1919 (via the USA
where he stayed for about a year before continuing on to Brazil), at the age of
fifteen, and in the years he lived there engaged in both Arabic-language
journalism and Syrian nationalist political activity. On his return to Lebanon
in 1930 he continued working as a journalist and also taught German in the
American University of Beirut. In November 1932 he secretly established the
first nucleus of the Syrian Social Nationalist Party, which operated
underground for the first three years of its existence. In 1933 it started
publishing a monthly journal called "Al-Majalla" which was distributed in the
American University of Beirut. The articles written in that journal and the
speeches given by Saadeh consolidated the ideological basis of the party, and
contributed to its popularity. Since its founding, the party endorsed an open
hostility to colonialism and advocated national self-determination, which
eventually led to its ban by French authorities and the incarceration of Saadeh
in 1936. Saadeh was sent to trial in 1936 and spent six months in prison for
creating a clandestine party. He was also accused in the trial of having been
in contact with the fascist movements of Germany and Italy, but the charge was
dropped as a letter was addressed from Germany denying any relationships. It is
during his months in prison that Saadeh laid down the final ideological
foundations of the party in "The Genesis of Nations". Saadeh emigrated again to
Brazil in 1938 and afterwards to Argentina, only to return to Lebanon in 1947
following the country's independence from the French in 1943. By that time, the
SSNP had grown exponentially and had clashed on many occasions with its primary
ideological rival, the Kataeb Party. While the latter was committed to the
notion of Lebanon as a nation state defined as an entity presiding over the
borders outlined first by the Sykes-Picot agreement in 1916, and afterwards by
the French administrative division of its mandate into six states including the
state of Greater Lebanon, the SSNP rejected this national claim on the basis
that the borders outlining the newly-created states were fictitious, resulting
from colonialism, and do not reflect any historical and social realities. The
party claimed that Greater Syria as defined by Saadeh represents the national
ideal encompassing the historical people of Mesopotamia and the Fertile
Crescent, bound together by a clearly-defined geography and a common
historical, social and cultural development path. Furthermore, and with the
start of the Arab-Israeli conflict in 1948, Saadeh radicalized the party's
Anti-Zionist stance by declaring that ""Our struggle with the enemy is not a
struggle for borders but for existence"". On July 4, 1949, a year after the
declaration of the establishment of the state of Israel and the Nakba, and a
response to a series of aggressions perpetrated by the Kataeb-backed central
government,the SSNP attempted its first revolution. Following a violent
crackdown by government forces, Saadeh traveled to Damascus to meet with Husni
al-Za'im in an attempt to obtain his support. Viewed as a radical agitator and
threat to the newly-created Syrian state, Al-Za'im handed Saadeh over to
Lebanese authorities, who had him executed on July 8, 1949. It was the shortest
and most secretive trial given to a political offender. The SSNP in Lebanon.
After Saadeh was executed and its high-ranking leaders were arrested, the party
remained underground until 1958 when it sided with then-president Camille
Chamoun against the Arab nationalist rebels. The party launched an abortive
coup attempt in 1961, under the semi-authoritarian rule of General Fouad
Chehab. This resulted in a renewed proscription and the imprisonment of many of
its leaders. In prison, some of the SSNP militants came under the influence of
Marxism with the left-wing Al Taware faction splitting off in the 1970s, a
split that would remain until the end of the Lebanese Civil War. With the
outbreak of the Lebanese Civil War in 1975, the SSNP formed a militia that
allied with the leftist Lebanese National Movement (LNM), against the
Phalangists and their allies of the Lebanese Front. The SSNP saw the Lebanese
Civil War as the inevitable result of the divisions of the Syrian nation into
small states and away from a liberation war against Israel. After the defeat of
leftist forces in the 1982 Lebanon War, the SSNP joined a number of the leftist
organizations who regrouped to resist the Israeli occupation, including the
killing of two Israeli soldiers in a Wimpy Cafe in west Beirut by party member
Khalid Alwan. The FBI blames the SSNP for the assassination, in in 1982, of
Bachir Gemayel, Lebanon's newly elected president supported by the Israelis
besieging Beirut. In 1983 the party joined the Lebanese National Salvation
Front. The SSNP participated in a number of general elections in Lebanon,
winning 6 seats in 1992, although seeing a decline in subsequent elections
winning 2 seats in both 2005 and 2009. The SSNP were involved in the 2008
conflict in Lebanon, with gunmen attacking an SSNP office. The SSNP in Syria.
In Syria the SSNP grew to a position of considerable influence in the years
following the country's independence in 1946, and was a major political force
immediately after the restoration of democracy in 1954. It was a fierce rival
of the Syrian Communist Party and of the radical pan-Arab Arab Socialist Ba'ath
Party, the other main ideological parties of the period. In April 1955 Colonel
Adnan al-Malki, a Ba'athist officer who was a very popular figure in the Syrian
army, was assassinated by a party member. This provided the Communists and
Ba'athists with the opportunity to eliminate their main ideological rival, and
under pressure from them and their allies in the security forces the SSNP was
practically wiped out as a political force in Syria. The SSNP's stance during
the Lebanese civil war was consistent with that of Syria, and that facilitated
a rapprochement between the party and the Syrian government. During Hafez al-
Assad's presidency, the party was increasingly tolerated. After the succession
of his son Bashar in 2000, this process continued. In 2001, although still
officially banned, the party was permitted to attend meetings of the Ba'ath-led
National Progressive Front coalition of legal parties as an observer. In Spring
2005 the party was legalised in Syria. It is considered to be one of the
largest political parties in the country, after the ruling Ba'ath Party, with
perhaps 100,000 members. In the 22 April 2007 election for the People's Council
of Syria, the party gained 3 out of 250 in the parliament. Ideology. Political
Tenets. While in jail from early February to early May 1936, Saadeh completed
"The Genesis of Nations" which he had started writing three months before the
French authorities in Lebanon discovered the secret organization and arrested
its leader and his assistants. In his book, Saadeh formulated his belief in the
existence of a Syrian nation in a homeland defined as embracing all historic
Syria extended to the Suez Canal in the south, and that includes modern Syria,
Palestine, Lebanon, Jordan, Iraq, and Kuwait. The boundaries of the historic
environment in which the Syrian nation evolved went much beyond the scope
usually ascribed to Syria, extending from the Taurus range in the north-east
and the Zagros mountains in the north-west to the Suez Canal and the Red Sea in
the south and includes the Sinai peninsula and the Gulf of Aqaba, and from the
Mediterranean Sea in the west, including the island of Cyprus, to the arch of
the Arabian desert and the Persian Gulf in the east. According to Saadeh, this
region is also called the Syrian Fertile Crescent, the island Cyprus being its
star. According to Saadeh, geographical factors play an important role in
setting the parameters for the process of association and thus for the
establishment of a nation. He held that the process of human evolution from
hunter-gatherer to settled agriculture was among the most important factors
that led to the creation of private property and the class system. Saadeh
highlighted the role that the class system played in the flourishing of trade
and commerce and the creation of wealth, ascribing it to be a characteristic of
the Semitic peolples, namely the coastal Phoenicians. He also stressed the link
between the economic modes of production and the establishment of cultural
norms and values, a view he shared with Karl Marx. However, Saadeh believed
that while the economic modes of production can create culture, culture
acquires a life of its own with time and eventually becomes embedded and
perpetuated in its people, who come to recognize themselves as a living
organism. Hence comes the importance of the state in serving the interest of
the nation, and of national democracy as the legitimate source of political
legislation. The party's foundations were that this development pattern is
exemplary to the Syrians and they came to constitute a complete nation and
civilization throughout history, from the Pre-Christian era, to the Islamic
era, all the way up until the present. The SSNP claimed that the Greater Syria
is the natural home of the Syrian people with clearly defined geographic
boundaries, yet that its people are suffering from an identity crisis due to
Ottoman occupation, colonialism, and sectarianism. Saadeh claimed that the
"renaissance" of the Syrian nation is inevitably linked to the purge of these
"decadent" forces through the reinforcing of national solidarity, resistance
against colonialism, and secularism. Saadeh's concept of the nation shaped
mainly by geography, rather than ethnic origins, language or religion, led him
also to conclude that the Arabs could not form one nation, but many nations
could be called Arab. Economic Theory. While the core of the party's political
theory revolves around the establishment of a Greater Syrian nation state, the
economic theory upon which the state is to be organized remains a topic of
contention. As a matter of fact, Saadeh did not elaborate a comprehensive
economic theory, yet proposed a social nationalist model which can be
considered to some extent as a distinctive form of socialism. As a matter of
fact, among the key tenets of "social nationalism" figured the abolition of
feudalism, the emancipation of the working class, the establishment of economic
dirigisme and the welfare state, universal healthcare as well as universal
education for the purpose of securing national solidarity. This remains a topic
of debate, however, as the strongly pronounced nationalistic features of SSNP
ideology would permit scholars to interpret "social nationalism" as a
distinctive breed of National Syndicalism. Organization. The SSNP was organised
with a hierarchical structure and a powerful leader. Its ideology was an
entirely secular form of nationalism; indeed, it posited the complete
separation of religion and politics as one of the two fundamental conditions
for real national unity. The other condition was determined economic and social
reform. Emblem and Flag. The party's emblem was designed by the SSNP students
American University of Beirut while the party was still clandestine and before
the French authorities had uncovered it in 1936. The SSNP emblem is a
combination of the crescent and the cross. The party flag features a red
hurricane, called the "Zawba'a", within a white circle on a black background.
Each arm symbolizes one of the four virtues of the party's mission: freedom,
duty, discipline and power. According to SSNP lore, the black color symbolizes
the Dark Ages of Ottoman rule, colonialism, sectarian division, national
division, and backwardness. The "Zawba'a" allegedly represents the blood of the
SSNP martyrs bound together as Muslims and Christians through freedom, duty,
discipline and power as a hurricane to purge the Dark Ages and spark their
nation's rejuvenation and renaissance. Critics claim that the symbol was
modeled after the Nazi swastika. Criticism. Ideological criticism. According to
Reeva S. Johnson, Saadeh, the party's 'leader for life', was an admirer of
Adolf Hitler influenced by Nazi and fascist ideology. The party adopted a
reversed swastika as the party's symbol, sang the party's anthem to
"Deutschland über alles", and included developing the cult of a leader,
advocating totalitarian government, and glorifying an ancient pre-Christian
past and the organic whole of the Syrian "Volk" or nation. Arab nationalist
thinker Sati' al-Husri considered that Saadeh "misrepresented" Arab
nationalism, incorrectly associating it with a Bedouin image of the Arab and
with Muslim sectarianism. Palestinian historian Maher Charif sees Saadeh's
theory as a response to the religious diversity of Syria, and points to his
later extension of his vision of the Syrian nation to include Iraq, a country
also noted for its religious diversity, as further evidence for this. The party
also accepted that due to "religious and political considerations", the
separate existence of Lebanon was necessary for the time being. From 1945 on,
the party adopted a more nuanced stance regarding Arab nationalism, seeing
Syrian unity as a potential first step towards an Arab union led by Syria.
Scholarly criticism. Lebanese historian Kamal Salibi gives a somewhat
contrasting interpretation, pointing to the position of the Greek Orthodox
community as a large minority in both Syria and Lebanon for whom "the concept
of pan-Syrianism was more meaningful than the concept of Arabism" while at the
same time they resented Maronite dominance in Lebanon. According to Salibi,
Kamal Salibi (1988, 1998), pp. 54-55 Prof. Salibi remarks on the beginnings of
Saadeh's party in the 1930s: "mong its first members were students and young
graduates of the American University of Beirut." This early party was "mainly
Greek Orthodox and Protestants with some Shi'ites and Druzes... ." In Lebanon
as a whole the party was not popular. "Christians were generally opposed to
their Syrian unionism, while Moslems were suspicious of their reservations with
regard to pan-Arabism. The Lebanese authorities were able to suppress them
without difficulty." According to historian Stanley G. Payne, the Arab
nationalism was influenced by European fascism, with the creation of at least
seven Arab nationalist shirt movements similar to the brown shirt movement by
1939, with the most influenced ones being the SSNP, the Iraqi Futawa youth
movement and the Young Egypt movement. These three movements would share
characteristics like being territorially expansionist, with the SSNP wanting
the complete control of Syria, belief in the superiority of their own people
(with Saadeh theorizing a "distinct and naturally superior" Syrian race), being
"nonrationalist, anti-intellectual, and highly emotional" and "military virtues
and power [and stressing self-sacrifice". Also according to Payne, all these
movements received strong influence from European fascism and praised the
Italian and German fascism but "never became fully developed fascist movements,
and none reproduced the full characteristics of European fascism"; the
influence in Arab nationalism remained long after 1945. Also, Saadeh's superior
race was not a pure one, but a fusion of all races in Syrian history. The SSNP
would be " elite group, with little structure for mobilization".
