Tea Party protests The Tea Party protests are a series of protests across the
United States that began in early 2009. The protests are part of a larger
political movement called the Tea Party. Most Tea Party activities since 2010
have been focused on opposing the efforts (supported by the Obama
Administration) to enact reforms to health insurance and health care delivery,
and on recruiting, nominating, and supporting candidates for upcoming state and
national elections. The name "Tea Party" is a reference to the Boston Tea
Party, whose principal aim was to protest taxation without representation. Tea
Party protests have sought to evoke images, slogans and themes from the
American Revolution, such as tri-corner hats and yellow Gadsden "Don't Tread on
Me" flags. The letters T-E-A have been used by some protesters to form the
backronym "Taxed Enough Already". Commentators promoted Tax Day events on
blogs, Twitter, and Facebook, while the Fox News Channel regularly featured
televised programming leading into and promoting various protest activities.
Reaction to the tea parties included counter-protests expressing support for
the Obama administration, and dismissive or mocking media coverage of both the
events and its promoters. History. Background. The theme of the Boston Tea
Party, an iconic event of American history, has long been used by anti-tax
protesters with libertarian and conservative viewpoints. It was part of Tax Day
protests held throughout the 1990s and earlier. The libertarian theme of the
"tea party" protest has also been used by Republican Congressman Ron Paul and
his supporters during fundraising events in the primaries of the 2008
presidential campaign to emphasize Paul's fiscal conservatism, which they later
claimed laid the groundwork for the modern-day Tea Party movement. Trevor
Leach, the New York Chairman of Young Americans for Liberty, a student
organization that branched off of Students for Paul and Campaign for Liberty
with the endorsement of Congressman Ron Paul, organized a protest during
November and December 2008 for the following January 24, with participants
dressing in Native American costumes and dumping soft drinks into Binghamton,
New York's Susquehanna River in protest of former NY Governor David Paterson's
proposed 18% tax increase on soda. As home mortgage foreclosures increased, and
details of the 2009 stimulus bill became known, organized protests began to
emerge. The character of the Tea Parties has since diverged significantly from
Paul's anti-war and libertarian focus, and Paul has stated that "neocons" who
do not accept his policies have become more prevalent in the protests. February
1, 2009 tea bag campaign. On January 19, 2009, Graham Makohoniuk, a part-time
trader and a member of Ticker Forum, posted a casual invitation on the market-
ticker.org forums to "Mail a tea bag to congress and to senate," a tactic that
had first been attempted by the Libertarian Party in 1973. The idea quickly
caught on with others on the forum, some of whom reported being attracted to
the inexpensive, easy way to reach "everyone that voted for the bailout." Forum
moderator Stephanie Jasky helped organize the group and worked to "get it to go
viral." Jasky is also the founder and director of FedUpUSA - a fiscally
conservative, non-partisan activist group whose members describe themselves as
"a group of investors" who sprung out of the market-ticker.org forums. The
group had previously held DC protests in 2008. On January 19, 2009, Jasky had
posted a formal invitation "to a commemorative tea party." She suggested
supporters send tea bags on the same day (February 1, 2009) in a coordinated
effort. The founder of market-ticker.org, Karl Denninger (stock trader and
former CEO), published his own write-up on the proposed protest, titled "Tea
Party February 1st?," which was posted in direct response to President Obama's
inauguration occurring on the same day, and railed against the bailouts, the US
national debt and "the fraud and abuse in our banking and financial system"
which included the predatory lending practices currently at the center of the
home mortgage foreclosure crisis. Karl Denninger, who helped form FedUpUSA in
the wake of the March 2008 Federal Reserve bail out of Bear Sterns, had been a
guest on both Glenn Beck and CNBC Reports. By February 1, the idea had spread
among conservative and libertarian-oriented blogs, forums, websites and through
a viral email campaign, and Denninger has since been credited as one of the
founders of the movement, and the organizer for the first Tea Party event. On
February 11, talk radio host and Fox Business Network personality Dave Ramsey
appeared on Fox and Friends, waving tea bags and saying "It's time for a Tea
Party." He was on the show criticizing the newly confirmed Secretary of the
Treasury Timothy Geithner, who that morning had outlined his plan to use the
$300 billion or so dollars remaining in the Troubled Asset Relief Program
(TARP) funds. He intended to use $50 billion for foreclosure mitigation and use
the rest to help fund private investors to buy toxic assets from banks.
"Porkulus" protests and "First Tea Party" claims. The dominant theme seen at
some of the earliest anti-stimulus protests was "pork" rather than tea. The
term "porkulus" was coined by radio talk-show host Rush Limbaugh on his January
27, 2009 broadcast, in reference to both the 2009 stimulus bill, which had been
introduced to the House of Representatives the day before, as well as to "pork"
barrel spending and earmarks. The term proved very popular with conservative
politicians and commentators, who began to unify in opposition against stimulus
spending after the 2008 General Election. Competing claims have emerged over
which protest was actually the first to organize. According to FreedomWorks
state and federal campaigns director Brendan Steinhauser, activist Mary
Rakovich was the organizer of a February 10, 2009 protest in Fort Myers,
Florida, calling it the "first protest of President Obama's administration that
we know of. It was the first protest of what became the tea party movement."
Rakovich, along with six to 10 others, protested outside a townhall meeting
featuring President Barack Obama and Florida governor Charlie Crist.
Interviewed by a local reporter, Rakovich explained that she "thinks the
government is wasting way too much money helping people receive high definition
TV signals" and that "Obama promotes socialism, although 'he doesn't call it
that'". She was invited to appear in front of a national audience on Neil
Cavuto's Fox News Channel program "Your World". Regarding the role Freedomworks
played in the demonstration, Rakovich acknowledged they were involved "right
from the start," and said that in her 2 hour training session, she was taught
how to attract more supporters and was specifically advised not to focus on
President Obama. However, though it was not the first protest of the Obama
administration or of the stimulus, "New York Times" reporter Kate Zernike,
reports that some within the Tea Party credit Seattle blogger and conservative
activist Keli Carender with organizing the first Tea Party on February 16,
2009. Another article, written by Chris Good of "The Atlantic", credits
Carender as "one of the first" Tea Party organizers. Carendar organized what
she called A "Porkulus Protest" on President’s Day, before, as she says,
"Rick Santelli’s rant" referring to the CNBC reporter who called for protests
after the announcement of the AIG executive bonuses in the face of increasing
home mortgage foreclosures. Carender contacted conservative author and Fox News
contributor Michelle Malkin in order to gain Malkin's support and publicize her
event. Malkin promoted the protest in several posts on her blog, saying that
"There should be one of these in every town in America," and that she would be
supplying the crowd with a meal of pulled pork. The protest was held in Seattle
on Presidents Day, February 16, the day before President Obama signed the
stimulus bill into law. Malkin encouraged her readers to stage similar events
in Denver on February 17 where President Obama planned to sign the stimulus
bill into law. A protest at the Denver Capitol Building was already in the
works at that time. Malkin reported that it was organized by the conservative
advocacy group Americans for Prosperity and spearheaded by the conservative
activist group Independence Institute as well as former Republican
Representative and presidential candidate Tom Tancredo. Another protest
organized by local conservative talk radio station KFYI was held in suburban
Phoenix, Arizona, on February 18, and brought 500 protesters. KFYI organized
the protest in reaction to Obama's visit to the local high school to hold his
first public talk on elements of the stimulus bill. By February 20, Malkin was
using her nationally-syndicated column to attempt to present these three
protests as a movement to her fellow conservatives, and continued to call for
more. "There's something in the air," she wrote, "It's the smell of roasted
pork." Birth of national Tea Party movement. On February 19, 2009, in a
broadcast from the floor of the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, CNBC Business News
Network editor Rick Santelli loudly criticized the government plan to refinance
mortgages, which had just been announced the day before, as "promoting bad
behavior" by "subsidizing losers' mortgages" and raised the possibility of
putting together a "Chicago Tea Party in July". A number of the traders and
brokers around him cheered on his proposal, to the apparent amusement of the
hosts in the studio. It was called "the rant heard round the world". According
to "The New Yorker" writer Ben McGrath and "New York Times" reporter Kate
Zernike, this is where the movement was first inspired to coalesce under the
collective banner of "Tea Party". By the next day, guests on Fox News had
already begun to mention this new "Tea Party". The day following Santelli's
comments from the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, on February 20, 2009, roughly 50
national conservative leaders participated in a conference call that gave birth
to the national Tea Party movement. In response to Santelli, websites such as
ChicagoTeaParty.com, registered in August 2008 by Chicago radio producer Zack
Christenson, were live within twelve hours. About 10 hours after Santelli's
remarks, reTeaParty.com was bought to coordinate Tea Parties scheduled for July
4, and as of March 4, was reported to be receiving 11,000 visitors a day. Also
on February 19, Young Americans for Liberty NY State Chairman Trevor Leach
created a Facebook page called "The Capitalist Chicago Tea Party—Rick's
Revolution," in response to Santelli's call for a national Tea Party. According
to The Huffington Post, a Facebook page was developed on February 20 calling
for Tea Party protests across the country. Eric Odom of the conservative
activist group FreedomWorks was one of the group administrators, and the group
was created by Phil Kerpen from the conservative advocacy organization
Americans for Prosperity—the same group credited for the Denver "porkulus"
protest as well as Mary Rakovich's early February 10 protest. Soon, the
"Nationwide Chicago Tea Party" protest was coordinated across over 40 different
cities for February 27, 2009, thus establishing the first national modern Tea
Party protest. Protests. April 15, 2009 tax day events. April 15, 2009, was the
date of the largest number of tea parties, with demonstrations reported to be
occurring in more than 750 cities. Estimates of numbers of protesters varied by
location and source. "The Christian Science Monitor" reported on the
difficulties of calculating a cumulative turnout and said some estimates state
that over half a million Americans participated in the protests, noting,
"experts say the counting itself often becomes politicized as authorities,
organizers, and attendees often come up with dramatically different counts."
Grover Norquist, president of Americans for Tax Reform, estimated that at least
268,000 attended in over 200 cities. Statistician Nate Silver, manager of
FiveThirtyEight.com, has stated that the largest protests were in capitals and
large cities while many others had little or no reliable media coverage and
were thus not included in his estimate. He reported a cumulative crowd size
estimate from credible sources of 311,460 for 346 cities and on April 16, 2009
stated "essentially all major cities and state capitals should now be accounted
for." The largest event, in Atlanta, Georgia, drew an estimated 7,000 to 15,000
people. Some of the gatherings drew only dozens. An April 15, 2009, Tea Party
protest outside the White House was moved after a box of tea bags was hurled
over the White House fence. Police sealed off the area and evacuated some
people. The Secret Service brought out a bomb-detecting robot, which determined
the package was not a threat. Approximately a thousand people had demonstrated,
several waved placards saying "Stop Big Government" and "Taxation is Piracy".
According to an April 20, 2009, Rasmussen poll, 51% of Americans polled viewed
the protests favorably and 32% of these viewed them "very favorably". About one
in four people polled knew someone who had attended a Tea Party protest. Those
results, however, stand in contrast to a CNN/Opinion Research Corporation
survey in March which found that 62% said that they approved how Obama was
handling tax policy. An April "USA Today"/Gallup poll also found that a
majority of Americans favored the expansion of government economic
intervention, "at least for now". April 15 – July 4, 2009 Tea Parties. After
April 15, 2009, Tea Party rallies continued in various locales around the
nation. Many of these events were focused on opposition to state or local taxes
and spending, rather than with national issues. Late April saw Tea Parties in
Annapolis, Maryland, White Plains, New York, Jackson, Tennessee, and Monroe,
Washington. In May, there were six more Tea Party events in Tennessee, New
York, Idaho, Ohio, Nevada, and North Carolina. During June, 2009 another dozen
events were held in North Carolina, California, Rhode Island, Texas, Ohio,
Michigan, Montana, Florida, New York, and Washington state. On June 29, 2009 in
Nashville, Tennessee, four thousand people rallied against new emissions
trading (cap and trade) energy and universal health care legislation in
Congress. Independence Day Tea Party protests. A number of Tea Party protests
were held the weekend of July 4, 2009, coinciding with American Independence
Day. "The rally followed a national effort that drew thousands of activists to
Tea Party events across the country on April 15, 2009 when income taxes are
due". On July 17, 2009, there were additional Tea Party protests around the
nation organized by a group called Tea Party Patriots, this time against
President Obama's proposed health care reform bill that they labeled socialized
medicine. Taxpayer March on Washington. On September 12, 2009, Tea Party
protests were held in various cities around the nation. In Washington, D.C.,
Tea Party protests gathered to march from Freedom Plaza to the United States
Capitol. Estimates of the number of attendees varied, from "tens of thousands"
to "in excess of 75,000". A rally organizer asserted that one local ABC News
station had reported attendance of over one million, but he retracted the
statement after ABC News denied making any such report. Using the counts of
those in attendance, the march may have been the largest conservative protest
ever held in Washington, D.C., as well as the largest demonstration against
President Obama's administration to date.
