List of designated terrorist organizations This is a list of designated
terrorist organizations by national governments, former governments and inter-
governmental organizations, where the proscription has a significant impact on
the group's activities. Many organizations that are accused of being a
terrorist organization deny using terrorism as a military tactic to achieve
their goals, and there is no international consensus on the legal definition of
terrorism. This listing does not include states or governmental organizations,
which are considered under state terrorism, or unaffiliated individuals accused
of terrorism, which are considered under lone wolf terrorism. This list also
excludes groups that might be widely considered terrorist, but who are not
officially so designated according to the criteria specified above. Process of
designation. Australia. Since 2002, the Australian Government maintains a
Listing of terrorist organisations as per the Security Legislation Amendment
(Terrorism) Act 2002. Listing, de-listing and re-listing follows a protocol
that mainly involves the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation and the
Attorney-General's Department. Canada. Since December 18, 2001, article 83.05
of the Canadian Criminal Code allows the Governor in Council to maintain a list
of entities that are engaged in terrorism, facilitating it, or acting on behalf
of such an entity. Entities are reviewed by the Minister and the Chief Justice
of the Federal Court, and finally published in the Canada Gazette. The list is
also published on the website of Public Safety Canada at http://
www.publicsafety.gc.ca/prg/ns/le/cle-eng.aspx for reference. European Union.
The European Union has two lists of designated terrorist organisations that
provide for different sanctions for the two groups. UN 1267 regime List. Al-
Qaida, the Taliban and their associates. The EU provides exceptions to the
implementation of relevant asset-freezing sanctions per UN resolution 1452
(2002). Upon request, a competent national authority may determine to release
funds on the following grounds if, within the time limit provided for, there
has been no objection made, or a release has been explicitly approved, by the
UN Sanctions Committee. Autonomous List. All other designated organisations. It
is important to note that sanctions are only applicable to EU-external groups
regardless of designation. For example, 47 groups are listed as terrorist
organisations in the EU but sanctions are only applied to 27 of these. Member
States do have an obligation to assist each other in preventing and combating
terrorist acts but this is the only action that follows from the designation of
an EU-internal organisation. India. Under the Unlawful Activities (Prevention)
Act, the Ministry of Home Affairs maintains a list of banned organizations at
http://www.mha.gov.in/uniquepage.asp?Id_Pk=292
