Tobin tax A Tobin tax, suggested by Nobel Laureate economist James Tobin, was
originally defined as a tax on all spot conversions of one currency into
another. The tax is intended to put a penalty on short-term financial round-
trip excursions into another currency. Tobin suggested his currency transaction
tax in 1972 in his Janeway Lectures at Princeton, shortly after the Bretton
Woods system of monetary management ended in 1971. Prior to 1971, one of the
chief features of the Bretton Woods system was an obligation for each country
to adopt a monetary policy that maintained the exchange rate of its currency
within a fixed value‚Äîplus or minus one percent‚Äîin terms of gold. Then, on
August 15, 1971, United States President Richard Nixon announced that the
United States dollar would no longer be convertible to gold, effectively ending
the system. This action created the situation whereby the U.S. dollar became
the sole backing of currencies and a reserve currency for the member states of
the Bretton Woods system, leading the system to collapse in the face of
increasing financial strain in that same year. In that context, Tobin suggested
a new system for international currency stability, and proposed that such a
system include an international charge on foreign-exchange transactions.
Though James Tobin suggested the rate as "let's say 0.5%", in that interview
setting, others have tried to be more precise in their search for the optimum
rate. Concepts and definitions. Tobin's concept. James Tobin's purpose in
developing his idea of a currency transaction tax was to find a way to manage
exchange-rate volatility. In his view, "currency exchanges transmit
disturbances originating in international financial markets. National economies
and national governments are not capable of adjusting to massive movements of
funds across the foreign exchanges, without real hardship and without
significant sacrifice of the objectives of national economic policy with
respect to employment, output, and inflation.‚Äù Tobin saw two solutions to
this issue. The first was to move ‚Äútoward a common currency, common monetary
and fiscal policy, and economic integration.‚Äù The second was to move
‚Äútoward greater financial segmentation between nations or currency areas,
permitting their central banks and governments greater autonomy in policies
tailored to their specific economic institutions and objectives.‚Äù Tobin‚Äôs
preferred solution was the former one but he did not see this as politically
viable so he advocated for the latter approach: ‚ÄúI therefore regretfully
recommend the second, and my proposal is to throw some sand in the wheels of
our excessively efficient international money markets.‚Äù It would be an
internationally agreed uniform tax, administered by each government over its
own jurisdiction. Britain, for example, would be responsible for taxing all
inter-currency transactions in Eurocurrency banks and brokers located in
London, even when sterling was not involved. The tax proceeds could
appropriately be paid into the IMF or World Bank. The tax would apply to all
purchases of financial instruments denominated in another currency---from
currency and coin to equity securities. It would have to apply, I think, to all
payments in one currency for goods, services, and real assets sold by a
resident of another currency area. I don't intend to add even a small barrier
to trade. But I see offhand no other way to prevent financial transactions
disguised as trade. I am a disciple of Keynes, and he, in his famous chapter
XII of the "General Theory on Employment Interest and Money", had already
prescribed a tax on transactions, with the aim of linking investors to their
actions in a lasting fashion. In 1971 I transferred this idea to exchange
markets. Speculators may do no harm as bubbles on a steady stream of
enterprise. But the situation is serious when enterprise becomes the bubble on
a whirlpool of speculation. (, p. 104) The introduction of a substantial
government transfer tax on all transactions might prove the most serviceable
reform available, with a view to mitigating the predominance of speculation
over enterprise in the United States. (, p. 105) Variations on Tobin tax idea.
The Spahn tax. Spahn suggested an alternative involving Special Drawing Rights.
On September 19, 2001, retired speculator George Soros put forward a proposal,
special drawing rights (SDRs) that the rich countries would pledge for the
purpose of providing international assistance, without necessarily dismissing
the Tobin tax idea. He stated, "I think there is a case for a Tobin tax ...
(but) it is not at all clear to me that a Tobin tax would reduce volatility in
the currency markets. It is true that it may discourage currency speculation
but it would also reduce the liquidity of the marketplace." Scope of the Tobin
concept. The term "Tobin tax" has sometimes been used interchangeably with a
specific currency transaction tax (CTT) in the manner of Tobin's original idea,
and other times it has been used interchangeably with the various different
ideas of a more general financial transaction tax (FTT). In both cases, the
various ideas proposed have included both national and multinational concepts.
Evaluating the Tobin tax as a Currency Transaction Tax (CTT). See also
Evaluating the Tobin tax as a general Financial Transaction Tax Are different
players in the economy operating at cross purposes to each other? In 1994,
Canadian economist Rodney Schmidt noted that Stability, volatility and
speculation. The appeal of stability to many players in the world economy. In
1972, Tobin examined the global monetary system that remained after the Bretton
Woods monetary system was abandoned. This examination was subsequently
revisited by other analysts, such as Ellen Frank, who, in 2002 wrote: "If by
globalization we mean the determined efforts of international businesses to
build markets and production networks that are truly global in scope, then the
current monetary system is in many ways an endless headache whose costs are
rapidly outstripping its benefits." She continues with a view on how that
monetary system stability is appealing to many players in the world economy,
but is being undermined by volatility and fluctuation in exchange rates: "Money
scrambles around the globe in quest of the banker‚Äôs holy grail ‚Äì sound
money of stable value ‚Äì while undermining every attempt by cash-strapped
governments to provide the very stability the wealthy crave." Frank then
corroborates Tobin's comments on the problems this instability can create (e.g.
high interest rates) for developing countries such as Mexico (1994), countries
in South East Asia (1997), and Russia (1998). She writes, "Governments of
developing countries try to peg their currencies, only to have the peg undone
by capital flight. They offer to dollarize or euroize, only to find themselves
so short of dollars that they are forced to cut off growth. They raise interest
rates to extraordinary levels to protect investors against currency losses,
only to topple their economies and the source of investor profits. ... IMF
bailouts provide a brief respite for international investors but they are, even
from the perspective of the wealthy, a short-term solution at best ... they
leave countries with more debt and fewer options." Effect on volatility.
Theoretical models. Most studies of the likely impact of the Tobin tax on
financial markets volatility have been "theoretical"‚Äîresearches conducted
laboratory simulations or constructed economic models. Some of these
theoretical studies have concluded that a transaction tax could reduce
volatility by crowding out speculators or eliminating individual 'noise
traders' but that it 'would not have any impact on volatility in case of
sufficiently deep global markets such as those in major currency pairs, unlike
in case of less liquid markets, such as those in stocks and (especially)
options, where volatility would probably increase with reduced volumes.
Behavioral finance theoretical models, such as those developed by Wei and Kim
(1997) or Westerhoff and Dieci (2006) suggest that transaction taxes can reduce
volatility, at least in the foreign exchange market. In contrast, some papers
find a positive effect of a transaction tax on market volatility. Lanne and
Vesala (2006) argue that a transaction tax "is likely to amplify, not dampen,
volatility in foreign exchange markets", because such tax penalises informed
market participants disproportionately more than uninformed ones, leading to
volatility increases. Empirical studies. In most of the available "empirical"
studies however, no statistically significant causal link has been found
between an increase in transaction costs (transaction taxes or government-
controlled minimum brokerage commissions) and a reduction in volatility‚Äîin
fact a frequent unintended consequence observed by 'early adopters' after the
imposition of a financial transactions tax (see Werner, 2003) has been an
"increase in the volatility" of stock market returns, usually coinciding with
significant declines in liquidity (market volume) and thus in taxable revenue
(Umlauf, 1993). For a recent evidence to the contrary, see, e.g., Liu and Zhu
(2009), which may be affected by selection bias given that their Japanese
sample is subsumed by a research conducted in 14 Asian countries by Hu (1998),
showing that "an increase in tax rate reduces the stock price but has no
significant effect on market volatility". As Liu and Zhu (2009) point out,
[...] the different experience in Japan highlights the comment made by Umlauf
(1993) that it is hazardous to generalize limited evidence when debating
important policy issues such as the STT transaction tax and brokerage
commissions." See also "Tobin tax proponents response to empirical evidence on
volatility" Historical attempts to reduce speculation via fixed exchange rates.
Matthew Sinclair, Research Director of TaxPayers' Alliance, notes that Is there
an optimum Tobin tax rate? When James Tobin was interviewed by "Der Spiegel" in
2001, the tax rate he suggested was 0.5%. His use of the phrase "let's say"
("sagen wir") indicated that he was not, at that point, in an interview
setting, trying to be precise. Others have tried to be more precise or
practical in their search for the Tobin tax rate. Tax rates of the magnitude of
0.1%-1% have been proposed by normative economists, without addressing how
practicable these would be to implement. In positive economics studies however,
where due reference was made to the prevailing market conditions, the resulting
tax rates have been significantly lower. According to Garber (1996),
competitive pressure on transaction costs (spreads) in currency markets has
reduced these costs to fractions of a basis point. For example the EUR.USD
currency pair trades with spreads as tight as 1/10 of a basis point, i.e. with
just a 0.00001 difference between the bid and offer price, so "a tax on
transactions in foreign exchange markets imposed unilaterally, 6/1000 of a
basis point (or 0.00006%) is a realistic maximum magnitude." Similarly Shvedov
(2004) concludes that "even making the unrealistic assumption that the rate of
0.00006% causes no reduction of trading volume, the tax on foreign currency
exchange transactions would yield just $4.3 billion a year, despite an annual
turnover in dozens of trillion dollars. Accordingly, one of the modern Tobin
tax versions, called the "Sterling Stamp Duty", sponsored by certain UK
charities, has a rate of 0.005% "in order to avoid market distortions", i.e.,
1/100 of what Tobin himself envisaged in 2001. Sterling Stamp Duty supporters
argue that this tax rate would not adversely affect currency markets and could
still raise large sums of money. The same rate of 0.005% was proposed for a
currency transactions tax (CTT) in a report prepared by Rodney Schmidt for The
North-South Institute (a Canadian NGO whose "research supports global efforts
to [..] improve international financial systems and institutions"). Schmidt
(2007) used the observed negative relationship between bid-ask spreads and
transactions volume in foreign exchange markets to estimate the maximum "non-
disruptive rate" of a currency transaction tax. A CTT tax rate designed with a
pragmatic goal of raising revenue for various development projects, rather than
to fulfill Tobin's original goals (of "slowing the flow of capital across
borders" and "preventing or managing exchange rate crises"), should avoid
altering the existing "fundamental market behavior", and thus, according to
Schmidt, must not exceed 0.00005, i.e., the observed levels of currency
transactions costs (bid-ask spreads). The mathematician Paul Wilmott has
pointed out that while perhaps some trading ought to be discouraged, trading
for the hedging of derivatives is generally considered a good thing in that it
can reduce risk, and this should not be punished. He estimates that any
financial tax should be at most one basis point so as to have negligible effect
on hedging. Assuming that all currency market participants incur the same
maximum level of transaction costs (the full cost of the bid-ask spread), as
opposed to earning them in their capacity of market makers, and assuming that
no untaxed substitutes exist for spot currency markets transactions (such as
currency futures and currency exchange-traded funds), Schmidt (2007) finds that
that a CTT rate of 0.00005 would be nearly volume-neutral, reducing foreign
exchange transaction volumes by only 14%. Such volume-neutral CTT tax would
raise "relatively little revenue" though, estimated at around $33 bn annually,
i.e., an order of magnitude less than the "carbon tax has by far the greatest
revenue-raising potential, estimated at $130-750 bn annually." The author warns
however that both these market-based revenue estimates "are necessarily
speculative", and he has more confidence in the revenue-raising potential of
"The International Finance Facility (IFF) and International Finance Facility
for Immunisation (IFFIm)." In 2000, a representative of another "pro-Tobin tax"
non-governmental organization stated that Tobin's idea was Is the tax easy to
avoid? Technical feasibility. Although Tobin had said his own tax idea was
unfeasible in practice, Joseph Stiglitz, former Senior Vice President and Chief
Economist of the World Bank, said, on October 5, 2009, that modern technology
meant that was no longer the case. Stiglitz said, the tax is "much more
feasible today" than a few decades ago, when Tobin recanted. However, on
November 7, 2009, at the G20 finance ministers summit in Scotland, Dominique
Strauss-Khan, head of the International Monetary Fund, said "transactions are
very difficult to measure and so it's very easy to avoid a transaction tax."
Nevertheless in early December 2009, economist Stephany Griffith-Jones agreed
that the "greater centralisation and automisation of the exchanges and banks
clearing and settlements systems ... makes avoidance of payment more difficult
and less desirable." In January, 2010, feasibility of the tax was supported and
clarified by researchers Rodney Schmidt, Stephan Schulmeister and Bruno Jetin
who noted ‚Äúit is technically easy to collect a financial tax from exchanges
... transactions taxes can be collected by the central counterparty at the
point of the trade, or automatically in the clearing or settlement process."
(All large-value financial transactions go through three steps. First dealers
agree to a trade; then the dealers‚Äô banks match the two sides of the trade
through an electronic central clearing system; and finally, the two individual
financial instruments are transferred simultaneously to a central settlement
system. Thus a tax can be collected at the few places where all trades are
ultimately cleared or settled.) Based on digital technology, a new form of
taxation, levied on bank transactions, was successfully used in Brazil from
1993 to 2007 and proved to be evasion-proof, more efficient and less costly
than orthodox tax models. In his book, "Bank transactions: pathway to the
single tax ideal", Marcos Cintra carries out a qualitative and quantitative in-
depth comparison of the efficiency, equity and compliance costs of a bank
transactions tax relative to orthodox tax systems, and opens new perspectives
for the use of modern banking technology in tax reform across the world. How
many nations are needed to make it feasible? There has been debate as to
whether one single nation could unilaterally implement a "Tobin tax." Speaking
to this question, Schmidt states, "It is possible for a single country to apply
a securities transaction tax unilaterally without significant capital flight to
exchanges in other jurisdictions. There are many examples of such taxes already
in existence. Britain levies a "Stamp Duty", a 0.5% tax on purchases of shares
of UK companies whether the transaction occurs in the UK or overseas. Such
specific financial transaction taxes exist in Austria, Greece, Luxembourg,
Poland, Portugal, Spain, Switzerland, Hong Kong, China and Singapore. The state
of New York levies a stamp duty on trades taking place on both the New York
Stock Exchange and on NASDAQ." In the year 2000, "eighty per cent of foreign-
exchange trading place in just seven cities. Agreement [to implement the tax by
three cities, London, New York and Tokyo alone, would capture 58 per cent of
speculative trading." Evaluating the Tobin tax as a general Financial
Transaction Tax (FTT). Sweden's experience in implementing Tobin taxes in the
form of general financial transaction taxes. In July, 2006, analyst Marion G.
Wrobel examined the actual international experiences of various countries in
implementing financial transaction taxes. Wrobel's paper highlighted the
Swedish experience with financial transaction taxes. In January 1984, Sweden
introduced a 0.5% tax on the purchase or sale of an equity security. Thus a
round trip (purchase and sale) transaction resulted in a 1% tax. In July 1986
the rate was doubled. In January 1989, a considerably lower tax of 0.002% on
fixed-income securities was introduced for a security with a maturity of 90
days or less. On a bond with a maturity of five years or more, the tax was
0.003%. The revenues from taxes were disappointing; for example, revenues from
the tax on fixed-income securities were initially expected to amount to 1,500
million Swedish kronor per year. They did not amount to more than 80 million
Swedish kronor in any year and the average was closer to 50 million. In
addition, as taxable trading volumes fell, so did revenues from capital gains
taxes, entirely offsetting revenues from the equity transactions tax that had
grown to 4,000 million Swedish kronor by 1988. On the day that the tax was
announced, share prices fell by 2.2%. But there was leakage of information
prior to the announcement, which might explain the 5.35% price decline in the
30 days prior to the announcement. When the tax was doubled, prices again fell
by another 1%. These declines were in line with the capitalized value of future
tax payments resulting from expected trades. It was further felt that the taxes
on fixed-income securities only served to increase the cost of government
borrowing, providing another argument against the tax. Even though the tax on
fixed-income securities was much lower than that on equities, the impact on
market trading was much more dramatic. During the first week of the tax, the
volume of bond trading fell by 85%, even though the tax rate on five-year bonds
was only 0.003%. The volume of futures trading fell by 98% and the options
trading market disappeared. On 15 April 1990, the tax on fixed-income
securities was abolished. In January 1991 the rates on the remaining taxes were
cut in half and by the end of the year they were abolished completely. Once the
taxes were eliminated, trading volumes returned and grew substantially in the
1990s. Tobin tax proponents reaction to the Swedish experience. Wrobel's
studies do not address the global economy as a whole, as James Tobin did when
he spoke of "the nineties' crises in Mexico, South East Asia and Russia," which
included the 1994 economic crisis in Mexico, the 1997 Asian Financial Crisis,
and the 1998 Russian financial crisis. Who would gain and who would lose if the
Tobin tax (FTT) were implemented? Views of ABAC (APEC Business Advisory
Council) expressed in open letter to IMF. In addition, ABAC expressed further
concerns in the letter:- Note - APEC's 21 Member Economies are Australia,
Brunei Darussalam, Canada, Chile, People's Republic of China, Hong Kong, China,
Indonesia, Japan, Republic of Korea, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Papua New
Guinea, Peru, The Republic of the Philippines, The Russian Federation,
Singapore, Chinese Taipei, Thailand, United States of America, Viet Nam. Views
of the ITUC/APLN (Asia-Pacific Labour Network) expressed in their statement to
the 2010 APEC Economic Leaders Meeting. The International Trade Union
Confederation/Asia-Pacific Labour Network (ITUC/APLN), the informal trade union
body of the Asia-Pacific, supported the Tobin Tax in their Statement to the
2010 APEC Economic Leaders Meeting. The representatives of APEC's national
trade unions centers also met with the Japanese Prime Minister, Naoto Kan, the
host Leader of APEC for 2010, and called for the Prime Minister's support on
the Tobin Tax. The ITUC shares its support for Tobin Tax with the Trade Union
Advisory Council (TUAC), the official OECD trade union body, in a research on
the feasibility, strengths and weaknesses of a potential Tobin Tax. ITUC, APLN
and TUAC refer to Tobin Tax as the Financial Transactions Tax. Would 'regular
investors like you and me' lose? An economist speaking out against the common
belief that investment banks would bear the burden of a Tobin tax is Simon
Johnson, Professor of Economics at the MIT and a former Chief Economist at the
IMF, who in a BBC Radio 4 interview discussing banking system reforms presented
his views on the Tobin tax Let Wall Street Pay for the Restoration of Main
Street Bill. In 2009, U.S. Representative Peter DeFazio of Oregon proposed a
financial transaction tax in his "Let Wall Street Pay for the Restoration of
Main Street Bill". (This was proposed domestically for the United States only.)
Would there be net job losses if a FTT tax was introduced? Schwabish (2005)
examined the potential effects of introducing a stock transaction (or
"transfer") tax in a single city (New York) on employment not only in the
securities industry, but also in the supporting industries. A financial
transactions tax would lead to job losses also in non-financial sectors of the
economy through the so-called multiplier effect forwarding in a magnified form
any taxes imposed on Wall Street employees through their reduced demand to
their suppliers and supporting industries. The author estimated the ratios of
financial- to non-financial job losses of between 10:1 to 10:4, that is "a 10
percent decrease in securities industry employment would depress employment in
the retail, services, and restaurant sectors by more than 1 percent; in the
business services sector by about 4 percent; and in total private jobs by about
1 percent." It is also possible to estimate the impact of a reduction in stock
market volume caused by taxing stock transactions on the rise in the overall
unemployment rate. For every 10 percent decline in stock market volume,
elasticities estimated by Schwabish implied that a stock transaction
("transfer") tax could cost New York City between 30,000 and 42,000 private-
sector jobs, and if the stock market volume reductions reached levels observed
by Umlauf (1993) in Sweden after a stock FTT was introduced there ("By 1990,
more than 50% of all Swedish trading had moved to London") then according to
Schwabish (2005), following an introduction of a FTT tax, there would be
150,000-210,000 private-sector jobs losses in the New York alone. The cost of
currency hedges‚Äîand thus "certainty what importers and exporters' money is
worth"‚Äîhas nothing to do with volatility whatsoever, as this cost is
exclusively determined by the interest rate differental between two currencies.
Nevertheless, as Tobin said, "If ... is suddenly withdrawn, countries have to
drastically increase interest rates for their currency to still be attractive."
Is there an optimum tax rate? Financial transaction tax rates of the magnitude
of 0.1%-1% have been proposed by normative economists, without addressing the
practicability of implementing a tax at these levels. In positive economics
studies however, where due reference was paid to the prevailing market
conditions, the resulting tax rates have been significantly lower. For
instance, Edwards (1993) concluded that if the transaction tax revenue from
taxing the futures markets were to be maximized (see Laffer curve), with the
tax rate not leading to a prohibitively large increase in the marginal cost of
market participants, the rate would have to be set so low that "a tax on
futures markets will not achieve any important social objective and will not
generate much revenue." Political opinion. Opinions are divided between those
who applaud that the Tobin tax could protect countries from spillovers of
financial crises, and those who claim that the tax would also constrain the
effectiveness of the global economic system, increase price volatility, widen
bid-ask spreads for end users such as investors, savers and hedgers, and
destroy liquidity. Tobin tax proponents response to empirical evidence on
volatility. These Tobin tax proponents have to therefore rely on "indirect"
evidence in their favor, reinterpreting studies which do not deal directly with
volatility, but instead with trading volume (with volume being generally
reduced by transaction taxes, though it constitutes their tax base, see:
negative feedback loop). This allows these Tobin tax proponents to state that
"some studies show (implicitly) that higher transaction costs might dampen
price volatility. This is so because these studies report that a reduction of
trading activities is associated with lower price volatility." So if a study
finds that reducing trading volume or trading frequency reduces volatility,
these Tobin tax supporters combine it with the observation that Tobin-style
taxes are volume-reducing, and thus should also indirectly reduce volatility
("this finding implies a negative relationship between [..] transaction tax
[..] and volatility, because higher transaction costs will 'ceteris paribus'
always dampen trading activities)." (Schulmeister et al., 2008, p.¬ 18). Thus
the beneficial impact of transaction taxes on the "Tobin volatility" can co-
exist as a valid economic theory even without direct supporting evidence from
the statistical volatility research, simply because of the special volatility
definition, which allows all economists defending the Tobin tax to escape
Popperian falsifiability. Another shortcoming of all of the empirical
volatility studies pointed out by some of the Tobin tax proponents is the lack
of distinction between "basic" and "excessive" volatility, which "might have
contributed to the contradictory and, hence, inconclusive results of these
studies" (Schulmeister et al., 2008, p.¬ 11-12). Unfortunately, no tests have
been conducted so far, which would be able to operationalize "excessive"
volatility assumed to exist by the Tobin tax theory (see Schulmeister et al.,
2008, p.¬ 11), therefore the acceptance of the Tobin-style transactions tax as
a fiscal or monetary policy instrument requires clear understanding that basic
theoretical phenomena underlying this tax, such as "excessive" volatility,
still remain untested. Should speculators be encouraged, penalized or
dissuaded? The Tobin tax rests on the premise that speculators ought to be, as
Tobin puts it, "dissuaded." This premise itself is a matter of debate: "See
Speculation." Matthew Sinclair, Research Director of TaxPayers' Alliance,
argues that "The whole idea of a Tobin tax is based on the flawed view that
trading ‚Äì or speculation ‚Äì is a bad thing. The truth is that it isn‚Äôt: it
helps the process of price discovery, makes markets work better, enhances
liquidity, ensures that resources are priced correctly and generally helps oil
the cogs of the global economy." On the other side of the debate were the
leaders of Germany who, in May 2008, planned to propose a worldwide ban on oil
trading by speculators, blaming the 2008 oil price rises on manipulation by
hedge funds. At that time India, with similar concerns, had already suspended
futures trading of five commodities. On December 3, 2009, US Congressman Peter
DeFazio stated, "The American taxpayers bailed out Wall Street during a crisis
brought on by reckless speculation in the financial markets, ... This
[ proposed financial transaction tax ] legislation will force Wall Street to do
their part and put people displaced by that crisis back to work." On January
21, 2010, President Barack Obama endorsed the Volcker Rule which deals with
proprietary trading of investment banks and restricts banks from making certain
speculative kinds of investments if they are not on behalf of their customers.
Former U.S. Federal Reserve Chairman Paul Volcker, President Obama's advisor,
has argued that such speculative activity played a key role in the financial
crisis of 2007‚Äì2010. Volcker endorsed only the UK's tax on bank bonuses,
calling it "interesting", but was wary about imposing levies on financial
market transactions, because he is "instinctively opposed" to any tax on
financial transactions. Questions of volatility. In February 2010, Tim Harford,
writing in the Undercover Economist column of the Financial Times, commented
directly on the claims of Keynes and Tobin that 'taxes on financial
transactions would reduce financial volatility'. Harford wrote:- Comparing
Currency Transaction Taxes (CTT) and Financial Transaction Taxes (FTT).
Research evidence. In 2003, researchers like Aliber et al. proposed that
empirical evidence on the observed effects of the already introduced and
abolished stock transaction taxes and a hypothetical CTT (Tobin) can probably
be treated "interchangeably." They did not find any evidence on the
differential effects of introducing or removing, stock transactions taxes or a
hypothetical currency (Tobin) tax on any subset of markets or all markets.
Researchers have used models belonging to the GARCH family to describe both the
volatility behavior of stock market returns and the volatility behavior of
foreign exchange rates. This is used as evidence that the similarity between
currencies and stocks in the context of a tax designed to curb volatility such
as a CTT (or FTT in general) can be inferred from the almost identical
(statistically indistinguishable) behavior of the volatilities of equity and
exchange rate returns. Practical considerations. Hanke et al. state, "The
economic consequences of introducing a Tobin Tax are [... completely unknown,
as such a tax has not been introduced on any real foreign exchange market so
far". At the same time, even in the case of stock transaction taxes, where some
empirical evidence is available, researchers warn that "it is hazardous to
generalize limited evidence when debating important policy issues such as the
transaction taxes". According to Stephan Schulmeister, Margit Schratzenstaller,
and Oliver Picek (2008), from the practical viewpoint it is no longer possible
to introduce a non-currency transactions tax (even if foreign exchange
transactions were formally exempt) since the advent of currency derivatives and
currency exchange-traded funds. All of these would have to be taxed together
under a "non-currency" financial transactions tax (such as under certain
proposals] in the U.S. in 2009 which, although not intending to tax currencies
directly, would still do so due to taxation of currency futures and currency
exchange traded funds). Because these three groups of instruments are nearly
perfect substitutes, if at least one of these groups were to be exempt, it
would likely attract most market volume from the taxed alternatives. According
to Stephan Schulmeister, Margit Schratzenstaller, and Oliver Picek (2008),
restricting the financial transactions tax to foreign exchange only (as
envisaged originally by Tobin) would not be desirable. Any "general FTT
seems...more attractive than a specific transaction tax" (such as a currency-
only Tobin tax), because it could reduce tax avoidance (i.e., substitution of
similar untaxed instruments), could significantly increase the tax base and
could be implemented more easily on organized exchanges than in a dealership
market like the global foreign exchange market. (See also the discussion of tax
avoidance as it relates to a currency transaction tax.) On October 5, 2009,
Joseph Stiglitz said that any new tax should be levied on all asset classes ‚Äì
not merely foreign exchange, and would be based on the gross value of the
assets, thereby helping to discourage the creation of asset bubbles. Original
idea and alter-globalization movement. Tobin's more specific concept of a
"currency transaction tax" from 1972 lay dormant for more than 20 years but was
revived by the advent of the 1997 Asian Financial Crisis. In December, 1997
Ignacio Ramonet, editor of "Le Monde Diplomatique", renewed the debate around
the Tobin tax with an editorial titled "Disarming the markets". Ramonet
proposed to create an association for the introduction of this tax, which was
named ATTAC (Association for the Taxation of financial Transactions for the Aid
of Citizens). The tax then became an issue of the global justice movement or
alter-globalization movement and a matter of discussion not only in academic
institutions but even in streets and in parliaments in the UK, France, and
around the world. In an interview given to the Italian independent radio
network Radio Popolare in July 2001 James Tobin distanced himself from the
global justice movement. ¬´"There are agencies and groups in Europe that have
used the Tobin Tax as an issue of broader campaigns, for reasons that go far
beyond my proposal. My proposal was made into a sort of milestone for an
antiglobalization program"¬ª. James Tobin's interview with Radio Popolare was
quoted by the Italian foreign minister at the time, former director-general of
the World Trade Organisation Renato Ruggiero, during a Parliamentary debate on
the eve of the G8 2001 summit in Genoa. Afterwards James Tobin distanced
himself from the global justice movement also in an interview given to "Der
Spiegel" in 2001, and continued to state the validity of his proposal, Tobin
observed that, while his original proposal had only the goal of "putting a
brake on the foreign exchange trafficking", the antiglobalization movement had
stressed "the income from the taxes with which they want to finance their
projects to improve the world". He declared himself not contrary to this use of
the tax's income, but stressed that it was not the important aspect of the tax.
ATTAC and other organizations have recognized that while they still consider
Tobin's original aim as paramount, they think the tax could produce funds for
development needs in the South (such as the Millennium Development Goals), and
allow governments, and therefore citizens, to reclaim part of the democratic
space conceded to the financial markets. In March, 2002, London School of
Economics Professor Willem Buiter, who studied under James Tobin, wrote a
glowing obituary for the man, but also remarked that, "This Tax ... was in
recent years adopted by some of the most determined enemies of trade
liberalisation, globalisation and the open society." Buiter added, "The
proposal to use the Tobin tax as a means of raising revenues for development
assistance was rejected by Tobin, and he forcefully repudiated the anti-
globalisation mantra of the Seattle crowd." In September 2009, Buiter also
wrote in the Financial Times, "Tobin was a genius ... but the Tobin tax was
probably his one daft idea". In those same "years" that Buiter spoke of, the
Tobin tax was also "adopted" or supported in varying degrees by the people who
were not, as he put it, "enemies of trade liberalisation." Among them were
several supporters from 1990 to 1999, including Larry Summers and several from
2000 to 2004, including lukewarm support from George Soros. Tobin tax proposals
and implementations around the world. It was originally assumed that the Tobin
tax would require multilateral implementation, since one country acting alone
would find it very difficult to implement this tax. Many people have therefore
argued that it would be best implemented by an international institution. It
has been proposed that having the United Nations manage a Tobin tax would solve
this problem and would give the UN a large source of funding independent from
donations by participating states. However, there have also been initiatives of
national dimension about the tax. (This is in addition to the many countries
that have foreign exchange controls.) Whilst finding some support in countries
with strong left-wing political movements such as France and Latin America, the
Tobin tax proposal came under much criticism from economists and governments,
especially those with liberal markets and a large international banking sector,
who said it would be impossible to implement and would destabilise foreign
exchange markets. Most of the actual implementation of Tobin taxes, whether in
the form of a specific currency transaction tax, or a more general financial
transaction tax, has occurred at a national level. In July, 2006, analyst
Marion G. Wrobel examined the international experiences of various countries
with financial transaction taxes. Sweden's experience with financial
transaction taxes. Wrobel's paper highlighted the Swedish experience with
financial transaction taxes. In January 1984, Sweden introduced a 0.5% tax on
the purchase or sale of an equity security. Thus a round trip (purchase and
sale) transaction resulted in a 1% tax. In July 1986 the rate was doubled. In
January 1989, a considerably lower tax of 0.002% on fixed-income securities was
introduced for a security with a maturity of 90 days or less. On a bond with a
maturity of five years or more, the tax was 0.003%. The revenues from taxes
were disappointing; for example, revenues from the tax on fixed-income
securities were initially expected to amount to 1,500 million Swedish kronor
per year. They did not amount to more than 80 million Swedish kronor in any
year and the average was closer to 50 million. In addition, as taxable trading
volumes fell, so did revenues from capital gains taxes, entirely offsetting
revenues from the equity transactions tax that had grown to 4,000 million
Swedish kronor by 1988. On the day that the tax was announced, share prices
fell by 2.2%. But there was leakage of information prior to the announcement,
which might explain the 5.35% price decline in the 30 days prior to the
announcement. When the tax was doubled, prices again fell by another 1%. These
declines were in line with the capitalized value of future tax payments
resulting from expected trades. It was further felt that the taxes on fixed-
income securities only served to increase the cost of government borrowing,
providing another argument against the tax. Even though the tax on fixed-income
securities was much lower than that on equities, the impact on market trading
was much more dramatic. During the first week of the tax, the volume of bond
trading fell by 85%, even though the tax rate on five-year bonds was only
0.003%. The volume of futures trading fell by 98% and the options trading
market disappeared. On 15 April 1990, the tax on fixed-income securities was
abolished. In January 1991 the rates on the remaining taxes were cut in half
and by the end of the year they were abolished completely. Once the taxes were
eliminated, trading volumes returned and grew substantially in the 1990s. Tobin
tax proponents reaction to the Swedish experience. Wrobel's studies do not
address the global economy as a whole, as James Tobin did when he spoke of "the
nineties' crises in Mexico, South East Asia and Russia," which included the
1994 economic crisis in Mexico, the 1997 Asian Financial Crisis, and the 1998
Russian financial crisis. United Kingdom experience with stock transaction tax
(Stamp Duty). An existing example of a Financial Transaction Tax (FTT) is Stamp
Duty Reserve Tax (SDRT) and stamp duty. Stamp duty was introduced as an ad
valorem tax on share purchases in 1808, preceding by over 150 years the Tobin
tax on currency transactions. Changes were made in 1963. In 1963 the rate of
the UK Stamp Duty was 2%, subsequently fluctuating between 1% and 2%, until a
process of its gradual reduction started in 1984, when the rate was halved,
first from 2% to 1%, and then once again in 1986 from 1% to the current level
of 0.5%. The changes in Stamp Duty rates in 1974, 1984, and 1986 provided
researchers with "natural experiments", allowing them to measure the impact of
transaction taxes on market volume, volatility, returns, and valuations of UK
companies listed on the London Stock Exchange. Jackson and O'Donnel (1985),
using UK quarterly data, found that the 1% cut in the Stamp Duty in April 1984
from 2% to 1% lead to a "dramatic 70% increase in equity turnover" . Analyzing
all three Stamp Duty rate changes, Saporta and Kan (1997) found that the
announcements of tax rate increases (decreases) were followed by negative
(positive) returns, but even though these results were statistically
significant, they were likely to be influenced by other factors, because the
announcements were made on Budget Days. Bond et al. (2005) confirmed the
findings of previous studies, noting also that the impact of the announced tax
rate cuts was more beneficial (increasing market value more significantly) in
case of larger firms, which had higher turnover, and were therefore more
affected by the transaction tax than stocks of smaller companies, less
frequently traded. Because the UK tax code provides exemptions from the Stamp
Duty Reserve Tax for all financial intermediaries, including market makers,
investment banks and other members of the LSE, and due to the strong growth of
the contracts for difference (CFD) industry, which provides UK investors with
untaxed substitutes for LSE stocks, according to the Oxera (2007) report, more
than 70% percent of the total UK stock market volume, including the entire
institutional volume remained (in 2005) exempt from the Stamp Duty, in contrast
to the common perception of this tax as a "tax on bank transactions" or a "tax
on speculation". On the other hand, as much as 40% of the Stamp Duty revenues
come from taxing foreign residents, because the tax is "chargeable whether the
transaction takes place in the UK or overseas, and whether either party is
resident in the UK or not." Sterling Stamp Duty - a currency transactions tax
proposed for pound sterling. In 2005 the Tobin tax was developed into a modern
proposal by the United Kingdom NGO Stamp Out Poverty. It simplified the two-
tier tax in favour of a mechanism designed solely as a means for raising
development revenue. The currency market by this time had grown to $2,000
billion a day. To investigate the feasibility of such a tax they hired the City
of London firm Intelligence Capital, who found that a tax on Pound sterling
wherever it was traded in the world, as opposed to a tax on all currencies
traded in the UK, was indeed feasible and could be unilaterally implemented by
the UK government. The Sterling Stamp Duty, as it became known, was to be set
at a rate 200 times lower than Tobin had envisaged in 2001, which ‚Äúpro Tobin
tax‚Äù supporters claim wouldn't have affected currency markets and could still
raise large sums of money. The global currency market grew to $3,200 billion a
day in 2007, or ¬£400,000 billion per annum with the trade in sterling, the
fourth most traded currency in the world, worth ¬£34,000 billion a year. A
sterling stamp duty set at 0.005% as some claim would have raised in the region
of ¬£2 billion a year in 2007. The All Party Parliamentary Group for Debt, Aid
and Trade published a report in November 2007 into financing for development in
which it recommended that the UK government undertake rigorous research into
the implementation of a 0.005% stamp duty on all sterling foreign exchange
transactions, to provide additional revenue to help bridge the funding gap
required to pay for the Millennium Development Goals. Multinational proposals.
Haq, Mahbub ul; Kaul, Inge; Grunberg, Isabelle (August 1996). The Tobin Tax:
Coping with Financial Volatility. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-
511180-4. European idea for a 'first Euro tax'. In late 2001, a Tobin tax
amendment was adopted by the French National Assembly. However, it was
overturned by March 2002 by the French Senate. On June 15, 2004, the Commission
of Finance and Budget in the Belgian Federal Parliament approved a bill
implementing a Spahn tax. According to the legislation, Belgium will introduce
the Tobin tax once all countries of the eurozone introduce a similar law. In
July 2005 former Austrian chancellor Wolfgang Sch√ºssel called for a European
Union Tobin tax to base the communities' financial structure on more stable and
independent grounds. However, the proposal was rejected by the European
Commission. On November 23, 2009, the President of the European Council, Herman
Van Rompuy, after attending a meeting of the Bilderberg Group argued for a
European version of the Tobin tax. This tax would go beyond just financial
transactions: "all shopping and petrol would be taxed.". Countering him was his
sister, Christine Van Rompuy, who said, "any new taxes would directly affect
the poor". On June 29, 2011, the European Commission called for Tobin-style
taxes on the EU's financial sector to generate direct revenue starting from
2014. At the same time it suggested to reduce existing levies coming from the
27 member states. Support in some G20 nations. The first nation in the G20
group to formally accept the Tobin tax was Canada. On March 23, 1999, the
Canadian House of Commons passed a resolution directing the government to
"enact a tax on financial transactions in concert with the international
community." However, ten years later, in November 2009, at the G20 finance
ministers summit in Scotland, the representatives of the minority government of
Canada spoke publicly on the world stage in opposition to that Canadian House
of Commons resolution. In September 2009, French president Nicolas Sarkozy
brought up the issue of a Tobin tax once again, suggesting it be adopted by the
G20. On November 7, 2009, prime minister Gordon Brown said that G-20 should
consider a tax on speculation, although did not specify that it should be on
currency trading alone. The BBC reported that there was a negative response to
the plan among the G20. For supporters of a Tobin tax, there is a wide range of
opinion on who should administer a global Tobin tax and what the revenue should
be used for. There are some who think that it should take the form of an
insurance: In early November 2009, at the G20 finance ministers summit in
Scotland, the British Prime Minister "Mr. Brown and Nicolas Sarkozy, France‚Äôs
president, suggested that revenues from the Tobin tax could be devoted to the
world‚Äôs fight against climate change, especially in developing countries.
They suggested that funding could come from ‚Äúa global financial transactions
tax." However British officials later argued the main point of a financial
transactions tax would be provide insurance for the global taxpayer against a
future banking crisis." The feasibility of gradual implementation of the FTT,
beginning with a few EU nations. John Dillon contends that it is not necessary
to have unanimous agreement on the feasibility of an international FTT before
moving forward. He proposes that it could be introduced gradually, beginning
probably in Europe where support is strongest. The first stage might involve a
levy on financial instruments within a few countries. Stephan Schulmeister of
the Austrian Institute for Economic Re-search has suggested that initially
Britain and Germany could implement a tax on a range of financial instruments
since about 97% of all transactions on European Union exchanges occur in these
two countries Two simultaneous taxes considered in the European Union. On June
28, 2010, the European Union's executive said it will study whether the
European Union should go alone in imposing a tax on financial transactions
after G20 leaders failed to agree on the issue. The financial transactions tax
would be "separate" from a bank levy, or a resolution levy, which some
governments are "also" proposing to impose on banks to insure them against the
costs of any future bailouts. EU leaders instructed their finance ministers, in
May, 2010, to work out by the end of October 2010, details for the banking
levy, but any financial transaction tax remains much more controversial. Latin
America - Bank of the South. In early November 2007, a regional Tobin tax was
adopted by the Bank of the South, after an initiative of Presidents Hugo Chavez
from Venezuela and N√©stor Kirchner from Argentina. UN Global Tax. According to
Stephen Spratt, "the revenues raised could be used for ... international
development objectives ... such as meeting the Millennium Development Goals."(,
p.¬ 19) These are eight international development goals that 192 United Nations
member states and at least 23 international organizations have agreed (in 2000)
to achieve by the year 2015. They include reducing extreme poverty, reducing
child mortality rates, fighting disease epidemics such as AIDS, and developing
a global partnership for development. At the UN September 2001 World Conference
against Racism, when the issue of compensation for colonialism and slavery
arose in the agenda, Fidel Castro, the President of Cuba, advocated the Tobin
Tax to address that issue. (According to Cliff Kincaid, Castro advocated it
"specifically in order to generate U.S. financial reparations to the rest of
the world," however a closer reading of Castro's speech shows that he never did
mention "the rest of the world" as being recipients of revenue.) Castro cited
Holocaust reparations as a previously established precedent for the concept of
reparations.
